Eugenius Theodidactus, THE PROPHETICAL TRUMPETER Sounding An Allarum to
ENGLAND Illustrating The fate of Great Britain, past, present, and to come.
Such wonderful things to happen these seven years following, as have not been
heard of heretofore.

A Celestial Vision.

With a Description of Heaven and heavenly things, Motives to pacify Gods
threatened wrath: Of a bloody, fiery way of the day of Judgment, and of Saints
and Angels.

Sung in a most heavenly Hymn, to the great comfort of all good Christians, by
the MUSES most unworthy, JOHN HEYDON, Gent. Philomat.

(...).
Possibile est Satyras non Scribere.
LONDON, Printed by T. Lock for the Author, and are to be sold by Thomas
Blackmore, at the angel in Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To the truly virtuous and tried learning, beholding no Mountain for Eminence,
not supportment for height, Mr. William Lilly
O give me leave to pull the Curta^n by
That clouds, thy Worth in such Obscurity,
Good Seneca stay but a while thy Bleeding
To accept what I received at thy reading,
Here I present it in a solemn strain,
And thus I plucked the Curtain back again.
the same John Heydon.
Hom. Ill. a.
(...)
(...).
I am gravis ille mihi nig^i quam ^mini ditis,
Ore aliud qui seri, aliud sub poctare colat.
As vale of death, so do I hate that kind,
Whose tongue from thought, whose mouth dissents from mind.
The same, I. H.
To Capt. John Heydon.
What Ornament might I devise to sit
The aspiring height of thy admired Spirit,
Or, what fair Garland worthy is to sit
On thy blessed brows that compass in all merit?
Thou shall not crowned be with cammon Bayse,
Because for thee it is a Crown too low;
Apolloes tree can yield the simple praise,
It is too dull a Vesture for thy brow,
But with a wreath of Stars shall thou be crowned,
Which when thy working temples do sustain,
VVillike the Spheres be ever moving round
After the Royal Music of the Brain.
Thy skill does equal Phoebus, not thy Birth,
He to Heaven gives Music, thou to Earth,
I. C. Esquire To the Author, Mr. John Heydon.
FAin would I speak, but yet my tongue-^ide Muse
In Rivers thirst; and when she has most use
Of speech, is stricken dumb; she is plentious poor,
And knew she less to say, she could say more:
She does enjoy, and yet she cannot find
Beginning too much brightness has struck her blind.
I could admire thee John, and though in truth
The downy characters of thy blooming youth
Scarce write the man, yet if we measure years
By Virtue, thou a heroical Spirit wilt appear,
For when most men do fill their greedy Maws
With Comic laughter, and the sweaty plause
Of vulger Palms, others write wounding Lines,
And will accuse, though they be worse, the times
Thou steer'st another course, and spend'st thy oil
In sacred objects, and in holy toil,
No sinful Eloquence thy verse defames,
No lustful sports nor Cupidinean flamess,
Thy Poesy does neither frown nor smile,
There Is no satyrick, nor Venerious style;
And must these works be hid, and car'st thou less
To give them to the Moths, then to the Press,
Free them from Darkness, John, that they may be
A torch to others, and a Crown to thee,
For ere they shall obscured lie undone
Like Raphael, I Will usher in Heydon.
M. B. Esquire To the Right Honorable in his Country; Righr Servicible in
Ireland; Right Able of Himself; his Excellency, the LORD HENRY CROMVVEL-DEPUTY
of IRELAND.
I Se the Storm a coming, whether shall I
Seek Covert in the Mountain, or the Valley?
Or, else be take me to the silent stream,
And let the tempest burst and split his splean
Upon the Earth; so I be safe and saven,
While I shall ride at anchor in the Haven;
Alas, the fatal Sister-hood (in sport
Will there betray thee; for within the Port,
Shipwreck has disappointed and disgraced,
The Proverb of long looked for comes at last;
Then will I launch into the very Main
To see if Neptunes Diety will dayne
To fence and fling his Trident on my Head,
By pewer whereof all storms are scattered;
Which if he do deny, my comfort it shall be,
My shipwreck great, Noble men shall see
I sink not in a dicch, nor by the shore,
But dye, and lie at Neptunes Palace D^re:
It Is thou alone that bearst the Triple Mace,
Can in the very speed of all their Chase
Restrain their pursuit, do but protect it,
The simple Misterious Nereides of the Prophet,
Charge Aeolus (as he does honor thee,
He do not dis-imbulk his Cheeks at me,
I have done nothing to offend thy train,
Stole Amemone as the Poets feign,
Nor sought to spoil the Sea-gods bed of Coral;
I mean, Heavens Mysteries; for that's the Moral,
If this be so, vouchsafe me thy Protection,
That I may bring this work unto perfection;
Then will I sing thy fortune and thy fame,
And prove that CROMVVELS from the Trojans came;
Show where his Ancestors long since did build
A seat which hitherto their name have filled:
Now may that name and honor nere expire,
But in a melting Firmament of fire.
From Cliffords-Inne, the 10. of May, 1655. So Prays your Lord-ships most
humble Servant JOHN HEYDON.

To the Reader.
REader; these Lines which must pass through the pikes and swords of censure,
are not written to pleasure every man, then I should displease my self and my
friend; I write only to give my friends that I promised, call me not one of our
now Priest, now Prophet, and then Lawyer, I Will assure you I never fancied a
Pulpet, never could boast of Entheusiasmes, nor never could attain to such
perfection in the Law, although it has been the most of my study, and now my
profession, viz. the practice of an Attorney in the Vpper-Bench; if you would
know who I am, I was born in this sumptious, City, in Green-Arbour London, I
lived sometime in Warwickshire very obscurely, it was my fortune to travel
into other Countries, first with a Merchant, as Factor, he dyed, afterward I
was forced to exercise my self in Martial disciplines in Spain, and Turkey,
under the Command of Sede-Malamet Booker Knine Alcad at the Siege of Sally, I
made my escape, was taken again, yet escaped to Mamorah, then I went to Zant,
from thence carrled to S^vel, and then to the Spaw, and when I came to England
I followed the Law, and gave a very ignorant fellow five and thirty pounds to
instruct me in that honorable profession he like a duns took my money, and
left me as ignorant as when I came to him; it was my good hap to meet with an
honest man, and by his instructions I came to be what I am, Reader, I have
taken in vacation to publish what may at all times be advantageous to you. A
well-wisher to all honest men is,

J. Heydon

The Preface.
YOu wanton Lads that spend your winged time,
And chant your ears in reading lustful Rhyme,
Who like transformed Acteon range about
And beat the Woods to find Diana out;
Is It this you would have? then hence here is no content
For you; my Muse nere knew what Venus meant:
But stay, I may subvert your rude conceit,
And every Verse may prove a heavenly bait;
O that ye were such Captives! then yould be
Thrice happy: such as these are only free.
Leave, leave your wanton toys, and let alone
Apollo sporting at his Helicon:
Let Vulcan deal with Venus, what is to thee?
Although she dandle Cupid^ on her Knee,
Be not enchanted with her wanton charms,
Let her not hug thee in her whorish arms:
But wisely do (as N^ptune did) in spite
Of all, spew out the Lady Aphrodite.
Come, come, fond lad, what would thou behold
A visage that will make thy V^nus cold,
If this be all, He g^ve thy eye delight,
Come see that face that lends the sun his Light:
A Cae^e i^ll glorious sight I did epsy,
No earthly object for thy wandering eye,
I saw a face that made the Heavens to shine,
Oh seek that glorious face that lends thee thine,
Look and behold that light, which if thou see
Aright, will make the earth a heaven to thee;
Come see that glistring face from which arise
Such glorious beams that dazels angels eyes:
What can have more? but do thou think that such
A comely visage will not let thee touch;
Or do thou think a Sun that shines so clear
will scorn to let a lesser Orb come near,
No thou mistakest; say, do thou truly thirst
For him, I dare avouch he loved the first,
Be not dismayed, it needs no more dispute,
Come give that glorious face a kind salute.
THE Prophetical TRUMPETER Sounding an Allarum to Britain.
I Do not wonder, as I erst have done,
That when the Prophet Jonas should have gone,
To Nineveh, Gods word He disobeyed,
And would Himself to Tharsus have conveyed:
For, I have now a sense how flesh and blood
The motions of the Holy Ghost withstood,
And feel (me thinks) how many a likely doubt
The Devil and his frailty found him out.
He was a man, (though he a Prophet were)
In whom no little weakness did appear:
And, thus he thought, perchance, What shall I d^
A strange attempt my heart is urged too:
And, there is somewhat, earnestly incites
That I should hasten to the Ninivites,
And, preach, that if they alter not their ways,
Their time of standing is but forty days.
My soul persuades God enjoyus me to it:
And sleep in peace I cannot til I do it:
But common Reason striveth to restrain
This Motion, and persuades me it is vain.
It says; I am a sinner, and so frail,
That many times my best endeavors fail
To rectify my self. How shall I then
Be hopeful of reclaiming other men?
To Israel I have threatened many years
Gods judgments: yet, no fruit thereof appears
Although they have some knowledge of the Lord,
And are within his League, they slight his word:
What hope then is there, that a heathen Nation
Will prove regardfull of my exhortation?
The style of Prophet, in this land I carry;
And such a Calling, here, is ordinary
But, in a foreign State, what warranty
Have I, to publish such a Prophecy?
How may the King and people take the same,
I shall in the open streets defame
So great a City? and condemn for sin,
A place wherein I never yet have bin.
If I shall, the Lord commanded me,
Then, they perhaps will answer, What is he?
For, they profess him not. Nay, some suspicion
They may conceive, that I to move sedition
Amsent among them. Or, if otherwise
They shall suppose, how can they but despise
My, person, and my counsel, who shall from
So far a place, so mere a stranger come,
That no man knows, or what, or who I am,
Or, from what country, or, from whom I came?
Such thought (belike) delayed and foar'd him so;
And, so the Spirit urged him to go
For Niniveh; that not to go, nor stay,
Could he resolve; but, fled another way.
From which rebellious course, God fetches him back
With such a vegeance, that he did not lack
Sufficient proofs, how Reason did betray him,
And in his calling, causlesly affray him,
Yea (mark heavens providence) though Jonas went
Another way, it crossed not Gods intent,
But furthered it. For, doubtless, e're he came
To Nineveh, the miracle and fame
Of his Deliverance, was sent before;
And, made his preaching work on them the more.
Now, though I do not arrogate, nor dare
My self (except in frailttes) to compare
With blessed Jonas: yet I may behold
To say, our causes a resemblance hold.
My heart, and when that moves, as one avers,
It more prevails than many Counselors.
My heart (I say) persuaded me e're while,
To read a warning Lecture to this I Will.
And in such manner moved, that to say
It came from God, me thinks, behold I may
Yet, my own natural frailty, and the world,
Among my thoughts so many doubtings hurld,
That every step had rubs. I levelled some
In my last Canto. Yet, I could not come
To even ground, till I had overtopt
Some other Mountains which my passage stopped.
Beware, said Reason, how thou undertake
This hazardous adventure, which to make
Thou have resolved: for this wise age denies
That God vouchsafed any Prophesies
Concerning them; or, that the application
Of ought foretold, pertains to this Nation,
She says, my constancy is no true sign
That God first moved this intent of mine;
Since Heretics, and Traitors, often are seen
As bold in all their causes to have been
As Martyrs be. And, that for what they do,
They can pretend the holy Spirit too:
And she persuades it is likely I shall pass
(At best) for one that much deluded was.
She says, moreover, that if these times be
Indeed, so wicked, as they seem to me;
I shall in stead of moving to repent,
Naught else but stir their fury, and be rent
Perhaps in pieces, by their hasty rage,
For, what is more likely in a wicked age?
When people in their sins grow hardened once,
She says I may as well go talk to ^ones,
As tell them ought. For, they are in the dark;
And, what they see and hear, they do not mark.
She urged that the Prophets in old times
Did speak in vain against the peoples crimes;
And if in them their words begat no faith,
Much less will such as mine, my reason says.
She tells me also that this I Will has store
Of Prophets and of Preachers never more:
She says, that though their calling none neglect,
Their pains appear to take but small effect:
And, if such men authorized as they,
Do cast their words, without success, away;
In vain my Muse (whose warrant most contemn)
Does seek to work more piety in them.
A thousand things unto the life effect;
Yea, all and more than any can object,
(Who shall peruse this Book) my Reason brought
before me, and objected to my thought,
And, as a Pilgrim (who occasions has
To take some extraordinary path)
Arrival making at a double way,
Is doubtful whether to proceed or stay:
So fared I; I was nigh tired quite,
Before I could be certain of the right.
Yea, twixt my doubtings, and all those replies
Which in my meditations did arise;
I so amazed grew, I could not know
Which way thest befitted me to got
But, at the last, God brought me through all
My doubts and fears; as though the Storm and Whale
Once Jonas came: That so all they, who are
Ordained for their good, these lines to hear,
The more may profit, when they think upon
What streights I passed, e're this work was done,
To that intent my frailties I have so
Insisted on, as in this book I do.
Yea, I am hopeful al^o, they that read
These lines of mine (and mark with how much head
And Christian awfulness, my heart was won
To censure and reprove as I have done)
Will plainly see, these Numbers flow not from
Fantastic rashness; not from envy come.
Nor spring from faction; neither were begot
By their distracted zeal, who (knowing not
What Spirit guides them) often are beguiled
With shows of truth; and madly have reviled
Both good and ill: and whose unsavory Rimes
Defames men's persons more then check their crimes
Dishonor Kings; their sacred names blaspheme;
And having ga^n'd some notions in a dream,
Or by report (of what they know not well)
Desire their giddy thoughts abroad to tell:
In hope to merit; as indeed they do,
Sometime the pillory and gallows too.
I trust, I say, these lines will seem no such,
Or, if they do, truth is, I care not much,
Because I certain am what power infused
Those matters whereupon I now have mused,
And know, that none will these or me condemn,
But they whose rage and follies I contemn.
Yet, that they may be sure I never care
Who censures me, nor what their censures are,
(When honest things I do) here, somewhat more
I Will add to what is mentioned before,
And give thee, Britain, a more perfect sight
Of thy distempers, and thy sickly plight.
Yea, thou shall know, I have not seen alone
A bodily Coniumption stealing on,
And wasting of thy Temporalties; but, that
I also have discovered of late,
A Lethargy upon thy soul to steal:
And that as well the Church as Commonweal
Does need a cure. Oh! do not quite neglect,
The good of both; but, one at least respect.
Though Judahs sicknesses unheeded be,
(Although thy temporal wounds afflict not thee)
Yet look on Syon: yea, behold and see
Thy spiritualties how much impaired they be.
The Churches Patrimony is decayed
And many a one is in her spoils araid,
Those Patrons, as we term them in this age,
Who of her Dowries have the Patronage,
Do rob and cheat her, many times of all;
And their Donations basely set to sail.
Those Cananites, whom thou preservest here,
And by thy laws to be expelled were,
Are in thy borders now so multiplied,
That they are thorns and thistles in thy side,
They are become a Serpent in thy path,
Which bites unseen; and nigh unhorsed has
Some able Riders, On thy Places high
Thy people does commit Idolatry,
And rear strange Alters. In my Fields are found
Those cunning harmless Foxes to abound,
That spoil thy Vines. And some I have espied,
Twixt whose opposed tales, are firebrands tied,
Which wastes thy fruits. Thy Harvest seems fair;
But secret blastings do so much impair
And blite the Corn; that when it comes to bread,
Thy Children often unwholsomly are fed,
Men use Religion as a stalking-horse
To catch preferment; yea, sometimes to worse
And baser uses they employ the same;
Like that bold harlot, who quite void of shame,
Did of her Vows, and of her Peace Offerings make
A Ginn, lascivious customers to take.
Yea, some resembling him, from whom was cast
One Devil, when one sin they have displac't,
Of which the world took notice, sweep and cleanse
Themselves (in show) from all their other sins;
Yet secretly, let Satan repossess,
And foul them with a sevenfold wickedness.
An universal dullness will benum
Thy senses, if thou do not soon become
More heedfull of thy state, then thou art yet:
For, every part has felt an ague-fit.
Thy Academs, which are the famous places
In which all pious knowledges and graces
Should nourisht he, and whence thy chief supply
Of Teachers, come, (as from a Nursery)
Even those fair Fountains are much tainted grown,
With doctrine hardly sound, which thence are blown
Through every quarter. In their Schools are heard
Vain jigs and janglings, worthless of regard.
Their very Pulpits, and their Oratories,
Are Stages, whereupon their own vain glories
Men often act. Yea, many a vain conceit,
Is brought instead of arguments of weight:
And (which is worse) disorder is so rife
Among them; and the weeds of evil life
Have so o'regrown those Gardens, that (unless
Good government shall speedily redress
That spreading mischief) it will over^p
The plants of Syon, and destroy her crop.
To be thy Shepherds, wolves are stolen in;
And thou have those who even by day begin
To sow their Tares among thy purest Seed;
And, with mixed Grains thy Lands polutions breed.
For hire, and money, Prophesies the Prophet:
The Priest does preach to make a living of it,
Even merely for a living; and but few
Their holy charge for conscience sake pursue,
Which I by many signs could make apparent,
But that it is not yet within my Warrant.
Loqunter Curae leves; little Cures
Do make men preach whilst poverty endures.
Ingentes stupent; but, large livings make
Our Doctors dumb, condemn not my mistake:
For, though I do the Latin sentence wrong,
That Is true I tell you in the English tongue.
Our Nation, which of late prophainness hated,
Is in that sin almost fasionated.
The Scriptures without reverence are used,
The holy phrase, in jesting, is abused
To flour, or praise, or curse, we can apply
Gods holy word, most irreligiously.
Instead of Emblemes, moving thoughts divine,
The filthy pictures of lewd Aretine,
Are found in many Closets Foolish lies,
Profane and most lascivious Elegies,
Are public made Yea, those whom heretofore
A heathen Emperor did so abhor,
That he, for them, their wanton Author sent
To undergo perpetual banishment;
Even these, we read, and worse than those, by far,
Allowed pass, and un aproved are.
Nay, their vain Authors often cherisht be,
At least, they have the favor to go free.
But, if a graver Mus^ reprove their sin,
Lord, with what a hasty zeal they call it in
How libellous they make it and how vile,
Thou know; and at that folly thou do it ^mile.
Full warily the politic Divine,
(Who should allow it) scanneth every Line
Before it pass; each phrase he does suspect;
Although he finds nothing to be checked,
He fears to license it. And if by chance
It pass abroad, forthwith does ignorance
Mistake or misapply, and false and bad
Constructions are of good expressions made:
Yea, they who on the seats of Judgment sit,
Are often, most ready to miscensure it.
I would they were as forward to disgrace
Those Authors, who have filled every place
With fruitless volumes For dispersed are
Even quite throughout this Land every year,
Even many thousand Reames of scurrill toys.
Songs, Rimes and Ballads, whose vain use destroys
Or hinders Virtuous knowledge, and Devotion,
And thus they do to further the promotion
Of our Diana. Yet, Behold, if we
To publish some few sheets required be,
Con ai^ing pious Hy^ns, or christian Songs.
Or ought which to the praise of God belongs:
We do so fear the hindrance of our gain,
That like the Ephesian Silver-smith, feign
A great complaint, as to have enlarged
A little Book, had grievously o'recharged
The Commonwealth. Whereas if it were weighed
How much of late this Land is overlaid
With trivial volumes: or how much they do
Corrupt our Manners, and Religion too,
By that abusive matter they contain,
I should not seem unjustly to complain.
These times do swarm with Pamphlets, which be far
More dangerous than mortal poisons are.
Even in those books, whereby the simple thought
To find true knowledge, they their bane have caught:
For, thence, strong heresies (there being hid
Amid some doubtless truths, a while unspi'd)
Steal out among the people, by degrees;
More mischief working than each Reader sees.
And, so, to ruin knowledge, that is made
A instrument; whereby it rising had.
For (by their lucre, who the Churches peace
Disturb, their private profit to increase)
Those Doctrines which are un-authorised,
Are so promiscuously divulged, and spread,
Among approved Verities, that foam
Are in those Labyrinths amazed become:
And such a contradiction is in that
Which their confused Pamphlets do relate;
That common Readers know not which to leave,
Nor, which the Church of Egland does receive.
And from this mischief many others flow,
Which will, in future times, more harmfull grow.
This spins vain controversies to their length;
By this most heresies receive their strength.
And what distraction it already makes,
Our grieved Mother woeful notice takes
Instead of active knowledge, and her fruit;
This silleth men with itching o^ dispute,
And empty words; whereby are set abroach
A thousand quarrels, to the truths raproach.
The sectaries, the munkeys, and the apes,
The Cubs and Foxes, which do man our Grapes,
The Wolves in Sheepskins, and our frantic rabble
Of VVorship-mongers, are innumerable.
And as the Churches quiet they molest,
So they each other spightfully infest.
We have some quakers, some that half way go:
Some Semi-quezills, some wholly so;
Some Anabaptists, some who do refuse
Black-puddings, and good pork, like arrant Jews:
Some also termed Arminians are among
Our Priests and people, very lately sprung.
What most, so called, profess, I stand not for;
And what some say they teach, I do abhor.
But, what some other, so misnam'd, believe,
Is that where^o best Christians credit give.
For, as we see the most reformed man,
By Libertines is termed a Protestan:
So (by our purblinde Formalist) all those
Who new fantastic crotchets do oppose,
Begin to be misterm'd Coxils now.
And hence e'relong will greater mischiefs grow
Then most imagine. For, the foolish fear,
Lest they to be Dattrells may appear,
Or else be termed quakers, will make
Great multitudes Religion quite forsake.
And I am half persuaded this will one
Of those great Schisms or earthquakes, cause which John
Foretold in his Apocalypse; and they
Are blessed, who shall not thereby fall away.
Some Hocasses and some Famalists have we;
And some, that no man can tell what they be;
Nor they themselves, Some seem so wondrous pure
They no man's conversations can endure,
Unless they use their pleaistrings; and appear
In every formal garb which they shall wear.
There be of those, who in their words deny,
And hate the practice of Idolatry,
Yet make an idol of their formal zeal,
And underneath strickt holiness, conceal
A mystery of evil which deceives them,
And, when they think all safe, in danger leaves them.
Their whole Religion some do place in hearing:
Some, in the outward action of forbearing
Ill deeds or in well doing, though the heart
In that performance bear no real part.
Some others, of their morrall actions make
Small conscience: and affirm that God does take
No notice how ^n body they transgress,
If him in their ^nward man confess:
As if a soul beloved could reside
Within a body quite un^an^fide.
Some not contented in the act of sin
Are grown so impudent, that they begin
To justify themselves in wickedness;
Or, by quait arguments to make it less;
And, by such Monsters, to such ends as this,
The Christian liberty defamed is.
Mewfangledness, Religion has overthrown;
And, many as fantastical are grown
In that, as in apparel. Some, delight
In nothing more than to be opposite
To other men: Their zeal they wholly spend
The present government to reprehend;
The Churches discipline to v^ll fie;
And rail, at all, which pleads antiquity.
They love not peace: and therefore have suspicion
Of Truth it self, if out of persecution:
And are so thankless, or so heedless be
Of Gods great love, in giving such a free
And plentious means of publishing his word,
That, what, his Prophets of the Jews record,
Some verify in us. Much pralse is given
To that blind age, wherein the Queen of Heaven
Was worshipped here. And alsly we extol
Those days, as being much more plentiful.
Some, at the frequency of Preaching g^utch,
And, tired with it, think we have too much:
Nay, impudently practice to suppress
That Exercise, and make our plenty less,
And, that their doing may not want some fair
Or goodly coulor, they do call for Prayer,
Instead thereof; as if we could not pray,
Until our preaching we had sent away.
As these are foolishly, or lewdly, wise;
We have some others want only precise:
So waywardly despised, amidst our plenty,
And through their curiosity, so dainty,
That very many cannot well digest
The bread of life, but in their manner dressed.
Nor will Gods Manna, or that measure serve,
Which he provides; but, they cry out they starve*
(Unless they feed upon their own opinions,
Which are like Egypt Garlike and her Onion^)
Some like not Prayer that's extempory:
Some notany that set form does carry.
Some think there is no devotion, but in those
That howl, or whine, or snufle in the nose;
As if that God vouchsafed all his Graces
For feigned gestures, or for sour faces.
Some think not that the man, who gravely teaches;
Or has a sober gesture when he preaches,
Of gentle voice: has any zeal in him,
And therefore, such like Preachers they contemn.
Yea, they suppose that no man's doctrine lave^
The Soul of any one, unless he raves,
And roares aloud, and slings, and hurleth so
As if his arms he quite away would throw;
Or over-leap the Pulpet, or else break it:
And this, if their opinion true may make it,
Is to advance their voices trumpet-like,
As God commands: yea this they say does strike
Sin dead. Whereas indeed, God seldom goes
In whirlwinds, but is in the voice of those
Who speak in meekness. And it is not in
The power of noise to shake the walls of sin:
For clamors, antique actions, writhed looks
And such like mimmick Rhetoric none brooks
That has discretion: neither does it move
The heart of any, when we so reprove;
Except it be in some contrary motion,
Which interrupts the hearts good devotion.
The well affected Christian pities it;
It makes prophanest men at naught to set
Gods Ordinance. Mere moral men despise
Such affatection; much it terrifies
The ignorant: but very few from thence
Receive sound knowledge, or true penitence.
Some relish nothing, but those points that are
In controversy: some would nothing hear
But songs of Mercy; some delight in none
But songs of Thunder, and scarce any one
Is pleased in what he hears. Nay of their Preachers,
Merchanicks, arrogate to be the teachers.
Yea, most of us, what e're our Pastor says,
Keep still our own opinions and our ways.
To hear and know Gods word, to some among
Our Nation, seems only to belong
To Clergy men; and their implicit Faith
Is built on what the common rumor says.
Some others filled with curiosity
Affirm that every several mystery
Within Gods book included, does concern
Ev^n each particular Christian man to learn:
Whereas they might as well affirm each guest
That is invited to each Feast,
Is bound the several dishes there to heed
And upon every meet before him feed,
Nay, some have almost this imagination
That there is hardly hope of their Salvation
Who speak not Hebrew. And this now adays,
Makes foolish women, and young Prentises
To learn that holy tongues; in which they grow
As do those who nothing know,
Save to be arrogant, and to contemn
Those Pastors, who have taken charge of them,
The appetite of some grows dull and fails,
Unless it may be pampered with Quails;
High flying crotchets, which we see do fill
Not half so many souls as they do kill.
We cannot be content to make our flights,
For that which God exposes to our sights,
And search for that which he is pleased to show,
But, we must also pry, what God does know,
Which was indeed an ancient fallacy
O Satan; and the very same whereby
He cheated E^ From seeking to disclose
Beyond our warrant, what God only knows,
Proceeds many errors. Thence does come
Most questions that have troubled Christendom.
Yea, searching things concealed, has overthrown
The comfortable use of what is known.
Hence flows their fruitless fond asseveration,
Who blundred on Eternall-Reprobation,
And many groundless whimsies have invented,
Whereby much better musings are prevented.
Of Reprobation I no doubt have made;
Yet, those vain quarrellings which we have had.
Concerning her, and her antiquity,
(But that the world has wiser fools then I)
Appears to me to bring so little fruits,
That I suppose it fitter for disputes
In Hell, (among the reprobated crew)
Then for a Church of Christians to pursue:
At least to brawle about with such hot rage,
As has possessed some Spirits of this age.
For, some have urged this point of Reprobation
As if the chiefest groundwork of salvation
Depended on believing, just, as they
(Deluded by their fancies) please to say.
And, though they never found Gods holy word
Did any mention of the same afford,
But, as of that which did begin since Time;
And with respect to some committed crime:
They, nevertheless, their streights together gather,
To prove the child solder than the Father.
And, since that fatal thread, there, finds her spinning,
But for Of; at farthest from Beginning:
They Reprobation otherwhile confound
With our Predestination: which is found
No where in all the Scripture to respect
The reprobates, but only Gods Elect.
And then they are compeld to prove the sense
Of their dark ten^, by an inference;
And to affirm from reason that Election
Eternal, does infer the like rejection.
As if an action of Eternity,
Were fit to square our shallow reasons, by
Which argument because it has not taken
True Faith, to ground on, may with ease be shaken.
Their tortering structure, therefore, up to keep,
They into Gods foreknowledg boldly peep,
Beyond his warrant; searching for decrees
And secrets, farther than an angel sees:
Presuming then, as if all things they knew,
And had Eternity within their view.
But, that has such an infinite extention.
Beyond their narrow-bounded comprehension,
That there they wander on, til they are mad
And lose that little knowledge which they had.
For what are they but mad men who maintain
The giddy fancies of their own weak brain,
For theses of Religion, which we must
Believe as they affirm them, of be thrust
Among the Reprobates? What less, I pray,
Are they then mad who fool their wits away
In wheeling arguments which have no end?
In strains which man shall never apprehend?
In seeking what their knowledge does exceed?
In vain disputings, which contentions breed.
In strange Chymera's, and fantastic notions,
That neither stir us up to good devotions,
Nor mend our manners? But our ways pervert,
Distract the Judgment, or puff up the heart.
If this I may not madness call, or folly,
It Is (at the best) religious-melancholly.
What shall we judge of those who strive to make
Gods Word (whose terms and scope they much mistake
Their proofs for that whereof no proofs they are,
And slight those truths, for which the Text is clear:
What shall we deem of those, who quite mistaking
Good authors, and their volumes guilty making
Of what they never meant, do preach and write
Against those Books with rancerous despite,
Which being well examined, say the same
Which they affirm, and check what they do blame.
Such men there be, and they great noise have made
By fighting furiously with their own shade.
What may be thought of them, who likely, ever,
In their perverse opinions to persever,
Take knowledge upon trust: and follow those,
Who lead them on, as wild-geese fly in rows?
And when their multitude is waxen great,
Do then so wilfully prejudicate,
Become so confident of that they hold,
And in their blind assurance, so are bold,
That they can brook no trial, neither see
Their oversights, how plain so e're they be;
But fondly think (though we believe it not)
That they infallibility have got.
Some piousmen; yea, some great Doctors tread.
Such Labyrinths; and often are misled
By holding that which they at first were taught,
Without due proving all things as they ought;
And vulgar men are often led awry,
By their examples, and for company.
For as a traveller that is to come
From some far Country, through large deserts home,
Nor knowing well the way, is glad to take
His course with such who shows of cunning make,
And walks along, depending still on them,
Through many a wood, and over many a stream,
Till he and they are lost: there to remain
He finds no safety, nor means back again,
Nor list to leave his company; because
He hopes that nearer homeward still he draws,
And that his guides full sure of passage are,
Although they cannot well describe it where,
So, when plain men do first attempt the way
Of knowledge, by their guides, they walk astray.
Without distrust: and when arrived they be
Where many troublesome windings they do see
And where no certainty they can behold,
Yet, on their leaders knowledge they are bold,
Or on their multitude: yea, though they know,
And see them err, and turn and stagger so,
In darksome paths, that well suppose they may,
They rove and wander in an uncouth way;
Yet still they are unwilling to suspect
The wisdom of the Fathers of their Sect.
Yea, though no satisfaction they can find,
Though fears and doubtings do afflict their mind,
They still impute it rather to their own
Infirmities, or to the depths unknown
Of those mysterious points, to mention brought;
But never call in question what is taught:
Lest being by those Teachers terrifide,
They might forsaken in despair abide.
Their Doctors, also, failing to devise
Strong arguments, their hearers to suffice,
This course, to save their credits, late have got;
They say, forsooth, Faiths doctrine settles not
With natural capacities; and that
The Spirit must those men illuminate
Who shall receive them. And indeed in this,
They do both say the truth, and say amiss:
This is a Jesuitish juggling trick,
And if allowed it be, each lunatic,
And every brainsick Dreamer, by that way,
May foist upon us all that he can say,
For, though Gods holy Spirit must create
New hearts within us, and regenerate
Depraved nature, e're it can be able
To make our outward hearings profitable;
We must not think that all which fancy faith
(In terms obscure) are mysteries of faith.
Nor make the hearers want of power to teach
Their meanings to be proofs of what they teach.
There is twixt men, and that which they are taught,
Some natural proportion, or it is naught.
The deepest mystery of our profession,
Is capable of literal expression,
As well to reprobates as men elected;
Or else it may of error be suspected.
Yea, wicked men a power granted have
To understand, although they misconceive;
And can of darkest pointsmake plain relations,
Though to themselves they fail in applications.
God never yet did bid us take in hand
To publish that which none can understand:
Much less affects he a man should mutter.
Rude sounds of that, whose depth he cannot utter;
Or in uncertain terms, as many do,
Who Preach nonsense, and often non entia too:
For those which man to man is bound to show,
Are such plain Truths, as we by word may know;
Which when the hearer can express again,
The fruit has equalled the Teachers pain.
Then, though the soul does many times conceive
By faith, and by that Word which we receive)
Deep mysteries, and that which far transcends
A carnal knowledge: though she apprehends
Some glimmerings of those Objects, that are higher
Then humane Reason ever shall aspire;
Though she has tastings of that blessedness,
Which mortal tongue could never yet express;
And though the soul may have some earnest given
On earth, of what it shall enjoy in heaven;
Though God may, when he list (and now and then,
For cause not ordinary) to some men
Vouchsafes (for their secret satisfactions)
A few reflections from eternal actions:
Though this be so, let no man arrogate
That he such secrets can by word relate:
For, they are things, of which no voice can preach;
High flights, to which no mortal man can reach,
It Is Gods own work, such raptures to convey,
To compass them there is no other way,
But by his blessed Spirit: and of those
Most can we not, some must we not disclose.
For if they only touch our private state,
They were not sent, that we should them relate;
But deigned that the soul they strengthen might
Amid the perils of some secret sight;
When men to honor God, or for their sin,
The terrors of this life are plunged in.
And as it is reputed of those things,
Which foolish people think some Fairy brings,
So, of Euthusiamses speak I may;
Discover them, and straight they fly away.
For, thus they fare who boast of Revelations,
Or of the certainty of their Salvations,
Or any Ghostly gift, at times or places,
Which warrant not the mention of such graces:
Yea, by revealing things which they should hide,
They entrance make for over weening pride:
And that quite m^rres the blessing they possessed,
Or, for a while obscureth it at best:
And yet, if any man shall climb so high,
That they attain unto a Mystery,
Conceived by few; they may, if they be able,
Disclose it where it may be profitable.
But they must know, that (if it be, indeed,
Of such transcendency; as does exceed
Mere natural reaches) it should be declared
To none, save unto those who are prepared
For such conceptions; and more apt to know them
By their own thoughts, then are out words to show them
Else, all they utter will in Clouds appear,
And errors, men, for truths, away will bear.
Would this had been observed a little more,
By some who in our Congregations roar
Of Gods unknown Decrees, Eternal Callings,
Of Perseverance, and of Final Fallings.
And such like Mysteries. Or else, I would
That they their meanings better utter could,
If well they meant. For, though those points afford
Much comfomrt and instruction, as Gods word
Has mentioned them, and may applied be,
And opened, when we just occasion see;
Yet, as most handle them, who now adays,
Do pass for Preachers, with a vulger praise,
They profit not; for, this ripe age has young
And forward wits, who by their fluent tongue,
And able memories, a way have found
To build a house, e're they have laid the ground,
With common places, and with notes purloin'd
(Not well applied, and as ill conjoined)
A garb of preaching these have soon attained,
Which has, with many, approbation gained
Beyond their merit. For, they take in hand
Those mysteries, they neither understand,
Nor studied on. And they have much distracted
Some hearers, by their Doctrines ill compacted:
Yea, by enquiring out what God fore-sees,
And meddling much with his unknown Decrees,
The Churches peace so much disturbed have they;
So foul and crooked made Faiths plainest way;
Such scandalls raised; and interrupted so,
By doubts impertinent, what men should do;
And their endeavors nullified so far,
That many of them at a nonplus are.
Heydons not of their minds, who take from this
And other things, that are performed amiss,
Occasion to disparage frequent preaching,
Or, to abate our plentiousness of teaching:
For, of our Harvest, Lord, I humbly pray,
The store of Laborers continue may.
And, I could also wish, that none were chose
To be a seed-man, till he truly knows
The wheat from tares; and is indu'd with reason,
And grace, to sow in order, and in season,
And that those art-less workmen may be staid,
Who build before foundations they have laid:
Lest, when our Church well built, suppose we shall,
It sink, and overwhelm us in the Fall.
It pities me to mark what rents appear
Within our Sion, and what daubings are
To hide the ruins, and I fear the frame
VVil totter, if we long neglect the same.
Our watchmen for the greater part, are grown
Less mindful of Gods honor, than their own:
For either almost wholly we omit
That work, or undiscreetly follow it.
Some speak the truth, without sincere intention,
As they who preach the Gospel for contention.
Some by their wicked lives do give offense,
And harden men in their impenitence.
As if not hell nor heaven they did believe,
They riot, game, drink drunk, and whore, and thieve,
For avarice, and envy, none are worse;
They are malicious, and blaspheme, and curse,
As much as any others. None are more
Regardless of the soul that is mean and poor,
Among their neighbors, none more quarrelsome,
Or that more hardly reconciled become,
Then many Clergymen: and as we see
They are the best of men, when good they be;
So, there are none that wander more astray;
When they have left a sanctified way.
Some Pastors are too hot, and some too cold,
And very few the golden temper hold.
Some at the Papist with such madness fling,
As if they could not utter any thing
Of them too vile; though never so false it were:
And we so used by their Jesuits are.
Some others at the Quakers do strike,
So furiously, that they are often like
To wrong the Protestants: for, men impose
That name sometime, upon the best of those;
Yea, they who are prophaine, that name mislay
On all who make a conscience of their way.
Some Shepherds on their flocks are gorged at full,
And sumptiously arrayed in their wool.
But, those that are diseased, they make not strong:
Their sickliest sheep they seldom come among:
They take no care the broken up to bind;
The sheep that is lost they never seek to find:
They let such wander as will run astray,
And many times their fury so does fray
The tender conscience, that their indiscretion
Does fright their hearers headlong to perdition.
Gods bounty has large pastorage provided,
But they have not his flocks with wisdom guided:
For in the midst of plenty, some be ready.
To starve in ignorance. Some sheep are headdy:
Some get the staggers, some the scab, and they
Infect their fellows. Some the wantons play
Among the thorns and briars, which have torn
The marks and fleeces, which they should have worn.
Some straggle from the flock, and they are straight
Surpised by wolves, which lie for them in wait.
Some sought large feeding, and rank pastures got,
Which proved not wholesome, and they caught the ^ot.
For, many preach themselves, and fancies broach,
That scandal preaching, to the truths reproach.
Yea, some term that (forsooth) Gods word divine,
Which would half shame me, should they term it mine,
And they we see, longest pray and speak
Are prized of most though head nor foot they make.
Because the common hearers of this Land,
Think best of that which least they understand.
Some, also, by their feet disturb the springs;
Or trample or defile Gods pasturings,
By hypocrites, injuriously defamed;
By the frailties of the best, often shamed.
And power ecclesiastical is granted
To them, full often, who those minds have wanted
Becoming such authority: and they
Play fast and loose, even with the Churches Key.
They censure and absolve, as best shall make
For their advantage; not for conscience sake.
As they shall please, they punnish or connive;
And by the peoples follies they do thrive.
Of evil customs many are we see
Insinuated, and so strict are we
To keep them, that we sottishly deny
To leave them, for what more would edify?
And we so much do Innovations fear,
That needful reformations none appear.
We have prophained every holy thing;
Even our most Christian Feasts which are to bring
Gods Mercies to our thought, and memorize
Of Saving Grace, the sacred Mysteries:
Some have even those gain-sayed; and in that
Have evil spoken of they know not what.
Some others keep them; but as heathenishly,
As Feasts of Bacchus; and impiety
Is then so rife, that God is rarely named
Or thought upon, except to be blasphemed.
By these, and other ways, the Church does lose
Much honor to the glory of Her Foes,
And our great shame and loss: for her decays
Shall be this Realms disprofit and dispraise.
God has a controversy with our Land;
And in an evil plight affairs do stand.
Already we do smart or doing ill;
Yet us the hand of God afflicts still,
And hey are either such as make obscure
Faiths principles; or such whose lives impure,
Profane their Doctrines. Other some have we,
Who like the beast that over-game some be,
Do push their weaker brethren with their Horns;
And hunt them from the flock, by wrongs, or scorn
Gods houses, also, much neglected are;
And of his Sanctuaries, few have care.
A barn, or any common house, or room,
Is thought as well Gods worship to become,
As in the Churches infancy; or there,
VVherewants, and wars, and persecutions are.
Amidst our peace and plenties, we do grutch
Our Oratories should be trimm^d as much
As are our vulgar dwellings; and repine
That exercises which are most divine,
Should with more Rites, or Ornaments be done,
Then when the troublous times afforded none.
As if a Garden when the flowers are blown,
Were still to look as when it first was sown.
To worship so in spirit, we pretend
That in our bodies, we do scarcely bend
A leg, or move a cap, when there we be,
Where Gods most holy Mysteries we see
Yea, many seem so careful to have bin,
To let no superstition enter in,
That they have almost, wholly banished hence,
All decency, and pious Reverence.
The Church by Lukewarm Christians, is neglected
By brutish Athests it is dis-respected;
By greedy Worldlings, robbed of her fleeces,
By self-willed Schismatics nigh torn in pieces;
By Tyrants and by infidels opposed;
By her blind Guides, to hazard often exposed;
And many see it not; as many be
So wilful, that his hand they will not see.
Some plainly view the same, but nothing care
Some at the sight thereof amazed are,
Like Balthazar, and have a trembling heart,
Yet will not from their vanities depart.
About such matters, othersome are loath
Their thoughts to busy, (merely out of sloth)
Like him, who rather would in hazard put
His Life, than rise from bed the door to shut.
Some dream that all things do by chance succeed,
And that I prate more of them than I need:
But heaven and earth to witness I invoke,
That causlesly, I nothing here have spoke.
If this, oh sickly Island! thou believe,
And for thy great infirmity shall grieve,
And, grieving of thy follies make confessions;
And, to confess thine infinite transgressions:
That thou amend those errors: God shall then
Thy manifold distempers cure again;
Make all thy scarlet sins as white as snow,
And cast his threatened judgments on thy foe.
But, if thou (fondly thinking thou art well)
Shall slight this Message, which my Muse does tell,
And scorn her counsel; if thou shall not rue
Thy former ways; but frowardly pursue
Thy wilful course: then, hark what I am bold,
(In spite of all thy madness) to unfold.
For, I will tell thy Fortune; which when they
That are unborn shall read another day,
They will believe Gods mercy did infuse
Thy Poets breast, with a Prophetic Muse.
And know, that he this author did prefer
To be from him, this Isles Remembrancer.
If thou, I say, oh Britain! shall retain
Thy crying sins, thou do presume in vain
Of Gods protection. If thou stop thine ear,
Or burn this Roll, in whice recorded are
Thy just Inditements; it shall written be
With new additions, deeply stamped on thee
With such Characters, that no time shall race
Their fatal image, from thy scarred face:
Though haughtily thou do thy self dispose,
Because the Sea thy borders does enclose.
Although upon the Rocks thy nest is placed:
Though thou among the Stars thy dwelling have;
Though thou increase thy ships; and unto that
Which is thine own, with King Iehosaphat;
Join Ahabs forces. Though thou watch and ward,
And all thy Ports and Havens strongly guard;
Although thou multiply thy inland forces,
And muster up large troops of men and horses;
Though like an Eagle thou thy wings display'st,
And (high thy self advancing) proudly say;
I fit aloft, and am so high, that none
Can fetch me from the place I rest upon.
Yea, though thou no advantages did want,
Of which the glorious Emperies did vaunt;
Yet, sure, thou shall be humbled and brought low;
Even then, perhaps, when least thou fear it so.
Till thou repent, provisions which are made
For thy defense, or others to invade,
Shall be in vain; and still the greater cost
Thou shall bestow, the honor that is lost
Shall be the greater, and thy wasted strength,
Be sink of a Consumption at the length
Thy treaties, which for peace or profit be,
Shall neither peace, nor profit bring to thee.
Or, if thy Counsels prosper for a while,
God will permit it, only to beguile
Thy foolishness; and tempt thee on to run
Some courses, that will bring his Judgments on.
Yea, all thy winnings shall but fuel be,
To feed those follies that now spring in thee;
And make with vengeance those the more enraged
Who shall for thy correction be engaged.
What ever threatened in Gods Book has bin,
Against a wicked people for their sin,
Shall come on thee: His hand shall be for ill,
On every Mountain, and high-raised hill.
Thy lofty Cedars, and thy sturdy Oaks,
Shall feel the fury of his Thunder stroke.
Upon the Ships, thy Havens, and thy Ports,
Upon thy arms, thy armies, and thy Forts,
Upon thy pleasures and commodities,
Thy Crafts mechanic, and thy merchandise;
On all the fruits and Cattle in thy fields,
On what the air, or what the water yields,
On State and people; on both weak and strong,
On Priest and Prophet or both old and young;
Yea, on each person, place, and every thing,
The Plague it has deserved, God shall bring.
What ever thou do hope he frustrate shall;
And make what e're thou fear on thee fall.
This pleasant soil, wherein such plenty grows,
And where both milk and honey overflows,
Shall for thy peoples wickedness be made
A Land as barren, as what never had,
Such plenties in it. God shall drive away
Thy pleasant Fowls, and all those Fish that play
Within thy waters; and for whose great store
Some other Nations would have praised him more.
Those Rivers, that have made thy valleys rich,
Shall be like streams of ever burning Pitch,
Thy dust, as Brimstone, fields as hard and dry
As iron is; the firmament on high,
Like Brass, shall yield thee neither rain nor due,
The hope of wasted blessings to renew.
Aleanness, shall thy fatness quite devour;
Thy wheat shall in the place of wholesome flower,
Yield naught but bran. In stead of grass and corn,
Thou shall in times of harvest, reap the thorn,
The thistle and the bryar. Of their shadows
Thy Groves shall robbed be: thy flowery Medows
shall steri; e wax: there shall be seldom seen
Sheep on thy downs, or Shepherds on the Green,
Thy walks, thy Gardens, and each pleasant plot,
Shall be as those where men inhabit not,
Thy Villages; where goodly dwellings are,
Shall stand as if they unfrequented were.
Thy Cities and thy Palaces wherein
Most neatness and magnificence has bln,
Shall heaps of rubish be, and as in those
Demolisht Abbeys where in Dawes and Crows.
Now make their nests, the Bramble, and the Nettle,
Shall in their halls and parlours root, and settle,
Thy Princes houses, and thy wealthy Ports,
Now fill^d with men of all degrees and sorts,
Shall no inbabitants in them retain,
But some poor Fisherman, or Country Swain,
Who of thy glories, When the marks they see,
Shall wonder what those mighty ruins be;
As now they do, who old foundations find,
Of towns and Cities perished out of mind.
The places where much people meetings had,
Shall vermin holes, and dens for beasts be made.
Or walks for sprights, who from those uncouth rooms
Shall fright the passenger, which that way comes.
In stead of mirth and laughter, lamentation
Shall there abide: and loathsome desolation,
In stead of company. Where once was heard
Sweet melody, men shall be made afeard
With hideous cries, and howlings of despair.
Thy very Climate, and thy temperate air,
Shall lose their wholsomness, for thy offenses,
And breed hot Fevers, Murraines, Pestilences,
And all diseases! they that now are trained
In ease, and with soft pleasures entertained;
In stead of idle games, and wanton dances,
Shall practice how to handle guns, and lances;
And be compelled to leave their friends embraces,
To end their lives in diverse uncouth places;
Or else, thy face, with their own blood defile,
In hope to keep themselves, and thee, from spoil.
Thy beauteous Women, whose great pride is more
Than theirs, whom Esaias blamed heretofore,
In stead of paintings, and of costly sents,
Of glittering gems, and precious ornaments,
Shall wear deformity about their faces;
And being robbed of all their tempting graces,
Feel wants, diseases, and all such like things,
Which to a wanton Lover lothing brings.
Thy God, shall for thy overflowing vices,
Scourge thee with Scorpions, Serpents, Cockatrices,
And other such; whose tails with stings are armed,
That neither can be plucked forth, nor charmed.
Thou shall not be suffiz'd when thou art fed;
Nor shall thou suffer scarcity of bread
And temporal food alone; but, of that meat,
Whereof the faithful soul desires to eat.
That curse of Ravenous Beasts, which God has said,
Upon a wicked Kingdom shall be laid,
He will inflict on thee. For though there be
No Tigers, Lions, Wolves, or Bears in thee,
By beastly minded men that shall be far
More cruel than those bloody spoylers are,
Thou shall be torn: for, each man shall assay
His fellow to devour as lawful prey.
In stead of Lions, tyrants thou shall breed,
Who not of conscience nor of Law take heed;
But, on the weak man's portion lay their Paw,
And make their pleasures to become their Law,
In stead of tigers, men of no compassion,
A furious, and a wilful generation,
Shall fill thy borders. Thieves and outlaws vile,
Shall hunt the ways, and haunt the woods for spoil,
As Bears and Wolves. A subtle cheating crew
(That will with tricks and cozenages pursue
The simpler sort) shall here increase their breed;
And in their subtilties the Fox exceed.
That hoggish herd, which always rooting are
Within the ground, and never upward rear.
Their grunting snouts; nor fix their eyes on heaven,
To look from whence their daily food is given:
Those filthy swinish livers, who desire
To feed on draff, and wallow in the mire;
Those who affect rank puddles, more than springs;
To trample and despise most pleasant things;
The holy to profane; Gods herbs of grace
To nouzle up, his Vinyard to deface;
And such like harms to do: these shall thy fields,
Mar worse, then those wild boares the desert yields.
If thou remain impenitent, thou art
Like Egypt, and so stony is thy heart.
For which obdurateness, those plagues will all
Descend on thee, which did on Egypt fall.
Blood, Frogs, and Lice, great swarms of uncoth Flies,
the infectious Murraine, whereof Cattle dies:
Boyles, Scabs, and Blaines fierce Hail, and Thunder-storms,
The Locust, and all fruit devouring Worms.
Cross Darkness, and the death of those that be
Thy Darlings, all those plagues shall fall on thee,
According as the Letter does imply,
Or, as in mystic sense they signify.
Thy purest Rivers God shall turn to blood;
With every Lake, that has been sweet and good,
Even in thy nostrils he shall make it stink,
For nothing shall thy people eat or drink,
Until their own or others blood it cost;
Or put their lives in hazard to be lost.
Most loathsome Frogs; that is a race impure,
Of base condition, and of birth obscure,
(Even in unwholesome ^ens, and ditches, bred)
Shall with a clownish rudeness overspread
Thy pleasant'st fields; thy fairest rooms possess;
And make unwholesome by their sluttishness,
Thy kneeding troughs, thy ovens, and that meat,
Whereof thy people, and thy Princes eat,
This hateful brood, shall climb to croak and sing,
Within in lodging chambers of the King,
Yea, there make practice of those natural notes,
Which issue from their evil-sounding throats:
To wit, vain-brags, revilings, r^baldries,
Vile slanders, and unchristian blasphemies.
The Land shall breed a nasty generation,
Unworthy either of the reputation
Or name of men. For, they as Lice shall feed
Even on the body whence they did proceed;
Til poverty, and floventy, and sloth,
Have quite disgraced them, and consumed them both.
There shall, moreover, swarms of diverse Flies,
Engendered be in thy prosperities,
To be a plague: the flesh-flye shall corrupt
Thy savory meats; Musketoes interrupt
The weary traveller; thou shall have Drones,
Doors, Hornets, Wasps, and such like angry-ones,
Who represent that warm whose buzzing tongues
(Like stings) are used in their neighbors wrongs;
And, still are flying, and still bumming so,
As if they meant some weighty work to do,
Whenas, upon the common stock they spend;
And naught perform of that which they pretend.
Thy Butter-flies shall plague thee too; even those,
Who wast their Lands and Rents, in gaudy clothes
Or idle flutterings, and then spawn their seed,
Upon thy godli^st flowers and herbs to feed.
As beasts destroyed by the Murraine be,
So they that are of beastly life in thee,
By lewd example shall infect each other,
And in their foul diseases rot together.
On all thy people, or what sort soever,
Shall Scabs, and bile, and running sores appear,
The fruits of their corruption. Yea, with pains
(Within their conscience, and with scars and blaines
Of outward infamy) they shall be grieved,
And in their tortures perish unrelieved.
Tempestious storms, upon this I Will shall fall,
Hot thunderbolts, and Haile-stones therewithal,
Men either too too hot, or too too cold,
Or else luke warm. But few or none shall hold
A rightful temper: and these meteors will
Thy borders with a thousand mischieves fill,
The Locust also, and the Palmer worms,
Shall prey on what escapes from the storms,
Not they alone, which on the grass do breed;
But also, they who from the pit proceed
Which has no bottom and when any thing
Does by the dew of Heaven begin to spring,
They shall devour the same, til they have left thee,
Nor leaf nor blossom; but of all bereft thee.
Then shall a darkness, far more black,
Then when the light corporeal thou do lack.
For grossest ignorance; o'reshadowing all,
Shall in so thick a darkness thee inthrall,
That thou a blockish people shall be made,
Still wandering on in a deceiving sha^e;
Mistrusting those that safest paths are showing,
Most trusting them, who counsel thy undoing;
And aye tormented be with doubts and fears,
As one that outcries, in dark places hears.
Nor shall the hand of God from thee return,
Til he has also more thine eldest-born,
That is, til he has taken from the quite,
Even that whereon thou fetst thy whole delight;
And filled every house throughout this Nation,
With deaths unlooked for, and lamentation.
So great shall be thy ruin, and thy shame,
That when the neighbor kingdoms hear the same
Their ears shall tingle. And when that day comes,
In which thy follies must receive their dooms;
A day of clouds, a day of gloominess,
A day of black despair, and heaviness
It will appear. And then thy vanities,,
Thy gold, thy silver, thy confederacies,
And all those reeds on which thou have depended;
Will fail thy trust, and leave thee unbefriended.
Thy Judge, thy Priests, and Prophets, then shall mourn
And, peradventure, feignedly return
To beg of God to succor them: but they
Who will not hearken to his voice to day,
Shall cry unheeded: and he will despise
Their vows, their prayers, and their sacrifice:
A sea of troubles, all thy hopes shall swallow,
As waves on waves, so plague on plague shall follow:
And every thing that was a blessing to thee,
Shall turn to be a curse; and help undo thee.
Thy Magistrates have to thee thy fathers bin:
By means of them has peace been kept within
Thy sea-girt limits: they thy weal befriended,
The blessed faith they stoutly have defended:
But know, that, til thou shall repent, no part
Belongs to thee of what is his desert;
His princely virtues, to his own avail,
Shall profit much: but they to thee shall fail.
To thee his clemency shall seem severe,
His favors all, shall injuries appear,
And when thy sin is fully ripe in thee,
Thy prince and people then alike shall be,
Thou shall have babes to be thy Judges, or worse,
Those tyrants who by cruelty and force
Shall take away thy ancient freedoms quite,
From all their Subjects, yea themselves delight,
In their vexations: and all those that are
Made slaves thereby, shall murder, yet not dare
To stir against them. By degrees they shall
Deprive thee of thy patrimonies all;
Compel thee (as in other Lands this day)
For thine own meat, and thine own drink to pay.
And at the last begin to exercise.
Upon thy sons, all heathenish tyrannies,
As just prerogatives. To these intents,
Thy nobles shall become their instruments.
For they who had their birth from noble races,
Shall some and some be brought into disgraces;
From offices they shall excluded stand:
And all their virtuous offspring, from the Land,
Shall quite be worn: instead of whom shall rise
A brood advanced by impieties,
By flattery, by purchase, and by that
Which every truly noble one does hate.
From stems obscure, and out of mean professions,
They shall ascend and mount by their ambitions,
To seats of Justice, and those Names to bear,
Which honored most within these nations are.
And being thither got shall make more strong
Their new-built greatness, by increasing wrong.
To those, will some of these themselves unite,
Who by their births to Lordly Styles have right;
But viciously consuming their estate,
Did from their fathers worths degenerate:
By this confederacy, their nobler bloods
Shall countenance the others il-got goods;
The others wealth again, shall keep from scorn
Their beggary, who have been nobly born:
And both together, being else unable,
(In this il course to make their standing stable)
Shall seek how they more great and strong may grow,
By compassing the public overthrow,
They shall abuse thy friends with tails and lies;
With seeming love and servile flatteries.
They shall persuade them they have power to make
Their wills their Law; and as they please to take
Their peoples goods, their children and their lives,
Even by their just and due Prerogatives.
When thus much they have made them to believe,
Then they shall teach them practices to grieve
their subjects by; and instruments become
to help the sorewing up, by some and some,
To compass their designs. They shall devise
Strange projects, and with impudence and lies,
Proceed in settling them. They shall forget
Those reverent usages, which do befit
The majesty of State, and rail and storm,
When they pretend disorders to reform,
In their high counsels, and where men should have
Kind admonitions, and reprovings grave,
When they offend, they shall be threatened there,
Or scoft, or taunted, though no cause appear.
It is unseemly for a judge to sit
And exercise a jibling School-boyes wit
Upon their trades, or names, who stand before
Their judgment seats: but who does not abhor,
To hear it, when a Magistrate objects,
Birth, poverty, or personal defects
In an upbraiding wise? Or, who with me
Derides it not, when in our Courts we see
Those men, whose bodies are both old and weak,
(Forgetting grave and useful things to speak)
Vent Giants words, and bristle up as tho
Their very breath could armies overthrow:
Whereas (poor weaklings) were there in their places
No more authority, then in their faces,
Their persons, or their language, all their chafing,
And threatening, nothing would effect but laughing.
For unto me big looks, and crying, hoh,
As dreadful seems as when a Child cries, boh,
To fright his Nurse, yea such a bugbeare fashion
Effects naught but scornful indignation.
But in those times (which nearer are than some
Suppose perhaps) such Rhetoric will come
To be in use; and arguments of Reason
And just proceeding, will be out of season.
Their wisdom shall be folly; and go nigh
To bring contempt on their authority.
Their Councel-table shall a snare be made,
And those against whom they no just matter had,
At first appearance, shall be urged to say
Some word or other, ere they part away,
Which will betray their innocence to blame,
And bring upon them detriment and shame:
Yea, many times (as David has of old,
Concerning such oppressors, well foretold)
To humble crouchings, and to feigned shows,
Descend they shall to work men's overthrowes:
And, what their subtilty does fail to gain,
They shall by rigor and by force obtain.
What ever from thy people they can tear
Or borrow, they shall keep, as if it were
A prize which had been taken from the foe:
And, they shall make no conscience what they do
To prejudice Posterity. For, they
To gain their lust, hut for the present day,
Shall with such love unto themselves endeavor,
That (though they knew it would undo for ever
Their own posterity) it shall not make
Those Monsters any better course to take.
Nay, God shall give them up for their offenses,
To such uncomely reprobated senses:
And blind them so, that when the ax they see
Even hewing at the root of their own tree,
By their own handy strokes, they shall not grieve
For their approaching fall: no, nor believe
Their fall approaches; nor assume that heed
Which might prevent it, til they fall indeed.
Thy Judges, Britain, in those days will be
Like roaring Lions, making prey of thee.
God shall deliver thee into their hand,
And they shall act their pleasure in the Land;
As once his Prophet threatened to that nation,
Which does exemplify thy Desolation.
Thy Priests (as thou have wallowed in excess)
Shall take delight in drink and wantonness.
And those, whom thou do call thy Noble ones
Shall to the very marrow, gnaw thy bones.
Thy Lawyers fulfully shall wrest thy Laws,
And (to the ruin of the common Cause)
Shall mis-interpret them, in hope of grace
From those, who may dispoyle them of their place.
Yea, that whereto they are obliged, both
By conscience, by their calling, and their Oath
To put in execution they shall fear,
And leave them helpless, who oppressed are.
Thy Prelates in the spoil of thee shall share;
Thy Priests as light shall be as those that are
The meanest persons: all their Prophesies
Or Preachings shall be heresies and lies.
The word of truth shall not in them remain,
Their lips no wholesome knowledge shall retain,
And all his outward means of saving grace,
Thy God shall carry to another place.
Mark well, oh Britain! what I now shall say,
And do not slightly pass these words away.
But be assured that when God begins,
To bring that vengeance on thee for thy sins,
Which hazard shall with total overthrow,
Thy Prophets, and thy Priests will sl^ely sow
The seeds of that dissension, and sedition,
Which time will ripen for thy sad perdition,
Even they who formerly were of thy peace
The happy instruments, shall then increase
Thy troubles most. And, even as when the Jews
Gods truth-presaging Prophets did abuse,
He suffered those who preached in his Name,
Such falsehoods, as the chiefest cause became
Of their destruction: so if thou go on
To make a scorn (as thou have often done)
Of them who seek thy welfare, he will send
False Prophets that shall bring thee to thine end,
By saying all things thou would have them say,
And lulling thee asleep in thine own way.
If any brainsick Fellow, whom the Devil
Seduceth to inflict on thee some evil,
Shall coin false Doctrines, or persuade thee to
Some foolish course that will at length undo
The Commonweal: his counsel thou shall follow;
Thou, covered with his bait, a hook shall swallow
To rend thy entrails: and thine ignorance
Shall also for that mischief him advance.
But if that any lover of thy weal,
Inspired with truth, and with an honest zeal,
Shall tell thee ought pertaining to thy good,
His Messages shall stiffly be withstood:
That Seer shall charged not to see;
His word shall slighted as a Po^sherd be:
His life shall be traduced, to disgrace
His counsels; or, his errant to debase:
Instead of recompense, he shall be sure
Imprisonments or threatenings to procure:
And peradventure (as those Prophets were,
Who did among the Jewish Peers declare
Their States enormities) his good intention,
May be so wronged, that he, by some invention,
May lose his life, with public shame and hate,
As one that is a troubler of the State.
But not unless the Priest, thereto consent:
For in those days shall few men innocent
Be grieved (through any quarter of the Land)
In which thy Clergy shall not have some hand.
If ever in the Fields (as God forbid)
The Bloo^ of thine own children shall be shed
By civil discord, they shall blow the flame,
That will become thy ruin, and thy shame.
And thus it shall be kindled. When the times,
Are nigh at worse; and thy increasing crimes
Almost complete; the Devil shall begin
To bring strange crotchets, and opinions in
Among thy teachers, which will breed disunion,
And interrupt the visible communion
Of thy established Church, And, in the steed
Of zealous Pastors, (who Gods flock did feed)
There shall arise within thee, by degrees,
A Clergy, that shall more desire to fleece,
Then feed the flock. A clergy it shall be,
Divided In it self: and they shall thee
Divide among them, into several factions:
Which rend thee will, and fill thee with destractions:
They all in outward seeming shall pretend
Gods glory, and to have one pious end:
But, under color of sincere devotion,
Their study shall be temporal promotion:
YVhich will among themselves strange quarrels make
Wherein thy other children shall partake.
As to the Persons, or the cause, they stand
Affected, even quite throughout the Land.
Now one great man among them gets the power,
From all the rest, and like an Emperor,
Does act his pleasure. And we know it is common
To have some foolish Favorite or woman,
To govern him, so in a pop'lar State,
Affairs are managed by the self same fate;
And either one or more away do steal
The peoples hearts, and sway the Commonweal.
Thus God is pleased, to humble and to raise:
Thus he by several names, and several ways,
The world does govern. Yea thus even in one nation,
And in one State, he makes much alteration
In forms of Government: of changing that
Which is but accidental to a State.
And such his Justice, and his Wisdom is,
That he preserves by the means of this,
Those things which do essentially pertain
To that great power which over all does reign.
Nor is he pleased thus it should be done
In States that merely civil are alone;
But also in the Churches Governments,
Allows the change of outward accidents.
Yea, they to whom he gives the oversights
Of some particular Church, may change old Rites,
The Customs, Forms, or titles as occasions
Are offered them; or as the times, or Nations,
Require a change: provided so, that they
Take nothing which essential is away;
Nor add what shall repugne or prejudice
Gods Laws, his prophets, or the liberties
Of them that are his people. For, in what
Has any Church a power, if not in that
Which is indifferent? Or, in what I pray
VVil men the Church authority obey,
If not in such like things? Or who should be
The Judge what is indifferent, if not she?
A private Spirit knows what best agrees
With his own fancy, but the Church best sees,
What fits the Congregation. For; what gives,
Offense to one, another man receives
Much Comfort; and his Conscience edifies.
By disciplines which many do despise,
There is I know, a middle-way that lies
Even just betwixt the two extremities,
Which to sedition, and to saction tend.
To find which tract, my whole desire I bend;
And wish it followed more. For, if we tread
That harmless path, we cannot be misled;
Nor shamed, though blamed we be. To every man
I feign would give his due; and all I can
I do endeavor it. I would not wrong
My Country; neither take what does belong
To Caesar: nor infringe, or prejudice,
The Universal Churches liberties;
Nor for her outward discipline prefer
Or censure any Church particular,
Or any State, but as befit it may,
His Muse, which naught but necedfull truths does say.
Nor have I any purpose to withdraw
Obedience, or respect from any Law
That's positive, or to dishearten from
Those Customs, which a Christian state become.
Nor have I any thought to scandalize,
Or speak amiss of Principalities;
Or, to traduce men's persons: but, I fall
On errors of men's lives in general,
And, on those great abuses, which I see
To blemish every calling and degree.
Of Dignities and Persons, I observe,
All means I can, their honors to preserve,
When I reprove their faults. And even as he
That hunteth Foxes, where Lambs feeding be,
May fright that harmless flock, and suffer blame
Of some Bystanders, (knowing not his Game)
When from his Dogs, those innocents are free,
And none but their devourers bitten be.
So, though my reprehensions, often are
Mistook by foolish Readers; they are far
From reprehending those, or taxing that
Which is unfitting for my shooting at.
I speak those things which will advantage rather
Then harm: and hence this blinded age may gather
Much light. Which little volume does relate
Naught else but what is like to be our fate,
If sin increase; and what in former times
Did fall on other Nations for their crimes.
I utter what our welfare may increase,
And help confirm us in a happy peace;
Which they will never compass, who pursue
To speak what is pleasing, rather than what is true,
How ever, here my thoughts deliv'red be:
Let God, as he shall please, deliver me.
And if what here is mentioned, thou do heed
(Oh Britain!) in those times that shall succeed,
It may prevent much loss, and make thee shun
Those mischiefs, whereby Kingdoms are undone.
But to thy other sins if thou shall add
Rebellions (as false Prophets will persuade)
Which likely are to follow, when thou shall
In thy profession of Religion halt:
Then will thy Priests and People scourge each other,
(...) their offenses, til both fail together:
By weakening of your powers to make them way,
Who seeek and look for that unhappy day:
Then shall disorder every where abound
And neither just not pious man be found.
The best shall be a bryar or a thorn,
By whom their neighbors shall be scratcht and torn.
Thy Prophets shall to nothing condescend
For any merit, just, or pious end;
But either for increasing of their treasure,
Or, for accomplishing their wilful, pleasure:
And unto what they sell or daine for need;
There shall be given little trust or heed.
For that which by their words confirm they shall,
(The Royal Seals uniting therewithal)
A toy shall frustrate; and a gift shall make
Their strickest Orders no effect to take.
The judge, without a bribe, no cause shall end:
No man shall trust his brother, or his friend:
The Parents and the children shall despise
And hate, and spoil each other, she that lies
Within her husbands bosom, shall betray him:
They who thy people should protect, shall slay them,
The aged shall regarded be of none:
The poor shall by the rich be trodden on:
Such grievous insolences, every where
Shall acted be, that good and bad shall fear
In thee to dwell; and men discreet shall hate
To be a Ruler, or a Magistrate.
When they behold (without impenitence)
So much injustice, and such violence.
And when thy wickedness this height shall gain,
To which (no doubt) it will ere long attain,
If thou proceed: then from the bow that is bent
And half way drawn already, shall be sent
A morral arrow, and it pierce thee shall
Quite through the head, the Liver, and the Gall.
The Lord shall call, and whistle from afar,
For those thy enemies that fiercest are:
For those thou fear most; and they shall from
Their Countries, like a whirlwind hither come,
They shall not sleep, nor slumber, nor untie
Their garments till within thy field they lie,
Sharp shall their arrows be, and strong their bow,
Their faces shall as full of honor show
As does a Lions. Like a bolt of thunder
Their troops of horse shall come and tread thee under
Their iron feet: thy Foes shall eat thy bread.
And with thy flocks both clothed be and fed.
Thy dwellers, they shall carry from their own,
To Countries which their fathers have not known,
And thither shall such mischiefs them pursue,
That they who seek the pit-fall to eschew,
Shall in a snare be taken. If they shall
Escape the sword, a Serpent in the wall
To death shall sting them: yea, (although they hap
To shun a hundred plagues) they shall not escape;
But, with new dangers still be chased about,
Until that they are wholly rooted out.
The Plowman then shall be afraid to sow,
Artificers their labor shall sorgoe;
The Merchant man shall cross the Seas no more,
(Except to fly, and seek some other Shore)
Thy ablest men shall faint: thy wise-ones then,
Shall know themselves to be but foolish men.
And they who built and planted by oppression,
Shall leave their gettings to the foes possession.
Yea, God will scourge thee, England, seven times more
With seven times greater Plagues than heretofore:
Then, thy allies their friendship shall withdraw;
And, they that of thy greatness stand in awe,
Shall say in scorn, Is this the valiant Nation,
That had throughout the world such reputation
By victories upon the shore? are these
That people which was Master of the Seas,
And grew so mighty? yea, that petty Nation
That were not worthy of thy indignation,
Shall mock thee too; and all thy former fame
Forgot shall be, or mentioned to thy shame.
Mark how Gods plagues were doubled on the Jews,
When they his mildrorrections did abuse:
Mark what at last upon their land he sent:
And, look thou for the self-same punishment,
If them thou imitatest. For their sin
At first, but eight years bondage they were in.
Their wickedness grew more, and God did then,
To Eglon make them slaves eight years and ten,
They disobeying still, the God of heaven,
Their year of Servitude were twenty seven,
To Iabin and to Midian: then prevailed
Philistia forty years; and when that failed,
To make them of their evil ways repent,
There was among themselves a fatal rent;
And, they often scourged each other. Still they trod
The self-same path; and then the hand of God
^rought Ashur on them; and did make them bear
His heavy yoke until the seventeenth year.
And last of all the Roman Empire came,
Which from their Country rooted out their name,
That foolish project which they did embrace,
To keep them in possession of their place,
Did loose it: and, like Cain, that vagrant nation,
Has now remained in fearful desolation,
Nigh sixteen hundred years; and whatsoere
Some lately dream, in vain they look for here
A temp'ral Kingdom. For, as long ago
Their Psalmist said, No Prophet does foreshow
This thraldomes end. Nor shall it end until
The Gentiles their just number do fulfill:
Which is unlike to be until that hour,
In which there shall be no more temporal power,
Of temporal Kingdom; therefore gather them
(Oh Lord!) unto thy new Jerusalem,
In thy due time. For, yet unto that place
They have a promised right, by thy mere grace,
To those who shall repent, thy firm Election
Continues in this temporal rejection.
Oh! show thy mercy in their desolation,
That thou may honored be in their salvation
Yea, teach us also, by their fearful fall,
To hearken to thy voice, when thou do call;
(Lest thou in anger unto us protest,
That we shall never come into thy rest.)
For we have followed them in all their sin;
Such, and so many, have our warnings bin:
And if thou still prolong not thy compassion,
To us belongs the selfsame desolation.
And it will shortly come, with all those terrors
That we on them inflicted, for their errors.
Then woe shall be to them that heretofore
By joining house to house expelled the poor;
And field have into field incoporated,
Until their town-ship were depopulated.
For desolate their dwelling shall be made:
Ev^n in their blood the Lord shall bathe his blade:
And they that have by avarice and wiles,
Erected Palaces and costly piles;
Shall think the stones and timbers in the wall,
Aloud to God, for vengeance on them call.
Then woe shall be to them who early rise
To eat and drink, and play, and wantonnize;
Still adding sin to sin, for, they the pain
Of cold, and thirst, and hunger, shall sustain;
And be the servile slaves of them that are
Their foes, as to their lusts they captives were.
Then woe to them who darkness more have loved
Then light, and good advice have disapproved:
For they shall wander in a crooked path,
Which neither light, nor end, nor comfort has.
And when for guides and Counsel they do cry,
Not one shall pity them who passes by.
Then woe to them that have corrupted bin,
To justify the wicked in his sin:
Or for a bribe; the righteous to condemn:
For flames (as on the chaff) shall seize on them:
Their bodies to the dunghill shall be cast:
Their flower shall turn to dust; their stock shall wast,
And all the Glorious titles they have worn,
Shall but increase their infamy and scorn,
Then woe to them that have been raised aloft
By good men's ruins, and by laying soft
And easy pillows, under great men's arms,
To make them pleased in their alluring charms.
Then woe to them who being grown afraid
Of some nigh peril, sought unlawful aid;
And settings Gods protection quite aside,
Upon their own inventions have relied.
For God their foolish hopes will bring to naught;
On them, their feared mischief shall be brought;
And all their wit and strength, shall not suffice,
To have their sorrow of, which on them lies.
Yea, then, Oh Britain! woe to every one,
That has without repentance evil done:
For, those who do not heed, not bear in mind
His visitings, Gods reaching hand will find;
And they with howling cries and lamentation,
Shall sue and seek, in vain, for his compassion.
Because they careless of his mercies were,
Til in consuming wrath he did appear.
Burst I we set far off that evil day,
In dull security we pass away
Our precious time; and with vain hopes and toys,
Build up a trust which every puff destroys.
And therefore still when healing is expected,
New and unlookt for troubles are effected.
We gather armies and we Fleets prepare:
And then both strong and safe we think we are
But when we look for victories and glory,
What follows, but events that make us sorry?
And it is Gods mercy that we turn our faces
With so few losses, and no more disgraces.
For what are most of those whom we commend
Such actions to; and whom we forth do send
To fights those battles, which the Lords we call,
But, such as never fight for him at all?
Whom do thou make thy Captains, and dispose
Such offices unto, but unto those
(Some few excepted) who procure by friends,
Command and pay, to serve their private ends?
This Island has some sense of what the ails,
And very much, this evil times bewailes:
But not our sins do we so much lament,
Or mourn, that God for them is discontent,
As that the plagues, they being disturb our pleasures,
Increase our dangers and exhaust our treasures.
And for these causes, now and then we fast,
And pray, as long as half a day does last,
For if the Sun do but a little clear
That Cloud, from which a tempest we do fear,
What kind of grief we took we plainly show
By those rejoycings which thereon ensue:
For in the stead of such due thankfulness,
As Christian zeal obliges to express;
To pleasure (not to God) we sacrifice;
Renew our sins, revive our vanities;
And all our vowed gratitude expires,
In games, in guns, in bells, in health, or Fires.
We fain would be at peace: but few men go
That way, as yet, whereby it may be so.
We have not that humility which must
Effect it: we are false, and cannot trust
Each other; no nor God with true confessions:
Which shows that we abhor not our transgressions.
It proves, that of our errors, we in heart
Repent not, neither purpose to depart
From any folly, For all they that are
Sincerely penitent, do nothing fear
So much as their own guilt; nor seek to gain
Ought more, than to be reconciled again.
And they that are thus minded, never can
Be long unreconcil'd to God, or man.
When we should stoop, we most our selves exalt,
and though we be, would not be thought in fault.
Nay, though we faulty be, and thought and known,
And proved so, and see that we are thrown
By our apparent errors into straits,
From which we cannot get by all our sleights.
Yet still our selves we vaunt and justify,
And struggle, til the snare we faster tie.
We sin, and we to boast it have no shame,
Yet storm when others do our follies name:
And rather then we will so much as say
We did amiss (though that might wipe away
The stain of all) I think that some of us
So wilful are, so proud, and mischievous,
That we our selves, would run, and our Nation,
To keep our shadow of a Reputation.
Oh! if we are thus headstrong, it is unlike
We any part of our proud fails will strike
Til they have sunk our vessel in the sea,
Or by the furious winds are torn away.
'Twere better, tho, we did confess our wound,
Than hide it til our state grew more unsound.
'Twere better we some wealth or office lost,
Then keep them, til our lives, and all it cost:
And therefore, let us w^ely be advised,
Before we by a tempest be surprised.
Down first with our top-gallants, and our Flags;
In storms the skilfull^st Pilots make no brags.
Let us (if that be not enough) let fall
Our Misne-yard, and strike our top-sailes all.
If this we find be not enough to do,
Strike Fore-saile, Sprit-saile, yea and Mainsaile too.
And, rather then our Ship should sink or rend:
Let Us overboard, goods, mast, and tanckling send.
Save but the Hul the Master, and the men;
And we may live to scour the seas again.
Believe it England, howsoever some
Who should foresee thy plagues before they come,
Endeavor to persuade thee that thou have
A hopeful time, and that the worst is past.
Yet, I dare boldly tell thee, thou have nigh
Worn out Gods patience by impiety.
And that unless the same we do renew
By penitence our folly we shall rue.
But what am I, that me thou should believe?
Or unto what I tell, credit give?
It may be this adultrous Generation
Expects tokens of her desolation;
And therefore I will give them signs of that
Which they are now almost arrived at.
Nor signs, so mystical as most of those
Which did the ruin of the Jews disclose;
But sings as evident as are the day.
For know ye Britains, that what God did say
Ierusalems destruction should foreshew,
He spoke to every State that should ensue.
And that he naught of her or to her spoke,
For hers alone, but also for our sake.
One sign that Gods long-suffering we have tired,
And that his patience is almost expired,
Is that, that many judgments he has sent,
And still removed them e're we did repent.
For God (even by his holiness) did swear,
(Says Amos) such a Nation he will tear
With briars, and with Fish-hooks rend away
The whole posterity of such as they.
Clean teeth (says God) I gave them; and with bread
In many places, them I scantly fed;
And yet they sought me not: then I restrained
The dews of heaven, upon this field I rained,
And not on that; yea, to one City came
Some two or three, to quench their thirsty flame;
Yet to return to me no care they took;
With blastings then, and Meldews I them struck;
And mixed amongst their fruits the Palmer-worme
Yet they their lives did not a jot reform,
Then did I send the Pestilence (said he)
Devoured, by the sword, their young men be;
Their Horse are slain, and up to Heaven ascends
Their stink; yet I discover no amends.
The self same things thy God in thee has done,
Oh England! yet, here follows thereupon
So small amendment, that they are a sign
To thee; and their sharp Judgment will be thine.
The second token which does fore-declare
When Cities, States, and Realms, declining are,
Even Christ himself has left us: for, (says he)
When Desolation shall approaching be,
Of wars, and warlike rumors ye shall hear;
Rare signs and tokens will in heaven appear;
Down from the Firm ament the stars shall fall;
The hearts of many men, then, sail them shall;
There will be many scandals and offenses;
Great Earthquakes, Schisms, Dearths, and Pestilences,
Realm, Realm, and Nation, Nation, shall oppose;
The nearest friends shall be the greatest soes,
Against the Church shall many tyranniz^;
Deceivers, and false Prophets, shall arise;
In every place shall wickedness abound;
Tnd charity shall very cold be found.
This Christ himself did Prophecy: and we
Are doubtless blind, unless confessed it be,
That at this hour, upon this Kingdom here,
These marks of desolation viewed are.
How often have we seen prodigious lights,
OF respread the face of heaven in moonless nights?
How many dreadful Meteors, have there been
In this our Climate, lately heard and seen?
Who knows not that but a while ago
A great Eclipse did threat, if not foreshow
Gods Judgments? In what age, to fore did hear
So many, who did Saints and Scars appear,
Fall (as it were) from heaven? Or who has heard
Of greater eathquakes, than has lately scared
These quarters of the world? How often, the touch,
Of famine have we had? But, when so much
Devoured by the Pestilence were we,
As in this present year our folks shall be,
Of wars, and martial rumors, never more
Were heard within these confines heretofore;
When were all Kingdoms, and all Nations through
The world, so opposite as they are now?
I Have been in no Country, whether nigh or far,
But is engaged or threatened with some war.
All places, either present woes bewail;
Or else things feared make men's hearts to fail.
False Prophets, and Deceivers we have many;
We scarcely find integrity in any:
The name of Christ begins in every place
To suffer persecution and disgrace;
And we the greatest jeopardies are in,
Among our neighbors, and our nearest kin,
Strange heresies do every where increase,
Disturbing Sion, and exiling peace.
Impiety does multiply. True love
Grows cold. And if these tokens do not prove
Our fall draws on, unless we do amend?
I know not when our folly shall have end.
A third apparent sign which does declare
When some devouring plague approaches near,
Is when a Nation does anew begin
To let Idolatry to enter in:
And openly or secretly give place
To heresy where truth established was:
Or, when like Jeroboam to possess
An outward profit, or a temporal peace,
They either change Religions, or devise
A worship which does mix Idolatries
With truth. For this, even for this very crime,
The King of Ashur, in Hosea's time
Led Israel captive. And, both from the sight
Of God, and from the house of David quite
They were cut off forever, and did neither
Serve God nor Idols; but even both together;
In such a mixed Religion as is that
Which some among us, now have aimed at.
Mark England, and I prithee mark it well,
If this offense which ruined Israel,
On thee appear not: and if so it be,
Amend, or look for what it threatens thee.
The fourth true token, which does fore-express
The ruin of a Land for wickedness,
Is when the Priests and Magistrates begin,
To grow extremely impudent in sin.
This Sign the Prophet Micah gives us;
And he (not I) to you cries loudly thus:
Hear, O ye house of Jacob, and all ye
That Princes of the house of Israel be:
Ye Justice hate, and ye pervert what is good;
Ye build the walls of Sion up with blood;
Jerusalem with sin, ye up have reared,
Your Judges pass their censures for reward;
Your Priests do preach for hire, your Prophets do
Like them; and prophecy for money too.
And, for this cause shall Sion mount (says he)
Even like a plowed field become to be;
And like a Forest hill where bushes grow,
The City of Jerusalem shall show.
Change but the names, oh Britain! and that token
Of desolation unto thee is spoken.
For, what this day thy Priests and Prophets are,
Their actions and the peoples cries declare.
A fifth sure evidence, that the cause, for which God among
Thy ruins will entomb thy fame ere long
(If thou repent not) is this, that thou
Do every day the more ungodly grow,
By how much more the blessed means of grace
Does multiply it self in every place.
God sends unto thee many learned Preachers
Apostles, Pastors, and all kind of teachers;
His Visions and his Prophecies upon thee
He multiplies: and (that he might have won thee
To more sincerity) on all occasions
By counsel, by entreaty, and persuasions,
He has advised, assured and besought thee,
With precept upon precept he has taught thee;
By line on line, by miracle, by reason,
In every place, in season, out of season;
By little and by little, and by much
Sometime at once: Yet is thy nature such,
That still thou waxest worse; and in the room
Of pleasant Grapes, more thistles daily come:
And thou that art so haughty, and so proud,
For this, shall vanish like an empty cloud;
And, as a Lion, Leopard, or a Bear,
Thy God, for this, shall thee in pieces tear.
If thou suppose my muse did this devise,
Go take it from Hosea's prophesies.
The six undoubted signal when the last
Good days of sinful Realms are almost past,
Is when the people near to God shall draw
In word, to make profession of his Law:
And by their tongues his praises forth declare!
Yet in their hearts from him continue far.
To such a Land, their destiny displayes
Isajah: for even thus the Prophet says:
God will produce a marvel in that state
And do a work that men shall wonder at;
The wisdom of their wisest Counselor,
Shall perish, and their prudent men shall err.
On their deep Counsels, sorrow shall attend;
Their secret plots shall have a dismal end;
Their giddy projects which they have devised,
Shall as the Potters Clay be quite despised.
Like Carmel, Lebanon, shall seem, and he
Like Lebanon, shall make mount Carmel be.
Their pleasant Fields like deserts shall appear;
And there shall Gardens be, where deserts are.
God keep (thou British I Will) this plague from thee
For signs thereof upon thy body be.
Thou of the purest worship make profession;
Yet, waxest more impure in thy condition.
Thou boastest of the knowledge of Gods word,
Yet thereunto in manners to accord
Thou do refuse. Thou make protestation
Of piety; yet hate reformation.
Yea when when thy tongue does sing of praise divine,
Thy heart does plot some temporal design.
And some of those, who in this wise are Holy,
Begin to show their wisdom will be folly.
For when from sight their snares they deepest hide,
By God almightles eyes they are espied.
The seventh symptom of a dreadful blow,
If not of a perpetual overthrow,
Is when a slumbring spirit does surprise
A Nation, and has closed up their eyes:
Or when the Prophets and the Seers are
So clouded, that plain truths do not appear:
Or when the Visions evidently seen
Are passed by, as if they had not been:
Or when to Nations who can read, God gives
His Book^; and thereof does unseal the leafes,
And bids them read the same, which they to do
Deny, or plead unableness thereto.
Black signs are these. For if that book to them,
Still dark; or as a Book unsealed seem;
Or, if they heed no more what here is said,
Then they that have the Book and cannot read;
The Judgments last repeated, are the doom,
That shall on such a stupid Nation come.
This sign is come on us, for, lo, unsealed
Gods Book is now amongst us, and revealed
Are all the Mysteries which do concern
The children of this present age to learn.
So well has has he instructed this our Land,
That we not only read, but understand
The secrets of his Word. The Prophesies
Of his chief Seers, are before our eyes,
Unveiled: true interpretations
Are made, and many proper applications
Even to our selves, yet is our heart so blind,
That what we know and see we do not mind.
We hear and speak, and much ado we keep,
But we as senseless are as men asleep.
What then we do. Yea, while that we are talking.
What snares are in the way where we are walking,
We heed not what we say, but pass along;
And, many times, are fast ensnared among
Those mischiefs, and those faults we did condemn,
Before our tongues have lost to mention them.
For our neglect of God in former times,
(Or for some present unrepented crimes)
A slumbring Spirit so possesses us,
That our estate is wondrous dangerous.
We see and hear, and tell to one another
Our perils, yet we headlong have together
To wilful ruin, and are grown so mad,
That when our friends a better course persuade,
Or seek to stop us (when they see we run
That way in which we cannot ruin shun)
We persecute those men with all our soul,
That we may damn our selves without control.
The eight plain sign, by which I understand
That some devouring mischiefs are at hand,
Is that maliciousness which I do see
Among professors of one Faith to be.
We have but one Father and one Mother,
Do persecute and torture one another.
So hotly we oppose not antichrist,
As we our fellow Brethren do resist.
The Protestant, the Protestant defies;
And we our selves, our selves do scandalize.
Our Church we have exposed to more scorn;
And her fair seamless Vestment rent, and torn,
By our own fury, more than by their spite
Who are to us directly opposite,
To save an apple we the tree destroy,
And quarrels make for every needless toy,
From us if any brother differ shall
But in a crotchet, we upon him fall
As eagerly, and with as bitter hate,
As if we knew him for a Reprobate.
And what ever all this does signify,
Saint Paul (by way of caveat) does imply.
Take heed (says he) lest while ye bite each other,
You of your selves, consumed be together.
Another sign, which causes me to fear,
That our confusion is approaching near,
Are those divisions, which I have espide
In Church and Commonwealth, this present tide.
We cannot hide these rents; for they do gape
So wide, that some their jaws can hardly escape.
Would God, the way to close them up we knew,
Else what they threaten time will shortly show;
For, all men know, a City or a Land,
Within it self divided, cannot stand.
The last black Sign that here I will repeat,
(Which does to Kingdoms desolation threat)
Is when the hand of God almighty brings;
The People into bondage to their Kings.
I say, when their own Judges shall take delight,
Those whom he should protect, to rob, and smite.
When they who fed the Sheep, the Sheep shall kill,
And eat them; and suppose they do il.
When God gives up a Nation unto those
That are their neighbors, that they may, as foes,
Devour them. When (Oh England!) thou shall see
This come to pass, a sign it is to thee
That God is angry, and a certain token
That into pieces thou shall quite be broken:
If not by foreign strength: by force at home;
And that thy greater torment will become.
This vengeance, and this fearful preparation,
Of bringing ruin on a sinful nation,
If they remain impenitentent the Lord
Does menace; and by Zachary record,
To make us wise. Oh! let us therefore learn,
What now is coming on us to discern.
For, (well considered, if all things were)
From this captivity, we seem not far.
It now already seems to be projected;
Nay, little wants of being quite effected.
But, if God should from us, as God forbid,
Take him, as once he good Josiah did,
He also will (unless we mend) perchance,
In times to come, a Shepherd here advance,
Who shall not plead for what his Young men say
Is just; but take the same, perforce, away.
An Idol Shepherd, who shall neither care
To find or seek for those that starved are;
Nor guard the Lambs; nor cure what has a wound;
Nor cherish those that firm to him are found;
But take the fat, and rob them of their fleeces
And eat their flesh, and break their bones in pieces.
More signs I might, as yet, commemorate,
To show Gods patience is nigh out of date.
But these are signs enough, and so apparent,
That twenty more will give no better warrant
To what I speak. Yet, if these false appear,
That Is one sign more, our fall approaches near.
Be mindful, therefore, while it is to Day;
And let no good occasion slip away.
Now rend your hearts, ye Britains, wash and rinse them
From all corruption, from all evil cleanse them.
Go offer up the pleasing sacrifice
Of Righteousness, from folly turn your eyes,
Seek peace, and follow it, with strict pursuit:
Relieve the needy, Judgment execute;
Refresh the weary, right the fatherless:
The strangers, and the widows wants redress:
Give praise to God, depend with lowly faith,
On him, and what is holy Spirit faith:
Remember what a price thy ransom cost;
And now redeem the time that thou have lost.
Return, return thou (oh backsliding Nation)
And let thy tears prevent thy desolation.
As yet, thou may return: for, Gods embrace
Is open for thee, if thou have the grace,
To give it meeting. Yet, repentance may
Prevent the mischiefs of that evil day,
Which here is menaced: yet, thou may have peace,
And by discreet endeavoring, increase
Each outward grace, and every inward thing,
Which will additions to thy comfort bring.
If this thou do; these fearful threatenings all,
(Repeated here) to mercies change he shall.
We cannot fay, it will excuse thee from
All chastisement, or that no blow shall come.
For, peradventure, thou so long have bin
Unpenitent, that some loud crying sin
Has waked that Vengeance, which upon thy crimes
Must fall (as once in Ieremiahs times)
Without prevention; to exemplify
Gods hate of sin to all posterity.
But, sure we are, that if he does not stay
His threatened hand, the stroke that he does lay
VVil fall the lighter; and become a blessing,
Thy future joys, and virtues more increasing,
Than all that large prosperity and rest.
Which thou, so long together have possessed.
God (with a writers Ink-horn) one has sent,
To set a mark on them that shall repent;
And bids him promise in his Name, that they
Who shall, recanting, leave their evil way,
And in their hearts, bewail the grievous crimes,
And miseries of Sion, in their times.
That they shall be secure and saved from
The hand of these destroyers which must come:
Or else by their destruction find a way
To that repairing which will never decay.
Yea, thou, oh Britain! if thou could reform
Thy manners, might^st expel the dreadful storm
Now threatened; and thy foes (who triumph would
The ruin of thy glory to behold,
And jeere thee when thou fallest) soon shall see
Thy God returning and avenging thee
On their insultings: yea, with angry blows
He would effect their shameful overthrows.
Or turn their hearts. For when from sin men cease,
God makes their enemies and them at peace.
Moreover thou shall have in thy possessing,
Each inward grace, and every outward blessing;
Thy fruitful Herds shall in rich pastures feed;
Thy soil shall plenteously increase thy seed;
Thy Flock, shall neither Shepherds want, nor meat;
Clean provander, thy stabled beast shall eat;
There shall be Rivers in thy Dales, and Fountains
Upon the tops of all thy noblest Mountains:
The Moon shall cast upon thee beams as bright
As now the Sun, and with a seven fold light
The Sun shall bless thee. He that Rules in thee,
To all his people reconciled shall be;
And they shall find themselves no whit deceived,
In those good hopes which are of him conceived;
But he, (and they, who shall his throne possess
When he is gone) shall reign in righteousness;
And be more careful of thy weal by far,
Than Parents of their childrens profits are:
Thy Magistrates, with wisdom shall proceed
In all that shall be counseled or decreed.
As Harbors, when it blows tempestuously;
As Rivers into places over-dry;
As Shadows are to men oppressed with heat;
As to a hungry Stomach wholesome meat;
To thee so welcome, and as much contenting,
Thy Nobles will become, on thy repenting.
Thy Priests shall preach true doctrines in thy temples,
And make it fruitful by their good examples.
Thy God with righteousness shall them array,
And hear and answer them, when they do pray.
Thy eyes that yet are blinded, shall be clear;
Thy ears, that then are deafned, then shall hear;
Thy tongue, that stammers now, shall then speak plain;
Thy heart shall perfect understanding gain;
The preaching of the Gospel shall increase;
Thy God shall make thy comforts and thy peace,
To flow as does a River; they who plant,
The blessing of their labor shall not want;
Thy poorest people shall at full be fed;
The meek shall of no tyrant stand in dread;
Thou shall have grace and knowledge, to avoid
Those things whereby the rest may be annoid;
Thou shall possess thy wished blessings all;
And God shall hear the still before thou call.
But as a Chime, whose frets disordered grow,
Can never cause it self in tune to go,
Nor chime at all, until some cunning hand
Does make the same again in order stand:
Or, as the Clock, whose plummets are not weight,
Strikes sometimes one for three, and six for eight;
So fares it with men and kingdoms all,
When once from their integrity they fall.
They may their motion hurry out of frame,
But have no power to rectify the same.
That curious hand which first those pieces wrought,
Must mend them still, or they will still be naught.
To thee I therefore now my speech convert,
Thou Famous Artist, who Creator art
Of heaven and earth, and of those goodly spheres,
That now have whirled many thousand years.
(And shall until thy pleasure gives it ending)
In their perpetual motion without mending.
Oh! be thou pleased, by thy powerful hand,
To set in order this depraved Land.
Our whole foundation, Lord, is out of course;
And every thing still grows worse and worse,
The way that leads quite from thee, we have took
Thy Covenant, and all thy Laws are broke;
In mischiefs, and in folly, is our pleasure;
Our crying sins have almost filled their measure;
Yet, every day we had a new transgression
And still abuse thy favor and compassion.
Our governor, our Prelates, and our Nobles,
Have by their sins increase, encreast our trouble.
Our Priests, and all the people, have misgone;
All kind of evil deeds, we all have done.
We have not lived as those means of grace
Require, which thou have granted lo this place:
But rather worse than many who have had
Less helps than we, of being better made.
No Nation under heaven so lewd has bin,
That had so many warnings for their sin,
And such perpetual callings on, as we,
To leave our wickedness, and turn to thee.
Yet, we in stead of turning, furthe went;
And when thy Mercies and thy Plagues were sent
To pull us back; they seldom wrought our fray,
Or moved to repentance one whole day.
No blessing, no affliction, has a power,
To move compunction in us, for one hour,
Unless thou work it. All that I can speak
And all that I have spoken, til thou break
And mollify the heart, will fruitless be,
Not only in my hearers, but in me.
If thou prepare not way for more esteem,
All these Remembrances, will foolish seem,
Nay these, in stead of moving to repent,
VVil indignation move, and discontent;
Which will men's hardened hearts obdurate more,
And make their fault much greater then before.
Unless thou give a blessing, I may strive
As well to make a marble stone alive,
As to effect my purpose: yea, all this,
Like wholesome counsel to a mad man is,
And I for my good meaning shall be torn
In pieces, or exposed be to scorn.
For they against thy word do stop their ear,
And wild in disobedience, will not hear.
In this, we all confess our selves to blame,
And that we therefore have deserved shame.
Yea Lord, we do acknowledg^, that for this,
There nothing else to us pertaining is,
(Respecting our own worth) but desolation,
And final rooting out, without compassion.
But gracious God, though such our merit be,
Yet mercy still pertains unto thee.
To thee the act of pard'ning and forgiving,]
As much belongs (oh Father everliving)
As plagues to us: and it were better far
Our sins had less than their deservings are,
Then that thy Clemency should be out-gone;
By all the wickedness that can be done.
As well as theirs whose lives now left them have,
Thou can command those bodies from the grave,
Who stink, and putrify, and buried be
In their corruption. Such, oh Sord! are we,
Oh! call us from this grave, and show thy power
Upon this much polluted Land of our,
Forgive us all our slips, our negligences,
Our sins of knowledge, and our ignorances;
Our daring wickedness; our bloody crimes,
And all the faults of past and present times.
Permit not thy just wrath to burn for ever;
In thy displeasure do not still persever,
But call us from that pit of Death, and Sin,
And from that path of Hell which we are in.
Remember, that this Vinyard has a Vine,
Which had her planting by that hand of thine,
Remember, when from Egypt thou remov'dst it,
With what entire affection, then, thou lov'dst it.
How thou did weed and dress it heretofore,
How thou did fence it from the Forest Bore,
And think how sweet a vintage then it brought,
When thy first work upon them thou had wrought.
Remember, that without thy daily care,
The choicest plants, soon wild and fruitless are,
And that as long as thou do prune and dress,
The sowrest Vine shall bring a sweet increase.
Remember, also Lord, how still that I oe,
Who first pursued us, does seek to sow
His tares among thy wheat; and to his power,
Break down thy fence, and trample and devour
The seeds of grace, as soon as they do sprout;
And is too strong for us to keep him out.
Oh! let not him prevail, such harm to do us,
As he desires, but Lord, return unto us.
Return in mercy: though thou find us slack
To come our selves, fetch, draw, and pull us back
From our own courses, by thy grace divine,
And set, and keep us, in each way of thine.
Vouchsafe that every one in his degree,
The secret error of his life may see,
And in his lawful calling all his days,
Perform his Christian duty to thy praise.
Give peace this troublous age; for perilous
The times are grown, and no man fights for us
But thou, oh God! nor do we seek or crave
That any other Champion we may have.
Nay, give us troubles, if thy will be so,
That we may have thy strength to bear them too;
And in affliction thee more glorify,
Then here heretofore in our prosperity.
For when thy countenance on us did shine,
Those Lands that boasted of their corn and wine,
Had not that joy which thou did then inspire,
When we were boyld and fryde in blood and fire.
Oh! give us again that joy, although it cost us
Our lives. Restore thou what our sin has lost us,
Thy Church in these Dominions. Lord preserve
In purity: and teach us thee to serve
In holiness and righteousness, until
We shall the number of our days fulfill,
Defend these Nations from all overthrows,
By foreign enemies, or homebred foes.
Our State with every grace and virtue bless,
Which may thine honor and its own increase.
Inflame our Nobles with more love and zeal,
To thy true Spouse, and to his Commonweal,
Inspire our Clergy in their several places,
With knowledge, and all sanctifying graces;
That by their lives and Doctrines they may rear
Those parts of Sion which decayed are.
Awake this People give them souls that may
Believe thy Word, and thy commands obey.
The plagues deserved already, save them from.
More watchful make them, in all times to come.
For blessings past, let hearty thanks be given.
For present ones, let sacrifice to heaven
Be daily offered up. For what is needing
(Or may be useful in the time succeding)
Let faithful Prayers to thy throne be sent,
With heart and hands upright and innocent:
And let all this the better furthered be,
Through these Remembrances now brought by me.
For which high favor, and imboldning thus
My spirit, in a time so dangerous;
For choosing me, that am so despicable,
To be employed in this honorable
And great employment (which I more esteem,
Than to be crowned with a Diadem)
For thy enabling me in this Embassage;
For bringing to conclusion this my Message;
For sparing of my life, when thousands died,
Before, behind me, and on every side;
For saving of me many a time since then,
When I had forfeited my soul again;
For all those griefs and poverties, by which
I am in better things made great, and rich,
Then all that wealth and honor brings man to,
Wherewith the world does keep so much ado:
For all which thou to me on earth have given;
For all, which does concern my hopes of heaven;
For these and those innumerable graces,
Vouchsafed me at, at sundry times and places,
Unthought upon, unfeigned praise I render:
Lnd for a living sacrifice I tender
To thee (oh God) my body, soul, and all,
Which mine I may, by thy donation, call.
Accept it blessed Maker, for his sake
Who did this offering acceptable make
By giving up himself. Oh! look thou not
Upon those blemishes which I have got
By natural corruption; or by those
Polluted acts which from that ulcer flows,
According to my skill, I have enrolled
Thy Mercies; and thy Justice I have told.
I have not hid thy workings in my breast;
But as I could, their power I have expressed.
Among our great assemblies, to declare
Thy will and pleasure, lo, I do not fear:
And though by Princes I am checked and blamed;
To speak the truth, I am no whit ashamed.
Oh! show thou, Lord, thy mercy so to me,
And let thy love and truth, my guardians be.
Forgive me all the follies of my youth;
My faulty deeds; the errors of my mouth;
The wanderings of my heart, and every one
Of those good works that I have left undone.
Forgive me all wherein I did amiss,
Since thou employd'st me in performing this:
My doubting of thy calling me unto it,
My fears, which often disheartened me to do it;
My sloth, my negligences, my evasions,
And my deferring it, on vain occasions,
When I had vowed that no work of mine,
Should take me up, til I had finished thine.
Lord, pardone this; and let no future sin,
Nor what already has committed bin,
Profane this Work, or cause the same to be
The less effectual to this Land, or me.
But to my self (Oh Lord) and others, let it
So moving be, that we may never forget it.
Let not the evil, nor the good effect
It takes, or puff me up, or me deject:
Or make me think that I the better am,
Because I tell how others are to blame:
But let it keep me in a Christian fear,
Still humbly heedful what my actions are.
Let all those observations I have had,
Of others errors, be occasion made
To mind me of mine own. And lest I err,
Let every man be my Remembrancer;
With so much charity, as I have sought
To bring their duties more into our thought.
And if in any sin I linger long,
Without repentance; Lord, let every tongue
That names me, check me for it: and to me
Become, what I to others fain would be.
Oh! Let me not be like those busy brooms,
Which having cleansed many nasty rooms,
Do make themselves the fouler: but sweet Father,
Let me be like the precious Diamond rather,
Which does by polishing another stone,
The better shape and luster, set upon
His own rough body. Let my life be such,
As that man's ought to be, who knows much
Of thy good pleasure. And most awful God,
Let none of those who spread of me abroad
Unjust reports, the Devils purpose gain,
By making these my warnings prove in vain
To those that hear them, but let such disgaces
Reflect with shame, upon their authors faces,
Til they repent. And let their scandal serve
Within my heart true meekness to preserve;
And that humility which else perchance,
Vainglory, or some natural arrogance
Might overthrow, if I should think upon
With carnal thoughts, some good my lines have done.
Restrain, moreover, them who out of pride,
Or ignorance, this Labor shall deride.
Make them perceive who, shall prefer a story,
Composed for some temporal friends glory,
Before those Poems which thy works declare,
That vain and witless their opinions are;
And if by thee I was appointed Lord,
Thy judgments and thy merc^es to record,
As here I do, set thou thy mark on those,
Who shall despitefully the same oppose:
And let it pulikely be seen of all,
Til of their malice they repent them shall.
As I my conscience have discharged here,
Without concealing ought for love, or fear;
From furious men let me preserved be,
And from the scorn of ^ools deliver ^e
Vouchsafe at length some comforting reflection,
According to the years of my affliction.
On me, for good, some token please to show,
That they who see it, may thy bounty know;
Rejoice, with fellow-feeling of the same,
And join with me, in praising of thy Name.
And least (oh Lord!) some weak ones may despise
My words because of such necessities
As they have brought upon me, by their spite,
Who to my studies have bin opposite;
Oh! give me that, which may sufficient be
To make them know, that I have served thee;
And that my labors are to be regarded,
Although they seem not outwardly rewarded.
These honors, or thar wealth I do not crave,
Which they affect, who most endeavored have
To please the world; I only ask to gain
But food and raiment, Lord, for all my pains,
And that the slanders and the poverties
Wherewith my patience thou shall exercise,
Make not these Lines, or me become a scorn,
Nor leave me to the world-ward quite forlorn.
Yet in preferring of this humble suit,
I make not my request so absolute
As that I will capitulate, or tie
To such conditions, thy dread Majesty;
For if to honor but an earthly prince,
My Muse had sung, it had been impudence
To prompt his bounty; or to doubt he might
Forget to do my honest Labors right.
Do therefore as thou please: only give
Thy servant grace, contentedly to live,
And to be thankful whatsoever shall
In this my weary Pilgrimage befall,
Such things thou do command me to require
With earnest, and an absolute desire
With which I come: beseeching I may find
Thy love coutinue, though none else be kind
That blessedness eternal I may get,
Though all I loose on earth to compass it,
And that at last when my account is even,
My payment may be summoned up in heaven:
Lord, this will please me, call me quickly thither,
And pay me there my wages altogether;
Not that which mine by merit seems to be,
But that which by thy mere grace is due to me.
A Celestial VISION Of Future EVENTS.
THE Armi-potent, all-seeing, all-Creator,
The all-mighty Artizan of Earths Thearer,
Having enclosed in his un-clapsed book.
When heaven and earth their first foundation took,
And therein registered this firm Conclusion,
An Universal end, and all-Confusion
Of all the world, which when once discreated,
Should be refined, renewed and re-created,
This great Decree will doubtless ratify,
And for the elects sake, do it more speedily,
As Sybels, Prophets, and Apostles wise,
Yea, Christ himself did truly Prophetize.
Then pallid Death, whose ash-pale face did fright
The stoutest Champion, most un-daunted Sprite,
Having at length with strength enough displaid,
His all-tryumphant trophies, having made
A massacre and havoc of all flesh,
Thinking to Nimrodize it still afresh,
Like proud disdainful Pompey at the last
Shall meet our Caesar, and at's feet shall cast
The glory of his Mortall-wounding might,
Shall lose his fatal sting which did so bite
And pierce the Heart of every mortal creature,
T'reduce to dust each wormlings dusty feature.
Death being then Man's fatal final fo,
Him, Christ victoriously shall overthrow,
From forth his claws shall strongly wrest the conquest,
And fell all-felling Death at's feet thus vanquished,
But as the Corner-creeping thief does watch
With sure advantage unawares to catch,
The careless Servants left the House to keep,
Whom when he finds snorting fast asleep,
Suddenly sets upon them, thus does prey
On's hop't-for Booty, and then hasts away.
Or as it fares in a fair Summer morning,
When the Great Light the azure skie's adorning,
And new-now risen from the Antipodes,
His radient rays displaies the world to please:
At whose sweet sight the pretty Lark does rise,
With warbling noats wavering in the lofty Skies,
Earth having op't her Shop of sweet perfumes
Of fragrant flowers, herbs, plants, and pleasant blooms;
T^ gentle wind fans coolness through the air,
The Suns increasing heat thus to impare;
Each Creature much delighted at the heart,
To see this sight; now ready to take part
Of pleasure, in this pleasant day begun,
When as upon a sudden, over the Sun
A mighty rain-swolne-cloud begins to spread;
And furious winds through the air are nimbly fled
From forth their Stations, blustering up and down,
The angry Heavens upon the earth'gin frown
And from their Spouts power down great streaming showers,
Dashing and washing trees, plants, herbs and Flowers,
With light-heeld lightning, and such Cannon-thunder,
As Heaven and Earth were reft and cleft in sunder,
Damping the former hope of sweet delight,
By this so sudden change amazing sight;
Even so this second coming of Christ Jesus
From sins most heavy hateful Yoke to ease us,
To purge the world of its impurity,
To Plague the Quakers incredulity,
T'avenge the blood of his dear slaughtered Saints,
To give an end to their sad sighs and plaints,
Shall sudden be, will come at unawares,
When worldly men are plunged in worldly Cares,
When lustful men are most a sensuallizing,
When fawning Gnathoes most are Temporizing,
When as voluptuous-vain-lings sport and play,
When they do least expect, suspect this day,
Then shall this unsure-certain doomsday come,
To some most welcome, woeful unto some,
Unto the wicked terrible and fearful,
Unto the godly comfortable and cheerful,
Unto the Hectors a day of lamentation,
Unto the Quozils, a day of consolation,
Sharp to the wicked, joyful to the just,
Gods wrath the sinner scattering as the dust,
Then as in the days of Noe, with wondrous change
Shall dire destruction int'all places range.
As that, with waters woeful inundation:
So, this, with fires all-spoyling conflagration.
As, that, with water, cold the heat of sin,
Wherewith the world had then inflamed bin:
So this, with fire to burn the rotten sticks,
Of want of Love (combustible dry kicks)
Our Globy-Gran-dame Earth, shall then all flame,
Like a huge bonefire, and about the same
The bound-less, groundless, sea, bright Fishes Station,
Shall be exciccated with strange admiration:
And that great-little, nimble scale-arm'd host,
Eo longer shall through the watery region.
Yea, then that huge Leviathan (seas wonder)
Shall cease his sport, and roaring voice like thunder.
Then heaven and earth, shall variated be,
To pure perfection in the highest degrees;
Then all the Spears, the Stars, and heavenly motions,
Which serv^d for time-distinctions, certain notions,
Planets and Plants, which man on earth did use,
Their power in man and virtue then shall lose.
Yea, all vicissitudes, all alternations
of heav^n and earth; shall leave their antique stations,
Shall be dissolved, cease, and have an end,
Mountains shall melt, and to low Dales descend.
The Creatures then, which groan and moan in pain,
Freed at the least, if not renewd again;
Then shall be heard a loud heart-daunting voice
A heavenly trump shall sound with ecchoing noise
By Gods all-potent power and providence,
Shall all flesh of this vast circumference
Hear and appear by that loud trumpets summon,
At this Grand-sessions all the world in common.
Then rattling, roaring thunder shall be heard,
Whereby the wicked shall be frighted, feared,
Then all the world shall be as flaming fire,
Christ our Iust-gentle Judge with love and ire
Shall come with all the host of winged Legions,
Soaring about the bright-star spangled Regions.
With whom apostles, Prophets, Martyrs fly
In complete glory in the glistring Sky.
Mercy and Justice marching cheek by jowle
Shall his divine triumphant Chariot roll,
Whose wheels shall shine with Lightning all about,
With beams of glory each-where blazing out.
Who shall in's hand a book in folio bear,
Wherein man's faults and follies written were.
Then shall the wicked sin-polluted Goats
Ingulft in sorrow, roar with hideous noats,
Howl, groan, and grieve, and lamentably moan
At Gods supernall and tribunal throne,
Holding their hands at's Bar with grief and horror;
Shall hear the Judges sentence to their terror,
Their self-accusing conscience telling them
That they are Guilty, and will them condemn.
And Satan's Sergeants at their elbowes stand,
To bear their souls and bodies out of hand
To his infernal-Jayle, with fiery chains
To bind them fast to hels nere ending paint.
Their sin, I say, will stand at their right hand,
And at their lest will damned divils stand:
Within, th accusing conscience crying shame,
Without them, all the world a burning flame:
Under their feet, soul frying, gaping hell,
And ore their heads, their Judge most fierce and fell.
Too late they then weep for un-wept-for sin,
Too late they wish they never born had been,
Too late ashamed at Heavens most glorious Light,
They wish, but vainly wish, that mountains might
Them cover, smother, from heart-searching Judge,
Thus rest of comfort, up and down they trudge.
And then the just-chiefe-Justice wrathfully,
On's left hand, says to the wicked, Stand you by,
You awless, lawless, wicked, hence, depart
Into eternal terror, pain, and smart,
Depart, I say, you cursed, go, begone
Into the depth of hels deep dungeon.
That Prison where your damned souls must lie,
And dye a thousand deaths, yet never dye.
Where shall be weaping, walling, schreeks and groans,
Gnashing of teeth, hel-howling, sighs and moans,
Devils tormenting you in flames eternal,
With fearful frights, by hellish Fiends infernal,
For ereta be sequestered from all joy.
In endless, restless, mercy less annoy.
O woeful wages, for their works of sin!
O how much better they never born had bin!
O that when they were born, they then had did,
Then thus for sin, hels horrors to abide!
But as we see after a mighty storm,
The sun shines out with beams bright, fair and warm:
So the God-fearing, and sin-flying sheep,
Which did Christ's Laws and Heasts sincerely keep,
Which his distressed Members clothed and fed,
Which to their power the poor had comforted,
To these blessed saints, I say, ats right hand placed,
Who shall be with Caelestiall glory-graced,
Whom he elected in be angelized,
Whose souls in joy shall be immortallized;
With sweet aspect to these will Christ thus say,
Come, come you blessed of the Lord for aye.
Come, near adopted brethren, come to me,
With me you all shall glorified be,
Receive the Kingdom for you all prepared,
Ere Earths foundation was to the Earth declared.
For your good service under my faiths banner,
You shall be crowned with my chief champions honor.
Since for my sake you once lived in annoy:
Now with me come into your Masters joy,
Into that joy, whereof none shall be able
You to deprive, it is so firm and stable.
Thus then the Lord-chiefe-Justice having driven
The rout of damned Reprobates from Heaven,
And having with the Fan of his Decree,
The chaff froms Wheat thus cleansed and made free,
Thus in a bundle having bound the tares,
The con-corrupted heap of hellish wares:
And by the power of's ireful Iron rod,
His Foes beat down and under foot thus trod:
His Church from all uncleanness purifide,
His sacred sons enthronized sanctifide:
Now shall they all with joy inexplicable,
With great content, and comfort amiable,
Behold and see the New-Jerusalem:
The City of the Lord, vouchsaft to them.
That sole Metropolis, that sacred seat,
Wherein our trine-one Lord most good, most great
Had long time promised, and now means to dwell,
With all his Saints in virtue that excel.
This being that sweet spouse spiritual,
That blotless, spotless Bride celestial,
To whom the Lamb Christ Jesus is contracted:
Now ready that the Nuptials be enacted.
Who being in her Militant estate,
Was then with blemishes contaminate,
Was often sin-sick, by her sinful course,
And as it were in danger of devorce;
By re-re-lapses and her often offense,
Though still protected by heavens indulgence.
But now being in her pure and glorious state,
In heaven triumphant, un-contaminate,
Conformed unto, confirmd in purity
All-chast, now placed in sweet security,
Now undivorceable, lovely and sweet,
Is new, prepared her bridegroom thus to meet.
Her eyes like Orient-Pearls, her cheeks with dimples:
Most amiable, fair, free of least Pimples.
Her lips like threads of scarlet, coral red,
Her temples fair, her hair like golden thread.
Her breath more savourie then mellifluous dew,
Her breasts like two young Twin-Roes white of hiew,
Arrayed in fine pure linen, clean and white,
In Vestures wrought with Gold which glister bright,
And cast an odor ferous fragrant sent,
Or Sp^kenard, Saffro^, and most pure ointment,
Attended on by Virgins virtuous, chaste,
To meet her Bridegroom, thus she forth does have.
Oh sacred sight, sweet show, souls sovereign bliss,
When thus the Bridegroom his dear spouse shall kiss,
Marriage of Manna and of M^ compacted,
Whereby our souls with Christ are aye compacted,
Prefigur'd in the sacred Sacrament
Of Christ's last supper, given to this intent.
Thus Christ (I say) his love, his dove shall meet,
Thus they each other kindly then shall greet:
Thus shall this glorious City then appear,
Wherein the just shall reign with joy and cheer.
But now ere we behold this blessed Theater,
Let me herein be th angels Imitater,
T^ each Godly Ceder here to signify
This observation, of importancie:
That since in this great Cities model rare,
We are to meet with wonders past compare,
We shall behold inimitable art,
Such as may quickly wonder-strike the heart,
And seem to Reason's Sin blear'd, Flesh-blinde Eye,
T^ exuperate the bounds of Verity:
Therefore a winged Messenger from Heaven.
To the blessed Evangelist this charge has given,
To register in time concluding scrowles,
To write this truth in Scriptures sacred rowles,
That Heavens all-seeing, all foreseeing King,
Truths spotless Fountain, Faiths ore-flowing-spring,
That alpha and omega, first and last,
Who was, is, shall be, when all times are past,
Who is as powerful to perform his will:
As ready-prest his Mercies to fulfill;
Whose Promises are all Yea and Amen:
Has promised (and what is he among all men
Has ever known the Lord to falsify
His Covenant made, or from his word to fly?)
Has vowed (I say) that he will all things renew,
All imperfections bring to perfect hiew,
And make the joy of's glorified Saint,
Endless and free from future moan and plaints.
Yea, with such grace and forcible persuasion
He seems to counter mand all frail evasion
Of doubting or demurring in this kind;
As if he should have said; Man, be not blind;
Let it not seem an intricate hard thing,
That I, the Lord, these things to pass should bring,
I, which of nothing all things did create,
I, which but breathed, and made each animate,
I, the arch-mover of what ere did move,
Shall ought to me so difficult then prove,
As not my beck, and how stre^ght to obey?
O no, be wise, do not my power gainsay,
Be not incredulous to fear or doubt,
For I the Lord, this thing will bring about:
Not only for my power, but Promise sake,
And the great care which ore my Saints I take.
To crown them all, with promised salvation,
Their foes to fell to hell with dire damnation;
That true believers then may find me true,
Athiests their Infidelity may rue.
Yea with a tripple firm ingemination,
Has heaven confirmed this faithful Protestation.
And what so scornfully, scoff^ing Cham so bold?
What impious athiest dares it untrue hold
What fearful, faultfull, or unfaithful Cain,
Does dare this truth, deride, doubt or disdain?
Doubtless the simplest peevish Grammatist,
The rudest rustic, who yet never wist
What it is to sound heavens depth of prudencie;
Would soon condemn them of absurdity.
O the great wisdom and indulgent Grace!
Of heavens great King, himself so to debase;
Precept on Precept thus to us to teach,
His will so often t'inculeate and to preach.
Line after line, yea now and then a little,
Our faith more soundly to confirm and settle.
Us to inform in his pure verity,
Us to reform from infidelity.
Therefore such faithless and incredulous,
Such graceless, godless, irreligious,
As do deny or will belly this truth;
Shall be rejected to their endless ruth;
Shall never have part nor portion in this joy,
But he obtruded unto ^i^ annoy.
And their too-light, too-late belief shall rue,
When they receive their meed and merit due:
When with the damned sin-co-operators
They shall of woe and horror be partakers.
Read then with faith, and what thou readst, desire,
And that thou can not comprehend, admire.
But, here as at a stand, I stand amazed,
That I a dust-born babe, poor, weak and crazed,
Of stammering tongne, a child an understanding,
Of heart, often subject unto sins commanding.
Should undertake (worm that I am) to pried
Into the depth of so great mystery.
That to describe, which asks an angels skill,
As Souls which of that sight has had its fill;
And yet all to^ too little, to declare
The beauty infinite, the splendour fair
Of great Jehovahs Palace Chrystaline,
All full of hev'nly glory, all divine;
Which to admire the more I do contend,
I more admire, and less do comprehend:
And whose rare fabrique and celestial sight,
I rather could stand wondering at, than write.
Pardon, oh therefore pardon Lord, I pray,
My great presumption, let thy grace always
Illuminate my sin-caecated heart:
And to my lays thy sacred help impart.
That naught may be mis-done, mis-thought, mis-said,
O Lord I crave thy sacred sovereign aid.
Give me a voice now, O Voice all divine!
With heavenly fire inspire this breast of mine,
And since thou. Lord, art able to declare
By th mouths of babes, which weak and tender are,
Thy might and power: Lord (though unworthy I)
Into my heart infuse abundantly
The so sovereign graces of thy holy sprite,
That my weak Pen, thy wondrous praise may write.
That thy Enthusiasme of Prophetic skill,
May on my lays like honey sweet distill:
That by divine divine John's godly guide,
I from the truth may not once step aside,
But by his true Prophetical direction,
May methodize Jerusalems perfection,
That all that read it, may enflamed be
With hearts desire therein to reign with thee,
To make great have and speedy properation,
To this blessed City with due preparation.
As God the ereliving, all good giving King,
The first that moves of every moving thing,
When unto Moses he vouchsaft to show
The Land of Canaan which didoverflo
With Milk and honey, which he vowed to give
To Jacobs offspring, wherein they should live;
On top of Pisgah Mountain did him place,
That Moses might from thence behold the grace,
The pleasure, wealth, and riches of that land,
Which they should have by power of his right hand:
Even so the Darling of Christ Jesus, John,
Rapt in the Spirit was also placed, upon
A high-topt Mount in Pathmos, whence he might
Contemplate this great Cities glorious sight;
A sight more glorious far, than that the Devil
That subtle Serpent, firebrand of evil,
Showed to our Savior in his great temptation,
When he with Satan fought for our Salvation.
Thou wel-beloved of thy Savior deer,
(Says a blessed angel unto John) draw near,
With joy come hither, stand a while by me,
And thou the heavenly Canaan shall see.
The Churches glorified spiritual State,
Thou shall behold and sweetly contemplate
The spotless Spouse, the immaculate chaste Bride,
With which the Lamb Christ Jesus will abide:
The joy in God, and godly consolation,
The elected Saints most holy habitation:
Prepared for them by the Trinity,
Where they shall reign, remain eternally,
Called the great City, Holy Canaan:
Great, whose inhabitants none number can,
Holy, because no putrifacting Sin,
Nor least impuritie can there creep in;
Called Canaan, or new Jerusalem,
A place of peace, Saints rest, Souls Diadem.
Now this most holy heavn^ly Habitacle,
Was most magnificent Saints receptacle
With glory, which did from the Lord proceed,
Whose most refulgent splendor did exceed
The luster of all precious stones most bright,
They all come short of this most glorious Light.
Yea, as fair transparent Jasper Green,
So shall his Saints felicity be seen
For ere to was most fresh and always flourish,
Because Gods power and prudence shall it nourish:
It being pure as any Crystal clear,
Whereby not blot, not spot can there appear;
No stains of foul terrestrial uncleanness,
No gross pollutions or impure obsceanness,
Shall this their joy obnub^late make dim,
Or once eclipse their beauty, framed by him;
Gods gracious presence and great Majesty
Shall it so deck, decore and glorify.
Here it is no trivial question, why the Light
Of this blessed Cities luster equisite
Is to a precious Jasper Stone compared;
Tnd why 't might not have been as well declared,
By the Sun, or Moon, or Stars most excellent,
Or artificial Lights which men invent?
All these are Lights, true; but too light they be,
Compared with Light it self, in the highest degree.
First, in regard the Suns far piercing rays,
With its bright beams the eyesight much decays,
If the beholder thereon fixtly look,
Nor can his sight the brightness thereof brook;
But precious stones have no obnoxious might,
But with their splendor rarely do delight
The eyes of their beholders, so that they
The more on them they look, the more they may.
Whereby, egregiously they intimate
And to us point the sweet and delicate
Delight we shall in heavenly knowledge find,
So to affect and recreate the mind,
As that the more we thereof do possess,
The more our love whereof we shall express.
Again the artificial lights men make,
As torches, tapers, lamps, and candles, slake;
Are soon burnt out, extinct, and therefore need
Some fomentarie adjunct, them to feed:
But as for precious Stones, their sparkling light
Is genuine, by Nature shines bright,
And glisters in the most obscure dark place,
Always retaining their resplendant grace:
And therefore do most lively represent
The splendour fair, and beauty excellent
Of the ever self subsisting Deity,
Always the same, one-same eternity.
This city is environed, bounded round,
With a great high-topt wall, thick, strong and sound,
Which unto us does thus much intimate;
That though in the Churches Militant esrate,
The congregations of Christ's faithful Saints
Were still molested, full of woeful plaint,
Tossed to and fro with storms Tyrannical,
With persecutions most satanicall,
And like Noes-ark were never in peace or rest,
With worldly billowing-waves dashed and distressed:
Yet in this Chuch-triumphant, they shall be
From all heart-hurting fear of danger free.
Surely, securely, kept from least annoy,
In heavenly safety sempiternall joy.
For why, the Doctrine apostolical
Shall as a firm invincible strong wall
Debar and keep out, heart deluding errors,
All unclean creatures, Liars and the tortors,
Which their abominations might effect;
For, this wall Doctrinall does them reject:
And thus the Prophet Jeremy does call
A constont Preacher, a strong, brazen wall.
Now this strong wall is made more admirable,
By Stately Ports and groundwork solid, stable,
Twelve Gates are about it placed conveniently,
Which thus much do unto us signify:
That all her friends and Citizens shall see,
The way to the city easy, plain to be;
Plain to the just, to the unjust narrow straight,
Easy to those, to these most intricate.
And on these Gates were charactred most fair,
The names of Isr'els twelve tribes, to declare
Their good assu^ance and their ready way,
That none might wander, err, or go astray.
There needs no use of a conducting guide,
Their way lying ope' to them on every side.
But here by the names of Isreal's twelve tribes,
The sacred spirit unto us describes,
(They being, once, Gods sole peculiar Vine,
Til they did from his Love and Lure decline)
That, by a figure, are in them included
The elected Gentiles, once from grace secluded.
Even people of all Nations under heaven
(To whom, Salvation, God in Christ has given)
Are here all taken for sp'rituall Israelites,
Whom Christ the Cornerstone to the Jews unites.
At these twelve Gates, twelve angels there did stand.
But not like Edens-angels, in their hand
Holding a sword, a sword like fiery flame,
To daunt and drive, what ever thither came:
But here these angels stand like Porters kind,
That Abr'ams faithful Sons access may find
Unto the tree of life, and sacred spring:
Which grows and flows from Christ this Edens King
With most commodious decent situation
Are these twelve gates plac' 'bout this heavenly station
And good Ezechiel does them thus digest
Three East, three North, three south, and three by west.
These three tribes names; Dan, Joseph, Semamen,
Orethe three Eastern Gates were to be seen.
Orethe three Ports set on the Northern side,
Jude, Levi, Reubens names might be discride.
Ore the three southern gates the inscription
Of Simeon, Isachar, and Zabu^on.
Also the three gates on the West part had
The name of Aser, Napthalem, and God.
Of which most decent triple distribution
Of these twelve Gates, this is the resolution;
Namely, that all the Saint-elected souls,
Whose names are written: Heavens eternal rowles,
From whatsoever quarter of the earth,
They had their first original and birth:
Yet, had but one especial means t'ascend
Unto this City, their hopes happy end.
To wit, the blessed profession of the trinity,
Hereby, to Christ the are joynd in near affinity
And, that they thus, professing three in one:
Shall find the way wide open to heavens high throne.
Shall find the path more parent, plain and straight,
And at the Gates twelve angels for them wait,
A twelf fold Groundwork and Foundatoin strong,
Did also to this mighty wall belong.
I mean not to the City, but the Wall,
For, of the City, Christ is all in all.
Upon which twelve Foundations glorious, rare,
Christ's twelve apostles names were graven fair:
Who here are said to be this Walls foundation,
By their apostolic administration,
For having by their blessed Ministry,
Christ Jesus Doctrine preached publicly
Unto the World: as the first instruments
Are therefore, thus, the twelve strong Firmaments:
Not that they are the Principal Foundation,
But having first place in this Fabrication.
Are (as I so may say) the first stones laid,
On which the building of this wall was made.
For, no man is so silly, as to say,
That the Foundation does it self down lay:
But that's the office of the architector,
Which is Christ Jesus, this great works director.
This Cities Sovereign, whose un-shrinking shoulders,
Are this most glorious Cities firm upholders.
Who laid his twelve disciples as Supporters
Of this Quadrangled walls most spacious quarters,
As those in whom his Churches doctrine pure
Did most consist and constantly endure:
Thus are the apostles grounds of ministration,
But Christ the only Basis of Salvation.
But what says Rome to this? that man of Sin,
Who proudly reigns and rules as Lord and King,
Peter's supremacy, superior State,
Is here (me thinks) quite torn, worn out of date.
For though our Savior called his Faith, the Rock,
Whereon he would build his Church, his Love, his Flock,
And his and all the apostles Doctrine pure,
To be his Churches groundwork, grounded sure:
Yet neither is St. Peter here expressed,
To be in dignity above the rest:
Nor yet to be the principal Foundation:
But one with others have their Station,
Then, surely, hence, it is most apparent plain,
That antichrist of Rome does not maintain
His proud priority, from Peter's Faith;
But from his Person (whom he falsely says,
To Have been Romes Bishop, which, nor he, nor's crew
Shall ere be able to approve as true)
His person it is, I say, not Doctrine pure,
Oh this it is the Pope can worst endure:
Therefore since he mis-deems Christ's blessed foundation
He never shall have least part in Christ's Salvation.
But now return we whence we have digrest,
The Light-bright Angel (which did manifest
Unto S. John this glorious sacred sight)
Now like some noble Pers'nage, Princely wight,
Like to another prudent Ne^emie,
Or like good Ezra full of prudencie,
By the Symbol of a Golden Reed in' his hand,
Did represent, that he with that Met-wand,
The Cities spacious round should measure out
The height, length, breadth, and compass all about,
Entries, and wall, environing the same
All under line and measure truly came:
All most exactly formed with due respect,
By the arch-artist of this architect.
Yea, with a Golden Reed he meets the same,
Most fit to measure such a glorious frame.
By which external gesture, the angel here,
As elsewhere in the Prophets may appear
In their Prophetic visions used to show
The Lords intent, by thus descending to
Our weak capacity: which never can keep
A verbal document, in mind so deep,
As actual gestures evermore we find,
Examples more than precepts teach the mind.
And here by the angels meeting with a reed,
We are advised to take a special heed,
And deeply to imprint in mind and heart,
The subsequent description and rare art,
The stately symmetry, worth admiration,
Of this celestial sacred habitation,
Containing in it an heavenly harmony,
With the chief grounds of christian verity,
This City lay in form quadrangulare,
By which firm cubique platform, here we are
To understand and note, the stable state
Of this Mount-Sion free from hostile hate:
Not to be stirred by tempests violent,
Immovable, most constant, permanent.
Which being square, the Gates are opposite
To the four corners of the earths-globe aright,
From every part whereof to let in those,
Whom Christ the Lamb, to reign with him has chose.
The four Evangelists the pattern are,
By whom this edifice was fashioned square:
By Matthew Mark, Luke and Christ tendered John,
Was framed (I say) this constitution.
And since the twelve apostles, as foresai^,
Were by their short and present doctrine made
The strong foundation of the holy wall.
Is It not a concord most harmonicall*
That these Evangalists most excellent,
By their long-lasting-written testament;
Should the four corners of that square build out,
And it to full perfection bring about.
The angel then, with his reed the City meeted;
Which by juss Measure was thus computated,
Twelve thousand sta^es, whereof eight makes a mile,
Which fifteen hundredth miles do just compile:
The length, height, breadth, being of all equal space,
Do make, almost, infinite room and place,
Within the wall: as Christ himself has said,
In my dear heavinly Fathers house, are made
Many fair Mansions: fit to comprehend,
The increase of Gods elect, to th worlds last end.
Now then, the total body of this place,
Does to us represent the beauteous grace,
The great felicity, admired joy,
Which in this City we shall sure enjoy
In the united glorious Deity,
The incomprehensible Trine-Unitie.
The three distinct dimensions as foreshew'd,
Of Latitude, Longitude, Altitude,
Present the several measures of delight,
Which in the Father, Son, and Holy-sprite,
We shall possess, and this felicity,
To be alike, of equal quantity.
There shall we three in one most clearly see,
There shall we also worship one in three,
And of this joy we shall have full fruition,
Alike of all, without all intermission,
Even as the Persons are one in the Deity,
And one in substance in the unite trinity,
The Premises thus re-obscur'd, afford
To us a most harmonious sweet accord,
Twixt God and this his holy Habitacle,
The Lambs sweet spouse; caelestial tabernacle.
God, the Worlds most admired artizan,
When first he fashioned and created man,
Like his own perfect Image, did him make;
God would man should his Makers likeness take,
Even so this Cities Specious Symmetrie,
Is shaped like heavens sacred Deity.
As God himself in trinity is one:
So by this City his true Church is shown.
As of the Godhead there be persons three,
And Father, Son, and Spirit coequal be:
So those dimensions, length, height, Breadth, are all
By the angel measured, to be just equal.
As neither person in the Deity,
Is seperable from their Unity:
So none of these dimensions, being three,
May from a city separated be,
Or other solid body, otherwise
It were not sound, but Line or superfice.
The persons three and their three offices,
Are not confounded: and no more are these;
For neither is the length, the breadth, and so
The height is neither breadth, nor length we know,
And even as Athanasius in his Creed,
As wittily, as wisely does proceed,
And says, the father, son, and holy sprite,
Though three in persons are one God unite:
So Longitude, Latitude, Altitude,
Must one sole city evermore include.
The doctrine also of the deity,
Is witnest in the fourfold verity,
Writ by the four Evangelists: so here
This New-Jerusalem, as does appear,
Is in a quadrate, or square form set down;
Most like a strong immovable firm town.
The twelve apostles, were dispersed and sent
To every quarter of earths continent,
To preach to all our Saviors doctrine sound,
Whereby al nations heavens rightrode way have found:
On twelve foundations, so stands this great frame,
And by twelve Gates all go into the same.
Lastly the Godhead universal is,
And infinite in glory and in bliss,
Infinitely extended over all:
So in Jerusalem celestial,
Is infinite tranquillity and peace,
Abundant room, for all the great increase
Of Gods dear Saints, who were predestinate
To this Jerusalems most happy state.
Thus having heard this sacred Symphonie
Twixt God and 's Church: proceed we orderly.
The angel now here measuring the wall,
The mighty bulwark apostolical,
Of this angelick State of sanctity,
Found it to be raised up in cubits high,
Even by a twelve-fold-high-ascending course,
By the twelve apostles raised to mighty force.
But this though spoken in a humane sort:
Yet has a heavenly sense of great import,
Namely, that though the Church, here, Militant
Was evermore distressed with woe and want;
Being by worldly obstacles kept low,
And never could to full perfection grow:
Yet now in her triumphant dignity,
To plenary perfection springs on high;
Yhis being by twelve courses signified,
Which twelve times so much more being multiplied,
T'an hundredth forty four courses of height;
Do make the wall to rise, direct upright,
By Jews and Gentiles mighty multitude,
Whom grace by faith will in this frame include.
Thus now, we having seen the stately stature,
The spacious compass of this heaven-built structure:
Let us with our divine divine behold
The matter, substance and most precious Mold.
Whereof the wall, city and firm foundation,
The twelve great gate of this heavens habitation,
Were formed, adorned, yea with what pavement rare,
The Streets were paved, all which is to declare
The wonderful unspeakable delight,
Which Gods dear Saints in presence of his sight,
Shall in that life to come, to th'ful possess:
And thus the Prophet Isay did redress,
And consolate the Jews disconsolation,
Declaring in his true vaticination,
The glory of this New-Jerusalem,
Which God would once re-build, re-make for them.
O happy are they, which are interested.
And whose blessed souls are there into invested!
Now then the building of this fencive wall,
This sincere Doctrine apostolical,
Of precious stones, most gloriously did shine
With bounty and with beauty most divine.
Having a luster like the Jasper green,
Which evermore to flourish shall be seen.
Hence then, this Note is set before our eyes:
That this rare fabrique, pompous edifice,
Is all most precious, specious, round about,
As bright within, as it is light without.
But in this wall, this one thing is most rare,
Is most regardable, beyond compare:
That though those twelve foundations firm and strong,
Were so by courses set and laid along,
As that course after course, the are placed all,
And strangely ordered clean throughout the wall:
Yet is the wall, as here we plainly see,
Thus wholly said of Jasper for to be.
Which is indeed to show and signifye.
That though those ground-props of the Ministry,
Whose rare and diverse gifts in every one,
Are by rich Jews afterward here shown:
Yet that the matter and the luster bright,
Of this great wall, are said, and that most right,
To arise from one, which is the Lord alone,
Designed here by this rare Jasper stone.
He only is the Churches bulwark strong,
For though to these apostles did belong
Diversity of gifts of heavenly grace:
Yet each of them in his peculiar place
Did over build one and the self-same thing,
And not themselves did preach, but Christ their King.
The cities model was of perfect Gold,
Most delectable, glorious to behold.
Which mettle, for its ex'lent properties,
This cities glory rarely amplifies.
It being of all other chief and best,
For these five reasons in pure gold expressed.
First, that the burning fire consumes it not:
Next, that it takes no Canker, stain or spot.
Again, for use it longest does endure,
As also that the fire makes it more pure.
Lastly, nor Salt nor Vinegar can spoil,
Nor any such liquidity defile.
The fair corruscant beauty of the same,
And therefore from the rest it bares the fame.
O! must not then this City needs be stable?
Is It not most strong, invincible, durable?
Being so free from stains of all corruption,
Being so far from fear of foes irruption.
Nay, here is not all, there is one more property
Of rare respect, of precious ex'lencie;
Namely, that it like clearest glass does glister,
And thereby casts a more admired luster:
Whereby is thus much to us intimated:
That it is not with soul spots contaminated,
But does with such a radient splendour shine,
That all may always clearly cast their eyne
With most sweet contemplation, on the face
Of Gods great beauty and most bounteous grace,
By re-percussion of those glorious beams
Which from his Godhead, on his Saints forth streams
Therefore this glorious City of the Lord,
Which inwardly such beauty does afford,
Is fat unlike the seat of Romes great whore;
Which she does gild and gorgeously daub over,
In her external parts; so to delude
The simple and besotted multitude.
Whereas within she is wholly inquinated,
With filthy beastliness all-vitiated,
And by her cup of poisonous Fornication,
Would all defile with her abomination:
Being beast-like drunken with the blood of Saints,
Which to heavens throne do send up Abels plaints.
But this celestial sacred architecture,
Like Solomon's fair Brides most princely vesture,
Is precious, curious, beautiful within,
Admits no soil, or smallest touch of Sin;
Within, without, all spotless purity,
And inter-mixt with boundless Majesty.
Thus having viewed the wall,
And what rare substance they are framed withal:
Now lets behold, and that with admiration,
The sumptuous substance of the strong Foundation.
All which, though of themselves they are most precious
Yet are they made more gogeous, gay and specious,
Being embost, enamelled and dight,
To make them give a more resplendent light,
With Patriarchs, Prophets, and Professors good;
With valiant Martyrs, who not spared their blood
In Christ's just quarrel, with interpteters,
And Soul converting holy Ministers:
All these do garnish, deck, and decorate,
The twelve foundations of this blissful state.
Which here the angel fitly does compare
Unto twelve Gems, or precious stones most rare
Whose virtues, colors, places where they grow,
Is worth our labor severally to know,
The first foundation is of Jasper stone,
An Indian Gem, as is by Pliny shown;
Whose specious splendour, and whose beauty rare,
It Is easier to admire, than to declare.
For, a confuse promiscuous multitude
Of Noble virtues, it does in it include:
In which, a pleasant multiplicitie
Gf excellencies rare variety
May be perceived; but which is chief or best,
Cannot be casly seen: or soon expressed:
For, it, as has been snew'd, does represent
Gods blessed similitude most excellent,
Therefore this stone (and that most worthily)
Has in this building chief priority,
The second was a precious Saphyr stone.
Which is reported amongst the Medes to have grown,
Fair goldey spots, this precibus stone does garnish,
With a remarkable and beauteous burnish.
The third was of a Chalcedonie clear,
Found 'bout the Chalcedonian waters; near
The Rocks Semplegads or those Isles in Thrac^:
This stone being named after that foresaid place,
It Is of one color glistring like a flame,
And with the Carbuncle does seem the same.
Which with good reason, well may signify,
Of burning zeal an ardent fervencie.
The fourth an Em^aude, or Smaragdes rare.
Which stone it is said does grow in the Scythian Lare
Of color green, glist^ing most clear and bright,
Which hiew indeed does most tontent the sight;
And is internally as admirable,
As for external beauty delectable:
For if by too-intentive contemplation
The sight grow dim, this stones rare delactation
Does soon refresh the lassitude of the eye,
And gives the sight perfection speedily:
Whose beauty green, sound knowledge intimates,
Which the eye of understanding highly rates,
"Therefore it is next the Chalcidonie set;
"To show, that where zeal has with knowledge met,
"And are conjoynd in the heart their supreme seat:
"Then are they both most pure and most complete.
For knowledge without zeal brings proud ambition,
And zeal without true knowledge, superstition.
A Sardonix is for the fifth foundation,
Which is a Gem found in the Indian Nation,
Whose superficial face is red and white,
Like a man's nail of's hand, and shines most bright.
And this does also to us signifye,
A certain show of chaste humanity.
A Sardius, Carbuncle or Rubic rare,
Does this most sacred sixth foundation rear.
A precious Stone, which specially is found
By Sardus city in the Lybian ground:
Of color red like blood, to intimate,
A Severitie on clemency should wait;
And fitly's with the Sardonix here placed,
Because the foresaid fleshly colors graced,
And cannot fade, but fresh vivificate,
By being joynd with this associate.
The seventh Foundation is a Chrysolite:
An Ethiopian stone which glisters bright,
Of golden hiew, and this does demonstrate
Much dignity, and great Magistick State.
The eigth a Beryll, which (as Pliny says)
Is found in Indie: this, for color has
Sea water-green, betokening lowliness:
For, water as experience does express,
Yields and gives place to each interposition,
Which is against it set, or makes inscission.
"Set with the Chrysollte to signify,
"Meekness with greatness should keep company:
A virtuous mean thus ever to retain,
And rash extremes still wisely to refrain.
The ninth a opaze which was first found out
By arabian rovers, ranging all about,
Called Traglodit's: this Stone's of color green,
And yet not simply so, for in it is seen
Much yellowness, glistring like perfect Gold,
Giving a Luster pleasant to behold.
A precious Stone called Indian Chrysoprase,
Does this great VValls tenth firm foundation raise.
Which also gives a certain golden glister,
but therein is a Scallion juice commixture,
This Fortresses eleventh and twelf foundation,
Were both of them two Gems of Indian nation,
Called hyacinth and ametist: both which
Are of a purple color, fair and rich.
And now of all that hitherto is said,
Of these rich precious Stones whereof was made
This twelve-fold Solid Glorious Strong Foundation,
This is the scope, true use and application:
Namely, that as a careful architector,
Who of a Princely building is Director;
And chief Ore-seer, sends with expedition
His Quarrions, Masons, gives them this commission,
In every quarter to search out and dress,
To hiew and cut, to have in readiness
The choicest Stones that might be got for gold,
For strength to build, and beauteous to behold:
Or, as Wit-wondrous Solomon is said,
When he would have the Lords great temple made,
To send his Princes to provide each thing,
Which might decore the seat of heavens great King:
With Hiram his kind Neighbor did compact,
For necessaries to that sacred act:
Who sent both men and all his choicest Stuff,
Of every thing abundantly enough:
Even so the Lord, this Cities Master Builder,
Earths globy Universals strong hand we^lder,
To the build in got this blessed habitation
Sent his apostles into every Nation,
To India, Egypt, Aethiopia,
Arabia, Europe, and Armenia.
Through every course it^ worlds circumference,
To reach and preach with care and diligence,
To congregate and bring into his ^old,
His precious people; who, like perfect Gold
Should gorgeously adorn this sacred frame,
Some Prophets, Martyrs, Preachers of great same;
Some with one gift, some with another graced,
That in this Sancture they might thus be placed,
To frame and build this everlasting palace
Of everliving Stones, and endless solace.
Who as the had built his Church once Militant:
Now should they thus build up his Church triumphant
And as they had converted souls to Christ:
Their souls should shine like Stars in glory highest.
Thus then the city, wall, and groundwork past,
To the gates with joy we now are come at last.
Twelve Gates most rich and precious did belong
To the wall apostolic, most firm, most strong,
Which Gates were all of pearls most orient.
Yet all were but one Pearl most excellent,
Even Jesus Christ, who is the only Port,
Through whom the Elect must into bliss resort.
Through whom alone by says we here are fed.
Through whom at last we all shall taste that bread,
That bread of Life never to hunger more,
Which for his Saints Christ has laid up in store.
He only is the Door, by which (I say)
We shall go in and out, feed, Live for ay.
And as on twelve foundations did arise
A Wall, as we did formerly premise;
But One in Matter and in Luster bright,
Even God the Father, Father of all Light:
So these twelve Ports, are all one Pearl most rare,
Even God the Son whence they derived are.
But here this one objection may accrue,
How it may come to pass, a pearl should show
And represent this Man-God Christ our King?
To which Objection, I this answer bring:
That as the Shel wherein the Pearl does grow,
(Which Pliny plainly in his work does snow)
Does at a certain season gape and yawn,
And without any generating spawne,
Draws into it a dew, from forth the air;
Which, by the Sea, in the shel grows Orient fair,
And of this dew does more coagulate,
Than it is of earthly stuff coaugmentate:
Even so, the Holy Ghost from heavens high frame,
Upon the blessed Virgin Mary came;
And Gods eternal power, whose breath all made,
Did so Christ's Virgin Mother over-shade:
That without any humane copulation,
Christ in her womb took on him incarnation.
Yet so, as that his powerful Divinity
Was still assistant unto his humanity,
Which subject was to man's infirmity:
But not to sins even last impurity:
Being thus most perfect God and Man indeed,
Knowing our wants to help us at our need.
Thus then, we see, that these twelve Pearly Gates
Consisting of one Pearl, this intimates,
That we in heaven or earth none o^ her have
To invocate, our sinful souls to save,
But Jesus Christ, true God and man alone,
Who sits (our advocate) in heavens high throne.
Oh then, the wilful madness of our Foe!
That monstrous beast of Rome, who though he know
This our Position most authentical,
Both he and his besotted shavelings all,
Vet they unto their Saints appropriate,
And unto angels dare accommodate
The honor only due to Christ's blessed name.
Angels themselves having refused the same
And since nor Saints, nor angels know out state,
Nor have in them, power, us to consolate,
But Christ has willed us come to him alone,
Who can and will ease and appease our moan,
Therefore that they dare add and thus diminish
From Gods firm truth; they do but strive to finish
And measure up to th'ful their own damnation,
Threatened to all such in the Revelation.
The Gates thus entered, now we may behold
The streets within, all paved with purest Gold,
Which gave allustre like the clearest glass,
Even every street through which the Saints shall pass,
And customarily walk up and down,
Like glorious Kings in pomp and great renown:
Which streets and patent passages, imply
(Amongst their other joys) the liberty
And perfect freedom, which those sacred Saints
Shall fully there possess; without restraints
Of being unto any one place tide,
For why, wheres'ere they go, God is their guide,
They walk in God, and God in them always:
Their beauteous paths shining with his bright rays.
Thus have we seen the essential Majesty,
This Cities glorious frame and Symmetry,
The most magnificent and blissful State
Of those which are in Christ incorporate:
But yet, whiles here, we see it no otherwise,
Then as we had a Mist before our eyes.
Then as we were in the bottom of a vail,
Whence of a perfect sight we needs must fail,
By reason that cloud-kissing Mountains hie,
And lofty trees are interposed to the eye:
And hereby hinder our more clear aspect
Of this most glorious heavenly architect:
So that, but Aenigmatically, we
As through a glass, this sacred City see;
Whiles in the Flesh we live by lively faith,
As blessed Paul in his Epistle says:
Yet let it joy our hearts our souls delight,
That though but thus, we may admire this sight.
That though but with the Prophet Daniel, we
May open the window and look toward thee,
O Dateless, Fateless, Restful, Blissful City;
Where Hallelujah is the angels Ditty.
Now let it not be (O! how can it be?)
Tedious to us, to contemplate and see
What majesty and dignity complete
Is accessory to the glory great
Of that external beauty of this place,
Filled with the glory of the Lords bright face;
Making this City most magnificent,
An abstract Commonweal most permanent.
First, there shall be no Temple in the same,
Wherein to worship God all-glorious name,
No sacrificing, no peculiar place,
To worship in, or be this Cities Grace,
Nor no external Paedagogie, shall
Be useful there, no Service Ritual,
Like that under the Law amongst the Jews,
When they did their old sacrifices use.
But God the Father, and the Lamb Christ Jesus,
Shall of such heavy yokes then clearly ease us.
And be a Temple unto his, most fair,
To whose blessed Saints with delight repair.
His worship, then, shall be most plain and pure,
And shall for ever constantly endure.
Without all legal Rites or Ceremony,
Adoring God in Christ in sanctimony
Whose looks to them as Lessons shall appear,
His holy name being Music in their ear.
And such indeed is this great Cities state,
So admirable, so inexplicate:
That Gold and precious stones being too too base,
T'express the glory of that glorious place,
If nature did more precious things bring forth,
More amply to describe this Cities worth:
I therefore know not, what terrestrial thing
We may with due proportion hereto bring,
To have a fit and true analogy
Unto this temple of eternity,
But God himself and Jesus Christ alone;
In whom it may most properly be shown.
Again this City has no need of Light,
Neither of Sun, or Moon, or Stars most bright,
For, as the Prophet says, when God again
Shall his dear Church restore and over it reign,
The glorious Light thereof so clear shall shine,
By the blessed presence of the Unite-trine:
That even the Sun and Moon shall seem most dark,
And in comparison but like a spark,
To that ineffable, refulgent light
Of Gods blessed countenance and sacred sight.
Whereby alone the Saints shall all possess
Such perfect joy and hearty cheerfulness,
As that all earthly comfort, though it seemed,
And were as bright as Sun and Moon esteemed,
Shall be superfluous, needless, most neglected,
And unto this compared, not least respected:
Also, the Heirs and Sons of this Salvation,
Even all the Elected people of each Nation,
Kings of the Earth whom Euphrates did bar,
And once sequester from Christ's Kingdom far;
So many as are saved (as many shall)
Shall in Jerusalem celestial
With perfect joy, enjoy the full fruition
Of this most infinite and heavenly vision,
And thither shall their pomp and honor bring,
Even unto God and Christ their heavenly King.
But here is not meant their worldly wealth and state,
Their Gems and Jewels, Gold or Silver plate,
For, since this sacred City needs no light,
Of Sun or Moon, which shine on Earth so bright:
Much less shall there be need of worldly pelf,
In this most sacred sumptuous Commwealth.
But this is hereby understood and meant,
That those good Princes which were eminent
For virtuous gifts of grace and piety,
Shall lift up all their whole felicity,
Their glory and their princely estimation
From earthly unto heavenly contemplation:
And only fix their joy upon the same,
And glory thus to glorify Gods name.
The gates, moreover, of this City, shall
Be never shut, but stand widrope to all.
None shall from this felicity be staid,
Nor be shut up, as frighted or afraid.
For there shall be no Enemy to fear them,
No doubt of danger, then shall once come near them,
All spite of former adversaries cease,
For there shall be perpetual rest and peace.
And which is more, there shall be here no Night,
For why, an everlasting splendor bright
From Gods all-glorious presence shall proceed,
A Lightmore pure then light it self indeed,
Shall so incessantly shine forth always,
Making an endless everlasting day.
But here this night may further intimate,
A twofold meaning Lit'ral, Figurate:
The Literal sense that there no night shall be,
Is, that indeed the Saints no Night shall see.
For why? as has been said all times distinctions
Of day and Night, summer and winter seasons
Shall then quite cease and be superfluous:
The figurative sense and meaning, thus
May be explained, that no obscurity
Of error of slye hypocrisy,
No unclean thing foul or abominable,
No filthy creature, Liar detestable,
No Murdering Cains, no Judas implous,
No Cham's, nor Achams sacrilegious,
No cruel, faithless, friendless, envious else
That hurts his Neighbor, but much more himself,
"No Avaricious armed in hooking tenters,
"And clad in Bird-lime catching all adventures,
Nor ought that may contagiously infect,
Or once eclipse the joy of Christ's Elect,
Or violate the glorious state and bliss
Which Christ the Lamb has purchased for his:
Nor in the least degree shall hurt or wrong
The flourishing estate, which does belong
To the Saints rare dignity, and perfect Light
Of sincere worship of the Lord of Might:
Which is his angels glory and chief grace,
And shall for ever in them keep firm place.
But those shall hither come with joys most rise,
Whose names are registered in the Book of Life,
For whom the Lamb Christ Jesus did ordain
This glorious Kingdom with him thus to reign,
Who were predestinate to this salvation,
Before the worlds original foundation.
To these alone the Gates stand open wide,
These shall for ever with the Lamb abide,
Lastly, to make this city most complete,
In every part to be as good as great,
The Holy Ghost having at large declared
The churches glory, being thus compared
Unto a sumptuous city full of State,
Now finally proceeds to relate,
That both this City and its Citizens
Are furnished and replenisht with all all means
For conservation of their endless joy,
Sufficient to protect them from annoy:
They have, I say, spiritual lively meat,
Divine angelike Mann' to drink, to eat,
The sovereign Balsum to conserve always
Their health, in health, from fall or least decay.
The holy spirit as erst, here using still,
These earthly terms t'express heav'n^ sacred will.
And all to show heavens great benignity,
Descending thus to our capacity,
This honored City has in it also
A sacred River which does overflow
With pure and precious water of blessed life,
Whose stream do issue from its fount most rife.
A current River, not a pool with soil,
Nor foul or troubled, Egyptian Nile;
Or billowing Euphrates; But sweet and fair
With dectable streams, smooth, clear and rare.
A River for its great aboundancie,
Pure in respect of its sweet sanctity,
Of water of Gods Spirits rare gifts of Grace,
Of life, whose tasters live an endless space,
And clear as Crystal from all spissitude,
From all unclean corrupt amaritude.
This River shall from Gods great throne proceed
And from the Lambs, gliding with pleasant speed.
And thus the River here may signify,
The Holy Ghosts gifts, third in a trinity.
Which is not slightly ratified, indeed,
In that it is said here, that it shall proceed
From Gods and from the Lambs most sacred throne,
Which John's shown Prophecy has clearly shown.
Yea, and in the midst of this great Cities street
Paved all with gold, as mould under their feet,
Through all the pleasant passages most fair,
Where to and fro the Sainted souls repair:
On either side this River (rare to see)
Does flourish fairly a Life-giving tree.
Which tree of Life, does thus much to us show,
That to those gracious Waters, which do flow,
To all the grace^s of Gods sacred Spirit;
Christ Jesus is conjoynd, by whose just merit,
His Church has life, true peace, and sure salvation,
Thus having with the Sp^rite cooperation:
And still residing with his Saints Elect,
Continually does guide and them direct,
Exhibiting to all, by his tuition,
Easy partaking, and a full fruition
Of all the Benefits and heavenly Graces,
Which in and 'bout this River he thus places.
Whereon they all shall spiritually feed,
Always desiring, yet ne'ere stand in need.
Which Tree of Life, twelve sorts of fruit does bear,
Whereby the Holy Spirit does declare,
First, that the Lord, who is the God of Order,
Does much detest confusion or disorder.
In still retaining as he first begun,
The number twelve, which hitherto is done:
And also to express that there shall be,
In number and measure full sufficiency,
To saturate the longing appecites,
Of all the twelve spiritual Israelites,
Even of all those that so have run their race,
The twelve apostles doctrine to embrace,
TO observe and keep (Maugre the rage and spite
Of pope and pagan, foes to Truths pure light.)
Thus then, we see the angel here observing
An exquisite decorum, thence not swerving:
Who since the City, Entries, Romes Foundations,
And Symmetry of these blessed habitations,
To the number twelve have been accommodated;
And orderly thus still continuated:
Therefore with decent correspondencie,
The angel to this number does apply
The spiritual food, and furniture most meet,
Making a consort most harmonious sweet,
Conformably agreeing thus in one,
With those whence they had their comparison.
Now as twelve sorts of fruit grow on this tree,
The Saints to satisfy: so shall they be
For delicacie, sweet content and pleasure.
As every Saint shall have abundant measure:
So shall this pleasant Plenitude of grace,
No Nauseous Surset cause, in any case.
For, as Christ Jesus is that drink and meat,
Whereof each Sainted soul shall taste and eat:
So is he sweet, pleasant, and delicate,
Whereon they feed their fill, yet moderate,
Taking sufficient for their contentation,
And their beatitudes firm conservation.
Which truth is farther illustrated here,
In that it is said this tree of life does bear,
Does every month bear fruit, green, ripe, and fair,
Which with delights their apperites repair.
Not that the times shall then alternate be,
By years, months, days, as now-a-dayes we see,
For then the seasons cease, time's termined,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, are then quite vanished,
As formerly was touched: but here is meant,
That all things then shall give such rare content,
Shall be so full of rich variety,
Shall yield such cordial sweet society
And with such fullness all the Saints shall feed,
As that to store and hoord up shall not need.
In that the harvest there shall ever last,
Their pleasant springtime then shall nere be past.
Also the Leaves of this most blessed tree,
Shall Salutiferous and most Sovereign be,
To help, to heal, to cure all Maladies,
Which amongst the Gentile Nations do arise.
So that this tree not only makes them live:
But to the Elect a healthful life does give.
Yet here is not meant the Churches final state,
But that when antichrist is ruinate,
When God shall th'unbelieving Nations call,
And faithless Jews, who once from Grace did fall.
But by these leaves is chiefly intimated,
That all the smallest gifts, accommodated
By th Lamb Christ Jesus to the Saints elect,
Shall serve some way their Souls with joy t'affect.
T'exhilerate and cheer their sacred mind,
In's meanest blessings they shall comfort find.
But now behold now follow him indeeed
That which does all the former joys exceed:
The absolute accomplishment of all,
The accessory blessings, which befall
The Citizens of this rare Domicil,
The inhabitants of Gods great Sion-hill.
Namely, that in it there no curse shall be,
It shall be from destruction firmly free.
It shall be subject to no execration,
But strongly stand, fearless of alteration.
Which is a symbol, and a certainty
Of this blessed Cities perpetuity,
A most infallible strong argument,
That it is eternal and most permanent.
A threefold reason hereof may be given,
First, that (as is foresaid) this seat of heaven,
This holy habitacle shall contain
No unclean thing, which may its beauty stain.
Again, the glorious throne and sacred seat,
Whereon omnipotent Jehovah great,
Whereon the blessed trinity will reign,
Shall here abide and evermore remain.
Lastly, in that all these his servants shall
With sincere Love and Zeal angelical,
For ever invocate his sacred name,
And his due praises constantly proclaim:
Serving the Lord in singleness of heart,
Not once to will from's worship to depart.
But Curses are (we know) for gross transgressors,
For disobedient stubborn Male-factors,
Not for the obedient, faithful and sincere:
Thus then, is their perennity most clear,
Moreover all the Saints of this blessed race,
Shall see the all-beautious, light-bright shining face
Of that arch essence of eternity,
To walk and talk with him familiarly:
And with inexplicable sweet delight
Have full fruition of this sacred sight,
Not as he is, immense and infinite,
For so even angels see not his bright light,
Who are described covering their face
With their angelike wings: in any case
Not able to behold his glorious sight,
He infinite, they being definite.
Yet that we shall have his full contemplation
Is certain, but with this just limitation,
First, in respect of us, we shall possess
A perfect sight of Gods great holiness.
The Lord in us, and we in him shall dwell
In such full measure, as no tongue can tell;
He will replenish every faculty
Of soul and body most abundantly,
With his most precious presence: by his sight
He Will fill our Mines, from darkness freed quite,
Our hearts he will quicken, there shall be no deadness,
Our whole affections freed from gloomie sadness.
What man is capable to comprehend,
Even so great glory God will then extend?
Again, of that blessed sight, which we shall have,
No inter-mediums shall our sight deprave.
Here, we as in a vision do him see,
By mediate Revelation: then shall we
Of him immediate perfect sight possess,
Which none but those that have it, can express:
A measure running over, heapt and p^est;
Wll Christ bestow upon his Saints most blessed.
His name shall also in their foreheads be.
That is, they shall with such bold constancy
And un-revolting zeal profess his name,
That nothing shall obliterate the same;
Or cause them once neglect their pure profession,
By least relapse or undiscreet transgression.
They shall be so conformed, confirmed therein,
To persevere as they did first begin,
Constant, courageous, evermore the same,
Professing still Jehovahs glorious name.
Again, his name is said (as here we see)
Upon their Foreheads charactred to be,
Because the Lord will publicly agnize
Them, by this cognizance and Patronize
(By his all-seeing, and all-soveraign power)
Them and their states, as in a fenced tower.
And in this City there shall be no night,
No need of candle, Sun or Stars most bright,
That is, there shall be no obscurity.
Or darkness of adverse calamity,
No night of obumbratick cloudy Error,
No frighting Fear, nor no heart daunting terror,
No sly bie-fronted close hypocrisy,
Shall viriate their intact integrity,
No need of earthly comfort more or less,
No seeking, suing there, wrongs to redress,
By temp'rall laws, or ecclesiastical,
For, there the trinity is all in all:
And is this glorious Cities great Lord Keeper,
Most vigilant, and watchful, he is no sleeper,
And, which (as was promised) is the perfection,
And consummating of this benediction,
This glorious Kingdom, where Gods Saints shall reign
Shall doubtless sempiternally remain,
Like glorified Kings most gloriously,
Their bliss shall last, past all eternity.
Now as bounteous hearted King does use,
When he a Fau'ri^e unto him does chose,
On whom he means largely to bestow
His golden gifts, like Rivers to ore-flow;
What he does promise or by words proclaim,
By's Letters Patent ratifies the same:
Thus, O even thus our bounteous hearted Lord,
The heart of bounty Loves ore-flowing word,
Having his Church his favorite elected,
And promised she shall be by him erected,
Richly endowed, gorgeously beautified
Rarely be royalliz'd and sanctified,
Her head adorned with a Crown of Gold,
A fragrant Garland which shall nere wax old,
Triumphantly in endless joy shall reign,
And see her subject, abject foes in pain;
The Lord (I say) this promise having given,
That all these joys they shall possess in heaven.
To verify his promise, and confirm
What he has said beyond times endless term,
Has given his Letters Patents, his broad Seal
In The sacred Scriptures, which he'ele nere repeal;
Sealed by an angels testimony pure
And as his act and deed given and made sure,
To blessed John, in the behalf and right
And to the use of all the Saints of Light.
Which being done, makes thereof Proclamation,
With most emphaticall asseveration,
That he, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
Has power to do, and will perform these things.
And surely, heaven and earth shall pass away,
Yea, all things shall prepostrously decay,
Ere his pure word in one least jot or tittle,
Shall fade or fail, or alter nere so little.
Which, though some wretches athiesticall,
Some Nauseous Neuter, Satan's tennis-ball,
Some execrable Saduces (I say)
Which do the resurrection denay,
Though some vile quakers Pythagoricall,
Or Anabaptists most Diabolical,
Which have supposed the spirits trans-migration
From one to another in life consummation;
Which do with devilish dotage them persuade,
That there is no God which ere the world has mad;
Nor that the would ere had a prime beginning,
And think and hold that it shall nere have ending.
Although such Hectors past all grace,
May entertain a thought, with brazen face,
And heart of flinty infidelity,
To think or say that the rare symmetry
Of this Jerusalem celestial,
Seems as thing mere hyperbolicall,
Incredible to their besotted sense,
And past the reach of their intelligence;
Yet let the rabble of such miscreants know,
That there is against them pronounced a fearful woe,
There no-belief, or wavering un-belief,
Shall fill their souls with never ending grief:
And what they erst would not conceive in mind,
Their heart with smart shall then both feel and find.
Nor shall they have least part or portion here,
Of this great Cities pleasure, joy and cheer,
But from Gods presence shall be separated,
Which is the second death nere terminated.
As for good Abraham's faithful Generation,
Who waver not in tottering haesitation,
Who have a hearty thirst, and thirsting heart
Of these rare pleasures once to have their part:
Whose hope past hope does cause their souls aspire,
By faith in Christ this Kingdom to acquire,
Wherewith, in the warfare of this life, they fight,
Fenc't with the bulwark of a zeal upright,
Armed at all points, with Christ's blessed furniture,
Wherewith they may most constantly endure
The fight spiritual, their Loins to tie
With the strong g^rdle of Christ's Verity;
Having the breast plate on of righteousness,
To quench the Darts of hels ourtagiousness,
And on their head the helmet of salvation,
True peril proof against he is most hot temptation,
The sword of the Spirit, brandisht in their hand,
Wherewith they may courageously withstand
That brood of quakers Anabaptists and the flesh;
Which evermore assault the soul afresh
With hot encounters, hellish stratagems,
To keep them from the new Jerusalems
Eternal bliss: In which most faithful fight
If they magnanimously stand upright,
Assisted by that all-proofe, fervent prayer,
The godlies guard, supporter, and chief stayer,
If thus they get (as thus being armed they shall)
The conquest, ore those foes fierce Capital,
Even from the proud Pope their old enemy,
When he shall challenge them this fight to try,
(As often he will) they nere by fraud or force,
By terrors or by torments leave their course
Of constant perseverance to the end,
But his hopes frustrate, and their souls defend:
Then shall they like brave victors have the crown
Of immortality of blessed renown,
Triumphantly to reign with Christ their King,
And all their virtues as rich trophies bring,
And lay before him, for which he will give
A crown, a Kingdom wherein they shall live,
The Lord in them, and they in him shall dwell,
As Christ's coheirs, whom he loves passing well,
And shall sit down with him as children dear,
To Sup at's table with celestial cheer,
And then their thirst of this accomplishment
Shall satisfied be with full content,
Then shall the holy, happy, faithful, see
The structure of this sacred frame to be
Far more illustrious, admirable, rare,
Than earthly things could possibly declare;
And that those Stones and gold were too too base,
To serve t'illustrate heavens celestial place,
Whose boundless beauty all discourse transcendeth,
Whose infinite felicity nere ends.
Yea, that it is such as that no mortal eye,
Could but as through a glass the same descry:
Such as no ear has heard no tongue ere told
The Majesty which there they shall behold,
Yea, such (I say) as never humane heart
Could ere conceive the incogitable part.
O then, my soul, thou having contemplated
This City all with glory decorated,
Thou having viewd, with heart exulting pleasure,
The Majesty unparralleld, the matchless treasure,
The most magnificent, majestic state,
Where into Christ will his incorporate:
What will thou thereof with thy self conclude?
What will thou say of this beatitude?
Oh this, even this, with Peter and with John
At Christ's admired tranfiguration,
It Is good to make thy seat and mansion there,
Oh there it is best to dwell and dwell for ere.
Never did noble Greece so much affect
Their Poetiz'd Elysean fields aspect,
Never so much did wandering wise Ulysses
Desire his chaste Penelopes kind kisses:
Or rather, more divinely for to raise
My thoughts unto a more religious phrase,
Never did Noah more desire to see
Ararats Hills, where he of's ark was free:
Nor Sheba's queen to see wise Solomon,
Nor at Christ's birth more glad was Simeon,
Then does my soul desire these heavenly fields,
Which perfect pleasure joy and comfort yields,
To see my Savior sweet on Sion hill,
My senses with his sacred sight to fill,
To ske him in his glorified state,
Therein to be with him associate:
Even in these Mansions of Eternity,
To live in sure in pure felicity.
Which happiness, though yet I may not have,
Until my soul receive my corpse from Grave,
Until I mortal be immortalized,
And with the sacred angels angelized;
Unttlith' clouds my Savior come again,
To re-collect the Elect with him to reign.
O yet, my soul, thy self delight and solace,
To ruminate the joys of that sweet Palace,
To recapitulate the sacred pleasure
The Saints shall then possess in plenteous measure,
Even in the eternal palace Crystaline,
The sacred seat of the United trine;
The glorious Court and heavenly presence Chamber
Of heavens great Emperor, wonderful Commander,
That alpha and omega, first and last,
Who was, is, shall be, when all times are past,
That mighty, powerful, One sole God most high,
The eternal King, nay, self-eternity,
Infinite, all in all, yet out of all,
Of ends the end, of firsts Original,
The Life of Lives, Bounties ore-flowing flood,
Cause of all Causes, Ocean of all Good,
Un-Seen, all-Seer, Stars-Guide, Sight of Seeing,
That One-None which to Nothing gave a Being.
There also shall my soul behold and see
The most ineffable deep Mystery
Of that incomprehensible trine-one,
Sitting in glory in his glistring throne,
With blessed Saints and angels comitated,
With all the heavenly host of soul-beated
Prophets, Apostles, Patriarchs of old,
The noble band of Martyrs stout and bold;
Our Parents, Wives, our Children, Kindred, Friends,
Yea all to whom Christ's saving health extends:
All of them clad in bliss celestial,
All shining bright in joy angelical.
Wherein the presence of their heavenly King,
They Hallelujah, Hallelujah sing
To him that sits on the throne most high,
Making a most harmonious Melody,
With sacred sugared Notes and heavenly Songs,
Singing the praise which to the Lamb belongs.
This being their especial exercise,
Their pleasant practice, customary guise,
Still to behold the Lords most beauteous face,
Burning with love of his most lovely grace,
Their mouths still filled with praises of his name,
In magnifying his immortal fame,
Without all tediousness or intermission,
Protected always by his blessed tuition,
O there is infinite, un-uttered joy!
Mirth without mourning, bliss without annoy,
Health without sickness or pernicious humors,
Perfection without all sonitainting humors,
Peace without war, and light without darkness,
Love without hate, beauty without paleness,
Sweetness without all fulsome surfeiting,
Life without death, life ere continuing.
There are no sighs, no sobs, no penury,
No hunger, thirst, but with saturity,
No chilling, killing frosts, or least extremes,
No parching Sunshine, with her piercing beams,
No will to sin, no power to offend,
No enemy least mischief to intend.
Good Paul has there no need to watch and pray,
To labor in the world both night and day;
And good old Jerome then may cease t'afflict
Himself, so often, by a life most strict:
To conquer his spiritual enemy,
To overthtow the Serpents subtilty.
For there is all peace, security and rest,
That peace which can by no means be expressed:
There Is all perfection sacred Light excelling,
All sorrow, care, darkness, and dread expelling.
O life eternal! holy habitacle!
Heavenly Jerusalem, Saints receptacle!
O amiable City of the Lord!
How should my soul thy praises due record?
What excellent rare thing are said of thee?
What things are writ, are hoped, are found to be
In thee! thou have the seat of glory sure,
That good-best good-God, joy and solace pure,
Which far exceeds the science and deep sense
Of humane reason and intelligence.
Por which even Legions of Professors good,
And godly Martyrs have not spared their blood,
But with undaunted valiant courage have
Made Lions, Tygres, Fire and sword their grave,
That after death they might enjoy that Crown,
Those Palms of peace, of honor and renown,
Wherewith thy Saints, O blessed Jerusalem!
Are happifi'd in happiness supreme,
VValking as Kings, in those most gorgeous streets,
Where each one naught but perfect pleasure meets:
In streets, I say, more precious than pure gold,
Glistring with glory wondrous to behold.
The Gates of which most holy habitation,
Are pearls of pearless price and valuation,
Whose wall is all of precious stones most pure,
Incomparably rich and strong to endure,
There is that glorious Paradise celestial,
Surpassing Adams Paradise terrestrial,
Wherein are fluent Oily Rivers Currents,
Fair brooks of butter and sweet Honney torrents.
Replenished with Garden-walks and Bowers,
With beds all wrought and frought with fragrant flowers.
Whose odoriferous rare variety
Afford most various sweet amenity,
Whose curious colors, and whose lovely green
Are always fresh, are always springing seen.
There, Hearts-ease, Saffron, Lillies and the Rose,
Do savor, sent, spring, spire, with sweet repose.
There all the Spices aromaticall,
T'afford delight and cheer the heart withal.
There is that sovereign Balsum med'cinable,
For sent and Salve most precious amiable.
All these in thee flourish without defect:
With these the Garlands of the Saints are dect,
Without corruption they continue still,
And sprout and spring about this Sion hill.
In thee's that peace of God, which does exceed
Man's understanding and faith wavering Creed,
There is that glory which does all advance;
Obnoxious never unto change or chance.
There Is that eternal light as sure as pure,
That Sun of righteousness for ere to endure.
That white and bright blessed Lamb of God most high,
Who shows and shines most clear incessantly,
Which no time ever shall once terminate,
Nor no disastrous chance extenuate,
There Is day which never darkness does admit.
There in their bowers of pleasure Saints do sit.
There also is certain security.
There shall thou find secure eternity.
There all rare comforts from heavens glorious King
Successively, successfully do spring.
What ere the soul can wish, request, desire,
Is there at hand without the least enquire:
What ere thou love, there is to be found,
Only, what is il, comes not in this blessed ground.
Oh then, my soul, what pleasure infinite?
Oh what an Ocean of most sweet delight?
Yea, what a most profound and pure abyss;
Thus to behold the Lord of Lords, is this?
Thus to behold with ravished admiration
The Lords bright face with sacred contemplation:
Yea, with thine eyes to see, what faiths dim eye
On earth was never able to epsy,
Even that eternal trinity most blessed,
Which can by man no sooner be expressed;
Than Austines seeming Lad could power or lade
The mighty Ocean, into the Shel he made
Without a bottom, that his Shel to fill:
No sooner can (I say) man's stupid will:
Til his corruptiod in-corruption be,
This holy Mystery clearly know and see.
But when thou mortal do imortallize,
When Christ my King, thy soul once happifies,
Then shall thou taste that God is good and gracious,
Then shall thou Live in this his house most spacious,
Then shall thou taste the spring of life most sweet,
Then in the heavens thou shall Christ Jesus meet,
Then shall thy water of terrestrial grief
Be turned into the wine of sweet relief:
Then shall thy Sobs be turned into Songs,
Then shall thou triumph for thy worldly wrongs;
O then in that most sacred glorious sight
Is to be found the fullness of delight,
Of wisdom, beauty, riches, knowledge pure,
Of happiness for ever to endure,
Of goodness, joy, and true Nobility,
Of treasure, pleasure, and felicity,
Of all that merits love or admiration,
Or works comfort, or sure contentation.
Yea, all the powers, and powerful faculties
Of soul and body shall partake likewise,
Shall be sufficed with the full fruition
Of heavens eternal ternal glorious vision.
God unto all his sacred Saints shall be
Their universal sweet felicity,
Containing each particular delight
Which may affect the aspect of their blessed sight:
Infinite both for number and for measure,
And without end shall be their endless pleasure.
To the eyes he shall be a Mirror clear,
Melodious Music to delight the ear:
To the Palate he shall be Mellifluous Mell,
Sweet spiring Balm for to refresh the Smell.
Unto the understanding he shall be
A Light most bright and pure in the highest degree,
To the Will he shall be perfect contentation,
To the Memory erelasting continuation.
In him we also shall enjoy, possess,
What ever, various time could here express:
Yea, all the beauties of his rarest creatures,
Which may our love allure by their sweet features,
All joy and pleasure to content the mind,
Such at in the creatures selves we nere could find.
This sight (I say) is the angels chiefest treasure,
The Saint repast, repose and princely pleasure,
This is their everlasting life, their crown,
Their Meed, their Majesty, their high renown,
This their rich rest, their spacious specious palace,
Their outward, inward joy, and sovereign solace:
Their Paradise divine, their Diadem,
Their ample bliss, their blessed Jerusalem;
Their peace of God past all imagination,
Their full beatitude and sweet salvation,
To see him who them made, re-made, made Saints,
Him seeing to possess without restraints:
Possessing him to love him as their King,
And loving him to praise him, as the Spring,
And Fountain of this all felicity,
And praising ever this blessed ^nitie.
O then my soul, cease not to like, to love,
These admirable lovely joys above:
And though thy corrupt flesh is the obstacle,
And stays, delays from this blessed habitacle:
Although thy flesh like churlish Nabal frown,
Refuse the pains to seek this sacred crown:
Yet let thy Spirit like good Abigal,
Go forth to find this place angelical.
Let Hagar, never get her Mistress place,
Nor Ismael good Isaac, so disgrace;
But strive most strenuously, fight that good fight,
Subdue thy flesh, withstand proud Satan's might*
And with the eye of faith believe, desire
To live with Christ, pray seek, sue and inquire*
Pray earnestly to Christ thy King above,
In burning zeal, firm faith and burning love.
For, what ^s this world? naught but a flou^ing fanciesie,
A theater or vainness, pleasant phren^
A sinc of sin, a shop of all deceit,
Iniquities chief center and sure seat,
A Map, a mirror of all misery,
A Dunge on of most dire calamity,
Lovely to look on like the Scarlet Whore,
But dangerous to deal with evermore:
A mazie Labyrinth of impious errors,
A camp of Cruelty, of tears and terrors,
Constant in naught, but in inconstancy,
And most unconstant in that constancy:
In naught the same, save not to be the same,
And of being, but a very name:
Still floting, fleeting, never at a stay,
Hates on the morrow whom it loves to day.
Yea, it is a Ioab full of craft and guile,
Kills his Embracers with a traitorous smile.
A Wrastler it is, and trippeth up the heels,
Of many a man ere he its grasping ^eels:
Solomon wise, strong Sampson so renownd,
It made their lengths to measure on the ground.
Therefore to love the world, is naught else, sure,
Then to her Lime-twigs thy poor soul to allure,
Which so the feathers of thy faith will mar,
Thy soul, if 't may be, from heavens joys to bar.
Why then my soul, should thou to the earth be thral,
Which have a heavenly blessed Original?
Why should thou pin thy thoughts on mortal things
Who art immortal from the King of Kings?
And, why should thou a sp'rit invisible,
Be pleased with things both gross and visible?
Striving to pamper thy corrupted body,
Whose definition is indeed, that both-die:
Both Soul and Body when the Flesh gives way
To Sin and Satan in their dire decay.
And hence it is, that Latinists likewise,
Thus Corpus fitly crimologize:
Cor which was once the heart of pure perfection,
Is thus made Pus, all filth and foul infection.
Why then should thou then thy self so low depress,
Who art of high caelestial Nobleness,
One of thy Fathers firstborn children deer;
Whose name in Heavens blessed Records may appear.
Why should the worlds fall promises delude thee,
Since heaven with grace and goodness has indu^d thee.
Will thou a Princes Son, a heavenly Prince,
Let Satan's gilded apples thee convince?
Will thou the Son of heavens all-sacred King,
Offend thy father for so vile a thing?
Will thou thy birthright Esau-like forge
For one dire mess of broth, bewitching woe!
Oh. no! deceitful Dalilah a-dieu,
Thy Sirens Songs, my soul does most eschew.
Thy Crocadile-like tears which would betray me,
By heavens preventing-grace shall never slay me:
For all thy bitter-sweets, false protestations,
My soul esteems but hellish incantations.
Wherefore as A^mon being once defiled
With his own Sister, whom he had beguiled,
After the fact, did hate her ten times more
Then ever he had loved her before:
So I, whom thy false friendship once defiled,
Whom thy deceitful ambush once beguiled:
I hate, abominate thy mischief more,
Then ere I loved or liked thee before.
As seamen Rocks, as Children Scorp^ons fly:
So (Oh my sou^) hate worldly vanity:
And, oh! what is he, that would not leave most glad
Worlds vanities so finite, base and bad.
For pleasures infinite: What Is he would take
Fraudulent joys, and permanent forsake:
None doubtless, none; but Dastards void of grace,
None but faint-hearted, fearful cowards base.
The resolute courageous Christian bold,
Dares deaths grim face confront, see and behold,
Dares death defy, and his approach desire,
Because by death, he knows he shall acquire
The end of all his hope, for deaths the Key
Which opes the door to true felicity.
Yea, it is no pain, but of all pains the end,
The gate of heaven and ladder to ascend.
And death's the death of all his storms and strife,
And sweet beginning of immortal Life.
Therefore with smiling countenance, merrily
To heaven his place of rest he casts his eye:
And in his heart these thoughts are often revolved,
Unfeignedly I wish to be dissolved.
To be with thee (O Christ my Savior sweet)
Thee my deer eldest brother for to meet.
I see thee Christ, I see thee heavenly home,
I gladly would and quickly to thee come.
I see thee, O thou Saints caelestial place,
I much desire I once had run my race.
But though I cannot with Elias run,
In The strength o'th spirit in this race begun,
Unto the heavenly Canaan: yet give Grace,
Though I with Jacob halt, to halt apace:
And if not so, yet that at least I may
Like to an infant, learn to creep the way:
And grow from strength to strength, from grace to grace,
Until I come in presence of thy face.
For I am weary of this pilgrimage,
And long for thee my heavenly heritage.
How often have I thee viewed with admiration?
How often have thou been my souls meditation?
How often have I been ravished with desire,
That unto thee my soul might once aspire?
How often have I been scorned and vili-pended
Earths most unpleasant pleasures quickly ended?
Being compared to those joys above,
Which from my heart, my soul does dearly love:
My heart, my life, my bliss, my joy, my gem,
My souls dear soul is New-Ierusalem.
And now I come, my joys I come to you,
For whom, I did so often seek and sue.
I pain and death do heartily embrace,
So that my soul amongst you may take place:
Yea, though even hell it self were in my way,
And would my journey stop, disturb, or stay,
I would it pass, and hazard hells annoy,
To live with Christ in his caelestial joy.
And, surely, since heathenish Cleo^ brotus
Did seem (but desp'rately) so valorous,
Hearing his Master Plato once discourse
Of immortality: with furious force
(From an high Rock) himself did headlong throw,
In hope to be immortalized so:
O how much rather then, I pray, ought I,
Dying in the Lord, a thousand death to die,
To be inve^ted in that perfect glory,
Shown an affur'd in truths most faithful Story?
He di'd in bare opinion, Souls blind-love,
I die in says and knowledge from above:
He only hop^ to have immortal Life,
I, for immortal rest and glory rife;
He went unsent-for, I am often invited,
Even Christ himself my soul has often incited:
Incited often, I say, with resolution,
And Paul's firm faith, to wish for Dissolution.
Shall then his Pagan-courage mine excel?
Shall fear of death my Christian-courage quell,
Since my sure ground than his, is much more firm,
And death to me is but my sorrows term?
And that my soul in the end shall sure exult,
Although the way seem somewhat difficult?
O no, my soul, be valorous and stout,
With constant courage persevere, hold out.
None fight but with a hope of victory:
Thy fight well finished, brings eternity.
If one shoul say unto a Captain stout,
Go forward with bold courage, fight it out;
Do but thy utmost, fight and give not over,
For, thou in th end the conquest shall recover.
Would any David his Goliath fly?
From whom he is sure to win the victory.
Would any Gideon such a fight refuse?
Could any valiant Joshua, think you, choose
But enter combat with the proudest Foe?
Whom he with triumph surely shall orethrow.
My Savior sweet even thus to me has said;
Take courage, Christian Soldier ben't afraid,
Do thou thy utmost, Satan to with-stand:
For I will be propitious at thy hand.
Fight valiently and though thy Foes fierce might
May hap to bring thee on thy knees in the fight,
May often foil thee by his crafty snare,
Yea, though his claws were ready thee to tare,
Yet I will raise thee up, I Will thee defend,
And thou shall sure be victor in the end.
Who then (I say) what is he would be so base,
As not this proffer gladly to embrace?
Who could with vile pusillanimity,
So free a Conquest coward like deny?
Shall do^ing Lovers for their Ladies fight,
And for their sakes account all danger slight!
Shall Merchants venture both lives and goods,
For wealth and pelf through the Oceans dangrous floods?
Yea, shall the ship boy gladly undergo
All hazards which or Sea or shore can show?
Only in hope to gain a Masters place.
And to obtain a cunning Pilots grace.
And shall my Soul turn coward, ^ear and fly?
Shall not my soul control that enemy?
Whom Christ my General first overthrew,
And thereby all his subtilties well knew:
And knowing them has taught me how to fight,
Me to defend; him offend, put to flight;
Yea, and has promised heel assistant be;
And in my weakness cause my foe to flee;
And underneath my feet pull Satan down,
And me as victor, graciously will crown.
O then my soul! stand stourly to it and fear not,
Christ's sacred arms in vain about thee bear not.
Fight this good fight, and let proud Satan know,
Christ being Captain, thou wilt him overthrow,
For, if Heavens King by grace be on thy side,
Thou needst not fear what ere do thee betide:
No danger sure, can in that Battle be,
Where thou for Christ, and Christ does fight for thee.
And here is my comfort, this is my souls stay,
That whether Satan wound or do me stay,
Dye fleshly body, so my soul may live,
Christ to my soul the Palm of grace will give.
But as a mighty Emperor which proclaims
At some great Feast Olympic warlike Games,
Wherein to him which proves the Conqueror,
And does the best exploits, this Emperor
Will give a crown, his valor to reward;
And him with Kingly favor will regard.
But not the Emperor unto him descends,
But lie to the Emp'rors Gallery ascends,
There from his Princely hand to take the Crown,
The triumph, trophy, of his high renown,
Even so the Christian Soldier having gained
The victory, for which he long had strained
With all his power spiritual, to quel
The rage of ray^nous sin, and Satan fell,
Musts from the worlds Lists in a blessed end
By death, Heavens glorious Gallery ascend,
There, from the hands of Jesus Christ himself
To take a Crown far passing worldly pelf;
A Crown of joy, even glories plenitude,
A Crown of bliss, even heavens beatitude.
Not as the Meede of his deserving merit,
But as the free gift of Gods sacred Spirit;
For having done what ever I am able,
Yet my best service is unprofitable.
Only in mercy he is pleased to Crown
His own good gifts in me to my renown.
O! therefore death, shall be my welcome guest,
Death, which translates from la Sour unto rest,
From worldly sorrow, to heavens joys increase,
From woe to weal, from trouble to sweet peace.
From earth the stage of instability,
To heaven the fortress of true constancy.
Go then you godless Heliogabolites,
You drunken Vicars, proud cosmopolites,
Go please your selves in swearing, feasting, fighting,
And not what is just, but what is your lusts delight in.
Go please your selves with rich and large extents
Of wealthy Manors, stately tenements,
Grow proud to see your underlings beslaved,
And by your greatness wrongfully outbraved,
To see your ward-roabs stuffed with proud apparel,
Your mouths with oaths, your thoughts with strife and quarrel.
To have variety of worldly pleasure,
Delicate Gardens, Coffers full of treasure.
Treasure (sa^d I?) nay white and yellow clay,
Bewitching Mammon, Sin-bane, souls decay:
Or if there is ought that does you more allure,
Or which you would with more content procure,
Use it, possess it, yet for all this know,
You shall it all with shame and smart for go.
Yea God will take at deaths disastrous day,
Your Lands (your life) your goods (your Gods) away.
This, this (alas) did cause the Prophets cry,
This moved S. Paul with zealous ard^ncy,
Against worldlings to cry out, and them accuse,
That they themselves, their souls would so abuse,
Such lying vanities so to respect,
So sottishly their Souls health to reject,
In Egypt, straw and stubble for to buy,
Yea Straw I say and chafe, which finally
Would their own house burn down and ruinate,
And headlong them to hell precipitate.
Whereas their savior at a cheaper price
Would sell them gold, pure gold, rare Merchandise,
Even all the Golden joys and sweet delight
Of Paradise celestial, sacred sight:
That Pearl of blessed salvation, which to buy
The wisest Merchant would most joyfully
Sell all his worldly treasure, earthly pelf,
With this rare jewel to enrich himself.
And what is his price? O cheap, and naught else, sure,
But what thou may thy self with ease procure,
Only thy heart, it is only this, he craves:
This given to God, both soul and body saves,
Not that thy God is better by the same,
But thou made blessed, to magnify his Name,
It Is only thine not his good, he desires;
And for this good he only thanks requires,
Oh therefore silly, simple, sinful man,
What greater madness? tell me, if thou can?
Than such a proffer, fondly to refuse,
Than death for life, for treasure, Straw to choose;
For precious liquor, Fountain water good,
To choose foul puddles stinking full of mud;
Oh more then mad men thus to take more pain;
Headlong to run to hell with might and main:
Then even the holiest Sain is to go to heaven,
Who often with treats and threats are thereto driven.
But ((...) my soul) thy Saviors Counsel take;
O do not thou his bounty so forsake!
Go buy of him, give body, heart and all,
To purchase this rare Gem angelical.
And with that royal Shepherd David say,
O thou my soul trust in the Lord always:
Yea in his awe and Law take thou delight,
O like, love, love look on this both day and night.
Let it be thy arithmetic, always
To take account and number out thy days.
A Deaths-head let thy chief companion be,
An hour glass remembrancer to thee.
Let thy chief study be continually,
How to live well, and blessedly to dye.
So shall thou (O my soul) most happy be,
When thou of that blessed City art made free,
When thou, amongst that sacred hierarchy
Shall sing sweet tones and tunes melodiously;
With heav^ns Psalmodical harmonious quire
Of Saints and Angels zealous, hot as fire,
The Diapason of whose heavenly Lays
Does warble forth heavens due deserved praise,
Where thou being graced and placed in heavenly state,
In precious pleasure never to ^erminate,
Being sweetly raped in heavenly ecstasy,
Christ and his Churches Epithalamy,
My sainted foul with surged voice shall sing,
To God in Christ my three-one heavenly King:
O happy Citizens enfranchised there!
O joyful quiristers singing so clear!
Victorious soldiers thus to be trans-planted!
Where peace for war, where life for death is granted.
Happy were thou (my soul) most truly blessed,
If thou were once of this rare joy possessed:
That then I might be filled and never fated
With that rare sight, which once initiated;
Shall last for aye without times dissolution,
Shall be most specious without all pollution.
Therefore my heart (as heart being chaft and chased
By furious hounds most nimbly tract and traced)
Desires the water-brook his heat t'allay,
That so refresht, he thence may scud away:
Even so my heart (O Lord) desires to see
Those Crystal streams of Life which slow from thee!
Sighs, sues, pursues, her Country to recover,
Here abject, subject, too too triumphed over
By my three fierce and furious enemies:
Who seek my soul t'insnare and sin-surprize,
Even Satan that old hunter and his hounds,
The quakers, Hectors which give my soul deep wounds.
Who more like ravening wolves would fain devour
And captivate my soul in hellish power,
But thy preventing grace (O spring of Grace)
Preserves my soul, dis-nerves their horrid chase;
And as a Bird out of the Fowlers Grin,
And as Noes Dove looking to be let in,
Into the Ark of thine eternal rest:
My cyred soul is unto the addressed,
My soul with worlds encumbrances oppressed;
Desires (O Lord) to be by thee refreshed,
My soul does thirst and hastes to draw near,
And longs before thy presence to appear,
O tree of Life! O ever-living spring!
Whose laud and praise the heavenly host do sing!
O when shall I come and appear in sight
Of thee, the S^n of righteousness most bright?
When shall my soul by thine all-saving hand,
Be led with joy from forth this Des^rt Land?
When shall I leave this Wilderness of woe,
Wherein my soul is tossed to and fro?
I sit alone; as one a house the sparrow:
In The Vale and Dale of tears, fears, sighs and sorrow.
O lead (dear Christ) my lovesick soul by the hand,
From this vast wilderness dry thirsty Land:
To thy wine-Cellers, that I there may taste
Of thy wine-flagons thou prepared have.
Comfort me with the apples of thy grace.
With thy Hid-Manna strengthen my weak case.
With heavenly Milk and Honny (Lord) make glad
My heart, which worlds afflictions has made sad,
O Let me once from wisdoms sacred Lip,
Celestial Nard, and Rosean Liquor sip.
Yea, let me fatiare mine insariate thirst,
With that sweet Milk wherewith thy Saints are noure't,
I thirst, O Lord, I thirst, thou art the well,
O quench my thirst, and let me with thee dwell,
I hunger, Lord, I hunger, thou are bread,
Even bread of Life, O let my soul be fed.
I seek thee, Lord, yet still I go astray,
Through highways, by-ways, yet I miss the way:
Thou art, (O Lord) the perfect way and door,
My soul will follow, if thou go before.
Direct my feet to leave the paths of sin,
Open glories gate, and let my soul go in.
Let it be riches to me to possess thee;
Let it be gloy to me to confess thee;
Let it be clothes, Christ Jesus to put on;
Let it be food, his word to feed upon;
Yea, let it be my life, to live and dye,
For Christ my King, and for his verity.
So shall my riches be to me eternal,
So shall my glory be with Christ supernal,
So shall my clothing fril be fair and new,
So shall my food be Manna heavenly dew,
So shall my life nere fade, but ever spring,
Being still preserved by Christ my Lord and King.
But, oh alas! when shall I see that day?
That day of gladness never to decay,
That day of Jubilee when all are glad,
That day when all rejoice, none can be sad?
Whose endless time and never fixed date,
Eternity shall never exterminate.
That Saints blessed birthday, which shall nere have evening
That lasting day to which no night gives ending.
That rare Grand-Iubile, that Feasts of feasts.
Sabbaths of sabbaths, endless rests of rests:
To which least care shall never dare come near,
Wherein the Saints shall shake of^ palid fear.
O pure, O pleasant, most desired day
Of that eternal springing month of May!
In which my soul shall evermore rejoice,
In which my soul shall hear that happy voice,
Enter (blessed soul) into thy Masters joy,
Enter into sweet rest without annoy;
Enter into the House of Christ thy King,
Where peace and plenty mirth and joy do spring,
Where thou shall find things most to be admired,
Where thou shall have what most thy soul desired.
Joys infinitely, numberless, I say,
And various pleasures infinitely gay:
Unspy able, unspeakable by man,
Immutable, inscrutable to scan;
Where I, thy soul will feed, will feast, will fill:
Feed with spiritual food of my blessed will,
Feast with the dainties of delight most pure,
And fill with glory which shall e're endure.
Enter, I say, and hear that melody,
Which comprehends dateless festivity.
Where is all good, no evil to abuse:
Where Is all thou wishest, naught thou would refuse,
Where Is life e're-living, sweet and amiable,
Where is true fame and glory memorable,
Where is, I say, certain security,
Securest peace and peaceful pleasancie;
Most pleasant joy, and joyful happiness,
Happy eternity, eternal Blessedness;
The blessed trinity in Unity:
The Unities trine-one rare deity.
The Deities three-one's most blessed Vision,
Which is our Masters joy in ful^ fruition.
O joy of joys, O joy beyond all pleasure!
Far passing far transcending terrene treasure.
O joy without annoy, O true conten^
O sovereign bliss, and souls sweet ravishment!
O everlasting Kingdom, supreme peace!
Where all the Saints enjoy such joys increase,
Where all the Saints are clothed with pure Light,
As with a Garment shining glorious bright:
Their heads adorned with crowns of purest Gold,
And precious stones most glorious to behold;
Whose only exercise is to rejoice,
To triumph, and to sing with sacred voice,
Sweet hallelujah to their sovereign King,
Which them to this felicity did bring.
Oh when shall my poor soul be made partaker
Of this great joy, O thou my Lord and maker!
When shall see thee in it, it in theee?
And therein dwell I in thee, thou in me?
Surely (O Lord) I will make have and fly,
I Will make no stay, but post most speedily.
I Will never cease to seek, til I have found,
I Will not leave knocking, til my soul be crowned.
I Will never leave asking, til thou have me given
My boon, thy bounty, even those joys of heaven:
Since then, I say, such is heavens majesty!
And since this world is but mere misery:
What is 't can hinder this my speedy pace,
Which I must run, til I have run my race;
Can worldly power or principality?
Can kingly favors, wealth or dignity?
Can worldly pleasures, pleasant unto some?
Can height or depth, things present, things to come?
Oh no, with Paul I Will all abominate,
E're they shall me from Christ's love separate.
I Will cry avaunt you soul betraying joys,
Which Bee-like bring the sting of ^re annoyes.
Avaunt, I say, worlds momentary pleasure,
Worlds transitory toys, Earths trashie treasure:
The love of Christ has so inflam^d my heart,
That as I trust, it nere shall thence depart;
And, Lord, confirm, strengthen this Faith of mine,
O let it never faint, fail, or decline.
But woe to me, poor wretch, who still am fain
Amongst the tents of Meshech to remain:
To have my habitation amongst the rout
Of Quakers most ungodly, stubborn, stout.
The time me thinks, is much procrastinated,
O that the date thereof were terminated.
Ah me! how long shall it be said to me,
Wait, wait, expect, and thou the time shall see?
And shall thou see? my soul thou art too blame,
I must accuse thee (O my soul!) for shame
Think not the time too long count it not much,
That with these trials God thy faith should touch.
For as a Goldsmith waits most carefully
Upon his gold, which he in the fire wiltry;
That when it is burnd enough and purifide;
It may not in the fire to wast abide:
So God his children dear attends upon,
When in the fire of dire affliction
He purposes to purify and try them:
When thus enough refined he does spy them:
By no means will he suffer them to wast,
But for their comfort to them soon will have.
As that most rare pair-Royal well did know:
Good Shedrach, Meshach, and Abednego:
Whom he in the Babylonian fire did prove,
Yet so respected in his sacred love;
That not so much as one hair of their head.
Was burnt or sindg'd, or once diminished.
O then, my soul, if God have such a care,
As from thy head not one small simple hair
Can fall to the ground, without his providence:
O then have thou assured confidence,
That he thy soul will nere permit to perish,
But in due time will thee refresh and cherish;
And say with Job, That than of God most just:
Lord, though thou kill me, I will in thee trust.
Yea, then confess (as it is) that all the woe,
Which in this life for Christ thou undergo;
That all earths torments or afflicting toys,
Are most unworthy heavens most blissful joys.
Heavens joys for weight and measure infinite,
Earths pains to death, but slender, small and slight.
Heavens joys most perfect, absolutely pure,
Earths choicest pleasures pain and grief procure.
Heavens joys are sempiternal, everlasting,
Earths joys mere toys, still fleeting, ever wasting.
O then (my soul) have patience, do not grudge,
Lest so thou make thy Christ thine angry Judge:
Give patience, Lord, thy sacred will to bear,
And then receive my soul, how, when, or where.
For as no gold nor silver can be pure,
Until the fires burning it endure:
Nor Stones for Palace work can well be fit,
Til they with hammers often be cut and smit:
No more, I say, is'^ possible that we
Vessels of honor in Gods house can be:
Til we be fined and melted in the fire
Of worldly crosses and afflictions dire.
Neither can we as living stones have place;
Jerusalems celestial walls to grace;
Unless the hammers of Earths tribulation,
Often bruise the flesh to work the souls salvation.
But though thy servants, Lord, may often be tempted,
Yet can they never finally be tainted,
They never can be surprised, though often assailed,
For why, heavens safeguard has them never failed.
Christians and persecutions join together,
Like Christ and 's cross, few calms much stormy weather
Ere the Israelites to the Land of Promise came,
Their temp'ral Canaan, Canaan of such fame;
The endured much danger, many miseries:
And shall not I, most patiently likewise
Endure all dangers, all anxiety;
Shall I not undergo all misery,
In this my journey to heavens holy Land;
O yes, with constant courage to it stand.
For why, I Am sure the more I here endure,
My joys in heaven shall be more pure.
And who would not to heaven go joyfully,
Though with Elias he in whirl-winds fly;
Grant therefore, Lord, I take earths Nocuments
As precious balm, as my souls Documents.
Confirm my faith with constant resolution,
To wait, and fit me for my dissolution:
To wait for thee my Savior, staff and stay,
Til thou shall change my bodies house of clay;
That like thy glorious Body it may be,
That so thy power and glory I may see:
That I may hear and see, and bear a part,
In heav's heart-charming music sacred art,
In that rare comfort of Mel-Melody,
At Christ's rare Nuptials blessed solemnity,
Come then, Lord Jesus, oh, I cannot cease,
To wish my soul in thine eternal peace,
Give me, O Lord, good Stephens Eagles-eye,
Through thickest clouds heavens glory to espy.
Give me (O Lord) a voice angelical,
With Heart unfeigned on thee thus to call:
How long (O Lord) how long will thou delay?
Lord Jesus come, come quickly, do not stay;
Make have and tarry not, I thee entreat,
And draw my soul from earth to heavenly seat,
For why? I fea^ (Lord falsify my fear)
That Satan will against me such malice bear,
To cause my refractory flesh to stur
My soul unto Rebellion: so t'incur
Thy wrath and indignation for the fame,
My stubborn flesh, therefore (Lord) curb and tame.
O, free me from this Fleshly Prison strong,
Wherein my soul has fettered lain too long:
Fett'red I say, yea fest'red more's my shame,
More art thou flesh; and much more I too blame,
Who often with Adam fondly have aspired,
And with vainglory led, have often desired
The fruit of the Tree of Knowledge for to eat,
Not of the Tree of Life, more sovereign meat,
And to be red in any other Book,
Much pride and pleasure I have often took,
Than in my Book of conscience, to behold,
The woe whereinto sin does me infold.
With wontons I often viewed Prides Looking-Glass,
But not times Dyall, how my days did pass.
Yea, on earths follies I have fixed mine eyes:
Gazing on blaztng worldly vanities.
Yet Lord I know that as thou have a book,
wherein my faults are writ on them to look:
So thou a Bottle have, wherein to keep
My contrite tears, when I for Sin do weep.
And though my self unworthy I agnize
Unto thy throne to lift my finful eyes:
Yet I my self unworthy do not find
To weep before thee til mine eyes be blind.
Lord then vouchsafe, vouchsafe I thee beseech,
An ear an answer to my souls sad speech.
O come Lord Jesus, come I humbly pray.
Speak peace unto my soul, O do not stay:
Bind up my wounds, make whole my malady
With the Samaratans sweet charity,
Into my sore, power thou the Oil of gladness;
Revive my soul from sin constrained sadness.
O bring my soul out of this mire and mnd,
This sinck of sin where I too long have stood:
Smite off my Fetters of iniquity,
As thou did Peter's in captivity,
Stop in me all the conduits of transgression,
Break Satan's weapons of my son's oppression,
Yea, let my eyes be as continual Lavers
To wash and cleanse sins ulcers stinking savours:
For a clean Lord (I know) takes delectation,
To have a clean heart for his habitation.
Give therefore grace (O Lord) whiles here I live,
That I a bil of due divorce may give
Unto that harlo^ sin, which too-too-long
Has by false Flattery done my soul much wrong,
O, double, treble happy were I sure,
If once I might put off sins rags impare,
T^ose Menstruous clothes wherewith I am disguised,
Whereby thine Image in mee's not agnized:
Whereby in thy pure sight I am but loathed.
O therefore that my soul might once be clothed
With thy most Royal Robes of righteousness,
Thy seamel^ss, spotless Coat of Holiness,
And therein be presented to the Sight
Of my great Lord the Father of all Light,
And be ingrafted and incorporate,
Into this New-Ierusalems blessed state,
Ino this Kingdom evermore existing,
Into this Kingdom all of joy consisting:
Where all thy Saints and Sacred Angels reign,
By thee their mighty Lord and sovereign,
Clothed in vestures of the purest white,
Still in the presence of thy sacred sight:
Their heads adorned with Crowns of purest Gold,
Of preecious stones, rich Pearls rare to behold.
Thou Lord alone being the Diadem
Of these thy Saints in this Jerusalem:
Whose only sight, is their beatitude,
Which duresfor aye without vicissitude.
But Lord, it may be thou may say to me,
Alas, poor soul, would thou my beauty see?
None ere could see the glory of my face
And lives on earth, such is man's mortal case.
Lord, thus I answer, and I this confess,
That thy celestial glorious, holiness
Is so immense, so infinite, so rare,
So great, so glorious gracious, specious, fair,
That no flesh living can it see, and live,
Yet to my soul (O Lord) this mercy give,
That so it may behold thy sacred sight,
Let death with thousand deaths my body smite;
So my poor Soul may see thy Majesty,
Let death my breath, and Life end speedily.
Oh then, I say, and never shall cease to say,
O three-sold, four-sold happy, sure, as they,
Who by a pious life and blessed end,
By Christ, heavens Ladder, to heavens joys ascend,
Who for the minutes of Earths Lamentation,
Enjoy heavens endless years of consolation,
Who from this earthly prison are set free,
And in heavens Palace live, O Christ, with thee:
Yea, who being dead to sin and Earthly toys,
Are there in plenitude of perfect joys,
But oh most wretched miserable I,
Who (in the Floods of worlds mortality,
By huge heav'n-mounting, hell descending waves,
By Rocks, Syrths, whirlpoles, al which seem my graves)
Am still constrained to sail through dangers great,
Which waters, winds, weather, together threat:
And, which is more, I mosterroniously
Through ignorance, often wander clean away,
I lose my way, and then am danger'd most,
Not ^nowing whither my poor ship does coast:
Being thus exposed to seas all jeopardies,
Like Jonah, when from Ninive he flies,
Tossed to and fro, even into the Maw of hell,
By furious hound which against me rage and swel:
So that my way to the Harbor of my rest
Thus being lost my soul is fore oppressed.
But which is worst, whiles thus to thee I sail,
I meet Sea Monsters which do me assail:
Resistful Remoraes do strive to stay me,
And huge Leviathan gapes wide to slay me;
Life's, toys and troubles, Satan's craft and power,
Nould stay my voyage, and would me devour.
Restless, redress is thus I store about,
Hnd for thy heavenly my soul cries out.
Wherefore Sea-calming, wind controlly Lord,
To my perplexed soul thine aid afford;
For if thou will (O Lord.) thou can me cherish:
O therefore help, or else my soul will perish.
One Depth (O Lord) another in does call,
As waves break out and on each other fall:
The depth of my calamity profound,
Does invocate thy Mercies which abound.
I call and cry from many waters deep,
My soul from sinking (Lord) preserve and keep.
O keep me from these dangers imminent,
Which have my silly soul on all sides pent,
Let thine oustretched arm, upholding grace;
Once bring my soul unto her resting place,
From floods or worldly infelicity,
Into the ^ven of eternity.
How long, O Lord, how long will thou prolong,
Thy wrath^ appeal and ease me, from among
These d^ death-threatning dangers? O direct
My way to thee, my (...) to thee erect.
My ^fidence re-plan in thee, I pray,
That ^o these temp^sts may me not dismay;
That so these floods, though flow, may not com near me
That so these blasts, though blow, may not so fe^r me,
Thou being my un-rocking rock, my shield,
My fortress strong, which to no force can yield,
Most skilful Pilot, so my stern direct,
My weather beaten boat, so safe protect,
That it these dangers infinite may sh^n,
And to my harbor may the right way run:
Commiserate, compassionate my case,
And in thine arms, O Christ, my soul embrace.
Though I with Jonas seamen lose my wares,
My goods, my life, worlds pleasures, best affairs;
Though persecution Rocks my Bark may batter,
My danger driven boat may split may shatter;
Yet grant, O Lord, I may not shipwreck make
Of my sure faith in thee; but as the Snake
Is said t'expose his body to the blow
Of him that smites, to save his head: Even so
I willingly may undergo all crosses,
And with content may bear the greatest losses,
That I may hold fast faith in Christ my head,
So I may live by faith, to sin be dead.
With this conclusion should my soul be cherisht,
I had been undone, had I thus not perished.
Yea, with those Argo-Nautae willingly,
My ship through straightest passages shall fly,
So that in the end I may with joy possess
The Golden fleece of endless happiness.
Lord, though the puddle of impurity
Has my poor soul polluted loathsomely
The Ocean of iniquities foul flood
Has me beimeard in stinking mire and mud:
O yet, sweet Christ, with Hylap of thy merit,
Cleanse and make clean my sin-polluted spirit;
Wash me, o Christ, with thy most precious blood,
None, naught but thou, can do my soul this good,
My wel-nigh-shipwrackt soul, O Lord assist,
Which too. too-long the way to thee has mist.
Contemn me not, condemn me not for sin,
But let my Soul to thy sweet rest go in.
Remit (O Lord) what I have il-omitted,
Remove (O Lord) what I have mis-committeed.
And though I be to pass by the Gates of hell,
Grant power to pass them, and with thee to dwell.
To dwell I say with thee, in the Land of Living,
Where to thy saints thy joys thou still art giving.
O thou my souls sweet soul, my Hearts dear Heart,
In this distress do not from me depart;
Be to my soul as a bright-morning-star,
Which I may clearly see though somewhat far,
And be, as the art indeed, the sun most bright,
Of righteousness, that my flesh-dimmed sight
Being with Faiths Collyrium made more clear,
I speedily may see the way appear
To my heart-chearing long desired port,
Whereto my soul has longed to resort,
I may in time see, and foresee sins charms,
And so prevent the event of Sins great harms,
That on the shore I may perceive thee stand,
Giving me aim with thy most sacred hand,
To keep the right way to thine habitation,
The heaven of happiness, and sure salvation.
That passing thus this Danger-obvious Ocean,
By thee the strong Arch-mover of each motion,
I may go forward with such circumspection,
And be so guided by thy good direction,
And with thy grace be so corroborated,
And with Rock-founded faith so animated,
That as 'twixt Scylla's and Charib^is fear,
My Bark in passage does a full sail bear:
I mean proud Pharisaical Self-station,
And graceless Diffident, Cains desperation,
By the justified Publicans example,
I may the right regenerate paths trample
Of that true penitent good Prodical,
To thee (O Lord) for mercy cry and call,
That by thy gracious guide and safe tuition,
I may escape despairs and prides perdition,
And so with joy, with joy unut^erable,
Approaching to the shore most amiable:
Casting the anchor of a constant hope
On Christ my Savior, fastened with faiths rope,
I may my Merchandises bring a-Land,
And put them into my sweet Saviors hand;
Even all the gains which I poor soul had made
Of this good Talent lent to me to trade:
To whom although I bring but one for five,
Yet will he not my soul of heaven deprive.
And though that one through mine infirmity,
Has been much blemish't with impurity,
Has been disgraced, defaced, and much abused,
Yet by my Christ it will not be refused,
But graciously he will take my will for deed,
Will hold me by the hand and thus proceed:
Well done, good Servant, worthy of my trust,
Well done (I say) thy service has been just;
Since thou in little matters have done well,
Thou shall be Lord of things which far excel.
Since thou to do my Will have done thy best,
Come, come with me into thy masters rest.
Even so Lord Jesus, come I humbly pray,
For thine Elects sake have that happy day.
I look, I long, that I might once deserie
That happy Day, my soul to happyfie:
That I with thee (my Savior) may rejoice,
That with heart-cheering music and sweet voice,
In that blessed Chorus sweet, Angelical
Society of Saints celestial,
I, Halleluiah, Halleluiah may
Sing cheerfully to God the Lord always;
To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Unto the Trine-One Lord of Host.
To this great God be given all thanks and praise,
For his sweet succor in these sacred Lays. Amen.
FINIS.
-- Omnis Gloria solus est Domini.
Thrice happy Vision, more thrice happy zeal,
Thus flames us with God, Saints, Heavens Commonweal.

To the good, godly, and ingenuous Reader.
GEntlemen, This Book was written for you, and for none ^ut you; any that are
malicious, wicked, and corrupted with any deadly sin, in no wise let him
presume with Uzza to touch the Ark lest he die. It is enchanted with white
Magic, the Angel of righteousness does and will protect it, the spirit of the
air his seal and plannet; Sachiel his, s^irit, and Zebul his Region, the Mild
south, Wind blows peace and concord, to those I mean, such as it is
dedicated to, and none but honest, good, moral, discreet men may read it, whose
lives are devoted to the service of God, and in whose hearts there is no guile,
to such this book is given.

Excuse my absence from the Press,
(Which causes me thus to express)
Reader, If you with any errors meet
In this or that, or the other sheet,
You must therefore the Printer blame,
For he did all these errors frame.

