AN ANSWER TO Monseiur de la Militiere his impertinent Dedication of his
Imaginary Triumph, To the KING of Great Britain, to invite him to embrace the
Roman Catholic Religion.

By John Bramhall D. D. and Lord Bishop of Derry.

HAGUE, Printed in the Year, 1653.

An Answer to Monseiur de la Militiere his Epistle to the King of great
Britain, wherein he inviteth his Majesty to forsake the Church of England, and
to embrace the Roman Catholic Religion.
SIR,
YOu might long have disputed your Question of Transubstantiation, with your
learned Adversary, and proclaimed your own Triumph on a silver Trumpet to the
world, before any Member of the Church of England had interposed in this
present Exigence of our Affairs. I know no necessity that Christians must be
like Cocks, Plut.
that when one Crows all the rest must Crow for Company.

Monseiur Aubertine will not want a surviving friend, to teach you what it is
to sound a Triumph before you have gained the victory. He was no fool that
desired no other Epitaph on his Tomb than this, Here lies the Author of this
sentence, Prurigo Disputandi scabies Ecclesiae, Sir Henry Wotton.
the itch of disputing is the scab of the Church.

Having viewed all your strength with a single eye, I find not one of your
Arguments that comes home to Transubstantiation, but only to a true real
presence, which no genuine Son of the Church of England did ever deny, no nor
your Adversary himself. Christ said, This is my Body, what he said, we do
steadfastly believe; he said not, after this or that manner, neque con, neque
sub, neque trans; And therefore we place it among the Opinions of the Schools,
not among the Articles of our Faith.

The holy Eucharist, which is the Sacrament of peace and unity, rences in the
Church directly about the Sacrament for the first 800. years.
ought not to be made the matter of strife and contention. There wanted not
abuses in the Administration of this Sacrament, in the most pure and Primitive
times, as profaneness and uncharitableness among the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 11.
The Simonians and Menandrians, and some other such Imps of Satan, unworthy
the name of Christians, Theod. ex Ignatio.
did wholly forbear the use of the Eucharist, but it was not for any difference
about the Sacrament it self, but about the natural Body of Christ; They held
that his flesh, and Blood, and Passion, were not true and real, but imaginary
and fantastical things.

The Maniches did forbear the Cup, but it was not for any difference about the
Sacrament it self; They made two Gods, a good God whom they called (...) or
light, and an evil God whom they termed (...) or darkness, which evil God
(they said,) did make some creatures of the Dreg, or more feculent parts of the
matter, which were evil and impure; And among these evil creatures they
esteemed Wine, which they called the Gall of the Dragon: for this cause, not
upon any other scruple, they either wholly absteined from the Cup, Leo. Ser. 4.
de quad. Epiph. haer. 30. and 46.
or used Water in the place of wine, which Epiphanius records among the
errors of the Ebionites, Aug. li. de Haeres. c. 64
and Tacians; And St. Austine of the Aquarians. Still we do not find any
clashing either in word or writing directly about this Sacrament, in the
universal Church of Christ, much less about the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament. Bell. l. 1. de Sac. Euch. c. 1.
Neque ullus veterum disputat contra hunc errorem primis sex centis Annis.

The first that are supposed by Bellarmine to have broached any error in the
Church about the real presence were the Iconomachi, after 700. years. Primi
qui veritatem corporis Domini in Eucharistia in quaestionem vecarunt fuerint
Iconomachi post Annum Domini 700. Bell ibid. Syn Nic. 2 Act 6.
only because they called the Bread and Wine the Image of Christ's body. This is
as great a mistake as the former. Their difference was merely about Images, not
at all about the Eucharist; so much Vasques confesses, Disp. 179. c. 1.
that In his judgment they are not to be numbered with those who deny the
presence of Christ in the Eucharist.

We may well find different observations in those days, Yet different
observations,
as one Church consecrating leavened Bread, another unleavened; One Church
making use of pure Wine, another of Wine mixed with Water; One Church admitting
Infants to the Communion, another not admitting them; but without
controversies, or censures, or animosity one against another: we find no
debates or disputes concerning the presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament,
and much less concerning the manner of his presence, for the first eight
hundred years.

And different expressions.
Yet all the time we find as different expressions among those Primitive
Fathers, as among our modern writers at this day, some calling the Sacrament
the sign of Christ's Body, the figure of his Body, the Symbol of his Body, the
mystery of his Body, the exemplar type and representation of his Body, saying
that the Elements do not recede from their first nature; others naming it the
true Body and Blood of Christ, changed not in shape but in nature, yea doubting
not to say, that in this Sacrament we see Christ, we touch Christ, we eat
Christ, that we fasten our teeth in his very flesh, and make our Tongues red in
his Blood: Yet notwithansting there were no questions, no quarrels, no
contentions amongst them; there needed no Councils to order them, no
conferences to reconcile them, because they contented themselves to believe
what Christ had said, This is my Body, without presuming upon their own heads,
to determine the manner how it is his Body, neither weighing all their own
words so exactly before any controversy was raised, nor expounding the sayings
of other men contrary to the analogy of Faith.

The first doubt about the The first difference about the presence of Christ in
the Sacrament.
presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament seems to have been moved not long
before the year 900. in the days of Bertram, and Paschasius, but the
controversy was not well formed, nor this new Article of Transubstantiation
sufficiently concocted in the days of Berengarius, after the year 1050. as
appears by the gross mistaking, and mistating of the question on both sides;
First Berengarius (if we may trust his adversaries) knew no mean between a
naked figure, or empty sign of Christ's presence, and a corporeal or Local
presence, and afterward fell into another extreme of impanation; on the other
side the Pope and the Council made no difference between Consubstantiation and
Transubstantiation, they understood nothing of the spiritual or indivisible
being of the flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as appears by that
ignorant and Capernaiticall retractation and abjuration, which they imposed
upon Berengarius, Penned by Umbertus a Cardinal, Exact. Syn. Romans sub Nich. 2.
approved by Pope Nicholas, and a Council, Ego Berengarius, etc.

I Berengarius do consent to the holy Roman Apostolic See, and profess with my
mouth and heart, to hold the same faith of the Sacrament, of the Lords Supper,
with Pope Nicholas and this holy Synod, etc. And what the faith of Pope
Nicholas and this Synod was, follows in the next words; That the Bread and Wine
which are set upon the Altar after Consecration, are not only the Sacrament,
but the very body and blood of Christ. This seems to favor Consubstantiation,
rather than Transubstantiation; if the Bread and Wine be the body and blood of
Christ, then they remain Bread and Wine still; if the bread be not only the
Sacrament, but also the thing of the Sacrament, if it be both the Sign and the
thing signified, how is it now to be made nothing? It follows in the
Retraction; That the body and blood of Christ is sensibly, not only in the
Sacrament, but in truth, handled and broken by the hands of the Priest, and
bruised by the teeth of the faithful, If it be even so, there needs no more
but feel and be satisfied. To this they made Berengarius sweat, By the
consubstantiall Trinity, and the Holy Gospels, and accurse and anathematize all
those who held the contrary; yet these words did so much scandalize and offend
the Glosser upon Gratian, that he could not forbear to admonish the Reader, De
Cons. did. 2 cap. Ego Ber.
that unless he understood those words in a sound sense, he would fall into a
greater heresy than that of Berengarius. Not without reason, for the most
favorable of the Schoolmen do confess, that these words are not properly and
literally true, but figuratively and metanimically, understanding the thing
containing by the thing contained, as to say the body of Christ is broken or
bruised, because the quantity or Species of bread are broken or bruised, they
might as well say, that the body and blood of Christ becomes fusty and sour, as
often as the Species of Bread and Wine before their corruption become fusty and
sour. But the Retractation of Berongarius can admit no such figurative sense,
that the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament are d^vided and bruised
sensibly not only in the Sacrament, (that is in the Spec^es) but also in
truth. A most ignorant Capernaiticall assertion; for the body of Christ being
not in the Sacrament modo Quantitativo, according to their own Tenet, but
indivisibly, after a Spiritual manner, without extrinsecall extension of
parts, cannot in it self or in truth be either divided or bruised.

Therefore others of the Schoolmen go more roundly and ingenuously to work,
Alex. Gab. Bonav. etc.
and confess that it is an abusive and excessive expression, not to be held or
defended, and that it happened to Berengarius, (they should have said to Pope
Nicholas, and Cardinal Umbertus,) as it does with those who cut of a
detestation of one error incline to another.

Neither will it a vail them any thing at all, that the Fathers have sometimes
used such expressions of seeing Christ, of touching Christ in the Sacrament, of
fastening our teeth in his flesh, and making our tongues red in his blood. There
is a great difference between a Sermon to the people, and a solemn Retractation
before a Judge. The Fathers do not say, that such expressions are true, not
only Sacramentally or figuratively, (as they made Berengarius both say and
accurse all others that held otherwise) but also properly, and in the things
themselves. The Fathers never meant by these forms of speech, to determine the
manner of the presence, (which was not dreamed of in their days) but to raise
the devotion of their hearers and readers, to advertise the people of God, that
they should not rest in the external symbols, or signs, but principa^ly be
intent upon the invisible grace, which was both lawful and commendable for
them to do. Leave us their primitive liberty, and we will not refrain from the
like expressions.

I urge this to show that the new doctrine of Transubstantiation is so far from
being an old Article of faith, that it was not well digested, not rightly
understood, in any tolerable measure, by the greatest Clerks, and most
concerned, above a thousand years after Christ.

The first definition or determination of this manner of the presence was yet
later in the Council of Lateran, in the days of Innocent the third, Scot. in
4. sent. did. 11. q. 3. T. 3 q. 75. d. 81. c. 1. The determination of the
manner of the presence opened a floodgate to a deluge of Controversies.
after the year 1200. Ante Lateranense Concilium Transubstantiatio non fuit
dogma fidei. And what the fruit of it was, let Vasques bear witness, Audito
nomine Transubstantiationis, etc. The very name of Transubstantiation being but
heard, so great a Controversy d^d arise among the later Schoolmen concerning
the nature thereof, that the more they endeavored to wind themselves out, the
more they wrapped themselves in greater difficulties, whereby the mystery of
faith became more difficult, both to be explained, and to be understood, and
more exposed to the Cavils of its Adversaries. He adds that the name of
Conversion and Transubstantiation gave occasion to these Controversies.

No sooner was this Bell rung out, no sooner was this fatal sentence given,
but as if Pandora's box had been newly set wide open, whole swarms of noisome
Questions and debates did fill the Schools. Then it began to be disputed by
what means this change comes, whether by the Benediction of the Elements, or by
the Repetition of these words of Christ, This is my body. The common current of
your Schools is for the later: Lib. de Corr. Theol. Schol.
But your judicious Archbishops of Caesaria, since the Council of Trent, in a
Book dedicated to Sixtus the Fifth, produces great reasons to the contrary.

Then was the Question started what the demonstrative Pronoun Hoc signifies in
these words, This is my Body; whether this thing, or this Substance, or this
Bread, or this Body, or this Meat, or these Accidents, or that which is
contained under these Species, Gloss. de Con^. d. 2. cap. timorem.
or this Individuum vagum, or lastly (which seems stranger than all the rest)
this Nothing.

Then it began to be argued, whether the Elements were annihilated; whether the
matter and form of them being destroyed their essence did yet remain, or the
essence being Converted the existence remained; whether the Sacramental
existence of the body and blood of Christ do depend upon its natural
existence; whether the whole Host were Transubstantiated, or only some parts
of it, that is such parts as should be distributed to worthy Communicants, or
whether in those parts of the Host which were distributed unto unworthy
Communicants the matter of Bread and Wine did not return. Guidmend. l. 1. de
ver.
Whether the Deity did assume the Bread or the Species thereof, by a new
Hypostaticall Union, called Impanation, either absolutely, or respectively
Mediante Corpore. Whether the body and blood of Christ might be present in the
Sacrament without Transubstantiation, with the bread, or without the bread;
whether a body may be transubstantiated into a Spirit, Vasq. disp. 184. c. 8.
and (which is most strange) whether a Creature might be transubstantiated into
the Deity.

Then the Schoolmen began to wrangle what manner of change this was, whether a
material change, or a formal change, or a change of the whole substance, both
matter and form; And if it were a Conversion of the whole substance, then
whether it was by way of Production, or by Adduction, or by Conservation, each
of which greater Squadrons are subdivided into several lesser parties,
speaking as different Language, as the builders of Babel, pestering and
perplexing one another with mextricable difficulties.

It cannot be a new Production (says one) because the body of Christ,
whereinto the Elements are supposed to be converted, did pre-exist before the
change, neither can that body which is made of bread, be the same body with
that which was born of a Virgin.

If it be not by Production (say others,) but only by Adduction, then it is
not a Transubstantiation, but a Tran-subiation, not a change of natures, but a
local succession. Then the Priest is not the Maker of his Maker, (as they use
to brag,) but only puts him into a new positure, or presence, under the
Species of Bread and Wine.

Howbeit this way by Adduction be the more common, and the safer way (if we may
trust Bellarmine) yet of all Conversions or changes, it has least affinity
with Transubstantiation. Suppose the Water had not been turned into Wine at
Cana of Gallilee by our Savior, but poured out, or utterly destroyed, and Wine
new created, or adduced by Miracle into the water-pots, in such a manner, that
the introduction of the Wine should be the expulsion of the Water, not only
Comitanter, but Causaliter, in such case it had been no Transubstantiation.
Moses his Rod was truly changed into a Serpent, but it was by Production, if
his Rod had been conveyed away invisibly, by Legerdemain, and a Serpent had
been adduced into the place of it, what Transubstantiation had this been? None
at all; no, though the adduction of the Serpent had been the means of the
expulsion, and destruction of the Rod. It is so far from Transubstantiation,
that is no Conversion at all. The substance of the Elements is not converted,
for that is supposed to be destroyed; The Accidents are not converted, but
remain the same they were. It is no Adduction at all, when the body of Christ
(which is the thing supposed to be adduced) remains still in Heaven, where it
was before.

It cannot be a Conservative conversion, (say others,) for the same individual
thing cannot be conserved by two total distinct Conservations; but if this
were a conservative conversion the body of Christ should be conserved by two
total distinct conservations, the one in Heaven, the other in Earth; Yea, by
ten thousand distinct total Conservations upon Eatth, even as many as there
are consecrated Hosts; Vasq. T. 3. q. 75. d. 181 c. 4.
Which seems to be ridiculous, and without any necessity administers great
occasion to the Adversaries of Christian Religion, of jeasting and deriding the
mysteries of our faith.

So here we have a Transubstantiation without transubstantiation; A production
of a Modus or manner of Being, for a production of a substance; An Annihilation
supposed, yet no Annihilation confessed; an Adduction without any Adduction; a
Terminus ad Quem, without a Terminus a quo; who shall reconcile us to our
selves? But the end is not yet.

Then grew up the Question, What is the proper Adequate body which is contained
under the Species or accidents; Whether a material body, or a substantial
body, or a living body, or an Organicall body, or an humane body; Whether it
have weight, or not, and why it is not perceived; Whether it can be seen by the
eye of mortal man; whether it can act or suffer any thing, whether it be
moveable or immovable; whether by it self, or by Accident, or by both; whether
it can move in one place, and rest in another; or be moved with two contrary
motions, (as upwards and downwards, Southwards and Northwards,) at the same
time?

Add to these, whether the Soul of Christ, and the Deity, and the whole Trinity
do follow the body and blood of Christ under either Species, by Concomitance?
Whether the Sacramental body must have suffered the same things with the
natural body? As supposing that an Host Consecrated at Christ's last Supper had
been reserved until after his Passion, whether Christ must have died, and his
blood have been actually shed in the Sacrament? Yea, whether those wounds which
were imprinted by the whips in his natural body, might and should have been
found in his Sacramental body without flagellation?

Likewise, what blood of Christ is in the Sacrament? whether that blood only
which was shed, or that blood only which remained in the body, or both the one
and the other? And whether that blood which was shed was assumed again by the
Humanity in the Resurrection?

Then began those Paradoxicall Questions to be first agitated in the Schools,
Whether the same individual body, without division, or discontinuation from it
self, can be locally in ten thousand places; yea, in Heaven and in Earth at the
same time; Or if not locally, yet whether it can be so spiritually, and
indivisibly? And whether it be not the same as to this purpose, whether a body
be lolocally or spiritually present in more places than one? Bellarmine seems
to incline to the affirmative. Bell. l. 3. de Euch. c. 3. in fine.
Though to be any where Sacramentally does not imply the taking up of a place,
yet it implies a true and real presence, and if it be in more Hosts or Altars
than one, it seems no less opposite unto Indivisibility, than the filling up of
many places. Nay, he is past seeming positive, that, without doubt if a body
cannot be in two places locally, it cannot be Sacramentally in two places.

Compare this of Bellarmine with that of Aquinas, In 4. d. 44. q. 7. art. 2. q.
3.
that it is not possible for one body to be in more places than one locally, no
not by Miracle, because it implies a contradiction; And consider upon what
tottering foundations you build Articles of faith. It is impossible, and
implies a Contradiction, for the body of Christ to be locally in more Hosts
than one at the same time (says Aquinas,) But it is as impossible, and implies
a Contradiction as much for the body of Christ to be Sacramentally in more Hosts
than one at the same time, as to be locally (says Bellarmine). The Inference
is plain and obvious.

Many more such strange Questions are moved, as whether it be possible that the
thing contained should be a thousand times greater than the thing containing?
whether a definitive being in a place, do not implie a not being out of that
place? whether more bodies than one can be in one and the same place? whether
there can be a penetration of dimensions? whether a body can subsist after a
spiritual manner, so as to take up no place at all, but to be wholly in the
whole, and wholly in every part? Moreover, whether the whole body and blood of
Christ be in every particle of the bread, and of the Cup, and if it be, then
whether only after the division of the Bread and Wine, or before division
also; And in how many parts, and in which parts, is the whole body and blood of
Christ, whether in the least parts, and if in the least parts, then whether in
the least in kind, or the least in quantity, that is so long as the Species may
retein the name of Bread and Wine, or so long as the matter is divisible, and
whether the body and blood of Christ, be also in the indivisible parts, as
points and lines, and superficies?

Lastly, whether Accidents can subsist without their subjects, that is, whether
they can be both Accidents, and no Accidents? whether all the Accidents of the
Elements do remain, and particularly whether the Quantity does remain? whether
the other Accidents do inhere in the quantity as their subject, that is,
whether an Accident can have an Accident? whether the quantity of Christ's body
be there, and whether it be there after a quantitative manner, with extension
of parts, either extrinsecall or intrinsecall, and whether the Quantity of the
body of Christ, be distinct and figured, or indistinct and unfigured? whether
the Accidents can nourish or make drunken, or corrupt, and a new body be
generated of them; And what supplies the place of the matter in such
generation, whether the Quantity, or the body of Christ, or the old matter of
the Bread and wine, restored by miracle, or new matter created by God? And how
long in such corruption the Body of Christ does continue.

Whosoever is but moderately versed in your great Doctors, must needs know that
these questions are not the private doubts, or debates of single Schoolmen,
but the common Garboils and general engagements of your whole Schools.

Wherefore it had been a mere vanity to cite every particular Author for each
question, and would have made the margent swell ten times greater than the Text.

From this bold determination of the manner of the presence, how, have flowed
two other differences, First the detention of the Cup from the Laity, merely
upon presumption of Concomitance, first decreed in the Council of Constance,
after the year 1400. Let what will become of Concomitance, whilst we keep our
selves to the Institution of Christ, and the universal practice of the
Primitive Church. It was not for nothing that our Savior did distinguish his
Body from his Blood, not only in the Consecration, but also in the distribution
of the Sacrament. By the way give me leave to represent a Contradiction in
Bellarmine, which I am not able to reconcile. Lib. 4. de Euch. c. 25.
In one place he says, The providence of God is merveilous in holy Scripture,
for St. Luke has put these words [do you this,] after the Sacrament given
under the form of Bread, but he repeated it not after the giving of the Cup,
That we might understand, that the Lord commanded that the Sacrament should be
distributed unto all under the form of Bread, but not under the form of Wine.
And yet in the next Chapter but one of the same Book, he does positively
determine the contrary, upon the Ground of Concomitance, that the Bread may be
taken away, Cap. 27.
if the Cup be given, but both cannot be taken away together, Can that be taken
away, which Christ has expressly commanded to be given to all?

A second difference flowing from Transubstantiation is about the Adoration of
the Sacrament; One of those impediments which hinder our Communication with you
in the Celebration of divine Offices: We deny not a venerable respect unto the
Consecrate Elements, not only as love tokens sent us by our best friend, but as
the Instruments ordained by our Savior to convey to us the merits of his
Passion: But for the person of Christ (God forbid) that we should deny him
divine worship at any time, and especially in the use of this holy Sacrament,
we believe with St. Austine that No man eats of that flesh, but first he
adores. But that which offends us is this, That you teach and require all men
to adore the very Sacrament with divine Honor. To this end you hold it out to
the people. To this end Corpus Christi day was instituted about 300. years
since. Conc. Vien.
Yet we know that even upon your own grounds, you cannot without a particular
Revelation, have any infallible assurance that any Host is consecrated; And
consequently you have no assurance that you do not commit material Idolatry.

But that which weighs most with us is this, That we dare not give divine
worship unto any creature, (no not to the very Humanity of Christ in the
Abstract, much less to the Host) but to the whole person of Christ God and man,
by reason of the Hypostaticall union between the Child of the blessed Virgin
Mary, and the eternal Son, who is God over all blessed for ever. Show us such
an union betwixt the Deity and the Elements, or accidents, and you say
something. But you pretend no such things, The highest that you dare go is
this, Bell. l. 4 de Euch. c. 29. quodam modo.
As they that adored Christ when he was upon Earth did [after a certain kind
of manner,] adore his Garments. Is this all? This is after a certain kind of
manner indeed. We have enough. There is no more Adoration due to the Sacrament,
than to the Garments which Christ did wear upon Earth. Exact no more.

Thus the seamless Coat of Christ is torn into pieces; Thus faith is minced
into shreds, and spun up into nicities, more subtle than the Webs of Spiders,
Fidem minutis diffecant ambagibus
Ut quisque est lingua nequior.


Because curious wits cannot content themselves to touch hot coals with tongs,
but they must take them up with their naked fingers, nor to apprehend mysteries
of Religion by faith, without descanting upon them, and determining them by
reason, whilst themselves confess that they are incomprehensible by humane
reason, and imperceptible by man's imagination; How Christ is present in the
Sacrament can neither be perceived by sense, Aq. p. 3. 1. 76. Art. 7.
nor by imagination. The more inexcusable is their presumption to anatomise
mysteries, and to determine supernatural not revealed truths, upon their own
heads, which if they were revealed were not possible to be comprehended by
mortal man; As vain an attempt, as if a Child should think to lade out all the
water of the Sea with a Cockleshell. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but things revealed unto us, and our
Children for ever.

This is the reason why we rest in the words of Christ, This is my Body,
leaving the manner to him that made the Sacrament; we know it is Sacramental
and therefore efficacious, because God was never wanting to his own Ordinances,
where man did not set a bar against himself. But to determine whether it be
corporeally or spiritually, (I mean not only after the manner of a spirit, but
in a spiritual sense,) whether it be in the Soul only, or in the Host also;
And if in the Host, whether by Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation, whether
by Production or Adduction, or Conservation or Assumption, or by whatsoever
other way bold and blind man dare conjecture, we determine not.

Durand.
Motum sentimus, modum nescimus, praesentiam credimus.

This was the belief of the Primitive Church, this was the Faith of the ancient
Fathers, who were never acquainted with these modern questions de modo, which
edify not, but expose Christian Religion to contempt. We know what to think,
and what to say with probability, modesty, and submission in the Schools; But
we dare neither scrue up the Question to such an height, nor dictate our
Opinions to others so Magisterially as Articles of Faith.

Nescire velle quae Magister maximus

Docere non vult, erudita est inscitia.

O! Against multiplying of questions, and controversies.
how happy had the Christian world been, if Scholars could have sat down
contented with a latitude of General, sufficient, saving Truth, (which when
all is done must be the Olive branch of peace, to show that the deluge of
Ecclesiastical division is abated,) without wading too far into particular
subtilties, or doting about Questions and Logomac^ies, whereof comes envy,
strife, raylings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings. Old controversies
evermore raise up new controversies, and yet more controversies, as Circles in
the water do produce other Circles.

Now especially these Scholasticall quarrels seem to be unseasonable, when
Zenos School is newly opened in the world, who sometimes wanted opinions, but
never wanted Arguments; Now when Atheism and sacrilege are become the mode of
the times; Now when all the fundamentals of Theology, Morality, and Policy, are
undermined and ready to be blown up; Now when the unhappy contentions of great
Princes, or their Ministers, have hazarded the very being of Monarchy and
Christianity; Now when Bellonia shakes her bloody whip over this Kingdom, it
becomes well all good Christians, and subjects, to leave their litigious
questions, and (...)
to bring water to quench the fire of civil dissension already kindled, rather
than to blow the Coals of discord, and to render themselves censurable by all
discreet persons, like that half-wirted fellow personated in the Orator, Qui
cum Capit is mederi debuisset reduviem curavit; when his head was extremely
distempered, he busied himself about a small push on his fingers end.

But that which creates this trouble to you and me at this time, is your
Preface, The Occasion of this Discourse.
and Epistle Dedicatory; wherein to adorn your vainly imagined Victory in an
unseasonable Controversy, you rest not contented, that your Adversary grace
your Triumph, unless the King of great Britain, and all his subjects, yea and
all Protestants besides attend your Chariot. Neither do you only desire this,
but augurate it, or rather you relate it as a thing already as good as don: P.
37.
for you tell him, that his eyes and his ears do hear and see those truths,
which make him to know the faults of that new Religion which he had sucked in
with his milk; you set forth the causes of his Conversion, The tears of his
Mother, and the Blood of his Father, whom you suppose (against evident truth)
to have dyed an invisible Member of your Roman Catholic Church. And you
prescribe the means to perfect his Conversion, which must be a conference of
your Theologians with the Ministers of Charentou.

If your charity be not to be blamed, The Authors indiscretion.
to wish no worse to another than you do to your self, yet prudent men desire
more discretion in you, than to have presented such a Treatise to the view of
the world under his Majesty's protection, without his license and against his
conscience: Had you not heard that such groundless insinuations as these and
other private whisperings concerning his Fathers Apostatising to the Roman
Religion did lose him the hearts of many subjects? If you did, why would you
insist in the same steps, to deprive the Son of all possibility of recovering
them?

To no purpose.
If your intentions be only to invite his Majesty to embrace the Catholic
Faith, The King is already a better Catholic than himself.
you might have spared both your Oil and labor. The Catholic Faith flourished
1200. years in the world, before Transubstantiation was defined among your
selves. Persons better acquainted with the Primitive times than your self
(unless you wrong one another) do acknowledge that the Fathers did not touch
either the word or the matter of transubstantiation. Discursus modestus
Jesuitaru^ p. 13. Watsons quod- lib. l. 2. Art. 4.
Mark it well, neither name nor thing. His Majesty does firmly believe all
supernatural truths revealed in sacred Writ. He embraces cheerfully
whatsoever the holy Apostles, or the Nicene Fathers, or blessed Athanasius, in
their respective Creeds or Summaries of Catholic Faith did set down as
necessary to be believed. He is ready to receive whatsoever the Catholic
Church of this age does unanimously believe to be a particle of saving Truth.

But if you seek to obtrude upon him the Roman Church, with its adherents, for
the Catholic Church, excluding three parts of four of the Christian world from
the Communion of Christ, or the opinions thereof for Articles and fundamentals
of Catholic Faith, neither his reason, nor his Religion, nor his charity will
suffer him to listen unto you. The Truths received by our Church are sufficient
in point of Faith to make him a good Catholic. More than this your Roman
Bishops, your Roman Church, your Tridentine Council, may not, cannot obtrude
upon him. Listen to the third general Council, Par. 2. Act. 6. c. 7.
that of Ephesus, which decreed, that it should be lawful for no man to
publish or compose another Faith or Creed than that which was defined by the
Nicene Council, Not lawful to add to the old Creed.
And that whosoever should dare to compose or offer any such to any persons
willing to be converted from Paganism, Judaism, or Heresy, if they were Bishops
or Clerks should be deposed, if Laymen anathematized.

Suffer us to enjoy the same Creed the Primitive Fathers did, which none will
say to have been insufficient except they be mad, Council. Flor. Sess. 10. prof.
sid. in bulla Pti quarti.
as was alleged by the Greeks in the Council of Florence. You have violated
this Canon, you have obtruded a new Creed upon Christendom. New I say, not in
words only; but in sense also.

Somethings are de Symbolo, What are additions to the Creed, and what are only
explications.
somethings are contra symbolum, and somethings are only praeter symbolum.
Somethings are contained in the Creed, either expressly or virtually, either in
the Letter or in the sense, and may be deduced by evident consequence from the
Creed, as the Deity of Christ, his two natures, the procession of the Holy
Ghost. The addition of these was properly no addition, but an explication. Yet
such an explication, no person, no Assembly under an Oecumenicall Council, Aq.
2. 2. q. 1. Art. 10.
can impose upon the Catholic Church. And such an one your Tridentine Synod
was not.

Secondly, somethings are contra symbolum, contrary to the symbolicall Faith,
and either expressly or virtually overthrow some Article of it. These additions
are not only unlawful, but heretical also in themselves, and after conviction
render a man a formal Heretic; whether some of your additions be not of this
nature, I will not now dispute.

Thirdly, somethings are neither of the Faith, nor against the Faith, but only
besides the Faith; That is, opinions or truths of an inferior nature, which are
not so necessary to be actually known: for though all revealed truths be a like
necessary to be believed when they are known, yet all revealed truths are not a
like necessary to be known. It is not denied, but that General or Provincial
Councils may make constitutions concerning these for unity and uniformity, and
oblige all such as are subject to their jurisdiction to receive them, either
actively, or passively, without contumacy or opposition. But to make these, or
any of these, a part of the Creed, and to oblige all Christians under pain of
damnation to know and believe them, is really to add to the Creed, and to
change the Symbolicall, Apostolical Faith, to which none can add, from which
none can take away, and comes within the compass of St. Paul's curse, Gal. 1.8.
If we, or an Angel from Heaven, shall Preach unto you any other Gospel (or
Faith,) than that which we have Preached, let him be accursed. Such are your
Universality of the Roman Church, by the Institution of Christ, to make her the
Mother of her Grandmother the Church of Jerusalem, and the mistress of her
many elder Sisters. Your Doctrine of Purgatory and Indulgences, and the Worship
of Images, and all other novelties defined in the Council of Trent, all which
are comprehended in your New Roman Creed, and obtruded by you upon all the
world to be believed under pain of damnation. He that can extract all these out
of the old Apostolic Creed, must needs be an excellent Chemist, and may safely
undercake to draw water out of a Pumice.

That afflictions come not by chance, P. 4. Crosses are not always punishments
but sometimes corrections, or trials.
that prosperity is no evidence of Gods favor, or adversity of his hatred;
that crosses imposed by God upon his servants, look more forwards toward their
amendment, than backwards to their demerits, and proceed not from a Judge
revenging, but from a Father correcting, or (which you have omitted,) from a
Lord Paramount proving and magnifying before the world his own graces in his
Servants for his glory and their Advantage, are undeniable Truths which we
readily admit. As likewise that the dim eye of man cannot penetrate into the
secret dispensations of Gods temporal judgments and mercies in this life, so
as to say this man is punished, that other chastised, this third is only proved.

But you forget all this soon after, Which the Author presently forgets.
when you take upon you to search into, yea more, to determine the grounds and
reasons why the hand of God; P. 8.
as well as the Parliament, has been so heavy upon the Head of his late
Majesty, and his royal Son. P. 14.
Namely on Gods part, because he called himself the head of the Church. God
purposing by his punishment, to teach all other Princes that are in the Schism,
with what severity he can vindicate his glory in the injury done unto the Unity
and Authority of his Church, P. 9.
And on the Parliaments part, because he would not consent to the Abolition of
Episcopacy, and suppression of the Liturgy, and Ceremonies established in the
Church of England.

First, what warrant have you to enquire into the Actions of that blessed Saint
and Martyr, which of them should be the causes of his sufferings? Not
remembering that the Disciples received a check from their Master upon the like
presumption; Joh. 9.2.
Who sinned? this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered,
neither has this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the works of God should
be made manifest in him.

Better grounds of his Majesty's sufferings, than those of the Author.
The Heroical Virtues, the flaming Charity, the admirable Patience, the rare
Humility, the exemplary Chastity, the constant and frequent Devotions, and the
invincible Courage of that happy Prince, not daunted with the ugly face of a
most horrid death, have rendered him the glory of his Country, the Honor of
that Church whereof he was the chiefest member, the admiration of Christendom,
and a pattern for all Princes, of what Communion soever, to imitate until the
end of the world. His Sufferings were Palms, his Prison a Paradise, and his
death-day the birthday of his happiness; whom his Enemies advantaged more by
their cruelty, than they could have done by their courtesy. They deprived him
of a corruptible Crown, and invested him with a Crown of glory; They snatched
him from the sweet society of his dearest Spouse, and from most hopeful Olive
branches, Psa. 128.3
to place him in the bosoms of the holy Angels. This alone is ground enough for
his sufferings, to manifest unto the world those transcendent and unparalled
graces, wherewith God had enriched him, to which his sufferings gave the
greatest luster, as the stars shine brightest in a dark night.

The Authors rash censure upon the Archbishop of Cant.
The like liberty you assume toward the other most glorious Martyr, the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, a man of profound learning, and exemplary life, of
clean hands, of a most sincere heart, a patron of all good learning, a
Professor of ancient truth, a great friend indeed, and earnest pursuer, of
Order, Unity, and uniformity in Religion, but most free from all sinister ends,
either a varitious or ambitious, wherewith you do uncharitably charge him, as
if he sought only his own Grandeur, to make himself the head of a
Schismatic body. In brief, you therefore censure him, because you did not
know him. I wish all your great Ecclesiastiques had his Innocence, and fervent
zeal for Gods Church, and the peace thereof, to plead for them at the day of
Judgment.

By applying these particular Afflictions according to your own ungrounded
Fancy, what a wide gap have you opened to the liberty and boldness of other
men? who if they should assume to themselves the same freedom that you have
done, might say as much, with as much reason, concerning the pressures of other
great Princes abroad, that God afflicts them, because they will not become
Protestants, as you can say that God afflicted our late King, because he would
not turn Papist.

But if you will not allow his Majesty's sufferings to be merely probatory; And
if (for your satisfaction) there must be a weight of sin found out to move the
wheel of Gods justice, why do you not rather fix upon the body of his Subjects
or at least a disloyal part of them? We confess that the best of us did not
deserve such a Jewel, Sovereigns may be taken away for the sins of their
subjects.
that God might justly snatch him from us in his wrath for our ingratitude.
Reason, Religion, and experience do all teach us, that it is usual with
Almighty God, to look upon a body politic, or Ecclesiastique, as one man, and
to deprive a perverse people of a good and gracious Governor, as an expert
Physician by opening a vein in one member, cures the distempers of another.
Prove. 28.^
For the Transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes thereof.

It may be that two or three of our Princes at the most (the greater part
whereof were Roman Catholics, Not above two or three of our Princes called
Heads of the Church.
) did style themselves, or give others leave to style them, the Heads of the
Church, within their Dominions. But no man can be so simple, as to conceive
that they intended a spiritual headship to infuse the life and motion of grace
into the hearts of the faithful, such an head is Christ alone; No not yet an
Ecclesiastical headship; We did never believe that our Kings in their own
persons could exercise any act perteining either to the power of Order or
Jurisdiction: That is only political heads. 1 Samuel 15.17.
Nothing can give that to another, which it has not it self. They meant only
a Civil or Political head, as Saul is called the Head of the Tribes of
Israel, to see that public peace be preserved, to see that all Subjects,
as well Ecclesiastiques as others do their duties, in their several places; to
see that all things be managed for that great and Architectonicall end, that is
the weal and benefit of the whole body politic, both for soul and body. If
you will not trust me, Hear our Church it self, When we attribute the Sovereign
Government of the Church to the King, Art. 37.
we do not give him any power to administer the Word or Sacraments; but only
that Prerogative which God in holy Scripture has always allowed to Godly
Princes, to see that all Sates and Orders of their Subjects, Ecclesiastical
and Civil, do their duties, and to punish those who are delinquent, with the
civil Sword. Here is no power ascribed, Expos. Paraphr. art. Conf. Ang. Art.
37.
no punishment inflicted, but merely political, and this is approved and
justificed by S. Clara, both by reason, and by the example of the Parliament of
Paris. Yet by virtue of this Political power, he is the Keeper of both Tables,
the preserver of true piety toward God, as well as right Justice toward men;
And is obliged to take care of the souls, as well as the skins and carcasses of
his subjects.

The Christian Emperors political heads.
This power, though not this name, the Christian Emperors of old assumed unto
themselves, to Convocate Synods, to preside in Synods, to confirm Synods, to
establish Ecclesiastical Laws, to receive appeals, to nominate Bishops, to
eject Bishops, to suppress Heresies, to compose Ecclesiastical differences, in
Councils, out of Councils, by themselves, by their delegates: All which is as
clear in the History of the Church, as if it were written with a beam of the
Sun.

This power, The old Kings of England political heads.
though not this name, the Ancient Kings of England ever exercised, not only
before the Reformation, but before the Norman Conquest, as appears by the Acts
of their great Councills, by their Statutes, and Articles of the Clergy, by so
many Laws of provision against the Bishop of Romes conferring Ecclesiastical
dignities and benefices upon foreiners, by so many sharp oppositions against
the exactions and usurpations of the Court of Rome, by so many Laws concerning
the Patronage of Bishoprics, and Investitures of Bishops, by so many examples
of Churchmen punished by the Civil Magistrate. Of all which Jewels the Roman
Court had undoubtedly robbed the Crown, if the Peers and Prelates of the
Kingdom had not come in to the rescue.

By the ancient Laws of England it is death, or at least a forfeiture of all
his goods, for any man to publish the Popes Bull without the Kings License. The
Popes Legate without the Kings leave could not enter into the Realm. If an
Ordinary did refuse to accept a resignation, See Authorities for all these in
Cawdries Case, in Judge Crook his Reports.
the King might supply his defect. If any Ecclesiastical Court did exceed the
bounds of its just power, either in the nature of the cauie, or manner of
proceeding, the Kings Prohibition had place. So in effect the Kings of England
were always the Political heads of the Church within their own Dominions. So
the Kings of France are at this day.

But who told you that ever King Charles did call himself the Head of the
Church? Neither K. Charles, K. James, nor Queen Elizabeth styled heads of the
Church.
thereby to merit such an heavy Judgment. He did not, nor yet King James his
Father, nor Queen Elizabeth before them both, who took Order in her first
Parliament, to have it left out of her Title; They thought that name did sound
ill, and that it entrenched too far upon the right of their Savior. Therefore
they declined it, and were called only Supreme Governors, in all Causes, over
all persons Ecclesiastical and Civil; which is a Title de jure inseparable
from the Crown of all sovereign Princes; Where it is wanting de facto (if any
place be so unhappy to want it,) the King, is but half a King, and the
Commonwealth a Serpent with two Heads.

Thus you see, you are doubly, and both ways miserably mistaken. First, King
Charles did never style himself Head of the Church, nor could with patience
endure to hear that Title. Secondly, a Political Headship is not injurious to
the Unity, or Authority of the Church. The Kings of Israel and Judah; the
Christian Emperors, the English Kings before the Reformation, yea, even before
the Conquest, and other Sovereign Princes of the Roman Communion have owned it
signally.

But it seems you have been told, or have read, this in the virulent writings
of Sanders, or Parsons, or have heard of a ludicrous scoffing proposition of a
Marriage between the two heads of the two Churches, Sixtus Quintus, and Queen
Elizabeth, for the reuniting forsooth of Christendom. All the satisfaction, I
should enjoin you, is to persuade the Bishop of Rome (if Gregory the Great were
living, The Authors satisfaction to persuade the Pope to leave that vain Title.
you could not fail of speeding,) to imitate the piety and humility of our
Princes; that is, to content himself with his Patriarchicall dignity and
primacy of Order, and Principium unitatis, and to quit that much more
presumptuous, and (if a Popes word may pass for current) Antichristian term of
the Head of the Catholic Church. If the Pope be the Head of the Catholic
Church, then the Catholic Church is the Popes body, which would be but an
harsh expression to Christian ears; then the Catholic Church should have no
Head, when there is no Pope, two or three Heads, when there are two or three
Popes; an unsound Head, when there is an heretical Pope; a broken Head, when
the Pope is censured or deposed; and no Head, when the Sea is vacant. If the
Church must have one Universal, visible, Ecclesiastical Head, a general
Council may best pretend to that Title.

Neither are you more successful in your other Reason, Hatred of Episcopacy or
the true cause why the Parliament persecuted the King.
why the Parliament persecuted the King; Because he maintained Episcopacy, both
out of Conscience and Interest, which they sought to abolish. For though it be
easily admitted, that some seditious and heterodox persons had an evil eye,
both against Monarchy, and Episcopacy, from the very beginning of these
troubles, either out of fiery zeal, or vain affectation of Novelty, (like
those, who having the green sickness, prefer chalk and meal in a corner, before
wholesome meat at their Fathers table,) or out of a greedy, and covetous desire
of gathering some sticks for themselves upon the fall of those great Oaks, yet
certainly they: who were the contrivers, and principal actors in this
business, did more malign Episcopacy for Monarchy's sake, then Monarchy for
Episcopacies. What end had the Nuncio's faction in Ireland against Episcopacy?
whose mutinous courses apparently lost that Kingdom. When the Kings consent to
the Abolition of Episcopacy in Scotland was extorted from him by the
Presbyterian faction (which probably the prime authors do rue sufficiently by
this time) were those Presbyterian Scots any thing more favorable to Monarchy?
To come to England, the chief Scene of this bloody Tragedy: If that party in
Parliament had at first proposed any such thing, as the Abolition either of
Monarchy, or Episcopacy, undoubtedly they had ruined their whole design; until
daily tumults, and uncontrollable uprores had chased away the greater, and
sounder part of both Houses: Their first Protestation was solemnly made to God,
both for King and Church, as they were by Law established.

The true causes of the troubles in Engl^^d.
Would you know then what it was that Conjured up the storm among us? It was
some feigned jealousies and fears, (which the first broachers themselves knew
well enough to be fables) dispersed cunningly among the people, That the King
purposed to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and to reduce the
free English Subject to a condition of absolute slavery under an Arbitrary
Government. For which massy weight of malicious untruth, they had no
supporters, but a few Bullrushes. Secondly, that he meant to apostate from the
Protestant Religion to Popery, and to that end had raised the Irish Rebellion
by secret encouragements, and Commissions; For which monstrous calumny, they
had no other foundation (except the solemn religious Order of divine Service in
his own Chapel, and Cathedral Churches) then some unseasonable disputes about
an Altar, or a Table, and the permission of the Popes Agent, to make a short
stay in England, more for reasons of State than of Religion. And some senseless
fictions of some Irish Rebels, who having a Patent under the great Seal of
Ireland for their Lands, to color their barbarous murders, showed it to the
poor simple people as a Commission from the King to levy forces. And lastly
some impious pious frauds of some of your own party, whose private whispers,
and printed insinuations did give hopes, that the Church of England, was
coming about to shake hands with the Roman in the points controverted; Which
was merely devised to gull some silly creatures, whom they found apt to be
catched with chaff; for which they had no more pretext of truth, than you have
for your groundless intimations in this unwelcome dedication.

These suspicions being compounded with Covetousness, Ambition, Envy,
Emulation, desire of Revenge, and discontent, were the sourse of all our
Calamities. Thus much you your self confess in effect; that, this supposition,
that the King and Bishops had an intention to re-establish the Roman Catholic
Religion, was the venom which the Puritan faction infused into the hearts of
the people, P. 11.
to fill them with hatred against a King worthy of love; And the Parliament
judged it a favorable occasion for their design, to advance themselves to
Sovereign Authority, Be Judge your self how much they are accessory to our
sufferings, who either were, or are the Authors, or fomenters of these damnable
slanders.

There was yet one cause more of this cruel persecution, which I cannot
conceal from you, because it concerns some of your old acquaintance. There was
a Bishop in the world (losers must have leave to talk) whose privy Purse, and
subtle Counsels, did help to kindle that unnatural war in his Majesty's
three Kingdoms. Our Cardinal Wolsey complained before his death, That he had
served his King better than his God. But certainly this practice in your
friend, was neither Good service to his God, to be the author of the effusion
of so much innocent blood, nor yet to his King, to let the world see such a
dangerous president. It is high time for a man to look to himself, when his
next neighbors house is all on a flame.

As hitherto I have followed your steps, though not altogether in your own
Method, or rather your own confusion; So I shall observe the same course for
the future. Your discourse is so full of Meanders and windings, turnings, and
returnings, you congregate Heterogenious matter, and segregate that which is
homogeneous, as if you had made your Dedication by starts, and snatches; and
never digested your whole discourse; On the contrary, where I meet with any
thing, it shall be my desire to dispatch it out of my hands, with whatsoever
perteins unto it once for all. I hope you expect not that I should amuse my
self at your Rhetorical flowers, and elegant expressions; they agree well
enough with the work you were about; The Pipe plays sweetly, whilst the Fowler
is catching his prey. Trappings are not to be condemned, if the things
themselves are good and useful, but I prefer one Pomegranate Tree laden with
good fruit, before a whole row of Cypresses, that serve only for show. Be sure
of this, that where any thing in your Epistle reflects upon the Church of
England, I shall not miss it first or last, though it be but a loose unjoynted
piece, and so perhaps hitherto untouched.

We are only accused of Schism.
Amongst other things which you lay to our charge, you glance, at the least
twelve times, at our supposed Schism. But from first to last, never attempt to
prove it, as if you took it for granted. I have shaped a Coat for a
Schismatic, and had presented it to you in this answer, but considering that
the matter is of moment, and merits as much to be seriously and solidly
weighed, as your naked Crimination without all pretext of proof deserves to be
slighted, lest it might seem here as an impertinent digression, to take up too
much place in this short discourse, I have added it at the Conclusion of this
Answer, in a short Tract by it self, that you may peruse it if you please.
Presbyterians and Brownists have been Romes best friends.


You fall heavily, in this Discourse, upon the Presbyterians, Brownists, and
Independents, if they intend to return you any answer, they may send it by a
messenger of their own. As for my part, I am not their Proctor, I have received
no Fee from them. And if I should undertake to plead their Cause upon my own
head, by our old English Law, you might call me to account for unlawful
maintenance. Only give me leave as a by-stander to wonder why you are so
cholerique against them, for certainly they have done you more service in
England, then ever you could have done for your selves.

And I wonder no less why you call our Reformation, a Calvinisticall
Reformation, brought into England by Bucer, and Peter Martyr, a blind
Reformation, yea, the entire ruin of the Faith, of the very form of the
Church, and of the civil Government of the Commonwealth instituted by God. P.
16.
Though you confess again in our favor, that if our first Reformers had been
interrogated, whether they meant: P. 19.
P. 14.
any such thing, they would have purged themselves, P. 17.
and avouched their Innocence with their hands upon the new Gospel. The gifts
of Enemies are no gifts. If such as these are all your courtesies, you may be
pleased to take them again; Our first Reformers might safely swear upon any
Gospel, old, or new, that they meant no such thing. And we may as securely
swear upon all the books of God, old or new, that there is no such thing. But
why our Gospel should be younger or newer than Sixtus Quintus his Gospel, or
Clemens Octavus his Gospel, passes my understanding, and yours also.

Comparisons are odious, therefore I will not say, that the true English
Protestant standing to his own grounds, is the best subject in the world. But I
do say, that he is as good a subject as any in the world, and our principles as
Innocent, and as auxiliary to civil Government, as the Maxims of any Church
under Heaven. And more than yours, where the clashing of two Supreme
Authorities, and the exemption of your numerous Clergy from the Coercive power
of the Prince, and some other novelties which I forbear to mention, do always
threaten a storm.

Tell me Sir, if you can, what Church in Europe has declared more fully, or
more favorably for Monarchy than the poor Church of England, L. Cant. 1643. C.
1.
That the most high and Sacred Order of Kings, is of Divine Right, being the
Ordinance of God himself, founded in the prime Laws of Nature, and clearly
established by express Texts, both of the old, and new Testament. Moreover,
that this power is extended over all their Subjects, Ecclesiastical and
Civil; That to set up any Independent coactive power above them, either
Papal, or popular, either directly, or indirectly, is to undermine their great
royal Office, and cunningly to overthrow that most Sacred Ordinance, which God
himself has established. That for their subjects to bear Arms against them,
Offensive, or defensive upon any pretense whatsoever, is to resist the powers
which are ordained of God.

The English Reformation not Calvinist. call.
And why do you call our Reformation Calvinisticall, contrary to your own
Conscience, contrary to your own confession, That in our Reformation we
retained the ancient Order of Episcopacy, P. 9.
as Instituted by divine authority, and a Liturgy, and Ceremonies, whereby we
preserved the face, or Image of the Catholic Church. P. 10.
And that for this very cause the disciplinarians of Geneva, and the
Presbyterians did conceive an implacable hatred against the King for the
Churches sake, and out of their aversion to it. Did they hate their own
Reformation so implacably? If these things be to be reconciled, reddat mihi
minam Diogenes. He that looks more in disputation to the Advantage of his
party, than to the truth of his grounds, had need of a strong memory; We
retained not only Episcopacy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies, but all things else
that were conformable to the discipline, and public service of the primitive
Church rightly understood.

No, Sir, we cannot pin our faith upon the sleeve of any particular man, as one
used to say We love no nismes; M. Tho. Sq.
neither Calvinism, nor Lutheranisme, nor Jonsenianism, but only one, that we
derive from Antioch, that is Christianism, We honor Learning, and Piety in our
fellow servants, but we desire to wear no other badge or Cognizance, than that
we received from our own Master at our Baptism. Bucer was as fit to be Calvin's
Master, as his Scholar. So long as Calvin continued with him in Germany, he was
for Episcopacy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies, (and for assurance thereof subscribed
the Augustane Confession) and his late learned Successor, and assertor in
Geneva, Monsieur Deodate, with sundry others of that Communion were not averse
from them. Or why do you call our Reformation blind? It was not blindness, but
too much affectation of knowledge, and too much peeping into controverted, and
new fangled Questions that has endamaged our Religion. It is you that teach
the Colliers Creed, not we.

Howsoever you pretend to prove that our Reformation was the ruin of the
Church, and Commonwealth: we expect you should endeavor to prove it. You
cannot so far mistake your self as to conceive your authority to be the same
with us, that Pythagoras had among his Scholars, to have his Dictates received
for Oracles without proof; what did I say, that you pretend to prove it? That Is
too low an expression, you promise us a demonstration of it, P. 19.
so lively and evident that no reason shall be able to contradict it. Are you
not afraid that too much expectation should prejudice your discourse by
diminishing our applause?

Quid tanto dignum feret hic promissor hiatu? Do you think of nothing now but
Triumphs? Lively and evident demonstration, not to be contradicted by reason,
is like the Phoenix much talked of, but seldom seen. Most men, when they see a
man strip up his sleeves, and make too large promises of fair dealing, do
suspect juggling. No man proclameth in the Market that he has rotten wares to
sell; And therefore we must be careful, notwithstanding your great promises,
to keep well Epicharmus his Jewel, Remember to distrust. By your permission,
your glistering demonstration is a very counterfeit, not so valuable as a
Bristol Diamant, when it comes to be examined by the wheel.

Sometimes nothing is more necessary than Reformation. Reformation is sometimes
necessary.
Never was house so well builded, that now and then needed not reparation. Never
Garden so well planted, but must sometimes be weeded. Never any order so well
instituted, but in long tract of time there will be a bending and declining
from its Primitive perfection, and a necessity of reducing it to its first
principles. Are your Houses of Religion which are Reformed, therefore the less
Religious? Why then did all the Princes and Commonwealths in Europe, Yea the
Fathers themselves in the Council of Trent, cry out so often, so earnestly,
for a Reformation? yet were forced to content themselves with a vain shadow for
the substance, as Ixion embraced a Cloud for Juno, or Children are often
stilled with an empty bottle.

Reformation not agreeable to all person, especially the Court of Rome.
But Reformation is not agreeable to all persons. Judas loved not an Audit,
because he kept the Bag. Dull Lethargick people had rather sleep to death than
be awaked; to and mad phrenetick Bigots are apt to beat the Surgeon that
would bind up their wounds; but none are so averse from Reformation as the
Court of Rome, where the very name is more formidable than Hannibal at the
Gates, yea than all the five terrible things. No mervail they are afraid to
have their Oranges squeesed to their hands; if they were infallible as they
pretend there was no need of a Reformation, we wish they were, but we see they
are not.

On the other side, There is danger in Reformation.
it cannot be denied that Reformation, when it is unseasonable, or inordinate,
or excessive, may do more hurt than good; when Reformers want just Authority,
or due information, or have sinister ends, or where the remedy may be of worse
consequence than the abuse, or where men run out of one extreme into another;
therefore it is a rule in prudence, Not to remove an ill custom, when it is
well settled; Unless it bring great prejudices, and then it is better to give
one account, why we have taken it away, than to be always making excuses why
we do it not. Needless alteration does diminish the venerable esteem of
Religion, and lessen the credit of ancient truths. Break Ice in one place, and
it will crack in more. Crooked sticks by bending straight are sometimes broken
into two.

There is a right mean between these extremes, The right rule of Reformation.
if men could light on it, that is neither to destroy the body out of hatred to
the sores and Ulcers, nor yet to cherish the sores and Ulcers, out of a doting
affection to the body, that is, neither to destroy ancient Institutions, out of
a zealous hatred to some new abusers, nor yet to do at so upon ancient
Institutions, as for their sakes to cherish new abuses.

Our Reformation is just Our Reformation not the ruin of Faith Church or
Commonwealth.
as much the cause of the ruin of our Church and Commonwealth, as the building
of Tenderden Steeple was the cause of Goodwins Sands, or the ruin of the
Country thereabouts, because they happened both much about the same time.

-- Careat successibus opto, May he ever want success who judges of Actions by
the Event. Our Reformation has ruined the Faith, just as the plucking up of
weeds in a Garden, ruins the good Herbs. It has ruined the Church, just as a
body full of superfluous and vicious humors is ruined by an healthful
purgation. It has ruined the Commonwealth, just as the pruning of the Vine
ruins the Elm. No, no Sir, Our sufferings, for the Faith, for the Church, for
the Monarchy, do proclaim us Innocent to all the world, of the ruin either of
Faith, or Church, or Monarchy. And in this capacity we choose rather to sterve
Innocents, than to swim in plenty as Nocents.

But this is but one of your doubles to keep us from the right form. It is
your new Roman Creed that has ruined the Faith. It is your Papal Court that
has ruined the Church. It is your new Doctrines of the Popes Omnipotence over
temporal persons in order unto spiritual ends, of absolving subjects from
their Oaths of Allegiance, of exempting the Clergy from secular jurisdiction,
of the lawfulness of murdering Tyrants and excommunicated Princes, of
aequivocation and the like, that first infected the world to the danger of
Civil Government. Yet far be it from me to make these the Universal Tenets of
your Church, at any time, much less at this time, when they are much fallen from
their former credit; neither can I deny that sundry dangerous positions,
destructive to all civil societies, have been transplanted by our Sectaries,
and taken too deep root in our quarters, but never by our fault. If God should
grant us the benefit of an Oecumenicall or Occidentall Council, it would
become both you and us in the first place to pluck up such seditious opinions
root and branch.

You say our Calvinistical Reformation (so you are pleased to call it as you
would have it, for the moderate and orderly Reformation of England, was the
terror, and eyesore of Rome) is founded upon two maxims, Our first supposed
Maxim.
The on^ that the Church was fallen to ruin and desolation, and become guilty of
Idolatry and Tyranny. The Catholic Church cannot come to ruin or be be guilty
of Idolatry or Tyranny.


This is neither our foundation, nor our superstruction, neither our maxim, nor
our Opinion. It is so far from it, that we hold and teach the direct contrary.
First, that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against the Universal
Church, that though the rain descend, and the floods come, and the winds blow
and beat upon it, yet it shall never fall to ruin or desolation; because it is
builded upon a Rock. Secondly, we believe that the Catholic Church is the
faithful Spouse of Christ, and cannot be guilty of Idolatry, which is
spiritual Adultery. Thirdly, we never said, we never thought, that the
Ecumenical Church of Christ was guilty of Tyranny. It is principled to suffer
wrong, to do none, and by suffering to Conquer, Chrysostom.
as a flock of unarmed Sheep, in the midst of a company of ravenous Wolves, A
new and unheard of kind of warfare as if one should throw an handful of dry
flax, into the midst of a flaming fire to extinguish it.

But I presume this is one of the Idiotisms of your language, Catholic and
Roman not Convertibles.
in which by the Church you always understand the Roman Church, making Roman
and Catholic to be convertibles. As if Christ could not have a Church, nor
that Church any privileges, unless the Court of Rome might have the Monopoly of
them. There is a vast difference, between the Catholic Church and a
Patriarchall Church. The Ca-Catholick Church can never fail; any Patriarchall
Church may Apostate and fail. We have a promise that the Candle shall not be
put out, we have no promise that the Candlesticks shall not be removed. Rev.
2.5.


The Roman Church it self not absolutely fallen to ruin.
But suppossing that (which we can never grant) the Catholic Church and Roman
Church were Convertibles, yet still you do us wrong. First we do not maintain,
that the Roman Church it self is fallen to ruin and desolation, we grant to it a
true metaphysicall being, though not a true moral being; we hope their errors
are rather in superstructures, than in fundamentals; we do not say that the
Plants of saving truth (which are common to you and us) are plucked up by the
roots in the Roman Church, but we say that they are overgrown with weeds, and
in danger to be choked.

Next for Idolatry, Whether the Roman Church be guilty of Idolatry.
whether, and why, and how far, we accuse your Church of it deserves further
Consideration. First you agree with us, That God alone is the Object of
Religion, and consequently that all Religious worship is due terminatively only
to him, that God alone is to be invocated, absolutely or ultimately, that is so
as to grant our requests and fulfill our desires by himself, and that the
Saints are not the objects of our prayers, but joint petitioners with us, and
intercessors for us to the throne of Grace.

Secondly, we profess as well as you that there is a proportionable degree of
honor, and respect, due to every creature in Heaven and Earth, according to
the dignity of it, and therefore more honor due to a glorified Spirit, than to
a mortal man: But withal we add, that this honor is not servitutis but
charitatis, not of service as to our Lords and Masters, but of love and charity
as to our friends and fellow servants, of the same kind and nature with that
Honor which we give to holy men on Earth. And herein we are confident that we
shall have your consent.

Thirdly, we agree in this also, that abundant love and duty does extend an
honorable respect from the person of a dear friend, or noble benefactor, to
his Posterity, to his memory, to his Monument, to his Image, to his Relics,
to every thing that he loved, or that pertained to him, even to the Earth which
he did tread upon, for his sake. Put a Liefhebber, or Virtueso, among a company
of rare Pictures, and he will pick out the best pieces for their proper value:
But a friend or a child will more esteem the Picture of a Benefactor, or
Ancestor, for its relation. The respect of the one is terminated in the
Picture, that of the other is radicated in the exemplar. Yet still an Image is
but an Image, and the kinds of respect must not be confounded. The respect
given to an Image, must be respect proper for an Image, not Courtship, not
Worship, not Adoration. More respect is due to the person of the meanest
beggar, than to all the Images of Christ and his Apostles, and a 1000.
Primitive Saints or Progenitors. Hitherto there is neither difference nor
peril either of Idolatry; or superstition.

Wherein then did consist this guilt of Idolatry contracted by the Roman
Church? I am willing for the present to pass by the private abuses of
particular persons, which seem to me no otherwise chargeable upon the whole
Church than for Connivence. As the making Images to counterfeit tears, and
words, and gestures, and complements, for advantage, to induce silly people to
believe that there was something of divinity in them; and the multitude of
fictitious Relics and suppositious Saints, which credulity first introduced,
and since covetousness has nourished. I take no notice now of those remote
suspicions or suppositions of the possibility of want of intention, either in
the Priest that consecrates the Sacrament, or in him that Baptized, or in the
Bishop that ordained him; or in any one through the whole line of succession;
in all which cases (according to your own principles,) you give divine worship
to corporeal Elements, which is at least material Idolatry.

I will not stand now to examine the truth of your distinctions, of (...), and
(...), yet you know well enough, that (...) is no religious worship, and (...)
is coin lately minted, that will not pass for current in the Catholic Church.
Whilst your common people understand not these distinctions of degrees of
honor, what holds them from falling downright into Idolatry?

Neither do I urge how you have distributed the Patronage of particular
Countries, the Cure of several Diseases, the protection of all distinct
professions of men, and all kinds of creatures, among the Saints, just as the
Heathen did among their Tutelary Gods; nor how little warrant you have for this
practice from experience; nor lastly how you build more Churches, erect more
Altars, offer more presents, power out more prayers, make more vows, perform
more offices to the Mother than to the Son. Yet though we should hold our
peace, methinks you should ponder these things seriously, and either for your
own satisfaction, or ours, take away such unnecessary occasions of scandal and
disunion.

But I cannot omit, that the Council of Trent is not contented to enjoin the
Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament, (which we never deny,) but of the
Sacrament it self, (that is, according to the common current of your Schoolmen,
the Accidents or Species of Bread and Wine, because it conteins Christ.) Why do
they not add upon the same grounds, that the pix is to be adored with divine
worship, because it conteins the Sacrament? Divine honor is not due to the
very Humanity of Christ, as it is abstracted from the Deity, but to the whole
person, Deity, and Humanity, hypostatically united. Neither the Grace of Union,
nor the Grace of Unction can confer more upon the Humanity, than the Humanity
is capable of. There is no such Union between the Deity and the Sacrament,
neither immediately, nor yet mediately, mediante corpore.

Neither do you ordinarily ascribe (...) or divine worship to a Crucifix, or to
the Image of Christ, indeed not Terminatively but transeuntly, so as not to
rest in the Image or Crucifix, but to pass to the exemplar or person crucified.
But why a piece of Wood should be made partaker of divine honors even in
Transitu, or in the passage, passes my understanding. The Heathens wanted not
the same pretext for all their gross Idolatry. Let them plead for themselves
Non ego, etc. I do not worship that stone which I see, but I serve him whom I
do not see.

Lastly, whilst you are pleased to use them, I may not forget those strange
insolent forms of prayer, contained in your books, even ultimate prayers, if we
take the words as they sound, directed to the Creatures, that they would,
protect you at the hour of death, and deliver you from the devil, and confer
spiritual graces upon you, and admit you into Heaven, precibus meritisque, by
their prayers and merias. (You know what merit signifies in your language, a
Condignity or at least a Congruity of defer^.) The exposition of your Doctors
is, that they should do all this for you by their prayers, as improper a form
of speech, as if a suppliant intending only to move an ordinary Courtier to
mediate for him unto the King, should fall down upon his Knees before the
Courtier, and beseech him to make him an Earl, or a Knight, or to bestow such
an Office or such a Pardon upon him, or to do some other Grace for him,
properly belonging to the Prerogative Royal. How agrees this with the words,
Precibus meritisque? A beggar does not deserve an Alms by asking it. This is a
snare to ignorant persons, who take the words to signify as they sound. And
(it is to be feared,) do commit downright Idolatry by their Pastors faults,
who prescribe such improper forms unto them.

The Roman Court most Tyrannical.
Concerning Tyranny which makes up the arriere of the first supposed Maxim: We
do not accuse the Roman Church of Tyranny, but the Roman Court. If either the
unjust usurpation of Sovereign power, or the extending thereof to the
destruction of the Laws and Canons of the Church, yea, even to give a Non
obstante, either to the Institution of Christ, or at least to the uniform
practice of the Primitive Ages, or to them both; If the swallowing up of all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the arrogating of a supercivill power
paramont; If the causing of poor people to trot to Rome, from all the Quarters
of Europe, to wast their livelihoods there; If the trampling upon Emperors,
and the disciplining of Monarchs be Tyrannical, either the Court of Rome has
been Tyrannical, or there never was Tyranny in the world.

I doubt not but some great persons, when they have had bloody Tragedies to act
for their own particular ends, have sometimes made the Roman Church a stalking
horse, and the pretense of Catholic Religion a blind, to keep their Policies
undiscerned: But if we consider seriously, what cruelties have been really
acted throughout Europe, either by the Inquisitors General, or by persons
specially delegated for that purpose, against the Waldenses of old, and against
the Protestants of later days, against poor ignorant persons, against women
and children, against madmen, against dead carcasses, as Bucer, etc. upon
pretense of Religion, not only by Ordinary forms of punishment, and of death,
but by fire and faggots, by strange new devised tortures, we shall quickly find
that the Court of Rome has died it self red in Christian blood, and equalled
the most Tyrannical persecutions of the Heathen Emperors. Our second supposed
Maxim


The other Maxim whereupon you say that our Reformation was grounded was this;
That the only way to reform the Faith and Liturgy, P. 21.
and government of the Church, was to conform them to the dictates of holy
Scripture, of the sense whereof every private Christian ought to be the Judge,
by the light of the Spirit, excluding Tradition, and the public Judgment of
the Church. You add, P. 26.
that We cannot prove Episcopacy by Scripture without the Help of Tradition;
And if we do admit of Tradition, we must acknowledge the Papacy, for the
Government of the Catholic Church, as founded in the Primacy of St. Peter.

Your second supposed ground is no truer than the former, Much mistaken.
we are as far from Anarchy as from Tyranny; As we would not have humane
Authority, like Medusa's head, to transform reasonable men into senseless
stones; So we do not put the reigns of Government into the hands of each, or any
private person, to reform according to their fantasies; And that we may not
deal like blunderers, or deceitful persons, to wrap up on involve our selves
on purpose in confused Generalities, I will set down our sense distinctly; When
you understand it, I hope you will repent of your rash censuring of us, of whom
you had so little knowledge. The Scripture the rule of supernatural truths.


Three things offer themselves to be considered: first, concerning the Rule of
Scripture; Secondly, the proper Expounders thereof, and thirdly, the manner of
Exposition.

Concerning Scripture we believe, That it was impossible for humane reason,
without the help of divine Revevelation, to find out those supernatural truths
which are necessary to Salvation. 2. That to supply this defect of natural
reason, God out of his abundant goodness has given us the holy Scriptures,
which have not their authority from the writing which is humane, but from the
Revelation which is divine, from the holy Ghost. Thirdly, that this being the
purpose of the Holy Ghost, it is blasphemy to say he would not, or could not
attain unto it. And that therefore the holy Scriptures do comprehend all
necessary supernatural truths; So much is confessed by Bellarmine, that All
things which are necessary to be believed, L. 4. de verbo Dei, cap. 11.
and to be done by all Christians, were preached to all by the Apostles, and
were all written. 4. That the Scripture is more properly to be called a Rule of
supernatural truths than a Judge, or if it be sometimes called a Judge, it is
no otherwise than the Law is called a Judge of civil Controversies between man
and man, that is, the rule of judging what is right, and what is wrong. That
which shows what is straight, shows likewise what is crooked.

Secondly, Who are the proper expounders of Scripture, and ho^ far.
concerning the proper Expounders of Scripture, we do believe that the Gospel
does not consist in the words, but in the sense, non in superficie, sed in
medulla; And therefore that though this infallible rule be given for the common
benefit of all, yet every one is not an able or fit Artist to make application
of this Rule, in all particular cases. To preserve the common right, and yet
prevent particular abuses, we distinguish Judgment into three kinds.

Judgment of Discretion, Judgment of Direction, and Judgment of Jurisdiction.

As in the former Instance of the Law (the ignorance whereof excuses no man)
every subject has Judgment of Discretion, to apply it particularly to the
preservation of himself, his estate and interest; The Advocates and those who
are skillful in the Law, have moreover a Judgment of Direction, to advise
others of less knowledge and experience; But those who are Constituted by the
Sovereign power, to determine emergent difficulties, and differences, and to
distribute, and administer justice to the whole body of a Province or Kingdom,
have moreover a Judgment of Jurisdiction, which is not only discretionary, or
directive, but authoritative to impose an Obligation of obedience upon those
who are under their charge. If these last shall transgress the rule of the Law,
they are not accomptable to their Inferiors, but to him or them that have the
Sovereign power of Legislative Judicature; Ejus est legem interpretari, cujus
est condere.

To apply this to the case in Question concerning the exposition of the holy
Scripture. Every Christian keeping himself within the bounds of due obedience
and submission to his lawful Superiors, has a Judgment of Discretion, Prove
all things, 1 These. 5.21.
hold fast that which is good. He may apply the Rule of holy Scripture for his
own private Instruction, comfort, edification, and direction, and for the
framing of his life and belief accordingly. The Pastors of the Church, (who are
placed over Gods people as watchmen and guides,) have more than this, a
judgment of Direction, to expound and interpret the holy Scriptures to others,
and out of them to instruct the ignorant, to reduce them who wander out of the
right way, to confute errors, to foretell dangers, and to draw sinners to
repentance. The chief Pastors to whose care the Regiment of the Church is
committed in a more special manner, have yet an higher degree of judgment, a
Judgment of Jurisdiction to prescribe, to enjoin, to constitute, to reform, to
censure, to condemn, to bind, to loose, judicially, authoritatively, in their
respective charges. If their Key shall err, either their Key of Knowledge, or
their Key of Jurisdiction, they are accomptable to their respective Superiors,
and in the last place to a general Council, which under Christ upon Earth, is
the highest Judge of Controversies. Thus we have seen what is the Rule of
Faith, and by whom, and how far respectively this rule is to be applied.

Thirdly, The manner of expounding Scripture.
for the manner of expounding holy Scriptures, (for there may be a privacy in
this also, and more dangerous than the privacy of the person,) many things are
necessary to the right interpretation of the Law, to understand the reason of
it, the precedents, the terms, the forms, the Reports, and an ability to
compare Law with Law. He that wants all these Qualifications altogether, is no
interpreter of Law. He that wants but some of them, or wants the perfection of
them, by how much the greater is his defect, by so much the less valuable is
his exposition; And if he shall out of private fancy, or blind presumption,
arrogate to himself, without these requisite means, or above his capacity and
proportion of Knowledge, a power of expounding Law, he is a madman.

So many things are required to render a man capable to expound holy
Scriptures, some more necessarily, some less, some absolutely, some
respectively; As first to know the right Analogy of Faith, to which all
interpretations of Scripture must be of necessity conformed. Secondly, to know
the practice and tradition of the Church, and the received expositions of
former Interpreters in the successive ages, which gives a great light to the
finding out of the right sense. Thirdly, to be able to compare Texts with
Texts. Antecedents with Consequents, without which one can hardly attain to the
drift and scope of the holy Ghost in the obscurer passages. And lastly, it is
something to know the Idiotisms of that language wherein the Scriptures were
written. He that wants all these requisites, and yet takes upon him out of a
phanatique presumption of private illumination to interpret Scripture, is a
doting Enthusiast, fitter to be refuted with Scorn than with Arguments. He that
presumes above that degree and proportion which he has in these means, and
above the talent which God has given him, (as he that has a little Language,
yet wants Logic, or having both Language and Logic, knows not, or regards not
either the Judgment of former expositors, or the practice, and tradition of
the purest primitive ages, or the Symbolicall faith of the Catholic Church) is
not a likely workman to build a Temple to the Lord, but ruin and destruction
to himself, and his seduced followers. A new Physician (we say) requires a new
Churchyard; But such bold ignorant Empericks in Theology, are ten times more
dangerous to the Soul, than an ungrounded unexperienced Quacksalver to the body.

This has always been the doctrine, This is conformable to the doctrine and
practice of our Church.
and the practice of our English Church; First, it is so far from admitting
laymen, to be directive Interpreters of holy Scripture, that it allows not this
Liberty to Clergymen so much as to gloss upon the Text, Can. 1603. Can. 49.
until they be Licenced to become Preachers. Secondly, for Judgment of
Discretion only, it gives it not to private persons above their Talents, See
the Preface to the Bishops Bible.
or beyond their last. It disallows all fantastical, and Enthusiasticall
presumption of incompetent and unqualified expositors. It admits no man into
holy Orders, that is, to be capable of being made a Directive interpreter of
Scriptures, howsoever otherwise qualified, Cant. ^4.
unless he be able to give a good account of his faith in the Latin tongue, so
as to be able to frame all his expositions according to the Analogy thereof.
Cant. 1571. tit. Concionatores.
It forbids the Licenced Preachers to teach the people any doctrine as
necessary to be religiously held and believed, which the Catholic Fathers,
and old Bishops of the Primitive Church, have not collected out of the
Scriptures. It ascribes a Judgment, of Jurisdiction over Preachers to Bishops,
in all manner of Ecclesiastical duties, as appears by the whole body of our
Canons. And especially where any difference or public Opposition has been
between Preachers, Can. 1631. Can. 53.
about any point or doctrine deduced out of Scripture. It gives a power of
determining all emergent Controversies of faith above Bishops to the Church,
Art. 20. Can. 1603. Can. 139.
as to the witness and keeper of the Sacred Oracles. And to a lawful Synod as
the representative Church.

Now, Sir, be your own Judge how infinitely you have wronged us, and your self
more, suggesting that temerariously, and without the Sphere of your knowledge,
to his Majesty for the principal ground of our Reformation, which our souls
abhor. Is there no mean between stupidity and madness? Must either all things
be lawful for private persons, or nothing? Because we would not have them like
David's Horse and Mule, without understanding, do we therefore put both Swords
in their hands, to reform and cut off, to plant and to pluck up, to alter and
abolish at their pleasure? We allow them Christian liberty, but would not have
them Libertines. Admit some have abused this just liberty, may we therefore
take it away from others? So we shall leave neither a Sun in Heaven, nor any
excellent creature upon Earth, for all have been abused by some persons, in
some kinds, at some times.

We receive not your upstart supposititious traditions, The English Church an
enemy to upstart, not to Apostolical traditions.
nor unwritten fundamentalls: But we admit, genuine, Universal, Apostolical
traditions, As the Apostles Creed, the perpetual Virginity of the Mother of
God, the Anniversary Festivals of the Church, the Lenton fast. Yet we know that
both the duration of it, and the manner of observing it, was very different in
the Primitive times. We believe Episcopacy to an ingenuous person may be proved
out of Scripture without the help of Tradition, but to such as are froward, the
perpetual practice and tradition of the Church renders the interpretation of
the Text more authentic, and the proof more convincing. What is this to us
who admit the practice and tradition of the Church, as an excellent help of
Exposition? Use is the best interpreter of Laws, and we are so far from
believing that We cannot admit tradition without allowing the Papacy, that one
of the principal motives why we rejected the Papacy, as it is now established
with Universality of Jurisdiction, by the Institution of Christ, and
superiority above Oecumenicall Councils, and Infallibility of Judgment, was
the constant tradition a^ the Primitive Church.

So Sir, you see your demonstration shaken into pieces; You who take upon you
to remove whole Churches at your pleasure, have not so much ground left you as
to see your Instrument upon. Your two main ground-works being vanished, all
your Presbyterian and Independent superstructions; do remain like so many
Bubbles or Castles in the air. It were folly to lay closer siege to them, which
the next puff of wind will disperse, ruunt subductis tecta Columnis.

Howsoever, though you have mistaken the grounds of our Reformation, and of
your discourse, yet you charge us, that we have renounced the Sacrifice of the
Mass, Transubstantiation, the seven Sacraments, Justification by inhaerent
righteousness, merits, Invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, with
Purgatory, and the Authority of the Pope. Are these all the necessary Articles
of the new Roman Creed, that we have renounced? Surely no; you deal too
favorably with us. We have in like manner renounced your Image Worship, your
half Communion, your prayers in a tongue unknown, etc. It seems you were loath
to mention these things.

Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
First, you say we have renounced your sacrifice of the Mass. If the Sacrifice
of the Mass be the same with the Sacrifice of the Cross, we attribute more unto
it, than your selves; We place our whole hope of Salvation in it. If you
understand another propitiatory Sacrifice, distinct from that (as this of the
Mass seems to be, for confessedly the Priest is not the same, the Altar is not
the same, the Temple is not the same,) If you think of any new meritorious
satisfaction to God for the sins of the world, or of any new supplement to the
merits of Christ's Passion, You must give us leave to renounce your Sacrifice
indeed, and to adhere to the Apostle; Heb. 10.14
By one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

Surely you cannot think that Christ did actually sacrifice himself at his last
Supper, (for then he had redeemed the world at his last Supper, then his
subsequent sacrifice upon the Cross had been superfluous,) nor that the Priest
now does more than Christ did then. We do readily acknowledge an Eucharisticall
sacrifice of prayers and praises, we profess a commemoration of the sacrifice
of the Cross, And in the language of holy Church, things commemorated are
related as if they were then acted, As Almighty God who have given us thy Son
[as this day] to be born of a pure Virgin. In the Collects for these ^easts.
And whose praise the younger, Innocents have [this day] set forth. And between
the Ascension and Pentecost, which have exalted thy Son Jesus Christ with great
Triumph into Heaven, we beseech thee leave us not comfortless, but send unto us
thy holy Spirit. We acknowledge a Representation of that sacrifice to God the
Father, we acknowledge an Impetration of the benefit of it, we maintain an
Application of its virtue: So here is a commemorative, impetrative, applicative
sacrifice. Speak distinctly, and I cannot understand what you can desire more.
To make it a suppletory sacrifice, to supply the defects of the only true
sacrifice of the Cross, I hope both you and I abhor.

The next crime objected by you to us is, Of Transubstantiation.
that we have renounced Transubstantiation. It is true we have rejected it
deservedly from being an Article of our Creed; you need not wonder at that. But
if we had rejected it 400. years sooner, that had been a Miracle. It was not so
soon hatched. To find but the word Transubstantiation in any old Author, were
sufficient to prove him a counterfeit.

Of 7. Sacraments.
Your next Article of the septenary number of the Sacraments is not much older.
Never so much as mentioned in any Scripture, or Council, or Creed, or Father,
or ancient Author; Anno 1439 1528. 1547.
first devised by Peter Lombard; first decreed by Eugenius the fourth; first
confirmed in the Provincial Council of Senes, and after in the Council of
Trent. Either the word Sacrament is taken largely; and then the washing of the
Disciples feet is called a Sacrament, then the only sprink^ing of Ashes on a
Christians head is called a Sacrament, then there are God knows how many
Sacraments more than seven; Or else it is taken strictly for a visible sign,
instituted by Christ, to convey or confirm invisible Grace, to all such
partakers thereof, as do not set a bar against themselves, according to the
Analogy between the Sign and the thing signified. And in this sense the proper
and certain Sacraments of the Christian Church, common to all, or (in the words
of our Church,) generally necessary to Salvation, are but two, Baptism and the
Supper of our Lord. More than these St. Ambrose writes not of in his Book de
Sacramentis, because he did not know them. These we admit for genuine, and
general Sacraments. Their Sacramental virtue we acknowledge.

The rest we retein more purely than your selves, though not under the Notion
of such, proper and general Sacraments. As Confirmation, Ordination,
Matrimony, Penitence (though we neither approve of your preposterous manner of
Absolution before satisfaction, nor of your Ordinary penitentiary tax,) and
lastly, the Visitation of, and Prayer for the sick, which only is of perpetual
necessity. The Unction prescribed by St. James, Jam. 5.14.
being appropriable to the miraculous gift of healing, or recovering men out of
sicknesses, then in use; Whereas your custom is clean contrary, never, or
rarely to enoyl any man, until he be past all hope of Recovery. The Ordinary
and most received custom of preparing sick persons for another world in the
primitive Church, was Prayer and Absolution, or the benefit of the Keys, and
the Viaticum of the body and blood of Christ, which we retein.

Concerning Justification, Of Justification.
we believe that all good Christians have true inherent Justice, though not
perfect according to a perfection of degrees, as gold is true Gold, though it
be mixed with some dross. We believe that this inherent Justice and sanctity,
does make them truly just and holy. But if the word Justification be taken in
sensu forensi, for the acquittall of a man from former guilt, to make an
offender just in the eye of the Law, as it is opposed to Condemnation, Romans 8.33
It is God that justifies, who is ^e that condemns; Then it is not our
inherent righteousness that justifies us in this sense, but the free Grace of
God for the merits of Jesus Christ.

Of Merits.
Next for merits, we never doubted of the necessity of good Works, without which
Faith is but a fiction. We are not so stupid to imagine that Christ did wash us
from our sins, that we might wallow more securely in sin, but that we might
serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. We never
doubted of the reward of good Works; Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. for I
was hungry, and ye fed me. Nor whether this reward be due to them in Justice;
Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.^
which the Lord the just Judge shall give me in that day. Faithful promise
makes due debt. This was all that the ancient Church did ever understand by the
name of Merits. Let Petavius bear witness; Discrt. Eccles. li. 2. c. 4.
Antiqui patres omnes and prae caeteris Augustinus, cumque iis consentiens
Romana and Catholica pietas agnoscit merita eo sensu, nimirum ut neque Dei
gratiam ulla antecedant merita, and haec ipsa tum ex gratia, tum ex gratuita
Dei pollicitatione tota pendeant. All the Ancient Fathers, especially St.
Austin, and the Roman and Catholic faith consenting with them, do acknowledge
Merits in this sense, that no Merits go before the grace of God, and that these
very Merits do Depend wholly on grace, and on the free promise of God. Hold you
to this, and we shall have no more difference about Merits; Do you exact more
of us, than all the Fathers, or the Roman and Catholic piety does acknowledge?

It is an easy thing for a wrangling Sophister to dispute of Merits, in the
Schools, or for a vain Orator to declame of Merits out of the Pulpit, but when
we come to ly upon our deathbeds, and present our selves at the last hour
before the Tribunal of Christ, it is high time both for you and us to renounce
our own merits, and to cast our selves naked into the Arms of our Savior. That
any works of ours, who are the best of us but unprofitable servants, which
properly are not ours but Gods own gifts, and if they were ours are a just debt
due unto him, setting aside Gods free promise, and gracious acceptance, should
condignly by their own intrinsecall value deserve the joys of Heaven, to which
they have no more proportion than they have to satisfy for the eternal
torments of Hell: This is that which we have renounced, and which we never
ought to admit.

Of Invocation of Saints.
If your Invocation of Saints were not such as it is, to request of them*
Patronage and Protection, spiritual graces, and Celestial joys, by their
prayers, and by their merits, (alas the nisest Virgins have oil in their Lamps
little enough for themselves;) Yet it is not necessary for two Reasons; First,
no Saint does love us so well as Christ. No Saint has given us such assurance
of his love, or done so much for us as Christ. No Saint is so willing, or able
to help us as Christ. And secondly, we have no command from God to invocate
them.

So much your own Authors do confess, and give this reason for it, S. Clara
Probl. 37. ex Horantio.
Lest the Gentiles being converted, should believe that they vere drawn back
again to the worship of the creature. But we have another command, Call upon me
in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee. We have no promise to be heard,
when we do invocate them; But we have another promise, Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my Name, ye shall receive it. We have no example in holy
Scripture of any that did invocate them, but rather the contrary; See thou do
it not; Rev. 22.9.
I am thy fellow servant, worship God. We have no certainty that they do hear
our particular prayers, especially mental prayers, yea a thousand prayers
poured out at one Instant in several parts of the world; We know what your men
say of the glass of the Trinity, and of extraordinary Revelations: But these
are bold conjectures without any certainty, and inconsistent the one with the
other.

We do sometimes meet in ancient Authors, with the Intercession of the Saints
in General, which we also acknowledge; or an oblique invocation of them (as
you term it,) that is a prayer directed to God, that he will hear the
intercession of the Saints for us, which we do not condemn; Or a wish, or a
Rhetorical Apostrophe, or perhaps something more in some single ancient
Author: But for an Ordinary Invocation in particular necessities, and much more
for public Invocation in the Liturgies of the Church, we meet not with it for
the first six hundred years, or thereabouts; All which time and afterward
also, the common principles and tradition of the Church were against it. So far
were they from obtruding it as a necessary fundamental Article of Christian
Religion. Of prayer for the dead with Purgatory.


It is a common fault of your writers always to couple Prayer for the dead and
Purgatory together, as if the one did necessarily suppose, or imply the other;
In whose steps you tread. Prayer for the dead has often proceeded upon
mistaken grounds, often from true grounds, both inconsistent with your
Purgatory. Many have held an Opinion, that though the souls were not
extinguished at the time of their separation from the body, yet they did lie in
secret receptacles, in a profound or dead sleep, until the resurrection, doing
nothing, suffering nothing in the mean time, but only the delay of their glory.
Others held that all must pass through the fire of Conflagration at the day of
judgment. These opinions were inconsistent with your Purgatory, yet all these,
upon these very grounds used prayer for the dead. Others called the merciful
Doctors, held, that the very pains of Hell might be lessened by the prayer of
the living: Such a prayer is that which we meet with in your own Missall, O
King of Glory, deliver the souls of all the faithful deceased, from the pains
of Hell, from the deep lake, Tartarus.
from the mouth of the Lion (that is the Devil,) that the bottomless pit of
Hell do not swallow them up. A man may lawfully pray for that which is certain,
if it be to come, but one cannot lawfully pray for that which is past. The
souls which are in Purgatory (by your learning,) are past the fear of Hell. Nor
can this petition be any ways so wrested, as to become appliable to the hour of
death. This prayer is not for the man, but for the soul separated; nor for the
soul of a sick man, or a dying man, but for the souls of men actually deceased.
Certainly this prayer must have reference, either to the sleeping of the souls,
or to the pains of Hell; To deliverance out of Purgatory it can have no
relation. Neither are you able to produce any one prayer public or private,
Neither any one indulgence to that purpose, for the delivery of any one soul
out of Purgatory, in all the Primitive times, or out of your own ancient
Missals or records. Such are the Innovations which you would impose upon us, as
Articles of Faith, which the greatest part of the Catholic Church never
received until this day. Moreover though the sins of the faithful be
privately and particularly remitted at the day of death, yet the public
promulgation of their pardon at the day of judgment is to come. Though their
souls be always in an estate of blessedness, yet they want the consummation of
this blessedness, extensively at least, until the body be reunited unto the
soul, (and as it is piously and probably believed) intensively also, that the
soul has not yet so full and clear a vision of God, as it shall have
hereafter. Then what forbids Christians to pray for this public acquittall,
for this Consummation of blessedness? So we do pray, as often as we say, thy
kingdom come, or come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Our Church is yet plainer, that
we with this our Brother, and all other departed in the faith of thy holy name,
may have our perfect Consummation of blessedness in thy eternal kingdom. This
is far enough from your more gainful prayers for the dead, to deliver them out
of Purgatory.

The Authority of the Pope.
Lastly, concerning the Authority of the Pope, It is he himself that has
renounced his lawful Patriarchall Authority. And if we should offer it him at
this day, he would disdain it. We have only freed our selves from his
tyrannical usurped Authority. But upon what terms, upon what grounds, how
far, and with what intention, we have separated our selves, or rather have
suffered our selves to be separated from the Church of Rome, you may find if
you please in the Treatise of Schism.

I cannot choose but wonder to see you cite St. Cyprian against us in this
case, P 27.
who separated himself from you, as well as we, in the days of a much better
Bishop than we, and upon much weaker grounds than we, and published his dissent
to the world in two African Councils; He liked not the swelling title of Bishop
of Bishops, nor that one Bishop should tyrannically terrify an other into
obedience; No more do we. He gave a primacy, or principality of order to the
Chair of St. Peter as principi^m unitatis; so do we: But he believed that every
Bishop, had an equal share of Episcopal power; so do we. He provided a part,
as he thought fit in a Provincial Council for his own safety, and the safety
of his flock; so did we. He writ to your great Bishop as to his Brother and
Colleague, and dared to reprehend him for receiving but a letter from such as
had been censured by the African Bishops. In St. Cyprians sense, you are the
beam that have separated your selves from the body of the Sun; you are the
Bough that is lopped from the Tree; you are the stream which is divided from
the Fountain. It is you, principally you, that have divided the unity of the
Church.

You collect as a Corollary from our supposed principal of the right and
sufficiency of private judgment, Whether humane Laws bynd the Conscience.
enlightened by the Spirit, that no humane Authority can bind the conscience of
an other, or prescribe any thing unto it. I have formerly showed you your gross
mistake in the premises, Now if you please hear our sense of the Conclusion.
Humane Laws cannot be properly said to bind the Conscience, by the sole
authority of the Lawgiver, But partly by the equity of the Law, every one
being obliged to advance that which conduces to a public good, thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self; And especially by divine Authority, which
commands every soul to be subject to the higher powers; for conscience sake;
not prudentially only. The question is soon decided, just Laws of lawful
Superiors, either Civil; or Ecclesiastical, have authority to bind the
conscience in themselves, but not from themselves.

How shall we believe that it is not you but God that represents these things
to his Majesty, P. 34. 69. The Author a little Enthusiasticall.
that addresseth them to him by your mouth, that calls him, that stretches
out his hand to him, that has set these things before his eyes, in Characters
not to be defaced. What? That his Majesty should turn Roman Catholic? Are they
like Belshazars Characters; and are you the only Daniel that can read them? we
do not see a Cloven tongue upon your head, nor a Dove seeming to whisper in
your ear. Be not too confident left some take it to be a little taint of
Anabaptism, perhaps you have had as strange fantasies as this heretofore,
whilst you were of a contrary party.

Be it what it will be, you cannot offer it to his Majesty with more
confidence, or pretend more intimacy with God, or to be more familiarly
acquainted with his Cabinet Counsel, than a Scotch Presbyter; And yet your
self would not value all his confidence at a Button. Wise men are not easily
gained by empty shows or pretenses, that signify nothing but the pretenders
vanity, nor by enthusiasticall interpretation of occurrences. It is only the
weight of reason that depresseth the scale of their judgment, and makes them
to yield and submit unto it.

Howsoever it be God or you that represent these things to his Majesty, you
tell us that the end is to reduce him from those errors which he sucked in with
his milk, which in the days of peace, and abundance, it had been difficult for
him to discover. But now his eyes and his ears do see and hear those truths
which make it evident to him, that God has condemned them to reduce him to the
Communion of the Church; wherein you promise him all manner of blessings. Who
told you of his Majesty's new Illumination? or what have you seen to believe
any such thing? when you dare avouch such gross untruths of himself, to
himself, how should he credit your private presumptions, which you tell him as
a new Mercury dropped down from Heaven.

The Romanists require submission to their Church as necessary to salvation,
You tell us that it is necessary for every one to adhere to the true Church,
which is the keeper of saving truth. That is true, but nothing to his Majesty,
who has more right already in the Catholic Church than your self. You tell us
moreover that this Church is the Roman Church. That is not true; but suppose it
were most true, as it is most false, what should a man be better or nearer to
the knowledge of the truth, and consequently to his salvation, for his
submission to the Roman Church; Yet cannot agree among themselves what this
Roman Church is.
As long as you cannot agree among your selves, either what this Roman Church
is, or what your infallible Judge is? One says it is the Pope alone; Another
says no, but the Pope with his Conclave of Cardinals; A third will go no less
than the Pope and a Provincial Council; A fourth will not be contented
without the Pope and a general Council; A fifth is for a General Council
alone either with, or without the Pope; A sixth party, (and they are of no
small esteem among you here at this present,) is for the essential Church,
that is the Company of all faithful people, whose reception (say they,) makes
the true ratification of the Acts of its representative body. It were as good
to have no infallible Judge, as not to know or agree who it is? Be not so
centorious in condemning others, for not submitting to your Roman Church or
infallible Judge, nor so positive to make this submission so absolutely
necessary to salvation, until you agree better what this Judge or Church is.
It is five to one against you, that you your self miss the right Judge.

The English Church not perished.
Whatsoever become of your Church, you say Ours is perished by the proper Axioms
of our own Reformation, and has no more any subsistence in the world, nor
pretense to the Privilege of a Church. This is hard. He perishes twice that
perishes by his own weapons. Even so Joseph's Brethren told Joseph himself with
Consciences guilty enough, One is not: Genesis 42.13.
This is that which the Court of Rome would be content to purchase at any rate.
This has been the end of all then secret Negotiations and Instructions, by all
means to support the Presbyterian faction in England against Episcopacy; Not
that they loved them more than us, but that they feared us more than them.

There was an Israelitish Church, when Elias did not see it; but he must be as
blind as Bartimaeus, that cannot see the English Church. Wheresoever there is a
lawful English Pastor, and an English Flock, and a subordination of this Flock
to that Pastor, there is a branch of the true English Protestant Church. Do you
make no difference between a Church persecuted, and a Church extinguished? Have
patience and expect the Catastrophe. It may be all this while the Carpenters
Son is making a Coffin for Julian. If it please God, we may yet see the Church
of England which is now frying in the fire, come out like Gold out of the
Furnace, more pure, and more full of luster. If not, his will be done. Just art
thou O Lord, and righteous are all thy judgments. The Primitive Church was as
glorious in the sight of God when they served him in Holes and Corners, in
Cryptis, Sacellis, conventiculis, ecclesiolis, as when his worship was more
splendidly performed in Basilicis, and Cyriacis, in goodly Churches, and
magnificent Cathedrals.

Your design stops not at the King of great Britain, P. 42.
but extends it self to all his subjects, yea to all Protestants whatsoever. I
wonder why you stay there, The Authors vain dreams.
and would not add all the Eastern Churches, and the great Turk himself, since
you might have done it with one other penfull of Ink? and with as much pretense
of reason, to secure himself from the joint forces of Christendom thus united
by your means. A strong fantasy will discover Armies, and Navies in the
Clouds, men and horses, and chariots in the fire, and hear articulate dictates
from the Bells. This is not to write waking, but dreaming.

Yet you make it an easy work, to effect which there needs no disputation, but
only to behold the Heretical Genius of our Reformation, P. 43. 44.
which is sufficiently condemned by it self, if men will only take the pains
to compare the fundamental principles thereof with the Consequences. Great
Houses and Forts are builded at an easy charge in Paper. When you have
consulted with your Architects and Engeniers, you will find it to be a work of
more difficulty. And your adversaries resolution may teach you to your cost,
what it is to promise your self such an easy conquest before the fight, and
let you see that those golden mountains which you phantasied have no
subsistence but in your own brain, and send you home to seek out that
self-conviction there, which you sought to fasten upon others. When you are
able to prove your Universal Monarchy, your new Canon of Faith, your new
Treasury of the Church, your new Roman Purgatory whereof the Pope keeps the
Keys, your Image worship, your common prayers in a tongue unknown, your
deteining of the Cup from the Laity in the public administration of the
Sacrament, and the rest of your new Creed, out of the four first General
Councils, or the Universal Tradition of the Church in those days, either as
principles or fundamental truths, (which you affirm,) or so much as ordinary
points of faith, (which we deny,) we will yield our selves to be guilty both of
Contradiction and Schism. Until you are able to make these innovations good,
it were best for you to be silent, and leave your vapouring. Desperate
undertakings do easily forfeit a man's reputation. P. 47. etc. His vainer
proposition of a conference.


Now are we come to the most specious piece of your whole Epistle, that is the
motion or proposition of a Conference, by Authority of the King of France, at
the instance of the King of great Britain, before the Archbishop of Paris, and
his Coadjutor, between some of your Roman Catholic Doctors, and the Ministers
of the reformed Church at Paris, whom you do deservedly commend for their
sufficiency and zeal. You further suppose that the Ministers of the reformed
Church will accept of such a disputation, or by their Tergiversation betray the
weakness of their cause; And you conclude confidently beyond supposition, that
they will be confuted and convicted, and that their conversion or conviction
will afford sufficient ground to the King of great Britain, to embrace the
Communion of the Roman Catholic Church; And that his conversion will reduce
all conscientious Protestants to unity and due obedience.

I will contract your larger Palm to a Fist. If the King of great Britain
desire a solemn conference, the King of France will enjoin it; If he enjoin it,
the Ministers will accept; if they do accept it, they are sure to be convicted;
if they be convicted, the King of great Britain will change his Religion; if
he change his Religion, all conscientious Protestants will be reduced: And all
this to be done, not by the old way of disputing, No, take heed of that, the
burned child dreads the fire; But by a proper new way of refuting old
Protestant principles, by new Independent practices. Why was this Remedy found
out no sooner? This might have eased the Cardinals in their Consultations about
propagating the Faith; This might have saved Cardinal Allen all his
Machiavillian Instructions to his English Emissaries; This may in a short time
turn the Inquisitors out of their employment, for want of an Object, and not
leave such a thing as heretical pravity in the world. How must men praise your
fortune, and applaud your Invention? But stay, the second thoughts are wiser;
What if this Chain supposed to be of Adamant, should prove a rope of sand? And
so it is; I have seen a Sorites disgraced, and hissed out of the Schools, for
drawing but one lame leg after it. This is foundred of all four, from the
beginning to the end there is nothing in it but future Contingents, which are
known only to God, not one grain of necessary truth.

The King of England desires no such Conference.
First Sir, be not angry if a man take away the subject of your whole discourse;
It is but your officiousness, the King desires no such Conference. Let them
desire Conferences who waver in their faith. All these blustering storms have
radicated him deeper in his Religion. And chiefly that which you make the
chiefest motive to his Apostating, the Martyrdom of his royal Father, and an
hereditary love to that Church which he has justified with his blood.

Secondly, If he should, he had neither reason nor need to desert his English
Clergy.
if his Majesty should incline to such a Conference, do you think he would
desert the English Clergy, who have forsaken their Country, their Friends,
their Estates, out of their Conscience, out of their duty to God, and their
Sovereign, who understand the Constitution of the English Church much better
than your self, or any Foreiners how sufficient soever, and cast himself wholly
upon strangers, whose Reformation (you say) is different from that of England,
in the points of Episcopacy, Liturgy, and the Ceremonies of the Church? Say,
what was the Reason of this gross Omission? were you afraid of that Image of
the Church (as you call it in a sleighting manner) which they retained? Or did
you not think any of the English Nation worthy to bear your books at a
Conference? It has been otherwise heretofore, and you will find it otherwise
now, when you come to prove it. I know not whether England has been more
fortunate or unfortunate since the Reformation, in breeding as many able
Polemique writers on both sides, as any Nation in Europe; Stapleton, Harding,
Parsons, Sanders, Reynolds, Bishop. etc. for the Roman Church. Jewel, Andrews,
Abbot, Laewd, White, Field, Montague, Reynolds, Whitaker, etc. for the English
Church (I forbear to name those that are living) And many more who come not
short of these, if they had pleased to communicate their Talents to the world.
This is such a Contumely as reflects upon the Nation, and you must be content
to be told of it.

Thirdly, Such a Conference not fit to be granted by the King of France.
how are you sure that the King of France and his Counsel would give way to
such a solemn and public Conference? private Insinuations use to prevail much
when a man may Laevere and tack to and again to compass his ends. Authority or
the Sword may put an end to Controversies: But public Conferences for the most
part do but start new Questions, and revive old forgotten animosities. What
were the Donatists the better for the Collation at Carthage? The mind of a man
is generous, and where it looks for opposition, fortifies it self against it.
Urban the Eighth was the wisest Pope you have had of late, who by his
moderation and courtesy cooled much of that heat, which the violence of his
Predecessors had raised against the Court of Rome. The mild beams of the Sun
were more prevalent, than the blustering blasts of the North wind. Multiplying
of words more commonly engenders strife, than peace.

Fourthly, Nor to be accepted by the Ministers of the reformed Church.
upon what grounds are you so confident, that the Ministers of the Reformed
Church would admit of such a public Disputation upon those terms which you
propose? That, is to accept of the Archbishop of Paris and his Coadjutor, two
persons interessed, for competent Judges. I am as confident of the contrary,
that they would rather choose to suffer, than wrong their cause so much; Frustra
fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. It were a readier way for them,
and but the same in effect, to subscribe to a blank paper, and to submit
without disputation. Nor could any such Success be expected from it.


Fifthly, suppose (all this notwithstanding) such a Conference should hold,
what reason have you to promise to your self such success, as to obtain so
easy a Victory? You have had Conferences and Conferences again at Poissye, and
other places, and gained by them, just as much as you might put in your eye,
and see never the worse. When Conferences are only made use of as Pageants, to
grace the Introduction of some new Proselyte, and to preserve his Reputation
from the aspersion of desultorious Levity, they seem much more efficatious than
they are. As they know well enough who are privy to what is acted in the
withdrawing room. The time was when you have been as confident in a contrary
Opinion, that such a free Conference would have sealed the Walls of Rome, and
levelled the Popes Triple Crown.

Sixthly, The Authors impertinence and sauciness with the King.
whether the Ministers should accept of such a partial unequal Conference or
not, or whatsoever should be the success thereof, you trespass too boldly upon
his Majesty's patience, to dictate to him so pragmatically, so magisterially,
what he should do, or would do, in such a case, which is never like to be. Does
his Fathers constancy encourage you to believe, that He is a Reed shaken with
the wind; Qui pauca considerat, facile pronunciat, He that weighs no more
circumstances or occurrences than serve for the Advancement of his design,
pronounces sentence easily, but temerariously, and for the most part
unsoundly. When such a thing as you dream of should happen, it were good
manners in you to leave his Majesty to his Christian Liberty. But to trouble
your self and others about the Moons shining in the water, so unseasonably, so
impertinently, or with what will come to pass when the sky falls, is
unbeseeming the Counselor of a King.

His Pen over ^uns his wit.
Lastly, consider how your pen does overrun your reason, and overreach all
grounds of probability, to ascribe unto his Majesty's change such an infallible
Influence upon all Protestants, as to reduce them to the Roman Communion, not
only his own subjects, but foreiners. His blessed Fathers example had not so
much influence upon the Scots his native Subjects. He was no Changeling indeed,
neither to the right hand, nor to the left. Henry the Fourth his Grandfather,
did turn indeed to the Roman Church. Had his change any such Influence upon the
Protestant party in France? I know no followers such a change would gain him,
but I foresee clearly how many hearts it would lose him. Certainly Sir, if you
would do a meritorious piece of ^^ice to his greatest Adversaries, you could
not fix upon any thing that would content them more highly, than to see you
successful in this undertaking. I have done with your Proposition. He than
compares it and your demonstration together, will easily judge them to be twins
at the first sight.

As a motive to his Majesty's conversion, you present him with a Treatise of
Transubstantiation, and desire that it may appear unto the world under his
royal name. P. 58.


His improper choice of a Patron for his Treatise.
I meddle not with your Treatise, some of your learned Adversaries friends will
give you your hands full enough. But how can his Majesty protect or patronise a
Treatise against his Judgment, against his Conscience, so contrary to the
doctrine of the Church of England, not only since the Reformation, but before?
About the year seven hundred, Sermon. Saxon. in fest^ Paschat.
The body of Christ wherein he suffered, and his Body Consecrated in the Host,
differ much. The body wherein he suffered was born of the Virgin, consisting of
flesh and bones, and humane members; his Spiritual body, which we call the
Host, consists of many grains, without blood, bones, or human members,
wherefore nothing is to be understood there corporally, but all spiritually.
Transubstantiation was neither held for an Article of Faith, nor a point of
Faith in those days.

You charge the Protestants in diverse places, P. 62.
That they have neither Church nor Faith, but have lost both. And at the later
end of your Treatise you undertake to demonstrate it: P. 222.
His unskilfulnes, or his unfortunateness in his Demonstrations.
But your demonstration is a mere Paralogism. You multiply your terms, you
confound your terms, you change and alter your terms, contrary to the rules of
right arguing, and vainly beat the air, concluding nothing which you ought to
prove, nothing which your Adversary will deny. You would prove that
Protestants have no Church. That you never attempt; But you do attempt to prove
(how pitifully God knows,) that they are not the only Church, that is, the
one, Holy Catholic Church. This they did never affirm, they did never think.
It suffices them to be a part of that Universal Church, more pure, more
Orthodox, more Catholic than the Roman, always professing Christ visibly,
never lurking invisibly in an other Communion, which is another of your
mistakes. I should advise you to promise us no more evident demonstrations;
Either your skill, or your luck is so extremely bad.

In the second place you affirm that Faith is founded upon divine Authority,
and Revelation, and deposited with the Church. All that is true; But that which
you add, that it is founded in the Authority of Christ speaking by the mouth of
his Church; By this Church, understanding the Church of this Age, and (which is
yet worse) the Church of one place, and (which is worst of all) the Bishop of
that one Church, is most false.

The great advantage of the Prostant above the Roman Catholic in the choice
of his foundation.
And so is that which you add, that the faith of Protestants is founded upon
their own reasonings, which makes so many differences among them. Reason must
be subservient in the application of the Rule of Faith. It cannot be the
foundation of Faith. Bad reasoning may bring forth differences and errors about
Faith, both with you and us, but the abuse of Reason does not take away the use
of Reason. We have this Advantage of you, that if any one of us do build an
erroneous Opinion upon the holy Scripture, yet because our adherence to the
Scripture is firmer and nearer than our adherence to our particular error, that
full, and free, and universal assent which we give to holy Scripture, and to
all things therein contained, is an implicit Condemnation and retractation of
our particular error, which we hold unwittingly, and unwillingly against
Scripture. But your foundation of Faith being composed of uncertainties,
whether this man be Pope or not, whether this Pope be Judge or not, whether
this Judge be infallible or not, and if infallible, wherein, and how far; the
faith which is builded thereupon cannot but be fallible and uncertain. The
stricter the adherence is to a false, uncertain, or fallible rule, the more
dangerous is the error. So our right foundation purgeeth away our error in
superstruction; And your wrong foundation lessens the value of your truths, and
doubles the guilt of your errors.

I will (by your leave) requite your demonstration, and turn the mouths of
your own Canons against your self.

That Church which has changed the Apostolical Creed, the Apostolical
Succession, the Apostolical Regiment, and the Apostolical Communion, is no
Apostolical, Orthodox, or Catholic Church.

But the Church of Rome has changed the Apostolical Creed, the Apostolical
Succession, the Apostolical Regiment, and the Apostolical Communion.

Therefore the Church of Rome is no Apostolical, Orthodox, or Catholic Church.

They have changed the Apostolical Creed, by making a new Creed, wherein are
many things inserted, that hold no Analogy with the old Apostles Creed; The
Apostolical Succession, by engrossing the whole succession to Rome, and making
all other Bishops to be but the Popes Vicars, and Substitutes, as to their
Jurisdiction; The Apostolical Regiment by erecting a visible and Universal
Monarchy in the Church; And lastly the Apostolical Communion, by
excommunicating three parts of the holy Catholic Apostolic Church.

Again, That Church which resolves its Faith not into divine Revelation and
Authority, but into Humane infallibility, or the Infallibility of the present
Church, without knowing, or according, what that present Church is, whether the
Virtuall, or the representative, or the essential Church, or a body compounded
of some of these, has no true faith.

But the Church of Rome resolves it Faith, not into didine Revelation and
Authority, but into the Infallibility of the present Church, not knowing or not
according what that present Church is, whether the Virtual Church (that is the
Pope,) or the representative Church (that is a general Council) or the
Essential Church, (that is the Church of Believers diffused over the world,)
or a body compounded of some of these, (that is the Pope, and a General or
Provincial Council.)

Therefore the Church of Rome has not true faith. The greater number of your
Writers is for the Pope, that this infallibility is fixed to this Chair. But of
all other Judgments, this is most fallible and uncertain, for if Simony make a
Nullity in a Papal Election, we have great reason to doubt, that that Chair
has not been filled by a right Pope these last hundred years. These are no
other but your own Mediums; Such luck you have with your irrefragable
demonstrations.

P. 68. His Majesty's Apostasy is not the way to his restitution.
In case his Majesty will turn Roman Catholic you promise him restitution to
his Kingdoms.

Great undertakers are seldom good performers; when you are making your
Proselytes, you promise them golden Mountains, but when the work is done, you
deal with them, as he did with his Saint, who promised a Candle as big as his
Mast, and offered one no bigger than his finger. Do you however think it reason,
that any man should change his Religion for temporal respects, though it were
for a Kingdom? Jeroboam did so, you may remember what was the success of it.

You propose this as the readiest means to restore him. Others who penetrate
deeper into the true state of his affairs, look upon it as the readiest way to
ruin his hopes, by the alienation of his friends, by the confirmation of his
foes, and in some sort the justification of their former feigned fears. Do you
think all Roman Catholic Princes desire this change as earnestly as your
self? Give them leave first to consult with their particular Interests. A
common Interest prevails more with Confederates than a common faith. The Sword
distinguishes not between Protestants and Papists.

But what is the ground of this your great Confidence? no less than Scripture.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness of it, and all other
things shall be added unto you. You say the word of God deceives no man. True,
but you may deceive your self out of the word of God. The Conclusion always
follows the weaker part, such as this, are commonly your mistaken grounds, when
they come to be examined. The text says, Seek the kingdom of God, You would
have his Majesty desert the kingdom of God; The promise is of all things
necessary or convenient, you will be your own Carver, and oblige God Almighty
to Kingdoms and particular conditions; The promise is made (as all temporal
promises are,) with an implicit exception of the Cross, unless God see it to
be otherwise more expedient for us; He that denies us gold, and gives us
patience and other graces more precious than Gold, 1 Pet. 1.7.
that denies a temporal Kingdom to give an eternal, does not wrong us. This
was out of your head.

That the Scots had an antienter Obligation to fidelity toward his Majesty, P.
70. The obligation of the Scots to his Majesty the greatest of any Subjects in
the known world.
and that Royal Family than the English, is a truth not to be doubted or
disputed of, I think I may safely add, than any Nation in Europe, or in the
known world to their Prince, his Majesty being the hundred and tenth Monarch of
that line, that has sweyed the Scepter of that Kingdom successively. The more
the pity that a few treacherous Shebas, and a pack of bawling seditious
Orators, under the vizard and shadow of pure Religion, to the extreme scandal
of all honest professors, should be able to overturn such an ancient fabric,
and radicated succession of Kingly Government.

Their Treachery
But take heed Sir, how you believe that any engagement of the Presbyterian
faction in Scotland, proceeded either from conscience, or gratitude, or
fidelity, or aimed at the resetling of his Majesty upon his throne. No, no,
their hearts were double, their treaties on their parts were mere treacheries
from the beginning. I mean not any of those many loyal patriots, that never
bowed their knees to Baal-berith the God of the Covenant, in that Nation: The
loyal Scots excepted.
Nor yet any of those serious converts, that no sooner discovered the legerdemain of a company of canting impostors, but they sought to stop the stream of
Schism and sedition, with the hazard of their own lives and estates. Nor even
those whose eyes were longer held with the Spirit of slumber, by some stronger
spells of disciplinarian charmers, but did yet later open their eyes, and come
in to do their duties, at the sixth or ninth hour. All these are expunged by me
out of this black Roll. Let their posterities enjoy the fruit of their
respective loyalties, And let their memories be daily more and more blessed.
But I mean the obstinate Ringleaders, The disloyal Scots deciphered.
and Standard-bearers of the Presbyterian Covenant of both robes, and the
setters up of that misshapen Idol. It is from these I say, that no help or hope
could in reason be expected. They who sold the Father, and such a Father, were
not likely to prove loyal to the Son. They who hanged up one of the most
ancient Gentlemen in Europe, the gallant Marquess of Montrose, being then their
lawful Viceroy, like a dog in such base and barbarous manner, together with
his Majesty's Commission, to the public dishonor of their King, in the chief
City of that Kingdom, in a time of Treaty; They who purged the Army, over and
over, as loath on their parts willingly to leave one dram of honesty, or loyalty
in it, who would not admit their fellow subjects of much more merit and courage
than themselves to assist them; They who would not permit his Majesty to
continue among the Soldiery, lest he should grow too popular; They who after
they had proclaimed to the world his Title and right to that Crown, yet sought
to have him excluded from the benefit of it, and from the execution of his
Kingly Office, P. 70.
until he should abjure his Religion, cast dirt upon his Parents, alienate his
loyal subjects, and ratify the asurpations of his Rebels; These, (there I
say,) were most unlikely persons to be his restorers. Was it ever heard before,
that subjects acknowledged a Sovereign, and yet endeavored to exclude him from
his rights, until he had granted whatsoever seemed good in their eyes? No hope
from that party until they repent.
Others may be more severe in their judgments, but I for my part could be well
contented, that God would give them the Honor to be the repayrers of the
breach, who have been the makers of the breach; to be the restorers of
Monarchy, who have been the ruiners of Monarchy; to be the re-establishers of
peace, who have been the chiefest Catalines and promoters of War. But that can
never be whilst they justify their former rebellious practices, and after they
have eaten and devoured, wipe their mouths, and say what have we done? until
they acknowledge their former errors; Repentance only is able to knit the
broken bone; why should they be more afraid to confess their faults, and shame
the Devil, than to commit them? P. 73. God must not be limited to time or
means of deliverance.


Yet I cannot say with you that this has robbed his Majesty of all hopes and
means of recovery. We may not limit God to any time, who commonly withholds
his help until the Bricks be doubled, until the edge of the razor does touch
the very throats of his servants, that the glory of the work may wholly redound
to himself. We may not limit God to those means which seem most probable in our
eyes. So long as Joseph trusted to his friend in Court, God did forget him;
when Pharaohs Butler had quite forgotten Joseph, then God remembered him. God
has nobler ways of restitution than by Battails, and bloodshed, that is, by
changing the hearts of his creatures at his pleasure, and turning Esau's vowed
revenge into love and kindness.

I confess, P. 74. 75. His Majesty's escape out of England almost miraculous.
his Majesty's resolution was great, so was his prudence, that neither fear
(which uses to betray the succors of the Soul,) nor any indiscreet Action, or
word, or gesture, in so long a time should either discover him, or render him
suspected. When I consider that the Heir of a Crown, in the midst of that
Kingdom where he had his breeding, whom all men's eyes had used to Court as the
rising Sun, of no common features or physiognomy, at such time when he was not
only believed, but known to be among them, when every Corner of the Kingdom
was full of Spys to search him, and every Port and Inn full of Officers to
apprehend him, I say that he should travail at such a time, so long, so far, so
freely, in the sight of the Sun, exposed to the view of all persons, without
either discovery, or suspicion, seem little less than a miracle. That God had
smitten the eyes of those who met him with blindness, as the eyes of the
Sodomites, that they could not find Lots door, or the Syrian Soldiers, that
were sent to apprehend Elisha. This strange escape, and that former out of
Scotland, where his condition was not much better, And seems to presage that
God has something to do with him.
nor his person much safer, do seem strangely to presage, that God has yet
some great work, to be done by him in his own due time.

You attribute this rare deliverance, P. 76. Prayers and tears the proper Arms
of woman,
and the hopes of his conversion, in part to the prayers and tears of his
Mother; prayers and tears were the only proper Arms of the old Primitive
Christians; more particularly they are the best and most agreeable defense of
that sex; but especially the prayers and tears of a Mother, for the Son of her
desires, are most powerful. As it was said of the prayers and tears of Monica,
Especially of Mothers;
for St. Austine her Son; fieri non potuit ut filius istarum lacrymarum
periret, It could not be that a Son should perish for whom so many tears were
shed. God sees her tears, and hears her prayers, and will grant her request, if
not according to her will and desire, (we often ask those things which being
granted would prove prejudicial to our selves and our friends) yet ad
utilitatem, to his Majesty's greater advantage, which is much better: She
wishes him a good Catholic, and God will preserve him a good Catholic as he
is. We do not doubt but the prayers of his Father (who now follows the Lamb in
his whites) for his perseverance, Yet not so powerful as his Fathers
intercession now in Heaven.
will be more effectual with God, than the prayers of his Mother for his
change. P. 77. The Authors instance of Henry the great not pertinent.


Your instance of his Majesty's Grandfather, your grand King Henry the fourth
is not so apposite, or fit for your purpose. He gained his Crown by turning
himself toward his people, you would persuade his Majesty to turn from his
people, and to cast away his possibilities of restitution, that is, Plutarch.
to cut off a natural leg, and take one of wood.

To the tears of his Mother you add the blood of his Father, P. 77. 78. The
just commendation of K. Charles.
whom you justly style happy, and say most truly of him, that he preferred the
Catholic Faith before his Crown, his liberty, his life, and whatsoever was
most dear unto him. This faith was formerly rooted in his heart by God, not
secretly and invisibly in the last moments of his life to unite him to the
Roman Catholic Church, but openly during his whole Reign, all which time he
lived in the bosom of the true Catholic Church. It is gross impudence to feign
that he dyed a Roman Catholic.
Yet you are so extremely partial to your self, that you affirm that he died
invisibly a Member of your Roman Catholic Church, as it is by you
contre-distinguished to the rest of the Christian world. An old pious fraud, or
artifice of yours, learned from Machiavell, to gain credit to your Religion by
all means, either true or false; but contrary to his own profession at his
death, contrary to the express knowledge of all that were present at his
murder. Upon a vain presumption, that Talem nisi vestra Ecclesia nulla parerit
filium. And because you are not able to produce one living witness, you cite
St. Austin to no purpose to prove that the elect before they are converted, do
belong invisibly to the Church; Yea and before they were born also. But St.
Austine neither said nor thought, that after they are converted they make no
visible profession, or profess the contrary to that which they believe. Seek
not thus to adorn your particular Church, not with barrowed but with stolen
Saints, Whom all the world know to have been none of yours. What Faith he
professed living, he confirmed dying; In the Communion of the Church of England
he lived, and in that Communion at his death he commended his soul into the
hands of God his Savior. The Authors confession confutes his demonstration,
that Prostants have no faith.
That which you have confessed here concerning King Charles, will spoil your
former demonstration, that the Protestants have neither Church nor Faith.

But you confess no more in particular here, than I have heard some of your
famous Roman Doctors in this City acknowledge to be true in general; And no
more than that which the Bishop of Chalcedon (a man that cannot be suspected of
partiality on our side,) has affirmed and published in two of his Books to the
world in Print; That Protestantibus credentes, etc. persons living in the
Communion of the Protestant Church, if they endeavor to learn the truth, and
are not able to attein unto it, but hold it implicitly in the preparation of
their minds, and are ready to receive it when God shall be pleased to reveal it
(which all good Protestants and all good Christians are) they neither want
Church, nor Faith, nor Salvation. Mark these words well. They have neither
Church nor Faith say you; If they be thus qualified (as they all are) they want
neither Church, nor Faith, nor Salvation (says he. His intelligence as good in
Heaven as upon earth.
)

Lastly Sir, to let us see, that your intelligence is as good in Heaven as it
is upon Earth, and that you know both who are there, and what they do, you tell
us that the Crown and Conquest, which his late Majesty gained by his
sufferings, was procured by the intercession of his Grandmother Queen Mary. We
should be the apter to believe this, if you were able to make it appear, that
all the Saints in Heaven do know all the particular necessities of all their
posterity upon earth. St. Austin makes the matter much more doubtful than you,
that is the least of his Assertion, Aug. de cura pro mortuus. c. 15.
or rather to be plainly false; fatendum est nescire quidem mortuos quid hic
agatur. But with presumptions you did begin your Dedication, and with
presumptions you end it. In the mean time till you can make that appear, we
observe, that neither Queen Mary's constancy in the Roman Catholic Faith, No
faith sufficient armor against bloody attempts:
nor Henry the fourths change to the Roman Catholic Faith, could save them
from a bloody end. Then by what warrant do you impute King Charles his
sufferings to his error in Religion? Be your own Judge.

Heu quanta de spe decidimus; Alas! The Author much fallen from his former
charity in seeking the ^eunion of Christendom.
from what hopes are we fallen! Pardon our error, that we have mistaken you so
long. You have heretofore pretended your self to be a moderate person, and one
that seriously endeavored the reuniting of Christendom by a fair Accommodation.
The widest wounds are closed up in time, and strange Plants by inoculation are
incorporated together, and made one; And is there no way to close up the wounds
of the Church, and to unite the disagreeing members of the same mystical body?
Why were Caleb and Joshua only admitted into the Land of promise, whilst the
carcasses of the rest perished in the Wilderness, but only because they had
been Peacemakers in a time of Schism? Well fare our learned and ingenuous
Countryman S. Clara, who is altogether as perspicacious as your self, but much
more charitable. You tell us to our grief, P. 204.
that there is no accommodation to be expected; that Cardinal Richelieu was
too good a Christian, and too good a Catholic to have any such thought; that
the one Religion is true, the other false, and that there is no society between
light and darkness. This is plain dealing, to tell us what we must trust to. No
Peace is to be expected from you, unless we will come unto you upon our knees,
with the words of the Prodigal Child in our mouths, Father forgive us. we
have sinned against Heaven, and against thee. Is not this rare Courtesy? If we
will submit to your will in all things, you will have no longer difference with
us. So we might come to shake a worse Church by the hand, than that which we
were separated from.

The way to a general Accommodation.
If you could be contented to wave your last four hundred years determinations,
or if you liked them for your selves, yet not to obtrude them upon other
Churches; If you could rest satisfied with your old Patriarchal power, and your
Principium unitatis, or Primacy of Order, much good might be expected from free
Councills, and Conferences from moderate persons; And we might yet live in Hope
to see an Union, if not in all Opinions, yet in charity, and all necessary
points of saving truth, between all Christians; to see the Eastern and Western
Churches join hand in hand, and sing, Ecce quam bonum, and quam jucundum est
habitare fratres in unum; Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for
brethren to dwell togein unity. But whilst you impose upon us daily new
Articles of faith, and urge rigidly, what you have unadvisedly determined, we
dare not Sacrifice Truth to Peace, nor be separated from the Gospel, to be
joined to the Roman Church; Yet in the point of our separation, and in all
things which concern either doctrine or discipline, we profess all due
obedience and submission to the judgment and definitions of the truly
Catholic Church; Lamenting with all our hearts the ptesent condition of
Christendom, which renders an Oecumenicall Council, if not impossible, (men's
judgments may be had, where their persons cannot,) yet very difficult, wishing
one, as general as might be, and (until God send such an Opportunity,)
endeavoring to conform our selves in all things, both in Credendis, and
Agendis, to whatsoever is uniform in the belief or practice, in the doctrine or
discipline of the Universal Church; And lastly holding an Actual Communion
with all the divided parts of the Christian world, in most things, and in voto,
according to our desires, in all things.

FINIS.

