The Camp at Gilgal. OR, A VIEW OF THE Kings Army, and spiritual provision
made for it.

And Iosuah made sharp knives and circumcised the Children of Jsrael, and they
abode in the Camp till they were whole. And the Lord said, this day have J
rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you, wherefore the place is called
Gilgal.

Ios. 5.3,8,9. The Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp, therefore
shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away
from thee.

Deuteronomy. 23.14. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University.
1643.

For the Kings Soldiers.
WHen I look upon the Jsraelites in their Camp at Gilgal, and how they were
brought thither, I cannot but think of the condition we are all in, and reflect
especially upon you that belong to the Royal Camp.

Those Jsraelites having worn out the long troubles of the Wilderness, and
passed through Jordan on dry ground, do look back, first upon the way through
which the Lord had wonderfully brought them, and then upon themselves and that
uncircumcision that was still upon them, as if they had still belonged to
Egypt which they had forsaken.

What do they then? Being now upon the borders of their enemies, they form
their Camp in Gilgal, and there they set up twelve stones taken out of the
passage of Jordan, for a Memorial to the Children of Israel for ever, that
they might know what way the Lord brought their forefathers into that Land,
Ios. 4. and then, before they go out thence to any Battle, the reproach of
Egypt is rolled away from off them, Ios. 5.9. that is they are all called to
Circumcision, which was a mark that put a difference between them and
Egyptians, and was a sign of new affections now to be entertained, to the
putting away of that hardness of heart, that had accompanied their fathers
from their coming out of Egypt.

And now you must give me leave upon the like occasions to invite you to the
like considerations; you have worn out the trouble of a long Winter, and
passed through many dangers, it is now the time that Kings go forth to
Battle, your Camp is formed, and you ready to be drawn out against the Enemy;
what then remains but that before you go out thence, you look back upon the
way you have been hitherto led by, and out of the several passages of your
deliverances, as out of the midst of Jordan, take you several remembrances of
Gods power and Mercy, set them up in a well grounded Memory, and you will find
the use and benefit of them ever after: then think of rolling away the reproach
of Egypt from off you.

The Reproach of Egypt is that uncircumcision, irreligion and profaneness of
life and conversation, which (besides the black note set upon the Soldiers
Profession by the licentiousnes of many in it) is laid upon you by those of the
adverse party; how justly you know best: I do not speak this to reprove you
for, or dishearten you in this course of life you are now entered upon in His
Majesty's service, but do praise you rather, the profession it self being
honorable, and this particular service most just and commendable.

Nor do I speak it any ways to clear your adversaries, who as they have Art
enough to belie you, and malice enough to make you and us all Egyptians, that
they may spoil us more fairly; so indeed they have upon them (and it will
stick to them never to be rolled away) the reproach, not only of evil lives
and conversations, but also of a most lewd cause.

Yet this you must give me leave to say, and it cannot be denied, there is in
too many of you too much that savours of the manners of Egypt, and is
Reproachful in Israelites, in Christians; it concerns you therefore to think
of Rolling away the reproach from off you, of entertaining new thoughts of life
and conversation.

The Lord did promise his people that he would send Hornets before them to
drive out their enemies, Exodus 23.28. and Joshua tells them the Lord had
performed it. Ios. 24.12. and we may see the Hornet seizing on them in this
Chap. 5. v. 1. the fear and terror of the children of Israel fell upon the
Amorites, and their heart melted.

And without doubt the Hornet of Conscience will at length seize upon the
enemies of that just cause which you maintain, and will drive them out; but
before that can come to pass, the sting of sin must first be felt in yours and
every man's conscience that desires and expects a happy issue of these troubles;
and unto this sting or prick of Conscience for sin, you must add the knife
of Circumcision.

It is for that purpose that this Monitory, these instructions were provided
like the sharp knives (which Ioshuah is said to make, v. 3.) to pare away from
you what is inordinate in it self, and hurtful and reproachful both to you
and to the Cause, you have undertaken to defend.

It was for the like purpose that the people came out to the Baptism of John,
for Baptism is answerable to Circumcision; and among them, that specially
stood in need of clensing and of direction for a new life, there came the
Publicans (a profession and employment that had as heavy reproach upon it as
any) and said unto him what shall we do? Luke 3.12. After them came the
Soldiers likewise and demanded of him, What shall we do? v. 14.

This was a very commendable readiness, and you cannot but think you are
concerned in the example, and bound accordingly to seek instruction, at least
to receive it being offered; for these were men of your profession, and what
their duty was either in the enquiry, or in the performance of what was taught
them, the same belongs to you.

The Answer they received (Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely,
and be content with your wages) does tell you thus much in general, that a
restraint is cast upon you; you may not do or speak what you list, but must
make a Conscience of your words and Actions.

What success it had we do not find expressed, so neither do we find that
they returned any reproachful answer for the strict lesson he gave them; and I
hope this Monitory will be as kindly entertained by you, though it should
sometimes prove as sharp as the Circumcisers knife or the Baptists language:
We see the whole multitude that came to hear, struck with an awful reverence
of that powerful and home-speaking Preacher, they all mused in their hearts
whether he was the Christ or not, v. 15. and we read how afterward many
Publicans came to our Savior, unto whom John poynted them the way, and we meet
with one good Centurion, and under him many conscionable and obedient
Soldiers, Luke 7.8.

For your better and more particular direction you must know and consider under
whose command you are, and what is your Duty: if you be asked under whom you
serve, you will presently name your King, and your Captain or Colonel, and can
readily give account of the duties you are usually put upon; and when you speak
any thing that concerns conscience, it is commonly this, you have a good cause.

All this is true and just; but this I must tell you, notwithstanding the
goodness of your Cause, and the strictness of your obedience to your
superiors, if you would have your King and your selves to prosper, you must
also and chiefly know him that has the highest command over you, The great
General of the Armies of the Creatures, the King of Kings and Lord of Hoasts
that walks in the midst of the Camp, and cannot endure to see any unclean
thing amongst you, as he tells you Deuteronomy. 23.14.

If you would have him deliver you, and give up your enemies before you, (as it
is there promised) you must approve your selves to him; for which there are two
things considerable, your Cause and your Conversation. A good Conscience in
regard of both these does assure a blessing from God, and adds true confidence
to a Soldier in all his enterprises.

THE CAUSE.
THe Lord is no Patron of an unjust cause, but will plead a just one, as David
often desires him to do in his Psalms, usually alleging the righteousness
of his Cause, as a prevailing argument to move him to undertake it. How comes
it to pass then that we see sometimes an unrighteous Cause to prosper? We
never see it finally prospering, but God in his justice suffers it a while to
prevail for the punishment and correction of others, that have not hearts and
conversations answerable to the uprightness of their cause: yet in the end the
unjust cause will bring destruction upon the undertakers, that a man shall say,
Doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth, Psalm. 58.10.

We may understand the Lords counsel and purpose in this particular, Esa 10.
v. 5, 6, 7, 12. He there uses the Assyrian (whose meaning was nothing else but
to spoil and oppress) as the rod of his anger against the people of his
wrath; but when he has performed his whole work upon Mount Sion (that is
thoroughly humbled and corrected his people) then will he punish the stout heart
and high looks of the Assyrian.

The Benjamites are very obstinate in defending a Lewd Cause, and do prosper
in two Battles, Judge. 20. but in the third (when the Israelites had truly
humbled themselves) Benjamin is cut off with an utter destruction. What your
Cause is, and what you fight for, that you may understand and remember it the
better, it is expressed upon the pieces of Silver, which you receive in pay;
look upon them, whose Image what Superscription they bear.

By that Image which you see on the one side, you are told it is for the King
and his Just Rights, that Caesar may have what is his: by the Superscription on
the other side, you are assured it is for the established Religion, for the
Freedom of Parliaments, for the Liberty of Subjects that you bear Arms.

Your Adversaries may fight for the bare Silver, having no better engagement to
hold them in Arms; as for the Image or Superscription they have nothing to do
with either; the Superscription which the Priests put upon Judas his pieces of
Sylver, The price of blood, they might read upon theirs, and would cast them
away as he did his, were their Consciences not too far hardened.

But you fight for the Cause, which is able to satisfy Conscience, when Gold
and Sylver cannot do it; and in the performance and discharge of this your
duty and allegiance, both the Law of God and of this Land will be your warrant,
will secure you of the justnes of your Cause.

Life and Conversation.
IVstnes of the Cause is not enough to make all prosper without a considerable
disposition of the Persons, and answerable Conversation of those that are
employed in the defense of it; I fear there is too general a security and
confidence this way, in many that follow the King in this War; who seeing
that between them and the Adverfary, the right of the Cause is on their side,
are not so sollicitous upon the point of righteousness between God and
themselves; as if their Loyalty to their Prince would excuse their Rebellion
against God, or their Zeal to His service cover their neglect in Gods worship.

Consider what the Lord threatens by the mouth of Samuel. If ye shall still
do wickedly ye shall be consumed both ye and your King. 1. Sam. 12.25. not
only ye for your own, but even your King also for your wickedness; and Psa.
81.14. The Lord tells his People under what condition they might expect his
help; If my People would have hearkened and walked in my ways, I should soon
have put down their Enemies, and turned mine hand against their Adversaries*
and the Psalmist in his own Person teaches every one of you to conclude with
your selves, If I incline unto wickedness with my heart, the Lord will not hear
me. Psalm. 66. you see you strip your selves of Gods protection, nay make him
your Enemy, who threatens to wound the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on
still in his wickedness, Psa. 68.21. you need no other Enemies, he will wound
you.

How often have we seen a just Cause suffer through the wickedness of Instruments
used in the defense of it? the Psalmist speaks of Gods people under his
special protection in the wilderness, how that, because they provoked him often
to anger with their own inventions, they were often brought down in their
wickedness, as weread, Psa. 78. and Psa. 106.

We may see this in several Examples. The Israelites had a just Cause against
Moab, but observe how they sped in it at first; The King of Moab sends for
Balaam, and shows him the Host of Israel from an high mountain, to the end
he might curse them; but so long as there was not iniquity and perverseness among
them, he could have no power against them: so he is forced to confess, Number.
23. verse. 21, 23. He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, he has not seen
perverseness in Israel, the Lord his God is with him; surely there is no
enchantment against Jacob nor divination against Israel. No Art or power of man
or Devil can prevail against a people, an army trusting in God and serving him.

Therefore Balaam lets the King of Moab understand that Israel must first be
brought to sin against their God, before he can prevail against them; and for
that purpose counsels him (which Counsel of Balaam is mentioned, Number. 31.16.)
to send in the daughters of Moab and the Midianitish women among them; we have
the performance and issue of that counsel, Nam. 25. They fall by Whoredom and
Idolatry, and then by the Sword and the Plague.

Israel had a just cause against the Canaanites, yetthey were slain before the
Men of Ai through Achans sin; they are forewarned of it in these words, Jos.
6.18. In any wise keep your selves from the accursed thing, least you make your
selves accursed, and make the Camp of Israel accursed and trouble it. Achan he
covets the forbidden thing, takes a Babylonish garment, a wedge of gold, and
two hundred shekels of Sylver; for this Israel is smitten before their Enemies,
and the Lord tells them, Jos. 7.13. There is an accursed thing in the midst of
thee O Israel; thou caust not stand before thine Enemies, until ye take away
the accursed thing from among you.

Against the Philistines also their Cause was good, yet are they smitten by the
uncircumcised, and the Ark is taken for the wickedness of the Priests, and for
the general profanenes and neglect of Gods worship among the People. Eli knew
all this, what little fear of God there was in his sons, or the People that
were gone out to War, and therefore expects the Issue of the Battle with a
trembling heart; He sat by the way side watching, for his heart trembled, etc.
1. Sam. 4.13.

The Israelites are twice smitten before the Beniamites (though their Cause and
War was approved by God) because they went not out with that mind, that
humility, that dependence on God, as they ought. For do but observe the
passages of that story, Judge. 20. The Beniamites are very obstinate in the
defense of a lewd cause, will not be brought to any peaceable way of giving
satisfaction for the injury done; the Israelites therefore gather themselves to
Battle, but first go up to the house of God to ask Counsel, verse. 18. A good
Cause they have, and they begin well: why then does it not succeed accordingly?
Surely there was something amiss among them.

They enquired only who should lead the Battle, they doubted not of the
Victory, because their Cause was good, and their number great, that was their
vain confidence; and besides that, they had Idolatrous worship among them,
Micha's graven Image was set up in the Tribe of Dan, Iud. 18.31. and the Lord
by that ill success he gave them, did as it were tell them, they must not
trust in their numbers but in Him, and be as sollicitous for the injury done to
him in his worship, as for the wrong done to the Levite, and be as careful to
remove the one as the other. Therefore being twice smitten, they understand
themselves, and weep before the Lord, and fast, and offer peace offerings, that
they may first be reconciled unto God before they go again into Battle; and
then the ill Cause falls heavy upon the Beniamites to their utter destruction.

All Prophanenes to be avoided.
BY the former examples and places of Scripture you are taught somethings are
utterly to be declined and avoided by you, some things again expected from
you, if you would have good success under Gods protection and preservation.

The Midianitish Woman must not be brought into the Camp, nor must the
Babilonish garment, or any accursed thing, or any profanenes be found among
you, as you may learn by the three first examples. But as Heart seeking the
Lord in all humility and fear, and wholly depending on him is required of you,
as you are taught by the Example of the Israelites going out against the
Beniamites.

The reason of both is drawn from the presence of God, which if you desire to
have comfortably among you, you must remove whatsoever is offensive to him, as
he Commands and gives the reason, Deuteronomy. 23.19. For the Lord thy God walks in
the midst of thy Camp to deliver thee, and to give up thine Enemies before
thee, therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee,
and turn away from thee.

He seems to speak there of the outward uncleanenes that passes from the
body, but indeed intends the sinful uncleanenes of Whoredom, Drunkenness, of
Cursing and Swearing, or any Profanenes, of violence, Injustice, Cruelty, as at
the 9. v. when the Heast goes forth against thine enemies, then (then
especially) keep thy self from every wicked thing.

What is done by you in secret I know not, but if there be any Midianitish
women brought in among you, though not so openly, as that Phineas the
Magistrate or Officer may take notice of it and punish it, but so closely as
Achan kept his Babylonish garment, Jos. 7. know ye that this God that walks
in the night through your Camp, and sees in darkness will bring the evil of
your ways upon you, Be sure (says he) your sin will find you out, Number.
32.22. But let me tell you how you appear in public, what every one that
passes by your Guards, may see in some of you, drunkenness and excess, may
hear from many of you, Oaths and Curses by that great and holy name, (in which
your help stands) and so frequently, as if you could not speak one to
another, or your Leaders and Officers give you a Command without an Oath or a
Curse.

Be you or they never so well deserving of the Military art, ye do His Majesty
but disservice in pursuing his commands, and keeping his guards after that
manner. If any of your Commanders be so far from executing His Majesty's
orders against this or any other profaneness, that they give you example
rather for it, you must know it will not excuse you, but aggravate the sin so
much the more, in them for giving the example, in you for the imitation.

Nay we might find the contagion of it yet spread farther upon the inhabitants
of this Town, in which whosoever shall hear, as with horror he may do, even
Boys and Women Swearing and Cursing, he will not think but the infection was
taken or increased since this City became a Garrison. This is the way to
hasten judgment, because the ready way to fill up the measure of iniquity,
when it comes to that of the Prophet, Hos. 4 9. and Esa. 24.2. Like People like
Priest, like Master like Servant, like Buyer like Seller, like Captain like
Soldier, like Guest like Host; how can we hope for abatement of judgments
upon the increase of sin, or that they should cease, while this does continue
in such an height of profaneness?

Do but hear what the Psalmist threatens to him that is guilty of it, His
delight was in cursing and it shall happen unto him: he clothed himself with
cursing, and it shall come into his bowels like water, and liek oil into his
bones, Psalm. 109.16,17. and then do but reflect upon your selves, and consider
how he meets with that custom of swearing and cursing which is so familiar
with many of you, as if it were your delight and clothing, and how it will
come home to him, that uses it, in a judgment that will not depart from him;
not much unlike that of Joab for his bloodshed. 1. King. 2.5. He put the blood
of War upon his girdle that was about his loins, and upon the shoes that
were upon his feet; that is, the guilt of blood would cleave close unto him,
like the straitest clothing which was about him.

It were to be desired that all you which are Commanders and Officers, would
consider there will always a mixed multitude follow an Army, as there did the
Camp of Israel, Exodus 12.38. and that mixed multitude being of an Egyptian
appetite, will be lusting after that which is unlawful, as they did, Number.
11.4,5. The more care rests upon you both to command your selves and to check
the unrulinesse of your People; for as it is said there, v. 10. Moses was
displeased at it, so should it displease you, whenever you hear the
Blasphemies and Curses, or see the excess and drunkenness of Soldiers under
you, and it should be your endeavor to restrain them.

That you and they are concerned in it, may be shown by many instances out of
holy Scripture, I will insist in four of them.

The first is from that choice which was made of those Soldiers, by whom the
Lord would save his people from the Midianites, Iud. 7.6. the Lord tells Gideon
their General, whom he should send away, whom he should retain; they that,
when they drunk at the brook, laid down to draw it in with their lips, that is,
such as would be sloathfull, and lie down to pleasure, drawing it in with a
full draught, were to be dismissed; but those that lapped it up bringing the
water with the hand to their mouth, that is, such as drank more sparingly, and
with more pains, which did argue they were more patient of labor and thirst,
content with a little, and able to moderate themselves and their pleasures,
were to be retained. This tells you, if you will be such, as are meet for the
Lord to save his People by, you must be temperate every way, not lying down to
pleasure to wallow in it, or take your fill of it.

The second is from the example of Vriah a Commander in David's Armies, who
coming from the Camp to the City, could not by any means be persuaded to go
home to his wife, and gives the reason of it. The Arc, and Israel and Judah
abide in tents, and my Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord are encamped in
the open fields: shall I then go into mine house to eat and to drink and to
lie with my wife? 2. Sam. 11.11.

This was a commander indeed, that had learnt first to command himself; not
like the Officers of Armies now adays, who can make occasions to step over
from the Camp wherever it is, to the next great Town, and there give
themselves up to all the pleasures the place will afford. But this, you will say,
was too great austerity in a Soldier; yet does it tell you, that Temperance
will beseem you which are of the same profession; for if he would not take the
liberty to do what he might, how shall ye to do what ye may not? and if he so
carefully abstained even from lawful pleasures, though earnestly persuaded to
the solace of them, how much more should you be careful to fly the unlawful
pleasures of Excess and Riot, of chambering and wantonness, though enticed
thereunto by earnest persuasions of evil companions?

It is true that before Vriah returned to the Camp he was made drunk, but it
was upon such provocations (as you may see v. 13.) that I verily believe none
of you can ever meet with the like.

The third instance is from that Captain in the Gospel, that good Centurion.
As he from that obedience which his Soldiers yielded to him (who was but a
mortal man) argued by a well grounded faith, that all things would obey him
that was God omnipotent; after this manner: At my word one goes, another
comes, a third does this or that as he is commanded, how much more shall
sickness depart from my servant and health return, if thou do but say the
word. Luke 7. So you that are in authority, from that obedience you expect and
receive from those which are under you, should reason accordingly, and
conclude, that there is obedience and service much more due from you and your
soldiers to the Lord of Hoasts, the great Commander of all the Creatures.

The last instance is from the Apostles argument, whereby he does often from
that duty and discipline (which is used in your profession, and cannot be
neglected without great hazard) endeavor to persuade diligence, care and
constancy in the Christian Warfair; so must you think you and your men are not
taken off from the duty and careful practice of the one by your attendance on
the other, but are so much the more prompted unto a strict observance of the
duty of a Christian life, by how much the similitude between it, and a
Soldiers profession, is more apparent.

See then what dutics of Christianity the Apostle has clothed with the habit
of your profession: Thou therefore endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ, 2. Tim. 4.3. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs
of this life that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier, v. 4.
If any manstrive for masteries he is not crowned except he strive lawfully, v.
5. Every one that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things, 1 Cor.
9.23. I so fight not as one beating the air, v. 26.

When you enter upon your profession, you undertake hardship, renounce
pleasure, and such engagements as may hinder you in the due performanee of your
service, you must be temperate in all things; if you stand upon the guard, it
is expected you should be sober and watchful; if you be summoned to march, you
cast of needless burdens, and carry only necessary provisions; if you do
march against an enemy, you observe Rank and Order; if you put on armor, you
put off first your outward loose garments: if you enter combat with the
adversary, you lay not about you vainly, beating the air, or smiting your
fellows that stand by you, but making at the enemy with all your might; and to
strive thus, is to strive lawfully, that is, to observe the Law of fights and
combats, in order to the obtaining of the prize, and pleasing of him that has
chosen you to be Soldiers.

do but apply all this to those duties and that Law which you are to observe
in the Christian warfare; and you will know what is expected from you, and what
nearly concerns you.

For in the warfair of a Christian life, you have enemies as well as in this
you now serve in, and there the loss of the soul is hazarded, as the bodily
life is endangered in this: there is armor to to be put on and used; there is
Order and Rank to be observed that you be not found walking disorderly, which
is as dangerous here as in a march against the enemy; there is a prize, a
victory to be obtained; there also is one to be pleased that has chosen you,
called you to be Christians. Nay the not pleasing of him in not observing the
duties of a Christian life, will make you fail not only of gaining the prize
of eternity, but even of all good success here in this temporal warfair.

There are some sins, done in the body, which make the Soldier unable to go
through with his service and duty that belongs to his place, which weaken the
constitution of the body, and eat out the Marrow of the bones, such as
drunkenness, rioting, whordome, and the like uncleanness; but these and all
other wickedness and sins of profaneness, as swearing, cursing, blasphemy,
bloodshed, oppression, do not only make you loosers in the spiritual warfait,
and give you up to your ghostly enemies, but also cut you off from Gods
protection and blessing, exposing you naked and unarmed to all the dangers of
War.

And not only so, but as it was said of Achan, that man perished not alone, but
wrath fell on all the Congregation, Jos. 22.20. and as it appears by the other
examples above alleged, you do through such provocations endanger, as much
as in you lies, a good Cause to fall with you, which you should uphold with
your best endeavors.

Thus in general you see a restraint is cast upon you, you may not do or speak
as you list; you must leave of and avoid somethings, and practice other; you
must strive lawfully observing the order and rule of your warfaire, that you
may please him who has chosen you to be Soldiers, that is, your God in the
duties of a Christian life, which is the Spiritual warfaire, and your Prince
in your orderly demeanor during this present War you serve him in.

Duties to be observed.
But a little more particularly to direct you, let me commend unto you three
Duties, to which if you hold, the observing of them will be your best Armor
and provision. 1. the true Fear of God. 2. A due Dependence upon his
providence and protection. 3. Daily Invocation and Prayer. These will preserve
and keep you from falling presumptiously into those former Evils of a lewd
conversation, and from sinking desperately under the Evils and Dangers of War;
you will find the direction and comfort of them in all the employments you are
put to; when you stand upon the Watch for the preserving of your selves and
others, when you are called to a trial of your valor against the Enemy, when
you are now to Enter the Battle, when you have the issue of it, either in Ill
Success, or in Victory, and taking the spoil. Of all which particulars
something for your Direction.

Fear of God.
I. OF the Fear of God; To teach a Soldier to fear, may seem but an improper
and unseasonable lesson; but indeed to teach you this fear, the Fear of God,
is to give you boldness, and to tell you, you need not fear any thing else:
The wiseman assures us and gives it for a proverb received of all, that the
Fear of the Lord is beginning of Wisdom, Prove. 9.10. So it is to all that can
learn it, but especially it is the Soldiers Wisdom, who, seeing he has of
all other most to do with fearful and dreadful things, does then acquit
himself most wisely, when he has learned how to Arm himself most
compendiously and readily against all otherfeares whatsoever, by the
entertaining of one fear, the Fear of God.

Take confidence whence you will, it is but vain without this Fear, be it
from the multitude of an Host, in Scripture you may read of diverse vast Armies
put to flight, not smitten by their Enemies, but stricken with a sudden fear,
sent among them from the Lord, whom they least feared; or be it from the
strength of Armor, see the Soldiers at the Sepulcher so astonyed, that they
lie for dead; or be it from height of walls, or from the spirit of strong
drink, (wherewith some Soldiers foolishly arm themselves, when they go upon
service) see Belshazar carousing with his Princes and Captains in his strong
Palace, without any fear of the Enemy then laying seige against him; when as
one hand from Heaven, not with a sword in it to execute, but a pen only to
write his doom upon the wall, affrights them all, Dan. 5.5.

Now this Fear of God is a fear to offend him, either by doing such things as
he has forbidden, for those tend to his dishonor and provoke him to wrath; or
by neglecting to do such things as he has commanded, for in those does his
service and worship consist, and the performance of them makes for the
advancement of his glory.

This Fear is grounded upon that due apprehension which we ought to have of
God. First, in regard of his Omniscience, in that he knows all things, and is
a witness to all the Evil we do, sees us wheresoever we are, and whatsoever we
are about, hears us whatsoever we speak, and considers the very thoughts and
desires of our hearts, Secondly, in regard of his Omnipetency, or his Power, as
it is subservient to his Justice in inflicting evil, and to his mercy in
preserving and rewarding; He that can inflict or bring the greatest Evil upon
man, is most to be feared, according to our Saviors argument, I will forewarne
you whom ye shall fear, Fear him, who after he has killed, has power to
cast into Hell, Luk, 12.5. man consists of body and Soul, God only has power
to destroy both; the greater World is made up of many sorts of Creatures, God
only has power to command their Hoasts, to chastise powerful Kings by
contemptible Creatures, froggs, lice, locusts, so in Egypt; but when he will
show his power by a judgment of more wonder, a Judgment worthy of God, as it
is, Wisd. 12.26. he can make the Sea give back when his people enter, and
retire again to overthrow the Egyptians pursuing them; can make the Stars
fight in their Course against Sizera, Judge. 5. can by one Angel from Heaven in
one night destroy an hundred and fourscore thousand men in the Camp of the
Assyrians. Conclude therefore upon all men as the Prophet does upon the
Egyptians, Esa. 31.3. The Egyptians are men and not God, their Horses are flesh
and not spirit: when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that helps
shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down.

But he has power not only for Judgment and destruction, but also for
salvation, and how great is his power, that for that purpose can command
Legions of powerful Angels; and this also is a ground of the true fear of
God, His Power as it is subservient to his Mercy, Mercy with thee that thon
may be feared, Psa. 130.4.

Do but thus apprehend the Allseeing, Almighty God, and such an awful
reverence and dread will possess your hearts, that it will check and restrain
you from all uncleanenes, because He walks in the midst of the Camp, as he
tells his People, Deuteronomy. 23 and will be a swift witness against the adulterers,
and swearers, and oppressors, as he threatens, Mal. 3.5. It was this Fear that
kept Joseph from consenting to his Masters wife, how can I (says he) do this
great wickedness and sin agaiust God, Genesis 39.9. It will restrain you from
cruelty and all unjust violence, so it kept Joseph from dealing hardly with his
Brethren, this do (says he) and live, for I fear God, Genesis 42.18. Finally,
it will drive you to him for protection in the times of distress; which was
the next duty commended to you.

Dependence upon Gods Providence.
II. A Dependence upon Gods providence and protection. Fear does usually drive
men from that which is feared, when they can see nothing but the evil of it,
or less good then evil in it; but this Fear is attractive, draws to God,
because that power of his, which is the ground of this fear is not only a
power of inflicting evil, but of saving too, as when he sets himself between
the hoasts of the Israelites and Egyptians in the pillar of the Cloud, which
gave light and comfort to the Israelites, but showed blacknes and terror to
their Enemies, Exodus 14.20. But see the promise of protection, how that Power
shall be employed for the security of them that fear him, The Angel of the
Lord encampeth round about them, Psa. 34.7. and God will appoint salvation for
Walls and Bullwarks, Es. 26.1. here are Fortifications beyond your outworks,
the protection of God draws the outmost lines of defense, keeps the outmost
guards round about them that fear him; for which the Psalmist often calls
the Lord his shield and buckler, his rock and tower of defense.

The Lord to clear this plainly in delivering his People from the great host
of the Midianites, tells Gideon, the people that are with thee are too many for
me to give the Midianites into their hands, least Israel vaunt themselves
against me, saying, mine own hand has saved me, Iud. 7.2. that Israel might
not say, the Midianites are too many for me (so indeed they were, if success
had depended on their Number rather then Gods protection) the Lord said to
Gideon, the people with thee are too many for me; so he reduces them to three
hundred, and sends them against so many thousand of the Midianites, that the
Salvation might appear to be wrought only by his power.

In the Camp at Gilgal, where all the men of war were circumcised, while they
were sore and not well able to help themselves (in which case two men, Simeon
and Levi, fell upon a whole City and slew all the males, Genesis 34.) they were
fare by his protection, that made the terror and fear of them fall upon the
Amorites round about, so that their hearts melted, and there was no spirit in
them because of the children of Israel, as we see, Jos. 5.1.

So when they went up to Jerusalem at the three great Feasts thrice every year
by Gods command, and thereupon their borders were left naked of men to defend
them, the Lord promised and did make it good, that none should so much as
desire their Land, when they went up to appear before the Lord, Exodus 34.24.
Their going up to Jerusalem was to worship and offer sacrifice, and if they
stayed at home or neglected the service, they could not expect the defense
promised, and this puts me in mind of what I commended to you in the third
place, Prayer.

Daily Prayer.
III. PRayer, or daily invocation or calling upon God; whereby that protection
and defense is implored and obtained; whereby you show your dependence upon
that protection, and do return unto him his daily worship, acknowledging him
to be your God, by begging of him what you stand in need of, as forgivenes of
sins, grace, food, and preservation, by giving him thanks for the good
things you daily receive from his gracious and powerful hand of Providence,
opened to you to feed you, and stretched over you to protect and defend you.

It will not be thought by many that a Soldier should have very much time to
bestow on devotion, yet is it often seen that Soldiers can find too much time
to spend upon Idleness and vanity; and if we look into Acts. 10. we may see how
Cornelius a Centurion or Captain employed his spare time, He was a devout man
and prayed to Godalway, v. 2. There are differences indeed o^ Times, and,
according to the necessities and exigencies of them, there are differences of
the performance of this duty of prayer and worship; for sometimes it is more
public and solemn, as when you meet together in a body to pray; sometimes in
Private by your selves, which should be your daily worship; and sometimes the
streits of time will not suffer it to be performed either by public meeting
or private retiring, as when you are suddenly commanded upon Service; yet then
may it be done in the closet of your heart, by mental ejaculations, and inward
elevations of the mind to God. So you have three ways of performing this your
duty of prayer and worship to God, the two first ways as opportunity will give
leave, (and that opportunity is not to be neglected) the last way you may use
upon what employments soever you shall be put.

When the Israelites journeyed not, but rested in a place, then they kept the
charge of the Lord, Number. 9.19. that is, they attended upon the public worship
of the Lord performed in the Tabernacle, which could not be solemnly observed
when the Camp removed; their frequent Journeyings also being a Cause of the
neglect and forbearance of Circumcision till the Camp came to be pitched in
Gilgal.

So when you rest in Garrison, as Cornelius did, of whom you heard above, or
when you make any abode in the Camp, as the Israelites did sometime in the
wilderness, and after that in Gilgal, then have you all opportunities of
performing your private devotion, and also of attending upon the duties of
public worship in praying to God and hearing his word. For which purpose you
have Chaplains in your Regiments to minister unto you, and he that shall find
you lying under hedges, and sporting by the high ways, cannot but see you have
spare time, and think in all reason you should be compelled to come in as those
were in the Parable, Luke 14.23.

But in the necessary streits of time God will admit of limitations and some
forbearances in his worship for the safety of the whole Army, which is
concerned in the speedy performance of sudden duties, that the Soldier is
called to. He does it in a matter of less moment, Mat. 5.23. If thou bring
thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against
thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, etc. He suffers a breach in his
own worship till the breach of charity between man and man be made up; but the
offering must not be taken away, he that brought it must return to offer; so
when you are broken of your accustomed time for devotion by a sudden command
for service, consider these two things, first, that you carry your heart, and
therefore an Altar, about with you, from whence you may offer up your thoughts
and desires to God as you March toward, or encounter with an Enemy. Secondly,
that you left your offering before the Altar when you were broken of your
accustomed time, and so when you return to privacy you must think of offering.

I have often thought with my self, how it should come to pass that Mariners
and Soldiers (who of all other stand most in need of the benefit of prayer,
and of a continual prepared heart, as being most often near to death) are yet
of all other most commonly farthest from the use of prayer and thought of
death, and do usually live more carelessly and loosely. It puts me in mind of
that which Plutarch speaks in the life of Solon, whom he notes to have been
formerly of a looser conversation and delighted in Poetry, and gives a reason
of it from his former course of life when he was a Merchant, to this effect;
Merchants running through many hazards and great dangers do, when the Fear
and sorrow (wherewith they were possessed) is over, desire to enjoy themselves so
much the more: in like manner such Soldiers (that have no better comforts and
refreshments then what sense does suggest unto them) being often in great
dangers, fears, and bitterness of mind, do seek the sweet of a licentious
relaxation and liberty, and the more they were straightened before, the more they
let all loose when once they are free.

This is no true ease or solace of mind after evils and dangers that are past,
nor is it any good preparation against those that are to come; it is not a
Christian but Epicurean remedy against fear and care, for it says, let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. But the Scripture would teach both
Mariner and Soldier the nearer they are to danger, the more carefully to
number their days that they may apply their hearts to Wisdom, which wisdom
is in the fearing of God, the depending on his protection, the serving of him
daily by prayer and thankesgiving, the duties already commended unto you.

And now if you will take a short View of the Services and employments you are
put upon, you shall find the use and benefit of those duties in them. The
employments or services you are put unto, I may reduce to two. You are called
either to Watch or to Fight against the Enemy, to the Guard or to the Encounter
and Battle.

The Watch or Guard.
I. When you stand upon the Watch or Guard, you are there set for the
preservation of your selves and others, and ought to consider what a great
charge is committed to your trust, no less then the lives of all that are
within the compass of your walls or trenches, who are to be secured by your
care, and to take their rest in your watchfullnes; a duty this is conscionably
to be discharged by you. A great Commander of the Thebans finding his Sentinel
sleeping dispatched him forthwith and excused it, I found him dead and so I
left him, dead, because sleeping, and because sleeping therefore rewarded with
death indeed. It shows what you deserve if you be found so, because those you
watch for, might be so dispatched by the Enemy through your neglect.

Hereupon you ought to consider how much it concerns you to take heed of
excess and drunkenness, which makes you unfit for the faithful performance
of this service; we read in several histories how many Cities and Armies have
been surprised and lost through the negligence of the Watch being oppressed with
drunkenness and sleep.

You must also consider that the safety of the City or Camp is not to be
ascribed only or chiefly to your care and watchfullnes, but to that Eye of
providence which never slumbreth nor sleeps, which watches over you and
those that you watch for, which appoints salvation for Walls and Bullwarks as
you heard above, and as the Psalmist tells us, It is the Lord that makes fast
the bars of our Gates, Psa. 147.13. and the Watchmen wake in vain, except
the Lord keep the City, Psa. 127. so that this service or employment calls for
your dependence on his protection, according to the Duty before commended to
you.

2dly. When you are called to the Encounter or Battle, you will find the
direction and benefit of the three former Duties; and here you are called to
the trial of your Valor, and to a consideration of the Issue of the Battle.

VALOVR.
I. Valor is both necessary and commendable in a Soldier, but very much
mistaken now adays; sometimes a quarrellsome disposition and heat of blood,
sometimes a careless and rash daring goes for Valor; we see how drunkenness
often brings forth quarrels and fightings, when it has heated the blood which
else upon a just and sober occasion would be cool enough, a Valor that
deserves not to be armed with swords but drinking pots, with which the
Thracians a drunken people were wont to fight.

We see also how a false opinion of honor and reputation thrusts men into
Duells; from whence come Wars and fightings among you? come they not from
hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? Iam. 4.1. No true Valor
here but inordinate lusts and desires, that first fight and strive within your
selves, being set on fire by excess and riot, or stirred up and misguided by a
false conceit of your reputation blemished, if you do not answer the challenge
that has dared you to adventure body and soul.

The first challenge for a Duel that we read of came from the mouth of an
uncircumcised Philistin, 1. Sam. 17.8. and yet that was in open war, tending
to the saving of many by the hazard of two, and because it was therefore
lawful, David did accept it: but a challenge to a private Duel upon a private
quarrel comes from an heart very unchristian, uncircumcised. Next we find
Abner and Joab meeting, and putting their men to twelve Duells, for being
inured to blood they made but a sport of killing, 2. Sam. 2.14. but to show
that the Lord liked neither the offer nor the accepting of the trial, the
matches on both sides fell down together and perished.

True Valor is grounded upon the assurance of a good Cause, in the maintenance
whereof, and in the confidence of Gods blessing the Soldier is not afraid to
meet Death, to hazard life; he that is resolute here is truly Valiant, though
he will not swear and swagger, though he will not answer a challenge from a
fellow Soldier, but dare from a just and lawful Enemy; for he dare adventure
his life but not his soul, knowing that duell's upon private quarrels are
both Vnsouldier-like, because men are not called together into Arms to try
their swords upon each other, to pursue a private revenge but an open Enemy,
and also Unchristian, because in such a case to kill or be killed, are both
unwarrantable, damnable.

Ioab was a valiant man, and showed it, not when he slew Abner and dispatched
Amasa, shedding the blood of War in Peace, 1. King. 2.5. but when he Encountered
the Ammonites and Syrians, then he showed a well grounded Valor. Be of good
courage (says he to his brother Abishai) and let us play the men for our
people, and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him
good, 2. Sam. 10.12.

Now as Religion does ground all true Valor upon a just and good Cause, so
does Reason set bounds for it, and tells you it is no disparagement to your
Valor, but a commendation of your discretion, to refuse to assail an Enemy
when there is no likelihood of prevailing. The attempt that Jonathan and his
Armor be arer alone made upon a Garrison of the Philistines is not to be drawn
into example, we know by the Text that it proceeded from extraordinary and
Divine warrant, 1. Sam. 14.6,10. But the Philosopher tells us truly in his
Moralls, that Fortitude or Valor, if you will make a Virtue of it must be
regulated, and confined by Prudence, as well as the other Virtues, that is, it
must not attempt against all reasonable possibility of success, for that is
rashness or fool hardiness.

You of the Kings Army have shown remarkable Valor upon all occasions, and I
have spoken all this to you of regulating your Valor by Religion and Reason,
not to straiten it, but that, as you have it grounded upon a good Cause, so you
may use it in order to the advancement of that Cause, not mispending it in
Quartels and Duels, but upon the Enemy in a just Encounter, and that with a
dependence upon God, the giver of all Victory; and this will not weaken your
hands but increase your cofidence: which calls you to the next point, the
Consideration of the Issue of the Battle, which falls out either with Ill
Success or with Victory to you, and the taking of the Spoil.

The issue of the Battle.
IN relation to which you must first consider, that however valor, and
strength, and number of men be the ordinary and secondary means of victory, yet
the Issue and success of the Battle is indeed given by a hand from Heaven;
the Arm of flesh is to be used, not trusted in. So the Prophet told Iehosaphat
and his Army going out against the enemy, the Battle is not yours but the
Lords. 2. Chron. 20.15. and the Psalmist, he girds with strength to the
Battle, Psalm. 18.32. He protects in fight whom he pleases and as he pleases,
He covered my head in the day of Battle, Psalm. 140.7.

When I see Ahab smitten with an arrow between the joints of the harness, 1.
King. 22.34. and Goliath struck dead with a stone in the forehead, where only he
was penetrable, I must acknowledge (besides that arm which drew the bow, for
it was done at a venture, and that hand which slung the stone) an Arm of
power, and hand of providence, that directed both arrow and stone. And it has
been seen, that the buckle of a Belt has borne of the thrust of a sword, and a
piece of an Horse-shooe casually found and hung at a Soldiers girdle has
broken the force of a bullet; a little armor serves the turn when Providence
will save, and the compleatest armor cannot save when the same providence will
expose to danger.

Secondly, consider how vain a presumption it is to make sure of Victory upon
any outward advantage, as of Numbers, Strength, Ammunition, it was the Vanity
of Sisera's mother, as she is made to speak concerning her sons return, Why is
his charet so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his charets? have they
not sped? have they not not divided the prey? etc. Jud. 5.28. But as Ahab
tartly admonished the boasting King of Syria, let not him that girdeth on his
harness boast himself as he that puts it off, 1. K. 20.11. So ought you to
consider, what the Wiseman had observed, Jreturned and saw, that the race in
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet favor to men of
skill, but time and chance happeus to them all. Eccles. 9.11. that is, the
Issue and event of things happens not always according to the appearance of
outward means, but this Chance as he calls it, is the effect of this divine
Providence which disposes all things, some things often against the
probability of outward advantages and means.

Upon these considerations you may think, First, how it concerns you to come
to the Encounter, not as the Philistin did against David, Cursing him by his
Gods, 1. Sam. 17.43. and as too many commanders use to do, bring up their men
against the enemy with Oaths and Curses: but to come to the fight as David did
against the Philistin, in the name of the Lord of Hosts, 1. Sam. 17.45. in a
dependence on his protection, as Asa did against the Ethiopians, O Lord our God
we rest on thee, and in thy name do we go out against our Enemies, 2. Chro.
14.11. and with such words, thoughts or meditations, as are suggested to you
below in the Occasional devotion, concerning this point of coming to the
Encounter.

Secondly, how to bear ill success if it happen, or how to receive a victory
and use it.

Ill Success.
YOu must not feek the cause of ill Success only in outward disadvantages and
miscarriages, the Servants of the King of Syria concluded as that the
Israelites were stronger then they, and put them to the worse because they
fought in the hilly Country, but in the plain they were confident they should
be too good for them, 1. K. 20.23. when as the God of Israel who discomfited
them, was the God of the Valleys as well as of the Hills.

But besides the outward disadvantages and miscarriages, you must look up to
that hand which disposes and overruleth all. You must conclude there is
something amiss in you, though your cause be good, as there was in the
Israelites defeated by the men of Ai, Ios. 7. and in the Israelites smitten
before Benjamin, Iud. 20. Either that you have ascribed former victories to
your own strength and the counsel of man, more then to Gods goodness over
you; or that now when you came to the Encounter, you depended more on your
numbers, strength, and valor, then on his power and providence; or that there
is some accursed thing among you, some notorious profaneness suffered among
you, which provokes the eyes of his glory, Esa. 3.8. and therefore the eye of
his providence is turned away from watching over you. This you ought to think
with your selves upon ill success, and to search it out, and to apply unto the
Lord in the acknowledgement of sin, and the desire of his protection, so you
may see Joshua doing, Ios. 7.6. and the Israelites, Iud. 20.26.

VICTORY.
IF it shall please God to give you good success and victory, you must not
ascribe it to your own strength or wisdom, although you therein much surpassed
your Enemies, but to that power and wisdom which can defeat the greatest
strength, and turn the most subtle Counsels into foolishness. Then must you
not forget to return Praise and thanksgiving to him that gave you the Victory;
and in his fear to use it with such moderation, and restraint of slaughter and
Spoil, as may repress Cruelty and Rapine, and yet not be prejudicial to the
Cause.

When Elisha spoke what Hazael would do to the children of Israel, how he
would set their strong holds on fire, and slay their young men with the sword,
and dash their children, and rip their Women with child; Hazael replied, But
what is thy servant a dog that he should do this great thing? 2. K. 8.12. In
the judgment of an Heathen Commander cruelty beseems not a Soldier, not a man.

We read how Gideon dealt with the men of Succoth which held out against him,
Iud. 8.16. he did not run furiously upon them, killing all that came to hand,
but took the elders of the City, and with the briars of the Wilderness taught
them, that is, made them to know by their punishment what it was to resist such
Rulers as God had set up over them; So that the chief commanders of the City
were called out to execution, the People only affrighted by their example.

SPOILS.
THe Act of Jacobs sons, first slaying the inhabitants of Sichem without just
cause, the^ fall. ing upon the slain and spoiling the City, was detestable
both for the Cruelty and Rapine in it, Genesis 34.26. this was a Cruel plunder;
Plunder is a new word, but I co^ceive it expresses an old way of injustice,
implies such spoils as are unlawfully taken. In the taking of Spoils, the
persons, from whom they are taken, and the manner of taking them, are
considerable.

First, they are lawfully taken from a lawful enemy. For such an one being
conquered forfeits life and goods to the Conqueror, He is servant to him of
whom he is overcome, as our Savior speaks, that is, he is altogether at his
disposing; and in the Parable, when the strong man, that keeps his Palace or
Fort, is vanquished by a stronger then he, he is spoiled not only of his Armor
but of his goods too. Luke 11.22.

Secondly, in the manner of taking the Spoil there is a difference between the
Spoil of the Field, and of a Town or Country; for though the spoiling of the
enemy taken or dead in the Field be permitted promiscuously to the Soldier, as
every one of Gideons Soldiers had the earerings of his prey taken from the
defeated Ishmaelites, Iud. 8.24. yet is the spoiling of a Town or Country to be
orderly performed by command: it being more to the preservation of justice, and
benefit of the Soldiers, to have the spoil of a Town orderly taken and
divided among them, then that they should fly tumultuarily upon it, and every
one be his own carver.

We read not that the Spoils allowed in Scripture were at the pleasure of the
Multitude, but orderly performed, both for the taking of them and the dividing
or disposing of them; The Midianites are spoiled, and all the spoil and the
prey is brought to Moses and Eleazer, and so divided, Number. 31.12. When Rabbah
was taken by David, it is said, He brought forth the spoil of the City in
great abundance, 2. Sam. 12.30. When Ioshuah sent home the Reubenites from the
war, he bids them, Divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren, Ios.
22.8. And when some that went down with David against the Amalekites grudged
that any of the spoil should be given to them that were left behind, David
replied, Who will hearken to you in this, but as his part is that goes down to
the Battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by the stuff, they shall part
alike, and he made it a statute for Israel unto this day. 1. Sam. 30.22,24,25.
and it were well it were better observed at this day, for who will tarry by the
stuff willingly, or keep the guard carefully, if not provided for by the
orderly disposing of the Spoil.

The Israelites having taken and slain the men of Judah, with much cruelty, are
reproved for it by the Prophet, whereupon they took those of Judah which they
had as Captives or Prisoners, and with the Spoil clothed and fed and shod
them. 2. Chro. 28.15. which as it forbids cruelty against an enemy, and makes
him sometimes the object of mercy, so does it much more condemn the injustice
of some Commanders, that engrosse the spoil to themselves, and make private
benefit of that, which is or should be appointed for the clothing and relief
of their own poor Soldiers. I defire you to remember what Jacob said to his
sons returning with the spoils of Sichem, Ye have troubled me, to make me
stink among the inhabitants of the Land, Genesis 34.30. and accordingly to
consider what disservice you do His Majesty, if under color of spoiling
Rebellious enemies, his peaceable Subjects be plundered by you.

Finally, when I consider what fuccesse it has pleased God to give His Majestis
forces, and cannot find any reason of it, either in the abundance of
ammunition, or the number of His men, or in the holiness of their lives, and
their care of serving God; I must conclude, and so ought you, that the Lord
does thereby show he justifies the cause you defend, and does invite you still
to ackuowledge him in all your enterprises, and to use the Victory he gives
you, with moderation and justice, and to be more careful of his service and
worship.

When I spoke above of Prayer, I showed how necessary it is for you, because
thereby you return unto God his Worship, and obtain from him protection and any
thing you need; also how much spare time you have, that might be employed in
devotion; and though the service be sudden many times upon which you are
commanded, yet may the heart be lifted up in praver, according to the straites
of times and occasions; I now come to give you patterns for the practice of
this in such set and daily devotion, or such occasional devotion as may and
will concern you.

The Soldiers private Devotion.
EVery day requires of you the performance of your duty to God, which that you
may do more fitly in relation to the service you are engaged in, I desire you
first to consider, how justly your King may say in the Psalmists words.

Be merciful to me, O God, for man goes about to devour me, he is daily
fighting and troubling me; mine enemies are daily in hand to swallow me up, for
they are many, O thou most High. Psalm. 56.1,2.

They daily mistake my words, and all that they imagine is to do me evil; for
they hold together, and keep themselves close and mark my steps, ibid. v. 5. 6.

They run and prepare themselves without my fault, arise thou therefore to
help me and behold. Psalm. 59.4.

Destroy their tongues, O Lord, and divide them, for I have espied
unrighteousness and strife in the City: day and night they go about within
the Walls thereof, mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it. Psalm.
55.9.10.

Shall they escape for their wickedness? thou, O God, in thy displeasure shall
cast them down, Psalm. 56.7.

Thou tellest my flittings, put my tears in thy bottle: are not these things
written in thy book? v. 8.

Hide me from the gathering together of the froward, and from the insurrection
of wicked doers, Psalm. 64.2.

For under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, till this Tyranny be
overpast, Ps. 57.1.

J will call unto the most high God, even unto the God, that shall perform the
Cause, which I have in hand. v. 2.

He shall send from Heaven and save me. v. 3.

Yea his right hand shall hold me up, and his loving correction shall make me
great, Ps. 18.35.

Let them rejoice and be glad, that favor my righteous dealing, yea let them
say, blessed be the name of the Lord, that has pleasure in the prosperity of
his servant. Ps. 35.27.

Then cannot you but think, you are invited to apply unto God in the behalf of
your King, your selves, and your Cause, as follows.

The PSALM.
PLead thou our cause, O Lord, with them that strive with us, and fight thou
against them that fight against us. Ps. 35.1.

Lay hand on shield and buckler, and stand up to help us. v. 2.

Help us, O God of our Salvation, for the glory of thy name, O deliver us, and
be merciful unto out sins for thy Names sake. Ps. 79.9.

Lead us in the right way because of our Enemies, and deliver us not over to
the will of our Adversaries, for there are false witnesses risen up against us,
and such as speak wrong, Ps. 27.14.

Remember, O Lord, the rebuke that thy servants have, and how thine Enemies
have slandered the footsteps of thine Anointed, Psalm. 89.49.

Stand up, O Lord of Hoasts, and be not merciful unto them that offend of
malicious wickedness, Psalm. 59.5.

For the sin of their mouth, and for the words of their lips, they shall be
taken in their pride; for why! their preaching is of cursing and lies, v. 12.

Oh turn not away the face of thine Anointed, Psalm. 132. Oh prepare thy
loving mercy and faithfulness, that they may preserve Him, Psalm. 61.7.

Stretch forth thy hand upon the furiousnes of His Enemies, and let thy right
hand save Him, Ps. 138.7.

Yea let Them be clothed with shame, but upon Himself let His Crown
flourish, Psa. 132.19.

So shall the King rejoice in God, and the mouth of them that speaks lies
shall be stopped, Ps. 63.12.

Yea their own tongues shall make them fall, insomuch that they which see it,
shall say, This has God done; for they shall perceive, it is his work, Psa.
64.8,9.

The Prayer for the Morning.
O Almighty Lord God, I bless thy Name, for that thou have kept me this night
past from all dangers, notwithstanding all my sins and ill deserts, I beseech
thee to pardon them all in Jesus Christ, and to guide me this day by thy Grace,
that I fall not into any presumptuous sins, but may have thee always before
mine eyes to fear thee in all my ways. And seeing nothing is safe without thy
defense, or prosperous without thy blessing, keep (I beseech thee) and defend
Our gracious King, protect Him in His Person, bless Him in his Counsels,
prosper Him in his Just Designs; Bless also and protect all his Armies, Us
especicially that attend here to serve Him under thee, who art the Everliving
God; Grant this for Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior; AMEN.

The Prayer for the Evening.
O Almighty Lord God, which have made the out goings of the Morning and of the
Evening to praise thee, blessed be thy Name, for that thou have kept and
preserved me this day; I acknowledge my manifold sins and transgressions, in
thought, word and deed, committed against thee; beseeching thee to pardon what
I have done amiss for thy mercyes sake in Jesus Christ. Defend, O Lord, the
Kings Majesty and His Army, watch thou over us, and keep us all from the
dangers of this night, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior, AMEN.

Occasional Devotion.
AS every day requires the performance of your Duty to God, so does every
special occasion, in order to the Battle and the Issue thereof, call you to
some Act of Devotion, which may be performed either more solemnly or abruptly
according to the straits of time.

We have King Asa's prayer when he went out against the Ethiopians 2. Chr.
14.11. and King Iehosaphats upon the like occasion, 2. Chr. 20. v. 6. Now as it
belongs to Authority, and is the duty of every General, to command the public
and solemn performance of this duty before the joining of Battle, if the time
will permit; so does it concern every Soldier to lift up his heart to God in
order to the occasion, and perform this duty in some sort answerable to the
straits of time.

And therefore be your service and employment never so sudden and urgent, yet
will it admit the private ejaculations of the heart; be you in a March, or
Motion toward the Enemy, the mind can move faster toward heaven; or be you in
the very Encounter, the sudden thoughts and desires, darted from the Soul,
are more ready then the dischargings of your Gunns, more quick then fired
Powder or flying Bullet.

Moses being in a strait between the Red Sea, and the pursuing Enemy, is said
to cry unto the Lord, yet we read not that he speak any thing, Exodus 14.15. it
was the cry of the heart, and that also sounds in Gods ears. Iehosaphat when
oppressed in battle by the Syrians cried unto the Lord, and God moved them to
depart from him, 2. Chr. 18.31. So the men of Judah, when the battle was before
and behind them, cried unto the Lord, 2. Chr. 13.14.

The good Emperor Theodosius in the like danger prayed, and was delivered, the
darts and arrows that came from the Enemy being by a mighty wind borne back
again upon them. And we read of the Christian Legion, which serving under
Antoninus an heathen Emperor, did by prayer save the whole army from the
necessity of perishing either by drought or by the Enemy; for out of the same
cloud at their prayer did issue Rain to refresh the Army, and Thunder and
Lightning to strike and confound the Enemy.

For direction of your thoughts and desires in order to the Battle, take what
follows.

The PSALM.
THou art our King, O God, send help unto Jacob, Psalm. 44. v. 5.

Through thee will we overthrow our Enemies, and in thy Name will we tread them
under, that rise up against us, v. 6.

For we will not trust in our Bow, it is not our sword that shall help us, v. 7.

There is no King can be saved by the multitude of an Host, neither is any man
delivered by much strength, Psalm. 33.15.

But it is thou that savest us from our Enemies, and put them to confusion
that hate us, Psalm. 44.8.

Through God will we do great Acts, for it is he that shall tread down our
Enemies, Psalm. 60.12.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, King of Kings, and Lord of Hoasts, it is nothing with thee to
help whether with many, or with them that have no power, Help us O Lord, and
deliver us, we humbly beseech thee, from our Enemies; that we being armed with
thy defense, may be preserved to glorify thee which art the giver of all
Victory, through the merits of thy Son and our Savior Jesus Christ. AMEN.

Upon ill Success.
WE find Joshua humbling himself upon the defeat before Ai, Ios. 7.6. and the
Israelites applying to God in fasting and prayer, when they were smitten before
Benjamin, Iud. 20. upon which occasion the Psalmist will tell you what thoughts
and desires should possess your hearts.

The PSALM.
O God thou have cast us out and scattered us, thou have also been displeased;
O turn thee unto us again, Ps. 60.1.

Thou stand a far off, and go not forth with our Armies. Ps. 44.10.

Thou make us to turn our backs upon our enemies, so that they which hate
us, spoil our goods. v. 11.

And though all this be come upon us yet will we not forget thee, nor behave
our selves frowardly in thy Covenant. v. 18.

Turn us again, O Lord God of Hoasts, show us the light of thy countenance, and
we shall be whole. Ps. 80.19.

Oh be thou our help in trouble, for vain is the help of man. Ps. 60.11.

Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and his blessing shall be upon his People.
Ps. 3.8.

The Prayer.
O Most merciful Lord God, we acknowledge we have not feared thee, nor served
thee as we ought, and therefore thou have smittenus that we may know thee,
turn us o Lord unto thee, and be thou merciful unto us, deliver us from our
Enemies, and save us for thy mercy sake in Jesus Christ. AMEN.

AFTER VICTORY;
The Psalm.
WE will magnify thee, O Lord, for thou have set us up, and not made our foes
to triumph over us. Ps. 30.1.

Thou art the God of whom comes salvation, God is the Lord by whom we escape
death. Psalm. 68.20.

Thou have sent forth strength, establish the thing, O God, that thou have
wrought in us. v. 28.

Thou have girded us with strength of War, Ps. 18. and covered our head in
the day of Battle, Ps. 140. and compassed us about with songs of deliverance,
Ps. 32.

God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in time of trouble;
therefore will we not fear though the Earth be moved, and Waters rage and
swell. Ps. 46.1.2.

For the Lord is King, be the people never so unpatient; he sits between the
Cherubins, be the Earth never so unquiet, Psalm. 99.1.

He stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the noise of his waves, and the
Madness of the People, Ps. 65.7.

He has broken the arrows of the bow, the shield, the sword, and the spear,
Ps. 76 3.

At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the Char^ and Horse are fallen, v. 6.

The fiercenes of man shall turn to thy praise, and the fierceness of them
shall thou refrain, v. 10.

Praise the Lord with a new song, for he has done marvailous things, with his
own right hand and his holy arm has he got himself the Victory. Psalm. 98.1,2.

The Vote of the People for Peace.
O God wherefore art thou absent from us so long? Why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy Pasture, Ps. 74.1.

Thou have moved the Land and divided it, heal the sores thereof, for it
shakes. Ps. 6.2.

Thou have showed thy People heavy things, thou have given us a drink of deadly
wine. v. 3.

Thou have proved us, thou have brought us into the suare, and laid trouble
upon our Loins; thou suffer men to ride over our heads, ps. 66.10,11.

The high Ways are unoccupied, the Travellors walk through bywayes, and the
Inhabitants of the Villages cease, Judge. 5.6.

For all the Earth is full of darkness and cruel habitations, ps. 74.21.

Up Lord, why sleep thou? awake and be not absent from us for ever, ps.
44.23.

O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon, for we
are come to great misery, ps. 79.8.

Turn thee again at last, and be gracious unto thy servants, ps. 90.13.

Comfort us now after the time that thou have plagued us, and for the years
wherein we have suffered adversity. v. 15.

Oh that salvation were given unto Israel out of Sion, oh that the Lord would
deliver his people out of Captivity, then should Jacob rejoice and Israel
should be right glad, ps. 53.7,8.

He is the God that makes men to be of one mind in an house, and brings the
prisoners out of Captivity, ps. 68.6.

He makes VVarres to cease, he breaks the bow, and knappeth the spear in
sunder, ps. 46.9.

The Lord shall give strength to his People, the Lord shall give his People the
blessing of Peace, ps. 29.10.

That our Garners may be full, and our sheep bring forth thousands in our
streets, ps. 144.13.

That our Oxen may be strong to Labor, tha^ there be no decay, no leading into
Captivity, and n^ complaining in our streets, v. 14.

Happy are the People that be in such a case, yea^ blessed are the People,
which have the Lord for their God, v. 15.

FINIS.

