Strange News FROM WARWICK, Which happened on Thursday last being the 17. day
of November, 1642.

Manifesting how one Jeremiah Stone, a Corporal of a company of Dragooners
under his Excellence, being wounded at the Battle at Keynton, came to the
Anchor at Warwick a little Inn, and gave the Hostess of the House a bag of
Money to keep for him until such time as he had recovered his Health.

Also how the said Hostess conspired with her Husband to cousen the said
Soldier of his Money, causing him to be Imprisoned for offering to demand it.

With the manner how they forswore themselves before the Bench, and how Gods
just judgment immediately fell upon them, to the terror and amazement of all
that great Assembly.

Whereunto is annexed another fearful example which happened at Coventrey.

[ Novem. 23.] Printed by T F for R. C. 1642.

The last true intelligence from the City of VVARVVICKE
AFter this News of Battails, death and desolation, between the Parliaments
Forces, and the Cavaleers being to our sorrow on both sides, fought at Keynton,
many being slain, which formerly you have heard, but rot the total truly,
let me write naught but the truth of one that escaped, and such a truth, that
falsehood cannot blemish, this Soldier having gotten after the Battle in
pillaging the dead bodies a Bag of money and coming to Warwick wounded, he
went, to the House of ROBERT STONE a small Inn at the sign of the Anchor,
where he was forced to rest until by the help of the Chirurgian he might
recover his strength, and having been there before, he thought none more
sufficient then his Hostis in credit and secrecy, and therefore he delivered
into her custody this Bag of money; within a Fortnight after recevering his
health and strength, he required to receive his Bag again, it grieved his,
unhonest Hostess to part from so great a Prize, therefore she entered into a
serious and earnest resolution with her Husband what shift they might find to
detain the said bagg of money, her unhapy husband being beyond all conscience
of that Judgment that too many be of now a days, that whatsoever by open
proof of Law cannot be won is their own gotten goods, he gives his Wife
counsel to deny the receipt of the said bag or money, his Hostess denied it,
how could the Soldier prove it? Mark the boldness of a wicked Woman? she
seemed to wonder at the Soldier, that he could be so impudent for to ask at
her hands that which she avouched she never received, in this ease she raileth
at him, and revileth him as far as the uttermost of her vain Rethoricke
could stretch; the Soldier, as commonly they are allowed to be somewhat more
bold, then other men, objecteth against her there upon falsehood, for that
contrary to her faith, she forswore the truth against her conscience, her
Husband a principal in this perjury, as if it were to defend his wifes honesty
with violence thrusts the Soldier out of doors, the Soldier bold in War
ab^oad, at home thought in a good quarrel he might be more bolder, and rather
chose to lose his life then money; the whole recompense of his lives adventure,
he stoutly drew his sword, vowing he would either lose his ^ife, or have his
money; and breaks with too much have his Hostisses house to reenter, alleging
that where his goods are there he may safely be: The Host pleads an action of
Burglary, and makes an open cry for help unto his Neighbors, with violence
forced an number of Officers to carry him as an open Malefactor unto the Goal.
The Common Counsel according to the intimation of the Fact are agreed
deliberately what Judgment to give; when public Judgment shall be craved;
Agreed it was by most voices, that the Soldier should be condemned.

The Devil, who now is very busy; who knows some things by permission; in
some form on fashion comes to the Prison unto the Prisoner: and to wi^^e the
more credit he tells him what judgment the Bench would pronounce, unless he
took good (...) and dealt wisely, and as he fain would have some Testimony
against man: he persuades the soldier to work him a free deliverance from
all his trouble, if he would give him his soul to hire, nay says the soldier
being undanted and having a just cause, I had rather yet loose my life then my
soul, well said the Devil, though I get nothing of thee as a reward, yet will
I deliver thee, so that thou be ruled by me, follow therefore said he these
instructions, when thou shall be brought before the Bench, plead for thy self
Ignorance, desire to have an Attorney, choose me to debate thy cause, by these
noates thou shall know me, by a Red Cap and a Feather? the Soldier easily
granted to use his counsel.

The Sessions is holden, the Soldier is brought forth as a Malefactor, the
Host pleads the death of the Soldier, the Soldier uses the Counsel of his
unhappy advocate.

License he craveth that the Gentleman in the red Cap and feather might plead
for him: Leave is granted forth comes the Devil, and like a skillful Lawyer,
he makes this Caution.

The Soldier not guilty, is not to be condemned, for from the Soldier grew no
cause of strife, the Host by violence thrust the Soldier out of the Doors, an
open and manifest Crime.

Give me leave and Authority to search the House, I dare promise and will
undertake without any further strife, to find the Bagg of money: So shall the
Host be Guilty, and the Soldier shall be of this aspertich plainly cleared.

The Host hearing these words, and being astonished at the same, for he
remembering of his quiet dwelling by his good Neighbors, and now bearing in his
mind, how that he is standing now upon his credit, or discredit for ever; and
as the Devil would have him, added many blasphemous Oaths that he by no
means knew of any such money.

And for confirmation of his Faith made by Oath, he requires, as the custom
of swearers is, vengance at Gods hands, yet he swore falsely I would quoth he,
the Devil would fetch me away now presently Body and soul before you all, if
I swear unsustly; which terrible words, when this Host had twice repeated,
this deviilish Lawyer, or this lawful Devil, left the cause, and snactht his
Body according to the vengance he desired of Gods hand of this perjured Host,
and carried him forth visibly over the Market place, so that his Body was never
since seen again: Nothing being left behind, but a terrible stink as a
witness what an unclean spirit, had carried away such an unclean Person: The
Bench being all amazed risse; the Hostess hearing of this unhappy disaster,
confessed the Fact, and restored the money to the Soldier.

That this is truth, the time is set down, the place, the Authors name, the
Soldier now remaining and living in Warwick.

JOHN FINCH, (a Shoemaker) in Saint Martins, being an Eye Witness, does
Testify the same.

Strange and miraculous news from COVENTRY.
IN Coventry, within twelve Miles of Warwick, one Richard Boad being in league
with a maid, a Mercers daughter dwelling by the Cross, her name Anne Kirk, a
contract past between them, he being in this troublesome times bent to the
Wars, came to her to take his leave, and to remember her former vows and
promises, she vowed and protested she would never marry any man but him, if he
survived this Battle, he desi^ed to have witness to those words, though he
had none to the contract, she answered him, that she would not have her name
divulged, nor brought in question, but this she on her knees d^d swear in
private to him (...), and desired him to take that for a real satisfacti^n and
called God to witness. That if she ever made a ^romise to any other in his
absence, or thought of Mar^age, unless with him? That the same day she was
Married, that the Devil might fetch her, and have no pity nor compassion but
take her away, when she proved false in thought, or deed; they thus parted with
many Protestations and weeping tears: He to fight for the King and Parliament;
She to remain at Coventry, his trusty and tru^ joy, and all his delight. The
Battle at Keynton being done, and he not hurt, he got leave of his Captain on
a Sunday morning, being then at Warwick to ride to Coventry to see this false
prejured Maid, when he thither came being noone, inquiring at the end of the
City of this Maid, his only joy, and most delight? Answer was made, she was
this day Marned: which struck such a terror to this young man's Heart, that
for a time he (...) amazed, because he was con^ted to her, but that was not
all, but he remembered the imprecation and the wish she made at his departure,
that the same day that she was married, unless to him, if he were living, that
the Devil might fetch her away, and have no pity nor compassion on her, the
young Soldier being grieved lay down on a Bed, and sent one as the order is to
know when they were at their dancing there, for to take a view of this falce
perjured Bride, the the time being come, thither he went secure unknown to
any, the Chamber being full with Music and Virgin danceing to the joy of the
Nuptials, the Bride passing by, he took her by the hand, and said, oh thou
falce fair one have thou broke thy Vow, she then replied, a rash Vow is
either broke or kept, where is your witness; just at that instant two
Gentlemen being alighted at the door all in black came up into the room and
desired being there was a Wedding, mirth, and dancing, that one of them might
have a dance with the Bride, she gladly entertained it, in the dance, the other
standing by fell in at last, they took her up and away they carried her, they
in the room ran after; but no news could they hear of the falcd perjured
Bride, they ran^e into the fields there being still an noise in the air, at
last the two Gentlemen in black came to them, with the Brides garments and
said take these again, we have power over her, but no power over her Clothes,
then her Sweetheart the soldier related to them the whole passage of her
perjury.

FINIS.

