THE PATHWAY TO PEACE.

OR, A sure means to make wars to cease.

According to the Prescription of the Lord, and the Practice of his servants
recorded in his Word.

Whereby we may clearly see what Duties God has required of his servants in
time of danger and distress, by reason of War or otherwise; and how they have
performed those Duties, and how the Lord has thereupon preserved and delivered
them.

Worthy to be imitated by all those that do unfainedly desire the Peace and
Welfare of this Kingdom.

Imprimatur,

Ja. Cranford.



Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be upon them,
and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Printed at London by G. B. and R. W. for
G. C. 1643.

The Pathway to Peace.
1. Gods people in the time of danger and distress must take notice of Gods
correcting hand.

THe Lords voice cries against the City, Mica. 6.9.
and the man of wisdom shall see thy name, hear the rod, and who has appointed
it.

Shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6.


Who gave Jacob for a spoil, Isa. 42.24.
and Israel to the Robbers? did not I the Lord?

I form the light and create darkness, Isa. 45.7.
I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these things.

I kill and make alive, Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I wound and I heal.

Examples of Gods people who have acknowledge the same.

Joseph said unto his brethren, Genesis 45.8.
It was not you that sent me hither, but God.

And Hanna said, 1 Samuel 2.6, 7.
The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down to the grave and raises
up, the Lord makes poor and makes rich, he brings low and lifts up.

And Eli said, It is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
let him do what it seems him good.

And David said concerning Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.10.
He curses even because the Lord has bidden him curse David.

I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, Psalm. 39.9.
because thou did it.

2. Gods people in the time of danger and distress must acknowledge that their
own sins have been a procuring cause of it.

And if thou say in thine heart, Wherefore came these things upon me? Jer.
13.22.
For the multitude of thine iniquities are thy skirts discovered, and thy
heels made bare.

Man suffers for his sin. Lam. 3.3^


Have not thou procured this unto thy self, Jer. 2.17.
because thou have forsaken the Lord thy God?

Thy ways and thine inventions have procured thee those things. Jer. 4.18.


Thou have killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, 2 Samuel 12.9.
and have taken his wife to be thy wife, now therefore the sword shall never
depart from thy house. Verse. 10.


And it came to pass, 2 Chro. 12.2.
that in the fifth year of Rehoboam, Shishak king of Egypt came up against
Jerusalem, (because they had transgressed against the Lord.)

For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, 1 Cor. 11.30.
and many sleep.

Examples of Gods people who have acknowledged the same.

Joseph's brethren said one to another, Genesis 42.21
We have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him, and therefore is this
trouble come upon us.

And she said unto Eliah, 1 Kings 17.18.
Art thou come to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?

The ways of Sion lament, Lam. 1.4, 5.
for the Lord has afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions.

They provoked him with their Counsel, Psalm. 106.43.
and were brought low for their iniquity.

My life is spent with grief, Ps. 31.10.
and my years with sighing: my strength fails because of mine iniquity.

There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger; Psalm. 38.3.
neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin.

3 Gods people in the time of danger and distress must fear and tremble before
the Lord.

Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Amos 3.6.


Fear ye not me, Isa. 5.22. Jer. 2.12.
says the Lord?

Be astonished at this O ye heavens, and be horribly afraid.

Sanctify the Lord of Hosts in your hearts, Isa. 8.23.
let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.

Fear him that can cast both soul and body into hell. Mat. 10.28.


At his wrath the earth shall tremble. Isa. 10.10 Pro. 28.14


Blessed is the man that fears always.

Examples of Gods people who have thus feared.

Adam said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and was afraid. Genesis 3.10.


And Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed. Genesis 32.6. Deu. 9 29.


And Moses said unto the people, I was sore a^raid of the anger and hot
displeasure, wherewith the Lord was wroth against you to destroy you.

And when the Messengers came, 1 Samuel 4.13.
lo Eli sat upon a seat by the ways side watching, for his heart trembled
for the Ark of God.

Samuel called unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.18.
and the Lord sent Thunder and rain that day, and all the people feared the
Lord and Samuel.

And David was afraid of the Lord that day.

And he could not go before the Arc to enquire of God, 2 Samuel 6 9 1 Chronicles.
21.30.
for he was afraid because of the sword of the Angel of the Lord.

And Nehemiah said, they all made us afraid, Neh. 6.9.
saying, Their hands shall be weakened.

And Job said (concerning the Lord) I am troubled at his presence, Job 23.15.
when I consider I am afraid of him.

And David said, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments. Psalm. 119.120. 2 Chronicles. 29.2.


And when a great multitude came against Jehoshaphat to battle, Jehoshaphat
feared.

And when Baruch read the roll in the ears of the princes, Jer. 36.15.
they were afraid both one and other.

And when Habakkuk heard that the Lord was displeased, Hab. 3.16.
he said, My belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered
into my by bones, and I trembled in my self.

And when the disciples saw him walking on the Sea they said, Mat. 14.26
It is a spirit, and cried out for fear.

4. Gods people in the time of danger and distress must humble themselves
before the Lord.

Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God. 1 Pet. 5.6.


Who fed thee in the wilderness with manna which thy fathers knew not, Deu. 8.16.
that he might humble thee and prove thee.

The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, Isa. 2.11.
and the haughtiness of man shall be bowed down.

Say unto the king and queen, Jer. 13.18.
Humble your selves, sit down, for your principalities shall come down, even
the crown of your glory.

Examples of Gods people who have thus humbled themselves.

When the Lord told Abraham that he would destroy Sodom, Gene. 18.27.
he said. Behold I have taken upon me now to speak unto the Lord that am but
dust and Ashes. Genesis 32.9, 10.


And when Jacob was in danger of his brother Esau, coming against him to
destroy him, he humbled himself before the Lord, saying, I am not worthy of
the least of al thy mercies, and of all thy truth which thou have showed unto
thy servant.

And when the people of God fled before the men of Ai, Joshua rent his clothes,
Jos. 7.6.
and fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of the Lord until the
eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.

And when Shemaiah the prophet came to king Rehoboam and told him, 2 Chronicles.
12.6.
that because he had forsaken the Lord, therefore the Lord had left him in the
hands of Shishak, he and the princes of Israel humbled themselves, and said,
The Lord is righteous.

And when Hezekiah through the lifting up of his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 26.
had brought wrath upon himself, and upon Judah and Jerusalem:

Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem.

And when Manasseh was in affliction he humbled himself. 2 Chronicles. 33.12.


And when Ezra heard that the Jews had done according to the abomination of the
Canaanites, Ezra 9.3, 4
he rent his garment and plucked the hair off his head and beard, and sat down
astonished, and there assembled unto him every one that trembled at the word of
the God of Israel.

And when Mordecai perceived that wicked Haman had obtained power of the king
to kill and destroy all the Jews, Hest. 4.1.
he rent his clothes, and put on sackcloath with Ashes.

And Job said, Job 42.56.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee,
therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

And David says, Psa. 35.13
when his enemies were sick, he clothed himself with sackcloth.

And the Church of God in the book of the Lamentations says, Lam. 3.19 20.
I remembering my aff^iction, and my misery, the wormwood and the gall, my soul
has them in remembrance, and is humbled in me.

5. Gods people in the time of danger and distress must pour out a prayer
before the Lord.

Is any afflicted? let him pray.

Call upon me in the day of trouble. Jam. 5.13. Psalm. 50.15 Psalm. 62.8. Jer.
29.12.


And pour out your hearts before him.

Then (namely in captivity) shall ye call upon me, and go and pray unto me.

And the Lord said to Jeremy in the dungeon, Jer. 33.3.
Call upon me and I will answer thee.

So likewise says the Lord Zech. 13*9. concerning his people, I will bring
them through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and try them
as gold is tried, and then they shall call upon my name and I will hear them.

Examples of Gods people who have prayed in time of danger and distress.

When the Lord had threatened Abimelech with death because of Sarah Abraham's
wife, Genesis 20.7.17.
Abraham prayed unto God.

And when Jacob heard that his brother Esau was coming against him, Genesis 32.9.
he prayed unto God, saying, Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my
brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear him.

And Moses said unto the people, Because the Lord had said he would destroy
you, Deuteronomy. 9.25 26.
I prayed therefore unto the Lord.

And when the children of Israel fled before the men of Ai, Joshua said, Jos.
7.7, 8.
Alas, O Lord God, what shall I say, when Israel turns their backs before
their enemies?

And when the prophet Esaias came unto Hezekiah, and said unto him, 2 Kings 20.1,
2.
Thus says the Lord, Set thine house in order, for thou shall die and not
live, he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord.

And when Hanna was in bitterness of soul she prayed. 1 Samuel 1.10. 2 Chronicles.
32.19, 20.


And when the servants of Senacherib threatened the people and spoke against the
God of Jerusalem, it is said, that for this cause Hezekiah the king, and the
prophet Esaias the son of Amos prayed and cried to heaven.

And when the Arabians and Ammonites, Neh. 4.7, 9
and the Ashdodites conspired to come and fight against Jerusalem, then says
Nehemiah We made our prayers unto our God.

And David says, 2 Samuel 22.7.
In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried to my God.

And Jonas prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fishes belly. Jona. 2.1.


And when Peter was in prison, Act. 12.5.
prayer was made without ceasing of the Church, unto God for him.

And when our Saviors soul was exceeding sorrowful unto death, Mar. 14.34.35.
he fell on the ground and prayed.

6. Gods people in the time of danger and distress must join with their
prayers, fasting, weeping and mourning.

Sanctify ye a Fast, call a solemn Assembly, Joel 1.14.
gather the Elders and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the
Lord your God, and cry unto the Lord.

Thus says the Lord, Joel. 2.12.
Turn ye even unto me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping,
and with mourning.

Blow the trumpet in Zion, verse 15.
sanctify a fast, assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that
suck the breasts, let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out
of her closet, let the Priests the ministers of the Lord weep between the
porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not
thy heritage to reproach, wherefore should they say among the people, Where is
their God?

O daughter of my people gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow thy self in
ashes, Jer. 6.26.
make thee mourning as for an only son, most bitter lamentations, for the
spoiler shall suddenly come upon us.

Thus says the Lord of hosts, Consider ye and call for the mourning women,
Jer. 9.17.18.
that they may come, and let them make have and take up a wailing for us, that
our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters.

In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, Zech. 12.21.12.
and the land shall mourn every family apart.

And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning,
Isa. 22.12.
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth.

Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, Jam. 4.9.
let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy into heaviness.

Examples of Gods people who have thus fasted wept and mourned.

When the children of Benjamin had twice prevailed against the children of
Israel and slain forty thousand of them; Judge. 20.21.25.


Then all the children of Israel, and all the people went up and came unto the
house of God, and wept, verse 26.
and sat there before the Lord, and fasted that day until even.

And when the children of Israel in the days of Samuel were in great distress
because of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 7.6
according to the advice of Samuel they gathered together to Mizpah, and drew
water, and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said, We
have sinned against the Lord.

And when the Lord struck the child that Uriahs wise bare unto David, 1 Samuel
21.75.
and it was very sick;

David therefore besought God for the child, 16.
and David fasted and went in and lay all night upon the earth.

And when there came a great company against Jehoshaphat to battle, 2 Chro. 20
1, 3.
he set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.

And when Nehemiah heard that his brethren in Jerusalem were in great
affliction and reproach, Neh. 1.3, 4.
and the wall of Jerusalem broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire,
he sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before
the God of heaven.

And when Haman had prevailed with the king to destroy the Jews in every
province, Est. 4.3.
whithersoever the kings commandment and his decree came, there was great
mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing, and many lay
in sackcloth and ashes.

And when word came to the King of Nineveh that within forty days his City
should be destroyed, Jon. 3.7, 8
he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Niniveh, Let neither man
nor beast, heard nor flock taste any thing, but let man and beast be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God.

Gods people in the time of danger and distress must turn from their evil
ways.

Now therefore go to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Jer.
18.11.
and speak to them, saying, Thus says the Lord, Behold I frame evil against
you, and devise a device against you, return ye now every one from his evil
way, and make your ways and your doings good.

Turn ye from your evil ways, 2 Kings 17.13.
and keep my Commandments and my Statutes.

Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, Eze. 33.11
for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

Let them turn every one from his evil way, Jona. 3.8.
and from the violence that is in their hands.

And if Gods people do use these means, God has graciously promised to
preserve them from danger feared, and from distress felt.

If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, 2 Chro. 7.13.
or if I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I send a Pestilence
among my people:

If my people which are called by my 14
name shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and
will heal their land.

Because thine heart was tender, 2 Chr. 34.27.
and thou did humble thy self before God, when thou heardst his words
against this place and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thy self
before me, and did rent thy clothes, and weep before me, I have heard thee
also, says the Lord.

See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? 1 Kin. 21.29.
because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days.

And call upon me in the day of trouble, Ps. 50.15.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

Then shall ye call upon me, Ier. 29.12.
and go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you.

And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord
shall be delivered: Joel 2.32.
for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has
said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.

If ye will fear the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.14.
and serve him and obey his voice, and not Rebel against the Commandments of
the Lord, then shall both ye and also the King that reigns over you continue
following the Lord.

And if ye turn again unto the Lord, 2 Chr. 30.6
your brethren and your children shall find compassion before them that lead
them Captive, so that they shall come again unto this land: for the Lord your
God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye
return unto him.

At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, Ier. 18.7.8
and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down, and to destroy it, if
that nation against whom I have pronounced turn from their evil, I will repent
of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all
my statutes, Ezc. 18.21
and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

Examples of Gods gracious performance of these promises to them that have
performed these duties.

Jacob performing these duties was delivered from his brother Esan, Genesis 33.4.

The children of Israel performing these duties, after they had lost forty
thousand men in two overthrowes, prevailed the third time against their
enemies, Judge. 20.43.

Joshua performing these duties, after that he had fled before the men of Ai,
prevailed against them, and destroyed the City, Is. 7.26.

The children of Israel in Samuels time performing these duties, 1 Samuel 7.10.
after that the Philistines had slain thirty thousand of them, they
discomfited the Philistines, and they were smitten before Israel.

King Rehoboam and the princes performing these duties, after that Shishak king
of Egypt had taken the fenced cities that pertained to Juda, the Lord said,
They have humbled themselves, therefore I will not destroy them, 2 Chro. 12.7.

King Jehoshaphat performing these duties, 2 Chro. 20, 23.
after that he heard there was a great multitude coming against him, was
wonderfully delivered from them, the Lord making them to destroy one another.

King Hezekiah performing these duties, after that the king of Assyria was come
against him with a multitude, and many reproachful speeches, was wonderfully
delivered from them, the Angel of the Lord in one night destroying an hundred
fourscore and five thousand of them, 2 King. 19.35.

King Asa performing these duties, after that Zerah the Ethiopian was come
against him with an host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred charets,
got the victory over them, the Lord smiting them before him, 2 Chronicles 14.12.

Ezra and Nehemiah performing these duties when they were in great danger of
their enemies, were by Gods special providence preserved from them, so that
they could not hinder the work, God bringing all the enemies counsel to
n^ught, Nehe. 4.15.

Mordecai, Esther and the rest of the Jews performing these duties, after that
Haman had obtained authority from the King to destroy, to kill, and to cause to
perish all Jews, they were delivered from them: For says the text, In the day
that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them, it turned
contrary, for the Jews had power over them that hated them, Est. 9.1.

King Manasseh performing these duties when he was in Babylon bound in fetters,
the Lord brought him again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 33.11 13.

The King of Nineveh and his people performing these duties, after that Jonah
had cried and said, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, they were
delivered: for, says the Text, God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he had said he would do
unto them, and he did it not, Iona. 3.4, 10.

The Church of God performing this duty in the behalf of Peter, when he was in
pris^n, obtained a miraculous deliverance for him, Act. 12.

FINIS.
This is Licensed according to order:


