EXPOSITORY NOTES, WITH Practical OBSERVATIONS;

TOWARD The opening of the five first Chapters of the first Book of Moses
called GENESIS.

Delivered by way of EXPOSITION In several Lords-dayes Exercises.

By BENJAMIN NEEDLER, Minister of the Gospel at Margaret Moses Friday-street,
LONDON.

Hereunto is added by way of Apendix certain Directions for the right
understanding of the Scriptures.

London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Nathanael Webb and William Grantham, at
the Bear in Paul's Church yard, near the little North-door. 1655

To the WORSHIPFUL, AND The rest his loving friends, The Parishioners of
MARGARET MOSES Friday-street, London.
Dearly beloved,
THe main design of a Minister of the Gospel, next to the glory of God,
should be the spiritual good, and advantage, as of the Church of God in
general, so of the flock committed to his charge in particular.

Had not this consideration been very powerful, and prevailing on my Spirit,
it would not have been able, to have broke through those many difficulties and
discouragements (amongst which the unworthiness, and weakness of the Author
was not the least) that did way-lay the publication of these papers.

The result of my thoughts being affirmative, as to the presenting of them to
public view, I determined to dedicate them to you my people.

The reasons that moved me to this, (besides your interest in the composer of
them, having been your Pastor now, for some years; and the equity of it, that
they that called for, and rejoiced in the first fruits of his Ministry, should
have tendered unto them the first fruits of his labors in this kind also) were
such as these.

1. That I might be instrument all to establish you in some of the truths of
Christ in these erroneous days; a fitter expedient hereunto I know not any
(next to the illumination of the Spirit) then the riight understanding of the
text; For these late years especially, the Devil has walked up and down our
streets with a Bible under his arm, and upon every turn pleads Scriptum est,
It is written.

2. That you might be the more confirmed, concerning the sweet harmony of the
Scriptures; how one Scripture sweetly embraces, and kisses each other, although
there be many in the world, that would if they could (Horrendum scelus!) make
them to fall out, and mutiny. One calls the Old Testament, and the New, Gods two
lips; whereby he breaths out the same truth. Some have gone about to find
contradictions in them, but the spirit of contradiction was in them, that went
about it. Oh that we could as well agree with them, as they agree with
themselves: while they are at peace in their doctrine, we are at war in their
interpretation.

3. That you might take notice of the obscurity of some texts of Scripture. We
may say of the whole book of the Scriptures, as Saint Peter does of all Paul's
Epistles: In which are some things hard to be understood: Some 2 Pet. 3. 16
things, though not all; there are some excellent herbs in the garden of the
Scriptures, whose names we know not. Difficilia quae pulchra. And these things,
They that are unlearned, and unstable, wrest, as they do also, the other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction. They deal with the Scriptures, as
Chemists deal with natural bodies, torturing them to extract something out of
them, which God and nature never put in them; Or as torturers deal with an
innocent man, make him speak that which he never thought; A seasonable Item
for these days, when men think a small measure of gifts sufficient for the
interpretation of Scripture.

God would not have the weakest of his people starved, and therefore some
truths are easy; nor the wisest of them cloyd, and sated, and therefore some
truths are obscure. Nor have we cause to murmur, or repine at this
dispensation. Since the fall, the understandings of men, are shrunk up, and
contracted. Shall the little vial be angry, because it cannot contain the
water in the Ocean? Shall the blind man blame the Sun, for shining no brighter?

4. That however God dispose of me by his providence, I might leave something
in your hands, which might be for your spiritual advantage: A Sermon, or
Exposition, if called to mind, (and I hope this small manual may be your
remembrancer) may do your souls good, seven, ten, twenty years after its
delivery. Physic does not always work when it is taken, no more do the
Ordinances. It Is said there, That many resorted unto Jesus and said, John did
no miracle, but all things Joh 10. 41, 42.
that John spoke of this man were true; and many believed on him there. John
had Preached of Christ before, but they did not believe in Christ when he
Preached; But when Christ comes amongst them; they upon John's Sermons preached
a great while before, then believed.

You have in these papers, (for I thought it not safe to go without a guide,
the way in many places being difficult) the conduct of several eminently
learned Authors, burning and shining lights, at whose torch my candle received
light, though I may say, to the praise of free grace, it shines not altogether
(unless we refer to God) with a borrowed, and derivative luster, etc.

One of these things I studied in this small piece, was plainness; it being
for a considerable part of it polemicall: And besides, truth is an excellent
Jewel, best when plain set.

I have several counsels to you, lying near my spirit, possibly I may have
another opportunity to offer them. At present let me exhort you (as most
pertinent to the business in hand) to a diligent study of the Word of God; To
this purpose, I have annexed by way of Appendix, certain directions for the
right understanding of the Scriptures; if they may be of any advantage to you,
bless God for them.

Beloved, the desire of my soul is, that your souls may be saved. This is the
prayer of

Your servant in the work of the Lord, Benjamin Needler.
From my Study at Bun-hill, Nov 17, 1654.
ERRATA.
Page 42, Line 9, for I read If p, 53, l, 3, f, four r, five, p, 73, l, ^3, f,
principilis r, principiis, p, 83, l, 1, f, the calling on, r, the carrying on,
p, 89, l, 11, f, Incommodum r, Incommodam, p, 95, l, 11, f, 8, r, or, 131, l,
3, f, gracious evidence, r, no gracious evidence, p, 150, l, 22, f, this, r,
thy, p, 208, l, 2, for esie, r, esse, p, 208, l, 23, f, sinon, r, sin.

EXPOSITORIE NOTES toward the opening of the first Chapter of Genesis.
(...).
THe distribution of Moses writings Moses, but by others: you may observe in
our Saviors time, when he quotes them, he phrases it, as it is written in the
Law, not in Genesis, or Exodus, etc.

The distribution of Moses writings into Bernards time.

The Divine authority of the Pentateuch, appears by the Lord Jesus owning of
them, Luke 20. 37. Now that the dead are raised, even Moses shows, when he
calls the Lord the God of Abraham, etc. So John 3.14. Ioh. 6.32. which cannot
be said of the books called Apocryphal.

Quest. 1. verse 1.
What is meant by the heaven and the earth?

By the heaven I conceive we are to understand two things.

The highest heaven, the heaven of the blessed, the dwelling place of glorified
heaven of heavens, 1 King. 8.27.

This heaven (I conceive) was made before the earth, although I lay not any
stresse upon the order of the words. Repentance is not before Faith, because
sometimes set in the first place in the text, nor was David before Abraham,
because David is set in the first place in the text, Matthew. 1. 1.

By the heaven we are to understand Angels, Job 38. 7. Where were thou, says
God, when I laid the foundations of the earth? viz. when the first matter was
made, of which the world was composed (for the earth, to speak strictly, is
without foundations, and hangs upon nothing, like a round ball in the air)
when the morning stars, viz. the Angels (for the lights of heaven, Sun,
Moon, and Stars were not yet created) sang together? etc.

To this purpose consider,

That all kinds of beings were created the

Angels are like the heaven in their spirituality,

The Saints are called heaven seven times verse 16. And the Rev. 12.
earth helped the woman: now if the Saints be called heaven in the Scripture,
why not the Angels?

From the consideration of the method,

By the earth is meant that whole confused yet without form, and void, as is
afterward described in the second verse: now this might be called the earth,
as when an house is in fieri, we call it an house, and say, an house is a
building.

Quest. 2. verse 1.
It is said God created the heaven, and the earth, and yet 2 Cor. 4. 4. Satan
is called the God of this world.

God is the God of the world, ratione creationis, in regard of creation; Satan
is the god of the world, ratione cultus, in regard of service, He rules in the
children of disobedience.

Quest. 3. verse 2.
Why God should begin time with darkness?

It is no greater a wonder, then that the

Darkness is a privation, now the habit must always actually go before the
privation in the same subject.

This darkness was rather a negation,

Take privation largely, and so it may be in subjecto capaci: As silence may be
before speech and blindness before sight, in a man, who is a subject capable
of both; so here darkness might be before light, because the subject of the
first matter was capable of both.

Quest. 4. verse 3.
God said, verse 3. Let there be light, and yet Sun, Moon, and Stars not
created till the fourth day?

That light, which before the fourth day

Quest. 5. verse 5.
It is said, The evening and the morning was the first day; now how could there
be morning or evening before the Sun was created?

Evening and Morning in this place, is was light, Evening for all that time it
was dark.

There is no argument from the present

Quest. 6. verse 11, 12.
Whether the World began with the Autumn?

Some have thought that it began in the

1. Because the spring is the time of increase, as we fin de by experience in
fish and foul.

2. Because Adam was thrust out of Paradise to till the ground, and springtime
is aptest for tillage.

Others, and I conceive more probably, think the world began in the Autumn:
for it is said expressly, that the earth brought forth ^^^sse, and herb
yielding seed after his ^work^ the tree yielding fruit, whose seed (...) self
after its kind so that as man (...) a child, but a perfect man, so the trees
and plants were created in their perfection; and therefore when the Serpent
tempted our first parents, which was immediately after their creation, the Tree
of knowledge of good and evil had fruit fully ripe on it. The woman saw that
the tree Genesis 3. 6.
was good for food, and that it was pleasant for the eyes.

Quest. 7. verse 14.
Whether from those words, let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for
days, and for years, Astrological predictions be warrantable?

Neg. There are two sorts of predictions

1. Praedictiones naturales, natural predictions, viz. when by the rising or
setting of the heavenly luminaries, by their opposition, conjunction, and
various aspects we are able to foretell natural events, viz. the Eclipse of the
Sun and Moon, etc.

2. Praedictiones civiles, civil predictions, viz. when the husbandman, by the
course of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, is able to say when it will be a
commodious season, for sowing, setting, ingraffing, pruning, etc.

So that we say with the Scriptures, that the Stars are for signs, viz. for
signs, and seasons, and days, and years: And that they are not only
ornamental, but influential: As trees and herbs were created, not only to
beautify the earth, but otherwise for the use of man and beast, to feed them,
and to cure them; so the Stars were created, not only to beautify the heavens,
but for the use and comfort of man. Certainly if God has given virtue to
springs, and fountains, stones, minerals, plants, every spire of grass that
grows upon the earth, much more to the Stars of heaven. But,

3. Praedictiones Astrologicae, Astrological Predictions, when men from the
consideration of the face of the heavens, will take upon them to foretell
contingent events, which shall befall Kingdoms or Commonwealths, or particular
persons, these are unlawful.

1. They are Antiscriptural: Deuteronomy. 18. 14. Esaias 44. 25. Esaias 47. 13. Jer. 10.
1, 2.

2. They are unreasonable: if there were any certainty in the Astrological Art
it would appear in those Predictions that concern the weather, which is the
proper subject of the Planets operation: but how false, and uncertain those
are, I shall leave to any to judge, that will read them without prejudice.

It Is the observation of a learned Author, that the weather may be guessed by
the heavens when the time is near, and natural causes have begun to work. As in
the Evening we may guess of the weather the next day, and in the Morning of
the weather in the Afternoon: that a cloud will bring a shower, and
South-winde heat, according to that of our Savior* When a cloud Luke 12. 54,
55.
arises out of the West, straightway ye say, There comes a shower; and when
ye see the South-winde blow, ye say, There will be heat: but long before to
declare these things is impossible.

To this purpose is that of Ambrose (says he) when rain was desired of all,
and one said the new Moon will bring rain, although we were desirous of
rain, it did me good no rain fell, till it came at the prayers of the Church
that it might appear it came not by the influence of the moon, but by the
providence of God. A man can no more tell what God will do, by looking upon the
Stars, and Heavens, then one can tell the counsels and determinations of a
Prince by looking on his Palace.

It Is sad to think how apt we are to run into extremes, some are so bold as to
ascribe the knowledge of future contingencies unto man; some so disingenuous,
as to deny it to God: have a care of both, the one is Scylla, the other
Charybdis; things are contingent to us, which are not so to God. In a
Syllogism, if the major be necessary, yet if the minor be contingent, the
conclusion is contingent: the first cause is certain, the second causes
fluctuating, and wavering, hence flows contingencie* We use to say, Omne quod
est quando est necesse est esse; God sees things in termino, in periodo, hence
they are certain to God; we see things in motu, in itinere, hence they are
contingent to us: those things which are contingent in regard of their own
natures, are certain in regard of Gods foreknowledge, and in subordination to
his decree.

Quest. 8. verse 14.
Why the Lord made the light, and days, and nights, as also the earth to yield
her increase, before the Sun, and Stars were created?

That the Lord might teach us, though tied to means. He has bound us to them,
but he has not bound himself. He has made the Sun to give us light, yet he is
able to give light without the Sun. God with all the creatures that he has
made, is no more then God without any of the creatures that he has made.

Quest. 9. verse 24.
It is said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind,
cattle, and creeping things. Now the question is whether in the beginning
every creeping thing was created?

Neg. Augustine was of opinion, that Vallesius in his book de sacra
Philosophia, renders the reason of it: Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest
per pauciora: God saw that these would be produced by generation alone, and
therefore what need was there of creation?

Quest. 10. verse 25.
It is said, God made the beasts of the earth, the sixth day, Now the question
is, why the beasts were created with man, rather then with fishes or fowls?

The reason may be this: man was not

Quest. 11. verse 25.
Whether those kinds of creatures, which are brought forth by a mixed
generation, as the Mule by the mixture of the Ass and the Mare, were created?

Neg. Says the judicious Willet, for

1. Because these are not distinct kinds of creatures from others, but the
first kinds made in the creation, mixed, and conjoined together.

2. Because we find it directly expressed, that Anah found the Mules in the
Genesis 36. 24
Wilderness, as he fed the Asses of Zibeon his father; this is set down as
strange, and therefore they were not created ab initio.

Quest. 12. verse 26.
Wherefore God said, Let us make man in our Image? and not, Let there be man,
as he said, Let there be a firmament, Let there be light, Let the earth bring
forth the living thing?

The Scripture herein speaks (...),

Quest. 13. verse 26.
God said, Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and the fowls of
the air, and the cattle, but the question is, whether if man had not fallen,
one man had had power over another?

Superiority and inferiority, dominion,

Divines therefore distinguish between natural subjection and civil; natural
subjection should have continued in the state of integrity, but as for civil
subjection, there had been no such thing in the world: if man had continued to
serve God, he needed none to serve him; service come in by sin, and the
increase of it, by the increase of sin.

We see, when Canaan was so vile, as to forget the duty of a son, he is set
in the lowest condition of a servant. Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants
shall he be unto Genesis 9. 5.
his brethren, viz. the lowest, and most abject servant. As God of gods the
greatest God, the Lord of lords, the highest Lord, so servant of servants, the
lowest, and basest servant.

Quest. 14. verse 27.
God is said to create man after his own image, and Paul says that the man is
the image and glory of God, but the woman is the 1 Cor. 11. 7.
glory of the man: the question is, whether the woman was not made after Gods
image, as well as the man?

We may consider man and woman two rational creatures, and so without question
the woman was made after the image of God as well as the man: but now consider
them as to their sex, or as to their relations of man and wife, so man is her
superior, and in regard of that authority that the man has over the woman the
man is said to be the image of God, and the woman the glory of her husband; and
well may she be called the glory of man, for it was a far greater honor for
man, to have dominion over one of his own kind, then over all the beasts.

Quest. 15. verse 27.
It Is said, both man and woman were created the sixth day, male and female
created he them, and yet after the six days were over, it is said, The Lord
caused a deep sleep Genesis 2.21 22.
to fall upon Adam, and he slept, and of one of his ribs he made a woman?

These Scriptures are easily reconciled; In the first chapter the Spirit of God
tells viz. he created the man, and woman, male and female; In the second
chapter he tells us Gods manner of doing it.

Quest. 16. verse 28.
It Is said God blessed them, and said, Be fruitful and multiply: and yet our
Savior says, Luke 23. 29. Behold the days are coming when they shall say,
Blessed are the barren, etc. and so in another place, Woe to them that are with
child in those days. Mat. 24.19


To have children; to be fruitful, in its self considered, is a mercy; and to
be preferred

Quest. 17. verse 29.
Whether the eating of flesh or fish was allowed by God to our forefathers
before the flood? for after the flood we find this liberty was given, Every
moving thing that lives shall be meat for you: but in this Gen 9.3.
chapter, when God speaks of the provision made for man, he only speaks of
Trees, and Herbs, and Vegetables.

I humbly conceive the Affirmative, inclined

1. God did not forbid them eating of flesh, and therefore left them to their
liberty.

2. What use could there be made of fish, and many other creatures, if they had
not been allowed for meat?

3. They offered up Sacrifices of their cattle, Abel brought of the firstlings
of his Genesis 4.4.
flock: Now it was a thing received and taken for granted among the Jews, that
they might eat of their Sacrifices.

4. They wore the skins of beasts, and therefore it is likely, they ate also
the flesh; Unto Adam also, and unto his wife, did the Genesis 3.21.
Lord God make coats of skins.

But after the flood God expressly permitted the eating of flesh, and
therefore he

Negativa non probant. By the same reason Posita causa ponitur effectus: Now
the Rainbowe is caused by the Sun shining upon a watery cloud: It is true, it
was not the token of Gods Covenant till after the flood, but it was before.

God did not after the flood give man a right to that, which he had not before
the flood, but only reinvested him with those possessions, and privileges,
which he had been cast out of, by reason of his sin.

Notes on the second Chapter.
Quest. 1. verse 1, 2.
HOw is it said, that God ended his work the seventh day, when God is totus
actus, and besides, John 5. 17 our Savior says, My Father works hitherto,
and I work?

Cessavit ab actu creationis non ab actu.

Moses does not say simply he rested from all his work, but from all his work
which he had made, viz. from the works of creation: and therefore that of our
Savior, my Father works hitherto, and I work, must be understood of the
works of providence.

But the souls of all the men and women

God rested from the creation of species

But the earth afterward brought forth Genesis 3.17, 18.

I know no inconvenience will follow,

But there are several things in the world,

Some things were created in their perfection,

Quest. 2. verse 3.
Whether God did from the first creation, appoint that the seventh day should
be kept as an holy Sabbath? or whether this be spoken by way of Prolepsis, or
Anticipation, viz. because God rested from his work upon the seventh day,
therefore he did afterward, at the time of the giving of the Law ordain, that
every seventh day of the week should be kept holy, as a Sabbath of rest unto
the Lord.

The Sabbath was appointed from the

It cannot be denied, but that it is an usual thing in Scripture, to set down
things in way of Prolepsis, or Anticipation, as they call it, to set down
things aforehand, in the History, which happened many years afterward: but
there is no such Prolepsis here, as if the meaning should be that he did this
two thousand five hundred years after the creation. It is observable that
throughout the whole Scripture, we shall not find one Prolepsis, but that the
History is evidently and apparently false, unless we do acknowledge a
Prolepsis and Anticipation to be in the History: the necessity of establishing
the truth of the History, only can establish the truth of a Prolepsis in the
History: but in this place alleged, can any say that the story is apparently
false, unless we imagine the Sabbath to be first sanctified on mount Sinai?

But Gods sanctifying the Sabbath may be expounded thus: God did actually
purpose to sanctify it after the giving of the Law.

If to sanctify the seventh day, be only ab aeterno: for then God purposed it
should be sanctified, etc.

For the further clearing of this truth, I shall give you the Arguments of some
learned persons, why they conceive that the Sabbath was not instituted till the
giving of the Law on mount Sinai.

Adam in innocence should not have

The Sabbath was instituted, not for Return to thy rest, O my soul, says the
Psalmist: The rest of the soul is not a ceasing from all operation, for that
cannot stand with the nature of a spirit; hence the soul is called (...), an
act, because it is still in action, a spirit cannot be, and not act; but when
the soul centers on God, then it is said to rest.

Bodies rest in their proper places, and souls rest in the enjoying of their
proper objects. Now Adam in innocence, though his body was not subject to
weariness, might stand in need of such a rest as this is.

Adam was to serve God in a particular God took the man and put him into the
garden of Eden, that he might dress it, and keep Genesis 2. 5.
it; now Luther professes, It follows from hence, says he, that if Adam had
stood in his innocence, yet he should have kept the seventh day holy, viz. on
that day he should have taught his children, what was the Word of God, and
wherein his worship did consist, and wholly have sequestered himself to his
service; on other days he should have dressed and kept the garden; though every
day was to be spent in holiness mediately, in seeing God in the creatures, and
meeting with God in his labor, yet it was not unsuitable for that estate, to
have one day in the week, for more immediate, and special converse with God;
and though it was no pain to him to dress the garden, yet this must needs
take up his thoughts while he was about it.

The Saints and Angels in Heaven, have had no set Sabbath, and why man in
innocence?

The state of innocence on earth, should

We do not read, that there was any other that they should not eat of the
forbidden fruit. Now the command of God for the observation of the Sabbath, is
a positive command, and that appears, because, although the worship of God do
belong to the Law natural, viz. founded in the Law of nature yet the
circumstance of time, when God in an especial manner is to be worshipped, that
we should keep an holy rest unto the Lord every seventh day, this is a positive
precept, and was never determined by the Law of nature.

That Adam had from the creation, at God sanctified the seventh day: Now,
though this word is variously taken in the Scripture, yet in this place, the
seventh day must be said to be sanctified one of these two ways:

Either by infusion of holiness, or sanctification

By separation of it from common use, and dedication of it to an holy use, as
the

Now if the Sabbath were thus sanctified, it must either be for the use of God,
or man; either God must impose upon himself the observation of every seventh
day to keep it holy, which is absurd; or else it was dedicated and consecrated
for man's sake and use: and if so, man had that which amounted to a positive Law
for the observation of the Sabbath.

When Moses makes repetition of the Deuteronomy. 5. 15. he lays down this as a
ground of the observation of the seventh day as a Sabbath, the deliverance of
Israel out of Egypt, therefore the Sabbath was not instituted from the creation.

This that is urged is placed by God by for the observation of all the
Commandments, yet who will say that none of them were in force till the
deliverance of Israel out of Egypt?

This was one reason why the Sabbath Exodus 20. 6. the reason that is rendered
there, why the seventh day is the Sabbath, is this, for in six days, the Lord
made heaven and earth, etc.

The Jews were to observe the Sabbath not only upon the ground of its first
institution, but upon reasons, proper, and peculiar to that Nation. It is
likely their deliverance out of Egypt, was on the Sabbath day, and therefore
urged by Moses, as a ground of their observation of it.

We find not any express mention, Moses time did sanctify a Sabbath.

We may as well argue, it was not kept Samuel, because no express mention made
in those Books of any such thing.

No doubt, but they observed it, because Sinai.

The like may we say of the Patriarchs Sinai, because it was sanctified from
the Creation.

Abraham is commended for keeping Gods Commandments, and the Sabbath is one of
Genesis 26.5.
them.

We may as well argue, that the Patriarchs: yea,

It is plain in the Scripture, that the Jews did keep the Sabbath before the
This is that which the Lord has said, To morrow is the rest of the holy Exo
16.23
Sabhath unto the Lord, etc.

I might add, that it is not improbable, but the sacrifices of Cain and Abel
were upon the Sabbath Day, the usual stated time for such services: If a time
had not been set apart even in Adams days, for Divine service, how improbable
is it, that Cain and Abel should concur at the same time, in bringing their
offerings unto the Lord? and if not at the same time, how could Cain discern
that Abels offering was respected, and accepted of God, when his was Genesis 4.3.
not? and besides, it is said, In process of time it came to pass, that Cain
brought of the fruit of the ground, an offering unto the Lord. In the process
of time, or at the end of days, as it is in the margin of your Bibles, and as
the original will bear it, viz. on the Sabbath Day; when there is an end of the
days of the week, and they begin again.

I might add, that it is not improbable, but that Noah and his family kept the
Sabbath in the Ark; for it is said, that he stayed Genesis 8. 10, 12.
other seven days, and sent forth the Dove out of the Ark; and verse 12. He
stayed other seven days, and sent forth the Dove: why did Noah this on the
seventh day? It was likely that then Noah and his family were at prayer, and
engaged in the worship and service of God, and at such times it is good to make
experiments of Gods fatherly care of us, and providence over us.

Quest. 3. verse 4.
In the first Chapter it is said, that God made the heavens, and the earth, in
six days, and in this verse it is said, These are the generations of the
heaven, and the earth, in the day that the Lord God made the earth, and the
heavens.

From this place some would gather, that Moses does divide the creation into
six days propter captum, that it might be the better understood.

Others conceive, that Moses relates to

Others think, with whom I close, that Moses does not speak strictly here, but
indefinitely, in the day the Lord made the earth, that is to say, in the time
the Lord made the earth: so it is taken in other places of Scripture, To day if
you will hear Psalm 95.7.
his voice, etc.

Quest. 4. verse 5.
How God could be said to create every plant of the field before it was in the
earth?

Either the meaning is, that they were potentialiter, in the first mass, and
so created before they were in the earth.

Or else the meaning is this, God created every plant of the field, before it
was in the earth, viz. there was not a plant in the earth, before God created
it.

Quest. 5. verse 7.
It is said, God formed man of the dust of the earth: How can man be said to be
made of dust, or earth, when he is made of the four elements, earth, fire,
air, water?

Moses says, God formed man of the dust of the earth, but not only of the dust
of the earth.

Moses loquitur de terra, ut de causa partiali, non totali: Moses speaks of the
dust, but as part of that matter, of which man was made.

But he expresses the one, and therefore

This is just as if a man, by calling one his

Quest. 6. verse 7.
Why does the Lord speak distinctly in this verse concerning man's body and
soul? We shall find God speaks of other creatures in the bulk, body and soul
together, Let the waters bring forth abandantly, the moving creature that has
life, and so, verse Genesis 1. 20 24
24. Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind? etc.

To note the spirituality and immateriality non educitur ex potentia materiae,
as the Learned phrase it; but the body was made of one kind of substance, and
the soul of another: for, Consider.

1. The condition, and nature of its object, speaks this truth; Seneca could
say, Hoc habet argumentum anima suae divinitatis, quod illam divina delectant;
This argument of its spirituality, has the soul of man, in its own essence,
that it is delighted with things divine and spiritual. If the soul were
material, we could not reach to the knowledge of any thing but that which is
material: and we might as well see Angels with our eyes, as understand them
with our minds. We say, Receptio fit per modum recipientis; you cannot fill a
chest with virtue.

2. Its independence on the body: it is able of it self to perform its own
actions, without the help and concurrence of the outward man. It sees when the
eyes beshut, and sometimes sees not when the eyes be open. It travelleth while
the body rests and rests when the body travelleth, Rev. 1. 10. When John
saw his glorious revelation, he is said to be in the spirit: when Paul had his
revelations, and saw things unutterable, he knew not, whether he were in the
body or out of the body: for believers to know, that there are laid up for the
Saints such joys, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard: what is this but
to leave sense behind us, and outrun our bodies?

3. Time that wears out all corporeal things, adds perfection to the souls and
understandings of men: old men, who have the weakest bodies, have the most
lively and vigorous souls: yea, we may observe, that men who have the most
admirable soul-accomplishments, have usually the weakest bodies, and are not of
the longest lives. It Is a remarkable passage, that of Saint John to Gaius, I
wish, says he, that thy body prospered, even as thy soul prospers.

Here is a clear text against the Atheists of these days, that question
whether there

Quest. 7. verse 7.
In what sense these words are to be understood, He breathed into his face the
breath of life? for the Manichees from hence held, that the soul was part of
Gods Essence, as the breath is part of a man's substance.

It is true, in man's breath there is part of if Moses should have said,
Jehovah, by the power of his Spirit, without making use of any elementary
matter, breathed into man a vital soul.

An horrid blasphemy to think the Essence of God should be subject to change,
ignorance, sin, etc. as the soul is.

Quest. 8. verse 7.
Why is God said to breath into his nostrils or face the breath of life, rather
then into any other part of the body?

Because the operations of the soul discover themselves in no part of the body,

And besides, the face and head is the seat of all the senses, except the
touch, which indeed is spread all over the body; so that the principal part of
the body, is put here for the whole: God breathed into his nostrils the breath
of life, viz. into his body the breath of life.

Because life seems to be seated in the nostrils: Nares Externum Respirationis
organum:

Quest. 9. verse 8.
Why the Lord planted the Garden of Eden for the use of man, when he knew that
man would not continue in his primitive state, and so by consequence be cast
out of Paradise?

God would deal with man, not according

God placed him in Paradise, that he

Gods dispensation herein, toward man,

Quest. 10. verse 8.
It is said, That there viz. in Paradise God put the man whom he had formed;
Now the question is, whether there were any other creatures in Paradise besides
man?

Affir. For these Reasons.

1. Because man while he was in Paradise, had dominion over all the creatures.

2. If Eve had neither seen the Serpent. nor any other creature before the
temptation, it is likely she would have been startled with the sight of the
Serpent, and not easily have treated with it.

3. If the beasts had not been in Paradise, man would have been deprived of
that great pleasure that he might be partaker of, from the sight of the variety
of creatures, over which he had dominion.

4. Because man gave names to the creatures in Paradise, verse 20.

Quest. 11. verse 9.
Why one of the trees that was planted by God in the midst of Paradise, was
called the tree of life.

Some conceive, that it was called so effective, Adam immortal.

Others conceive, with whom I rather close, that it was called so
significative, because

But it seems, that the fruit of the tree And the Lord said, Behold, the man
is become like one of us, to know good and evil; Genesis 3.22.
now lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, therefore
the Lord sent him forth from the garden of Eden, etc.

I suppose this is an Ironical expression: Behold, the man is become like one
of us, to know good and evil, this was spoken ironically, and the meaning was,
they were become most unlike him: so in these words ironically he upbraids him
after the same manner, Lest, says the Lord, he put forth his hand, and take
also of the tree of life; and eat, and live for ever; not that there was any
danger of his living for ever, but in derision of any such hope, or expectation.

Quest. 12. verse 9.
Whether the tree of life in Paradise was a type of Christ?

Neg. For the clearing of this* consider,

1. That we should be very wary of Allegorizing any part of the Scriptures: The
Libertines of our times, are so daring, as to turn all the Scriptures into an
Allegory: as the Gnostics of old, made abstinence from adultery forbidden in
the seventh Commandment, a type of our spiritual chastity: it is the design of
some frothy wits to typisie, and allegorize Gods Commandments out of the Law,
and his truths out of the Gospel.

2. That it is an unwary Assertion, that the tree of life in Paradise was a
type of Christ; although the tree of life, and sundry other things in Paradise,
are made similitudes to set forth Jesus Christ, yet it is agross mistake, to
make every metaphor, or similitude, and allusion to be a type. The Husbandmans
sowing of the seed, is a similitude of preaching the Word, yet it is no type of
it: The head, and the members of man's body, are similitudes of Christ, the
head, and the Church, his members; but will any affirm these were types of
Christ? Just thus was the tree of life, a similitude, to which the holy Ghost
alludes in making mention of Christ, but not a type: and the reason is, because
the Covenant of works, by which Adam was to live, is directly contrary to the
Covenant of grace, by faith in Christ: Adam therefore was not capable of any
types then to reveal Christ to him, of whom the first Covenant cannot speak,
and of whom Adam stood in no need.

But though Adam stood in no need of Adam had not sinned, Christ should have
been incarnate, and that then he should have been head of mankind, as now
the head of Angels? and if so, the tree of life might be a type of Christ.

If the tree of life was a type of man's

I conceive it a dangerous assertion to say Christ would have been incarnated
if Adam had not sinned: because the Scripture names this to be the principal
end of Christ's coming into the world, to save that which was lost: Ultra
Scripturam sapere est insanire.

May not a man say, the tree of life was a type of Christ by Anticipation?

This is as much as to say it was not a type

Quest. 13. verse 9.
Why was the other tree called the tree of knowledge of good and evil?

Not Effective, because the fruit thereof had any such quality, or virtue, that
being eaten, it would work, and increase knowledge, or quickness of wit:
indeed the Socinians border upon this opinion, and they say, Adam and Eve were
created simple and weak in knowledge, and that this tree was to beget it, and
increase it.

But significative, because it was another sacramental sign annexed to the
Covenant viz. the worth of good, by the want of it, and the presence of evil,
by the sense of it.

But it is said, Man is become like one of us, knowing good and evil: now God
cannot be said to know the worth of good, by the want of it, or the presence of
evil, by the sense of it.

The Lord speaks those words Ironically,

Quest. 14. verse 15.
It is said, God put the man into the garden of Eden to dress it, and yet
afterward, it is pronounced as a curse: In the sweat of thy face, thou shall
eat thy bread, Genesis 3.16.


Man should have labored if he had continued

Quest. 15. verse 16, 17.
Here the Lord gives a Law to man, Of every tree of the garden thou may
freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not
eat; and yet, the Apostle says, The Law is not made for the 1 Timothy 1.9
righteous.

The Law is not made to the righteous

The Apostle speaks of Gospel Times, when does it follow, as a Reverend Author
very well observes, that there is no Law because it does not curse. It is a
good rule in Divinity, A remotione actus secundi in subjecto impediti, non
valet argumentum ad remotionem actus primi; From the removal of an act or
operation, the argument does not hold to the removing of the thing it self: As
it does not follow, The fire did not burn the three Worthies, therefore there
was no fire: God did hinder the act: And if that could be in natural agents,
which work naturally, how much rather in moral? such as the Law is of
condemnation, which works according to the appointment of God.

Quest. 16. verse 16, 17.
Why would God give man a positive (...) ^esides that natural Law that was
(...) his heart?

(...) thereby Gods dominion and pow^^ (...) man might be the more
acknow^^^ged: man might have submitted to the ^oral Law of God, not so much in
order ^o the command, as because it was suitable to that principle which was
within him; for the Moral Law at first was written in man's heart: Even as the
Heathens do abstain from many sins, not because forbidden by God, but as
dissonant to their natural reason, therefore God gives him a positive Law: Ut
nulla alia causa esset obedientiae, nisi obedientia. So that the forbidding to
eat, was not from any sin in the action, but from the will of the Lawgiver:
As if a man forbid another to touch such an herb, because it is poison, this
herb is contrary to a man's health, whether it be forbidden or not, and
therefore he may abstain from it, not because of the command, but because it
is contrary to his health: but to forbid the eating of something, that is
wholesome to the body, and delightful to the taste, here indeed is a trial of
obedience.

Quest. 17. verse 16, 17.
Whether sensitive creatures be capable of being under the obligation of a Law?

Neg. Inter bruta silent Leges: for

1. There can be no satisfaction to justice, in inflicting an evil upon them;
no satisfaction to be had from such things, as are not apprehensive of
punishment. Seneca, Quam stultum est his irasci, quae iram nostram nec
meruerunt, nec sentiunt.

2. A punishment inflicted upon them has no power to mend brutes, or to give
an example to others amongst them.

3. Nec turpe nec honestum among them, no duty, nor obedience to be expected
from them, no praise nor dispraise due to them: no punishment nor reward to be
distributed among them.

Levit. 20. 15. I a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death, and
ye shall slay the beast.

The meaning of that place is not this, bestia cum homine concumbens was to be
stoned.

1. Because it was the occasion of so foul a fact, and so fatal punishment
unto man.

2. That the sight, and presence of the object might not repeat so prodigious a
crime, in the thoughts of men.

Exo. 21. 28. If an Ox gore a man or a woman that they dye, then the Ox shall
be stoned.

This was ad poenam exigendam a domino

Quest. 18. verse 17.
It is said, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, what is
meant by death in that place?

Spiritual, temporal, eternal death.

1. Spiritual death, this is comprehended

2. Temporal death, for so the Spirit of God expounds his meaning afterward;
In the Genesis 3.19.
sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread: dusl thou art, and to dust shall
thou return.

3. Eternal death, this is cleared by the Apostle Paul, when he says, The
wages of sin is death; and that he principally Rom 6.23
intends eternal death in that place, is clear by the life to which it is
opposed, The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Quest. 19. verse 17.
Whether Adam was created mortal? or, Whether Adam was mortal before his

Neg. As appears by the threat pronounced

It Is said of God, Who only has immortality, Tim. 6.16.

A thing may be said to be immortal several

1. Simply, and independently; immortal omni modo, in every respect, and so is
that Scripture to be understood, Who only has immortality.

2. Immortal secundum substantiam, in regard of its substance: there are some
beings that are segregated from matter, and corporeity, and are not e potentia
Materiae Educti, as the Learned phrase it: as Angels and rational souls: now
these though they are not immortal simply, and independently, yet they are so,
as I may phrase it, substantially.

3. Immortal by the power and mercy of God, or immortal by the power and
justice of God: the power and justice of God given immortality to the bodies of
the damned in hell, and the power and goodness of God gives immortality to the
bodies of the Saints in glory: now these, though mortal and corruptible
substantialy, yet are immortal and incorruptible by the power, justice, and
goodness of God.

4. Immortal ex hypothesi: when a thing may be said to be mortal in regard of
its constitution, yet immortal upon this supposition, if it continue in its
obedience: and in this sense, Adam was created immortal.

So that Adam in the state of innocence might be said to be mortal in regard of
the composure of his body, immortal because he had potentiam non moriendi, a
possibility not to die.

Yet we must consider, there was a great deal of difference between the
mortality of Adams body in the sense before mentioned, before the fall, and
after the fall; the one was natural, the other contracted by sin: Before the
fall, he might be said to be mortal, because he had a posse mori, he might die;
after the fall, he might be said to be mortal, because he had a non posse non
mori, he must die.

The Arguments of the Socinians, whereby they would prove Adam to be mortal, in
regard of his body and the composure of it, we are ready to grant, and yet
keepto our principle, that Adam was not created mortal.

The Arguments brought by the Socinians against this truth are these.

Adam dyed not the death of the body

Though Adam dyed not a natural death,

Though death it self did not instantly

Adam and Eve, before the fall were to Luke 20.35. They that shall be accounted
worthy to obtain the immortal state, and the resurrection from the dead,
neither marry nor are given in marriage.

Our Savior speaks there of the

An earthly man is a mortal man: the first man of the earth, earthly. 1 Cor.
15. 47


An earthly sinful man and mortal are terms convertible, not an earthly man
and

Adam was to eat and drink, and this

This was not suitable to the state of immortality

Posita Causa ponitur Effectus; now Composition

There was the Cause of mortality in in potentia remota, not in potentia
proxima for at present, there was no consumption of the parts, no fighting, nor
disorder among the Elements, nor should this have been reduced into act, had it
not been for man's sin: let it not seem strange that datur potentia quae non
reducatur in actum. There is a power in God to make ten thousand worlds, which
notwithstanding shall never be made, and so his power not reduced into act.

Quest. 20. verse. 17.
Whether death was inflicted on man, as a punishment for sin?

Affir. This appears by the threat pronounced

All punishment is from God: But death

Death is not a Deo effectore, Death is not

That which is homini natural, natural to man, that cannot be the punishment
of

Natural, or that which is natural may be taken two manner of ways.

Proprie for that which is essentiale naturae, essential to nature; as to
understand, to will, essentiale semper competit: and therefore in this sense
death is not natural.

Improprie, for those things which do adhere

Christ has delivered us from all that Adam did contract and deserve; but
Christ has not delivered us from death; godly dye as well as ungodly,
believers as well as infidels; therefore death was not inflicted, as a
punishment for sin.

Christ has delivered his people from whatsoever is evil in death, he has
taken away

He will take it away wholly at last: Oh death, where is thy sting? Oh grave,
where is thy Victory? Christ at present has taken away the sting of death, and
hereafter he will take away its Victory.

Quest. 20. verse 18.
How are we to understand that speech, It is not good for man to be alone? God
creaed man alone, and Moses says that all that God made, was very good.

We may answer it thus, non bonum, is not in malum. The meaning is not, It is
not good for man to be alone, viz. it is evil, dishonest, or sinful for man to
be alone; but it is not good, viz. it is not expedient; bonum est honestum,
utile, jucundum.

We may answer it thus, and advance further: solitude was not only good for

Quest. 21. verse 18.
It is said here It is not good for man to be alone; and yet, 1 Cor. 7. 1. the
Apostle says, It is good for a man not to touch a woman.

In the one place Moses speaks of a specifical good, or the good of the kind;
in the

But is not here a Scripture to justify a Monastical life, It is good for a
man not to touch a woman, and we are all bound to that which is good?

We are all bound to bonum simpliciter to bonum (...) good in some respect, est
fallacia a dicto secundum quid ad simpliciter.

Quest. 22. verse 18.
God says I will make him an help meet for him; and yet on the sixth day, when
God made both the man and the woman, it is said, Let us make man, there in the
plural number, here in the the singular.

This was to show the Unity of essence

Quest. 23. verse 18.
How the woman was made an help meet for Adam, when in stead of helping him she
deceived him?

Here is, as the Learned call it, fallacia Accidentis; she that was given by
God to man, to be an help meet for him, by the malice of the devil, and the
abuse of her own free will became a seducer of him.

Though the woman did deceive the

1 Cor. 7.34. the Apostle says, The unmarried woman cares for the things of
the Lord, but she that is married cares for the things of the World: therefore
the wife is rather an impediment to man in the ways of holiness, then an help
meet for him.

Here also is fallacia Accidentis: we From the beginning it was not so?

The Apostles assertion is not universal,

The Apostle speaks not of what

Quest. 24. verse. 19.
It Is said, That God brought the creatures unto Adam to see what he would call
them, which implies Adams great knowledge; now the question is how far this
knowledge did extend?

There are four kinds of things excepted: 1. The decrees of God. 2. His fall
3. The secret thoughts of the heart. 4. The number of all individualls, viz.
how many sands there are in the sea, how many birds in the air, And 5. Futura
contingentia.


Quest 25. verse 21.
Why the Lord caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and why the woman was
formed, Adam sleeping, rather then Adam waking?

Some conceive, because God would discover in a dream (an usual way whereby
Adam, that he had formed a woman of his Rib, and that he had given her unto him
to be an help meet for him: and hence it was say they, that Adam, when the
woman was brought unto him, said, This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my
flesh.

Some hold that Adam was cast into a Eve was made, might be taken from him
without pain; Physicians cauterize the part, that they intend to cut off.

Which I rather close with, others Adam was cast into a deep sleep by God, that
he might not be a spectator of his workmanship, but an admirer of it: God would
have us take notice of his works, and thereby to admire his goodness, and
power; but the manner of his working, is one of those secrets that God would
have cabinetted and locked up in his own breast; which also might be the
reason, why all the creatures were made before Adam was created.

Quest. 26. verse 22.
Why God formed the Woman of a Rib?

To note the cordial affection, and intimacy

1. That whereas God made all the Angels at once, he made but one man, and one
woman: to note, that every man should have his own wife, and every wife her own
husband.

2. Whereas he might have made the woman of the same materials, whereof he made
man, he made her of a Rib, to note, that she was bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh.

Quest. 27. verse 24
It is said, A man must leave his Father and mother, and cleave to his wife;
and yet God in the fifth Commandment says, we must honor Father and mother.

To leave father and mother in this place is not to deny them that reverence
and

1 Positively, in regard of cohabitation, a man must leave his fathers house,
and dwell with his wife.

2. Comparatively, in regard of that intimacy of affection, and communion that
there should be between a man and his wife.

Degrees of love are not contrary each unto other, and therefore do not mutuo
se tollere, mutually expel each other.

In some respect the parents are to be preferred before the wife, viz. in
respect of obedience and reverence; in other respects the wife is to be
preferred before the parents, in regard of cohabitation, affection, and
intimacy of communion.

Quest. 28. verse 24.
It is said; that a man shall leave his father and mother, and cleave to his
wife, and they two shall be one flesh; and yet it is said, Know ye not that he
that is joined to an Harlot is one body? for two, says he, shall be one 1 Cor.
6.16
flesh.

Unclean persons become one flesh

Notes on the third Chapter.
Quest. 1. verse 1.
Whether it were a true Serpent that talked with Eve, or not?

Affir. It was a true Serpent, but possessed, Serpent, appears,

1. Because here is a comparison made, between the Serpent, and the beasts of
the field; if we say the Lion is more strong then any beast of the field, it is
implied that the Lion is a beast: so when it is said, that the Serpent was more
subtle then any beast of the field, it is implied that the Serpent here spoken
of, was a beast.

2. The punishment that was afterward pronounced upon the Serpent, is
agreeable to that which we find by experience verified on the true natural
Serpent, viz. Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the
days of thy life.

3. It will be hard to say, that Satan had power before the fall, in interiora
hominis acccdere, to do him mischief by an inward temptation, and therefore he
makes use of a Serpent, something ad extra.

Quest. 2. verse 1.
Why did the Devil make use of a Serpent in tempting our first parents to sin?

Because, though the Serpent was a beast,

Quest. 3. verse 1.
Why did not Satan rather appear in the shape of a man, or woman, for so he
might have gained an opinion with Eve of more excellency and knowledge, then
appearing in the form of a Serpent?

It Is answered by Learned men, that the: it is observed, that the good Angels
can take upon them no other shape, then the shape of a man, the shape of an
inferior creature would be unsuitable to their excellent and glorious state:
so the Devil could not appear in the shape of a man, because he was fallen
from that state wherein he was created. It Is true, since the fall of man the
case is altered, yet it is said, the Devil cannot take upon him the shape of a
complete man, but appears with some deformity or other.

Quest. 4. verse 1.
Seeing it is clear by the Scripture, that our first parents were seduced by
the Devil, the Question is, why we find no mention of the Devil in this
Chapter, but only of the Serpent?

Some conceive, because Moses herein,

Others say, Moses did not write as an Interpreter, Eve: she saw the Serpent,
heard the Serpent, treated with the Serpent, therefore Moses in this place
makes mention only of the Serpent. So he relates unto us the story of Abraham
entertaining three men, which were only in the shape of men, but indeed
Angels: yet he so gives us Genesis 8.
the history, that by the circumstances we may easily gather, that it was not
the Serpent alone that seduced our first parents, but the Devil in the Serpent,
for the Serpent being an irrational creature could not speak, at least not so
as to discourse by way of question and reply, and therefore must be acted by
some being of an intellectual nature: now if what had been said, had been
good, and holy, we should in reason have ascribed it to God, or a good Angel,
but being a Lie, and sinful, we ascribe it to Satan.

Quest. 5. verse 1.
How could the Serpent be said to speak?

The Devil spoke by the Serpent, as he

Persons possessed had natural Organs Serpent.

It Is true they had, but the Devil has

Thus by the ear death is brought into the world; but blessed be God, through
Christ life is brought in by the same door.

Quest. 6. verse 1.
How came it to pass that Eve was not astonished to hear the Serpent speak,
and so dreaded to treat with him?

Some conceive, that in the beginning Julian laughs at this conceit, and says
he, Quo idiomate usus est serpens? This I am sure, it was not natural for the
Serpent to speak after this manner, by way of rational discourse.

Some say, that Eve knew that a spirit Serpent, and upon that account treated
with him: but this ties the knot faster then it was, for she might, and indeed
she ought, before she entered into a treaty, to consider, why a spirit good or
bad, should make use of such an instrument.

What if it should be asserted, that Eve did not know but that other creatures

Was knowledge imperfect in innocence?

Say some, It is probable Eve had less Adam, and yet had as much as was
required to the perfection of a woman, and that state and condition that God
had placed her in: It was not necessary for her to know things by their causes,
and to understand the natural properties of all the creatures, but she was
skilled in those things that concerned her family, and related to her husband
and children.

The state of innocence was free from Eve did not know but that other creatures
might speak as well as the Serpent, she was in an error.

There is a twofold ignorance:

1* Ignorantia pravae disposi^ionis, when we are ignorant of that we are bound
to know, and this indeed was repugnant to the state of innocence.

2. Ignorantia purae negationis, which is when a person barely not knows a
thing; this the Learned call Nescience: this was not repugnant to the state of
innocence. Christ as man might be said Nescire, not to know some things, viz.
the day of judgment, and yet Christ as man was without sin, so children in
the state of innocence should not have known so much as men, yea, for ought I
know, Adam himself might have attained to a greater measure of knowledge by
experience.

3. Though I have high thoughts of those learned Authors that are of this
persuasion, yet dogmatically to affirm that Eve was created with less
knowledge then the women of after-ages have attained to, is an assertion hard
of digestion to my understanding etc.

4. It is likely therefore Eve was something astonished at first at the speech
of the Serpent, but being desirous to hear what the Serpent would say, the
understanding of a rational creature being as much delighted with knowledge,
as the stomach with meat, engaged in a treaty with the Serpent, which was the
occasion both of her sin and punishment.

Quest. 7. verse 1.
Why Satan sets upon the woman, and not upon the man?

1. Because the precept was given to Adam by God himself, say some, Adam Eve
that had it by tradition from her husband.

The woman was the weaker vessel, and the Devil delights to set upon us when
he was an hungry: the Devil will be sure to force us there most, where we are
least able to resist.

Adam would sooner be seduced by his Saul knew what he did when he married his
daughter unto David, I will give him her, said Saul, that she may be a snare to
him: snares are tied fast 1 Samuel 18. 2^.
with a false lovers knot: motions of a wife either to good or evil, are very
taking on an husbands heart.

To enhance the sinfulness of Eves sin; if the Serpent had tempted Adam, and
Adam Eve, more might have been said by her, by way of excuse: As Adam said, The
woman thou gave me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat; so might Eve have
said, The man thou gave me to be my head, my governor, gave me, etc.

Quest. 8. verse 3.
Whether the woman sinned, in saying, neither shall ye touch it?

Some conceive she did: say they

1. She endeavors to cast a reproach upon the ways of God, as if they were
too severe, and strict: as if a woman were forbidden by her husband to go out
of the house and she being angry therewith, when questioned about it, should
say, that her husband would not suffer her to stir out of her chamber.

2. She adds to the command of God, God says, Ye shall not eat, and she says,
Ye shall not touch.

Others conceive she did not sin; and: then the meaning is this, thou shall not
eat of the fruit, yea, thou shall not take the fruit into thy hand with a
purpose to eat thereof; the least motion, and tendency to sin is sinful, Nemo
repent fit turpissimus.

As for that which is spoken on the other side, it does not, as I conceive,
press much upon the reason and understanding of a man: For the first, it is
but said, not proved; and for the second, to explain a precept, is not to add
thereunto.

Quest. 9. verse. 3.
Whether Eve spoke doubtingly concerning the threatening, and the fulfilling
thereof, when she said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest
ye die?

It is the Opinion of those vry Learned, that from this pharase it cannot
clearly be demonstrated, that Eve doubted concerning the threatening: for,

1. The Septuagint turn the words absolutely, (...).

2. The Particle (...) pen, does not always note dubitation, as, I the Lord do
keep it, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it night
and day; where there is Isa. 27. 3.
not implied the least doubt, whether the Lord would keep it or not.

And truly I conceive, hitherto Eve cannot be blamed.

Quest. 10. verse 5.
The Serpent says to the woman, Ye shall be as gods: which words imply that
Ambition was a main ingredient in the sin of our first parents: now the
question is, how the desire of being like unto God could be a sin, when God
created man in his own likeness?

For the answer of this question, we must

Wicked men strive to be like him in his incommunicable attributes, as worship,
honor, and glory, and to be loved, and feared above all, in self-dependance,
etc. Good men strive to be like him in his communicable attributes, holiness,
mercy, love, patience. The image of God after which man was created, did
certainly consist in the participation of those attributes which are
communicable Good and bad strive to be like God; the one will be like God in
power and glory sicut altissimus; the other in holiness and righteousness,
sicut sanctissimus.

Quest. 11. verse 6.
Whether the woman sinned before the eating of the forbidden fruit?

Aff* And that appears by ver. 6. And when the woman saw the Tree was good for
food, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she saw the tree before, but
now she saw it to be good for food, which clearly shows her judgment to be
tainted. How many thousand souls have died of the wound of the eye?

Quest. 12. verse 6.
What was the first sin?

Some conceive, as the Popish Writers, that pride was the first sin: certainly
it was a poisonous ingredient in the transgression of our first parents.

Others, as Protestant Writers, that unbelief

Reasons given by us for our judgment herein, are such as these.

1. The sacred History favors us in it; first the Devil solicites the woman to
doubt of the truth of Gods Word, Ye shall not surely dye, and then to pride,
for God does kn^w, that in the day you eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened,
and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

2. It is impossible for the soul to rise up against that command, which at
present it peremptorily and resolvedly purposes ^ diametro pugnant, therefore
pride could not in order of Time be before disobedience to the command.

3. Faith is the grace, by which first of all we are united unto God, and so
probably unbelief the first sin, by which we departed from God.

Romans 5. 19. The first sin of man is called disobedience, For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous, now if the first sin were unbelief, neither truly nor properly
did the Apostle call it disobedience.

Vere et proprie, Truly and properly

Unbelief is comprehended under disobedience:

We say the end is first in intention, and Adams thoughts to be like unto God,
and afterward he resolved upon a departure from the command, as the means
tending thereunto.

We are to distinguish between election the means; but in seduction, or choice
upon persuasion, we first set upon the means, without consideration of the end,
as a man may first be persuaded to take a convenient delightful walk, and
afterward may be told whither it will bring him, as Isaac was persuaded by his
father to go along with him, and did readily assent, though he did not know
what his fathers ends might be, in persuading him thereunto, as Isaac had high
thoughts of his father, and what he said, so Eve of the Serpent.

But you will say, According to this account,

Incogitancy is a part of unbelief, viz. a

Quest. 13. verse 6.
It is said, that the woman did eat and gave also unto her husband, the
question is whether she spoke something, when she tendered the forbidden fruit
to her husband?

It Is likely she did, and that she told him of that fruit: As appears by the
holy jeere, if I may speak it with reverence, that God puts upon the man,
Behold, the man is Genesis 3.22.
become as one of us: God would not have said this concerning man, if being as
God had never come into his thoughts. Quod Deus loquitur cum risu, tu legas cum
fletu.

Quest. 14. verse 6.
Whether Adams or Eves sin was greater?

There are some that set themselves to Adams sin, as if he did eat the
forbidden fruit, not that he would be like unto God, but purely upon the
Account of gratifying his wife.

But I conceive it dangerous to go about such a work as this is: if you handle
nettles gently they will sting so much the sorer.

But for the solution of this question, consider, there was something that
aggravated Adams sin, and something that aggravated Eves.

Adams sin was greater then Eves in this: and truly this consideration accents
sin, and makes it exceeding sinful.

Eves sin was greater then Adams, because Propter quod aliquid est tale, id
est magis tale. etc.

And truly I conceive, it would not have been an easy matter to have determined
whose sin had been greater, had not God done it, as it were to our hands, by
inflicting a greater punishment on Eve, then on Adam.

Quest. 15. verse 6.
How man created after Gods Image, in righteousness and true Holiness, could
fall into sin? or how Adams understanding being in vigore viridi could be
entangled in such a snare and deluded with such a miserable fallacy?

For the answering of this perplexing

1. There is no created good per essentiam, but per participationem, and
therefore may possibly fall from its goodness. God is essential holiness,
essential goodness. A man may be a man, and yet unholy, because holiness is
a quality in man, and not his essence. But goodness and holiness in God is
his very nature: and therefore if you deny the holiness, or goodness of God,
as much as in you lies, you put God out of the world; Aug. Cujus participatione
justi sunt, ejus comparatione nec justi sunt. Man who is justby participation
from God, is not just in comparison with God.

2. Sin is an irregular act, and it is possible for any agent to act beside
the rule, unless the will of the agent be the rule according to which it acts.
And therefore all intelligent beings, consider them as to their natures, may
sin, except God himself, because his will alone is the rule of his own
actions. The reason why the Artificer sometimes works irregularly is, because
his hand is one thing, and his rule is another but if it were possible for his
hand to be his rule, he could not work amiss.

3. Though our first parents were created holy, yet they were created mutable;
and although they had not an inclination to sin, for that pronita^ ad malum non
fluit ex principilis, naturae integrae; it would be too injurious to the God of
nature to imagine he should frame evil: yet they had a power to sin if they
would.

4. The Learned conclude, that the understanding of Adam was defective in its
office by a negligent non attendency, and so sinned against God: yet so as that
this negligence did not go before the first sin, but was part of it.

Quest. 16. verse. 6.
In this verse you read that Adam and Eve both sinned, and yet the Apostle
tells us, that by one man's disobedience many were made sinners? Rom 5.19


The Apostle speaks of one man, because they two are one flesh.

Adam being the superior, and one that

Quest. 17. verse 6.
Whether the Church militant be always visible?

Neg. From this very text, when Adam Eve were excommunicated from the presence
of God, and cut off from the Ordinances, where was then the Church visible?

You may as well say the invisible

Neg. The Angels belonged to the invisible

But Adam and Eve were not a Church,

Neg. Paul calls a family a Church, as, Greet the Church that is in their
house. Salute Romans 16.5
the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Col. 3.15.
Nymphas, and the Church which is in his house. Now we know, two, viz. a man
and his wife, may constitute a family.

Quest. 18. verse 7.
It is said that the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew they were
naked. Did not they know they were naked before?

Yes, questionless they both saw, and The man and his wife were both naked,
and were not ashamed? Genesis 2.25.
but now they saw it with shame, which they did not before; sin and shame are
twins, and came into the world together. As there was no palenesse to be seen
in the state of innocence, no tremblings, no shiverings, no tears, no sighs, no
blushes: so not the least tincture of shame. Paradise had so much of the Lilly,
that it had nothing of the Rose; the nakedness of creation needed no Covering,
nakedness was then an Ornament; man was richly attired when he had no garments.

Quest. 19. verse 7.
Why our first parents made themselves aprons of figge-leaves rather then of
the leaves of any other Tree?

Some conceive, that the tree of knowledge

They sewed figge-leaves together, because

Quest. 20. verse 8.
How are we to understand that passage, And they heard the voice of the Lord
God, walking in the Garden?

We have often mention in the Scripture

The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, Psalm. 29.3.
the God of Glory thundereth. Sometimes the Word of God, though it be delivered
by a man, is called the voice of God; Samuel also said unto Saul, The Lord sent
me to anoint 1 Sa. 15.1.
thee to be King over his people, now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of
the words of the Lord.

The Learned conceive, that the voice of God in this place is not to be taken
for a sound, or a noise, but for an articulate voice: but now whether this
voice was formed in the air, As at the time of the Baptism and
transfiguration of our Savior; or whether it was formed in some body, God at
that time assuming the visible shape of a man, is not very clear; yet the
latter seems to be probable.

1. He deals with man by way of judicial process as a man, first he calls him
to an account for the crime he had committed, and then pronounces sentence
against him.

2. Ye read of the Lord God walking in the garden, which seems as it were to
point toward this opinion.

Quest. 21. verse 8.
It Is said, They heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden, and yet
it is said, in Jeremiah, that the Lord fills heaven and earth. Jer. 23.24.


The Divine essence fills heaven and

Quest. 22. verse 8.
It is said, they hid themselves from the presence of the Lord, and yet the
Psalmist Ps. 139.7, 8.
says, Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
presence, etc.

It Is true, we cannot hide our selves from Gods presence, yet we may from that
visible

In vain does the sinner endeavor to run away from God and the terrors of
Conscience. This is just as if the wounded Dear should go about to run from
the deadly Arrow that sticks in his side; this is like the fish, which swimmeth
to the length of the Line with the Hook in its mouth. The best way to run from
God is to run to God, viz. from his wrath to his mercy. To close and get in
avoids the blow: when a storm arises the Mariner puts forth to sea.

Quest. 23. verse 9.
God calls man, Adam, where art thou? and yet in Jeremiah, Mine eyes are upon
all their ways, neither is there iniquity hid Jer. 16.17.
from mine eyes.

Non interogat ut ipse sciat, sed ut hominem scire et agnoscere faciat: God
does not propound this question to Adam that he might know, but that man might
know that he did know.

Non est vox ignorantis, sed ad judicium citantis: It is not the voice of one
that desired to be informed, but of a Judge calling man to an account for the
transgression of the Command.

Quest. 24. verse 9.
Why does not God call Eve by her name, as well as Adam, they having both
sinned?

Some say, to note, it concerns the husband to take heed not only of what is
done by himself, but also by his wife, or family; he may be called to an
account for it.

Quest. 25. verse. 10.
It is said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, did not Adam
fear God before?

Yes, but he feared him before with a

The people of God have not a slavish, wiredrawen, and compelled affection
toward God, but their affections freely melt and drop toward God, as the
honey drops out of the Comb; fear, and love must be mixed, and tempered
together; indeed they do not well asunder, as if a man would make the most
perfect beautiful color, he would temper the purest white, and the fairest
red together; such is that for which the spouse gives her beloved the
Commendation, that he was candidus et rubicundus, white and ruddy, fear
without love would set us in the forlorn hope, and precipitate us into
despair; and love without fear, would make us wanton and secure; therefore
there is not only magnitude, but pulchritude in God; he is not only great to
cause us to fear him, but he is good to cause us to love him.

Quest. 26. verse 12.
The man said, The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the
Tree, and I did eat. And yet the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 2. 14.
That Adam was not deceived, but the woman.

The Apostle may speak of the manner Adam was not deceived, viz. by the
Serpent, but the woman.

The Serpent deceived Eve, but Eve Adam: for that person may be said properly
to deceive, who persuades to something false, and injurious animo fallendi,
with an intention to wrong another, and in this sense the Serpent may be said
to deceive Eve. But Eve had no thoughts of overreaching her husband, therefore
Adam was not deceived, but the woman.

Quest. 27. v^rse 14.
Why the Serpent was not examined by God as well as the man, or woman?

The examination of the man and woman Serpent.

Quest. 28. verse 14.
Upon whom this curse was pronounced, upon the Serpent or Satan, or Satan, and
the Serpent?

Some would have it only spoken of the Serpent, and the Jews are very zealous
in the maintaining of this assertion.

But if this were a truth, then it would follow that the brute creature that
Satan made use of, should be punished; but Satan himself, who was the
principal actor in tempting our first parents to sin, should escape
unpunished

Some would have it only spoken of Serpent the Devil, because the brute was
only passive, and abused by the Devil, for the calling on of his sinful
designs.

But neither can this be; for if this curse had not been pronounced upon a
true Serpent, why should this Serpent be reckoned amongst the beasts of the
field? And why does not Moses make mention of Satan, in this whole Chapter.

Some would divide the controversy, applying the first part of the curse in
the 14. verse, to the brute Serpent, and the verse to the Devil, the spiritual
Serpent.

But neither can this be; for,

1. The subject the Spirit of God speaks of, is not changed, but the same in
the 14. and 15. verses. ver 14. The Lord said to the Serpent, Thou art cursed
above all cattle. And, verse. 15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman.
etc?

2. It is clear, that the words in the 15. ver. without any straining are
applicable to the brute Serpent: viz. It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel; you know the Serpent being a creature going upon his belly is
obnoxious to be tread upon, and to have his head bruised; but being not able to
reach man's head, it is said of the Serpent, that it should bruife man's heels.

Some conceive that the curse was pronounced Serpent and the spiritual
Serpent, and this I hold to be the Truth: the Devil when he beguiled man, came
not as a naked spirit, but in the shape and figure of a Serpent: and therefore
that his punishment might be suitable and answerable to his offense, he was to
receive his doom likewise under the figure of a serpent.

Quest 28. verse 14.
Whether Satan was not under the curse of God before this was pronounced?

Affir. but,

1. After he had tempted man to sin, his curse was augmented.

2. In this verse God declares the curse pronounced upon the Serpent to be
irrepealable: Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the
days of thy life.

We may observe, that there is a great difference between the sentence
prenounced upon the man and woman, and the sentence pronounced upon the Serpent.

1. You have a curse pronounced upon the Serpent, but none upon the person of
man or woman.

2. The punishment inflicted upon them is temporal, but the punishment
inflicted upon the Serpent is eternal: which is noted unto us by that
expression, All the days of thy life, viz. as long as Satan has a being.

Quest. 29. verse 14
How it could be just with God to punish the brute Serpent being an
unreasonable creature, knowing neither good nor evil, and had no will to sin,
but spoke merely as it was acted, and possessed by Satan?

Why should we question the justice of Adams Censure, verse. 17. where the whole
earth was cursed for Adams sake? what had the earth done? or how was it guilty
of Adams transgression? And afterward we read And behold, I, even I do bring a
flood of waters on the Earth to destroy all flesh: Gen 6.17.
How were the beasts, the creeping things, the fowls of the Air partakers of
man's wickedness?

God cursed the Serpent, as well as Satan, Serpent, as his instrument to tempt
our first parents to sin against God; God was so displeased with sin, that he
would curse not only the principal cause of it, but the isntrumental also; so
in other cases God does not only punish the offender, but the instrument made
use of in the committing of the offense; As if a man defiled himself with a
beast, if a man lie with a Lev. 20.15
beast, he shall surely be put to death, and ye shall slay the beast. We may
see this in a Case where there is no dispute; when a man has committed murder,
his body suffers; now what is the body, but an instrument the soul makes use
of? The hand cannot move otherwise, then as it is acted by the soul, yet this
would not be a plea in humane Courts: Oh see the vileness of our hearts! we
can reason against God, when in the very same case we dare not reason against
man.

Quest. 30. verse 14.
Whether the Serpent went upon his belly before the curse?

Some conceive that it did, but that

1. Nakedness was natural to man at first, and yet afterward he was ashamed
of it, and it became his punishment.

2. Briars and thorns were created before man's fall, but afterward became a
curse.

But to both these instances we may give this answer:

1. That nakedness simply considered was not the cause of man's shame, but
nuditas turpis. Adamus videns faedos, et inordinatos membrorum motus,
pudefactus est.

2. For briars and thorns, consider them in puris naturalibus, in their pure
naturalls, and so they did not become a curse; but as after the fall, they grew
out of their proper places, and were blended and mixed with the fruits of the
earth, for the punishment of man, etc.

Therefore others conceive, that the Serpent did not go on his breast till the
curse, but had a body erected as man has: and they render these reasons
amongst others.

1. We know the more excellent, and sublime the nature of a creature is, the
more it raises it self upwards; the more ignoble and base, the more it falls
down-ward; this we see in the Elements; the fire the most excellent, and
operative of the four, raises it self above the rest; the earth the most
unactive and basest of all, the lowest.

2. As there is this difference amongst elements, so among living creatures;
the basest is the most creeping, as worms, etc. whilst the noble Lion
advances his head and breast, so far as the frame of his body is capable; so
man being of all creatures most excellent, is therefore of all others most
advanced in body.

Os homini sublime dedit coelumque tueri Jussit. -- The Serpent therefore being
of a sublime nature, insomuch that the Scripture says, it was more subtle
then any beast of the field, the frame and shape of his body was suitable
thereunto.

Quest. 31. verse 14.
In what sense we must understand this phrase, Dust shall thou eat all the days
of thy life; when we find, that Serpents feed upon herbs, and devour other
creatures also?

These two phrases, Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat,
ought to be joined together in the opening of this Scripture, the one ought to
be considered as the cause, and the other as the effect.

So that eating dust in this place is not so to be understood, as if the
Serpent should live, and feed only upon dust; but that the Serpent going upon
his belly, should be forced to eat dust, viz. take in dust into his mouth
whether he will or not: the Learned phrase it thus, Haec verba non referuntur
ad alimentum, sed ad incommodum, et velut coactam terrae in os receptionem.

Against this Exposition some object, The dust shall be the Serpents meat: The
Wolf, and Is 65.25.
the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the bullock,
and dust shall be the Serpents meat.

These words are not to be understood literally, The dust shall be the Serpents
meat, the meaning is no more but this, that in those days man shall not need
to fear hurt from any creature: the Serpent it self shall be confined to his
dust; and shall not be able to prejudice man in the least.

Quest. 32. verse 14.
Seeing this sentence was pronounced both upon the brute Serpent, and the
spiritual Serpent, the question may be, how this phrase, Upon thy belly shall
thou go, and dust shall thou eat, can be accommodated unto Satan?

Per analogiam, in a spiritual sense we Jerusalem, mark how he phrases it,
Thou shall be brought down, and shall speak out of the ground, thy Isa 24.4.
speech shall be low, out of the dust, and thy speech shall whisper out of the
dust. The Spirit of God seems to allude to the carriage of a poor captive
taken in war, and lying prostrate at the feet of the Conqueror, hardly
daring so much as to whisper out of the dust: You may find also expressions
something like to these, Esaias 49.23. Lam. 3.29. Mic. 7.17.

So then these expressions signify the debasement of Satan from his primitive
excellency. A wonderful stoop indeed this was, when that which was advanced as
high as heaven, was made to fall down as low as hell.

It is the observation of a learned Author, that as food is made use of for the
repairing, and preservation of nature, so the goodness or badnesse thereof
does make the temper of the body better, or worse: hence according to the
degrees of excellency in the creatures, their food is finer, or courser. Plants
suck moisture from the earth, beasts live upon plants, man of beasts, foul,
and fish: so that this expression, Dust shall thou eat, notes unto us, the
lowness, and baseness of the Serpent.

Quest. 33. Verse 15.
What is meant by the woman in this verse?

It seems to be that woman, with whom viz. Eve: as if God had said Seeing thou
have by a treaty with the woman, tempted her to sin, I will put enmity
between thee, and the woman.

Now the woman is mentioned, and not the man, not because God had not put
enmity between the man and the Serpent, as well as the woman and the Serpent,
but because Eve was immediately seduced by the Serpent, the man by the
persuasion of his wife.

Quest. 34. Verse 15.
Whether we may not with the Church of Rome, expound the woman of the Virgin
Mary?

Neg. And amongst others this reason verse, was immediately to follow the
curse: now the Virgin Mary was not borne many hundreds of years afterward.

But God speaks in the future tence, I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, etc.

God speaks in the future tence, when Verse. 14. Upon thy belly shall thou go,
and dust shall thou eat: now this curse immediately followed upon the sentence,
and why not the other?

God speaks in the future tence, to note the duration, and continuance of this
curse.

Quest. 35. Verse 15.
What is meant by the Serpents seed?

This cannot be expounded, but in a daemones proprie semen non habent, nec
gignunt sibi similes: therefore we are to understand by the Serpents seed, the
reprobate wicked world: They which imitate God, and obey him, are called his
seed, or his children in the Scripture, as, Be ye followers of God, as dear
children: so they that imitate the Ephesians. 5.1.
devil, and obey him, are called his seed, or his children, as, Ye are of your
father Joh. 8. 44
the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He that commits sin
is of the devil. 1 John* 3. 8.


Quest. 36. Verse 15.
What is meant by the seed of the woman?

First, and principally Jesus Christ.

It implies all the Elect, viz. all Eves

By the seed of the woman can be of the woman, that he was not of the man.

It Is true Christ was born of a Virgin,: but yet that by the seed of the woman,
Christ singularly, and individually should be meant by the Spirit of God in
this place, is not sufficiently demonstrated by this phrase: and the reason is
this, because such persons as have been conceived, and born in an ordinary way,
have been called the seed of the woman, or that which amounts thereunto: so,
Adam knew his wife again, Genesis 4.25.
and she bare a son, and called his name Seth, for God, faith she, has
appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew: there you have Eve
calling Seth her seed: so the wicked Jews. are Isa. 57.3.
called the sons of the forceresse.

Quest. 37. Verse 15.
How is this particle it, to be expounded, It shall bruise thy head?

Some, and those very learned, though they, referres unto Christ singularly,
and individually considered.

Their reasons are three,

Say they, the Septuagint renders it

But we must consider, that both in Latin, cum re, then cum voce: and so it is
in this case: by the seed of the woman, though we do not say, is meant Christ
only, yet we say Christ principally, and (...) clearly relates to Christ: now
that in Latin, and Greek Authors, pronouns do not only convenire cum verbo,
but sometimes cum re, appears: Terence has such a phrase as this, Ubi est
scelus qui me perdidit? And as for the Greek, frequent instances we may find
in the New Testament: Mat. 28.19
as, (...) Luke 8. 5.
(...). And so in Luke, where the noune (...) is of the masculine gender, and
(...) the neuter.

It is opposed to one individual Serpent,

The seed of the Serpent is implied

For the further clearing of this, the seed of the woman, may be said to bruise
the Serpents head two manner of ways.

1. As the Lord Jesus spoiled principalities and powers, and blotted out the
handwriting of Ordinances against us, and nailing it to his cross.

2. As he overcomes the plots, the assaults, the rebellions of this conquered,
and broken enemy.

In both senses we may say of the seed of the woman collectively considered, it
shall break the Serpents head, It, viz. Christ and his Church, head and members.

In the first sense the Saints break the Serpents head in Christ, in the second
sense Christ breaks the Serpents head in and with his Saints.

In the first sense Christ breaks the Serpents head, without the actual
concurrence of his Saints: it is true, the Saints do it in him, but they do not
concur with him in it: (as all of us sinned in Adam, though we did not
actually concur with him in his sin) and in this sense he is said to tread
the Winepresse alone*

In the second sense, Christ breaks the Serpents head, with the actual
concurrence of his Saints: not that Christ receives any help from them for to
do it, but because he is pleased to make use of them in the doing of it, and in
this sense is that Scripture to be understood; The God of peace shall bruise
Satan under your feet shortly. Romans 16. 20.
Christ has thrown Satan down, and wounded him, and he will enable his people
to keep him down, and tread upon him; As Joshua caused the Princes of Israel to
set their feet on the very necks of the five Kings.

They urge, to break the Serpents head notes a Divine power, and therefore it
is

This Argument would be something Serpents head, but that power whereby it does
it, is derived from Christ.

Since therefore besides what has been already said according to the judgment
of those who hold this first assertion, the seed of the woman is to be taken
collectively therefore.

I rather close with others as Learned, who say, that this particle it, is to
be expounded it being a pronoune relative, and pointing to the seed of the
woman, which the Adversary says is to be expounded collectively, I conceive we
cannot without straining of the Grammar of the Text, interpret it otherwise.

Nor does this detract from the honor of Christ, the victory is Christ's
principally, ours only relatively, and as his members.

Nor does this advantage the Jew: for according to this construction, in this
Scripture you have a Prophecy concerning the Messiah: It is said here, The seed
of the woman shall break the Serpents head; now this being a work above the
sphere of the activity of any creature, it will follow that the Messiah is
principally intended in this promise, or Prophecy.

Quest. 37. verse 15.
Why we may not translate this verse according to the vulgar Latin, she, viz.
the Virgin Mary shall break the Serpents head?

Because according to the Hebrew text she, but according to our translation it.

Because this, detracts much from the Seneca, Similiter esse exprehensibilem,
nimiam laudationem et immoderatam vituperationem.

I but say the Romanists, Christ did it by Mary by Christ's.

If you say that of the blessed Virgin,: but they intend more by it then this
comes to.

Does not the worth and eminency of a Abraham, In thee shall all Nations be
blessed, though it was not Abraham that made them blessed, but his seed, why
not of the Virgin Mary, In thee shall the Serpents head be broken, though she
did not do it, but Christ?

It is one thing to say, a parent is blessed in a child, or to say that in a
parent a Nation

Thus they endeavor to paint over their black and horrid blasphemies, with the
fairest colors they will take: The chimney-piece is commonly the fairest part
of the Room, and yet it covers the foulest and blackest place.

Quest. 38. verse 15.
Why is it said, I will put enmity between thee, and the woman in the Abstract?

To note unto us the bitter, inveterate,

It is observable, that profane persons, Heretics, blasphemous, Popish, and
superstitious persons are more loving, and favorable each to other (though
vastly differing in their judgment) then either of them to the people of God.
Edom, and Ishmael, Moab, and the Hagarens, Gebal, Ammon, Amaleck, and the
Philistines the men of Tire, and Ashur, had each several gods, yet all
conspired against the true God. Ps. 83. 5, 6, 7, 8. They have consulted
together with one consent, they are confederate against thee. The Tabernacles
of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of Moab and the Hagarens, Gebal, and Ammon, and
Amaleck, the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tire. Ashur also is joined
with them, they have helped the children of Lot. Darkness and darkness agree
better together, then light and darkness.

Quest. 39. verse. 15.
Whether man had any share in this curse pronounced in these two verses?

Man has a share in that which was pronounced verse, half white, and half
black, much of judgment and terror, and much of mercy and consolation,
resembling Moses, who saved the Israelites, and slew the Egyptians.

In this verse, you have the Sun in a cloud, the Gospel with its masque on: the
daybreak of that glorious mystery which was hid in God from before the
foundation of the world, the light whereof, though it were faint, and shadowy
in regard of our Noon-day-brightnesse, yet at that time, through the help of
the prospective of faith they might see thereby,

1. Man's Redemption, from the Tyranny of Satan, and by consequence from sin,
death, and hell, noted in that expression of breaking the Serpents head.

2. That man should be redeemed by a Mediator, viz. by the intervention of the
seed of the woman.

3. That this Mediator should be true man, intimated by the seed of the woman,
and that he should have a divine power, being able to break the Serpents head,
which is tantum mount to (...), Godman.

4. That this Redemption should be wrought in a way of suffering, intimated by
that expression, Thou shall bruise his heel.

5. That none should have benfit by this Redemption, but the elect, intimated
by the seed of the woman.

6. That this Redemption is an act of free grace; as soon as man had sinned,
God makes a gracious promise of the Messiah, (no possibility of merits
intervening)

7. That the Devil and his Angels have no interest in the free grace, and mercy
of God in Christ; He took not on him the nature of Angels, but became the seed
of the woman: We have a saying in nature, Corruption optimi est pessima; when
Satan sinned against God, the most excellent nature was defiled, and so fell
under the heaviest doom.

Quest. 40. verse 15.
Why the promise made concerning the Messiah was so dark and hard to be
understood?

1. Propter Diabolum, in regard of the Devil, that he might be exercised with
perpetual fear, and suspect every child that was borne into the world to be
the Messiah: the Doctrine of the Messiah was a Ephesians. 3.9.
mystery hid in God.

2. Propter parents, in regard of our first parents, that God might exercise
their faith, and the faith of their holy seed, and that their desires might be
enflamed after a clearer discovery of this mystery: the Apostle Peter tells us,
that the Prophets enquired, and searched diligently after the grace 1 Pet. 1.10.
of Christ.

3. Propter Christum, in regard of Christ himself: for look as it is with
Schoolmasters, they will reserve the reading of the most Learned Lectures for
themselves: So Christ is our great Rabbi; All were his Ushers that were before,
they taught the punies an inferior Lecture of the Law and Prophets; but the
Gospel, as to the sublimest and most mysterious part of it, Christ has
reserved for to unfold himself: It is said, The Law having a shadow Heb. 10.1.
of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, etc. In this
ver. you have mention made of the shadow, and the image: The thing it self was
not yet come; the Jews had the shadow, and we the image, now look how much an
image or the picture of a man goes beyond his shadow, so much does the
discovery of Christ now, go beyond the discoveries of him then; so in another
place, God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke Heb. 1.1.
in times past unto the fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son; God who by piece meal, drop by drop, now a drop,
and then a drop, spoke unto our forefathers by the Prophets, has in these
last times spoken more fully by his Son. When this King came, all the cocks
ran with wine: as Jacob before he was borne, put forth his hand, so Christ
before he was borne, did as it were put forth his hand to the Jews, they could
see something of Christ, but unto us a Son is borne, unto us a child is
given. Our fathers went to heaven by Candlelight, how sad will it be if we
should go to Hell by daylight?

Quest. 41. verse 16.
Whether the woman should have conceived, and brought forth in sorrow if she
had not sinned?

Neg. For although now her pain, and sorrow the constitution of the body of
woman, might be such at first, as she might conceive and bring forth without
sorrow: and therefore we need not say, as some, that woman should have brought
forth by a miracle, if she had not sinned, etc.

Quest. 42. verse 16.
It is said here, Thy desire shall be to thy Husband, and he shall rule over
thee: Now the question is, how that could be inflicted as a punishment upon the
woman, which was suitable to her condition in the state of innocence?

The subjection of the woman to her

The truth is, though this be the punishment of the woman, yet those who have
good husbands have not the like share in it, with those who have bad. A good
man dares not but carry himself as a man of knowledge toward his wife, and
make her yoke as easy as may be: It is remarkable when the Apostle had bid
wives, Submit Col. 3. 18, 19
your selves unto your husbands, as it is fit in the Lord, he does not say,
Husbands, rule over your wives, for that they will do fast enough without
bidding; but, Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter to them.

Quest. 43. verse 17.
Why does the Lord in pronouncing the sentence upon the man, insert the cause,
Because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife?

That God might convince man of the verse 12. The woman whom thou gave to be
with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat.

Let us have a care of carnal shifts, and excuses; when God calls us to an
account, these will not stand us in stead: there was never any came to Hell,
but they had some seeming pretense for coming thither.

Pilate could not wash off the guilt, when he washed his hands: Saint Paul
exhorts, Be not deceived, God is not mocked: as in Gal. 6. 7.
diverse other things, the deceitfulness of our hearts shows it self so in
this, viz. the forging of idle reasons, to satisfy, and bear out our selves
in the neglect of duties commanded by the Word of God; and if you consult the
context, you will find, it is about paying the Minister his dues: Let him that
is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good things;
Now people are very apt to verse 6.
find excuses, that they may save their purse, and if it be possible satisfy
Conscience; but the Apostle exhorts them not to put a cheat upon their souls,
Be not deceived, says he, God is not mocked.

Quest. 44. verse 18.
God says, Thou shall eat the herb of the field: why? should not man have eat
of the herb if he had not sinned? Did not God say, Behold, I have given you
every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all Genesis 1. 29.
the earth, and every tree in the which is the fruit of a Tree yielding seed;
to you it shall be for meat?

Very true, but here when God says,

Quest. 45. verse. 19.
How this curse can be verified concerning man, That in the sweat of his brows
he should eat his bread, when many neither labor, nor sweat, and yet have
bread enough?

As for idle persons, whilst they think

We must distinguish of a threefold labor.

1. Labor Oeconomicus or mechanicus, the labor of mechanics, as we call them,
or handicrafts-men; of this the Apostle speaks, Let him that stole steal no
more; Ephesians. 4.28.
but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is good.

2. Labor Politicus, the labor of Magistrates and Governors: so the Apostle
speaking of the Magistrate, He is the Minister of God to thee for good; but if
thou do Romans 13.4
that which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain; for he
is the Minister of God, etc.

3. Labor Ecclesiasticus, the labor of Ministers; we may observe that whilst
the world takes this to be an easy calling, the Spirit of God in the Scripture
frequently speaks of the labor, and the work that does attend it: He that
desires the office of a Bishop, desires a good work. And, The workman is worthy
of his hire. And, They that rule well are worthy of double honor, especially
they that labor in the Word, and doctrine.

Ministers are called Stars, now the Stars are in continual motion for the
good of the Universe; they are to cry aloud, and to lift up their voice like a
Isa. 58.1.
trumpet, Durante pugna non cessat Tuba: The trumpet must be sounding all the
while the battle is fighting. The Church of God is Gods husbandry, and the
Ministers are his husbandmen.

-- Redit agricolis labor actus in Orbem.

The husbandman has never done his work, but the end of one task is still the
beginning of another: so it fares with the Ministers of the Gospel, sometimes
they are instructing poor ignorant souls, and then they are like Stars that
shine in a cold winters night; another while convincing gainsayers; then they
are like those Stars that fought in their course against Sisera; every man
must be accountable for his idle words, and a Minister for his idle silence:
Qui claves habent Ecclesiae ostia suorum labiorum aperiant: A Minister had
better be worn out with whetting, then with rusting.

A way then with the fanatic Spirits of our days, who call upon Ministers to
work with their hands, as if there were no other labor, but hand-labour.
Consider,

1. They confound those things that God would have distingushed: there is the
labor of the head and brain, as well as of the hand.

2. They overthrow (as much as in them lies) the well-being, if not the being
of Kingdoms, States, Commonwealths in which they live: for we stand in as
much need of the Magistrate, and Minister as we do of the Husbandman, and
handycraftsman.

3. Aaron with his posterity were Priests, Joshua, David, Josias were
Magistrates, yet it might be said of them, that they are their bread in the
sweat of their brows.

Quest. 46 verse 19.
It is said here, In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread; and yet
our Savior has taught us to pray, Give us this day our daily bread. If we
earne our bread with our labor, how is it a gift?

We earne it of man, but not of God, from man it is a debt, but from God it is
a

It is an act of free grace, that we have bread for our labor; God might have
Nebuchadnezzar: that in the sweat of our brows we eat bread, is a mercy.

As the Scripture speaks of bread, so of the staff and stay of bread: For
behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts does take away from Jerusalem, and from
Judah, the Isay. 3.1.
stay, and staff, the whole stay of bread. And the truth is, a man is
strengthened more by the staff that is in his body, then by the staff that is
in his hand; it is not the corn, and flower, but the staff of bread, which
supports the life, and that is not any thing that comes out of the earth, but
the blessing of God, which comes down from heaven. The creature cannot hold up
it self, much less contribute to the subsistence of other things, unless God
continue the influence of his blessing upon it. It is the observation of a
Learned Author, As soon as ever Christ cursed the fig tree it withered, and
dried Ma. 11.20.
up from the roots, to show, that it was not the root alone, but the blessing
of Christ which did support the fig tree, it is pronounced Hos. 4. 10.
as a curse, They shall eat, and not have enough; and again, Ye shall eat, and
not Lev. 26. 26.
be satisfied: when I have broken the staff of your bread, ye shall eat, and
not be satisfied. As good take a mouthfull of gravel, as a mouthfull of bread,
and as able it is to nourish without Gods blessing.

The means by which we live, are without life; If they be living creatures, as
sheep, and oxen, and beasts, and birds, and fishes, they must lose their lives,
before they can come to be helps to ours; so true is that saying mortibus
vivimus, we live by deaths; now reason tells us, Nihil dat quod non habet
nothing can give that, which it has not; How should food of it self preserve
and further life, which in it self is void of life? the death of the creatures
shows that our life is not from them, but from something else.

By all which we may perceive, how these Scriptures may be reconciled, of
Eating our bread in the sweat of our brows, and yet to pray, according to the
form our Savior has prescribed us, Give us this day our daily bread.

Quest. 47. verse. 19.
Whether from this Scripture we have a command from God, to labor, To eat our
bread in the sweat of our brows?

I conceive we have, though some think, that this was laid upon man after his

1. It is granted that this was a curse laid upon man for his transgression.

1. As some of Gods curses are promises as well as curses, to set out his
goodness: so some of Gods curses are precepts as well as curses, to set forth
h^s justice.

Some of Gods curses are promises, as well as curses; so, I will put enmity
between thee and the woman: It is a curse on he Serpent, and yet a promise of
the Messiah.

Some of Gods curses areprecepts as well as curses; so, Thy desire shall be to
thy husband, and he shall rule over thee; this is Genesis 3.16.
a curse, and yet it is a precept: Let our 1 Cor. 14. 34.
women keep silence in the Churches; for it is not permitted unto them to
speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience, as says the Law.

Now the truth is, this of eating our bread in the sweat of our brows is all
these, it is a curse, it is a promise, it is a precept; it is a curse, in that
God will not suffer the earth to afford us bread, without our sweat; it is a
promise, in that God assures us, that we shall have bread for our sweat; and
it is a precept too, in that God enjoyneth us, if we will have bread to sweat
for it.

Have a care then of relieving common beggars, vagrant and idle persons: I
speak not against Alms, God requires us to feed the hungry: but remember as
God does not approove of any other work without charity, so neither of charity
it self without discretion, as Paul, Honor widows; but those that are
widows indeed: 1. Tim 5.3
A woman that has poisoned her husband is a widow, but she is not a widow
indeed, not to be honored; so you must relieve the poor, but those who are
poor indeed: who are they?

Those that want not only the things they ask, but want also means to get
without asking, viz. blind, aged, past their work, that have a greater charge
then they can maintain by their work.

Jerome: Pars sacrilegii est rem pauperum dare non pauperibus. Whilst you
think you relieve the poor, you rob the poor.

Quest 48. verse. 16, 17, 18, 19.
What may we learn, from these verses considered together?

That God in the midst of judgment: and that he rolls up the sentence
pronounced against the man, and woman in love, and sweetness: thou shall
conceive, and travel in sorrow, there is judgment, but thou shall bring forth
children, there is mercy; thy desire shall be subject, there is judgment; but
it shall be to thy husband, there is mercy. God says to Adam, Cursed is the
ground for thy sake, there is judgment; but not cursed art thou, there is
mercy. Thou shall labor and sweat, there is judgment; but it shall not be
overmuch, (you know the face sweats before any part) and it shall be the sweat
of thy face, there is mercy; thy face shall sweat, there is judgment; but in
the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread, there is mercy.

Quest. 49. verse. 21.
Why did the Lord God make coats of skins, and cloth our first parents with
them?

To teach them he had not cast them out

That it might be a continual Item of Adam, but be remembered as a check to the
vanity, and pride of apparel; we have no more cause to be proud of our
clothes, then of a plaster of mastick worn to stay the Rheum from annoying
the eyes or Teeth, or a pair of spectacles to help the dimnesse of the sight.

Quest. 50. verse. 24.
In the former verse it is said, The Lord God sent man forth from the garden of
Eden, and in this verse, it is said he drove out the man.

It is like God at first bid him go, and

Quest. 51. verse 24.
What may we Learn from Gods placing at the East of the Garden Cherubims, and
a flaming sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the Tree of life?

That when man fell out with God, he fell out with the good Angels; The: The
Angels conveyed Lazarus into Abraham's bosom.

Good examples are rare in the world, Oh that we could imitate the good Angels!
The mariners at sea when they have no land-markes to direct them home to their
own Country, are guided by the Stars. Truly we have but a few good examples
in this world, and therefore let us take our pattern from the Angels, that
continually behold the face of God, ready to do his will: Despise ye not one of
these little Matthew. 18. 19.
ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven their Angels do always behold the
face of my Father which is in heaven.

Notes on the fourth Chapter.
Quest. 1. verse 1.
It is said here, by Eve, I have gotten a man from the Lord, and yet it is said
in the first Epistle of John, Not as Cain, who 1 John 3. 12.
was of that wicked one, and slew his brother.

Eve speaks of bringing forth a son, The heritage of the Lord; Lo children
Psa. 227 3.
are an heritage of the Lord* and the fruit of the womb is his reward. There
be some that account children but bills of charges, but God puts them upon the
account of our mercies: It was an holy, and pious speech of Jacob concerning
his children, These, says he, are the children, which God has graciously
given thy servant. Genesis 33. 5.


A Learned Author observes, that children are greater blessings then any
outward thing else whatsoever, and therefore when a description is made of Jobs
goods the best is put first, first the Spirit Job. 1.1.
of God sets down his spiritual blessings, Job was a man perfect, and upright
and one that feared God, and eschewed evil; and then comes his outward
blessings, and amongst them his children are set in the first rank, There were
borne unto him seven sons and three daughters, and then comes his sheep, and
Oxen, and Camells.

So that Eve speaks of bringing forth a son which in it self, is a blessing
from the Lord, and hence says she I have gotten a man from the Lord; John
speaks of Gain with respect unto his wickedness, which was not from God, but
from the Devil, and hence says he, Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew
his brother.

Quest. 2. vese 1.
Whether Eve thought that she had brought forth the Messiah? for so many
affirm with a great deal of confidence; and they render the words not as we
do, I have gotten a man from the Lord, but say they, according as it is in the
Original, I have gotten a man the Lord.

The ambiguous acceptance of the particle

We grant that this particle is many

Withal we say, it is not rarely taken cum, or a, vel abs, pro, cum; ut, Genesis
5. 22. Exo. 1. 1. pro a, vel abs; ut, Genesis 44. 4.

We may conclude therefore with safety, that the Original will bear this I
have gotten a man from the Lord.

That those that are of the other persuasion Eve understood that the Messiah
should be God, which was the occasion of the speech, I have gotten a man the
Lord.

That to me it sounds discord, to say, that Eve should know so much of the
Messiah, as that he was God, and yet that she should think that he should be
born after the ordinary way of mankind as Cain was.

Therefore I judge it safer, to keep to viz. by the favor and gift of God:
especially, when I consider, that good women have used such expressions in the
like case: as Leah. And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his
Genesis 29. 32.
name Reuben, for she said, Surely the Lord has looked upon mine affliction;
and verse 33. And she conceived again, and bare a verse. 33.
son, and said, Because the Lord has heard that I was hated, he has
therefore given me this son also, and she called his name Simeon. See also
ver. 34. and. 35. of the same Chapter.

Let us Learn, that riches, and honors, and children, and servants, and
houses, and lands, are the gifts of God as well as grace, and peace. When the
Jews should come to Canaan, and grow great, there was a caution given them, to
look up unto God as the donor: When thou have eaten and art full, then thou
shall bless the Lord Deu. 8. 10, 11.
thy God, for the good land which he has given thee: beware that thou forget
not the Lord thy God, etc. Many who are persuaded that God gives grace, and God
gives heaven, and salvation, are hardly persuaded, at least do not consider it,
that God gives riches, and health, and wealth, and liberty. Oh it is a sweet
thing, when a man can look upward from these lower things, and can say that his
earth has dropped down to him from heaven.

There is no creature in the world, that God has made capable of knowing any
thing of the first cause, but only the rational creature: And it is the
excellency of man, not only to enjoy the good that he has, but to be able to
rise up to the highest and first cause of all good. It is observed of the
doves, that they peck, and look upwards; hence the Church in the Canticles is
said to have doves eyes, because they look so much up to heaven, upon every
good they receive.

As the Church has doves eyes, so the men of the world have dogs eyes; dogs
you know look up to their Master for a bone, and when they have it they
presently look down to the earth again; wicked men will look up will pray to
God when they want any thing, but when they have received what they would have,
God shall not have one good look from them.

Quest. 3. verse 2.
Why did Adam bring up his sons, one to be a keeper of sheep, and the other a
tiller of the ground?

To teach us that parents should bring Cain and Abel were heirs apparent to
the whole earth; and yet they had their employments.

I know we ought to distinguish between manual labor, and mental labor: in
the manner of employment may be some odds. Manual, servile, and mechanic
labor is fit for men of a lower condition; generous, and ingenuous, and
liberal employments for persons of the greatest births, and brightest
intellectualls, and this kind of labor possibly might have suited best with
Cain, and Abel, had it not been for the scarcity of persons then living in the
world, and the necessity of engaging in such callings for the present; but
every one ought to be industrious.

And therefore, as a Learned Author very well observes, That those Gallants,
who live in no settled course of life, but spend their time in pleasure and
vanity, there is not the poorest contemptible creature that cries Oysters, and
Kitchin-stuffe in the street, but deserves his bread better then they; and his
course of life is of better esteem with God, and every sober wise man, then
theirs. An horse, that is neither good for the way, nor the cart, nor the race,
nor any other service, let him be of never so good a breed, never so well
marked and shaped, yet he is but a Jade. His Master sets nothing by him,
every man will say, Better knock him in the head, then keep him. His skin,
though not much worth, is yet better worth then the whole beast besides.

Let us have a care therefore of giving up our selves to the vanities and
pleasures of the world; An idle man's brain is the Devils shop, where he forges
all manner of sin. Nihil agendo, male agere disces: Hierom thought that
action, and lawful employment was a disheartning to the Devil, and therefore
he gives this advice, Semper aliquid age, ut te Diabolus inveniat occupatum;
Put thy self upon some business or other, that when the Devil comes to tempt
thee to sin, he may not find thee at leisure.

Quest. 4. verse 3, 4.
Why did Cain bring of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord, and
Abel of the firstlings of his flock?

Both Cain and Abel brought such offerings unto the Lord as were suitable to
that: Cain was a tiller of the ground, and therefore brings as his offering the
fruits thereof; Abel was a keeper of sheep, and therefore brings as his
offering the firstlings of his flock.

As Old Testment Saints had their sacrifices under the Law, so New Testament
Saints have their sacrifices under the Gospel. Almost every duty of
Christianity in which a man consecrates himself to God, is called a sacrifice;
righteousness is a sacrifice, Offer the sacrifices of righteousness; prayer is
a sacrifice, Let my prayer Psa. 4.5.
Psalm. 141. 2.
be set before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my hands as an Evening
sacrifice: Ps. 51.17.
Repentance is a sacrifice, The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken
and contrite heart, Lord, thou will not despise: Almesdeeds Heb. 13.16
that is a sacrifice, But to do good, and to communicate forget not, for with
such sacrifices God is well pleased: Thanksgiving is a sacrifice, I will offer
to thee the sacrifice Psalm. 116. 17.
of thanksgiving, and will call upon the Name of the Lord.

It is usual for the Spirit of God in the Scripture to describe spiritual
duties by expressions drawn from Ceremonies, and usages under the Law; As
Repentance is called Washing, Wash ye, make ye Isay. 1.16.
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes. So prayer is
called Incense, Let my prayer be set before thee as Incense. And the
righteousness of Saints, Psa. 14.2.
Fine linen. And to her was granted, that Rev. 19.8.
she should be arayd in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is
the righteousness of Saints. (Being an allusion to the garments of the Priests)
so in this case Gospel-graces and duties are called Sacrifices.

A Learned Author observes, that we may parallel Christian sacrifices under
the Gospel to those under the Law: Repentance is as a trespasse-offering, Zeal
a burnt-offering, praise a free-will-offering, sincerity the oblation of
unleavened bread, etc.

Well then let us be exhorted in the words of the Apostle, To offer up our
bodies, Romans 12.1.
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable
service: every word in this verse is very Emphaticall.

1. Present your bodies, viz. your whole person; as Christ gave himself for
you, so you must give your selves to him. As he was sacrificed for you, so you
must be sacrificed for him, not your sheep, nor your Oxen, nor your Goats, but
your selves. Cainistae sunt, says Luther, offerentes non personam, sed-opus
personae. Now says Origin, Instead of a Ram we must kill our irefull
passions, instead of a Goat our unclean affections, instead of flying fowls
our idle thoughts.

2. A living sacrifice; because the Jews sacrifices were dead sacrifices.
Beasts dyed when they were sacrificed, but men live when they are sacrificed,
nay, they dye unless they be sacrificed.

3. An holy sacrifice, the Jews might sacrifice beasts, and not be holy, but
the Christian cannot sacrifice himself but he must needs be holy.

4. An acceptable sacrifice; before the sacrifice of beasts, did not please
God, unless they did sacrifice themselves too; but if Christians sacrifice
themselves, it does please God, though they do not sacrifice beasts.

Quest. 5. verse. 3,4.
Whether Cain, and Abel knew, that God was to be worshipped this way, viz. by
offering up of sacrifices, by the light of Nature, or whether they had it by
tradition from Adam?

Our adversaries of the Church of Rome contend, that they knew by the Light of
Nature that God was to be worshipped this way, and that they learned from their
father only some circumstantials of worship.

The reasons they give for this their judgment, are,

1. That the Heathens by the Light of Nature worshipped God this way.

2. That the Law of Nature does oblige us not only to the worship of God; but
to such a worship as might most fitly set forth the Majesty and dominion of
God, and the subjection and homage of man, and this was best represented by
sacrifices.

To both these answer may be made.

As for the first, though Heathens worshipped God by sacrifices, yet it
remains to be proved, that they knew this way of worship by the Light of
Nature.

As for the second, it does not appear (but by the intervention of a positive
Law of God obliging thereunto) that the killing or sacrificing of a brute
creature was the best way of worship to set forth Gods sovereignty, or our
homage.

Therefore, as to the answer of this question, we affirm that by the Light of
Nature we may know that God is to be worshipped, and that with inward and
outward worship, but deny that this kind of worship is to be found out by the
Light of Nature.

The Orthodoxy of this persuasion will be cleared up, if we consider, that the
killing or sacrificing of a beast did not please God any further then as it was
a type of Christ; now the doctrine of Christ being such a mystery, as never yet
has been discovered by the Light of Nature, the same may be said concerning
this way of worship that pointed thitherward.

So then Cain and Abel were instructed in this way of worship by their parents,
Adam and Eve.

From the consideration of the whole we may note:

1. Outward performance of duties are gracious evidence: Cain offers sacrifice,
as well as Abel. They come unto thee, as the people Eze. 33. 31.
comes, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but
they will not do them; for with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness. As a statue has all the parts of a man,
head, and arms, and legs, and feet, but it wants an inward principle of life:
so an Hypocrite has all the outward parts and lineaments of a Christian, he
prays, and hears, and receives the Sacrament, but there wants an inward
principle of grace: Be ye doers of the word, not hearers only, deceiving your
own souls. A Learned Jam. 1.22.
Author observes, that the word in the Original is (...), a term of Art, and
it implies a sophistical Argument, or syllogism, which has an appearance or
probability of truth, but is false in matter or form, and is put by the
Apostle to imply those false discourses, that are in the Consciences of men,
viz. They that hear the Word shall be saved; But I hear the Word; Therefore I
shall be saved.

Therefore have a care of resting upon holy duties, Satan still tempts us to be
like unto God, to be Christ's our selves, and Saviors our selves. The dove made
use of its wings to fly to the Arc, but it trusted not in its wings, but in
the Arc; We may make use of good duties to bring us to Christ, but we must not
trust in our duties, but in Christ. A good work rested on, is as b^d as a sin
committed.

Consider God is a Spirit, and he looks to the spirit. All the ways of man are
Prove. 16.2.
clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs the spirits. A man may deceive
his neighbor, yea, he may cheat himself, but God is not mocked. The Lord
knows our inside. The Lord tryes the spirit, he turns up the bottom of the
bag, as Joseph's steward did, and then comes out all our Abominations, and
wickednesses that have been so long hid.

A man may miscarry, though he be employed in the highest duties and services;
Mat. 7.22, 23.
Many will say unto me in that day, Have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in
thy Name cast out Devils, etc? A man may have the gift to cast out Devils, and
yet at last may be cast unto the Devil. A Minister by his preaching may be
isntrumental to save others, and yet not be saved himself. The shipwrights
that built Noah's Arc, were drowned themselves.

2. Note here the duties of Parents toward their children; Adam nurtured his
children very well; for,

1. He provideth for them till they come to age. 2. Then he appoints them their
callings, for one was an Husbandman, the other a shepherd. 3. He taught them
the worship of the true God.
Adam should be a pattern to Parents in these particulars, and especially in
that which is the greatest matter of all these, viz. instructing of their
children in the true worship and service of God.

A Learned Author observes, that furthering the salvation of our children, is a
duty incumbent on parents in point of justice, from the parents they received
the filement and misery of their nature, and therefore they owe them all
possible help for their recovery. It is a piece of cruelty for a parent to
suffer his children to lie in their blood; if we hurt but a stranger, yea,
though against our wills, we think it our duty to help to cure him.

It is worthy of our consideration, that the promise of a blessing to be
continued to posterity is annexed to the second commandment in the Decalogue,
which is concerning the worship and service of God, God thereby intimating,
what parents and others should principally apply themselves to have planted in
their families, if they would have Gods blessing entailed upon their issue.

It is an idle conceit of many, that Religion, and godliness are not for
children; surley most equal it is, as the first fruits of other things, so the
first fruits of our years should go also to God. Ut primitiae rerum, it a
primitiae dierum. Greg.

Quest* 6. verse. 3, 4.
It is said here, Cain and Abel brought their offerings unto the Lord, and yet
it is said after Seth's time, Then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord:
Was not the Name of the Lord called upon Genesis 4.26
before by Abam and Eve and Abel?

Yes, But for some time the greater with Cains wicked progeny, insomuch as it
is probable, the good people at first worshipped God in their families, but
after Seth, the family of the righteous increasing, the worship of God became
more public, and solemn.

This then that is said, verse. 26 of this Chapter, that then began men to call
up-the Name of the Lord, is not spoken simpliciter, sed (...).

Quest. 7. verse 3, 4.
Why did Abel bring the firstlings of his flock, and the fat thereof, as an
offering unto the Lord?

The firstlings of the flock were accounted Abel would not offer up unto God
that which cost him nothing.

It is our duty to be at some cost for the carrying on of the worship and
service of God: Buy the truth, and sell it not: He Prove. 23. 23.
does not say take the truth, as if it might be had for taking up, but buy it.
What is the meaning of that phrase? You know in buying of a commodity, we are
willing to part with something, that we may have and enjoy the thing we buy:
There are several things you must part withal, if you would have the truth,
and amongst the rest you must part with your purses.

It is true indeed, Gods grace and truth is not to be had for money; but though
you cannot buy grace, you may buy Preaching, maintain a godly Ministry,
whereby you may come to get grace.

We may observe in that Parable, The Merchant finding a rich treasure, hid in
the field, he is said To sell all, and buy the Mat. 13. 44.
field. He does not buy the treasure, but the field; the field is the Ministry
of the Gospel, in which the treasure of grace is hid; now in buying the field,
he buys the treasure hid in the field.

The Gospel, (...) is a free gift, and yet you must buy the truth, and
maintain the Ministry.

But is it not a wicked thing to set the

Yes, without question: but pray mark, the Gospel, nor Ministers sell it. But
you will say, if you do not sell the Gospel, what else do you sell? We answer,
we sell our study, our pains, the spending of our strength, and spirits, but
the Gospel is Gods gift. That Minister, and he alone may be said to sell the
Gospel, that would make the Gospel to serve his base carnal interest, and so
make a market of it.

And truly in this sense, others may be said to sell the Gospel as well as
Ministers; there are some, that put the Gospel to the same drudgery that they
put their foot-boyes, and make it lackey after their Coaches.

Quest. 8. verse 3, 4.
Why the Lord had respect to Abels offering, and not unto Cains?

Some, and indeed the most, conceive Cain offered unto the Lord of the fruits
of the ground, any thing, he cared not much what; but Abel of the firstlings of
the flock, of the best he had, and this (say they) was a main reason why the
Lord had respect to Abels offering, and not Cains.

But by the leave of so many Learned, and reverend Divines, I shall enter a
demurrer against this judgment of theirs; for consider,

1. As you heard before, they brought those offerings that were suitable to
that way or calling in which God had set them.

2. There is not the least hint in the Scripture, that Cain brought the worser
sort of the fruits of the ground, but for ought we read the best of the kind.

3. That God is to be served with the best, is a Notion that lies with its face
upwards in the understandings of men.

4. That though it must be acknowledged, that the best of the kind was to be
offered up in sacrifice unto God (as you read, Ye offer the blind for
sacrifice, is it Mal. 1.8
not evil? And ye offer the lame; and sick is it not evil? Offer it now unto
thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the
Lord of Hosts?) Yet when the Scripture clearly makes the difference of the
issue of Cain, and Abels offering, to consist in the persons who offered, and
not in the offering, why should we enquire any further concerning it? By faith
Abel offered unto God a mo^e excellent sacrifice then Cain. Heb. 11.4


This should teach us to mix all our holy duties with faith: It is said, when
Christ was baptized, Lo, a voice from Mat 3. 17.
heaven saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; Not with
whom I am well pleased, but in whom. God the Father is not only well pleased
with Christ himself, but in him with the graces, duties, and persons of his
people: It is not with our duties, as with our posies, the posie gives
sweetness to the bosom, but the bosom gives no sweetness to the posie: But
in regard of our holy duties, the case is quite contrary; The Lord Jesus, as it
were, takes our duties, and puts them into his bosom, and they receive all
their goodness, and fragrancy from the bosom of Christ.

It is said, That the smoke of the Incense which came with the prayers of the
Saints, ascended Rev. 8.4.
up before God out of the Angels hand: Our Incense smells of our own hand, and
it would stink worse in Gods nostrils then the Onions, and garlic of Egypt,
if it were not perfumed, and presented by the hand of Christ.

Now faith sets Christ at work: as Christ sets his people at work to do him
service, so faith sets Christ at work to do his people good.

Quest. 9. verse. 5.
It is said, That Cain was worth, and his countenanee fell;

-- Difficile est animum non prodere vultu.

It seems therefore that God by some visible sign gave Testimony concerning
the acceptance of Abels sacrifice, and not Cains, or else how came Cain to
know it? now the question is, what this visible sign was?

It is very probable, that it was by fire And Moses and Aaron went into the
Tabernacle Lev. 9.23, 24
of the Congregation, and came out, and blessed the people, etc. And there came
a fire out from before the Lord, and consumed upon the Altar, the
burnt-offering and the fat, which when all the people saw, they shouted and
fell on their faces. So, 1 Kin. 18. 38.

What reason have we to believe, that Abels sacrifice, was confirmed by a
miracle, when we have no such thing in the Scripture?

Although we have it not in express terms, yet it is clear by the context,
that God did manifest his acceptance of Abels sacrifice some extraordinary
way, which by other instances in Scripture of the same nature we conceive to be
fire from heaven. And if that be miraculous, you see we have reason to look
that way.

But this was a meat offering; now we do not find that meat offerings were
burnt

That this was a meat offering is said, not

That suppose it be so, we may find in Gideons offering; Judge. 6.19. 21.
the same we read concerning Manoahs offering. Judge. 13. 19, 20.


Let this caution us against the sin of envy, Cain is sad because Abels
sacrifice was accepted: there are two sins, which were Christ's sorest
enemies, covetousness sold Christ, and envy delivered him.

It is a Devilish sin, and comes from Hell, the Devil is called the envious
man.

It is one of the torments of Hell, There shall be weeping and gnashing of
Teeth, when Luck. 13. 28.
ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom
of Heaven, and you your selves shut out.

Envy opposes the Providence of God, grieving that God should dispose of his
blessings, as he does.

It is a most unjust sin, for it is offended with nothing but that which is
good; and the more good it is, the greater is the envy. As the brighter the Sun
shines, the more are weak and sore eyes offended: Oh how contrary are good
Angels, and evil men! they are ready to cry, and burst for anger at that which
makes music in heaven: The Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, and
they rejoice when one sins who is converted.

An envious man is more unhappy then other sinners; others are troubled for
their own evils, the envious man for other men's good.

Quest. 10 verse 5.
Why is it said, The Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering: It is not
said, The Lord had respect unto Abels offering, but unto Abel and his offering?

To teach us that God first had respect to Abel, and then to his offering: and
that the Abels offering was, because he had respect to Abels person. We prize
the person because of the gift; God prizes the gift because of the person. The
reason why wicked men are not accepted is, because they bring unto God opus
personae, sed non personam: They offer their duties unto the Lord, but not
themselves.

Quest. 11. verse. 6.
Why does the Lord propound this question unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and
why is thy Countenance fallen?

Not for information; God knew the

1. To teach us, that when we are moved to passion we should think with our
selves again and again, why are we angry; are we angry upon good grounds, upon
a righteous account?

We should endeavor in such a case to commune with our own hearts, and indeed
we had need to take some pains, for self will hardly be spoken with.

To be angry is our duty in some cases. If anger were an evil in it self
considered, it could no more be attributed unto God then envy, etc. But because
it is an hard matter to be angry and not sin, it is said, Be angry, and sin
not: and the Apostle Ephesians. 4. 26.
adds, Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, viz. Let it not lodge with you
nor take up its Inn in your breasts.

I have read a story of two persons of eminency between whom anger had passed;
But at evening the one sent the other word, the Sun was set, upon which they
were soon reconciled.

The Apostle adds, Neither give place to the Devil; He that keeps anger in
his bosom gives place to the Devil, and why should we make room for him that
will crowd in too fast of himself?

Men think to be a little angry is no such matter; but mark the consequence,
you give place to the Devil; have a care of the beginnings of sin; Says
Solomon, The beginning of the words of a fools mouth is Eccl. 10. 13.
foolishness, but the end of his talk is mischievous madness. They that
dwell by the Sea-bankes, will not let a small breach lie unrepaired: they know
it will endanger the losing of much ground if not looked to in time: Learn
therefore to deal with thy sin, as the Apostle Paul did with false brethren,
He gave them no place, no not for Gal. 2.5
an hour.

You may ask me, what are the causes of an holy Anger?

I must not enlarge in this; therefore in a few words,

Holy anger arises from our love unto God, and our hatred against sin.

And herein appeared the exceeding sinfulness of Cains wrath, that whereas he
should have been angry with his brothers sin, he was angry with his brothers
righteousness.

And that his rage was great, appears by the text; for it is said, He was very
wrath, and his countenance fell. One glosses upon it thus, Ex ira vultus Caini
demititur in terram: nonne Deus tibi faciem rectam concessit, cur pronam et
similem bestiis, deprimis? Non miror Cainum similem animalibus iratus enim
erat, at iratus expers est omnis rationis. It is said, Cains countenance fell:
God gave him a face erect looking up toward heaven, but now in his passion, he
seems to be void of reason, and his countenance falls, as if he were a beast.

Let this caution us against passion upon every turn, let us enquire why we
are wroth? He will make a strange combustion in his soul, who at the landing of
every Cock-boat, (upon every trivial occasion) sets the Beacons on fire. He
that will be angry for every thing, will be angry for nothing, etc.

The Apostle gives us an exhortation, Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God,
whereby ye are sealed unto the doy of redemption: But Ephesians. 4. 30.
what course must we take that we may not grieve the Spirit? This follows in
the next verse, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil speaking verse. 31.
be put away from you with all malice. The Spirit of God cannot endure an
unquiet habitation. It is observable, how many times in the Scriptures the
Spirit of God appeals to the reasons and understandings of men; as here, why
art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance fallen? Nothing more irrational
then irreligion: when a man is intemperate, unjust, passionate, he acts not
only against Scripture, but against principles of reason, and ingenuity. If
God had not commanded us to be sober, just, temperate in our affections, it is
for our interest so to be; the commands of God, like Benjamins sack, have money
in the mouth of them; in the keeping the Commandments there is exceeing great
reward; wicked men are mad in a Scripture-sure-sense; The Prodigal came to
himself when he came to his Father.

2. Another reason why God might propound this question to Cain might be this,
to note unto us that when wicked men are not accepted, they are apt to cast the
blame upon God: why art thou wroth? Thou seem to be angry with thy brother,
whose sacrifice is accepted, but indeed thou art angry with God, who accepted
the sacrifice. Thou strikest at the Head, and because thou can not reach
that, thou woundest the Heel.

Proud daring sinners, to lay the blame on God: It is foolish to cast our sins
altogether on Satan, but it is blasphemous to cast them upon God. Sin is a
bastardbrood, it is conceived and brought forth by man, and yet if you lay it
at his door he will not father it.

It is the observation of a Learned Author, man naturally hates God, and since
he cannot raze out the sense of a Deity out of his soul, he would destroy the
dread and reverence of it. It Is a saying of Plutarch, Malo de me dici nullum
esse Plutarchum quam malum esse Plutarchum. Man cannot deny God, therefore he
debase, him, which is worse. It Is better not to be, hen to be wicked

3. A third Reason may be to teach us, that God will call the wicked to an
account for every evil work.

1. For their sins of Omission; I was an hungry, will Christ say, and you
gave me no meat, etc. Such a time, you had an Mat. 25.43
opportunity in the hands to get wisdom, but you neglected it, you had power
and opportunity to appear for God, and his glorious Gospel, but you had no
heart to it.

2. For sins of commission, Rejoice, Oh young man, in thy youth, and let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these things
God will bring thee into judgment: For all these things, these trifles, these
tricks of youth, as the world accounts them: Item for thy Oaths, Item for thy
Lies, Item for thy Cozening, Item for thy drunkenness, Item for thy Hypocrisy,
for all these things God will bring thee to judgment: As the Apostle says, We
are the children of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be; viz.
there is more glory in heaven, then the people of God are able to conceive; so
wicked men are now the children of wrath, but it does not appear what they
shall be, viz. there shall be greater torment in Hell then the wicked are able
to conceive.

And God shall bring thee to judgment, viz. unexpectedly, and for ought thou
know speedily. Death does not always knock at the door, but nany times
breaks in, and takes persons away in the prime of their age.

Oh that the Gallants of this age would think of this Scripture; a Wicked
youngster is like a thief, that having stolen a gelding rides away bravely
mounted, till such time, as being overtaken with Hue and Cry, is soon afterward
sentenced, and put to death.

Quest. 12. verse 7.
Why is it said, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted, and not, if
thou do that which is good?

Because a man may do that which is Cain did that which was good, when he
brought an offering to the Lord, but he did not do well. We use to say, Ex
quolibet defectu malum: A work that is good, as to the matter of it, may by
reason of a defect in the principle, or end, become stark naught: therefore
Luther used to say, Of all works take heed of your good works. Sordet in
conspectu Judicis; quod fulget in conspectu operantis: That which is fair to
men, is abomination to God. God rejected the swan for sacrifice, some say,
because under a white feather it has a black skin.

Quest. 13. verse 7.
What is the meaning of that phrase, sin lies at the door?

By sin in this place is meant the punishment of sin, and not sin it self,
and sin lies at the door; now sin when it is committed, does notly at the
door, but is gotten into the House.

Then the meaning is this, If thou do not well, sin lies at the door;
though this punishment seem to sleep for a while, yet it lies at the door,
and it will not be long there before it be roused, and then like a great
Mastiffe, it will be ready to pull out the throat of thy soul.

Let us remember, if we do not well, sin lies at the door; the sinner shall
not escape unpunished; God is righteous, and by no means will clear the
guilty, etc. The Devil always covers his hook with a bait. He never comes
bluntly and rudely to a man, and bids him simply transgress Gods
Commandments, but always uses some device or other to make his sin please
him: when the Devil fished for Adam, he baited his hook with hope of
preferment, that he should be as God: To catch David, he baiteth his Hook with
pleasure; to catch Achan, Gehazi, he baiteth his hook with profit: but when the
fish has swallowed the hook, had she not better have been without the bait?
The Devil promises pleasure, but God knows it is dear bought: there is never
a dram of sin, but it brings a pound of sorrow.

Quest. 14. verse. 8.
What is the meaning of this phrase, and Cain talked with Abel his brother?

Most Expositors carry it, that he talked

Learn, Foulest sins have oft-times fairest pretenses: Woe unto you, Scribes,
and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye devour widows houses, Mat. 23.14
and for a pretense make long prayers. Mark, They devoured houses, that showed
their covetousness, and widows houses, that showed their cruelty, and all
this under pretense of religion, making long prayers; this showed their
hypocrisy. Herod colors over his cruel intention of murdering Christ, with
pretense of doing him homage: Herod sent the wise men to Bethlehem, and said,
Go search diligently for the young Mat. 2.8.
child; and when ye have found him, bring me word, that I may worship him.
Judas endeavors to dissemble his treason with a kiss. Judas, betrayest thou
the Son of Luke 22.48
man with a kiss? What? an Apostle of Christ, a betrayer of Christ? betrayest
thou the Son of man, and with a Kiss? Any Treason is bad enough, but for Judas
to betray Christ, and with a kiss, Horrendum scelus! who would have thought
the very kisses, and salutations of Christ to be murder?

We may observe, that Jesus in one place calls Judas Devil, and in another
friend, the reason may be, because Judas played the Devil in the likeness of a
friend. (...) signifies both a player, and an hypocrite; as great men have
their players, so has the devil his; some play men in the shape of devils,
others play devils in the shape of men: The roof of the mouth in Greek is
called (...) heaven, and the heart of man is called abyssus, which signifies
hell: there are those that have an heaven of holiness in their mouths, that
have an hell of wickedness in their hearts.

The Church of God has two sorts of enemies, the openly profane person, the
swearer, the drunkard, the unclean person, as also the carnal professor, the
hypocrite, the pretender unto holiness. These oppose and persecute the people
of God as well as the other. The Ivy imbraceth the tree, but withal eats out
the heart of it, and kills it: there are many in the world, that make a great
profession of godliness, who are Wens in the body of Christ, not members of
it; A Wenne is skinned over with the same outside, which the true members have,
and it seems to belong to the integrity of the whole body, when indeed it is
an enemy, and a thief therein; many pretend to be members of Christ, when they
are enemies unto Christ.

The Devil in these latter days has been found in Samuels Mantle; many a toad
has been found under the stones of the Sanctuary.

Religion has been most opposed, by the carnal and hypocritical professors of
it: Luther professes, A falsis amicis plus est mihi periculi, quam ab ipso
toto Papatu: I am in more danger of those that are my pretended friends, then
from the Pope, and all his adherents. The Gadarens besought Christ to depart;
but his own Contrymen thrust him out of their Luke 4.29.
City, and led him unto the brow of an hill, that they might cast him down
headlong. Pretended friends do the greatest mischief to the Church of God;
poison kills more surely then the sword. Goliahs sword lies hid in an Ephod; no
sword to Goliahs, no cruelty to hypocrites.

Quest. 15. Verse. 8.
What may we learn from Cain's killing his brother Abel?

The bloody-mindednesse, of wicked murder of Abel we may take notice of these
particulars.

1. Homo occidit hominem, one man kills another.

2. Frater occidit fratrem, a brother kills a brother; non homicida tantum, sed
fratricida.

3. Injustus occidit justum, a wicked man kills a good man.

4. Propter sinceri cultum Dei, this murder was committed upon the account of
worshipping God in faith; non homicida and fratricida, sed Justicida; Cain was
not only a killer of his brother, but of his brother for righteousness sake.

5. He killed not his brother in a passion, or by chance-medly, as we use to
say, but maliciously, and with premeditation. He talks with his brother after a
friendly manner, gets him into the fields, and there rises up against his
brother and slayes him.

6. He kills his brother in the fields, not in his house, lest help might come
in to save his life, and that he might with the more convenience (at least as
he conceived) deny the fact when it was committed.

7. Post admonitionem Dei, after counsel given him by God to the contrary, If
thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well sin
lies at the door.

Learn, There is no hatred so virulent, and bitter, as that which is occasioned
by profession of the Name of Christ; this makes people forget all natural
affection; The brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father
the child, and the Mat. 10.21
children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to
death.

When Christ was borne, all Jerusalem was troubled, and Herod cut the throats
of all the children in Bethlehem; when Christ is borne in the soul, Satan and
his instruments are in an uproare, and are ready to kill (though it be never so
little) the babe of grace. No fire burns so hot, as that which is kindled by
the breath of religion.

And, we may observe, (which truly should lie sadly upon our spirits) the
nearer men come to each other in their judgments (if there be a difference)
the more desperate are their designs one against another. The Persians and
Turks, are both Mahumetans, and yet differing in some small points, in the
interpretation of their Alcoran; the Persians burn whatsoever books they find
of the Turkish sect: and the Jew can better brook an Heathen, then a Christian;
The Pope will dispense with Jews, but not with Protestants; Lutherans will
sooner join hands with a Papist, then a Calvinist: I could instance in others,
but I forbear.

Quest. 16. Verse. 9.
What may we learn from the answer that Cain gives unto the question propounded
unto him by the Lord, And the Lord said unto Cain, where is Abel thy brother?
And he said, I know not; Am I my brothers keeper?

We may learn, That the Commission Cain offers up his sacrifice without faith
in God, then he kills his brother, and here in this verse, first he tells a
notorious lie, when God asked him, where his brother was, he said he knew not;
and then he is guilty of high contempt against God, as if the Lord had asked
him an impertinent question; Lord why do thou ask me, where is Abel my
brother? I am not my brothers keeper. He does not deny him to be his brother,
and yet does deny, that he should have any care of him.

There are some learned men, that conceive, (I suppose the impudency of Cain's
speech inclined them thereunto) that this debate was between Adam and Cain, and
that God is said to speak to Cain, because Adam had it by instinct from God.

But this consideration has not strength enough in it, to beat us off from the
received opinion; for what wickednesses are there imaginable, but we should
commit with greediness, if God should give us up to the wickedinesse of our
own spirits?

Well then learn, How the commission of one sin, leads us (as it were) by the
hand to the commission of another. There is in wicked courses a praecipitium;
when a man is at the top of an hill, it is at his choice, whether he will
thence throw himself down, or not; but once let him headlong himself, there is
no stay till he come to the bottom. It is an easier matter to keep our selves
from entering into desperate courses. then when once we have given our selves
the reins to make a stop.

Nemo repent fit turpissimus. As no man on the sudden becomes most excellent
in virtue, so no man on a sudden becomes desperate in evil. There is such a
combination of sin, as in the links of a chain; if a man draw one link all
the rest will follow, so malice follows after anger, murder after hatred,
Adultery after drunkenness. If a man cast a stone into the water, there
arises presently a circle in the place, and presently after that another, and
so another, till at last all the water be full of circles. In like manner if a
man commit one sin, another will follow upon it, and after that another,
unless the grace of God prevent, till he be out of measure sinful.

Take heed therefore of the beginnings of sin, take Babylons brats, and dash
them against the stones.

We may learn that private spiritednesse, is not a thing well pleasing to God;
Exodus 23. 5. If thou see the Ass of him that hates thee lying under his
burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him: and
more should we show compassion and love to our brother. Am I my brothers
keeper? Take heed of that profane speech; Christians ow a mutual
serviceablenesse one unto another. God makes no Patentees, nor will he endure
any Monopolies, Christians must drive an open, and free trade. The excellency
of other creatures is in their communication of themselves; the Sun raying out
his warm and cherishing beams, the Fountain bubling out his purling streams,
the Earth yielding forth sovereign herbs, and plants: Christians are then in
their excellency, when they are communicative, and useful.

I have read, that the Art of Medicine was perfected thus; As any one met with
an herb, and discovered the virtue of it by any accident, he would post it up
in some public place, and if any were sick, or diseased, he was laid in some
beaten passage, that every one might communicate the best receipt; and say
they, the Physicians skill was perfected by a collection of those posted
experiments and receipts: of all things take heed of the napkin; wrap not up
your Talents, As every one has received the gift, even 1 Pet. 4. 10.
so minister the same, one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace
of God.

Quest. 17. verse. 10.
What is meant by this phrase, The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me
from the ground?

This is to be understood figuratively, a Thy brothers blood cries; that is,
as if God should have said, I know what thou have done as clearly, as if I had
called thee to the bar of justice, and the whole matter of fact had been
heard, and determined before me, and upon the whole, I should be called upon
for justice.

By the way, by what has been said, some light may be given, for the
understanding of that Scripture, I saw under the Altar the souls of them that
were slain for the Word of God, and for Rev. 6* 9, 10.
the Testimony which they held, and they cried with a loud voice, saying, How
long, Oh Lord, holy, and true do thou not judge, and avenge our blood? Which
must not so be understood, as if the souls of the blessed Saints should
earnestly desire vengeance on them that shed their blood, which is hardly
competible with an heavenly State, but may be expounded in the same manner, as
the words in this ver. The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me: viz. The
Lord has the blood that has been shed for his Names sake, fresh in his
thoughts, and will as certainly be revenged on them that shed it, as if every
drop of their blood were a tongue, and continually crying in his ears for
justice, etc.

Well then Learn to avoid crying sins: crying is applied to several sins in
the Scripture.

1. To blood, so in this verse. Thy brothers blood cries.

2. To the wickedness of Sodom, Gen 18. 10. The Lord God said, Because the
cry of Sodom, and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous,
etc.

3. The oppression of Gods servants, Exo. 2. 24. God heard their groaning, etc.

4. The oppression of the widows, and fatherless, Exo. 22.23. Ye shall not
afflict any widow or fatherless child; if thou afflict them in any wise, and
they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry.

5. The oppression of the Labourer, Jam. 5.4. Behold, the hire of your
laborers, which have reaped down your field, which is of you kept back by
frand, cries.

And let us bless God for Jesus Christ; the Apostle does ascribe a cry to the
blood of Christ, as Moses here to the blood of Abel: And to Jesus the Mediator
of the new covenant, and to the blood H^b. 12. 24.
of sprinkling, that speaks better things, then that of Abel.

In that speech of the Apostle, there is an allusion made to the blood of Abel,
and to the cry thereof: and he illustrates the cry of Christ's blood for us, by
the cry of the blood of Abel against Cain, yet see the dissimilitude, as a
reverend Author has it, thus.

1. Abel was a Saint; The blood of a wicked man, if innocently shed, cries: if
Abel had murdered Cain, Cains blood would have cried, and called upon God for
justice against Abel; but Abels blood cries according to the worth of the
person, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. Now if
the blood of a Saint cry so, how much more the blood of the King of Saints?

2. Abels blood cries from the ground, but Christ's blood is carried up to
heaven. The cry of the blood of a Saint may come up to heaven, yet the blood it
self does not come up thither.

3. Add to this, the intercession of Christ himself, Christ by his own
prayers seconds the cry of his blood; the blood of a man does cry, though the
man be dead, but Christ ever lives to make intercession for his people.

Quest. 18. verse. 11, 12.
Why did the Lord pronounce against Cain only earthly punishments; as, ver.
11, 12?

Because wicked men are not so greatly becomes like the beasts that perish,
which are carried with an hurry to things present, and sensible.

Quest. 19. verse. 13.
Whether that saying of Cain be well translated. My punishment is greater then
I can bear?

Some say, it should be rendered, my sin is greater then can be forgiven; but
the context seems to favor our translation, for in the following words, he
speaks not of his sin, but of his punishment, verse. 14. Behold, thou have
driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and from thy face, etc. here
sin is taken for the punishment of sin, as in several other places of
Scripture.

The greatness of Cains punishment will appear, if you compare it with Adams.

1. God did not curse Adam, but the earth was cursed for Adams sake, but God
says to Cain, verse. 11. And now thou art cursed from the earth.

2. That which is included in Adams curse, viz. That though he should labor
and sweat, yet he should have bread for it, In the sweat of thy face thou shall
eat thy bread; is denied to Cain: for, says the Lord verse. 12. When thou
tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength.

3. Though Adam was expelled out of Paradise, yet there was a commodious place
assigned him by God, where he and his family might reside, and till the earth;
but the Lord says of Cain, that he should be a fugitive, and a vagabond on the
earth, ver. 12.

Oh have a care of blood. What have thou Genesis 4.7.
done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries to mefrom the ground. God will
give a tongue to the earth; speechless creatures shall speak, rather then
blood shall be concealed.

It is an excellent observation of a learned Author upon that text of
Scripture, When he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers them; Says he,
does not the Psalm. 7.12.
Lord make inquisition for all sin? Or is there any sin that God does not
enquire after? Surely no, but when it is said God makes inquisition for blood,
it argues the greatness of that sin; We find not the like expression, about
any other particular sin, in all the whole book of God: Though God makes
inquisition for all sin, yet as if he would let all other sins past unsought,
and uniquired after, it is said only of this sin, that he makes inquisition
for it.

Quest. 20. verse. 14.
Cain says, From thy face I shall be hid, and yet the Psalmist says, Psalm.
139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
presence?

God is present every where in regard of Whither shall I flee from thy
presence? We may run from God as our friend, but we cannot escape him, as an
enemy: A man pursued in an Island, when he runs from one end to the other,
runs from sea to sea: if you should flee from one end of the earth unto the
other, you would run from God unto God,

The meaning then of this phrase, I shall be hid from thy face, is this, I
shall be deprived of communion with God in his Ordinances.

Though Cain was a wicked man, yet he was taught by his parents, that there was
no way of enjoying God in this world, but in and by his Ordinances; And he
speaks this, not from a principle of love to God, or his Ordinances, but upon
the account of education.

Learn from hence, The condition of a person excommunicated, is very sad;
Christ tells us, we cannot serve God, and Mammon; and therefore when we are
cast outof Gods service, we are said to be delivered into the hands of Satan:
Hymeneus, and Alexander, excommunicated persons, are 1 Timothy 1. 20.
said to be delivered up unto Satan.

Learn also, If the casting out of the Church a particular member, though it
be in order to cure and repentance, be so dreadful, what a black day would
that be, when the Ordinances of Jesus Christ should as it were be
excommunicated, and cast out of the Church of Christ!

Quest. 21. verse. 14.
Cain says, It shall come to pass that, every one that finds me, shall slay
me; The question is, who those were whom Cain feared, that if they met him,
they would slay him?

Some think that Cain speaks this Cain imagines multitudes to meet him, and
slay him: Every one that finds me, shall slay me, Prove. 28.1. The wicked
flees, when no man pursues: only his own guilt pursues him, and makes him
flee.

But this opinion has not the savor of truth in it, for Cain does not only
suppose a considerable number of persons to live at that time in the world, but
God himself, as appears by what the Lord said unto Cain, verse. 15. Whosoever
slays Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him seven fold.

Some are of opinion, that this is to be

But this cannot be the meaning of the words, as appears by that which
follows, for it is said, The Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him
should kill him, which cannot with any show of reason, be applied to the beasts.

Others hold, that Cain in these words had

But neither can this be; for what needed there a present law, for those who as
yet were not in being?

Another sort are of opinion, that these Adam and Eve: for that Adam had
Daughters at that time, is more then probable, from that which follows; for it
is said, Cain had a wife, (which must needs be his sister) and that she was
come to years appears, because it is said, ver. 17. that Cain knew his wife.

From the whole (I conceive) we may more then probably conclude, that Adam and
Eve, at the time when Cain spoke these words, had many Sons, and Daughters,
(although the Spirit of God does not make mention of them, the History mainly
referring to Cain and Abel.)

And to me it seems very unlikely, that Adam and Eve should have no more
children after Cain and Abel, till they came to years of discretion, when at
the beginning we find, God did make especial provision for the increase of
the world, as appears by Gods sparing Cains life, and his dispensation of his
marriage with his sister.

However we may take notice of the terrors of Cains conscience; for those that
were in the world, were either his parents, brethren, sisters, or near
kindred, and yet he cries out, Every one that finds me shall slay me. If it
be such an intolerable burden for a man to read one page, or leaf of the book
of conscience, as Cain the killing of his brother, how dreadful will it be to
read the book of conscience, leaf, by leaf, from one end to the other at the
day of judgment?

The accusings of conscience, are one part of the punishment of the damned in
Hell; when Dives desired that his brethren might not come into that place of
torments, it is conceived by some, that it is not spoken from a principle of
love to his brethren, for all natural affections cease in Hell; but from a
principle of self-love, because their presence would tend to his further
conviction, and be a means to increase his torment.

Quest. 22. verse. 15.
Why did the Lord so far indulge Cain, that he would not permit him to suffer
death, though guilty of murder?

Some say, Credibile est antiquitus. gravium delictorum leves fuisse poenas,
sed cumeae progressu temporis contemnerentur, ventum ad mortem. If this could
be cleared, it would be a strong argument for punishing

Propter hominum raritatem: Because of the scarcity of persons then living,
that God might provide for the increase of the world, he spares Cain.

Because there was then less fear of doing hurt by example. Malefactors are

God would convince Cain, that he was

God is not the God of confusion, A taxy, Levelling, It Is not for every one,
for private persons, to act as Magistrates, in determining matters criminal,
nor yet as executioners, in binding, or killing those that are worthy of bonds,
or death.

It is true, He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; by
man, that is, not by every man; but by the Magistrate, says Paul, speaking of
the Magistrate, He is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him
that Romans 13.4
does evil.

Quest. 23. verse. 17.
It is said, And Cain knew his wife, why is she not called his sister?

There is no question, but Cain married Cains wife being his sister, but only
Cain knew his wife.

The truth is, Cain could not do otherwise; for being under a command to
increase and multiply, and God creating but one man and one woman, viz. his
father and mother, Marriage could not have been continued, nor mankind
propagated, if he had not married his sister.

But will necessity make a thing unlawful

Yes, If that necessity be founded upon

Quest. 24. verse. 17
Why Cain builded a city?

It may be for these reasons.

1. That if possible, he might evade the sentence God had pronounced against
him, that he should be a runagate and a vagabond.

2. Securitatis ergo; that being in a strange place, he might secure himself
from the wild beasts.

3. Ad sui defensionem; that he might be the better provided against any that
should go about to slay him; for his conscience told him, that every one that
met him would kill him.

Quest. 25. verse. 17.
How was it possible for Cain to build a city, for where had he builders, and
laborers for the work, or how could he replenish it with multitudes of men,
wherein Cities, and Commonwealths do principally consist?

It Is likely that this city was not so magnificent,

That Adam had many Sons, and Daughters at that time, which the Scripture

That these Sons and Daughters did

That Cain at the building of this City, Enoch mentioned in the text, but many
other Sons, and Daughters.

That he calls the name of the City after Enoch, not because he had no other
children, but because he was his firstborn.

That it is likely that Cain lived after the

It is probable that Cain built this City, in the four hundredth or five
hundredth year of

We read concerning the children of Jacob, that they were six hundred thousand
Exodus 11 37.
men of war; Now these were enough to replenish a City, and why not Cains
posterity?

Quest. 26. verse. 17.
How could Cains building of a City suit with that punishment that God had
pronounced against him, that he should be a fugitive and a vagabond?

It Is not expressed how long Cain should Cain, and his family for some time
might be in such a condition, and afterward settle.

Some distinguish between, a prediction or Prophecy, and a threat. A Prophecy,
say

Though he built a City, yet he continued

Although this may seem at first to be

The stock of Adam increases, as well by Seth, as by Catn, and yet none of
that family is said to build a City before the flood: And wherefore not?
Because the Lord had given them the plenty of the earth, and was a stronger
defense to them then the walls of any City: but Cain, who was departed from the
presence of the Lord, was compelled to build a City for his defense: not for
pleasure, but for security.

Learn from hence, Worldly, and wicked men chiefly set their minds on worldly
things.

You may observe, (amongst others) two things concerning the sin of
worldliness:

1. It is the sin of professors: what is the cry in the world? (I would there
were not too much cause for it) it is true, they profess much, and hear
Sermons, and would be accounted Saints, but are as griping, as covetous, as
earthly as others.

It Is a thousand pitties, that they that have heaven at their tongues end,
should have the earth at their fingers end.

2. As it is the sin of Professors, of them that pretend to holiness, so you
read not in the Scripture of any truly holy, that are branded for this sin.
Once Noah was overtaken with the love of Wine, never with the Love of the
world; Lot was twice incestuous, never covetous; once David was besotted with
the flesh, never bewitched with the world. Peter denied his Master, but it was
not the love of the world, but the fear of the world that caused him to fall
into that sin. Zaccheus had been a covetous person, but no sooner does he take
Christ by the hand, but the first thing he does is to shake hands with
covetousness, Half my goods, I give to the poor.

Qest. 27. verse. 19.
From this Scripture, where it is said, That Lamech took unto him two wives,
it may be demanded whether Polygamy was a sin in the time of the Law or not?

This question has more perplexities

1. Some conceive, that Polygamy, was not a sin in the time of the Law: the
reasons they render are these:

Because we find a Law made by God, as touching those who had more wives then
If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and they have borne
Deuteronomy. 21 15, 16.
him children, both the beloved, and the hated, and if the first borne son be
hers that was hated, then it shall be, when he makes his sons to inherit
that which he has, that he may not make the son of the beloved firstborn,
before the son of the hated, who is indeed the firstborn: Now if the Lord
makes a Law concerning those who had more wives then one, how could it then be
a sin?

This is a non sequitur: we find Laws in Scripture concerning things sinful;
as, If a man strive, and hurt a woman, so that her Ex 21.22, 23.
fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow, he shall be surely
punished, etc. And if any mischief follow, thou shall give life for life; So
concerning theft, He that steals a man, Exo. 21.16
and sells him, he shall be surely put to death. So concerning the price of
an harlot, Thou shall not bring the hire of an whore, Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
or the price of a dog into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow.

They urge those words of the Lord to David, Thus says the Lord, I anointed
thee 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8.
King over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul; and I gave
thee thy Masters house, and thy Masters wives into thy bosom; this the Lord
reckons as one of the mercies, he had bestowed on David, and therefore it was
not a sin.

That phrase say some, I gave thy Masters wives into thy bosom, is not to be
understood of Gods giving them in a way of marriage unto David, but of giving
them into his power. To clear this, consider,

1. This phrase of giving into a man's bosom in Scripture does not always
signify a marriage-union; Render unto Psalm 1
our neighbor sevenfold into their bosom. So in Esaias, Your iniquities and
the iniqui^ of your fathers together, says the Lord, which have burnt incense
upon the mountains, and bl^sphemed me upon the Hills therefore will I measure
their former work into their bosom.

2. David had married Saul's Daughter Mi^hol, so that Saul's wives were Mothers
in Law to David; now you have an express Law, Thou shall not uncover the Lev.
18. 15.
nakedness of thy Daughter in Law. Now if a father ought not to uncover the
nakedness of his Daughter in Law, then certainly a Son ought not to uncover
the nakedness of his Mother in Law.

2. Others conceive that Polygamy was a sin, persuaded thereunto by these
reasons.

From the institution of marriage in Paradise, Therefore shall a man leave his
Father, and Mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and Genesis 2. 24.
they shall be one flesh.

It Is not said, they two shall be one flesh;

Though it be not explicitly, yet it is Have ye not read, that he Mat: 19.4, 5.
that made them at the beginning, made them male; and female, and said, For
this cause shall a man leave Father, and Mother, and cleave to his wife, and
they twain shall be one flesh?

The word two, or twain, does not At the mouth of two witnesses Deu. 17.6.
or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put to death: So in
Matthew says Christ, Mat. 18. 19.
If two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shall
ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven.

The word two, or twain, is taken in

By those words, two shall be one flesh,

There may be conjunctio animorum; many conjunctio animorum, sed corporum: an
union of spirits, but of bodies.

God commends this unto us, as that

Neg. For, Matthew 19. 5. The Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for
every cause? Christ urges, in answer to this question, Genesis 2.24.

Lamech primus Polygamus; Polygamy had Cains wicked race; therefore likely
sinful, and displeasing to God.

3. There is a third opinion, which I find some learned persons inclinable to
close with, viz. That though Polygamy was a sin under the Law, that is to say,
to Lamech and to the rest of Cains wicked progeny; yet it was not a sin to
the Patriarchs: and that though there was a law from the beginning, that one
man should have but one wife, as, Genesis 2.24. yet as to the obligation of it,
God gave a dispensation to the Patriarchs.

The reasons, that incline them to this opinion, are such as these.

If there were a Law whereby plurality

If it were known to them, then they lived and died in a known sin without
Repentance, as far as we can gather from the Scriptures.

If any say it was not known to them, then this will follow, that holy men from
one generation to another lived, and died in a gross and heinous sin, without
having the least intimation of it from God, which will be hard to affirm?
especially if you consider, how David, one of these holy men delighted in the
Law of God, and that it was his meditation day and night.

We do not read that any of the Prophets,

Neither do ye read that Lat was reproved

We may easily gather from the text, that Lots Daughters make their father
drunk? and if Lot knew it to be a sin, we cannot from thence conclude the
Patriarchs knew Polygamy to be so.

Jacob married two sisters, and yet we

The hand of God was upon Jacob for a Few, and evil are the days of the years
of my pilgrimage.

A particular person possibly may commit

If having more wives then one, were a

Thus I have given you the several judgments of learned men concerning this
point; I shall now give you my own sense of it, (with submission to others) in
several Propositions.

1. Prop.
That we find not in the whole book of God, at least in express words, that
God dispensed with his Law against plurality of wives, as to the Patriarchs,
and whether or no it can be proved by consequence, will appear afterward.

2. Prap.
That I conceive, there can no reason be rendered why the Lord should be pleased
with the Patriarchs having more wives then one; but the same may be urged a
fortiori, why it should be so, from the beginning God created but one man and
one woman, he could have created more, but it did not please him so to do.

3. Prop.
That text in Malachi, is worthy our consideration in this case, where you have
the Lord reproving his people thus. Because Mal. 2. 14 15, 16
the Lord has been witness between thee, and the wife of thy youth against
whom thou have dealt treacherously, yet she is thy companion, and the wife of
thy covenant. And did he not make one? Yet had he the residue of the spirit:
and wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed; therefore take heed to your
spirit; and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth; for the
Lord the God of Israel says, he hates putting away, etc.

I know the Lord urges this against a man's putting away his wife, but mark
from whence he takes his rise, viz. from the primitive institution of marriage:
and God argues a fortiori; If the Lord was pleased, that one man should have
but one wife at first, and made a law to that end and purpose; and if a man
deals treacherously against his wife by marrying another, though he lives with
them both, how treacherously have thou dealt with the wife of thy youth, in
putting her away from thee? you may be sure the Lord hates putting away.

4. Prop.
That that text of Scripture, where God reckons it as a mercy, that he gave
David 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8.
his Masters wives into his bosom, must not so be expounded, as if it were a
mercy in it self to have many wives, but in regard of the concomitants of it: I
gave thee thy Masters wives into thy bosom, viz. I gave thee the Kingdom.

For it was a custom among the Jews, when a King died, and another succeeded
in his stead, for the successor to have the deceased Kings wives: which was the
reason why Solomon was so exceedingly incensed against Adonijah, for moving to
have Abishag to wife, because she accompanied David, as his wife, and it was
the same, as if he should ask the Crown, and so by consequence was guilty of
treason; for mark what Solomon says, And King Solomon answered, and said unto
his Mother, And 1 King 2. 22.
why do thou ask Abishag, the Shunamite for Adonijah? ask for him the
Kingdom also.

There were two reasons why Achitophel persuaded Absalom to lie with his
fathers wives on the house top, in the sight of all Israel.

1. That he might engage him into the commission of such a crime, that David
neither in honor nor justice could pass by, and by consequence that himself
and his party might not be brought to condign punishment, which might come to
pass by a close between David and Absalom.

2. Because by this act he did virtually proclaim himself King to all Israel.

And therefore by the way I crave leave to demurre to the two answers given by
learned men to this argument, urged formerly.

For the first, it is true, this phrase of giving into a man's bosom, does not
always in Scripture signify a marriage-union, but for all that has yet been
said, it may signify so, if the phrase will bear it, and so it is in this
case.

For the second, Though the Law of God might be against marriage with Mothers
in Law, yet this might lie hid to the Patriarchs, it being only deducible by
consequence, and not expressly interminis in the text.

5. Prop.
That the holy Patriarchs might live, and dye in the continual practice of
this sin, and yet be saved, because known sins require particular repentance;
but if sins be unknown, or unconsidered, by reason that men are carried away
with the sway of the times (as the Patriarchs were) then a general repentance
suffices as David, Who can understand his errors? cleans thou me from secret
faults. Psa. 19.12.


6. Prop.
That which is a gross sin under the Gospel, when God has clearly revealed
unto us his mind in this Case, might be a sin of a lesser size under the Law
yea, even under the dispensation of the Gospel; that which was an Error of
Infirmity in the time of the Apostles, at the first promulgation of it, viz.
that the Messiah should not suffer death, is now, after a more full, and clear
discovery of the mind of God, a most gross, and horrid blasphemy.

7. Prop.
That although the holy Patriarchs knew that there was such a Law, that a man
should leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife, and they shall be
one flesh, yet it might not be clear that the sense and meaning of that Law,
was that one man should have but one wife.

8. Prop.
That Polygamy under the Law, being nothing near so heinous a sin, as Polygamy
under the Gospel, the inconveniences following thereupon, were not so great
then as those which would follow now, viz. disgrace, and reproach upon the
persons committing this sin, and upon their seed.

9. Prop.
That though having of many wives were a fault, yet it would be something an
unsavory speech to affirm, that Abraham, and the holy Patriarchs were
Adulterers; I conceive the Poligamy of the Fathers may be placed in the middle,
between adultery and holy wedlock; they took not wives of a lewd mind, for the
satisfying of their lust, but of a conscience not rightly informed in this
point.

10. Prop.
That upon a serious consideration of the premises I think it safest to join
issue with those who hold, that even the Patriarchs themselves sinned in having
more wives then one.

Learn from hence to detest that dangerous error of some sort of the
Anabaptists, who hold plurality of wives under the Gospel.

Though this assertion be so unsavory, as that I verily believe it stinks in
the nostrils of all those that hold Christ to be the Lord; yet because we live
in such times when the Serpent casts out of his mouth water as a flood after
the woman, that he might Rev. 12.15
cause her to be carried away of the flood; I shall endeavor to hold up your
head above water by several considerations.

1. That all the actions of the holy Patriarchs, though not blameworthy, are
not recorded by the Spirit of God for our imitation, but for other ends and
purposes.

2. That unto the following of the example of any holy person, it is not enough
that we do what he did, but we must do it upon the same grounds, and for the
same ends as he did it. The Apostles did not imitate Elias, by calling down
fire from heaven.

3. That in the Gospel, wherever our Lord Jesus, or his Apostles speak of
marriage, mention is made but of one man and one woman.

4. That although, Ephesians. 5. 22. Col. 3. 18. in those two places of Scripture
mention be made of wives, yet there is also mention made of husbands, an
ordinary eye may see, haec verba accipi per distributionem.

5. Our Savior says, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery: Mat. 19.9.
Now if a man when he puts away his wife, and marries another commits adultery,
then if he keeps his wife and marries another, he commits adultery.

Our Savior there speaks not of marrying more wives then one, but of putting
away those whom a man has married.

The same Argument that our Savior

6. It is said in Timothy, A Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one
wife; now we 1 Timothy 3 2.
must not think that these words refer ad bigamiam successivam, as some
phrase it; to the marriage of a second wife, after the decease of the first:
for this kind of Polygamy is not blameworthy, but the meaning is this, A
Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife, viz. of one wife at one
time.

Polygamy is forbidden to Bishops, therefore

This is a strange Consequence, as if a A Bishop must be sober, and of good
behavior, therefore another may be intemperate, etc.

Besides all this, I might add, Polygamy is against that natural principle,
or maxim, Quod tihi fieri non vis alteri ne feceris: Whatever you would others
should do unto you, do ye unto them.

8. Against one main end of marriage, to avoid fornication; If a man had half
as many wives as Solomon, I would know how the ends of marriage could be
accomplished?

Quest. 28. verse. 23.
What may be the meaning of that speech of Lamech to his wives: I have slain a
man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt, if Cain shall be avenged
sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.

Some conceive, that these words speak Lam^chs horror of conscience, and
fear of judgment, for the murders he had committed, as if he should say, If
God will be avenged on Cain, much more on me.

But here is suppositum non supponendum: for it is not said God would be
avenged on Cain, but on him who killed Cain.

The Jews have a tradition, that Lamech was so exceedingly delighted in
Hunting, that notwithstanding he was old, and blind,, yet taking Tub all-Cain a
youth, along with him, engaged in that sport, and by the direction of
Tuball-Cain, he, instead of his game, killed Cain: which he understanding
afterward, was very wroth, and in his fury killed Tuball-Cain.

But this opinion has more absurdities following it, then one.

1. It Is very unlikely Lamech being old, and blind would go on hunting.

2. That Tuball-Cain was killed, when a youth, being the text says, he was an
inventor of arts.

3. It Is not likely that Cain was wandering up and down in the woods at this
time, having built a City, and his family very numerous.

Others therefore more probably conceive, Lamechs speech noted his insolent
contempt of Gods judgments, and abuse of his patience toward Cain, Eccl. 8.
11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart ^f the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

The Scripture being silent who they were that were murdered by Lamech, it is
our best way to be silent also.

Notes on the fifth Chapter.
Quest. 1. verse. 2.
It is said, God created male and female, and Genesis 2. 5.
blessed them, and called their name Adam; How is it then said, That Adam
called his wives name Eve?

Eve was the woman's proper name, Adam was a name common to them both.

Quest. 2. verse 3.
Why is it not said that Adam begat Cain or Abel in his own likeness, as well
as Seth?

The opinions of the Learned are diverse concerning this expression, he begat a
son

1. Some would have it expounded of the rational soul; as we may say of any
other animal, that it begets a creature according to its likeness, when a
creature of its own kind is begotten, and brought forth.

But according to this exposition, Adam begat Cain and Abel, after his own
likeness, as well as Seth: for who doubts but Cain and Abel were true men?

2. Some would have it expounded thus; he begat Seth in his own likeness, viz.
a good man like himself, viz de imagine pietatis.

But if so, why was not this said concerning Abel being a good man, as well as
Seth?

3. Others therefore expound it rightly de privatione originalis justitiae, and
corruptione mentis; He begat a son in his own likeness, viz a sinful man
like himself; Homo mortalis genuit mortalem, corruptus corruptum: A mortal
man begat a mortal son, a corrupt man begat a corrupt son. God at first
created man in his likeness, but afterward man fallen begets a son in his
own likeness, a sinful creature like himself.

But this might be said of Cain, and Abel, as well as Seth:

It was not said of Abel, because he had no offspring; and corruption was to
run in We are all by nature the children of wrath. Nor of Cain, that it might
appear, that the righteous seed are subject to original depravation, and
defilement, as well as others: Holy persons do not beget children as Saints,
and therefore their Saintship is not derived to their posterity, but their sin.

Quest. 3. verse. 3.
Whether the soul of man be generated by the Parents, or as the Learned phrase
it, An anima sit ex traduce, vel per creationem?

This question being full of perplexities,

1. Prop.
There is no creature the cause of it self, or the fountain of its own being.

2. Prop.
That all effects, with reference to their causes, are not carried on after the
same way or manner, v^z.

Some effects are produced by the concourse of four causes, the efficient,
material, formal, final; and thus are all corporeal substances.

Some by the concourse of three causes; viz. efficient, material, and final: as
for instance, formae accidentales, ut nigredo, and albedo, black and white
produced by three causes. 1. The efficient who works it. 2. An end propounded
in the working of it. 3. Some subject matter on which it must be wrought.

And this we may observe, that these accidents depend rather on the material
cause, then either efficient or final: they depend on the efficient, and
final quoad fieri, as to their being, but on the material, both as to their
being, and continuance in their being: white and black may continue Efficiente,
and finali causa sublatis: When the efficient, and final cause is removed; but
this cannot be said of the subject matter whereon it is wrought.

Another instance may be given in substantial forms, they (the soul of man
being excepted) are produced by three causes, efficient, material, final; and
this we may observe, there is a great deal of difference between the soul of a
man, and the soul of a beast, respectu materiae: the soul of a brute can
neither exist, nor act, viz sentire and appetere, sine materia sua, the soul of
man is capable of both. Some effects again are produced by two causes,
efficient, and final, thus are Angels, and rational souls.

3. Prop.
That that phrase, that the Learned make very much use of, viz. Eductio formae
e potentia materiae, is applicable to the form of a brute, but not to the
form, or soul of a man.

The form of a brute could not have had its being, but vi passiva materia; but
the form or soul of a man, licet in materiam inducitur, non tamen educitur e
potentia materiae: God might (if he had pleased) have created rational souls,
and these might have lived, and acted to his praise without the concurrence; or
assistance of any material substance whatsoever.

4. Prop.
That the Original of forms is in profundo, very latent and Mysterious.

This was the reason, why the ancient Fathers differed so much in this point;
Origin was of opinion that all souls were at first created together with the
Angels; and afterward put into bodies. Tertullian will have the soul ex
traduce. Augustine leaves this question undecided, neither dares he determine
any thing: An eminently elegant, and learned, modern Auther, tells us, that in
this we may, (...), and that a modest hesitancy may be very lawful here.

5. Prop.
That most of our Divines (with whom I humbly close) are of opinion, that the
soul of man is by creation, not by traduction, or generation; their reasons are
both rational, and Scripturall. Rational grounds are these.

If the soul be by propagation, it must vel per multiplicationem, vel per
divisionem substantiae ipsius animae, vel per generationem a semine aliquo:
either by multiplication of the soul, or by division of the substance of the
soul, or prolifica virtute seminis.

Not the first way; for,

This action of multiplication, it must either be a natural, or a voluntary
action; if it be a natural action, and not voluntary, how can it be, that a
rational soul endowed with understanding and will, should multiply it self,
neither knowingly, nor willingly? If it be a voluntary action, then the cause
of barrenness will be seated in the will, because the soul will not multiply
it self: If this were a truth, few rich men but would have more, and few poor
men that would have so many children: Quomodo in Adulteris sequatur
foetificatio, cum eam maxim nollent?

Not the second way, by division of the substance of the soul; for why should
the rational soul be rather divisible then an Angel: when it is the common
judgment of Philosophers, That spirits are indivisible, Omnis spiritus est
(...)?.

Not the third way, Prolifica virtute seminis, si in and cum semine gencretur
anima, semen dici poterit animatum; si ita, annon anima rationalis erit
mortalis, quia non sempere ffuso semine sequitur prolificatio?

Nulla virtus activa agit ultra suum genus?

If it be objected, nothing material can produce such an effect, by its own
natural power, or by the help and assistance of common providence, but by the
special hand, and power of God: it will a mount to as much as, this assertion,
anima fit per creationem.

As the dissolution, or corruption of the

As the soul cannot be destroyed by any: so neither can it be produced thereby:
what is the reason why all the force on earth cannot reach the soul? Because it
is of a spiritual substance: now it seems to be as repugnant to right reason,
for a spiritual substance to be produced by any thing material, as to be
destroyed thereby: Especially if you consider it is far easier to destroy,
then it is to build up: there is no such art required in demolishing, as there
is in erecting of an edifice, those things which are long, and difficulty
composed, and framed, are suddenly extinguished.

Scripturall grounds are these.

The creation of Adam and Eve, God's breathing into their face the breath of
life, is a

If it be objected, that this proves nothing, because it was necessary that the
souls of Adam and Eve should be by creation, when there was nothing
pre-existent, whereby they might be naturally propagated.

Answer may be made, that if any thing material had necessarily been required
to the being of the soul of a man, as to the souls of brutes, then as the
souls of other creatures were concreated in and with the matter of which they
were made, in the like manner, in all reason should God have dealt with the
souls of men: but we find it otherwise* after the body was made, and the
matter prepared, then the soul is infused.

The soul of Jesus Christ was created,

If it be objected, that this was extraordinary, that Christ might not be
tainted with sin.

We may answer, Non magis difficile erat Spiritui sancto semen Josephi, quam
virginis ab omni vitio purgare, etc.

I suppose Christ was borne after an extraordinary way, rather upon the account
of the malediction, that was pronounced against our first parents, in case of
eating the forbidden fruit, that in the day they did eat thereof; they should
die the death, Then upon the account of generation.

Ecclesiastes 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth whence it was, and
the spirit shall return unto God who gave it: where you have the essential
parts of man, his body, and his soul compared one with another. The body that
was compacted of dust, and it returns to the dust from whence it was; the soul
created by God, and that returns to God that gave it. When the Spirit of God
speaks of the body, he makes mention of the material cause; but when of the
soul, only of the efficient: and the word gave it is emp^haticall, and spoken
by way of eminency, for God gave the body, as well as the soul.

Heb. 11.9. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us,
and we gave them reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection to the
Father of spirits? It appears by the Antithesis the Spirit of God makes
between fathers of flesh, and Father of spirits, that we receive our body from
our parents, but our soul from God, he is the Father of spirits.

Now mark, how the Apostle argues, If to those from whom we receive our worser
part, we give reverence, haw much rather should we be in subjection to the
Father of spirits?

It is worthy our consideration, that God by a peculiar title, is called the
Father of spirits: and herein he is opposed to the fathers of the flesh. Now if
the soul be by traduction, those that are the fathers of the flesh would also
be the fathers of the spirits, neither would God by this title be distinguished
from others.

The Objections made against this assertion are such as these.

Genesis 2. 2. On the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and he
rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. This Scripture
must be understood of the works of creation, therefore the souls of men, and
women are not now created.

God after the sixth day ceased from the new species, not from the creation of
new individuals: Now the rational souls that are now created by God, non
specie, sed numero differunt, differ not in kind, but in number from the soul
of Adam, which was at first created. Though God ceased from the work of
creation in regard of species, yet not in regard of individuals.

Genesis 46.26. All the souls that came with into Egypt, which came out of his
loins besides Jacobs sons wives, all the souls were threescore and six:
souls coming out of Jacobs loins, is the same with this, that the soul of man
is by generation.

The soul here is put by a synecdoche, for totum compositum, for the whole man.
Now though the soul may not be said to be generated, yet the totum compositum,
or the man may, as hereafter shall be demonstrated.

If the soul of man be not produced by generation, then man is in a worse
condition viz. animam vegetativam, and sensitivam.

Man is in a better condition then a brute, even in regard of generation,
because by Nobilissima forma unitur cum materia.

That which is urged advances the condition of man, and not lowers or debases
it; we may observe the less use God makes of second causes in the carrying on
of any work, the more excellent that work is, viz. Adam and Eve exceeded their
posterity in soul and bodily perfections: the body of Christ, that was formed
in an extraordinary way by the Spirit of God, was of a finer make, and a more
excellent composure then the body of any man or woman in the world, and this
may be the reason which made his torments on the cross exquisitely painful.

It is true, we read of some, that were rolled in barrells stuck with nails,
and of others, whose flesh was plucked off with hot iron pinchers, and of
others that have been broyled on a Gridiron; their deaths might be more harsh,
and severe in themselves considered, then the death of Christ, and yet Christ
might suffer as much, or more bodily pain, then they: According to the rules
of Philosophy we say, That the nature, and quality, and measure of pains, must
be taken not so much from the force or violence of the agent, as from the
condition and temper of the patient; the fire has not the same operation upon
Gold, as it has upon Lead. The lead suffers a great deal more from the fire,
then the gold. If a man should deal blows with an even hand, on a sound body
and on a sickly crazy body, their pain would be, unequal, though the blows
were equal: now to our purpose, without question, the body of Christ was soft,
and tender. Aristotle has this rule, Quo complexio nobilior, mensque
dexterior, eo mollior, ac tenerior solet esie caro: The more noble the
complexion, and the more dextrous the mind, the more soft, and tender the body:
The body of Christ was of a most excellent temperament: Quae fiunt per
miraculum excellentiora sunt, quam quae fiunt per naturam; Those things that
are done by miracle, are more excellent, then those things that are done by
natural causes; viz. the wine that Christ made at a marriage in Cana of
Galilee, and the body of Christ.

If God creates the soul of all those, that are Nam fornicariis, and
adulterinis conceptibus animas creat, and largitur, quod videtur absurdum.

A learned Author answers a like case to providence; for in him we live, and
move, and have our being; the strength of a wicked man's hand, while he sins is
from the Lord, yet the Lord does not strengthen his hand to sin. The sinner
has natural help from God, but he has not moral help from God: suppose a
Musician should touch, or play upon a Lute, that is out of tune, his touching
the Lute is an artificial act; but the sounding of it, comes from the nature
of the instrument; the sound simply considered is from the hand of him that
plays upon it; but that it sounds, untuneably is because it is out of tune.
The Lord by natural assistance puts the hearts and hands of wicked men into
motion, but that they move irregularly, that they make such harsh music, that
there is such discord in their actions, is from the disorder, and
untunablenesse of their own spirits. To eat was a natural act in our first
parents, this was from God, but to eat against the command, was a moral act,
and this was from man; so in this case, to beget children is a natural act,
and this is from God, but to act the adulterer or fornicatour in it; is a
sinful act, and this is from man.

Quest. 4. verse. 3.
How it can be said, that Adam begat a son in his likeness, anim a hominis est
homo, the soul of a man is the man, and therefore if the soul be not generated,
how can the man be said to be generated?

To this question learned men answer several

1. Some say, one man may be said to beget another quia in generatione suppedit
at materiam ex qua fit homo, but this cannot consist with Principles of Reason:
For,

1. Then it would follow, that the body of man was only generated, and not the
man

2. It is one thing to afford a Carver matter of which he may make a statue,
and another thing to frame it.

3. To beget a man, is tribuere (...) esse homini, To give being to a man; now
a man does not consist of soul alone, or body alone, but of body, and soul
united.

2. Others say, one man may be said to beget another, because the vegetative
and sensitive powers of the soul are from man, though the intellectual be from
God.

But this neither does not savor like truth, because according to this opinion
one man could not be said to beget another, sed hoc vivens, et hoc animal.

3. Others more probably say that one man may be said to beget another, though
the soul be created by God, quia ab homine generante sit ipsa actio, qua anima
rationalis substantialiter corpori unitur. Because in generation, the rational
soul is substantially united to the body. Quid enim est aliud producere
hominem, quam efficere ut existat homo, seu ens constans exanima, et corpore.

Res est per formam.

Est per formam potius quam per materiam.

But if God create the soul, and infuse it

When God infuses the soul into the non substantialiter, sed localiter. It is
not to be denied, but in the same instant, wherein the soul is locally present
with the body, it is substantially united to the body: yet these two differ one
from the other: an Angel, when it assumes a body, is locally present with that
body it assumes, and yet is not substantially united to it, ut forma materiae,
so as to be a part of the Angel, as the soul is a part of man.

Quest. 5. verse 3.
Whether this Doctrine of the creation of the soul, may consist with the
doctrine of Original sin?

Affirmatively we may answer, as I suppose, Augustine to demurre about it: He
was very enclinable to the doctrine of the souls creation, if it could consist
with Original guilt.

The main Objection against the doctrine

If the soul of man be by creation, it is either created pure or impure.

Not impure, for so God would be the author of sin.

Not pure, for then it will follow, that it either remains pure after its
union with the body, which nullifies the doctrine of Original sin, or else
that the soul may be infected by the body, corpore infici posse spiritum, which
is equally absurd.

That consequence is to be denied, viz. as this, If God creates the soul, creat
risibilem, he creates it in a capacity to laugh: Now a weak eye will see the
absurdity of such a consequence, because risibility is competible to the whole
man consisting of body and soul; in like manner, Original defilement is not
competible to the soul any otherwise, then as it is united to the body, and is
altera pars constituens composi^um.

So then, though the soul be created by God, and that it be tainted with sin,
immediately after its creation, and infusion into the body, yet it will not
follow God created an impure soul; for,

1. The soul as created by God, is free from sinful defilement.

2. The soul immediately upon its union with the body, is corrupted, and
infected.

3. That this corruption and defilement, (so far as concerns the creation of
the soul, is per accidens) though in regard of Gods ordination it admits of
another consideration.

4. That which is competible to the creature per accidens, considered as a sin
of Adam, and not as a creature, cannot be charged upon the Creator under that
notion considered; because this is a perplexed case, I shall endeavor to
illustrate it.

A Parent runs in debt, he dies the debt, by the Laws and constitutions of
this Nation; is transmitted to the heir now though God may be said to be the
Creator of the soul of the debtor, yet not in the least the author of the debt,
because this man is indebted per accidens, and by virtue of his parents not by
virtue of Gods creation.

That consequence is to be taken into corpore infici posse spiritum, which is
an absurdity; for,

1. Though the truth of this axiom be taken for granted, that Corpus non
potest agere in spiritum, yet I conceive we may demurre to it.

For though it should be assented unto, that this could not be done by the
power of nature, yet it may be done by the efficacy and power of divine
ordination.

Especially if we consider, what a strict union there is between the soul and
the body, and that according to the various disposition, and affecton of the
body, the soul also is variously affected, and disposed: We find by
experience, that children resemble their parents not only in their
countenance, and the outward lineaments of their body, but in their manners,
and inward habiliments of their mind.

We find, that the soul in a great measure follows the temper of the body,
and that the spirits, humors, organs of the body being vitiated and disordered,
there follows upon this frenzy, Melancholy, passion, and the like.

The Learned say, Potentia materiae est duplex.

1. Naturalis, quae educibilis est in actum vi alicujus agentis naturalis:
There is a natural power in that which that material or corporeal which is
educible into act, by virtue of a natural agent; that is to say, wood has a
natural power to receive heat, viz. vi naturalis agentis scilicet ignis.

2. Obedientialis, an obediential power, which is educible into act by virtue
of a superior agent; this wood or stone has an obediential power to be formed
into astatue, for this is not effected by a natural agent (which does
necessario agere; but by virtue of an Artist: such a power also has the soul
to receive spiritual gifts, the supernatural gifts of the Spirit, as faith,
hope, etc.

We say the work of conversion is possibile naturae, though impossible natura;
possible to nature, though impossible to be wrought by a natural power.
Obediential power of a subject to receive a new form, puts not any causall
power in the thing or matter to be changed, all such power is without, viz. in
the efficient: there is only a power of reception in the thing or matter, not
a power of causality.

Now we may take into consideration whether vi superioris agentis, corpus may
not agere in spiritum.

To this, I might add the consideration of the fire of hell (which, for ought
I can learn, may be material, and yet can t^rment spirits) as calor naturalis
has two properties, 1. Calefacere, to make warm, and this it acts of it
self. 2. Alimentum in debitas parts distribuere, To convey nourishment into
the several parts of the body, and this it acts as an instrument of the soul;
so Helfire may be considered in its self, and so it burns bodies, or as an
instrument of divine wrath, and so it torments spirits.

2. Be it granted, that the soul is created pure by God, and that it cannot be
tainted by the body, yet it may be polluted ratione suppositi, by Gods
ordination, and appointment, as it is the soul of a man, son and heir of
corrupt Adam.

If you ask me, Supposing this be taken for granted, that we are defiled upon
the account of divine ordination, as a punishment inflicted by God on man, for
his apostasy, by what instrument or second cause, this is effected, or brought
to pass.

I answer, that as there is nothing more secret then the forming of the child
in the womb, the union of the soul with the body, and the manner how it is
united thereunto: so this also must needs be a secret, by he mediation of what
instrument, or second cause man comes to be defiled.

There are also other Objections urged against the doctrine of the creation of
the soul.

It seems not to suit with the justice, and

The consequence is to be denied, for he Adam, who sinned in Adam, and merited
thereby eternal death into pure bodies: But rather the contrary, according to
the curse, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death.

We say that God does infuse a pure soul into an impure body, as the phrase may
vulgarly be taken, for that would imply that our souls, before they were united
to our bodies, were pure, which suits not with our principles formerly
mentioned.

Causa causae, est etiam causa causat^: viz. if God be the cause of the union
of the soul with the body, therefore he is the cause of that sin that is
occasioned by that union.

This rule is to be understood de causis perse, not de causis per accidens,
viz. God is the cause of his divine Law, the Law is the cause of sin per
accidens: as the Apostle, I was alive without the Law once; but when the
Commandment came, sin revived, and I Romans 8.9.
died. Yet no man will from thence conclude, that God was the cause of sin.

How can Original sin be propagated, Non potest accidens traduci sine subjecto.

Accidents do frequently transire a subjecto in subjectum, non transeunte
subjecto, as for instance, heresy is propaged in these days, and derived from
one to another, but so is not the soul which is the subject of these errors.

The same numericall accident, cannot transire a subjecto in subjectum; but so
may the same in kind, as appears in the former instance.

Quest. 5. verse. 4.
According to what space of time, the years of the Patriarchs were measured?

The great age of the Patriarchs has

Indeed we read of two periods of time especially, by the ancients called
years.

1. There was annus solaris, or that which they called their solar year: which
was the same with ours, and contained. 12. months: Now this year was called
solaris, because it was measured by the Suns passing through the Zodiac.

2. There was annus lunaris, or that which they call their lunar years: the
same with our month or thereabouts: now this was called Lunaris, because it is
measured by the Moons passing through the Zodiac.

Some think that the years of the Patriarchs were Lunar years, The days of
Adam were eight hundred years, that is, say Genesis 5.4.
they, eight hundred months, etc.

Now this cannot in any case be allowed, for these reasons.

1. Enoch begat children at 65. years of age, verse 21. of this Chapter; now
how could this be, if he lived but so many months?

2. Metheuselah lived 969 years, but if you cast up these by months, you will
find that in our days, some might be said to live longer then Methuselah.

3. Abraham is said to live 175. years, Genesis 25.7. and in the next verse it is
said that Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man and
full of years. How could this also be said, if he lived but so many months?.

Quest. 6. verse 4.
Whether in any sense it may be said, that Adam was the longest liver amongst
the Patriarchs?

Affir. Vritually, though not formally, Adam years; for none of the Patriarchs
begat children under that age: Now add 60 years unto the time that Adam
lived, and you will find he lived longer then Methuselah.

Quest. 7. verse. 4.
What account may be given of the long lives of the Patriarchs?

For the right understanding of this consider,

1. That since Moses time, who was borne in the year of the world 2434. when
the world was well peopled, and necessary sciences depending upon observation
perfected, the length of man's age has little or nothing abated, as appears by
that famous testimony of Moses himself, Psalm. 90. 10.

2. That in all times since Moses we shall find some that have exceeded the
number of years, accounted the utmost period of man's life; as Joshua, Chap.
24.29.

3. That reasons both natural and moral are given by the learned, why the
Patriarchs lived, by many years, longer then those who succeeded them in
after-ages, viz.

The first reason is, the feeding of the infant with the milk of a strange
breast.

Now because this is grown into fashion in these licentious, and corrupt
days, and unnatural curiosity has taught all women but the beggar, to find
out nurses for their children, which only necessity should allow: let it not
seem a digression if I propound some Queries concerning this practice.

1. Quaere.
Whether God has not given breasts to women, for this very end, and purpose
that they might feed, and nourish their children?

2. Quaere.
Whether this be not clearly demonstrated, by the milk flowing into the breasts
immediately after the child is borne, and a great part of the parents meat
being converted into that substance?

3. Quaere.
Whether putting out of children to nurse, be not the occasion of unnatural
affection, both in the Mother to the child, and the child to the Mother.

4. Quaere.
Whether God has not taught us by his dispensations to other creatures that
the Mothers milk, is most kindly and natural to the child; we see other
things are nourished by the same of which they are bred: the earth yields
plants and nourishes them, the trees bring forth fruit, and yield sap unto
them: and the same also may be said of Brutes.

5. Quaere.
Whether such children as are nursed by the mother do not usually thrive best?

6. Quaere.
Whether parents that might have nursed their own children and will not, be
not accessory to the death of those that are cast away by the nurses negligence?

7. Quaere.
Whether this may not be a great cause of bodily distempers in the parents, the
drawing of the breast, (if moderation be observed) having a rational tendency
toward the preservation of Health?

8. Quaere.
Whether strange milk may not be a cause of distempers in the child: for as
Contraria contrariis curantur, so similia similibus alunter, and whether the
blood which was first the fabricator, should not be the altor when turned into
milk?

9. Quaere
Whether the milk of the nurse has not a great influence upon the body of the
child? The learned tell us, that take a kid, and let it suck an ewe, the hair
of it will become like unto wool: and take a Lamb and let it suck a goat, the
wool of it will become like goats hair we our selves find a difference in the
flesh of creatures according to the coursenesse, or finenesse of that food with
which they are brought up.

10. Quaere.
Whether the soul following in some measure the temper of the body, the milk
of the nurse may not have some influence upon the manners, and disposition of
the child? Some give us this reason, why Tiberius caesar was a drunkard,
because he sucked a drunken nurse: and whether in this the parents may not be
the occasion of the drunkenness and excesses of their children?

11. Quaere.
Whether when God pronounces it, as a curse to have dry breasts, it be not an
unworthy piece of ingratitude, for parenrs, when God gives them nourishment for
their child, not to account it worthy of their acceptance? And whether to turn
the back upon any courtesy, would not be accounted a piece of incivility among
the Heathens themselves in their dealings one with another?

12. Quere.
Whether when God provides proper nourishment for a child to be ministered by
the breast of the parent, and refused, this act does not interpretatively charge
God with folly; and whether in such a case the parent does not set up his, or
her wisdom above Gods?

13. Quaere.
Whether Sarah might not have pleaded as much and more, then the Gallants of
our age, for putting out her child to nurse, being the wife of an honorable
person, and of a great age?

14. Quaere.
Whether although we read of nurses in the Scripture, it can be made out, that
any good woman put forth her child, when she was able to nurse it her self?

A second reason, why our lives are shortened: while nature is yet green, and
growing, we rent from her, and replant her branches, while her self has not
yet any root sufficient to maintain her own top.

The use of much physic, and little exercise,

The pressing of nature with weighty burdens, and when we find her strength
defective, Scotland, and the wild Irish commonly live longer then those of a
softer education, and more tender bringing up. Seneca, Multos morbos multa
fercula fecerunt; Variety of dainty dishes has bred variety of diseases: A man
may die wirh cordials, and fire nature out of its place.

Besides this which has been said, I suppose there may be two main reasons
given of the long lives of the Patriarchs.

1. Propagation of posterety.

2. Promotion of piety; for at that time the Church having not the Scriptures,
but being guided by extraordinary revelations from God, lest the worship of God
might be brought into contempt, by posterity, the lives of Holy men were of
long continuance, which might be an expedient to enforce religion on those who
succeeded.

Let the consideration of the frailty of our bodies teach us to consult for the
good of our immortal souls. We may observe many times it so falls out, that
our rational life is best, when our vegetative is worst; and, we begin to grow
in wisdom, when we cease to grow in strength. As it is with the rational
life, so it should be with the spiritual: when the life of the flesh is ready
to dye, the spiritual life should have so much the more spirit, and vigor.

Quest. 8. V. 24.
It is said in this verse, that Enoch was not, for God took him: now the
question here may be, whether Enoch was translated in soul and body, or
whether in soul only etc?

Some think that Enoch was translated

I shall propound their arguments, and give you the answers rendered thereunto.

No mortal body unglorified can enter Ergo.

It is a slender kind of arguing, to say, that

The glorification of his body is plainly implied, though not expressed; for it
is said, he was translated, that he should not see death. Heb. 11.5.


Now if his body saw not death, it was made immortal, which is a special part
of glorification.

If the bodies of Enoch and Elias were translated Paradise to Adam) was shut
up, till Christ opened it by hsme rits.

We readily grant, that the opening of Paradise, is to be ascribed to the
merits of Christ.

We confidently deny, that heaven was Lord Jesus was a Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world; Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; and
our Fathers under Old Testament-dispensations, ate the same spiritual meat, and
drank the same spiritual drink, as we do under the Gospel, viz. the body of
Christ crucified, and his blood shed for the remission of sins: and these
things though they were future to hope, yet they were present to faith, which
is the Substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.

From, Joh. 3.13. And no man has ascended up to heaven but he that came down
from heaven, even the Son of man, which is in heaven. By which words (say some)
is signified that no man bodily ascended into heaven, until the time of
Christ's ascension.

This place is to be expounded Metaphorically: Nicodemus, that he was more able
to teach him heavenly mysteries, then all the Doctors among the Jews: as you
may perceive, by verse. 11. and 12. Verily I say unto thee, We speak that we do
know, and ^estifie that we have seen^, etc. And besides, Prove. 30. 4. Ascending
up into heaven is made all one with the knowing of holy things.

From, Heb. 6.20. Where Christ is called the forerunner. And Christ says, John
14. I go to prepare a place for you. Therefore before Christ's death, and
ascension a place was not prepared.

Christ might be called a forerunner

Christ might be called the forerunner of

That a place was prepared for Old Testament-Saints Enoch, and Elias, yet it
was necessary Christ should die, and Christ should ascend.

From, Col. 1.15. where Christ is called firstborn of every creature; and,
verse 18. in all things to have the preeminence; and, Romans 8.29. he is called
the firstborn among many brethren.

The primogeniture of Christ does not first fruits of them that sleep, not
because none arose 1 Cor. 15. ^0.
before Jesus Christ, but because he alone arose by his own power, and is the
cause of the resurrection of all those that have or shall arise unto glory: s^
here, Christ alone ascended into heaven by his own power, and is the cause of
the ascension of his people unto glory.

To whom be glory for ever, Amen.
(...),
FINIS
Directions FOR The right understanding Of the SCRIPTURES.
1. Rule
THere are tropes or figurative expressions which are made use of by the Spirit
of God in the Scriptures, which if not war^ly observed, will occasion a
misunderstanding of the text: The Scriptures are adorned with various kinds of
Elegancies, and Rhetorical expressions, demulcere animos legentis: Amongst
many others, I shall instance in two.

1. The figure, called (...), a figure, whereby one thing is signified by two
several Noune substantives; As, The Lord will create upon every dwelling place
of Mount Sion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day: viz. a smoaky
cloud. Isa. 4. 5
So, I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that comes after
me, is Mat. 3.11
mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, viz. with the holy Ghost, as with fire. Sad
consequences may follow upon the literal Interpretation of this Scripture. I
have read that the Abyseni took this text literally and when they baptized
their children, they poured water upon them, and then marked them with an hot
iron.

2. The figure, called Ironia, whereby we speak one thing, and mean another,
but signify our meaning, either by our gesture, or manner of speaking; this
manner of speech, though it be often abused unto sin, as in deriding and
scorning our brethren, yet is in it self lawful, if rightly used; and of this
we have example in the Scriptures. Such a speech was that of Michaiah to wicked
Ahab, Go up and prosper. If this figure were not 1 King. 22. 15
observed, we might question the truth of this Scripture, for Ahab did not
prosper, neither was Ramoth-Gilead gven into his, hand. Such a speech was that
of Elias in deriding the folly of Baals Priests, Crya aloud, for he is a God,
either he is talking, or 1 King. 18. 27
he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleeps, and must
be awaked. Such was Paul's speech, For what is it wherein ye were inferior to
other Churches, except 2 Cor. 12. 13
it be that I my self was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong, viz.
all the wrong I did you, was this: whereas I might have required maintenance
from you, I wrought with my hands, and maintained my self, pray forgive me
this wrong.

2. Rule
The proper Idioms of speech which are made use of by the Spirit of God in the
holy Languages Hebrew and Greek, are heedfully to be observed. There is not a
Language, but has some phrases peculiar, and proper to it self. He would be
laughed at, by all those that pretend but to a little skill in Learning, that
would go about the translation of Cicero, or Virgil word for word into English,
and the reason is, because English has some phrases proper to it self, the
Latin has some phrases proper to it self: to give you instances proper for
this Rule. The Pharisee said, I fast twice in the week, Luke 18. 12,
In the Original it is, (...), I fast twice in the Sabbath; yet it is not
translated so, because Sabbath amongst us, is a word propriate to the
Lord's Day. So in another place: If they come from market, (speaking of the
Pharisees) except they w^sh, they eat Mare 7. 4.
not. And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, as the
washing of cups and pots, etc. In the Original the words are (...), the
Baptism of pot^s, but we translate it not so, because Baptism amongst us, is
a word propriate to a Sacrament. So we read, When Jesus wos borne in Bethelem
of ^udea in the days of H^rod Mat. 2. 1.
the King, behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem. The wise men
came from the East. In the Original it is (...), but we translate it not
Magicians, because amongst us, it is a word propriate to sorcerers.

3. Rule
We are not only to mind that which is written, but the mind of the writer.
As for instance, Paul says; When it pleased God, who separated me from my
Mothers womb, Gal. 1.15. 16.17.
and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach
him among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood;
neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles before me, etc.
These words, if you observe not the scope, and aim of him that writ them, may
seem to savor of a^rogance, that Paul should not in a business of so great
concernment, confer with them that were Apostles before him: and therefore
Paul's design herein is to teach us, that when a truth is clearly revealed to
us by God, we are not to dispute, to consult with flesh and blood, whether we
shall close with it, or not. And truly we must observe this, as well in what
men do, as in what men write or speak: The Physician cuts the body, the thief
cuts the body, yet we make a difference between what the Physician does, and
what the thief does, because their aim is not the same. Hence also is that
Axiom, used amongst Politiques: The reason and equity of a Law, should rather
be observed then the letter. There is in Laws, an equitable, and a literal
sense; the Law taken abstract from its original reason, and end, is a shell
without a kernel, a shadow without a substance, and a body without a soul; nor
need this equity be expressed in the law, being so naturally employed, and
supposed in all laws. As when the Militia of an Army is committed to a
General, it is not with any express condition, that he should not turn the
mouths of his Cannons against his own soldiers, for that is naturally and
necessarily implied, and therefore needless to be expressed, insomuch as if he
did attempt or command such a thing against the nature of his trust and place;
it did ipso facto estate the Army in a right of disobedience; except we think,
that obedience binds men to cut their own throats.

4. Rule
The knowledge of the original Languages is of great use for the understanding
of the Scritures. I grant our Savior chose unlearned men for his Disciples,
but he made them learned before he made use of them. Now that which they had by
extraordinary revelation, must be supplied to us by education, for miracles are
ceased; and therefore Paul gives in charge to Timothy, Till I come give
attendance to reading. 1 Timothy 4. 13, 15.
And ver. 15. Meditate on these things, that thy profiting may appear to all.
And here I would observe, that though some of those whom Christ called were
unlearned yet others were learned; as, Paul, Nathaniel, Nicodemus. If the most
of those whom Christ called had been learned, the world would have said he had
made choice of them for their wisdom; if none of those whom Christ called had
been learned, the world would have said, they had been deceived, out of their
weakness, and ignorance.

It cannot be denied, but that there are some Sermons preached, that have more
learning in them, then divinity: Saint Augustine bewailed this as the vanity of
his youth, that he had framed discourses, ut placerent magis quam ut docerent,
to please rather then to profit. Humane learning is to be used in exercises,
non ut esculenta, sed ut condimenta, not as meat, but as sauce. A man would be
loath to have sauce only brought him for his dinner. Learning beautifies, and
adornes a Sermon, as ^ace sets out a garment; yet we would not be willing to
have a garment altogether of lace.

Learning may be abused, but certainly there is a very good use to be made of
it, by the Ministers of the Gospel; some say, God in Scripture has not
appointed Universities: grant we this, no more has God expr^sly appointed
Schools, to teach children to read: and indeed what need was there, when God
had commanded us to search the Scriptures. Qui vult finem, vult media.

Translations are excellent helps (and blessed be the Name of the great
Jehovah, that we have the benefit of them) yet the Learned will tell you in
regard of the Emphasis, and fullness of the Original, they may say as the
Queen of Sheb^; that which she heard was nothing to the glory of that which
she ^aw. I my self (though I do not pretend to be in the number of those above
mentioned) falling into discourse with one acounted eminent for konwledge in
Religion, but He^erdox in judgment, conferring with him concerning the work of
soulhumbling, and urging that text, Come unto me all ye that are weary* and
heavy-laden, etc. He told ^e that coming to Christ was before weary and
heavy-laden; Whereas if he had read but his Grammar, he might have known that
though coming to Christ, go before being weary and heavy-laden, in order of
words; yet weary and heavy-laden, go in construction, and in order of sense. So
it is said there of the Gentiles, that As Act. 13: 48
many as were or dained to eternal life, believed. Some tell us, the words
should be rendered thus, As many as were addicted to eternal life, believed,
viz. as many as were addicted, and disposed heavenward afterward believed;
whereas the words in the Original run thus, (...), And they believed, as many
of them as were ordained to eternal life; that word which is placed in the
last place in our English Bibles, (which I suppose might be one occasion of the
mistake,) is placed in the first in the Greek.

5. Rule.
In the interpreting of Scriptures, we must observe who it is that speaks,
whether a Prophet, or one of a more private capacity; if it be a Prophet,
whether he speaks in his own person, or in another If he speaks in the
person of another, we must observe whether he speaks in the person of God or
man, or of a good man or a wicked man? These things must carefully be heeded,
if you would understand the Scriptures; for instance, Solomon personates the
Atheist. That which befalls the sons of men, befalls Eccl. 3.19.
beasts, even one thing befalls them, as the one dies, so dies the other,
yea, they have all one breath so that a man has no preeminence above a ^east;
and whereas the Atheist heard some speak of the ascent of man's spirit, he
replies, Who knows the spirit of a ver. 21.
man, that goes upward? viz. Who can tell there is such a difference between a
man and a beast? This is not known, only talked of and guessed. A learned
Author enlarges himself on this Scripture thus: Is it not strange, says he,
that any of those who are called sober Christians, should plant their opinion
in this soil of Atheism, and make that a proof of their faith which Solomon
only brings as a proof of some men's infidelity? there is no more reason to
ground the tenet of the souls mortality on this text, then there is
encouragement unto intemperancy from that, Rejoice, Oh young man, in thy youth,
etc. Eccl. 11.9.


6. Rule.
The Scripture is the word of truth, and yet every thing that is written in the
Scriptures considered without reference to the context or the person that
speaks, is not truth; hence is that rule made use of by Divines in this case,
Scripturae narratio quamvis verissima sit, non tamen omnia quae ibi dicta sunt
vera esse dicuntur; for instance: He casts out Devils, through Beelzebub, the
Luke 11.15.
chief of Devils; The words in themselves considered, are blasphemous, and
false, and yet the Script^ral narration of them is true.

7. Rule.
In the expounding of Scripture, we are not so much to respect from whence
words are de^ived, as how they are used; this Axiom is out of Aquinas, and the
Schoolmen; Verbis non tam spectandum ex quo, ^uam ad quid sumantur; as we see
the branches of trees spread much further then their roots, so derivative words
are often of larger extent of signification then their primitives; as for
instance, (...), signifies a sound, or an echo, but (...), signifies to
Catechize or to i^struct in the principles of religion: That thou might know
the certainty of those things wherein thou have been i^structed, (...) Luke.
1.4.
(...): so the word (...), signifies tingo, to dip, or plunge into the water,
yet (...), is frequently, if not always, taken more largely, for an^ kind of
washing, rinsing or cleansing, where there is no dipping at all, the Apostles
were baptized with fire, yet they were not dipped into it; tables and beds are
said in the original to be baptized, viz. washed, not dipped; the Israelites in
the wilderness were baptized with the cloud, yet not dipped into it; the
children of Zebedee were to be baptized with the Baptism of blood, wherewith
our Savior was baptized, yet neither he nor they were dipped into blood; so the
Ancients speak of the Baptism of tears* wherewith all penitents are washed,
yet there is no dipping in such a B^ptisme.

8. Rule.
We must not only take notice of those phrases or words which are made use of
by the Spirit of God in the Scr^ptures, but also in what respect those phrases
or words are made use of in that particular text which we desire to understand
for instance it is said* This is life eternal, that they might know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: If the Father be Joh. 17.3
the only true God, how then is the Son or the Holy Ghost God? For the
answering of this difficulty, we must consider upon what account, Christ
calls God Father in this place: we must know therefore, that verse 1.
though he ^seth the word Father: yet Father is nor there taken for the first
person in the Trinity, but as a common attribute of the Deity; so it is
elsewhere taken: our Savior in his Prayer teaches us Mat. 6.9
to say, Our Father; so, V. 14. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your
heavenly Father will also forgive you; according to which interpretation, this
text is parallel to that of the Apostle: There is one God, and one Mediator
betwixt God and man, the man Christ 1 Timothy 2.5.
Jesus.

So in John it is said, The Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father,
he shall testify Joh. 15.26
of me: Now if this rule be not observed, here will arise a difficulty: if the
Spirit proceed from the Father only, how does he proceed from the Father, and
the Son? We must consider therefore upon what account the Spirit is said to
proceed from the Father, in the place above alleged: viz. because he
proceeds from the Father originally, not because he proceeds from the
Father only; elsewhere he is called the Spirit of the Son: And because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into Gal. 4.6.
your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

9. Rule.
In the time of St. Paul the Jewish ceremonies were things indifferent, which
might be used or not used, as they saw-it tend to Gods Glory, and the good of
the Church; now this is profitable to know, for the understanding of the
History of the Acts, where we shall find Paul, using Circumcision, and yet
writes against it in his Epistles

There are three things observable as to the use of Ceremonies.

1. Before the death of Christ the use of Ceremonies was not indifferent, but
necessary, as being commanded of God.

2. After the death of Christ, their use was indifferent for a time: this time
was till the doctrine of Christian liberty might be fully made known to the
world, which could not be done on a sudden: As Acts of Parliament have a day
set down, when they shall be in force, that so all the subjects of the Land
may have time convenient to take knowledge of them; so it is in this case.

3. But now they are not necessary, nor indifferent, but absolutely forbidden.
After the passion of Christ, Jew^sh Ceremonies were mortuae, says a learned
man, that is, dead: But after the divnlgation of the Gospel, they bec^me
mortiferae, that is, deadly.

Saint A^gustine elegantly expresses this by a similitude; A man's friend dies;
he does not so soon as the breath is out of his body, take him by the heels,
and dragge him out of the doors, and cast him upon the dunghill; but he keeps
him a certain time, wraps him in fair clothes, and so with honor accompanies
him to the grave: so these Ceremonies were alive till Christ; and because they
had been by divine Ordinance, of great use in Gods worship, they remained for a
time indifferent, that so they might be laid down in an honorable manner.

And here you may see the difference between Laws Ceremonial, and Laws
moral; the one were temporary, the other are universal, and perpetual; the
one were therefore good, because they were commanded, the other were commanded,
because they were good: Moral Laws ^ave an inward goodness in them, which
others have not. When the Apostle would set forth the glory and excellency of
the moral Law, he gives these titles to it, that it is holy, and just, and
good, which holiness, justice, Romans 7.12.
and goodness he opposes to his own wickedness: I am carnal, says he, but
the Law is holy, and just, and good. Now look as his carnality that was
contrary to the Law, was evil in it self, so the Law which was contrary to
that carnality, was just, holy, and good in it self. The Prophet Micah
perceiving how forward many were in Ceremonial duties and sacrifices in
opposition hereunto, he tells them, He has showed Mic. 6.8.
thee, Oh man, what is good (speaking of moral duties, as showing mercy, and
walking humbly with God) were not sacrifice, and offerings good, as well as
mercy, and walking humbly? Yes, but herein lies the difference: sacrifice, and
burnt-offerings were not in themselves good, but only as commanded by God, but
moral obedience, as showing mercy and walking humbly is good in it self, and
therefore said the Prophet, He has showed thee, Oh man, what is good.

10. Rule.
Comparisons in Scripture must not be wrested further then the scope of the
comparison requires: For instance, Saint James ^aith, As the body without the
Jam. 2.26.
spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also; The Papists gather from
hence, as the soul is the form of the body, and animates it, so are works the
form of faith which animate faith; but the comparison is wrested, for the
scope of the Apostle is this, as the body is known not to be dead by the
operation, and presence of the soul, so faith is known not to be dead by works.

So the Church is called the pillar of truth. The Papists make the comparison 1 Timothy 3. 15.
here; as the pillar upholds the house, so the Church upholds truth. But the
comparison is wrested; the Church is the pillar of truth, viz. it holds out
truth (we use to hang out things upon pillars) but it does not hold it up.

11. Rule.
When we read concerning Christ in the Scriptures, we must consider what
expressions referce to Christ as he was God, what expressions refer to Christ
as he was man, and what refer to his person as he was (...), God-man: This
Rule must heedfully be observed, that we may neither confound the natures of
Christ with Eutyches, or cry up two persons in Christ with Nestorius.

As we may say concerning a man, that some things are attributed to him which
are proper only to his soul, as he is said to understand, to grieve, to
rejoice, to fear, to hope; some things are attributed to him which are proper
only to his body, as to eat, and drink, and walk; some things again are
attributed unto him which are neither proper to the soul alone or the body
alone, but to the Quid compositum, the person consisting of both; for instance,
to laugh, to write accurately, to speak judiciously.

In like manner, some things are spoken of Christ as he was God; for instance,
he is called the Word, the image of the invisible God, the express image of
his substance. Some things are spoken of Christ, as he was man, as that he was
acquainted with griefs, that he was hungry, thuirsty, etc. some things again
are spoken of Christ neither as he was God, nor as he was man distinctly
considered, but as he was God-man; for instance, Had they known it, they would
not have crucified 1 Cor. 2.8.
the Lord of glory. So, Take heed unto your selves, and to all the floock, etc.
to feed Act. 20. 28.
the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

12. Rule
There are several promises in the Scriptures, which although as to the rind
and outside of them, they seem to relate only to temporals, yet if we look
within, we shall find that they contain spiritualls; Now this must carefully
be observed, that we may be established concerning the truth of divine
promises; Abraham was promised a son, a blessing temporal; but there was a
spiritual blessing annexed (even the greatest that ever the sons of men were
made partakers of) viz. the Lord Jesus Christ: whom the Scripture calls the
son of Abraham, that seed in which all the nations of the earth should be
blessed: You have another instance also in Samuel, where Nathan says, to David.
When thy days be fulfilled, and thou shall 2 Samuel 7. 12, 13, etc.
sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall
proceed out of thy bowels, he shall build an house for my Name, and I will
establish the throne of his Kingdom for ever.

These words here are spoken of Solomon, and yet something else is intended by
the Spirit of God in this Scripture, then can in propriety of speech be
attributed unto Solomon. For the power of Solomon was exceedingly weakened
before his death, and afterward his son even upon the point cast out of his
Kingdom, by the revolting of the ten tribes.

But that which is more then all this, Solomon's race we may see ended in
Jeconiah; Thus says the Lord, Write ye this man childlesse, Jerem. 22. 30.
a man that shall not prosper in his days, for no man of his seed shall
prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Juda.

Therefore this promise must be extended further then to Solomon, and his seed;
to Christ, even of whom Solomon was a type, whose Kingdom is for everlasting.

But it is said, Jeconias had a son, and after they were brought to Babylon,
Jeconias, begat Salathiel, etc. Mat. 1 12.

It Is true, children are ascribed to Jeconiah, succession, not by generation;
and therefore Jeconiah (as I have said) dying without issue, Salathiel in the
line of Nathan, Solomon's brother, comes in as nearest heir, and is reckoned by
Saint Matthew, the son of Jeconiah, viz. legal. For we must understand, that
there was a double descent, usually reckoned among the Jews, the one legal,
the other natural; the natural descent was, when as one by natural generation
descended of another; the legal descent was, when one not naturally descended
of another, yet succeeded as nearest of kin to the inheritance.

This is necessary for us to observe, that we may be convinced of a truth (not
taken notice of by most in the world) viz. that our Lord Jesus was not of the
line of Solomon naturally; that is, he was not the natural son of Solomon,
but the natural son of David by Nathan, Solomon's brother; he was legally
Solomon's son, not naturally.

Hence al^o the Evangelists Matthew, and Luke may be reconciled; Saint Luke
deduces the natural line of Christ from David, making it known how Christ by
Nathan is the natural son of David, according to the flesh; but Saint Matthew
deduces the legal line of Christ from David, making it known how Christ as
Solomon's heir and lawful King of the Jews succeeded as nearest kin to sit
upon the throne of David his Father, for the which cause also Saint Matthew
calls him borne King of the Jews.

13. Rule.
There are many things spoken of in the Scriptures, as done, and past, which in
truth are promised, and to come.

For instance, in Esaias many things are spoken by the Prophet, as done, and
suffered by Christ, which notwithstanding were to be done, and to be suffered:
So, Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: And ver. 5. He
was wounded for our Isa. 53.4
transgressions he was bruised for our iniquities: So, ver. 7. He was
oppressed, and he was afflicted.

In like manner the Psalmist, For dogs have compassed me; the assembly of the
wicked Psalm. 22.16
have enclosed me, they pierced my hands, and my feet.

A learned Author, gives us this account of this Rule; In prophetia been
miscentur futura praeteritis quia ea, quae ventura prophetantur secundum tempus
futura sunt, secundum scientiam vero prophetantium j^m pro factis habentur.
Many things prophesied in the Scriptures, if you note strictly the time of
their accomplishment, are to come; but the revelation of them to the Prophets
of God, were as full of light, and certainty as if they were present.

Another thus: Omnis lingua prophetica loquitur de futuro tanquam de
praeterito; and hoc ideo, quia dictum Dei habetur pro facto. The Prophets speak
of things to come, as of things past, because Gods word is his act.

14. Rule.
In the perusal of the Scriptures it is safer to follow the commands of God,
then the examples of men: This will appear if you consider these particulars.

1. The good actions of wicked men are heedfully to be observed: Jehus zeal
for God is worthy of our imitation, provided we act from a right principle, to
a right end: Precious stones, some say, may be taken out of poisonous creatures.

2. The evil actions of godly men are carefully to be avoided; the falls of
the Saints are spectacles of natural frailty, not examples for practice: they
are written for our caution, not for our imitation. Rocks are set down in a
Map, that the saylors may shun them, and not run their ships against them. Lots
wife, says Augustine, was turned into a pill^r of salt; ut condiret te suo
exemplo, that she might season thee, that thou might not do the like.

3. If the fact be approved in tanto, sed non in toto, in some part* but not in
the whole, it is not to be made an example of Imitation.

Zipporah circumcised her child, and so the Angel left off to kill Moses;
therefore a midwife may baptize a child. This follows not; the Angel ceased
to trouble Moses, because his son was circumcised, and not because he was
circumcised by a woman,

4. Some actions of the Saints, may be approved of by God, and yet are not to
be followed by us: and that in several Cases: as,

1. What the people of God did by an extraordinary call, or by special
instinct from God: as when God commands Abraham to sacrifice his son, this is
no rule for a Fathers laying violent hands on his child, for God has said,
Thou shatlt not kill. The Israelites taking away the Egyptians Jewels, is no
warrant for cousenage, for this is aworke of the ungodly: The wicked boroweth,
and pays Ps 37.21.
not again; the Apostle healing the sick, anoninted them, therefore the Priest
now may is a nonsequitur, for that Oil was miraculous: Dispensations extend
not beyond the particulars to whom they were given

2. What the primitive Christians did, occasioned by special necessity of the
times or for the avoiding of scandal; the primitive Christians had all things
common, they that believed were together, and had all things common; Acts 2 44.
they knew Jerusalem should be destroyed and that they were to suffer great
persecutions, and therefore it was prudence rather to sell, their goods, and to
dispose of them for the good of that Church of God, then to lose all. So Paul
makes his hands minister to his necesityes. There is no footing here for
Anabaptisticall community, nor necessity laid on Ministors, to work with their
hands, except the times, and the case were alike.

15. Rule.
When the Spirit of God is pleased to make use of ^militude in the Scripture,
it is only required that they agree unto those things unto which they relate,
in that which they are brought to prove.

In every similitude, there is some similitude. Analoga sunt (...), non (...),
they are alike, but they are not the same.

For instance, you read of the similitude Mat. ^0.
of the Laborers in the vineyard; and how the Lord of the vineyard makes no
difference, in regard of his payment, between those that came into his vineyard
at the third and sixth hours, and those that came in at the ninth and eleventh
hours: But they received every man a penny: And ver. 10.11.
verse. 11. When they had received it, they murmured against the good man of the
house: Now who knows not, when the people of God come to heaven to receive
their penny there shall be no murmuring? It is sufficient you find in this
Parable, that for which it was intended, viz. to prove the rich and free grace
of God toward sinners.

So in the Proverbes, it is said, As a Prover. 11. 32.
Jewel of Gold in a swines snout, so is a fair woman without discretion:
Certainly there is a vast difference between a swine and between a woman,
between a Jewel of Gold in a swines snout, and the beauty of a foolish woman*
Yet the similitude is apt enough for that, for which it was urged: viz. as a
Jewel in a swines snout is rather hurtful, then profitable, so is beauty to a
foolish woman.

In the Canticles, it is said of Christ, that Can. 5.^3.
his lips were like lillies now if the comparison be not marked rightly here,
we may be deceived: for to make Christ's lips as white as a lilly, were
impertinent; therefore the comparison is in odore, non in color, in regard of
the smell, not of the color.

16. Rule.
In Scripture sometimes a number certain, is put for a number uncertain:
numerus finitus ubi intelligi debet infinitus and e contr^; sometimes a number
uncertain, is put for a number certain, numerus infinitus ubi intelligi debet
numerus finitus: for instance,

1. A number certain, is put for a number uncertain, Prove. 24.16. A just man
falls seven times a day, viz. many times So. Psa. 24.16.
Psalm. 119. 164.
David, Psalm. 119. 164. seven times a day do I praise thee, viz. crebro,
ofttimes do I Esaias. 4.1.
praise thee. So the Prophet Esaias, In that day seven women shall lay hold of
one man, viz. many women, and some times you have more numbers then one in a
Scripture when you have this very thing intended by the Spirit of God. For
instance, Psalm. 91.7. A Psalm. 91 7.
thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it
shall not come nigh thee. A thousand, and ten thousand, viz. very many. So,
Mat. 18.21, 22. Peter came to Christ, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother
Mat. 18.21.
sin against me, and I forgive him; till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I
say not unto thee, till seven times, but until seventy times seven, viz. as
often as thy brother sins, against thee.

2. A number uncertain is put for a number certain. So the Lord speaking of
the Passover, You shall keep it a feast to the Lord, throughout your
generations, you shall keep Ex. 12.14.
it a feast by an Ordinance for ever, viz. as long as these Ceremonial rites
are in force. So it is said of Hannah, that she said unto her husband, I will
not go up until the 1 Samuel 1. 22.
child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he may appear before the
Lord, and there abide for ever: And yet we shall find, Numb. 8. 24.25.
that the Levites were to wait upon the service of the Tabernacle of the
congregation, but from twenty five years old, to Deuteronomy. 25. 15, 16, 17.
the age of fifty, So in Deuteronomy; If thy servant shall say unto thee, I
will not go away from thee, because he loves thee, and thy house, because he
is well with thee, then thou shall take an Aule and thrust through his ear
unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever, viz: as long as he lives.

17. Rule.
In computation of times the Spirit of God frequently speaks by a synecdoche
of the whole for the part, or the part for the whole. For instance,

When Matthew speaks of the transfiguration Mat. 17.1, 2.
he speaks of six days; After six days Jesus takes Peter, James, and John
his brother, and brings them up into an high mountain apart, and was
transfigured before them; But now, Saint Luke speaks of eight days; And it
came to pass, about eight days after these sayings, he took Peter, Luc. 9.28.
and James, and John, and went up into a mountain to pray, etc. For the
reconciling of these places, we must know, that Saint Luke speaks of part of
the first, and the last days, as two days, and so he reckons upon eight
days; Saint Matthew omits them, being but part of two days, and so reckons
but upon six: So we say, Christ was raised the third day after his crucifixion,
whereas he lay but one whole day in the grave; but per synecdochen part of
friday and part of the Lords day are reckoned for two days.

18. Rule.
There are some propositions unto which a note of universality is affixed, and
yet ought not to be accounted altogether universal. So Adam called his wives
name Eve, because she was the mother of all living, viz. viventis hominis, Genesis
3.20.
non bruti, of every living man, not of every living creature. So the Lord
Jesus, If I be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all Joh. 12.32.
men unto me, viz. all believers unto me. So, All seek their own, not the
things which are Jesus Christ's; all, viz. many. So, I Phil. 2.21.
will pour out my Spirit on all flesh, which Joel 2.28.
is spoken of believers, as appears, Act. 2. 17.

Now this ought to be heedfully observed; that notes of universality in
Scripture, whether affirmative, or negative, ought to be restrained, or
limited to that subject matter, of which the Spirit of God speaks in the
context.

For instance, ^au^ spoke not any thing that day, viz. concerning David that
day: 1 Samuel 20. 26.
For certainly the King spoke concerning other things. So in John, But ye have
an unction from the Holy one, and ye know all 1 John 2. 26.
things, viz. all points necessary to salvation, of which Saint John formerly
treated. So Paul, Who gave himself a ransom 1 Timothy 2. 6.
for all, viz. Some of all sorts, quaties, and conditions; and this appears by
the context. For in the first and second verses Paul speaks of Kings, and all
that are in authority: and verse. 7. he speaks of the Gentiles; I am ordained
(says Paul) a Preacher, and an Apostle, a teacher of the verse 7.
Gentiles in faith, and in verity. So then the meaning is, Christ gave himself
a ransom for all, viz. Kings as well as subjects, Gentiles as well as Jews.

19. Rule.
In Scripture the species is not rarely Lev i9.36.
put for the genus: For instance, A just Ephah, and a just Hin shall ye have:
Where you have one certain kind of measure, put for every measure.

So again, Whosoever he be of the children Lev. 20.2.
of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourne in Israel, that gives any of his
seed unto Moloch, he shall* surely be put to death; unto Moloch, viz. unto
that, or any other kind of Idol.

20. Rule.
Many things are spoken in Scriputre, rather ex vulgi opinione, according to
the common opinion of men, then as the things are in themselves considered.

For instance, it is said, And God made Genesis 1.16
two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to
rule the night; meaning the Sun; and the Moon, whereas the Moon is the least
of all the planets; only thought to be one of the greatest by most people. So,
the Virgin Mary says unto Jesus, Son, why have thou dealt thus Luc. 2.48.
with us? thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing: thy Father, viz. thy
supposed Father, as he is elsewhere called. So Christ calls Judas friend; for
he was so accounted, though indeed he was but a face-friend, and an
heart-enemy. So the Pharisees are styled by the Holy Ghost, righteous, just
persons, such as need no repentance, because they were so in the conceit of the
world.

21. Rule.
Proph^sies in Scripture are shaped into several forms.

1. Some Prophecies are delivered forma optandi, by way of wish, or desire,
Genesis 49. 18. I have waited for thy salvation, Oh Lord. Quo ipso non optat
solum, sed prophetat: He does not only wish that his salvation might come, but
prophecies that his salvation should come. So the Psalmist, Psalm. 14.7.
Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion: when the Lord brings
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be
glad.

2. Some Prophecies are delivered forma imperandi, by way of command. So, Come
Esaias. 47.1.
down, and sit in the dust, Oh virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground:
there is no throne, Oh daughter of the Caldeans, for thou shall no more be
called tender and delicate. So, ver. 5. Sit thou silent, and get thee verse. 5
into darkness, Oh daughter of the Caldeans; for thou shall no more be called
the Lady of Kingdoms.

3. Some Prophecies are delivered forma imprecandi, by way of imprecation; so
the Ps^lmist, Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen, Psalm. 79, 6.
that have not known thee, and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy
verse. 12.
Name. So, verse. 12. Render unto our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom,
the reproach wherewith they have reproached thee, Oh Lord.

22. Rule.
In reading of the Evangelists, we should take notice, what things are
specified by one Evangelist, what by two, what by three, and what by all the
four: For instance.

Some of Christ's works are specified only by one Evangelist, as his turning
of water into wine, as his healing the sick man at the poole of Bethesda, his
healing that blind man, John 9.

Some of them are specified by two Evangelists, as the History of Christ's birth
by Matthew and Luke.

Some things are recorded by three of them, as the institution of the Sacrament
of the Supper.

Some things by all four, as Christ's death and passion.

Only two write the History of his birth, all four the History of his death,
possibly to teach us, that though all Christ's works, and actions are to be
seriously minded, meditated upon, and remembered, yet none so espcially as his
death and sufferings.

23. Rule.
Although we should find the holy Penmen of God, differ from each other in
things of a lesser import, or consideration, we should not from hence in the
least scruple the divine authority of the Scripture.

For instance, in the History of Christ's temptations, Matthew for the second
temptation, Mat. 4 5.
puts the devils taking Christ up into the holy City, and setting him one a
pinnacle of the temple; now the Evangelist Saint Luke seems to invert the
order, and for the second temptation puts the devils taking Luc. 4.5.
Christ into an high mountain, and showing him all the Kingdoms of the world
in a moment of time.

Now if the question be, how these Evangelists must be reconciled? Answer may
be made, if there be an harmony, as to the temptations that are written by the
Evangelists, it is enough, though they differ as to the order of the
temptations. We do not use to accuse a man of a falsehood, who tells us many
things that be true, though they be something out of order, unless he promise
that he will not only tell us the things that were done, but also the order of
the doing of them. So then if Matthew speaks of that temptation in the second
place, which Luke does in the third place as long as they differ not about the
maine, as to the temptations concerning which they write, there is an harmony
still between Matthew and Luke.

Yea, some think, that this is a good argument to prove the divine authority of
the Scriptures, viz. that the Holy Penmen did not lay their heads together,
about the framing of the Gospels, nor did transcribe one another coppies; they
agreeing in the maine, and yet differing in things of a lesser consideration.

24. Rule.
When the Evangelists urge a Scripture out of the Old Testament, many times
they refer not to the words in themselves considered, but to the scope and
aim of the Spirit of God in that place to which they relate.

For instance, He came, and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which Mat. 2.23
was spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a Nazaren; which saying cannot
be found in terminis in any of the Prophets and therefore the Evangelist
referres to those Scriptures, were the Spirit of God speaks to the same
purpose, though he makes not use of the same words. So Saint Luke Now that the
dead are raised even Moses Luke 20. 37, 38.
shows at the bush, when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: for he is not a God of the dead but of the
living. Moses showed not that, the dead are raised in terminis, but indeed this
is inferred from what he said by consequence; for he calls the Lord, the God
of Abraham and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and he is not the God of
the dead, but of the living.

And from hence let us be established in this truth, that necessary
consequences from Scripture do prove a jus divinum, a divine right; yea, our
Lord Jesus calls consequence from Scripture, Scripture; He Joh. 7.38.
that believes on me, as the Scripture says, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water: Now these words strictly taken, are not to be found in
the whole book of God, excepting this place where they are urged; the place of
Scripture nearest to this, that I know of, is in Esaias, I will pour water upon
him that is thirsty, and floods upon the Isa. 44. 3.
dry ground: And indeed if this should be denied, we should fall into gross ab
surdities.

A Learned Author observes, that all kinds of unlawful, and forbidden
marriages are not expressly mentioned in the Law, but diverse of them to be
collected by consequence; that is, either by parity, or greater strength of
reason. For instance, The nakedness of thy sons daughter, or of Lev. 18.^0
thy daughters daughter, even their nakedness thou shall not uncover. Now from
this text, it is collected a fortiori, that much less a man may uncover the
nakedness of his own daughter. Which yet is not expressly forbidden by the
Law, but left to be thus collected by necessary consequence from this very text.

How can it be proved, that women are to receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, but by consequence? That any one particular Church is a true Church but
by consequence? that fasting days, and thanksgiving-daies, may be observed
upon occasion but by consequence?

And here you have the great vapor of the Anabaptists spending it self, and
coming to nothing, viz. where do you find it expressly said in any place of
Scripture, that infants are to be baptized? if we have it by necessary
consequence, it is sufficient.

25. Rule.
It is usual for the Spirit of God, to express both the duties and the
privileges of the people of God, under the New Testament, by phrases taken
from the Economy and Administration of the Old. To instance.

1. For the duties of the New Testament, to offer sacrifice is a phrase proper
to the administration under the Old Testament, and yet this is pressed as a
duty under the New. So Paul, I beseech you therefore, brethren Romans i2. i.
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable service.

2. For the privileges of the New Testament, for instance; It shall come to
pass Esaias. 2.21
in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established
in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and al
Nations shall flow unto it. The meaning is not, that there should be another
temple raised, like that at Jerusalem, but it is to be expounded of the
spreading of the Gospel. New Testament-priviledges set out by an expression
taken from an Old Testament-administration. So, I will pour Joel. 2.28. 29.
out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy* your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:
The meaning of this Scripture is not, that God in the time of the Gospel would
discover himself unto his people by dreams, and visions; but that God would
give a greater measure of light, and bestow a greater measure of his Spirit on
those that should live under the Gospel, then those that lived under the Law,
and that this is the meaning of it, is clear by the Apostle Peter's quotation
of it, Acts 2.17.

26. Rule.
When the Scripture makes mention of ^lthy actions, either natural or sin^ull,
it expresses them in comley terms

1. When it speaks of natural actions, as, Judge. 3.24. it is said of Ehud,
that he covered his feet in the Summer-chamber, Judge. 3.24.
viz. he was easing of nature, for they had long coats which covered their
feet when they eased nature.

2. When it speaks of sinful uncleanness; So stolen waters are sweet, viz.
adultery is sweet. So see how incest is described, says Jacob to Reuben, Thou
wentest up to thy Genesis 49.4^.
fathers bed.

And yet this is very observable, that the Scripture when it speaks of
Idolatry, and spiritual whoredom, makes use of plain terms: mark how the
phrase is altered, when God speaks of Idolatry, Thou have Ezekiel. 16. 2^.
built thy high place at every head of the way, and have made thy beauty to be
abhorred, and have opened thy feet to every one that passes by, and multiplied
thy whoredoms: A Learned Author gives this account of it, Idolatry is such a
subtle thing that we are not sensible of its defilement, as we are of bodily
whoredom, and therefore the Lord expresses it in plain terms, that we may
hate it the more.

27. Rule.
The circumstance of time with relation to the person, or thing that is spoken
of in the Scripture, must heedfully be observed.

Hence was that saying of Augustine, Distribue tempora, and concordabit
Scriptura: Distinguish concerning the time, and then Scriptures will agree. For
instance, we read concerning Jotham the Son of V^^iah, 2 King. 15 33
that he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem, and yet in the same Chapter,
mention is made of the twentieth year of Jotham: now distribue tempora, and
concordabit Scriptura: 2 King. 15. 30
distinguish concerning the time, and you will reconcile these Scriptures. For
Jotham reigned alone only sixteen years, but he reigned with his Father
V^^iah (who being smitten with Leprosy could not manage the affairs of the
Kingdom) four years; in all twenty years.

28. Rule.
We are to consider in the perusal of Scripture what speeches are proper and
what speeches are figurative. The Scriptures have a proper, and literal sense,
and they have an allegorical and figurative sense. Now it is a dangerous
thing, when the words are properly to be taken, to understand them
figuratively, or to take them figuratively, when they are to be understood
properly. For instance,

1. It Is dangerous to understand those places of Scripture properly, which are
to be taken figuratively, as in the Prophet Malachi; Behold, I will send you
Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great, and Mal. 4.5.
dreadful day of the Lord. The Jews expound this properly of Elias Tishbites,
when the Prophet meant them figuratively of John the Baptist, who came with the
gifts of Elias; for so you have John called, But I say unto you (^aith our
Savior unto his disciples) that Elias is come already, and Mat. 17. 12, 13.
they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed, etc. Then
the Disciples understood, that he spoke unto them of John the Baptist. Another
instance you have, Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees: Mat. 16.6.
The Disciples understood it properly, when Christ meant figuratively. So,
Except a man be borne again, he cannot enter into Joh. 3.3.
the Kingdom of God. That which Christ meant figuratively of regeneration,
Nicodemus understands literally.

2. It Is dangerous to understand those places figuratively which should be
taken properly; thus the Familists turn all the history of Christ into an
Allegory, Heaven and Hell into an allegory, and without repentance their
salvation also: Such an one was he, who reading that place of Scripture, where
it is said of Judas, that having received the sop, he went immediately out, and
erat nox, and it was night, puts both together as spoken of Judas; He, says
he, was the night, that went out; as Christ was the Sun, that gave knowledge to
his Disciples, who were day: So Judas was the night, who gave knowledge to the
Jews, who were darkness. A senseless conceit, but I mention it to show you
the danger of allegorizing the Scriptures.

Origin was very faulty this way, in turning all Scripture almost into an
allegory. And it is observable, that he who was so much for allegories,
understood that literally, which was to be taken mystically: There are some
Eunuchs, which were so borne Mat. 19.12.
from their mothers womb; and there are Eunuchs which were made so of men; and
there be Eunuchs, which have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of
heavens sake.

And truly I think, there was the finger of God plainly to be seen in this
providence: his punishment was like his sin: As the taking of literal
Scriptures in a figurative sense was his sin, so the taking of a figurative in
a literal, was his punishment.

But you may ask me, when the litterall sense is to be left?

When it is repugnant to the analogy of faith, or that systeeme of Divinity,
which is evidently grounded upon the Word of God. For instance; when it is
said, Every branch in me, that bears not frait: we Joh. 15.2.
must not interpret the branches that bear not fruit, to be really in Christ,
as parts of his mystical body, because this is against the Analogy of faith:
we know that no branch, which is truly engraffed into Christ can ever be taken
away; and therefore we must understand the phrase of such as are in Christ
visibl^^ as members not of his true body, but of his visible Church.

The Inchanters Rods are related to be turned into Serpents; now they must be
interpreted to seem so, rather then to be so, because the literal
interpretation is against the analogy of faith; the changing of the natures of
creatures, being beyond the sphere of the activity of the devils power.

So when we are commanded to pluck out our right eye, and cut off our right
hand, if they offend us; this cannot be expounded literally, because it is
against the analogy, of faith, God has expressly commanded Thou shall not
kill.

29. Rule.
Although the proffer of salvation in the Scripture be conditional, yet is
neither the decree of God, nor the purchase of Christ relating thereunto
conditional.

The Lord Jesus did not redeem us, if we did believe, but that we might
believe; there is a condition in the things proffered, but none in the will of
God, Gods offering salvation upon condition of believing, does only note that
faith is a means tending thereunto: In like manner, Gods promises are not (for
the form of them) to be compared with his purposes or intentions: that which
is performed upon a condition, is not intended upon a condition so to be
performed. God absolutely intended to make his elect to believe, and to save
them; their belief is but a condition to their salvation, not to Gods
intention which is absolute.

For the further clearing of this, consider that the voluntas signi may be
conditional, and the voluntas beneplaciti may be absolute, and yet there may
be a sweet Harmony between them. To this purpose observe, that a conditional
proposition having such a condition annexed to it, as will certainly and
infallibly be effected, is equivalent to an absolute affirmative categoricall
proposition; As if a man says, he will take a journey to morrow if he be able,
and knows certainly he shall be able, this is eq^ivalent to an absolute
affirmative categoricall proposition, that he will absolutely go: So on the
contrary, if a proposition be conditional, and has a condition annexed to it,
which is impossible and shall never be effected, this is equivalent to an
absolute categoricall negative proposition; when Reprob^tes are told, if they
believe they shall be saved, it is equivalent to this proposition, they shall
not be saved, because they shall not believe. So that the outward tender,
though conditional, may answer to an absolute decree, the render it self
being equivalently absolute.

30. Rule.
The Scripture sometimes speaks of a thing, as absolutely, and infallibly
coming to pass by virtue of Gods ordination, and yet the same thing may be in
its own nature contingent.

For instance, it was prophesied concerning Christ, that not a bone of him
should be broken* now Christ's legs were not broken; not because in themselves
considered they could not be broken, but because Gods decree could not be
broken: they were capable of being broken, and ye^ not capable: capable in
respect of themselves, incapable in regard of Gods decree.

When there is a non-essentiall connection between things, we say there is
contingency: when there is an essential connection, there we say there is
necessity: For instance, ^ationality and risibility are necessary to a man,
because a man cannot be a man but he must have a power both to reason, and
laugh; they do ingredi essentiam: but that a man does exercise his reason or
not exercise it, that a man does laugh or not laugh, is contingent; the power
is necessary, but the act is contingent: Christ's legs in respect of themselves,
were as apt to be broken as the malefactors, therefore the not breaking of
them was contingent, as to the soldiers, though coming to pass necessarily as
to Gods decree. Contingent things are nothing the less contingent for some
kind of extrinsecal necessity.

31. Rule.
Negations in Scripture must be read with these cautions.

1. Sometimes they deny not simply, but only in comparison; I will have mercy,
Mat. 9.13.
and not sacrifice, that is, I will have mercy rather then sacrifice. So, When
thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, Luke 14.12. 13.
nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors, etc. But when
thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind: Bid not
your brethren, but the poor, that is, the poor rather then your brethren,

2. Sometimes negatives deny only according to the conceit, and opinion of the
hearers; So, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: He is not the
God Ma. 22.32.
of the dead, that is, of such dead, whom the Sadduces thought dead, who should
never rise again; for Christ spoke this to the Sadduces, who denied the
resurrection, as appears by the context. So Jesus said, Joh. 7.16.
My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: Is not mine, that is, as you
take me to be a mere man.

32. Rule.
The truth of an Hypotheticall Proposition, does not depend upon the truth of
the two Propositions, the Antecedent and the consequent; but upon the necessary
connection: viz. The Antecedent and consequent of an Hypotheticall Proposition
may be true, and yet the Proposition, may be false it self, and e contra, the
Antecedent and consequent of an Hypotheticall Proposition, may be false, and
yet the Proposition may be true it self. For instance,

If Isaac were Abraham's Son, then he were truly good; both parts considered
apart are true, yet the Proposition it self is false, because there is no
necessary connection between the Antecedent, and the Consequent: If a man be
irrational, he is a beast, both parts are false, yet the Proposition true: Paul
says to the Centurion, and to the Soldiers, Except these abide in the Ship,
ye cannot be saved; both parts are false, Act. 27.31
either that the Ship-men should not abide in the Ship, or that any man in the
Ship should not be saved: God having before determined, that there should be no
loss of any man's life among them; so says Paul, I exhort you to be of good
cheer, for there shall be no loss of any man's life among you, but of the Ver.
22
Ship: yet the connection is true, except they did abide in the ship they could
not be saved: If I say to a Reprobate, If thou believe thou shall be saved,
this Proposition is true; though that the Reprobate shall either believe, or be
saved, is false.

33. Rule.
To say this or that opinion is untrue, because it does in ^erminis contradict
some place of Scripture, will not hold. For instance,

To say that Christ is not equal with the Father, is expressly contrary to
that Scripture, He thought it no robbery to be equal with God; yet agreeable
enough to that of Christ himself, My Father is greater then ^: To say God
cannot repent, is in terminis to contradict some places of Scripture: To say,
God can repent, is in terminis to contradict other places of Scripture; yet
neither of these are unsound, because in terminis only to contradict the
Scripture, is not to contradict indeed the Scripture; but when we contradict
the meaning of the Scripture, then, and not till then, we are justly said to
contradict the Scripture. For instance,

To deny Gods delight in the destruction of sinners, is to contradict in
terminis that place of Scripture, I will laugh at your calamity: and to say,
God does delight in the Prove. ^.26.
destruction of sinners, does in terminis contradict another place of
Scripture, As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked. And yet never a whit Ezekiel. 33.1.
the more contradiction found in the Scripture for all this.

As for example, it is both true, that the Father is greater then the Son, as
touching the Sons manhood, and the Son equal to the Father, as touching the
Sons Godhead. So of repentance it cannot be attributed unto God as it
signifies a change of mind, or counsel, but it may be attributed unto God, as
it signifies change of sentence, according to that Axiom, Deus mutat
sententiam, nunquam consilium. So, as touching Gods pleasure, or delight in the
death of a sinner, as it is the destruction of a creature, he delights not in
it; but as it is the just punishment of a sinful creature he delights therein:
God delights in the execution of justice, as appears in Jeremiah; But let him
that glories, glory in Jer. 9.24.
this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise
loving kindness, judgment and righteousness on the earth; for in these
things I delight, says the Lord: God delights in the exercise of judgment and
righteousness, as well as in the exercise of loving kindness.

In like manner we say, that two Propositions may contradict each other in
terminis, and yet may agree well enough, as to the sense and meaning of them.
For instance, These two Propositions, 1. Adam might not have sinned. 2. It
could not be but that Adam would sin, are both true; That Adam might not have
sinned, is true of Adam in the sense of division, considered as in himself: It
could not be but that Adam would sin, is true of Adam in the sense of
composition, being considered as subordinate to the decrees of God.

24. Rule.
Pray unto God for the illumination of the Spirit.

Luther used to say, Been or are, est been studuisse; he will study well, that
can pray well. It is a singular comfort and privilege to every godly man, to
see with his own eyes: It is a great comfort to a blind man, to meet with a
faithful guide, whom he may trust to lead him in his way; but it comes nothing
near to the content, which a man that has eyes takes, when with them he sees
the way on which he walks.

35. Rule.
Labor for true holiness.

The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him Saint John tells us, That the
anoy^ting 1 John 2.27
which the people of God have received, and have abiding in them, shall teach
them all things. God will not reveal his will to those that will do their own.
So Paul, Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind; Romans 12.2
that ye ^ay prove, what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God.

36. Rule.
Get an humble heart.

With the lowly is wisdom. God will break Prove. 11.2
his mind to the broaken in heart: Who am I says Moses? and yet who ^itter
then he to go unto Pharaoh? He that refused to be called Pharaohs daughters
son, was afterward called to be Pharaohs God. See, (faith the Lord to Moses)
I have made thee a God to Exodus 7.1
Pharaoh.

How shall that Christian be satisfied,

These things may be said for the satisfaction

1. That it is not necessary that a Christian should understand every Text in
the Scriptures: if he understands so much as is absolutely necessary to his
salvation, he is a good Scholar in Christ's school.

2. As often as thou meetest with any thing that is above the reach of thy
capacity, be humbled in the sense of thine own weakness. Thou art so far
carnal, as thou do not perceive the things of God, which are spiritually to
be discerned.

3. Pray unto that God, who has the Key of David, that he would open thy
understanding, that thou may rightly conceive of the great mysteries of
Religion: Christ has told us, if we knock, he will open unto us; he has
commanded us to knock, that we may not be slothful; he has promised to open,
that we may not be distrustful.

4. The complete knowledge of Divine Mysteries is reserved for our heavenly
state: whilst we are in this world, we know but in part. Yea, Irenaeus adds,
says he, In glory to all eternity, the Saints shall be learning something of
God, that so God to eternity may be a Teacher, and the Saint a learner. There
is such another like expression, that the Schools make use of, when they speak
of our state in glory; they say. The Angels and glorified Saints, are full
vessels, and yet are always a filling.

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are now to be sold by Nathanael W^bb and William Grantham,
at the black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard near the little North-door of Paul's
Church.
MAster Isaac Ambrose, Prima, Media, and Vltima, first, middle, and last
things, in three Treatises of Regeneration, Sanctification; with Meditations on
Life, Death, Hell, and Judgment, in 4. Mr. Nathanael Hardy, several Sermons
Preached upon Solemn occasions; collected into one Volume, in 4. History
Sorvey'd in a brief Epitomy, or, a Nursery for gentry, comprised in an
intermixed discourse, upon Historical and Poe^icall Relations, in 4. Dr.
Stoughton's 13 Sermons, being an Introduction to the Body of Divinity* in 4.
Dr. John Preston, The Golden Scepter, with the Churches Marriage, and the
Chur^hes Carriage, in three Treatises, in 4. Mr. Walter Cradock,
Gospell-Liberty, in the extension and limitation of it, in 4. Mr. Thomas
Parker, The Visions and Prophecies of Dan^el Expounded, wherein the mistakes of
former Interpreters are modestly discovered, in 4. Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticarum ex Authoritate primum Regis Henrici ^ inchoata; in ^. Mr.
George Strode, The Anatomy of Mortality divided into eight Heads, viz. 1. The
certainty of Death. 2. Meditations on Death. 3. Preparations for Death, etc. in
4. Dr. Daniel Featly, The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking
away the Sacred Cup from the Laity, at the Lords Table, in 4. Mr. Richard
Lewthait, Vindiciae Christi and obex errori Arminiano; A Plea for Christ, in
three Sermons, in 4. Welsh Common Prayer, with the singing Psalms, in 4. Mr.
John Lawsons Gleanings and Expositions of some of the more difficult places of
holy Scripture, in 4. Mr. John Cotton, The way of the Churches of Christ in New
England, in 4. Mr. Edward Thorp, The New Birth, or, Birth from above, in 4
Sermons, in 4. Mr. John Vicars, The Schismatic sifted, etc. in 4. --
Colemanstreet Conclave visited, and that Grand Impostor, the Schismatics
Cheater in chief, truly and duly discovered, in 4. Roberti Heggi, Dunelmensis
in Aliquot Sacra Paginae Loca Lectiones, in 4. Mr. John Jews, Contemplations
upon these times, or the Parliament explained to Wales, in 4. Dr. John Preston,
A Position delivered in Cambridge, concerning the irresistibleness of
converting Grace, in 4. The Beacon Fl^ming, with a non obstante against those
that plead for Liberty of Printing and Publishing Popish Books, in 4. The
Ranters Reasons Resolved to nothing, or the fustification instead of the
Justification of the Mad Crew, etc. in 4. Mr. Nathanael Stevens, A Prec^pt for
the Baptism of Infants out of che New Testament, in 4. Mr Josiah Ricraft, A
Nosegay of rank smelling flowers such as grow in Mr John Goodwins Garden, etc.
in 4.
Sermons in 4*
Dr. Robert Gell. A Sermon touching Gods Government of the World by Angels,
Preached before the Astrologers, the 8 of August, 1650. in 4. Dr. John Whincop,
Gods call to Weeping, and Mourning, A Sermon Preached at a Fast before the
Parliament, 29 of Jan. 1644. in 4. Mr. George Walker, A Sermon Preached at a
Fast before the Parliament, 29 Jan. 1644. in 4. Mr. Valentine. A Sermon
Preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4. Mr John Warren of
Hatfield-Regis in Essex. The Potent Potter, A Sermon Preached at a Fast before
the Parliament, the 19 of April. 1649. in 4. Mr. William Good. Jacob Raised, A
Sermon Preached at a Fast before the Lords in Parliament, 30 of December, 1646,
in 4. Dr. Thomas Goodwin, The great Interest of States and Kingdoms, A Sermon
Preached before the Parliament 15 of Feb. 1645, in ^. Mr. Samuel Kem, The King
of Kings his privy marks for the Kingdoms choice o^ new Members, A Sermon
Preached upon the Choice of Burgesses, for the City of Bristoll, in 4. Mr. Ben.
Hubbard. Sermo Secularis, or a Sermon to bring to remembrance the dealings of
Jehovah with this Kingdom of England, ab anno 1547, usque ad annum 1647, in 4.
Mr. ^. P. A Sermon ^reached the 5 of September, upon Mat. 22.21. Wherein is set
forth the Kings due in Part, and the peoples duty, in 4.
Octavo.
Mr. Robert Young, A Sovereign Antidote against all grief, with the victory
of Patience, in 8. Mr. John Simpson, The Perfection of Justification against
the Pharisees, the Purity of Sanctification against the stainers of it, the
unquestionablenesse of glorification against the Sadduces, etc. in 8. Bishop
William Cooper, The Triumph of a Christian, in three excellent Treatises. 1.
Jacobs wrestling with God, etc. in 8. Mr John Robotham, the Preciousnesse of
Christ to Believers, etc. in 8. The Bee-Hive of the Romish Church, A work of
all good Catholic^s to be read, and most necessary to be understood, in 8.
Testament Roman Letter, Scotch Print, in 8. Mr Thomas Hall, The loathsomenesse
of Long Hair: A Treatise wherein the Question is Stated, many Arguments
against it produced, etc. in 8. -- Vindiciae Literarum, the Schools Guarded, or
the excellency and usefulness of Arts, Sciences, Languages, History and all
sorts of Humane Learning, in Subordination to Divinity, with an Appendix in
Answer to Mr Webster. Mr. John Warren of Hatfield in Essex, Principles of
Christian Doctrine Illustrated with Questions and Scripture-Answers, for the
use of the Inhabitants of Hatfield Brodoake, in 8. Mr. Nicholas Byfield, The
Marrow of the Oracles of God: Or, Diverse Treatises containing directions, about
6 of the weightiest things can concern a Christian in this life, in 12. Mr.
John Jackson, The true Evangelic all Temper, wherein Divinity and
Ecclesiastical History are interwoven and mixed, etc. in three Sermons, in 12.
Mr. Joshua Mullard, Celestial Soliloquies, Composed of several divine
Meditations and Prayers drawn from the Holy Scriptures, in 12. Francis Thin
Esqu^re, the Perfect Ambassador, Treating of the Antiquity, Privileges and
behavior of men, belonging to that function, in 12. A Baptismal catechism
showing unto what persons, whether of riper years, or as yet infants, the
Sacrament of Baptism ought to be administered according to the Scripture by Mr.
Daniel Evance* sometime preacher of the Word at Clement Danes London; and late
Pastor of the Church of Calborne in the Isle of Wight. The first dish at the
wilt shire Feast, a Sermon Preached the 9 of November. before many hundreds of
worthy Citizens of London born in that Country. By Dr. Samuel Annesley
Preacher of the Word at John Evangelists, Friday-street, London.
FINIS.

