THE PEACEMAKER, OR A brief Motive to Unity and Charity in Religion.

By W.P.D.D.

Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God,
Mat. 5.9. LONDON, Printed by T.W. for John Place, and are to be sold at his
shop at Furnifals-Inne gate, 1652.

These Books are to be sold in Edinburgh at Thomas Wily his Shop, over against
the Old Church-Style.

THE Peacemaker, etc.
IT was the advice, good Christian Reader, of the Prophet Jeremy, run to and
fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and seek in the broad places thereof, if
ye can find a man, Jr. 1.5. They were not so much troubled there to find out a
man, as we shall be now to find out a Christian. We so busy our selves about
Controversies, that we forget to be good Christians. There was a time indeed
when the name was first given at Antioch, Act. 11.26. that it was then well set
by; but this lasted not long, for presently after they fell a siding amongst
themselves, and one cried I am of Paul, another I am of Apollos, and another I
am of Cephas, and another I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.12. and much ado had St.
Parl to appease these factions: for presently after they fell to them again,
and have so continued, yea, and increased in them even unto this day. But
Christ is not divided, says the same Apostle, neither is this to imitate
Christ the God of love and peace, who loved us when we were his enemies; and
the Apostle makes a good inference of imitation upon it, 1 John 4.11. Beloved,
if God so lovedus, we ought also to love one another: Nay, as though there were
nothing else required of a good Christian, and a fellower of Christ, our
Savior says, Joh. 13.15. by this shall all men know you are my d sciples, if
you have love one to another. Seeing then this is the proper and peculiar badge
and cognizance of a disciple of Christ to love his fellow-disciples, What
argument would be fitter here to treat of, than a persuasion to all Christians
to be in peace and charity one with another?

But alas how unwelcome a task is it, to entreat of Peace and Charity! For he
that goes about to part a fray, in all likelihood will have blows on both
sides, especially where the opposites and combatants are fierce and violent; he
that is eager on any one side, shall be sure to find some fast friends, but he
that bewaileth the miserable distraction of the whole, and does but set a foot
forward to make up the breach, will find few to take his part, but shall be
sure to have many about his ears: And therefore we may observe that presently
after our Savior had said, Blessed are the Peacemakers, Mat. 5.9, 10. he
immediately adds, Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness
sake; knowing well enough, that if a man will undertake to be a Peacemaker,
he must presently prepare to suffer persecution, and I know none greater than
that of Peacemakers in religion, for they suffer on all sides, either by sharp
and bitter words, or by scoffing and jeering speeches. For although the
hot-spurs of these times be at deadly fewd and bitter enmity one with another,
yet will they, like Herod and Pilate, join together and muster up their forces
against those who labor any kind of pacification, and desire to be quiet in
the land. Woe is me (says David, Psalm. 120.4, 5, 6. ( that I am constrained to
dwell with Mesech, and to have mine habitation amongst the tents Kedar: my soul
has long dwelt among them that be enemies unto peace. I labor for Peace, but
when I speak unto them thereof, they make them ready to Battle. Never could
the pious and peaceable Soul more truly cry out than now, My mothers Children
were angry with me. Cant. 1.5. A strange speech to call them Mothers children:
had it not been a more easy and familiar way to say, my Brethren or my Sisters
were angry with me (for so they must be, if they were her Mothers Children) why
then does she make such an involved speech of it, My mothers children were
angry with me? True indeed, though they cannot choose but be her Brethren, (as
being her Mothers children) yet she does not, she dares not call them Brethren,
for they will not acknowledge it, they hate the name of Brethren, and make
themselves professed enemies, and therefoe she is forced to leave out this
loving and affectionate compellation of brethren, and say in a kind of strange
phrase, My mothers children were angry with me. Yet should no man be
discouraged from performing so worthy a duty; for though there be a persecution
that attends upon Peace makers here, yet is there a blessing promised them
hereafter. And seeing our blessed Lord and Master Christ Jesus, when he was
about to leave his Apostles and Disciples, left unto them this golden legacy,
Joh. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, O how well would
it become all of us to be men of Peace, the Ministers to preach for the Peace
of Jerusalem, the people to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, for they shall
prosper that love it. Psalm. 122.6.

I will begin this exhortation unto Peace and Charity, from that common name
which we all acknowledge, in that we are called Christians, and do all pretend
to imitate Christ in our doctrine and practice. There was a time indeed when
this name was much taken notice of, and great danger for any man to own it,
when they had no other argument then, nor any other cause of their cruel
persecutions, but to hear a man confess Christianus sum, I am a Chrian: But
when these storms were blown over, and the Church began to be in peace, this
name of Christian was not so much regarded. And yet methinks the very name of
Christian is not altogether to be contemned, for, unless I am deceived,
whosoever has but this appellation may challenge a brotherhood with me, for in
Scripture I find a brother and a Christian to be the very same, so that
whosoever is a Christian will necessarily be my brother. 1 Cor. 7.12, 13. If
any brother has a wife, says the Apostle, that believes not, and she be
pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away; and if the woman has an
husband which believes not, if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not
leave him: But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart, a brother or a sister
is not to bondage in such cases. Where the Apostle plainly shows that a
brother and a sister are such as are Christians, and opposite only to Infidels
and unbelievers. Neither ought we to take that exhortation of Saint Paul 1 Pet.
2.17. when he says, love the brotherhood, in any narrower sense, but that we
should love every one that is a Christian, not only because he agrees with me
in some opinions concerning religion, but I ought to love him in that respect
he is a Christian, and professes Christ crucified. Neither ought we to love
him thus with an ordinary kind of love, in wishing him well, and doing him
good, for so we ought to love and do good to all, but there is a more strict
tie of love that lies upon us Christians one to another; and therefore although
the Apostle wishes us to do good to all men, yet especially tot he household
of faith, Gal 6 10. that is, to such as be Christians.

Were this precept of the Apostle practiced as it ought to be, there would not
be so much uncharitableness, nor peradventure so much dissension amongst
Christians. Why can we not consider one another as united in this blessed name
of Christian, and set aside for a time those names of faction and division? why
should we not rejoice awhile in those things wherein we agree, and not always
be wrangling about those things wherein we differ? Of what moment those
opinions are wherein we disagree I am not able to determine; this I dare be
bold to say, that the points wherein we are friends, are of far greater
consequence, than those are wherein we fall out. And yet we so eagerly contend
one with another, and damn each other to the pit of hell, as though our
differences were very important, and our agreement not worth the talking of.
For my part I should be loath to exclude any visible Christian Church from all
hopes of salvation, and if I must needs offend, I had rather give account to a
merciful God for too much mildness and Charity, than too much fierceness and
severity: yet I hope to make it appear, that my opinion of Charity shall not
exceed the bounds of verity.

A chief cause of the continuance of these dissentions is, that men mind not so
much the common cause of Christianity, as their own particular engagements, nor
study how they may agree one with another, as how to uphold the side they are
on: whereas would they set aside prejudice and partiality, and cast an equal
eye upon all the Churches, they would not spy so many faults abroad, and so few
at home, but would freely confess there might be greater concord amongst
Christians than now there is. No other Unity do I labor for at this time but
that of Charity, that Christians would not for some differences in opinion,
pronounce such an heavy sentence upon one another, as is that of Damnation. If
God should deal with us as we deal with one another, if he should censure us
all as we censure one another, I know not who should be saved: The Papist
damning the Protestant, and some among us the Papists, and both of them any
other that shall differ from them both. But my hope is, and my hearty prayer to
God shall be, that he would be more merciful to all these, than they are one
to another. When I consider with my self the manifold distractions of
Christians about Religion, and the great fierceness and violence used on all
sides, every one thinking his own opinion truest, and consequently damning all
others that differ from him, I could not but call to mind that prophecy of our
blessed Savior, Mat. 24.12. concerning these latter and worser times, Because
iniquity shall abound (says he) the love of many shall wax cold: for although
Charity of it self be of a hot and diffusive nature, yet now clean contrary to
the nature of it, it is in most men grown cold; it being the nature of cold to
contract and combine, to congeal and draw into a narrow room; thus is it now
with our Charity. For whereas like the heat in our natural bodies, it should
diffuse it self into all the members thereof, unto the whole Christian Church,
yet I know not how it has taken cold, for men contract their love now into a
very small compass and narrow room, that is, to no more than to such who jump
with them in the same Opinion about Religion, leaving others who differ from
them, to nothing but death and damnation. For not only in several Countries,
but in the same Kingdom, in the same City, nay in the same Family, there are
several Religions, or at the least several Opinions about Religion reigning:
So that what Saint Austine complained of in his time, is truly verified in
these, Epist. 147. Thou see (says he) with how great and miserable
distraction Christian houses and families are divided and troubled; husbands
and wives can agree well enough to go to bed together, bnt they cannot agree
to go to Christ's Altar together: There they swear peace one to another, but
here they can have no peace. Parents and Children live well enough together in
one house of their own, but one house of Gods will not hold them both. Their
desire is that those should succeed them in their own inheritance, who yet they
think have no inheritance with Christ. Masters and servants divide the Common
Lord and Master of us all, who yet took upon him the form of a servant, that so
he might free all. I say never more fully verified than in these days; For in
how many families shall we observe this great division? the Husband goes to
Church, and the Wife stays at home, or the Wife goes to Church, and the
Husband stays at home, and so between Parents and Children, Masters and
Servants. The Father will give his Son the portion of his land, who yet thinks
he shall have no portion in the land of the living.

The great division of the Christian world, was first between the East and West
Churches, and this West has been since subdivided into the Roman and the
Reformed Religion: So that the division amongst Christians which is
considerable, is but into three parts, the Eastern, the Romanist, and our
Reformed. All Christian Churches, and so far forth the members of them brethren
and sisters; and not only Christian Churches, but also Catholic and Orthodox
in these points wherein they agree one with another, and with the Primitive
Church. Why may it not be with these Churches, as it was with those seven
Churches of Asia which S. John wrote unto, in which there were some things
commendable, and other things amiss? they were encouraged in the former, and
reproved for the latter. And although some of them were better than others, yet
you shall sacre find one of them to which he does not say, haben adversus te
pauca, I have a few things against thee: And yet we shall find that Christ
himself was in the midst of all these seven churches, for he was in the midst
of the seven golden candlesticks, Revel. 1.13. and bad in his right hand seven
stars, Rev. 1.16. For writing to the Church of Ephesus, he makes this one of
his attributes, Apoc. 21. These things (says he) who who holds the seven
stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks. So that our Savior walked in the midst of all these Churches,
even in that lukewarm Church of Laodicea, which he threatened to spue out of his
mouth. And let Rome tell us never so much of her infallibility and unerring
chair, yet questionless there is none of our Churches, no not the best of them,
that our Savior may not say to her, habeo adversus te pauca, I have a few
things against thee. And as those several Churches, though some of them very
faulty, yet were all several members of Christ, and helped to make up one
body: why may it not be so in these Churches I speak of? For first they all
agree in that one and only foundation of Religion, Jesus Christ, as the Apostle
calls him, No other foundation can any other man lay, than that which is
laid, to wit Jesus Christ, and this no doubt is a sure and good foundation, and
this makes them to be Christan Churches; they are all baptized into Christ,
and look to be saved by his sufferings: And think not this to be a small
matter; for St. Paul desired to know nothing else, I esteemed not (says he) to
know any thing among you but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and it worked
upon his affection as much as upon his understanding; God forbid that I should
rejoice (says he) save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14. that
is in Christ crucified. Besides this one foundation, they all embrace the two
Testaments, the three Creeds, and the four first general Councills, and many
other very material points. The discord amongst us Christians has been long
ago objected to us; and certainly there has nothing so much drawn some out of
the Church, and kept others from coming into the Church, as these quarrels
amongst our selves; Unto whom I briefly answer; If they like not our
differences, let them join with us in those things wherein we agree, and that
is to be Christians, to believe in Christ and him crucified, and those other
principal points whereof I spoke, and to strive to imitate Christ to their
power, and then our discords will less trouble them. It is true, we have not
all built alike upon this foundation, but some no question have built wood and
straw, as well as silver and gold; yet all of us no doubt do strive to imitate
Christ as near as we can, both in our doctrine, and in our practice: and
certainly in these superstructures of Religion, good intentions must go far, or
else it will go hard with many of us; not that they altogether excuse the
fault, but doubtless they take off much from the punishment. There is a
difference between the East and West Churches, in what kind of bread the
Eucharist is to be received; the East receiving in unleavened bread, the West
in leavened bread. And herein though they differ among themselves, yet they
both strive to imitate Christ, because the one Church thought our Savior used
then the bread that was leavened, the other, that which was unleavened. Either
Church is the less blameable because they think both, that they follow our
Saviors example.

S. Austin in like manner does prettily reconcile a difference between some
concerning the time how often we should receive the holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; for some it seems in his time thought we were bound to receive the
Eucharist every day, others but now and then Some (says he Epist. 118.)
communicate daily, others but upon certain days; some will omit no day, others
will only receive on the Sabbath, and the Lords day. There is a freedom to be
used in both these. Some will say we must not daily receive the Sacrament,
because we ought to select and set apart some days wherein we must live more
carefully and religiously, and so come to the Sacrament more worthily, and with
greater devotion: On the other side, another tells us, yea, but if the plague
sore of sin, and violence of the disease beso great and dangerous, such
sovereign medicines as these are not to be deferred. Of both these, says he,
Iet every man take his choice, and do that which he thinks in his conscience he
may best and most piously perform; for neither of these dishonor the body and
blood of our Savior, but rather both of them do strive to honor this saving
Sacrament. For Zacheus rejoiced greatly to entertain our Savior in his house.
The Centurion said, Lord, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof;
both of these did worship and honor our Savior, though after a diverse, and
as it were a contrary manner, both of them being miserable by reason of sin,
both of them obtaining mercy for their sins. Thus one man to honoun Christ
dares not receive every day, another also to honor Christ dares not omit any
day. And although these be but petty differences, yet why may I not apply it to
controversies of greater moment, especially seeing that ancient Father S.
Salvian, lib. 5. de Providentia; has found a good intention in the Arians, the
most pernicious and most dangerous heretics accounted that ever have been in
the Church: They whom we account heretics (says he) account not themselves
heretics, for they so much esteem themselves good Catholics, that they defame
us with the note and appellation of heresy. That therefore which they be to
us, the very same are we to them. We are certain that they injure the divine
generation, in that they say, the Son is less and inferior to the Father: They
think us likewise injurious to the Father, because we make the Son equal unto
him. The true honor of God is among st us, but they think that to be the
honor of the Deity, to believe as they believe. They are undutifull, but they
think it the greatest duty of their Religion. They are impious, but they think
this to be true piety. They err therefore, but they err with a very good mind
and intention, not with a hatred, but with a good affection toward God; verily
believing that they honor and love God. Although they have not the right
Faith, yet they notwithstanding think this to be perfect love toward God. In
what manner they shall be punished in the day of Judgment for this very error
of false opinion, no man can tell but the Judge himself.

A good lesson for the hot-spurs of these times, with who^ it is a very easy
matter to pronounce damnation upon the very least disagreement in Religion,
whereas this good Father would not determine any thing concerning these great
heretics the Arrians, but leaves them to the mercy of the Judge, not being
able to discern what they did deserve. You see that this holy Father finds out
a good intention even in these heretics. And if there was a good intention
amongst those that were so grossly erroneous, why may there not be good
intentions found out amongst us also, who are not at such great odds, and
acknowledged on all sides to have no such dangerous opinions amongst us.

I speak not this any whit to countenance that opinion of the Arrians, which is
creeping into the Church again, but leave them to stand or fall to their own
master, and shall in the mean time be persuaded that they go not against their
consciences, and so far forth it will go better with them: yet with this
holy Father, not free them from punishment, but must refer the manner and
measure thereof to the time of Judgment.

Those of the Church of Rome are so impatient of this doctrine, that they care
not for being saved, unless they may be saved alone; And their writers
generally agree upon nothing so much, as that out of their Communion there is
no Salvation. One of their late writers, ( Barckly Paren. li. 1. cap. 1.) can
profess thus, We (says he) proclaim with the whole Church, and we command with
Moses that Heaven and Earth would hear us, that there is no communion between
God and Belial, and that these Protestants do so far differ from us in matters
of faith, that they altogether in vain expect those mansions of happiness which
are prepared for us. And afterward he says, He that dares believe a stubborn
and obstinate Protestant can be saved, does by so believing fall from the
Catholic Faith. And that this is no private or obscure sentence of the Church,
but that all Catholics are of the same mind, that none of them are ignorant if
it, nor any can dissemble it, unless he be an unexpert Divine, or for fear on
ambition presfers some men's favor before the truth.

Another of their company Camp. rat. 10. avers the same, with a very great and
solemn protestation, I call to witness (says he) Gods throne, and that
tribunal at which I shall stand to give an account of these my reasons, and of
whatsoever I have spoken or done, that either there is no heaven at all, or
that it peculiarly and properly belongs unto us.

IN Campian, must ye be saved, and none but ye? what is not Heaven able to
hold us as well as you? Or will our salvation be any disparagement to yours? It
seems it will. But to come a little closer to you: Is it nothing with you at
one breath, to throw so many souls headlong to Hell, for whom Christ died; and
which is more who are already incorporate into Christ by Baptism? It cost more
to redeem their souls; but you will let that alone for ever. Our comfort is
that though you pass such sentence upon us here, yet you are not to be our
Judges hereafter, but must your selves come to give an account as well as we,
and peradventure of these speeches. Account us not men of so desperate and
deplored an estate that we would wittingly and willingly run into hell: why
should not our salvation be as dear unto us, as yours is unto you? or why
should you not think us to have as great a care of our salvation, as you have
of yours? For could we be persuaded that we were inherisie, and that there is
no salvation out of your Church, how quickly would we fly unto you? How gladly
would we be entertained by you? what means and moans would we make to be
members of your society? Who can endure such peremptory pronunciations of
Judgment of God's eternal wrath and condemnation upon us, before fore we come
to our hearing? And seeing, God's mercy is over all his works, who can endure
that you should interdict God's mercy, and judge what the sentence of the Judge
shall be, before the day of judgment. So that if God had a mind to spare such
sinners (as you say we poor Protestants are) yet by your verdict and
prescription he could not be suffered to do it as S. Jerome long ago complained
of Critobulus the Pelagian. lib. 1. advers. Pelag. Were we such tares in the
field of the Church, as you would make the world believe, yet if you would
imitate Christ, Mat. 13. you should let us grow till the harvest, lest you
pluck up the good corn with us.

Neither are you thus fierce alone, there are some of our own side, to requite
you in your own kind, are as confiden-that you cannot be saved, as you are that
we cannot; so that the Question now is, In which of our two Churches salvation
is to be had? For taking it for granted that we have excluded all others, and
got Heaven between us, we cannot be content to share it, but we must confine
and ingross it to one of our Churches, as though it could not be had in both,
nay as though it could not be had out of both; for I am verily persuaded, and
dare undertake to make it good, that those poor Eastern Christians, who differ
from us both, will yet come to Heaven as soon as either of us; which were it
well considered, might be a good means to pacify this Question, and to abate
the heat of many more betvveen us.

But this monopolizing of Christ, although it be generally entertained by the
Roman Party, yet are not all our reformed Divines so strait laced, but many of
them, and those of no small note can be content that others should be saved
with them, and therefore they are called by you, by way of derision, good
fellow Christians. As though they had so much of the good fellow in them, that
they have too little of the good Christian. And indeed you have most reason to
be angry with these good fellow Christians, for they are like to do you all
the mischief, for having found that there may be salvati on in our Church as
well, yea, with more ease than in yours, we shall never be thinking of going
any further. As for those who are so eager, that will consine salvation to one
certain Church, you have some hope of them, that in time they may come over to
you: And what you object to us as a crime, we esteem as our great glory, and
account it one of God's special blessings, that we live in the bosom of a
Church, that is so charitable, and we are willing to have so much of the good
fellow in us, because we would not have too little of the good Christian: for
though our Creed be comprised in a narrow room, yet our charity extends far,
not only to you, but the Eastern Church.

We have a little Sister, and she has no breasts, what shall we do for our
Sister, in the day when she shall be spoken of? We have a little Sister. Cant.
8.8. Though the Church of Rome call the Church of Greece Heretical and
Schismatic, yet we of the Church of England, esteem her to be a Daughter of
the Catholic Church, and our Sister, though now she be little, yet she was a
great one, not inferior any ways to the Church of Rome, she brought forth
many Children, and gave Milk plentifully; but now alas she is little, by reason
of her long persecution, and her breasts dried up, for now she is in a manner
barren, and able to bring forth but few Children. And although She be in this
poor and desolate estate, yet the Church of Rome will do nothing for her, for
when at the Council of Florence she desired aid of them against the Turks,
they gave her no succor at all, but left her in misery here, and adjudged her
as they do us to death and damnation hereafter. What shall we do for our
Sister? so long as we acknowledge her for our Sister, we should be willing to
do something for her in the day when she shall be spoken of; for as yet no
body speaks for her, no body laments her, but lets her alone, as if she
deserved no pity, no succor, no commiseration, the Romanists have persuaded
so many that she is schismatic and heretical in her tenants. But all those
who esteem of her as a sister, I hope will do something for her in the day
when she shall be spoken for, when her cause shall be pleaded, and she cleared
from holding such dangerous and damnable Doctrines, then certainly she will
have many to pity her, many to help her.

But the confining of salvation to your own Party, has not only sharpened
the pens of many Writers to much bitterness and condemning one another, but
also has unsheathed the swords of many Princes and Potentates to the great and
lamentable effusion of much Christian blood. S. Paul thought it a strange thing
in his time for a Brother to go to Law with a Brother: I speak to your shame
(says he.) Is it so that there is not a wise man amongst you, no not one that
is able to judge between his Brethren, but Brother goes to Law with Brother,
and that under the Infidels? 1 Cor. 6.5.6. What if S. Paul had lived in these
days; wherein not only a Brother goes to Law with a Brother, but a Brother
goes to War with a Brother, yea, and which is more, makes that to be a motive
unto his War, to wit, Religion, which should be a forcible means of peace and
reconcilement. Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum? Is it possible that
Religion should ever be the true Mother of so much mischief? No, no, our true
Mother the Holy Catholic Church does not further such designs, but lament
them, and does more justly complain then Rebecca did when twins strove in her
womb, seeing it is so, why am I thus. For she could be content would her
children but strive, and struggle one with another, but when they come to blows
and blood, yea much effusion of blood, as we see at this day, how can she be
but like Rabel weeping for her children and not be comforted because they are
not? Mat. 1. When was that ever more truly fulfilled then now, they that kill
you shall think they do God good service! Ioh. 16.2. Do you not think you have
done God good service in those many massacres in France, in every of which how
many thousands of poor Christians have you swept away with such a sudden
destruction, that had they been willing, you gave them not so much time as to
repent them of their Protestancy? Do you not think that you had done God good
service, if that horrible design of the Gun-powder-Treason had taken effect, a
prodigy not to be spoken of without horror and amazement, void of all
humanity as well as Christianity.

But do what you can, call us Heretics, Schismatiques, and what other
disgraceful name you can invent, imprison us, banish us, strangleous, stifle
us, burn us, hang us, we are yet your Brethren. Certainly our Savior never
intended to begin or propogate his Church by this means, he could as esily have
sent forth mighty men of war to compel others to believe in him, as poor
Fishermen who catch none but such as come to net, or are fairly allured to lay
hold on the bait. If this open hostility were used against the Turks, the
common enemy of the Christian name, there were some pretense for it; and
therefore we read that Moses, Exodus 2. when he saw the Israelite and the
Egyptian fight, he did not say, why strive you, but drew his sword, and slew
the Egyptian, but when he saw the two Israelites fight, he said, ye are
brethren why strive ye. What a glorious sight would it be to see the red Cross
once again advanced as it was in the days of Constantine? and if we did not
see it written in Heaven, I hope we should find it true upon earth, in hoc
signo vinces. Unto this holy war I suppose all they would come, who have
promised to fight under Christ's banner. And set aside for a while this private
interest of Protestant, and Papist, and Grecian, and Lutheran, and Calvinist,
and Arminian, and Socinian, and if there be any other division amongst us, and
take upon us that general livery of Christianity, and so join together to
rescue our Brethren from that wild Boar of the Forest which has laid wast
this goodly vine; and afterward we might see how we could decide the
Controversies amongst Christians: For whosoever is in the right, I hope we are
all well enough persuaded that he is in the wrong. Could Herod and Pilate,
otherwise deadly enemies be made friends, and agree together to condemn Christ,
and shall not those, who are already Brethren and therefore should be friends,
combine together to save Christ: I say to save Christ, for so long as we save
and preserve his members, we save and preserve him; but so long as we suffer
his members to be thus persecuted and oppressed, he cannot choose but suffer
with them: But we in steed of bandying against the common enemy, muster up our
forces one against another, and find that to be true by lamentable experience,
there is no greater hatred then of Brethren that are fallen out.

Seeing then that all Christians are Brethren, I say Brethren, as having one
Father of us all, Brethren as having one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, whereby
we are born into the Catholic Church, and one food by the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, which makes us grow to be perfect men in Christ; seeing we are all
these ways Brethren, I may well say as Moses did, ye are Brethren why strive
ye? of if ye must needs be striving about matters of Religion, strive and
strive earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints. Jud. 3.

And because I say we are Brethren, I would not have you think we like not the
cause we have in hand, or that we are ready to yield unto you, and presently
join hands with you, as some of you Imagine, and many of our side causelessly
suspect, but this is all, we would have the breach no greater than it is, and
would not have the world believe, because we differ in some things, that we
agree in nothing. And although we call you Brethren, we will not wink at your
faults, or join with you in them, but this does put us in mind to admonish you
more gently of them as brethren, though you rage never so fiercely against us,
for by this means we shall express our charity toward you, and so heap coals
of fire upon your head. God, he knows we are far enough from yielding to you as
Romanists, yet should we not be charitable to you as Christians, we were much
to blame. But see how you mistake, or rather indeed pervert and abuse this our
charity: For (say you) by your own acknowledgement, there may be salvation in
our Church, but we all deny there can be Salvation in yours, therefore all if
they had care of themselves would have recourse to us, for it is the safer way
to be a member of that Church, where both sides yield there may be salvation,
then in that where on side denies it. This were something if Salvation or
Damnation depended upon opinion, but I suppose that charitable opinion, of
ours, in hoping you may be saved, makes you never a whit the nearer heaven, but
our selves; and that rough censure of yours in setting us all out for
damnation, makes us no whit the nearer hell, but your selves. And I had rather
be a member of that Church, which holds there may be Salvation in both, then of
that which holds there can be salvation but in one. For holding with the first,
I am safe wheresoever I am, but holding with the latter, I must be in danger
wheresoever I am. I say, wheresoever I am; for I am not only in danger of my
salvation, if I be in that Church wherein I think there is no Salvation, but
also if I be in that Church out of which I think there can be no Salvation;
because I confine Salvation to one of these, which though I think it be in this
alone, yet it may be in the other alone; this may suffice to satisfy that
great Argument of our Adversaries, wherein they so much glory, and if it be
possible to moderate their severity against us.

Many other motives unto Charity might be showed, but these briefly shall
suffice. The one is, that we are Chrians, and therefore brethren, and so ought
to love as brethren; Another is, in that I hope our intentions are good, and
that none maintains a false opinion perversely against his conscience.

Now let me say unto all Christians, as S. Paul does to the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
6.11, 12, 13. O ye Christians, our mouth is open unto you, and not only so, but
our heart is enlarged, not only to the Roman, but even to the East Church, and
to as many as call upon the name of our Lord Jesus. Ye are not straightened in us,
but ye are straightened in your own bowels, now for a recompense in the same, I
speak unto you as unto Brethren, be ye also enlarged!

Let me bespeak all learned Prelates and Pastors on all sides, as S. Austine
Epist. 147. does Proculianus, a Bishop, and a favourer of the Donatists, I pray
and beseech thee (says he) if there be any good disposition in thee, which
many do extol, and command, if it be not a counterfeit courtesy by reason of
worldly honor, that the tender bowels of pity and compassion begin to yerne
in thee, and that you would have these controversies discussd between us at the
length, not by wrangling and railing one at another, but by fervent prayers and
earnest supplications unto Almighty God, and by comparing all things peaceably,
and examining them in the spirit of meekness, lest the poor ignorant people
which now yield to, and willingly obey our jurisdiction and command over them,
press us with this their submission and dutiful obedience to us in the day of
the Lord Jesus, and say, they did as their leaders directed them, but rather by
our unfeigned love and charity, being together with us drawn from those
bypath of error and dissension, they should be directeed into the right way
of truth and peace. I will concude all with this prayer, that it would please
God to inspire continually the Universal Church, with the spirit of truth,
unity and concord, and grant that all they who do confess his holy name, may
agree in the truth of his holy word, and live in unity and godly love! And
although we cannot at the first attain to that perfection to be of one mind,
yet let us begin to be charitable, and bear with one another; for who knows but
that by entertaining this bond of peace, we may in good time come to the unity
of the spirit; which he heartily wishes, and daily prays for, who is

Thine in Christ, W.P.


