Quatuor Novissima: OR, MEDITATIONS UPON The Four Last Things, DELIVERED In
four COMMONPLACE DISCOURSES:

BY Thomas Longland M.A. and Fellow of S. JOHN'S College in Cambridge.

O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end,

Deuteronomy 32.29. (...)

Eccles. 7. Haec spirituatis est exercitii summa, haec forma studii
spiritualis, ut sapienter disponamus praesentia nostra, recogitemus in
amaritudine animae nostrae praeterita, futura quoque solicit provideamus.

Bern. in Solen. Pet. and Paul. Ser. 2. London, Printed by A. Maxey for J.
Rothwell, at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-Row, Cheapside. 1657.

TO THE REVEREND AND LEARNED, Anthony Tuckney D. D. Regius Professor; And
Master of S. JOHN'S College in Cambridge.
Reverend SIR,
THese few Discourses, which (next to their being Gods Sacred Truth) derive all
their Worth, from your vouchsafing an Acceptance of them, had not seen the
light, unless you had cast a smiling Aspect upon them and their Author. Eccl.
1.7.
The grateful Rivers acknowledge their Homage, by sending their Streams to the
Ocean from whence they were received.

Dumb Creatures teach me to speak, and thankfully to acknowledge, That next to
God, you are One, to whom I owe what I have or can do. You have been the
Conduit, through which he has conveyed much good to my outward, many Mercies
to my inward Man. I desire to praise him, to testify my Thanks to you, by
Devoting these Meditations to His Honor, your Patronage and Perusing. Let
others commend their Patrons; desire of Praise, implies weakness in the
Subject; your Brighter Name stands not in need of such a shadow as men's
Applause, to make it more Renowned in the world. Native Worth is ever more
respected, than Adventitious Glory: Yet excuse me, if I say you are one who in
these last days, delight to Meditate of the last things, who in these worst
days, put not the evil day far from you, or him who presents it to your view.
Your Acceptance of these Papers, does make them more welcome to those who are
looking Sion-ward, and does encourage him in what may promote his own or their
journey thither: who is

St. John's Col: Camb. March 30. 1657. Yours, In all Obligations Christian and
Civil, Thomas Longland.

Christian READER,
SUch thou art, or my desire is thou should be, into whose hands these Papers
are fallen. I did once think to have saved my self the pains in writing, though
not thee the trouble in the perusal of an Epistle. But being most privy to my
own thoughts in the publishing these Discourses to the World, and also the best
Judge of my own Intentions in their composure, I thought it convenient to
acquaint thee, That these Meditations were the Result of some vacant hours; the
occasion of which was (what I pray may be their effect upon thee;) namely, A
desire so to number my days, that I might apply my heart to wisdom: Which
afterward I did deliver in a Learned Auditory, yet contrary to my first
thoughts. I since resolved to communicate them unto others; not doubting but
they may (through Gods Blessing) be useful in the World; and may in some
measure testify my desire to acknowledge my Obligations to him, who has
Honored me in the Acceptance of them to his Patronage. These, and such like,
were the Reasons of adventuring this small Essay of my Studies to vulgar view.
If any ambiguity in the Expressions be taken notice of, know, The safest
Interpretation was my intention: If any obscurity appears in the Phrase,
consider, They were not delivered, much less suited Ad Populum, To the Vulgar:
And should I have altered the phrase, (in some places) the sense would have
been inverted. If any thing else want an Apology, let thy Charity find an
Excuse. Psalm. 30.12.
Remember thy Tongue is thy Glory, and is better used in Praying for, than
Censaring of him, who is

Cambridge March 30. 1657. Thine, To promote thy Eternal Welfare, T. L.

HEB. 9.27. It is appointed to men once to die, but after this the Judgment.


COnsiderations of death to living men, Charron of Wisdom, lib. 2. c. 11. Sect.
2.
though usually most unwelcome; yet are the most profitable to promote the Duty
of Preparation thereunto: for which purpose I have made choice of these words.
And because I will not build without a Foundation, lest I erect a tottering
Structure, I will first speak something to the scope of these words, and then
deduce a Proposition, which shall be the Basis of my future Discourse.

These words (as a Learned man notes) are alleged by the Author to the
Hebrews, Paraeus in locum.
as an Argument to evince, or reason to prove, that Christ neither could, nor
should offer oftener then once, which is clear, if we consult the precedent and
subsequent words of the Text. But it being not my intention to speak to them as
they stand in relation to the Context, but as they make an entire Proposition;
I shall not be solicitous after any inquiry of their relative connection; but as
they are in Thesi. they are the declaration of the Decree of Heaven concerning
our latter end: Statutum est, etc, It is appointed to men once to die, but
after this the Judgment.

I shall speak to them in order, 1. Death. 2. Judgment.


I. Of DEATH.
That Death is inevitable.

A short, yet sure Truth, as we shall see in the sequel of this Discourse.

Were it not that the daily spectacles of mortality, which we see, the deep
groans of dying men, (...). Chrysostom. Sermon. de Fid. and leg. Naturali.
Immortalia ne speres: monet annus and almum quae rapit hora diem. Horat. lib.
4. Od. 7.
which echo again, which was the usual Salutation of one, to Philip of
Macedon, That he was a man. I say, If these did not convince us, of the truth
of this Doctrine; I might appeal to those sudden fits, and fainting distempers,
the most healthful body does sometimes perceive in it self. To the course of
Nature, which shows us, as the longest day has its closure in the night, even
so the longest life must have its period by death.

But as I do believe there is not amongst us such an Epicure, who believes not
a life to come after death; so I in charity hope there is not such an Atheist
as does believe he shall not die. I will pass this therefore, and proceed to
discover the nature of death, which I shall endeavor in the resolution of
these Questions: 1. Quid sit? What it is? 2. Quot uplex sit? Of how many sorts
it is? 3. Quare sit? Wherefore it is?


For the First. In the resolution of this Question, What death is? Because it
is a privation, I shall not curiously seek out a positive definition, but speak
to it as it may be considered, 1. Formaliter in se. 2. Accidentaliter ad aliud.


First, What it is formally, and in it self.

Death is the separation of life from its subject: Death is not only a
cessation from action, but a negation of existence: for the soul may in a
swooning fit cease to operate, not to animate. There may be a suspension of
action, where there is not a privation of its principle; but death separateth
the soul the fountain of vital action, from the body the subject thereof.

Secondly, We will view death in what it is Accidentaliter ad aliud,
Accidentally and in reference to something without it self. And that to 1 The
Godly. 2 The Wicked.


First, To the Godly. And so it is a rest from their labors. (...). Chrysostom.
Hom. 51. de Sanct. Mar. Boren. and Pro^^^c.
Blessed are they that die in the Lord from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, and their works follow them, Rev. 14.13.
They rest from 1 Sin. 2 Sorrows.


Both which the holiest of men are exercised with, and subject to, whilst they
live in the world; they labor under the former, in the latter, whilst in this
dying life. But when they dye, that which does separate them from their bodies,
does unite them closer unto God. Their death is the Funeral of their sins, the
resurrection of their Graces: that which does unpinion them of mortality, does
also translate them into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. So that Death
is but a change to a holy Job; Job 14.14. Act. 7.60 2 Cor. 5.10
a sleep to a blessed Steven; a dissolution of the earthly house to a holy
Paul, whilst by it he accounts, not to be found naked, but to be clothed
upon with his house which is from heaven; to have mortality swallowed up of
life, and by the death of his body, Romans 7.24
to enjoy his wished for deliverance, from the body of death. And this for the
first, Death to the godly is a rest from their sins.

2. sorrows. Joseph's feet shall no longer be detained in the stocks neither
shall he complain of the iron which entered into his soul^ Nor any of the Saints
and holy Martyrs shall at all complain of the incessant malice of their
enemies. Death shall give them a resting place; for in the grave the weary shall
be at rest; There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
oppressor, Job 3.17, 18 And all this shall not be the effect of a Stoical
apathy or stupefactive cessation from sense and motion: But by an introduction
into real joy. That soul which was before glewed unto the body, shall therefore
be dissolved that it may be with Christ, and that which whilst it was in the
world, was but at best a prisoner of hope shall then be set at liberty, and
have eternity wherein to expatiate; in the enjoyment of those mansions of glory
which God has provided for such whom he shall account worthy to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in light. (...) V^ri. Septu.
The righteous also are taken away from the evil to come, Isai. 57.1. and their
graves are but beds wherein they rest in the evening of their days.

And thus you see, that as to live is Christ, so to die is gain to believers,
whilst by it they rest from sin and sorrow.

Our next work is to consider death in its reference to the Wicked. And to them
it is the beginning of evil, the entry of their woe. They are the men who have
hope only in this life, and therefore are of all men the most miserable. That
death which in its intention is to put out the candle of a good man's life, does
but snuff it, and make it burn the brighter, whilst their life of grace is
consummate by being swallowed up in a never-ending life of Glory. This shall
cause the candle of the wicked to go out in a stench, their Sun to set in a
cloud, their flattering day of prosperity to end in a dismal night of black
eternal horror: whilst by it, they shall at once be separated from their
bodies, and from the presence of God, in whose favor is life, and from his
right hand, where are pleasures for evermore. And thus I have answered this
Question, Quid sit? What death is?

Secondly. Quotuplex sit? Of how many sorts it is?

And Death in its complexe notion represents it self under a threefold respect,
(...). Chrysostom. Sermon. 56.
1 Corporal. 2 Spiritual. 3 Eternal.


These three unnatural branches, spring from one root; to wit, Sin. The First
is by sin. The Second in sin. The Third for sin.


The First is competent to both, the Godly, and the wicked, and has been
spoken to already. Let us consider a little the second, Spiritual Death, and
this also hatha double consideration, 1. A Death in sin. 2. A Death to sin.


The Apostle speaks of the former to the believing Colossians, Col. 3.13 where
he tells them, that they being dead in sins and trespasses, God has quickened
them together with Christ. And thus the wicked are said to be dead whilst they
live; there being a separation between God, the Author of Spiritual life; and
their souls, the due subjects thereof, by reason of their sins, Psalm. 59.2. And
this is the estate of every one of us until God says unto us, Live.

A Death to sin. Secundum Spiritum ^ mors est, non credere vina quae c^edeb^t,
non jacere vana; quae faciebat. August. Sermon. 121. de Resurrect. more.
And this is the estate of a lively Christian; of one who is passed from death
to life. This is to be dead with Christ; and is a testimony to him in whom it
is, that he shall live with him, Romans 6.8. This is not, as the former, the
result of sin, but the gift of God; and of this death there is a twofold
testimony.

First, A death to the Law. That is to say, when we are brought by the
threatenings in the Law to know that there is no salvation or life to be found
by the Law, but in Christ, and this I doubt not to assert for the meaning of S.
Paul, Gal. 2.19. For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live
unto God.

Secondly, A dying to the World. A de^pising all things therein, or whatsoever
it counts admirable for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ. And thus
to do, is to be made conformable to the death of Christ, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10.

But I haste to pass over these, which though fair fruit, yet never grew on
this tree; profitable Doctrine, but not arising from the present Text, spoken
to by transition, rather then regular deduction from the subject I am upon.

I proceed to consider death in its third acception, Eternal Death. This is the
inlet of Hell, the sum of misery, the second death, (which I suppose is not
excluded, yet not primarily intended in the words) and has power over none,
but such as have had no part in the first Resurrection. THIS is the dregs of
the fury of the Lord, the Cup of his sorest indignation, which requires
eternity, to drink it to the bottom. This is the gnawing worm and unquenchable
fire the sense whereof does cause them on whom it is inflicted to meditate
terror for ever. THESE are the sparks which the wicked have kindled from the
fire of their own lusts; and wherein God will cause them to lie down in sorrow.
THIS is that Devouring fire, who among us shall dwell with it? Who among us
shall dwell with these everlasting burnings? Every one shall thus die for sin,
who is before dead in sin.

The next Question I am to resolve, is, Quare sit, Wherefore it is? which will
be answered by inquiring, Vnde sit? Whence it is? And there is a threefold rise
of Death: 1. Satan. 2. Man. 3. God. The first by Temptation. The second by
Consent. The third by Infliction.


1. SATAN is the grand contriver of man's destruction, and therefore is the
Author of it, not by a Physical but moral causality. He is the Father of sin,
(...). Jam: 1.15.
Sin the parent of death He who is the Ancient of days tells us, the Devil is
(...), A murderer from the beginning. And through man's cowardice in consenting
to iniquity, he who at the first did but usurp, has now (...), the power of
death: and is not to be overcome, but by Christ who is stronger then he. And
blessed be God that the Author of Death is overcome by him who is the Prince of
life, Heb. 2.14, 15.
and the Author and finisher of that faith against which the gates of hell shall
not prevail

But 2. Man consenting. This is another cause of death: to prove this, see that
remarkable place, Romans 5.12. Hic enim duo concurrunt tentator et obtemperator.
Zeged. loc^ commu.
As by one man sin entered into the world and Death by sin, and so death passed
upon all men for that all have sinned. We were no sooner children of Adam, but
we were sons of Death. Our first Father Adam, and we in him did eat of that
apple, the core whereof does yet stick in our throats, and will at length choke
us one by one. Sin is our own work, and death is the Wages of sin, which brings
me to the third cause, God inflicting. If man by his sin says he will die, God
by his decree says he shall die; so that man shall have his will though it end
in his woe. If Adam will needs entaile an hereditary curse upon his posterity,
God will so ratify it by his supreme Act in heaven, that it shall never be cut
off, it shall be inevitable, seeing he has appointed for men once to die. And
thus we have the resolution of these three Questions. I shall only answer an
objection, and so proceed to use.

is this true? It is appointed to men, men indefinitely; to all men to die.
What is the reason we read of some persons who did not, of some who shall not
taste of Death?

I. Answer, Particular exceptions destroy not the verity of general rules:
because some go out of the backdoor, we do not therefore cease to say that the
gate is the ordinary way out of the house; and because some has not seen
death, or others shall not, we need not cease to affirm, It is appointed for
men once to die; for men are said to die either properly, and really, or by way
of aequivalency, when they ungergo a Change equal with death. Thus did Enoch
when he was translated; Elijah, when carried to heaven in a fiery Chariot, and
this shall they undergo who shall be found alive when Christ shall come to
judgment. The essence of Death or rather its nature, not consisting in
cinerefaction, but (as I have before affirmed) in a separation of life from its
subject, which in Gods people is accompanied with a blessed disunion, of sin
from their soul. They are no longer subjects of sin, when once vessels of
eternal glory.

The next thing in order of method will be to make some inference from what
has been said, and let me premise this, it will be wisdom for us to look this
King of Terror in the face, and to consider whether we are able to encounter
with him or no; and what Nero did when he heard he was sentenced by the Senate,
as an enemy to the Public Weal, to be punished More majorum, despairing to
live, he tried the points of the Ponyards wherewith he had resolved to dye, to
feel their sharpness, before he sheathed them in his bowels. So it would be
wisdom in us. by serious reflection upon our frailty, to die daily, that so
the day of our death may not surprise us unawares. Storms are most terrible
when they surprise us suddenly, and without a shelter. Death will then be most
unwelcome, when it overtakes us unprepared or unresolved to grapple with it.

I shall now endeavor to apply this Doctrine.

If this be true, That death is inevitable; their graves with their own teeth;
How many are there whose (...), are their (...) whilst they are Somno vinoque
sepulti before their passing bell has tolled; and even whilst their bones are
full of marrow, Job. 20 11.
their souls are replete with the sins of their youth. These are such who put
far from them the evil day; They consider not the days of darkness, neither
think of them any more then (as the Profane proverb is) Their dying day. Their
inward thought is, that not only their houses, Psalm 49.11.
but they shall abide for ever, not considering there is a God in whose hands
are their life, breath and all their ways; that their breath is in their
nostrils, and their life ere long may be as water spilton the ground; that it
will lay the greatest Prince leveld with the poorest Peasant; Pallida mors
aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas Regumque turres Hor at. lib. 1. Od. 4.
that Death regards not the scepter of a mortal Prince, nor compassionates the
sad estate of any nor will be bribed to give a release from natures bonds; that
the grizly hand of death will cover many a naked breast (which formerly has
been the looking-glass of lust, and pride) with a winding sheet: That this
which is called death, (...) Chrysostom. Sermon. de Fid. and Leg Nature. Psalm. 49.14
shall cool the valor of all the hot-spurs in the world, who in their life
time could not put up an injury without a challenge. That they shall roll in
the dust, who sometimes did wallow in pleasures, like the swine in the mire;
when like sheep they are laid in the grave, and death shall feed upon them. And
how few of the heirs of life, do walk as if they were to pass to an
inheritance, but after death? whilst some do either with persecuted Elijah, or
peevish Jonah, seek after death, exceedingly desirous of the penny, but yet so
delicate, that they they are loath to work in the heat of the day. Others of
them, though they have set their faces toward the new Jerusalem, and are on
their journey thither, yet by the way they remember the fleshpots of Egypt,
Number. 11.5
and their present enjoyments do make them the less active in the expectation
of future felicity. God is forced to cast wormwood upon the breasts of the
Creature, that he may make them the more earnestly draw water out of the wells
of Salvation.

Others of them conceive, God may have honor by their lives: and therefore
they are loath they should be deprived of such an opportunity, by their deaths.
For this cause possibly the Psalmist might say, Psalm 102.24. O my God take me
not away in the midst of my days. And upright Hezekiah might beg for a
reprieve after God had said unto him, Thou shall dye, and not live. All these,
though their intentions might plead an excuse, yet their actions are not
commendable. Yet we know, a found constitution is consistent with some qualmes:
and we ought to conclude, that strength of grace is consistent with some
weakness in this particular. Gods people cease not to be men by becoming
Christians; as they are the former they may be afraid, as the latter, they do
dare to dye. Aaron upon Mount Hor can be stripped of his clothes, Number. 20.18
and without repining go to bed. Blessed Simeon will depart in peace, Luke 2.29
30.
after his eyes have seen the Lords Salvation. Act. 21.13
The holy Apostle is indifferent whether to live or dye, but if it be for the
name of the Lord Jesus he is ready not to be bound, but to dye also. Thus we
see the Shepherd of Israel, has sheep as well as Lambs in his fold; men of
riper years, as well as babes in Christianity. Such as dare encounter the King
of terrors, as well as such who are afraid at his presence. Vide Bullinger. in
1 Thessalonians. 4.8 Morte^n mali vitant sancti in vitant, quibus non tam vitae hujus
interitus: quam aeternae interitus est. Heidfel. Sphis Theo Phil. c. 38. p. 908.
But all believers have this happiness, though few live in the comfort of it,
that death to them is but a sleep, the grave an hiding place, both a resting
from their labors: their passage from this vale of misery, is but an entrance
into their Masters joy. This notwithstanding, is not sufficient, for a
Christian to know, that though he die, yet his life is hid with Christ in God.
He must so dye, that God may be glorified by his death; the which that every
one of us may do, we must prepare our selves for so great a change. The which
preparation consists in three things, 1. Dying unto sin. 2. Living unto
righteousness. 3. Mortification to the world.


A word to each of these

First, unto sin. * The sting of death is sin; 2 Cor. 15.56
he then that dies unto sin, destroys death. And frequent reflections upon
death, would prove an excellent means hereunto. But oh! how hard is it (though
we have daily Spectacles of others mortality) to live under convictions of our
own! we should live more in heaven, if we did believe we were to die, and so
to go from hence. This would season our discourse, lives, and check the
exorbitancy of our rising lusts to consider it is appointed for all men once to
die, and consequently alleviate the fear of death. For that which makes death
terrible to a considerative mind, is not so much the pain which is felt in the
separation of soul and body; (for I doubt not but men undergo more sharp
agonies (as to fense) in a fit of the stone, (...). Chrysostom. expos. Psalm. 116.
or gout, or such acute diseases, then at the moment of their dissolution) nor
is it altogether that natural abhorrency of an annihilation, or destruction of
being. which makes death formidable; but that which represents death sitting
upon a pale horse, as described Rev. 6.8. is conscience of sin, and thereby
obligation unto hell following after death: but a believer may use with a holy
confidence, what sometimes presuming Agag said, 1 Samuel 15 32.
Surely the bitterness of death is past; and with the blessed Apostle may
close his eyes in peace with a (...), etc. Romans 8.83.39.
I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, etc. shall be able to separate me from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

2. Living unto righteousness. Mala more put^nda non est qu^m bona vita
praecesserit. August. de civit: Dei lib. 1. cap. 11.
A holy life will usher in a happy death. This is that which does also evidence
our dying unto sin, and will make us die more peaceably in our beds. We find,
that they who lived most up amongst the heathens to the principles of morality,
were least afraid to die; when those who lived the most rudely, were most
unwilling to leave the world. Seneca, or Cate, when about to die, seem
exceeding ready, when a wicked Nero, whose conscience told him what his mouth
did utter, Sueton: in vita Neronis.
Vivo deformiter ac turpiter, does depart the world with an Vsque adeone mori
miserum est and encourages himself to his own ruin, with an (...).

It becomes not, It becomes not thee, O Nero, to be so daunted, go to,
encourage thy self. Upright Hezekiah had not such cause to weep, when the
Prophet brought those tidings to him, Isai. 38.1, 2
that he should dye, and not live, seeing he was so well prepared for death,
that he could appeal to God, that he had walked before him in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and done that which was good in his sigh. David his father also,
a man after Gods own heart, did thus prepare for death, and after he had served
his own generation, by the will of God fell asleep, Act. 13 35.

Thirdly, Mortification to the world; this will prepare us for the stroke of
death. Those things which are glewed together, are not without much difficulty
dis-united; and when our affections are set upon earthly things, we shall not
willingly think of being covered up in dust. A bird in the hand is worth two in
the bush: and men are not easily persuaded to part with present delights for an
expectation of future happiness. The man who fares deliciously every day,
will not willingly hear of being meat for worms. He who is gorgeously arrayed
(as the rich man in the Gospel) will not easily strip himself to a
winding sheet, or they that stretch themselves upon their couches, will be
willing to be laid in the grave. Charies the Fifth.
Haec sunt que faciunt invitos mori, These are the things which make us
unwilling to die, was a sober answer of that prudent Emperor to a magnificent
Duke of Venice in the like case. But now a child of God, whose Treasure is in
Heaven, desires to be there himself also, leaving the world (...), as the
Apostle his phrase is, Phil. 1.23. having a desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ; who by his death does enable his to die to earthly things, that
their heart may soar a of^, and aspire to that place, where he their treasure
is; where their souls being sequestered from earthly comforts, they drink no
longer at the broken cisterns of the Creature but derive all their happiness
from him with whom their springs are found. Thus those precious Jewels (their
immortal souls) shall there shine in their native luster, where not trampled
upon by filthy sense, they approach to God, and are made more like to him from
whom their essence was received. And thus much shall serve for the first use.

Is Death inevitable? under, to strengthen us against the loss of friends: we
usually say, patience perforce is small hearts ease, but yet we may make a
virtue (...) this necessity of mortality imposed upon us, to help our patience
in this particular. The wise heathen could comfort himself under the loss of
his sons, with this expression, Scio me mortales genuisse; (...). Laert. Diog:
vita Anaxag.
I know I have begot such who are mortal. But a holy Christian, who knows
that God has appointed, and not fate imposed, a necessity of Death to all, may
with greater comfort support himself with a Scio Deum hoc decrevisse; I know
God has appointed it: and with the Psalmist, hold his peace seeing the Lord
has done it. David has learned this lesson exceeding well: and we see him
take it out to the amazement of his Servants, 2 Samuel 12.21, 22, 23. even to
their saying with admiration, What thing is this that thou have done! Much more
may we comfort our selves, if we know they did die in the Lord: The doubt of
which possibly might be one reason of the impatience, and immoderate grief of
the aforesaid holy man, for the death of Absalon. Were our relations holy in
their lives, they are happy after death: They have left us, we have not lost
them, but shall receive them, or rather be received to them at the last day,
when death shall be swallowed up into victory. It Is the Apostle his comparison,
That which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: neither is the body
raised in glory, except sown in dishonor, 1 Cor. 15.36 43. This is rather envy
than piety, to bewail the death of such, Charron of Wisdom, lib. 3. c. 27.
seeing their absence from us, speaks their presence with their and our
chiefest good. Their death is but a departure to a better life. Hence St. Paul,
when he speaks of his death for the cause of his blessed Savior, (...).
Ch^ysost. in Phil. 2.12.
and the service of the Church, Phil. 2.12. does not call for their tears, but
rejoying. The serious belief of a Resurrection, and this life which is to come,
would be then a great support, under our loss of friends for the present; 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
or else the Apostle showed himself no good Rhetorician, when he makes use of
such an Argument, to persuade believers from sorrowing, as others which have no
such hope. But whilst I speak for this, Humanitatis vero officia and
misericordiae opera (quod and alibi monuimus) per hoc non damnantur etc.
Bulling. in 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14.
I would not seem the least to countenance or insinuate the other extreme; I
mean, that (...), which is more common in the world. Many men, who would not be
counted (...), men without hope, yet are (...), without natural affection, who
never think they shall live, till their relations die; and follow them with
less sorrow to their graves, then they return with laughter to their Chests.
The which though they labor to conceal, yet their neglect of Funeral Rites to
their deceased friends, does give others occasion to suspect it. If you ask
them a reason of this omission, their answer is at hand; and because you shall
know they speak not without the book, you shall have the sense, if not the
words of the Father, O mnis ista curatio funeris, August. de Civit. Dei, lib.
2. c. 12.
conditio sepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis sunt vivorum solatia, quam
subsidia mortuorum; Funeral so^^mnities are rather for the comfort of the
living, than the advantage of the dead; and therefore are with less trouble
omitted, than cost performed. But I could wish such to look a little further,
and they shall soon perceive what ill use they make of that Doctrine: Nec ideo
tamen contemnenda, August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 1. c. 13.
and abjicienda sunt corpora defunctorum, etc. We must not therefore cast those
away, from whom God has withdrawn his breath, especially those bodies which
have been the organs of the Holy Spirit to every good work. God will not be
well pleased that men should respect those bodies that were the Temples of the
Holy Spirit, no more than dung, which is cast forth into the open Air: That the
Stones of the Sanctuary should be poured forth in the top of every street; that
the precious Sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, should be esteemed as
earthen pitchers; nor that the Body of a man should be buried as the Carcass of
a dog. The same God who has commanded us, not to sorrow, as men without hope,
does yet allow we should mourn as those, in whose hearts resideth love. That we
weep, Vid. Bullin. optime de hac re disserentem, Dec. 3. Ser. 10. de Inst.
Eccles. Mat. 23.27, 29.
will speak us men; that in this case we grieve with moderation, will show us
Christians. Indeed our Savior seems to chide such who did build the Tombs of
the Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous: but (take notice)
they were such, who themselves were as graves that did not appear, and like
unto whited Sepulchers, Luke 11.44, 47.
seeing it was not affection to the persons of the Prophets, but respect to
their own praise, which put them upon that Religious show, yet Hypocritical
action; they persecuting the Lords anointed, whilst they pretend to do his
Prophets no harm: yea, to reverence their memory after death, whom their
Parents not only hated, but attempted to kill when alive. Notwithstanding
this, we find it the practice of the Saints, to bewail the loss of their
friends, and decently to interre them. Even the Father of the faithful, Genesis
23.2.
when Sarah is dead, comes to mourn, and to weep; and with no less care than
love, does provide a Burial-place for her. Thus when Jacob had yielded up the
ghost, the youngest Joseph shows the strongest love, and fell upon his fathers
face, and wept upon him; and kissed him, and commands his servants the
Physicians to embalm him, Genesis 50.1, 2. and made a mourning for his father,
ver. 10. There was his natural affection as a Son, yet but seven days; there
his moderation as a Christian, (...), Eus. Eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 4.
who had hopes of a Resurrection: which the Egyptians not expecting, were more
extravagant in their sorrow, and mourned for him seventy days. We find it
also promised as a blessing to Abijah the Son of Jeroboam, that all Israel
should mourn for him, and bury him; which was performed, as to him, so to good
Josiah, whom the Prophet Jeremiah lamented for, and all the singing-men and the
singing-women spoke of; and that not for once, but made it an Ordinance in
Israel to this day, composing Elegies upon him: when as wicked Jehoiakim, 2 Chronicles. 35.25.
as a curse upon him, had no other Monument, but the burial of an Ass, drawn
forth, and cast beyond the gates of Jerusalem; neither did any lament for him,
saying, Jer. 22.18, 19.
Ah Lord, or Ah his glory! Not to multiply Examples, let that of our Savior be
the last, who was decently interred, as for otehrs, so this account, Vid.
Polan. Syntag l. 6. c. 19.
That we might be careful that our burials of the dead may be so comely, that
it may answer somewhat the hopes we have of a Resurrection unto life. Fear of
Superstition, must not thrust us upon a certainty of Inhumanity; the former is
not to be allowed, the latter must ever be avoided. The Medium, is, A due
respect to those after their deaths, whom we have loved in their lives: which
will testify to the world, they lived desired, whilst they die lamented. We in
the mean time moderating our grief with this Consideration, It is appointed
unto men once to die.

HEB. 9.27. But after this the Judgment.


II. Of JUDGMENT.
HAving spoken of Death out of this place; I now come to speak of what is after
it, to wit, Judgment. Although possibly by Judgment may be here meant, the
particular Judgment of every man; (to wit) immediately after the separation of
his Soul and Body, by Death. Yet where God has not expressly set us bounds, I
suppose it is not necessary for us to confine our selves. There being therefore
no such necessity of that restriction, I shall take my liberty to speak of the
general Judgment at the end of the World. In my ensuing Discourse, I shall not
attempt any Division in this entire Proposition, but deduce this Doctrine: That
God has appointed a Day in which he will Judge the World.

The express words of the Apostle, Act. 17.31. I shall not heap up many
Arguments, either from Scripture or Reason, (...). Chrysostom. de Laz. Con 4.
to prove the truth of this Proposition; though upon due consideration, many
from both would crowd into my thoughts. But I wave them: for I suppose my self
to speak to Christians who believe, not to Infidels who may deny, at least
doubt, of this truth. But if I must needs prove it, I will go no further than
that usual expression of men, to put an end to strife, As God shall judge me.
The frequency of which in men's mouths, does testify to their faces, that God
has appointed a day wherein to judge the world. For the due understanding of
which Truth, let these particulars be considered: 1 Judex, The Judge. 2
Judicandi, The persons to be judged. 3 Modus Judicii, The manner of Judgment.
4 Judicii Eventus, The Event of the Judgment.


For the first, The Judge of the World, attributed sometimes to God, sometimes
to Jesus Christ.

To God, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Eccles. 3.17. I said in
my heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked. But I suppose, those
and the like places, may be understood of Gods Providential Exercise of
Judgment in the World, as being the Moderator and Governor thereof, and not
of the Vltimate and Definitive Sentence at the last Day: Ideo antem cum diem
Judicii Dci dicimus addimus ultimum, vcl novissimum: quia and nunc judicat, and
ab humani generis initio judicavit. August. de Cir. Dei, lib. 20. c. 1.
for thus the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the
Son, Joh. 5.22. not but that the whole Trinity do exercise this Work: for Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa; but in a more singular manner Christ, as he
is (...): and that upon these Accounts. 1 As it is a part of his Regal Office.
2 As he is iDELEGATUS DEI to this Work.


FIRST, As it is a part of his Kingly Office to judge others, to absolve the
Innocent, to condemn the Nocent: this is a Kingly Work. And that Christ has
Authority to do this, is evident; for in the day of his Inauguration, when the
Diadem of Glory was first set upon his head, (to wit) after his Resurrection,
he tells us, All Power is given unto him both in Heaven and in Earth: He drunk
of the Brook in the way, and here he did lift up his head. But in the last Day,
he shall much more be higher than his enemies; when they who in their popular
fury cried out, We have no King, but Caesar, Videbunt ergo Judaei Deum and
hominem semper regnantem quem negande desperaverunt morientem. Aug. de Sym. ad
Catech. tract. 4. c. 8.
and would not have him to rule over them, shall be brought before him, and
slain before his face. They who would not kiss the Scepter of his Grace, shall
be bruised like a potters vessel, by the iron Rod of his Justice.

Secondly, assigned, substituted, appointed him to, or committed to him the
Judgment of the World. See Act. 17.31. He has appointed a day wherein he will
judge the World in Righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained. And so
Romans 2.16. God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ: Romans 14.10. 2.
Cor. 3.10.
And hence Gods Tribunal is called the Judgment Seat of Christ. And thus we
see Quis Judex. SECONDLY,

Quinam Judicandi? Who are to be judged? The Doctrine tells us in general, the
World; but more particularly 1 Angels, 2 Men.


FIRST, Angels, that is to say, The evil ones, they shall be judged: for
therefore is it they are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto
the Judgment of the great day, Jude 6. This the Devils believe, Mat. 9.29.
and tremble because of: and therefore was that cry, Art thou come to torment
us before the time?

But SECONDLY, Man; 1 Good Men, 2 Evil Men.


For, says the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 5.10. We must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ. But yet this shall be after a diverse manner: THE
former, to be declared just; THE latter, to be condemned as wicked. The former
shall have Confidence when he shall appear, (...). Chrysostom in Genesis 1. Hom. 8.
1 John 2.28. The latter shall not only be ashamed, but shall not stand in the
Judgment, Psalm. 1.5.

I now proceed to the third thing to be considered, The manner of this
Judgment. And in the right stating of this, these things must be observed: 1
Res Judicandae, The things judged. 2 Norma Judicii, The Rule of Justice. 3
Assessores in Judicio, The Assessors in Judgment.


FIRST, The things to be judged. The matters to be inquired after in this great
Assizes, at this general Audit, and what they are, is resolved Eccles. 12.14.
God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it
be evil, or whether it be good. This Judge of Heaven and Earth, is Sagax animi.
(...). Chrysostom Hom. 25. de fut. Judic. tom. 6.
He will suffer no person, no thing to escape his most exact scrutiny, to avoid
his uncontrolled Sentence. He himself tells us, Mat. 12.36. There is not an
idle word, but we shall give an account of it. The Apostle Paul goes somewhat
further than this, Romans 2.16. In that day when God shall judge, (...), the
secrets of men's hearts. And if God do so, what is there hid, that shall not be
made manifest? The Adulterer, who waits for the twilight, and to whom the
morning is as the shadow of death, shall in that day be made manifest at
noontide to the view of Men and Angels. And if his being known here, put him in
the terrors of the shadow of death, Job 24.17
how terrible shall that day be unto him, when what he has done in secret,
shall be proclaimed upon the housetop? For look as the Apostle says, Heb.
4.13. (...), etc. There is not any creature that is not manifest in his sight,
but all things are naked, (...). Oe^umen. in locum.
(...), and opened unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do: So shall they
be to all the world at the day of Judgment: for, there is nothing covered,
which shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known, Matthew. 10.26.
The hand of Justice at that time, shall wipe away many a blot, which has been
cast upon the people of God, their name, actions, cause, by the ungrateful
world; and shall pluck off many a Mask from the face of such, (...) etc.
Chrysostom. de Pro. lib. 1.
who have covered hatred by deceit, and make them known in the midst of the
congregation. He shall then, by the Touchstone of his Truth, distinguish gold
from that which glisters, and is not such; and shall take every piece of
reprobate silver, and cast it into a furnace of unquenchable fire, not to
purify, but to consume it. In this world, Saul is sporting in his Palace,
while David is flying as a Partridge upon the Mountains; Ahab is stretching
himself upon his Couch, whilst righteous Naboth is breathing his last under a
heap of stones; Ahasuerus and his Courtiers are drinking wine in bowls, whilst
holy Esther, with the Church of God, are weeping and wailing, covered in
sackcloth and ashes: Ps. 37.6, 7. Heb. 11.37.
VIOLENCE covers the wicked as a garment; their eyes stand out with fatness,
they have more than heart can wish: whilst the godly wander about in sheepskins
and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented. The proud are called
happy; yea, they that work wickedness, are exalted. Vide Aug. de civ. Dei l.
20. c. 2, 3.
The Chaff and the Corn are mixed together in the same floor; the Wheat and the
Tares grow together in the same field. But in that great and notable day of the
Lord, when God shall appear with his fan, and thoroughly purge his floor, Mal.
4.1. Hic est qui dicitur, dies judicii. August. de civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 35.
he will separate the precious from the vile; and all the proud, yea, all that
do wickedly, shall be stubble, and that day shall burn them up. Then shall the
world discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves
God, and him that serves him not, Mal. 3.18.

Secondly, NORMA JUDICII, The Rule of Justice. This also must be considered in
Courts of Judicature; and because that Lex est norma Judicii, we shall see that
God will proceed legally also: for, as for heathens, who having not the law,
are a law unto themselves; if they sin without the law, they shall perish
without the law, Romans 2.12. They then shall be judged by this Rule, (to wit)
the law of Nature. As for such, Secondly, who have sinned in the law, they
shall be judged by the law, Romans 2.12. and so that law which was ordained unto
life, through their breach thereof shall be found to death; as the Apostle
speaks in his own person elsewhere, in another case. For such then who have
heard of the Moral Law, it shall be the Rule of their Judgment, but yet
closer. Revel. 20.12. The Apostle John speaking of the last Judgment he saw in
a Vision, he tells us, The dead were judged out of those things which were in
the Books, etc. Now there are three Books, out of which, the Dead shall chiefly
be judged: 1 The Book of Conscience. 2 The Book of Gods Omnisciency. 3 The Book
of the Scriptures.


For the first, Book of Conscience: The Book spoken of, Rev. 20.12. which is
the Book of Life; LIBER VITAE UNIUSCU jusque (The Book of each man's Life) as
one * translates it; Vide Aug. de civ. Dei l. 20. c. 14.
and that is (as he interprets it) Conscience: into which, God shall infuse a
supernatural Light, whereby all the actions of men, which have been written in
it, shall appear, however formerly they may have seemed rased out by Oblivion:
Conscience shall then awake, however it has been stifled or seared by
counter-checks, to the dictates of an enlightened mind. Truth, though
imprisoned before in unrighteousness, shall now have its freedom to accuse,
yea, to condemn the sinner; and (will he nill he) shall set those sins before
his eyes, Psa. 50.21. and 51.9.
from which God has not hid his face.

Secondly, Conscience, which is the Clerk of the Assizes, but God, who is the
great Custos Rotulorum, shall produce and prefer all the Bills of Indictment
that can be brought against a sinner, and read all the Pardons which have been
sealed to a Saint, who stands now at Gods Tribunal, for his Trial upon Life and
Death.

Thirdly, Book of the Scriptures: This shall be NORMA JVDICII, The Rule of
Judgment. And so we hear the Judge himself say, Joh. 12.48. The word that I
have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day: And one of his chief
Retinue tells us the same; God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
(says he) (...), Romans 2.16.
according to his Gospel delivered by me. Men shall be judged according to
their Works, their Works according to the Gospel. The wicked shall be judged,
SECVNDVM, ET PROPTER OPERA, according, and for their Works, by the Law; The
godly, SECVNDVM, SED NON PROPTER OPERA, according, but not for their Works, by
the Gospel: Which Gospel shall condemn the wicked, for their neglect of so
great Salvation; and shall acquit the godly of their sins against the Law,
Praeveniunt judicium fide sua^. Aug. Sermon. 121. de resur. mort.
by reason of this, that they believe in Christ, and so have accepted the
Reconciliation tendered in the Gospel.

THE third thing in this manner of Judgment considerable, ASSESSORES IN
JVDCIO, the Assistants or Associates in the Judgment: and these God does use
out of indulgence, not indigency; to honor them, not to help him. And they are
1 Holy Angels, 2 Glorified Saints.
Christ formally, the Angels instrumentally, the Saints declaratively, shall
Judge the Word.

FOR the first, formally to Judge, who passes the definitive Sentence of Life
or Death, Absolution or Condemnation upon the Innocent or Nocent; and that
Christ with his own mouth shall do this, and that (as I have said) as a part of
his Regal Office, see Matthew. 25.34. Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, etc. SECONDLY,

The Holy Angels instrumentally or ministerially: with the sound of a Trumpet
they shall gather together the Elect from the four winds, from the one end of
heaven unto the other, Mat. 24.31. And whether or no Christ will use them as
instruments to execute his Sentence, I shall not here determine; the
Affirmative seems evident, Mat. 13.49, 56.

The Saints declaratively shall judge the World, 1 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not know
that the saints shall judge the world? This honor then shall the Saints have,
that they who are now trodden down as mire in the streets, shall hereafter sit
upon the Bench with the Judge of the Earth. They shall judge the World: how?
Not as Counselors to this Judge; For who has been his Counselor, Romans 11.24.
but declaratively? that is to say, either by consenting to his Judgment, as
just and true, as in Courts of Civil Judicature, they are said to do, when by
rising up, or some such sign, they show an assent to the Sentence, pronounced
by the Judge, as the Judgment of the Court: or else declaratively; that is to
say, their Faith, good Conscience, Integriry, shall then so appear, that they
shall make the wicked inexcusable. And thus even in this life, Noah is said by
preparing an Ark, Heb. 11.7.
to have condemned the world: And in the life to come our Savior says, Mat.
12.41.
The queen of the South shall rise up in judgment with that generation which
heard him, and his Gospel, and shall condemn it. And he also tells his
Disciples, Luke 22.30. that they shall sit on Twelve Thrones, and shall judge
the Twelve Tribes of Israel; that is to say, the Faith of the Apostles, Non est
aliter intelligendum. Marlorar. in loc. (...), 1 Cor. 4.13.
who were Israelites, yea ignorant men, and yet embraced Christ, and were
Ministers of his Kingdom, shall take away all excuse from the Israelites. O how
shall the sparkling Beauty of a Saint (who is but in this world accounted as
the filth thereof, and the offscouring of all things) break forth in that day,
when God shall make up his Jewels, (...). Cyri^. Catec. 15. p. 382.
even to the dazzling of the eyes, and tying the tongues of those, whose malice
or detraction did so far hinder them, that they would or could not behold the
Majesty of Heaven in their lives, whilst in this world! They shall then look
upon them with an eye of envy, whom before they viewed with supercilious
contempt and disdain; and with their tongues shall say, We fools counted their
lives madness; but behold, they are numbered amongst the righteous. And thus
much for this third Particular.

We shall next speak to JVDICII EVENTVM, The Event of this general Judgment:
and it is set down, Mat. 25.46. The wicked shall go away into everlasting
punisment; but the righteous into life eternal; the former shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of
his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. The latter shall meet the Lord in the air, and so
shall ever be with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. It may be expected I should now
speak somewhat to the LOCVS JVDICII, The Place of Judgment: And truly some
have curiously disputed, none I know of clearly determined this thing. Some
would have it in the Valley of Jehosaphat, which is situated betwixt the City
of Jerusalem and Mount Olivet, which is toward the East; which opinion is
grounded from that of Joel 3.2. where God says, He will gather thither all
Nations, and plead with them there for his people: and the Argument is enforced
from Act. 1.11. where the Angel tells our Saviors Disciples, whilst they stood
gazing up into heaven, that the same Jesus which was taken up from them into
heaven, should so come in like manner, as they had seen him go into heaven.
Others think it shall be in the Air, Grotius, Amesius, etc.
out of 1 Thessalonians 4.7. For my part, I I desire to be wise unto sobriety; and till
I better understand the aforesaid places of Scripture, I shall believe, if God
will find a time when, he will also find a place where, to judge the World.
Temere definire non audeo, quod excogitare non valeo. August. de Civ. Dei, l.
21. c. 30.
In the mean time, I shall leave it amongst the (...), the secret things which
belong to God; as knowing, that those things which are revealed alone belong to
us. As for the TEMPVS JVDICII, the particular time of this general Judgment,
some may possibly be inquisitive after; and some, with more confidence than
success, have undertaken to define it. But I should be loath to decide, what
Infinite Wisdom has left in doubt: neither do I profess my self to
understand, what the Angels of heaven, nor any man does know, but the Father
only, Mat. 24.36. Proud desire of knowledge may do hurt, where humble
ignorance of what God is pleased to conceal, does not suppose a fault. Let me
leave this therefore irresolved, as the former, and apply what has been
already said.

It may inform us in the words of the Apostle, So then, every one of us shall
give an account of himself to God: for therefore is this Judgment appointed,
that God may exercise Distributive Justice in the World, by rewarding the
righteous, punishing the wicked; absolving the one, condemning the other: which
actions suppose a scrutiny in men's lives. And although God who knows all
things might without further witness, pass to give Sentence; yet he will give
the sinner leave to plead his own Cause, and then out of his own mouth will
condemn him; or else so clear shall be the testimony of his own Conscience,
that it shall leave him speechless, without excuse. And thus the sinner shall
justifi: God when he speaks, and shall clear him when he judges. Thus they
who would not confess their sin here, to give glory to God, shall (will they
nill they) then confess it, to take shame unto themselves. Neither is this
account less strict than sure; there are no shifts to avoid it: we cannot
blind the eyes of this Judge with gifts, nor scare him with our frowns; nor
appeal from his Tribunal to a higher Bench, nor hide our selves from his
Omniscience, or fly any where from his Presence: His Sergeant, Conscience, will
Arrest the proudest Prince, and bring him before the King of kings; where,
divested of his Royal Pomp, he shall equally stand to receive his Doom with the
meanest Peasant, and shall there exchange his Scepter for a Crown of Glory, his
Royal Ornaments for the White Robes of the Saints; or else be environed with
greater shame. Each creature will own the Summons at that day, which the last
Trump shall proclaim: The Earth shall give up its dead, the Sea likewise its;
that so each person contained in them, may give an account of himself to God.

Secondly, If God has appointed a Day wherein to Judge the World; Then learn
that, 1 Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord
come, who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the heart. Let no man anticipate God, or take his
Office out of his hand, by judging his brethren Exact knowledge is requisite in
a Judge; Si judicas cognosce. Sen. Med.
but the eyes of man are too dim to judge of the actions of others, because
they cannot see them in the heart, their Root and Fountain: for God alone
searches hearts. Hence it is that holy men in this life are often judged as
hypocrites; when as on the contrary, the glistring gloworm of Morality, in this
dark night of the world, goes under the notion of Holiness and Integrity. Thus
the righteous are condemned, and the wicked are justified by those, who judge
after the sight of their eyes, according to appearance, and not righteous
judgment. To those God does speak, Who art thou that judge another? Iam. 4.12
And also Gods people say, (as to Moses was once retorted by the Israelite) Who
made thee a Prince, Exo. 2.14.
and a Judge over us? Produce thy Commission, thou that art so forward in
censuring or condemning the rest of thy brethren: If thou have none, what is
thy plea for this inordinate practice? Is it that in the Psalmist; Psa. 12.4.
Our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? And therefore thy tongue walks
through the streets. Have thou not read, that God is ready to judge both the
quick and the dead? to acquit whom thou condemnest; to condemn whom thou
approvest? Or read thou not that of the Apostle, Jam. 5.9? Behold, the Judge
stands before the door, execute not then thy malice, till God has delivered
his Sentence. It is not hatred of sin, but desire of revenge, which does
inflame men's tongues with a love to blame, and condemn, not amend and correct
the faults of others; or rather as S. Austin does notably observe, De Sermon.
Dom. in Mont. lib. 2. cap. 18. in Mat. 7.1.
Such do labor with Pride or Envy, which cause their hearts to swell against
the persons and names of their brethren.

Whilst I thus inveigh against judging another, I do not say, but we may say A
sin is a sin; Gal. 5.19.
for the works of the flesh are manifest and therefore fall under our censure.
But in judging, we must avoid these three things:

First, judge our brethren about the use, or abstinence from those things which
in their own nature are indifferent. In this case the Apostle puts the
question, Sunt quaeiam facta media quae ignoramus quo an mo siam qaia and bono,
and malo si^r. possunt, de quibu. temerarium est judicare maxim ut
condemnemus. Aug. de Sermon, Dom. in Mont. l. 2. c. 18.
Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own Master
he stands or falls. And for the abstinence from such things, the same
Apostle says, Let no man judge you; Calvin in loc.
and that is (as one explains it) make guilty of Judgment, or Condemnation,
(to wit) for the omission of such Ceremonies as were abolished by Christ his
death.

Secondly, Our Suspicions must not serve us to condemn our brethren; for those
(...), those secret things of the heart, it is Gods work to bring them to
light, 1 Cor. 4 3. Suspicions are no Proof, and therefore not a sufficient
foundation of a Legal Sentence: No, nor every Report is sufficient to raise a
mist, whereby to darken the reputation of our brethren: for we know, SI SATIS
FVERIT ACCVSASSE, NEMO ERIT INNOCENS, If it were sufficient to accuse, none
should be innocent. We must therefore in this case take Gods counsel, and
imitate his practice. First, We must take his counsel, Deuteronomy. 13.14. They were
not upon a bare report, to destroy them who said, Let us go and serve other
gods. (But mind) thou shall inquire, make search, and ask diligently: and
behold, if it be truth, and the thing certain, then do thus and thus. Again,
see Gods Practice, Genesis 18.21. There God, who is Omniscient, saw their sin, the
cry thereof came unto heaven, yet speaking to our capacity, and suggesting our
duty; I will go down now (says he) and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.
This is the second thing we must avoid then in judging: we must not condemn our
brother for what we suppose or suspect, before sound search after, and clear
knowledge of the fact.

Thirdly, We must not condemn our brother for some particular failing we
clearly see in his life; either to the safety of his estate here, or the final
security of his condition hereafter. My meaning is this, If I see one, the more
constant tenor of whose life has been toward God, and the remembrance of his
Name, through temptation hurried, or invigilancy entangled in any sin, I must
not censure this man to have been always an Hypocrite, or condemn him as one
who shall ever be a Reprobate: No, I am to look upon him as a dislocated joint
in Christ's Mystical Body; (...), Gal. 6.1.
and therefore I must endeavor to restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering my self, lest I also be tempted. That man's tongue had outrun his
wits, and charity also, who should have (as it is to be thought many one did)
counted David a Hypocrite before, or a Reprobate after his two great sins,
Murder and Adulteny. But the Sun was never totally eclipsed, nor shall the
candle of the righteous be put out in obscurity. Ps. 37.24.
A righteous man may fall, but he shall not utterly be cast down: and it is the
confidence of the Church, When I fall, I shall rise; when I sit in darkness,
the Lord shall be a light unto me, Mic. 17.8. Let me add, Though the constant
tenor of a man's life in sin, Duo autem sunt in quibus temerarium judicium
evitare debemus cumincertum est quo animo factum fuerit quic quid, and quum
incertum sit: qualis futurus sit, qui nunc vel honus, vel malus, apparet. Aug
de Sermon. Dom. l. 2. c. 18.
may give us ground to think a man at the present, to be no better than a
child of wrath; yet this cannot warrant us to say, Hereafter he shall be a son
of perdition: for, INTER PONTEM ET FONTEM, MISERICORDIA DOMINI; God makes our
Necessity of help, his Opportunity to bestow mercy. And he who here has
wallowed with Swine in the mire of sin, may before he die be washed white in
the blood of the Lamb, and made fit to lodge in Abraham his bosom. Apud
apertissimos adversarios, praedestinati amici latitant, ad huc ignotictiam
sibi. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l: 1. c. 35.
He who here had fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, may through
Gods renewing Grace be made meet to be partaker hereafter, of the inheritance
of the Saints in light. We must not then, we cannot judge any, scarce as to
their estate here, not at all to their weal or woe hereafter.

The Third Use, So spe^k ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law
of liberty. He founds his Exhortation upon the Rule of Judgment, The Law of
Liberty: He does not say, Liberty, your Law; which Judge, many one would with
their hearts and good will stand to: but that Law, the observance of which,
makes you, speaks you free, is certainly meant by the Apostle. Now he that will
practice this duty, must observe these Directions, which will prepare him for
the last and final Judgment by the Law of Liberty, the future Rule of our
judgment.

FIRST, that in Act 17.30. Let our actions answer Gods injunctions, which is,
that all men every where do repent. God gives a reason of this Command in the
following verse, (...), etc. Because God has appointed a day, in the which he
will judge the world in righteousness, etc. This is the great Audit of Heaven,
and God expects our Accounts should be ready. It is Heavens Assizes, and God
would give us notice to make sure of our Advocate, lest we be impleaded. It is
the day of Hearing, and God expects that our cause should not then be to be
commenced: and because we cannot say we are innocent, God desires we should
meet him with Repentance, that so he may not lead us forth with the workers of
iniquity. ^ic agat anima paenitentiam, ut illapossit mutaare sententiam. Aug.
de Sym. ad Cat. tract. 3. c. 8.
He warns us to flee from the wrath to come, which cannot be, but by flying to
his mercy in Christ offered at the present: we should meet him with sorrow,
that he may not cover our faces with shame; open our mouths to him in
confession, lest we stand speechless before him at that great day. Let every
one of us say, QVID FECI? What have I done? lest hereafter, in the bitterness
of our Souls, each of us cry out, QVID FACIAM? What shall I do, for the great
day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

Secondly, Let us practice that, Constitue te ante te; ascend tribunal mentis
tuae, esto ribi judex, torqueat te timor, erumpat confessi^, etc. Aug. in Psalm.
49.
1 Cor. 11.31. Judge our selves, that we may not be judged. We shall not be
condemned at the Great Assizes, if we judge our selves in our own Private
Sessions. If we would consider our ways, God would not set our iniquities in
order before us. When God does open the Books, amongst the which, that of his
Omniscience will be one, all our debts will be found cancelled, wiped out with
the blood of our Redeemer, if we wash them with the tears of true Repentance.
Assure we our selves, God will not seal up that man's iniquity in a bag, whose
tears he puts into his bottle. In that day the penitent sinner shall lift up
his head for joy, and know his Redeemer lives; when the obstinate sinner shall
not stand when he is judged. He who has opened his mouth to God in Confession,
shall stop the Devils mouth, by preventing his Accusation. Then shall that
Promise have its full accomplishment, Pro. 28.13
He that confesses his sins, shall find mercy, when he that hides them,
shall not prosper.

A Third thing, is that Act. 24.16. To Exercise our selves to have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God, (...). Chrysostom. de Fut. Jud. Hom. 25.
Tom. 6.
and toward men. This the Apostle tells us was the result of his Faith in the
Resurrection, which does immediately precede the Judgment: 2 Cor. 5.9, 10.
to which also St. Paul had special regard, as an excellent Motive to a holy
life. The same Conscience which does Absolve us in this life, will also, under
God, Acquit us in the other. A Conscience which is here void of offense, will
not hereafter be filled with Complaints: but if our hearts condemn us, God is
greater than our hearts, and knows all things, 1 John 3.20. Repentance indeed
is, TABVLA POST NAVFRAGIVM. But no man will sink his Ship, trusting to a
possibility of escaping drowning by a floating Plank: Nor should we sin,
because the Grace of God does abound. No man runs into Debt the more,
because he hopes for a Purse to discharge it. Next to having our sins blotted
out of Gods Book, it is our greatest happiness, not at all to run upon the
score; especially when God has told us certainly, The Soul that sins shall
die; 2 Timothy 2.25.
but has left it at a peradventure, whether or no he will give us Repentance,
to the acknowledgement of the Truth. He therefore that exercises himself to
keep his Conscience void of offense, takes the surest course to be one, who
(...), Joh. 5.24.
though he may appear before Gods Tribunal; yet he shall not come into
Condemnation. It is through Faith we are saved; but our Faith thus working by
Love, herein is made perfect, 1 Ioh. 4.17
that we may have boldness in the Day of Judgment.

MAT. 25.46. And these shall go away into Everlasting Punishment; but the
Righteous into Life Eternal.


III. Of HELL.
I Have formerly spoken of Death, and its consequent, Judgment: the which
seeing it is terminated in a definitive Sentence of Absolution or Condemnation,
I have chosen these words, wherein we have described the different estate of
the Wicked and the Righteous after Judgment: They shall go away into
everlasting punishment, but these into life eternal. And because we judge of
Contraries best, Ideo autem hunc tenere ordinem malui ut postea disseram de
faelicitate Sanctorum, nec a divinis ordo iste abhorret eloquiis etc. Aug. de
Civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 1.
where they are opposed each to the other (we know the pleasure of light, by
experiencing the terrors of darkness; the worth of health, by feeling the woe
which is in sickness) I shall endeavor to represent to your thoughts the nature
or estate of Hell; that so we may with greater vehemence aspire by our thoughts
and actions toward Heaven.

The subject then of my present Discourse, is, To Treat of Hell; in the Suburbs
whereof, every Son of Adam is born, and therein does inhabit; till being born
again, he becomes the Son of God, and consequently, an Heir of Eternal Glory.
In these words, we have these parts.

FIRST, The Persons; which are two sorts expressed under these terms: (...),
that is to say, (...), The Wicked, those on the left hand: (...), The Righteous
on the right hand.

Secondly, Everlasting; the latter, Eternal. I shall endeavor to speak to both
in their order.

first part, is, That the Portion of the Wicked is everlasting Punishment:

Or in the words of the Psalmist: The Wicked shall be turned into Hell. Psalm.
9.17.


I suppose I need not multiply places to evince the truth of this Proposition:
if any man doubt of it, let him consult his Conscience; the secret rebukes
whereof, do sometimes anticipate Hell, and give the sinner an earnest of that
Sum of Misery, the payment whereof never shall have end. Let me ask such a
sinner, if he feel not that Worm crawling in his breast, which shall never die?
If he is not sometimes even scorched in this life, with some sparks of that
unquenchable fire? But I should be sorry to think my self speaking to any who
are worse than the Devils who believe what I am about to speak, and do tremble.
I therefore proceed to open this Abyss of Terror, to bring to light the state
of this place of Darkness, by considering it in these respects: 1 Secundum
Materiam, According to its Matter. 2 Secundum Modum, Its Manner. 3 Secundum
Mensuram, Its Degree. 4 Secundum Durationem, Its Duration.


I shall speak to Hell, and the Torments thereof, according to all these
respects.

For the First: When I speak of this Materia Gehennae, my purpose is not
problematically to dispute, or positively to assert any Corporeal fire in that
place of Torment, Aquinas Suppl. ad 3. partem, Quest. 97. Art. 5. Bellarm. de
Purgat. lib. 2 cap. 11. Eligat quisque quod placet, aut ignem tribuere corpori,
animo vermem hoc proprie, illud topice, etc. August. de Civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 9.
Qui ignis, cujusmodi and in qua mundi vel rerum part futurus sit hominem scire
arbitror neminem. Ibid. de Civit. Dei, l. 20. c. 16.
which some out of choice, rather than with clearness have possibly undertaken:
But my design is to treat of that Materia circa quam, that object upon which
these internal flames are conversant; as also the Materia ex qua, that Pabulum
ignis, the fuel and foment of those everlasting burnings. And as to the first,
we are to know, That Soul and Body conjoined, are the adequate objects of this
eternal fury. They have been partakers in sin, and therefore shall be sharers
in suffering; though the Soul, as it was the Principal and Ringleader of this
Rebellion against its Creator, shall have the first and deepest taste of this
Misery. Look as the Body, whilst in this life, by reason of the corruption of
the Soul, was made an instrument thereof to act impiety: so when they are in
Hell, the Soul shall be the Efficient of that vexation and anguish which shall
seize upon the Body. Even as we see here they do sympathize together, and
partake of the weal or woe of either in this life: Though I deny not but God
does positively inflict his wrath on the Body, as well as on the Soul, as we
shall hear further ere long.

But Secondly, Materia ex qua, that which does kindle, and does keep alive
those coals of fire, which are heaped upon the heads of the wicked; and that is
Sin. This is that which was the Parent of Hellish sorrow, which did dig that
Bottomless Pit, and does daily enlarge the Mouth thereof. We lost our Right to
Happiness, when we let go our Title to Holiness; and ever since we have
departed from God, our steps have took hold of Hell; which is the production of
the Creature, not at all the operation of the Creator: and though he execute it
as an act of his Justice, (...); Theoph. in Mat. 23.41.
yet he approves not of it, when it comes in competition with his Mercy: for,
As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that
he turn from his iniquity, and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. And thus much for the first
Consideration of Hell and its Torments.

SECONDLY, Secundum Modum, according to the Manner of that estate: And this
will further descry the nature of these Torments; the manner of which,
consists 1 In privation of Infinite Good. 2 In position of Unspeakable Misery.


The First is that Paena damni.

The Second, that Paena sensus which those miserable Creatures do lie under.

First, That Privation is part of the nature of Hell, seems to have some ground
from this expression, (...), they shall go away; there is then terminus a quo,
from which they depart, as well as terminus ad quem, whither they go: (...) ab
a privativo and (...), is an Etymology which every Schoolboy is acquainted
with: and such indeed is the nature of Hell. There is a twofold privation which
I shall touch upon.

First, A Privation of all outward enjoyments, of whatsoever the world calls
good.

Secondly, chiefly, A privation of the Beatifical Vision. And indeed, if the
former were all, (...), Chrysostom. ad Theod. laps. Paraen.
Hell were something tolerable; there being nothing without a man, in the
absence whereof he may not retain his happiness But yet that is not
inconsiderable in this forlorn estate, because whilst wicked men have their
outward comforts about them, they do somewhat stupifie Conscience, and put far
from them the evil day. But in Hell, (...), Chrysostom. ad Theod. laps. Paraen.
Cain shall find no Cities to build; nor shall his Posterity invent to
themselves instruments of Music; none among them will take the Timbrel and
Harp, or rejoice at the sound of the Organ. Belshazzar cannot there drink wine
in bowls, or eat the lambs out of the flock, or the Calves out of the midst of
the stall. The rich man shall be deprived of his delicate dishes, and that fine
raiment wherewith he was clad every day. There are no Dice, whereby to cast
care away; nor Cellars, wherein to drown his grief. Jezebel her Paint shall
there be melted off, and burning shall be in stead of beauty. Neither shall
Judas his Bag afford him a crum of Comfort: for, in one hour, so great delights
are come to naught. But this is the least part of their loss; for these also
shall be deprived of him, in whose Presence is fullness of joy, and at whose
right hand are pleasures for evermore. Depart from me, ver. 41. is the first
and worst of that dreadful Sentence which such shall hear. How shall Amazement
and Horror, the pangs as of a woman in travail, seize upon the Souls of these
accursed Caitiffs, when the Lamb of God shall utter his voice like a Lion, in
that terrible Sentence, Depart from me; each syllable whereof does pronounce
amazement, accent grief, and will cause their Souls to meditate Terror, whom it
does concern. Thus those who did forget the God that formed them, shall be cut
off from his hand, and be remembered no more. They who were the Servants of Sin,
shall be free amongst the dead. They who were wise to do evil, whilst they
suffer the terrors of the Lord, shall be distracted. They who wearied
themselves to commit iniquity, shall find, that the wages of sin is death,
when they shall reap the fruit of their own doings, and their backslidings
shall correct them.

But I proceed to the Second (to wit) Position of Unspeakable Misery. as the
Pen of a ready writer, (...). Chrysostom. ad Theod. laps. Paraen. Psalm. 108.11.
I should fail in speaking of those Torments which eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive. If we respect
the Soul, great is the misery inflicted on it. Let us then judge of the Lion by
his Paw, and that Ocean of wrath, by those (...). Chrysostom. ad Theod laps. Paraen.
Drops thereof, which fall sometimes upon men on this side the Infernal Pit. If
these do drown men in sorrow and sadness, what will be the case of such, when
God shall afflict them with all his waves? when the terrors of the Lord shall
come round about a Soul, Psa. 88.17.
and compass it about together? when the Lord shall meet such a Soul, as a Bear
which is robbed of her whelps, and shall rend the caul of his heart? when he
shall make the wicked as a fiery oven in the time of his anger, Psa. 29.9.
and shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them? Job
7.15.
when God shall hunt them as a fierce Lion, and the Almighty shall set himself
against a sinner in battle array? How would such a Soul choose strangling and
death, rather than life? But this is not all, though the chiefest of their
sorrow; for the Body has sinned, and must also suffer: That flesh which has
swimmed in pleasures, shall be drenched in rivers of Brimstone: Those eyes,
which were sometimes the windows of vanity, shall now be the inlets of ghastly
spectacles: Those ears, which were delighted formerly with corrupt
communication, shall now be affrighted with hideous yellings of those damned
creatures: The curious smell, stopped with the stench of that infernal place:
That nice palate, shall want its curious fare; when he who was mighty to drink
wine, and a man of strength to mingle strong drink, shall feed upon wormwood,
and drink the water of gall: The delicate touch shall no longer then be
pleased, when he who was accustomed to stretch himself upon Beds of Ivory,
shall have this at the hand of the Lord, to lie down in sorrow. This will
silence each cursing Shimei, who adds grief to the sorrow of Gods people, by
reproachful taunts; and tie the tongues of those railing Rabshekahs, who love
all devouring words: For the tongue of the Slanderer shall not then be at
liberty to walk up and down the earth, when its imprisonment in Hell shall
control it: The hands of the violent person shall be Manacled there, and cease
to oppress; and the feet of him who was swift to shed blood, shall be reserved
in everlasting chains of darkness. Rev. 18.17
And by how much the more such have glorified themselves, and lived
deliciously, so much torment shall be given unto them. Were their strength the
strength of stones, or their flesh of brass, yet how could they harden
themselves in this sorrow? Can their hearts endure, or can their hands be
strong in the day that the Lord shall deal with them? it is Gods own question,
Ezekiel. 22 14. Yet endure they must, and that more than I have yet named. And
this leads me to the Third Consideration of these Torments.

Secundum Mensuram, According to the Measure or Degree of them: and this is
exceeding great, yet various, according to the several demerits of the sinner;
for such as rebel against the light, is reserved the blackness of darkness for
ever: LAESA PATIENTIA FIT FVROR, Love slighted, turns to irreconcilable
hatred. The Gulf between Heaven and Hell is made more wide, by neglecting great
Salvation. It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the day of
Judgment, than for Chorazin and Bethsaida, wherein Christ did his mighty
works. We poor Mortals (until God do bring us from under the power of Satan to
himself) do live in the world, as if Hell were not so hot, or the Devil so
black, as indeed he is; as if Hell and Heaven were Nuga tricaeque the one not
worth the avoiding, the other not worth the enjoying: But the heat of fire was
never painted; and the Devil is more deformed, than represented on the wall;
there are unexpressible Torments in Hell, as well as unspeakable Joys in
Heaven. Some who write of Purgatory, Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2. c. 14. Bellarm. de
Aeter. Faeli. Sanct. l. 2 c. 11. Bosquier Dom. in festo post pentec. tom. 2.
tell us, the pains thereof are more exquisite, (though of short continuance)
than the united Torments that the earth can invent, though of longer duration.
If the Popes Kitchen be so warm, how hot is the Devils Furnace? A Poetical
Fiction is but a Meiosis, Paena autem vehemens ac multo sevior illis,
Quas and Ceditius gravis invenit aut Radamanthus
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testen.
Juv. Sat. 13.
when brought to show the nature of these real Torments: The lashes of Furies
are but petty scourgings* when compared to the stripes of a wounded Conscience:
Tytius his Vulture, though feeding on his Liver, is but a Flea-biting to that
Worm which gnaweth their Hearts, and dies not: Ixion his Wheel is a place of
rest, if compared with those Billows of Wrath, and that Wheel of Justice, which
is in Hell brought over the ungodly: The task of Danaus his Daughters is but a
sport, compared to the torture of those, whose Souls are filled with
bitterness, within whom are the Arrows of the Almighty, the poison whereof does
drink up their spirit. Look as men did drink iniquity like water, so God will
pour out the vials of his wrath; they pressed him under their sins, he will
load them with his fury and indignation; Deuteronomy. 32.22.
they heaped up their sins as high as Heaven, the fire which is kindled in his
anger, shall burn unto the lowest Hell; their sins have been increased, his
wrath is treasured up, the measure whereof appears from the several Names it is
entitled with. Mat. 13.42. Luke 16.28.
It is called, A furnace of fire, which speaks intolerable heat; A place of
Torment, which speaks a total privation of ease; A Prison, Mat. 5.25. and
5.22.
which speaks restraint; Gehenna, from the Valley of Hinnom, where the
unnatural Parents did sacrifice the fruit of their bodies for the sin of their
Souls, to their merciless Idols. The which word, Gehenne vox Gallica.
by a Neighbor Nation, is retained, to signify a Rack; than the Torture of
which, Rev. 20.10
what more exquisite? It is called A Lake of fire and Brimstone; than the
torment of the former, what more acute? than the smell of the latter, what more
noisome? There is heat, yet no light; for it is termed Mat. 25.30.
outer darkness. In a word, he has made it deep and large, (...). Chrysostom.
Hom. 25. de fut. jud. tom. 6.
the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream
of brimstone does kindle it, Isa. 30.33. But yet if I have not sufficiently set
out the measure thereof, if we believe not Moses and the Prophets, which are
with us, let us impannel a Jury from Hell, let them from the dead speak, and
see if their Verdict amount not to this. It is an evil and bitter thing to
depart from God, and that his fear was not in them. What say thou, O Cain, is
the fire of Hell more delightful than the flames of Bretherly Love thou did
abhor to live in, whilst in the world? Thou also, O Achitophel, is thy Treason
and Conspiracy against the Lords anointed, Nihil proderit damnatis quod in hac
vita in perpetua saturitate, and ebrietate vixerunt, quia tunc ne guttu am
quidem aquae obtiuere possunt. Nihil proderit eis quod vestibus usi fuerint
splendidis, quia induentur confusione and corpora ips^rum vestientur
igno^^^^ia. Nihil proderit (...) quod in hac vita constituti fuerint in
honoribus, quia in inferno nullus erit honor, sed (...) inuus gemitus and
dolor. Ger. Med. 49.
rewarded with that repute thou did expect? What think thou, O Belshazzar,
is the Cup of the red wine of the fury of the Lord, as pleasing to thy taste,
as thy wine drunk in thy sacrilegious bowls? Tell us, O Judas, will thirty
pieces out-value the loss of an immortal Soul, or countervail the misery of
sixteen hundred and odd years in that place of darkness? Or resolve us, O
Herod, whether the breath of the Lord, which keeps alive these eternal Coals,
does tickle thy fancy, as sometimes vulgar air, or popular breath, now thou art
proved a Man, and no God, by being brought down to the sides of the Pit? The
Foreman speaks in these and the rest of their Names, My punishment is greater
than I can bear? Genesis 4.13.


I now proceed to consider it Secundum Durationem, In its continuance: and we
need not go far for the resolution of this; for it is called in the Text,
(...), (...). Chrysostom. ad Theod. laps. Parae^.
everlasting punishment, the end thereof is not known, its duration is
undetermined. Hell is a bott^mless pit, and therefore shall never be fathomed:
It is (...), an unquenchable fire; and therefore the smoke of their torments
does ascend for ever and ever, Rev 4.12. Hell is a Prison, from whence is no
freedom; because no Ransom to be paid, no price will be accepted for one in
that estate. When we lie under great sorrows, sinking troubles, yet this
strengthens us, Dabit Deus his quoque finem, God will put an end to all these.
But this is that which will augment the misery of a damned creature, he is
sensible his case is sad, he is sure God has decreed it shall be no better:
the sorrowful reflection upon which, shall wound his Soul, and in the anguish
thereof cause him to utter with his mouth, what his heart is astonished at, Who
among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? This is the portion of those,
whose Souls are removed far off from peace, and forget prosperity; in the
bitterness whereof they complain, My strength and my hope is perished from the
Lord.

Whilst I have been thus reasoning of Judgment to come, possibly some Felix
may tremble, the thoughts of Hell may have kindled some affection toward
heaven, and he whom the love of Christ could not constrain, yet the terror of
the Lord may have almost persuaded to be a Christian; (...) Cyr. Chat. 15. p.
389.
being forewarned, he may desire to flee from this wrath to come. Such I shall
send to John Baptist for direction in this case, Mat. 3.8. Bring forth fruits
worthy of amendment of life: Avoid those sins which do in a principal manner
lead to these chambers of death, and bring forth the fruits of Holiness, the
end whereof is Eternal Life.

Quest. What are those sins which God has affixed his condemnatory Sentence to
the Commission of?

Ans. I answer indefinitely in the language of the Apostle, The wages of sin;
that is to say, Romans 6 23.
of every sin is death: but more particularly God has revealed his wrath from
heaven against those sins, which he does usually reserve to punish in Hell.

First, Unbelief. it makes him a liar, 1 John 5.10
it eclipseth the Sun of Righteousness; no wonder then if God will punish it in
Everlasting darkness: yea, (...). Chry. hom 25. de fut. jud. tom. 6.
not believing of Hell, does make more broad the way which leads to
destruction. Unbelief in the heart, is always accompanied with ignorance in the
head; and against both, Gods vengeance is directed; 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

Secondly, Detraction. Whisperers and Back-biters, are joined in the Catalogue
with haters of God, who are worthy of death, Romans 1.31. The Detractor, (...). 1 Timothy 3.11.
is a Devil above ground, his tongue is already set on fire from Hell, which
does sadly presage what will be the portion of the Soul and Body for ever,
unless Repentance quench those flames. He who has here swords in his lips,
Psa. 59.11.
may expect hereafter his iniquity should be upon his bones: He that smites
others with his tongue* may expect the Arrows of Gods Quiver to enter into his
reins. In a word, he in whose mouth is a rod of pride, may fear to be broke in
pieces as a potters vessel, by the staff of Gods indignation.

Thirdly, Hypocrisy. God will make a right path for his Justice toward those,
who turn aside from him by their crooked ways. The Holy Tongue admits not of
the Neuter Gender, nor will the God of Holiness allow neutrality in any person:
for, The hypocrite in heart heapeth up wrath, Job 36.13. and we find
Hypocrites and Unbelievers meet together in that place of misery, and their
Griefs made the Standards of others sufferings Mat. 24.51. Luk 12.41.

Fourthly, Uncleanness. (I say not) cleansing flames. They who have burned in
the fire of lust, must not think much to be scorched in the flames of Hell.
Pro. 7.12.
He who went after that Harlot (as Solomon describes him) as an Ox goes to the
slaughter, shall find in this place what follows, He shall go as a fool to the
correction of the stocks. She to whom stolen waters were sweet, and bread eaten
in secret was pleasant, shall vomit up those sweet morsels, and her mouth shall
be filled with gravel. She who perfumed her bed with Myrrh, Aloes and
Cinnamon, Pro. 7.17, 18.
shall find the end thereof as bitter as wormwood, as sharp as a twoedged
sword: whilst they who go astray in her paths, shall find that her house is
the way to Hell, Prove. 7.27.

Fifthly, SENSVALITY. A loving of pleasures more than loving of God: The Harp,
and the Viol, Is. 5.12, 14
the Tabret, and the Pipe, and wine are in their feasts; but they regard not
the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands: therefore
Hell has enlarged it self, and opened her mouth without measure, that they who
did thus spend their days in mirth, may in a moment descend thereinto.
Destruction is to none so sudden; as to the sensual person. Dan. 5.5.
Whilst Belshazzar is tasting his wine, in the same hour come forth the fingers
of a man's hands, and write his doom. When the rich man cries, Lu. 12.20.
Soul, take thine ease; God breaks his sleep with that terrible voice, Thou
fool; this night shall they require thy Soul.

Thus have I spoken to this estate or place of Hell. I should next discourse of
Heaven, and there Sense will be the best Orator. He alone can describe it, who
lives in the fruition thereof. But yet the People of God are not left in the
dark, concerning the nature of this Inheritance of the Saints in light. They
behold through a Glass yet darkly, that which ere long they shall see face to
face: Even in this Wilderness of the world they have a Pisgah-sight of the
Heavenly Canaan, the description whereof follows in the next Discourse.

MAT. 25.46. But the Righteous into Life Eternal.


IV. Of HEAVEN.
IN the former part of this Verse, you had the black side of the Cloud, here
you have the bright part thereof; you saw the mouth of the Bottomless Pit
opened, behold here the Heavens opened, and the righteous ascending thereinto.
I have spoken of Hell, let me now endeavor to show you the estate of the Saints
in Heaven: But how shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land? Ps. 137.4.
was sometimes the sorrowful quaere of the Jews So I say, Quis audet de his
rebus, positus in hac mortali carne, quae aggravat animam aliquid dicere? cum
Paulus Apostolus hoc non valuit explicare, qui in isto positus corpore usque in
tertium caelum gratia operante valuit ascendere. August. de Sym. ad Cat. lib.
2. cap. 12.
Think not that I can describe these Mansions of Glory, who am imprisoned in a
house of Clay; the which whilst I do behold, my eyes are dazzled, my hand does
waver, whilst I undertake to describe them; and I can but lisp forth my
halfconceptions of the feliciry of that state: Non possum dicere, quia nec
videre possum, tamen aliquid non impudenter dico, qui ex Scaipturis dico. Aug.
Ser. 10 de Resur. mort.
yet so far as Scripture will give leave, I shall endeavor the prosecution of
this subject: for it must be an Angel from heaven, or some blessed Saint, who
with that holy Apostle has been eaught up into the third Heaven, who can
conceive these (...) which concern that estate. Notwithstanding which, I shall
express my thoughts of it, by prosecuting this Doctrine: That the reward of the
Righteous is Eternal Life.

In speaking to which, I shall consider this Recompense of Reward, this gift of
God, Eternal Life, much after my method used in speaking to the wages of sin,
Hell, or Death, and so we may view it, Romans 6.23
1 Quoad Subjectum, According to the Subject. 2 Quoad Modum, The Manner. 3
Quoad Mensuram, The Measure. 4 Quoad Durationem, The Duration thereof.


For the first, I mean, the Subjectum in quo, The Subject in which this Glory
shall be revealed, this Eternal Life shall reside: and what God will conjoyn in
this estate of Bliss, let not me separate. The Subject then of this Happiness,
is the Body and Soul reunited: The Body, as well as the Soul, was an
instrument of grace here; it shall be a vessel of glory hereafter: both of them
had their fruit unto holiness, and the end of both shall be Eternal Life. The
Body without the Soul is incapable of; the Soul without the Body is incomplete
in this Eternal Happiness. They were Commilitones in pugna, they shall be
Consortes in praemio: It is styled, Romans 8.18 Putas qualis tunc erit splendour
animarum quando solis claritatem habebit lux corporum. Aug. Ser. 12. in verb.
Apost: 2 Cor. 5.10 1 Cor. 15.
Glory revealed in us. Not to speak then of the Soul, which is the proximate
Subject thereof, and therefore shall excel that of the body: Let us a little
see what Scripture speaks concerning that whereof the Body shall be a partaker.
The Apostle describing to us the estate of the Body in the Resurrection
thereof, does in some measure represent to us the est^te it shall for ever
continue in. The Body of a man, considered in this present condition it is in,
is of little worth, had it nota reference to an Eternity, which is future. It
is corruptible, dishonorable, infirm, natural; but when it is raised again,
this corruptible, does put on incorruption; that which was sown in dishonor,
is raised in glory; that which was sown in weakness, is raisedin power. In a
word, that which was sown (...), a natural body shall be raised (...), a
spiritual body. So far then as these opposites excel each the other, so far
shall the estate of the Body which is future, excel that which is at present.
But the same Apostle does yet more lively delineate the future glory of the
body. So great shall the change thereof be, Phil. 3.21.
that it shall be fashioned like unto the glorious body of the Lord Jesus
Christ. It is here (...), a vile body; or which is worse, a body of vileness.
Ante ortum sperma faetidum, Gerhar. Med. 34.
in vita saccus stercorum post mortem cibus vermium. This is the condition of
all: But Gods people are exceeding vile in the eyes of others, and are yet more
vile in their own eyes. Oh but in that day, when God does make up his jewels,
he will remember them, when he will cast aside many a glittering stone. He will
be glorified in them who were despised because of him; he will despise those,
in whose account he was not precious: the latter shall awake to shame, and
everlasting contempt, but the former shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, Dan. 12.2, 3.
as the stars for ever and ever. And this for the first.

Secondly, QVOAD MODVM, according to the Manner of this Eternal Estate: And so
we shall find it consists, 1 In Remotione Malorum. 2 In Exhibitone Bonorum.


In Removing what speaks Misery; in Conferring whatsoever is called Good. I
begin with the former, because it is ever supposed, at least effected by the
latter.

First then, Removal of Misery, does ever accompany this estate of Happiness.
Now there are three great Miseries under which holy men groan in this life,
which they shall then be freed from: 1 Sin. 2 Temptations. 3 Sorrow.


From all these, the Saints shall then be released. I will speak somewhat to
them in their order.

First, Sin. source of all our misery; and when we are freed from it, we shall
be completely happy. This is that (...), Sin that dwells in us, Romans 7.17
as the Apostle calls it. And therefore before we lay down this tabernable of
our body, Quia peccavit ista natura, quum peccare potuit, larg^ore gratia
liberatur, ut ad came perducatur libertatem: in qua peccare non possit, sic enim
erit inamissibilis voluntas pietatis and aequitatis, quomodo est faelicitatis.
August. de Civ. Dci, l. 21. c. 30.
it will not change its dwelling. An imperious Tenant, which will turn the
Landlord out of doors: But this is our comfort, it is a Tenant at will; I
mean, at Gods will, who by our death shall destroy it. This, because the
nearest, is therefore the greatest grief to a godly heart. The sin of others
also is matter of trouble to a pious Soul. But in this estate of life,
righteous Lot shall no more be vexed in his Soul, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8.
with the the ungodly deeds of the unclean Sodomites: Ps. 110.5.
Holy David shall not sojourn in Meshech, nor dwell in the tents of Kedar: Or
Jeremiah wish for a lodging-place of wayfaringmen in the wilderness, that he
might leave his people, and go from them. The choicest earthly contents are but
a shadow, or as a dream of the night, to those heavenly delights, where each
faculty of the Soul shall be settled in its primitive perfection, and each
member of the Body become subservient to the end of its Creation, The Glory of
God, and the Comfort of the whole: The Law of the Members shall be extinguished
by the victorious strength of the law of the Spirit of Life which is in Christ
Jesus: Those civil commotions in the mind of man shall cease, and the blessed
conquerors shall bear their Palms in their hands, and cast their Crowns at the
feet of him, Romans 11.15.
with whom they shall also reign.

Secondly, Temptations. Nemo seeurus esse debet in hac vita, quae totae
tentatio nominatur. Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 32.
Whilst we are in this probationstate, we cannot but be under a necessity of
meeting with trials, whilst on this side heaven we are in danger of falling by
them. Vide Aug. de civ. Dci, l. 19. c. 27.
Strait is the gate which leads unto heaven, and great, yea many are the
stumbling blocks to hinder our entrance. Narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and many are the snares which are laid to hinder our progress thither. We
open not our eyes, but we are ready to behold vanity; we hear not, but the
Devil is ready by corrupt communication to corrupt our manners; we taste not,
but our wine is a mocker, and our bread deceitful. The Devil has bribed our
senses, and they are become purveyors of the flesh: Even where we think our
selves most safe, the Devil does often take us napping, even in our harmless
Recreations: Latet anguis in herba, Ipsum mundum per omnes hor as tentationibus
plenum. August. de civ. Dei, l. 1. c. 27.
and we are stung ere we are aware. So that how true is that, In many things we
offend all, Jam. 3.2. * Add to all, Temptations from the World, such whom the
Psalmist calls his Vid. Byth. Prax. in Psalm. 5.9.
Observers, such who watch for their haltings, and say as those of Jeremiah 20
10. Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we
shall take revenge on him. And if such a man's foot slip, they magnify
themselves against him. This is a sword in the bones of Gods people, Ps. 42.10
(that I may use the Psalmists expression) a sore and grievous temptation: But
heaven shall free them from these temptations. A Dog may bark at the Moon, but
he cannot pull it from its Orb; and the Devil may howl at the Saints in bliss
through envy, but this great Dragon, the Devil, and Satan, is cast out into the
earth, and his Angels with him, and shall never come nearer to molest them.
Rev. 12.9.
And this is one Stave in the Song of the Lamb, Now is come Salvation, and
Strength, and the Kingdom of God, and the Power of his Christ, for the Accuser
of our brethren is cast down, Rev. 12.10. And they who watched the stumbling of
Gods people, will have enough to undergo their own misery, now they themselves
are fallen into the Pit. Yea, these Sons of Zion, who by reason of adherent
frailty, are impediments sometimes to each other in the way, Vita totius
elegantiae and dignitat^s plenissima ubi non est adver sarius impugnans, ubi
nulla peccati illecebris, ubi est amor perfectus and timor nullus, ubi Deus
aeternus and unus omnium spiritus. Aug. c. 22.
shall congratulate their mutual arrival in their end; where those flames of
love shall put out the fire of all contention; those rivers of pleasure shall
assuage the heat of those Paroxysms of wrath, (...), Acts 15.39. (...), etc.
Chrysostom. ad Pheod. laps. Paraen:
wherewith Gods people are too often distempered in this humane state. But there
shall they be of one heart, and of one soul, one with God, at unity amongst
themselves for evermore. Each Name of Division will cease, every Bone of
Contention shall be cast into the fire, each Rock of Offense taken away: Love,
which was here inchoative, and in the increase, shall be there consummate, and
blessed Union betwixt God and the Saints, shall render more happy their
communion one with the other.

Thirdly, Sorrow. This is another misery incumbent upon Gods people here. Every
Son of the first Adam is born crying; and few of the children of the second
Adam live without tears upon their cheeks. Infantia non a risu sed a fle^u
orditurh-n^ lucem quo quid malorum ingressa sit nejciens prophetat quodammodo.
A^g. de civ. De^ l. 21. c. 14.
Every son whom he receives, he chastises, Heb. 12.6. He himself was a man of
sorrows: it cannot be expected then, that his should be unacquainted with
grief. David, a man of no melancholy temper yet complains, that his tears were
his meat day and night, Psa. 42.3. and elsewhere we hear him rearing for the
disquietness of his Spirit. And the Prophet tells us of the Church in general,
Lam. 1.
She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks; and though she
spread forth her hands, yet there is none to comfort her. But what? Has the
Lord forgot to be gracious, and will he remember his people no more? Yes
surely, the time is approaching, when every Prisoner of Hope shall be set at
liberty, Zech. 9.12
when sorrow and sighing shall flee away: when God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain. The Garden of Eden is but a Wilderness,
if compared to this Paradise of the Saints; wherein is that river, the streams
whereof thus make glad the City of God. Whence they, who whilst on the earth
did draw water out of the wells of Salvation, are as from a Fountain satis fied
with favor, and full of the blessing of the Lord: Their temporary flashes of
peace, being kindled into flames of immortal joy. This is the state of the New
Jerusalem which is above: there is no such humor as Melancholy in Heaven; Vera
ibi pax est ubi nihil adversi nec a seipso nec ab alio quisquam patletur. Aug.
de civ. Dei l. 22. cr 30.
those: Hellish fumes, that smoke from the Bottomless Pit, shall not there
arise to disturb our fancies, and corrupt our imaginations, to fill us with
black and dismal thoughts: Malevolent Saturn shall be below us, and have no
influence in that Superior state. And thus much for what does consist In
Remotione Malorum, In Removal of what is bad. Let us now consider the Second:
which consists

In Exhibitione Bonorum, Conferring what is Good. And this I suppose may be
summed up in three Particulars: 1 Vision of God. 2 Society with Saints and
Angels. 3 Fruition of inconceiveable Joy.


First, Vision of God. Whilst we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord,
he stands behind our wall, as the expression is, Cant. 2.9. If ever we have
a glimpse of God, it is but when he is pleased to look forth at the windows, or
does show himself through the lattice; the Saints do but at best see (...),
through a glass darkly in this life, but then face to face: which whether it be
Oculo corporen, Aug. Fort. de vidend. Deo, ep. 311 and deinceps Tom. 2. A quin.
Suppl. ad tert. partem quaest. 52. art. 2. 1 Ioh. 3.2.
to me is curiosity to inquire, would be boldness to determine: But certainly
they shall see him and S. John tells us how (...), As he is. Those blessed
Saints, who have believed on him whom they have not seen, shall there enjoy
their desired sight of him whom they have believed, according to his prayer,
Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me,
where I am, that they may behold my glory, etc. If those eyes were blessed,
Luke 10.23.
which did behold Christ in his low estate, how happy are they who see him sit
at the right hand of the Father? Here, he was covered in Scarlet, there he is
clothed with Honor and Majesty: Here he was Crowned with Thorns, there
invested with a Diadem of Glory: Here a Reed in his hand, there the Scepter of
his Kingdom to protect his people; or the Rod of his Justice, wherewith to
dash in pieces his enemies: Here spit upon, there his reproach taken away: Upon
the Cross rai^ed on, and blasphemed, there a Name above every name, at which
every knee does bow: Here environed with Soldiers, there encompassed with
Millions of glorious Saints and Angels, partakers of that bliss with him, which
he has purchased for, and confirmed them in. The Patriarch Jacob, having seen
God even in this life, sets up a Monument thereof, and calls the place Peniel,
Genesis 32.30.
in token of joy: For I have seen God face to face (says he) and my life is
preserved. Gerhar. Med. 48.
Quod si momentanea Dei visio tantum potuit apportare laetitiae cumulum; quid
potuit visio ejus aeterna? If those beams of comfort which are reflected upon
them here, Domine tu scis quod illo die cum talia loqueremur, and mundus iste
nobis inter verba ista vilesceret cum omnibus delectationibus suis. Aug. lib.
Con. 9. Cant. 504.
do so refresh their Souls in this valley of tears, what will be their joy,
when the Lord shall be their everlasting light? If the Spouse her bowels are
moved when Christ puts in his hand by the hole of the door, how will her Soul
be inflamed, when she her self shall be received into those everlasting
Mansions? When this Sun arises, every shadow will disappear; and he who did
sometimes speak roughly to his people, shall then discover himself to be their
Father, and their hearts shall revive within them. They who did bear his image
here, when he shall appear shall be like him. They who in the world cried,
Hosanna to the Highest, shall then chant forth Hallelujah to him that sits
upon the Throne.

The Society of Saints and Angels. This is another part of their Happiness. Our
Savior describes part of Heavens Happiness to consist therein; (...). Chrysostom.
ad Theod laps. Paraen. Luk 13.28, 29. Mat. 8.11.
They shall come from the East and the West, the North and the South, and sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God.
Cicero de Senect. page (mibi) 212.
If Cato the Heathen Philosopher could comfort himself in his old age, with an
O praeclarum diem cum ad illud animorum concilium, caetumque proficiscar, and
cum ex hac turba and colluvione discedam! Vid. Melch. Adam. vit. Bullinger.
Vid. Ger. Med. 48. de suavissima Angelorum in caelo associatione.
And Socrates against death, because after it he hoped to see Homer, Hesiod,
and other worthy men. How much more may a Saint lay down his head in Lu. 2.29.
Heb. 12.23.
peace, and rejoice, seeing he is but going to the City of the living God, to
the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general
assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are writien in heaven, and to the
spirits of just men made perfect. (...), etc. Chry. hom. 70. de mart Egypt.
The company of the Saints even in this life, does comfort the weak, encourage
the faint, cheer up the dejected, whilst by their mutual intercourse, and
intimate society, they provoke one another to love and good works, inliven each
others zeal, incite, and encourage each other by a good example, to hold forth
to the end, that they may receive the Crown of Life; and by mutual offices of
love, do endear themselves one to the other, and chiefly to God, whose image
they behold ingravened in their Souls, as the bond of that Union which is
between them. If this be so pleasant, how sweet will then their communion be in
that s^^te of peace, where they who served the Lord with one shoulder, and
prayed together here, Omnium Christianorum spes (fratre^ charissimi) in futurum
^empus extenaitur u^ quod hic servimus Dom no alibi nos servisse lae^emur. Aug.
in verb. apost. 2 Cor. 5.10.
shall with one consent offer up praise to their God, where nothing shall
interrupt their joy, frustrate their hopes, contradict their wills, which are
then perfectly on with God's. O blessed Society, where is no jarring envy,
strife! O heavenly Consort, where is no Discord, but a perfect Harmony with God
and one another! Methinks I could say with the Psalmist (his phrase somewhat
varied) Who will give me the wings of a Dove, Psalm. 55.6.
that I may fly hither, and be at rest? And this is the second thing that shall
be conferred upon them; they have been (...), like unto God in holiness here;
they shall be (...), as with, so like the Angels in glory hereafter.

Thirdly, Fruition of inconceiveable Joy. In this place, and that to purpose,
Psalm. 50.8.
God shall make his people to hear the voice of joy and gladness. (...). Chrysostom.
ad Thcod. laps. paraen.
If corn, and wine, and oil, do make men's hearts rejoice, what will the light
of Gods countenance, when lift upon his people, so as never more to be obscured
with a frown? God shall then put gladness into their hearts: his joy in this
life is in them, then shall they enter into their Masters joy, Mat. 25.23. Here
it is our happiness to have God rejoice over us; there it shall be the honor
of the Saints, to joy in and with the Lord. Joy here is in a capacity of
increase; there it shall be full. Jeremiah, though sometimes cast into the
dungeon, as not worthy to behold the light, shall shine as the Sun; and though
his feet did stick in the mire, yet shall he lift up his head for joy. Paul and
Silas, who did sing in the Prison, whilst their feet were in the Stocks, shall
then be delivered, and their glory shall awake to their Redeemers praise: Then
the eyes of the blind shall be opend, and the ears of the deaf shall be
unstopped; then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb
shall sing: In the wilderness shall waters break out, and the streams in the
desert, Isa. 15.5, 6. This is the Saints Nuptial day; Rev. 19.7.
should they not sing for mirth? The accomplishment of their Warfare; shall
they not be in peace? The Harvest of their Hopes; should they not now rejoice,
who themselves are gathered into the garner? Yes surely: But how great shall be
the measure thereof? Which leads me to the third Consideration;

Quoad Mensuram, The Measure of their joy. Of the Quae sententia plus habet
disputationis quam certitudinis and utilitatis. Muscul. in 1 Cor. 15.40.
different Degrees of which, there are more nice Discourses, than satisfactory
Resolutions: Some, whilst they would engross a greater portion of this glory,
may possibly detract from Gods grace, which is free, and bestows a penny upon
him who is called at the last hour, Quo utique denario vita fignificatur
aeterna. Aug. Exp. in Johan.
as well as on them who did bear the heat and burden of the day. The
Affirmative is most believed, because chiefly desired, and is an excellent
motive to be abundant in the work of the Lord, because he that sows
sparingly, shall reap also so: but the Vide Pet. Mart. in 1 Cor. 15.40. Musc.
ibid.
Negative is not yet beyond dispute.

The various Has dissimilitude in resurrectione mortuorum apparet verum in
applicatione vulge crratur, etc. Calv. in 1 Cor. 15.41.
excellency of the Stars, is an Argument wanting light to evidence the
different glory of the Saints; it being wrested from the first intention of the
Apostle: and, which is more, seems to be contradicted by the Lord of Glory; who
speaking indefinitely of the Righteous, tells us, Mat. 13.43.
they shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father And it may
seem a Paradox, That each Saint should be Luke 20.36.
equal to the Angels, and yet unequal amongst themselves in this state of
Bliss, unless we also aver different Orders amongst them: Vid. Wall. hanc
opinionem refutantem, cap. de Aug. off. p. 198.
Which is but to allow a Scruple in the Schools; and that easier to assert,
than maintain, rather than Resolve a Doubt in our own breasts. As for that
Similitude of the Sun, being more obvious to the Bellar. de aeter. faelic.
sanct. l. 5. ^ c. 3.
Eagles eye, than to other Birds; or the fire its diverse heat, operating in a
several manner upon many person: Whatever this may clear, yet it does not
necessarily prove this opinion. If I were to give my judgment, I had rather
Vid. Wall. optime disserentem de hac re tit. de Eccles: trium, page 451.
Affirm, though (I say nor) there is probable Reason to deny this Assertion:
But cautious Ignorance, is better than rash Presumption; therefore I leave this
as I found it, An Exercise of our knowledge, and not by my decision, to be
determined as an Article of our Faith. But to speak more strictly to the
Measure of this Glory, I have told you it is inconceiveable. The Apostle
speaking of the first fruits thereof in this life, calls it joy unspeakable, 1
Pet. 1.8.
and full of glory. It is styled, fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11. Glorious objects
to the eye, do usually affect the heart with joyful admiration: and Scripture
has described the City of God by such things, as are most affecting to sense,
that so we may see the inconceiveable worth of that estate of Bliss; and by our
necessity of Divine Condescension in this particular, guess at the Jewel, by
the beauty of the Cabinet; and have a transient view of the condition of the
Saints in heaven, by considering the New Jerusalem descending thence from God.
We see this City described, Rev. 21.16. and whatsoever is glorious, represented
in it. If for defense, it has a Wall, and that not of Clay, but of Jasper, the
foundation whereof is garnished with all manner of Precious stones. If for
Beauty, even the streets are of pure gold, Cant. 4.10
like Solomon's Chariot, the midst thereof being paved with love. Thus God has
revealed Truth in a Mystery, uttered Knowledge in Parables; and what our
understanding does not comprise, our senses by this description may apprehend
of that estate. Semper nobis in meatem veniat aeterne faelicitas de cujus
excellentia si omnia dicta fuerint quibus omnium hominum linguae sufficiant vix
tamen infima cjus particula delibata fuerit. Calv. instit. l. 4. c. 25.
Let us then be contented to admire, what we cannot comprehend; to believe,
what we cannot concelve; to consider, what no tongue can express. The Apostle
Paul seems at a loss for words to express his thoughts of this glory, he styles
it, (...), 2 Cor. 4.17. Which phrase, though we read, A far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. Yet Interpreters are at a loss to explain it. Judge we
then of that good land, by the Grapes which are brought from Eschol; of the
excellency of the Honey, by its taste upon the end of the Rod. (...) Chrysostom. ad
Theod. laps. Parae.
Have we ever discoursed with one who did lie in the bosom of God, who has
eaten of the hidden Manna, and to whom God has given the White stone, and did
not such a ones face shine, with Moses, and by his speech we might know he was
upon the Confines of the New Jerusalem? Or have any of our Spirits been wounded
with our Transgressions; and has the Sun of Righteousness afterward risen
upon us with healing in his wings? The tempe of a man's Spirit in such a case,
is some dark Representation of that heavenly joy. Yet this is but the twilight
of Glory, the dawning of that Everlasting Day. Nay, whilst we are speaking
hereof, should God open the windows of Heaven, and give us a Steven's-sight of
himself in Bliss, set us upon Mount Nebo, that we might behold this Land of
Promise; though this would strengthen our weak hands, confirm our feeble knees,
and encourage us in our travel to that Rest which remains; and, with Peter,
(...); Chrysostom. ad Theod. laps. Paraen. in verba Pet. Mart. 17.41.
constrain us to say, Lord, it is good for us to be here: yet this would but be
as the Gate of Heaven, our entrance would not be, till with him we fell asleep.
We find Gods people ravished in the contemplation hereof, rapt up in an
Ecstasy of heavenly joy, with their believing apprehensions of it; whispering
forth what they understood, or rather were ignorant of, concerning Heaven, in
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy goodness, which thou have
laid up for them that fear thee! How happy are they, whose Souls do lodge in
goodness! Psa. 25.13.
whose action is reflection upon bypast Misery, to rejoice because of its then
being fled away! whose labor is turned into leisure to praise their God! to
whom no evil shall appear, no good be hid, when God shall be to them all in
all! Men look upon Religion, usually as a Scarecrow; and upon the Professors
thereof, as so many Ghosts or Walking shadows: but were they not ignorant of
this heavenly joy, with which a stranger intermedleth not, they would then
forsake their fading pleasures, and, with Moses, Heb. 11.25.
choose to suffer affliction with the people of God, rather than to glut
themselves with the most satiating contents of the creature, which are but for
a season. Yea, did Gods people live under deep impressions of those noble and
lovely thoughts, wherewith God has expressed himself concerning this their
Bliss, their Souls would be drawn after him with that vigor and activity, that
the heavy Iron is by the Loadstone: They would then no longer question, suspect
Gods willingness to entertain them, but bathe their Souls in that Abyss of
Love; cast their selves into those Arms that are stretched out to receive them.
This purer joy would cause them to disrelish the fleeting pleasures, wherewith
Satan does bait his hook, and allure them to Transgression. Stupefied Reason,
and enchanted Sense, are the only Caterers of earthly joy: but the Sons of God
derive their comfort from a more noble Spring. The World, as it cannot take
away, neither can it give that peace which they inherit from him, Ioh. 14.27
who is styled, The Everlasting Father, and, Isa. 9.6.
The Prince thereof. No wonder then, if the pious Father does rather confess
his ignorance, Quanta erit illa faelicitas? nescio. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 22. c.
30.
than endeavor a resolution of the greatness of that Heavenly joy. Methinks,
when we poor Mortals do hear of this incorruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9.25.
this inaccessible Light, this immortal Life, we should stretch every Nerve,
intend our strength, be unwearied in the work of the Lord, cast a despising eye
upon the withering beauty of this inferior World; run the race which is set
before us; resist unto blood; fight the good fight of faith, that so, if by any
means we might lay hold on Eternal Life: Which brings me to the last
Consideration.

Quoad Durationem, Its Duration It is called in the Text Eternal. We say of the
things of this life (though in another sense) The End does Crown the Work;
Finis coronat opus.(...). 1 Pet. 5.4.
the Event does prove the Action: But this is the Crown of this Estate, that it
is incircled with Eternity. This Epithet, It is Mortal, does disgrace all
Sublunary Glory; the thought thereof leaves a bitterness in our choicest
earthly comforts; it causes our Sun to set at Noon: but it is not thus in
Heaven; Their Sun shall no more go down, neither shall their Mooon withdraw it
self: for the Lord shall be their everlasting light, and the days of their
mourning shall be ended, Isa. 60.20. When they are thus confirmed in that state
of Bliss, then shall they sing that of the Psalmist, Return unto thy rest, Psa.
116.
O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee: for thou have
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling;
whilst the wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth,
and melt away.

Thus have you seen a Glimpse of this Approaching Glory. And possibly some,
whose hearts are affected with it, may with him, Mat. 19.6. ask, What good
thing shall I do, that I may have Eternal Life? I shall send such a one no
further than our Saviors answer, ver. 17. If thou will enter into life, keep
the Commandments: for to them that obey him, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 25. de fut.
jud. tom. 6.
Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation. Or let us look a little more, and
see the condition of our admission hither; or for the default of what we shall
be hindered this place of Happiness: Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born again of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. It is our
Newbirth, which will usher in this New-life: and this supposed, there are
several graces, which, if they be in us, and abound, will minister unto us an
entrance abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. And they are these:

First, Humility. The Saints of God do not only grow as the Lilly, the most
tall and comely Flower in the Garden, but cast forth their roots as Lebanon.
Hos. 14.5.
(...); Chrysostom. ^er. 27. de profec. Evan. tom. 5.
Humility is their way to honor. I never see a strong Castle, a fair Tower,
but its foundation was laid exceeding deep; whereas a Cottage may stand on the
Surface of the earth: neither was there ever any one made a Temple for the Holy
Ghost, a fit Habitation for God, through the Spirit, who was not first deeply
humbled. Whereas the Devils Sty, the heart of a wicked man, may be proud, and
lifted up. But let such a one top the Stars, yet thence God will pull him down,
and trample upon his glory: But he who is poor in Spirit, is upon the first
Round in Jacobs Ladder, the top whereof reaches unto Heaven. Blessed are such,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: Mat. 5.3.
it is theirs now in Reversion, it shall be theirs hereafter in Possession. Our
Savior, when born, did lie in a Manger; and now he is exalted on the right
hand of God; he delights to dwell with him, who is of an humble and contrite
spirit. Lu. 24.16.
Christ ascended from the Cross unto the Crown; he despised the shame, before
he received his glory; was found in the form of a Servant, before his being
declared the Son of God: and we must submit our selves to God, Jam. 4.10.
humble our selves under his mighty hand, if we expect to be exalted in his due
time. God will teach the humble; and such whom he guides by his Counsel now,
he will afterward bring unto his Glory: This is the first duty we should
practice in order to our future Bliss.

Secondly, Purity in Heart, expressed in a holy life. Mat. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: But there shall in no
wise enter into the New Jerusalem, any unclean thing, or that defiles, Revel.
21.27. If Heaven were an Elisium, the proud person might perhaps get in, under
the notion of an Heroic Spirit: If it were a Turkish Paradise, the unclean
person might thrust in amongst the crowd. But this estate is nothing such. Psa.
93.5.
Holiness becomes thy house, says the Psalmist; much more then does it become
these everlasting habitations. This purity of heart, is that which makes the
Saints meet, to be partakers of this everlasting Inheritance: It makes Heaven a
suitable good to the desires of their immortal Souls. Flesh and Blood in its
degenerate estate, 1 John 3.3.
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; even the hope of living with him, does
call upon us to purify our selves as he is pure, 1 John 3.3.

Thirdly, Love; to which might be annexed Peace, its issue: He that lives in
Love, God dwells in him; He that abides in peace, 1 Ioh. 4.16. (...) videbit
and (...) Pax. vide Heb 7.2.
shall live in the vision of peace for evermore. A Soul winged with Love, will
fly more swiftly to Heaven, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 57. de Poenit. 9.
and find speedy Admission thereinto: Love does conform us to God now; and
they who are like him here, when he is manifested, shall be with him where he
is. Yet God expects this Love should appear to others by the fruits thereof;
and because our goodness extends not unto him, we should show it to the
excellent ones in the earth. There is a work and labor of Love, showed by
ministering unto the Saints, which we see the Judge of the World taking notice
of, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 25. de Poen. 5. Tom. 1. in Matthew. 25.31.
and requiting, Matthew. 25.35, 36. They who do such works in secret, shall
certainly eat of the Hidden Manna: He whose left hand knows not what his
right hand does, Mat. 25.32
shall not stand on the left hand, when Christ shall sever the wicked from the
just. He who sounds not a Trumpet to gain the praise of men, shall be
rewarded openly, and receive praise from God. The poor man's Box will prove the
safest Chest, wherein to hide our Treasure: Giving to him, is to bestow on our
selves; yea, to lend to the Lord, who will repay with the greatest interest.
The Prophet speaking of Idolaters, Isa. 46.6. tells us, They lavish gold out of
the bag, and weigh silver in the balance: but when the Idol is framed, yet can
he not answer, or save out of trouble. But there is a better way to thrive,
which he takes notice of; namely, To draw out our Soul to the hungry, to
satisfy the afflicted soul, to bring the poor that are cast out, to ones
house: They that do thus, 1 Timothy 6.19.
lay up in store a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay
hold on Eternal Life.

Fourthly, Patient enduring Affliction for the Name of Christ. This is that
which does make Religion even now honorable in the world, whilst those who do
profess it, do flourish like the Palm, notwithstanding those weights of sorrow
which are daily cast upon them by the ungrateful World, with whom for a time
they do converse. Like their Savior, their honor does most shine forth,
whilst their enemies seek the most to eclipse their fame; much more shall this
advance their worth, when God shall make their reproach to vanish, their shame
to disappear. Upon such the Spirit of Glory rests here, 1 Pet. 4.14
and they shall rest in Glory hereafter. The Apostle doubts not to call this an
evident token of Salvation, and that of God, Phil. 1.24. and tells believers,
That their light Afflictions, which are but for a moment, do (...), not only
work, but work out a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory, with
the which they are not to be compared. This is that which is the great support
of their Souls, in their fiery trials, the Spirit it self bears witness with
their spirits, Romans 8.17
If so be that they suffer with him, they shall be also glorified together. The
Lilly of Christ shall no longer then be amongst the Thorns; his Dove, which
has here lain amongst the pots, shall have her wings covered with silver, Ps.
68.13.
and her feathers with yellow gold. Thus the Lord shall bring back the
Captivity of his people, so that Judah shall be glad, and Israel shall rejoice.

AWAKE then, OH my Soul! load not thy self with Refined Clay, trample upon
these Earthly Nothings: Admire not those Apples of Sodom, which though
beautiful to the Eye, yet when thou touchest them, moulder into dust; Gaze not
upon these glittering Pleasures, colored Griefs, blushing Woes; Relish not
these sugared Lies, but account Heaven thy Happiness, Godliness thy Crown,
Christ thy All: So shall thou insult over death, have boldness in the day of
Judgment, shall not be left in Hall, thy Righteousness shall go before thee,
the Glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward.

THVS. have I finished my Meditations on these Last Things; beseeching him who
is the Prince of Life, to prepare us for the Approach of Death; Him who shall
be our Judge, that he will be our Advocate; Him who has the Keys of the
Bottomless Pit, that he would shut the mouth of the Grave, that it may not
devour us; Him who is gone before to prepare a place for his people, that he
would prepare us for that place, where we may bear a part in the heavenly
Chorus, and sing that new Song, saying, Blessing, honor, glory, and power be
unto him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

(...).

Quis alius noster est Finis; August. de civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 30.
nisi pervenire ad Regnum, eujus nullus est

FINIS?
Ingenuous Reader,
THese, with some other faults that do oc^^^ in the words or pointing, as they
are ^^^mitted to thy candid Censure, so also beg (...) ingenuous Correction,
The Authors absen^^ and the Printers mistake, being the cause of su^^

ERRATA.
Page Line For Read 3 mar. (...) (...) 3 10 which that which 5 mar. Boren.
Beren. 13 25 has have 17 mar. (...) (...) 19 mar. interitus introitus 21 6
(...) (...) 23 20 heart hearts 24 28 has had 26 22 (...) (...) 38 mar. (...)
(...) mar. (...) (...) 39 mar. (...) (...) 44 25 (...) (...) 48 mar. (...)
(...) mar. (...) (...) 60 mar. illa ille 69 mar. topice tropice 11 tabernable
tabernacle 75 Psalm. 29.7. 21.9. 103 mar. 32 92 106 mar. (...) (...) 115 mar.
Mart. Mat. 120 mar. (...) (...)

Januarii 12, 1657.
IMPRIMATUR Cantabrigiae,

Theoph. Dillingham Procan. Ri. Minshull. Ra. Cudworth. Guil. Dillingham. John
Arrowsmith.



