A True NARRATION OF The Royal Fishings OF Great BRITAIN and JRELAND.

Instituted Anno 1632, and prosecuted by the Right Honorable, PHILIP, Earl of
Pembrook and Montgomery, and his Associats, until Anno 1640, from the River of
THAMES.

Whereunto is added a Discovery of new Trades, for the employing of all the
poor people and Vagrants in the Kingdoms.

BY SIMON SMITH, Agent for the Royal FISHING.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nicholas Bourne, at the south Entrance of the
Royal EXCHANGE. 1641.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons, in the high Court of
PARLIAMENT assembled.
Simon Smith, Agent for the Royal Fishing, of great Britain and Ireland,
In all Humbleness^ showing,
THat having now by the space of eight yee^es, since his Majesty's first
institution of the Royal Fishery, applied himself by all the best ways and
means, to advance the Arts, Skill and Knowledge of the same, for the
employment of people; and increasing of the Traffike of the Kingdoms, to the
great benefit of his Majesty and the adventurers; which being brought to that
perfection as formerly has not bin attained unto; It now wants nothing but
execution; which to do I doubt not but there are many very willing and able;
only that the employment is not believed, to yield that answerable profit
which is expected and also because it has been often begun and given over
again, and these late associations have much discouraged the wel-wishers
thereof; Wherefore to vindicate the honor and reputation thereof, I have made
bold in all humbleness to set forth this narration, and am ready to demonstrate
the action it self to be very good and profitable, in all its relations, and
to be embraced and cherished.

Whereas it is reported that the Herring Fishing by Busses is unprofitable,
alleging that the Lord Marshall, and the Lord Chamberlaines associations have
lost their stocks, in their Fishing Business, I answer and say.
THat the cause of the consumption of their stocks, was by their improper
disbursements, managed by unskilful Factors, building of Barks, instead of
Busses, which were not fit for that performance, and sending them, and other
great ships laden with Merchandises, and many Factors, which wasted and
consumed their stocks unto the Islands, of the Lewis and Sheteland, applying
themselves in a way of coaping with the Ilanders for their commodities, taking
unvendable Fish in lieu thereof.

This was not the Fishing intended.
And having made great preparations for the Herring Fishing in the Lowghes at
the Lewis-Ilands, bought Land and erected houses for the curing and packing
their Herrings, and stoage of their Nets, Caske, salt, and other provisions, it
happened that the Herrings failed to come into those loughes, whereby their great
charges and freights and wages were all lost: and being afterward made known,
that the Herrings did not constantly make their appearance in those Loughes,
but many years failed.

The Lord Marshals association, having wasted all their stock in that way of
employment, quite gave over their Fishing, which did discourage many of the L.
Chamberlains associats, whose under-writings being in 7 years payments by
equal portions, prevented the losing of their whole Srock; but caused them to
detain their two last payments, yet the L. Chamberlan, and some of his
associats, have prosecuted that business of the Herring Fishing, with Busses
in the North seas, where the Netherlanders do constantly Fish, which is to
this day continued by the Lord Chamberlaines Agent, to the relief of many
poor people; but the want of Stock, and interruption by the Dunkerker,
although it has hindered the prosperity and growth thereof, yet it has
discovered the action it self to be very good in all respects, and to be
embraced and cherished, as for Directions for the Herring Fishing.

Touching the proportion and charge of a Busse, with all the particulars
belonging thereto, I refer unto the Book called Britiaines Busse, which
exactly and truly sets down, both the qualities and quantities of all things
belonging thereunto.

The manner of the Fishing.
The Busse of 70 Tuns, which can stow but 30 lastes of Herring Barrels, which
is 360 barrels, in regard of the Stoage for the Nets, and other provisions, and
must have 55 deep sea nets, of 4 deepings to each net, and each deeping being
70 Masses, at the first setting out, and must have 55 Nets more in readiness
at return, leaving the others to be newed and tanned, and fitted for the last
going out again, and so for Caske, Salt, and all other provisions to be ready
for the quicker dispatch.

The number of men and youths employed in this Busse is 19. viz. 10 Fishers,
Gippers, Salters and Coopers, 6 common men for labor, and three Country
youths for Apprentices.

The whole monthly wages to the 18 persons, besides the Master, will be about
20 li. The Master is to have in lieu of his wages 12. d. for every Merchantable
barrel of Herring he takes.

The victualling reckoned for two months at first setting out, which is the
time of taking Summer Herring (called Seasticks) and then expected back unto
the Maggazeene again.

The places of the Fishing are
First at Sheteland in Cullero and Brutio, Sowndes, which is our Kings
Dominions, at which coaste the Herrings do first rise, and shootes forwards to
the Doggerbanke, which lies in the maine Ocean of those Northern seas, and
there all nations do fish together, and about Bartholmew, they come into the
Yarmouth Seas.

This can give no offense to the Hollander, being its free in GODS high way (
which is the Ocean) for all Nations to Fish.

But if it please our Kings Majesty in the future, when as our English and
Scottish Busses shall increase, then to strengthen the privileges of
Sheteland, Yarmouth, and other places from the stranger, it may prove
advantageous to his subjects, as by the right of his Royalty, he may justly
do.

The Vent of Herrings in foreign parts.
For the Summer Herrings, which are called Seasticks, (not being capeable of
packing, by reason of their fatness) are vented at Danske, Elbing,
Coningsburg, Statteene, and other places, within the Baltic Seas, from whence
is Masts, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Waynskots, Clapbords, Deal, and Caske, useful
for the Fishery, or Gold, Silver, and Corn returned.

Also Hamburg, Dunkerke, Deep, Nants, Rouen, St. Valleries, St. Mallows,
Bordeaux, and elsewhere.

The second Fishing being repact Herrings, the full and shotten separated,
which may be vented in all the places aforesaid. The Crux Herrings made with
salt, upon salt, do find their best vent and price, at Rouen.

For the latter Fishing, if Corved Herrings, the best vent of them is at
Yarmouth, to make red Herrings for Leghorne, Genoua, and other parts within the
Streights.

And what repact Herrings then shall be made, are to be vented at Deep Rouen,
and those other places before named, the Eastland being frozen up, and so too
late to send any thither.

The Herring Fishing begins the middle of June, and cease about the middle
of November, but from the time of going forth, until the return will be full
six months.

The same Busse being set forth with hook and line, for Cod and Lyng may be
employed therein, until the beginning of March, and then returning, is to be
graved, cawlked and fitted out again for the Herring Fishing.

The Contrymen employed, may after the Herring Fishing, return to their
Country employment, or beat and dress Hemp, spin, twine, and brade deepings,
and the like. The Gange Busse being open with one deck, is fittest for the
Herring Fishing in regard the nets will be better preserved therein, then in a
two deck Busse, and the charge is much less.

There is another sort, and that is called a Hooker, or Welboat, whose bayt is
with Lampres, when as the herrings are not to be had for bayt.

That the Action is profitable in a way of Trading, may appear by this
Calculation hereunder named, according to good experiment made thereof.
The charge in setting forth of a Herring Busse, from the 15. of May, to the
15. Novem. being 6. months, will be at the highest rates.
FOr Caske and Hoopes 1000. Barrels at 2 s. per Barrel 100 l. 00 s. 00 d. For
Salt 1000. bushels at 2 s. per bushel, 100 l. 00 s. 00 d. For Victualing and
pettie-Tallie, 060 l. 00 s. 00 d. For the six months wages to the Company, 120
l. 00. 00 d. For the Master his allowance, 12 d. the Barrel 050 l. 00 s. 00 d.
For the repair of the 55. Nets, at 3 l. per Net 165 l. 00 s. 00 d. For
extraordinary charges of Storehouses and Sallaries, 035 l. 00 s. 00 d. For the
repair of the Busse, or freight at 10 l. by the mo. 060 l. 00 s. 00 d. Some is
630 l. 00 s. 00 d. The 1000. Barrels of Herrings will produce one with another
for the net-Sales, the some of 1000. 00 s. 00 d. So the clear gains for the
Stock adventured is, 370 l. 00 s. 00 d.

And if it should so happen, that but 500. Barrels be taken, yet there can be
no loss.

For the Salt and Caske not used, is 100 l. 00 s. 00 d. For the Masters
allowance and other charges saved, 030 l. 00 s. 00 d. For the Sale of the 500.
Barrels of Herring, 500 l. 00 s. 00 d. For the Sale of the 500. Barrels of
Herring, 630 l. 00 s. 00 d.

But if provision be made in due time with ready money, will further Fishings
very much, and ease the rates of the provisions, and cause the return and
dispatch of the Busse sooner, for the want of a Magazine has been the only
cause of hindering the prosperity thereof.

If three Busses consort together, and take along with them, a Yagar laden
with provisions, to supply them after they have taken such a quantity wherewith
the said Yagar may run to the next market, and returning may meet together
again at the Magazine, thereby a greater quantity of Herrings may be taken
before that the Busses make their first return, and the same nets being
employed whilst they are wet, will perform it with less hurt to the nets,
then if they should come away as soon as they have gotten their lading.

Also during their Fishings in the North Sea, the Busses may repair unto
Holy-Iland near Barwicke, for drying their Nets, and receiving of fresh
provisions of Salt and Caske, which will be a great accommodation in regard
they may in seven hours from thence be at their place of Fishings again.

In few years the number of Busses increasing both of English and Scottish,
they may be able to maintain an Armado for their defense as the Holland Busses
do, which are always in readiness for the defense of the Kingdoms, if any
sudden attempt should hereafter happen, which the Spanish Fleet that came
lately into the Downs, found by woeful experience, It has been observed that
at Shetland which is the Randezvous of the Hollands Busses in the month of
June, yearly has been to the number of six and twenty hundred Busses, being
enjoined not to put their Nets into sea before the 15. day of June.

And this year 1641. the Netherlanders have sent forth 1900. Busse, and 36.
ships of war to attend them, in which Busses and ships, are to the number of
40. thousand persons, Fishers, and Mariners, and the poor people which they
set on work, at the several Towns and places whereto they belong in beating
and dressing of Hemp, spynning of twine, brayding of deepings, making of Nets,
Ropes, Caske, and other provisions, building and repairing of the Busses and
the like, is not so little, as 40. thousand families at home, besides their
foreign employment in the way of Merchandising which arises thereby, and is
of greater consequence unto the States then the Indies to the King of Spain.

This Fishing employment is with a smaller Stock, less danger, nearer at
hand, and quicker dispatch then any other, it is gained out of the Sea, for 4
s. which is the cost of the Salt and Herring barrel, produces the 20. s. in
Herrings, there being no one Manufacture in this Kingdom that gives so
universal employment.

And if this business of the Herring Fishing were taken into due
consideration, and made a national work, the poor people and vagrants, in,
and about all Cities, Towns, and other places, may be kept in work to get
their livings by the beating and dressing of hemp, spinning of twine, and
brading of deepings, for making of Nets, Lines, Norsels, Ropes, Caske. and
other provisions, for the furnishing of a Magazene in each port, where any
Busses shall be built, or set forth according to the manner of the Hollanders,
who thereby have a flourishing Commonwealth, and do not suffer an idle person
among them.

And if those men that live wholly by their money trade, would employ their
stocks, ot some part thereof in this service of the Commonwealth, to set up
this Fishing Trade, in any one of the particulars, either by buying Hemp and
making deeping to sell, or in building of Busses to sell, or Caske, or
providing Salt, or setting up a Magazine for the victualing and furnishing with
the needfulls, or will buy the Herring from the Fishermen and vent them, or
will set up a Bancke to furnish poor people with small sums of money on their
pawnes, at eight pence, whereby the spynners and Brayders, and others, may
employ themselves in any one of the said Manufactures; they would find a
greater gain to arise unto them, then by their trade of Usury: and more safe
and comfortable for them; And to instance in one particular, a 100. li.
bestowed in hemp will produce 300. li. weekly, by the Manufactures thereof.

FINIS.

