THE DIVINE DIRGE Of a dying SWAN, Or a Priestly POEM Entitled by the Author,
De anima immortali carmen.

Written by Fr. Tucker, M. A. of St. John's College in Oxon.

printer's or publisher's device



April 4 London Printed by Peter Lillicrap. 1661.

To the Right Honorable and most Reverend Fathers in God, William by Divine
Providence, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, His Grace, Accepted Lord
Archbishop of York His Grace, Primates and Metropolitans of England, with all
the rest of the Reverend Bishops, dignified Persons and Priests in the Church
of England.
Most Reverend Father, and m^st Honored Lord,
I Am emboldned to address this Divine Dirge of a dying Swan as his last
breath, into your Graces hands; Nor indeed could I, as I humbly conceive more
properly recommend it to any person living, not only because your grace is
Primate of the Church and so chief of his Coat, but also because under your
graces most happy government he drew his first University breath and breding,
being some time aservant of that College in Oxon where your Grace was the
Honored head: and so truly might be called a St. Iohns-man born, So I shall
not need to insist any further in any Character of his Piety and parts, having
had so long a relation to your Grace and Government: In the next place I must
be bold to present this small piece to all you my Lords, the Bishops, and
others his Fathers, and Brethren in the Church of England: Nor need I
otherwise recommend his memmory to your Lord-ships than that he was one that
had the honor to were your girdle and was not only a beater down of Treason
and Rebellion in his Pulpit, but in the field, where he durst do, and did as
much as any man of his coat. Nay he did not only Preach but proclaim against
the horid murder of his late Sacred Majesty, before the very face of the
Actors of the most bloody Tragedy, and he forbore not to tell them of it, when
it was done in open congregations, for which he together with his whole family
were no little sufferers: but now, O how he would have rejoiced to see this day!

In fine, my most Honored Lords, I humbly beseech you through the bowels of
Jesus Christ, that you will not only meditate on the souls immortallity which
I doubt not but my Husband does happyly enjoye, and so will your Lord-ships
after him but also an Immortality of our bodies, the poor widows and poor
fatherless Children, now all ready to perish if not releived by your Lord-ships
most charitable goodness, and so as these shall be obliged to your Lord-ships
for the^r temporal life, they shall pray for all Temporal and e^ernall good
things to be bestowed upon your Lord-ships. So your Lord-ships may be pleased
to accept this as the widows mite from,

My Lords, Your Lordships most devoted Beadswoman and humble servant Martha
Tucker.

De Anima immortali Carmen.
BEfore the Birth of time or ere the Sun
In motion circular his course had run;
Before the Stars were taken from the womb
Of night, confined to endless orbs, and bound:
To natural influence all was a Rude
And indigested Mass, nothing indude,
With form or Soul, no organs then were tuned
Unto the Spheres, for then no Spheres were found
Nor this dull earth, nor lighter heaven nor Sea
Had place conservative, naught did obey:
Or Art's, or natur's Law, no Element
Had it is essential form or Complement;
Until the first and mighty movers Hand
Parted the jarring seeds, the Sea from Land
The purer fire from air and in a Robe
Of quantity and figure dressed the Globe:
On which he placed his vegetable Guests:
And Sensitives had here asign'd their feasts
To live and grow for him, who last of all
Enters the Scene at his Creators cal^
The mighty Elohim Consulted than
To build a stately frame, and called that Man:
For which endeared Creation and Respect
This Lovely Micro-cosme was made erect,
With upright Speculation, and a Soul
Was given him past Mortallities Control
Whose holy flames and sweet integrity
Did counterfit the Allmighties Deity
Till his too forward will, too free to evil
Transformed this Heaven born Child to the Shape of Devil:
Whose easy, prompt posterity did track
His steps so fast, that to eternal wrack:
Whole general man had run, but that his Maker
Snatched him from loss and was himself pertaker:
Of what himself had made, God assumed man
And from the imperial Throne descending came,
Disrobed of Glory, and his tire of Light
To save his new lost boy from the sad night,
But by the shine he could discern and tell
There was an immortality in Hell:
Waiting the soul whom now privation
Of good had plunged into dimnation.
Then 'twas; from Salem, the the Land of Peace,
Came bound for Jerico and Robbed of Grace.
Was struck to the heart past reverend Aarons cure
The Sacrifice or the Levites power:
For, (the first covenant broak) dread Sina's Law
Bound her in thrall and barred up Sions way;
Till heaven to earth came down, till pity gave
That Sovereign wine, and Sacred Oil to save:
The wounded wreteh, who then again his head
Lifts up, and breathes to him from whom he fled:
Son of the morning Glorious Lucifer
When sinned had fallen, the potent Thunderer
Hurled him from beauties Palace, to the Abyss
Of darkness never to regain that bliss:
He lost, the Angels mis't that privilege
Allowed this mortal whose high Sacrilege:
So boldly acted against Infinity
To heaven on earth's paid by the Deity,
That God and man in one hypostasie
Infinite finite that the etternall might
His at tributes of love and Justice write?
Clear to the now redeemed sin I eye
Turning him to his best eternity
Stupendous Mystery I what cause could move
So great a Change; ah 'twas the God of love.
Pause here Oraculous Schole-man tell and write
What kind of love is this great Stageritie
Go burn thy books, dam thy fond Herisies,
And learn the God of natures Deity,
This ponderous pile, and all those Clements turn
Man to a better Paradise than before
His sin and folly lost, whose soul shall soar
Above the Spangled Orb embos'd with Store
Of curling stars and cut yon Chyristalin
Transparant heaven, Through which with wings divine
Bove Primum mobile it shall aspire,
Till it ascend and reach that Sacred Quir,
Where martyrs Crowned stand and Angels Sing
Anthems, and Halelujahs to their King.
This though the Sager Orpheus did not know
Nor Proclus, nor the sharp Averross show;
Shall rise a truth, when Heaven and earth shall fall
To dissolution! the grand Funeral.
This busy soul by some was thought to pass
By Metempsachosis into some Ass
Or other body as if beasts with men
Had equal share in death and life again:
Obsteperous Atheists so may write, and teach
Phanatique toys, to their desciples preach
The worlds Eternity, man's nobler Spirit,
A breath let forth, and lost, not to inherit?
Or future good, or bade, once past and gone
No more to find a second Station.
Prodigeous Blasphemy! had they but known
From whence the Soul descended they had shown:
Whether it moves, and winds, and fain would rise
To whence it came above the Arched Skies?
Least violently it should be hurled byneath
By the weight of sin, etternall though in death:
Mark how the flame of day does trot, the Ring
Of aged time and in his progress bring:
His Chariot nearer Earth, as near his end
Declining stars do nod, planets descend
To chere the Crazie fainting centers heart
That Shook with Earthquake agues in each part:
And droping into Chaos once again
Groans for a disolution from its pain?
Yet when man's tottring body full of days,
Reclines his Snow-white head, and in a maze,
Pants with his struggling throws and groaning dies
The same again Numericall shall rise;
To Claspe the eternal Soul a Mystery
Made only clear unto Theology:
Then fond Astronomer go bore the Stars
Ransack the Zones, and tell to fools the jarrs
Betwixt the Planets, Search the brightest flames
Of all the constellations, and their names:
Set down, from fair Orion to the Bear?
From Cassiopeia to Jov's Eagles so hear.
Erect a subtle figure, then prophecy
What fate attends thy self, what ^iserie
Thy Country; tell what famine, Rapes, what wars
Are hovering there, the wise man Rules the stars?
And thou may break thy Epicyles for he
Laughes at thy Jacobs staff, thy Schemes and thee
His heaven in spired soul to heaven can go
Without thy Astrolobe, his faith can show
The way and reach the end, heaven is his home,
Earth but his Inn, discharging that, he is gone
FINIS.

