A CATECHISM To be Learned for the Training up of YOUTH And Others, In the
Grounds of Christian RELIGION.



LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson MDCLIII.

A Catechism to be learnt for the training up of Youth, and others in the
Grounds of RELIGION.
Question, WHat Religion are you of?

Answer Christian Religion.

Question, How is that distinguished from others?

Answer, I received the sign of it in Act. 2. 38, 39.
Baptism, when I had clean Ezekiel. 36. 24, 25. 1 Cor. 7. 14.
water sprinkled upon me, whereby I was distinguished from the Heathen, and made
visibly holy by the professed Faith of my Parents.

Question. What does Baptism teach you?

Answer, It teaches me three things; First, That I should repent, and forsake
the devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and
all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Matthew. 3. 11. Mark 1. 4.

Secondly, That I should believe all things written in the Word of God. Mark
16. 16.

And Thirdly, that I should keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the days of my life. Romans 6. 4. Question.

Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe and to do what thou art
thus taught by Baptism?

Answer, Yes Verily, and by Gods help so I will, and I heartily thank our
heavenly Father, that he has called me to this state of salvation through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And I pray God to give me his grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my lives end. Heb. 6. 1, 2.

Question. Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief.

Answer. I John 14. 1.
believe in God the Gal. 1. 1.
Father Genesis 35. 11.
Almighty Genesis 1. 1.
maker of Heaven and Earth: And Ephesians. 1. 17.
in Jesus Christ Joh. 3. 16.
his only Son our Lord, Mat. 1. 20.
which was conceived by the holy Ghost, Matthew. 1. 23.
born of the Virgin Mary, Matthew. 27.
suffered under Pontius Pilate: Was crucified, dead and buried: Matthew. 28.
The third day he rose again from the dead: Act. 1.
He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty: from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. John 14.
26.
I believe in the holy Ghost: Matthew. 28. 19.
The holy Catholic Church. 1 Cor. 14. 33.
The communion of Saints: Isa. 43. 25.
The forgiveness of sins: 1 Cor. 15.
the resurrection of the body: Matthew. 19. 29.
and the life everlasting. Amen.

Question.

What do thou chiefly learn in the Articles of thy Belief?

Answer. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me and all
the world.

Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all mankind that believe.

Thirdly, In God the holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the Elect people
of God.

Question. You said that Baptism does teach you that you should keep Gods
Commandments: tell me how many there be.

Answer. Ten.

Question. Which be they?

Answer. THe same which God spoke in the xx chapter of Exodus, saying; I am the
Lord thy God, which has brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

1. Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

2. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them: For I the Lord
thy God, am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands of them that love me and keep my Commandments.

3. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

4. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God, In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: Wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy Father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6. Thou shall do no murder.

7. Thou shall not commit adultery.

8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

10. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Question. What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?

Answer. I learn two things: my duty toward God: and my duty toward my
neighbor.

Question. What is thy duty toward God?

Answer. My duty toward God is Joh. 14. 1.
to believe in him, Levit. 25. 15.
to fear him, and Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
to love him with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with
all my strength, to Exo. 34. 14.
worship him, to 1 These. 2. 13.
give him thanks, to Psalm. 115. 9.
put my whole trust in him, to Psalm. 105. 1.
call upon him, to honor his holy Name and his Word, and to 2 Timothy 1. 3.
serve him truly all the days of my life.

Question. What is thy duty toward thy neighbor?

Answer. My duty to my neighbor is Matthew. 19. 19. Romans 13.
to love him as my self, and Luke 6. 31.
to do unto all men, as I would they should do unto me, to Matthew. 15. 4, 5, 6.
love, honor, and succor my Father and Mother, To Romans 13. 1.
submit my self to them that have authority over me, Heb. 13. 17.
To obey spiritual Pastors and Teachers, Luke 14.
To order my self lowly, and reverendly to all my betters, Psa. 101. 7.
To hurt no body by word or deed, Psa. 101. 6.
To be true and just in all my dealings, Psa. 101. 4.
To bear no malice, nor hatred in my heart, Psa. 101. 7.
To keep my hands from picking and stealing, Psa. 39. 1.
my tongue from evil speaking, Psa. 101. 7.
lying and Psalm. 101. 5.
slandering, To keep my body in Gal. 2. 3. 5.
temperance, 1 Pet. 4. 7.
soberness, and Psalm. 101. 3.
chastity, Romans 13. 9.
not to covet nor desire other men's goods 1 Cor. 7. 20.
but to learn and labor truly to get my own living and t to do my duty in that
state of life unto the which it shall please God to call me.

Question. My good friend know this, that thou art not able to do these things
of thy self; nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him
without his special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by
diligent prayer.

Let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords Prayer.

Answer. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom
come, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: give us this day our daily
bread: And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us: And lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Question. What desire thou of God in this Prayer.

Answer. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all
goodness, to send his grace unto me, and to all people: that we may worship
him, serve him, and obey him, as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he
will send us all things that be needful both for our souls and bodies, and
that he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins: and that it will
please him to save us and defend us from all dangers ghostly and bodily: and
that he will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy,
and from everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and
goodness, through our Lord Jesus Christ: And therefore I say Amen. So be it.

Question. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

Answer. Two only as generally necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism
and the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3.

Question. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

Answer. I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace
given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the
same, and as a pledge to assure us thereof, Romans 4.

Question. How many parts be there in a Sacrament?

Answer. Two the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace.

Question. What is the outward visible sign or form in baptism?

Answer. Ezekiel. 36. 25.
Water wherein the person baptized is dipped, or sprinkled with it, Matthew. 28.
19.
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Question. What is the inward and spiritual grace.

Answer. A death unto sin and a new birth unto righteousness, for being by
nature born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children
of grace, To. 6.

Question. What is required of persons to be baptized?

Answer. Matthew. 3. 6, 7, 8.
Repentance whereby they forsake sin, and Act. 16. 30, 31, 32, 33.
faith, whereby they steadfastly believe the promises of God made to them in
that Sacrament,

Question. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age
they cannot perform them?

Answer. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Act. 2. 38, 39. Genesis 17.
The Parents being visible believers their Infant children have a right to
water Baptism, by virtue of the promise to believers and their children under
the Gospel, as the male children had to Circumcision under the Law.

Question. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?

Answer. For the continual remembrace of the Sacrifice of the death of Christ,
and the benefits which we receive thereby, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

Question. What is the outward part or sign of the Lords Supper?

Answer. Bread and Wine which the Lord has commanded to be received, 1 Cor.
11. 23, 24, 25.

Question. What is the inward part or thing signified?

Answer. The body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and
received of the faithful in the Lords Supper, John 6. 55.

Question, What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?

Answer, The strengthening and refreshing of our souls to eternal life, by the
body and blood of Christ, as our bodies are to a temporal life, by the bread
and wine. John 6. 56, 57. 58.

Question, What is required of them that come to the Lords Supper?

Answer, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life, have a lively Faith in Gods mercy
through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death, and be in charity
with all men, 1 John 1. 3. 1 Cor. 14. 33.
And to have fellowship with the Saints in Church Communion.

FINIS.

