May 3. A TRVE AND PERFECT Diurnall: Of the most remarkable Passages in
Ireland, from the second of April to this present. Sent over by a Gentleman of
very good worth, and an eyewitness.

To a brother of his in LONDON.

Printed at London for Edward Blackmore, at the sign of the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard 1642.

April the second, 1642.

THe Army marched out, lodged at Recoole, and the next morning at our departure
fired the whole Town, the 3. we marched by Punchington toward the Naas,
burning and pillaging all the Rebels houses in the way, and hearing that at
Tipper the Rebels had refortified themselves, some of our Horse going on too
securely, a Trumpetter was slain by the fall of a stone from the top of the
Castle thrown at him: whereupon at evening Sir Charles Coote took two foot
Companies, and two troops to force it; and having by the Pioners broke the
gate, they entered the lower rooms, the enemy took the higher, and a barrel
of powder was set in the Vault, and they blowed up the Castle with them in it,
only a Dutchman and others, taking the staire case were taken, and the
Dutchman confessed, that a Priest was there slain, who had 200. l. in his
pocket, and that there was 500. pound in plate, all which was buried in the
ruins, some pillages, as Linen and Cloth was got there; the Dutchman hanged
the next day in the Naas: we lost there seven men.

The 4. We marched, our troops burning and pillaging most of the Rebels
Castles and Towns unto Kilcullen, an ancient Borough, but now altogether
ruinous; and there we killed 3. Rogues, all the rest being fled.

The 5. We came to Athy, in the way were two Rebels hanged, and a little on the
further side of Ballisoneere Castle, fortified by the Rebels; the Earl of
Antrim, Earl of Castle-haven, and Duchess of Buckingham met the Army, who
were entertained by Sir Charles with a volley of shot of Musketieres, and 3.
Pieces; at our coming into Athy, we found most part of the Town burnt by the
Inhabitants the day before, because a great Company of the Rebels thought, by
the help of the standing, to a forced the whole Castle, standing on the
Bridge, on the gate we found newly set up a head of one of their Captains
that was slain, which by the general vote of all that knew him, was the head
of one of the Fitzgarrets, a Fencer in Dublin.

The 6. We rested in Athy, in the mean time Sir Charles Coote releeved
Captain George Grymes at Ballilyon, who most valiantly did defend the Country
according to his ability, and brought Sir John Bowen with him to Town: in the
mean season some of the troopers went to Carlow, of whose coming the Rebels
hearing, fired the Town and fled, yet not so fast but our troops slew about
70. of them: this day at night were 4. Rebels hanged, and one Luke Maly, a
great Receiver of the robbed English goods: Also George Walters governor of the
Town of Athy came in of himself, who had reconciled himself to the Church of
Rome, as by a certificate found from a Priest was made known; for which next
day he was hanged, and after him eight others, and one Pioner for firing his
quarter without warrant.

The 7. We marched to Sradbelly, and lay that night, and hanged the next
morning 14. Rogues, and burnt all the Towns of the Rebels.

The 8. We marched to Maribrough where the people told us, that the Rogues made
an incursion or two upon them, they slaying 22. of them, but none of ours hurt,
and yet there has dyed of miseries and diseases above 300 since these
troubles: Sir Charles hearing Ballanakill to be straightly besiedged went that
night thither, put to flight 600. of them, with a few troops of Horse, killed
60 and odd, brought home 4. muskets, 6. Pieces, some Pikes and Darts; one of
our Conductors being shot through the Arm with two bullets, and one Trooper
clear through the thigh.

The 9. We rested in Mariborough, and Richard Grace the Burgonor came in
before, having delivered up the Town, Castle and White-rod: and as is supposed
went to the Rebels, there came in also George Fitzgarret, whose son is in
Rebellion, and Captain Crosby, and others.

10. Sir Charles with 400. Horse, and 20. Musketeers went to relieve the
Burrage, which was so hardly beset, and almost famished, having but four
horses left, whereof one they had eaten: Giving them into the Castle 40. Cowes,
beside sheep and swine, powder and shot; in his progress in the woods he was
set on by the Rebels, who after two or three shots fled, and in the chase there
were killed two Commanders, the head of one set on the gate of Burrage, of
them, and near 50. others, Captain Armestrong being shot thorough the buffe
coat, the bullet grased on his belly, and Captain Yarner with a bullet shot
through his cap, and his head only rased with the shot, that night they rod
through the Byr, and relieved them, which are now provided in the Castle for
12. months, the enemy as yet not daring to approach them.

The 11. They returned with horse, and men, much wearied to Maribrough late at
night, having lost some of their horses in the bogs, but the men came safe off
not without divine providence: for the Rebels thought to encompasse them: but
Leiut. Hughes, and some other going and firing diverse Towns in the woods
adjacent, drew off the Rogues, whereby they came off safe the same day; some of
our soldiers going out to forage, by their neglect lost one fire Lock, and
two Pioners by the Rogues.

The 12 We rested in Mariborough, and that night were handged 3. poor Rogues,
one whereof a bastard of John a Youghall, that had hanged five English people
in the same town, all dying without any show of penitence.

We marched from Mariborough to Athy: Captain Hughes firing all the country
with 300. men on the edge of Clanmelyra, killing few of the Rogues, they being
fled into the woods: in the mid way at Stradbally, they found a smiths man, his
Master being a little before fled, making Pike heads, and skeanes for the
Rebels, whom they instantly hanged on a gate, in our absence the Rebels made an
approach toward Athy, to the number of 58. others say 32 colors, but the just
number is uncertain, though our Scouts went out to descry, they lying on the
west side of the Burrow a River running down from Athy to Water-ford.

The 14 Captain Armestrongs troop being quartered at Captain Burrowes, some
of them issued out, and found some of the Rebels Scouts, who they put to
flight, killing and drowning 18. of them, they having passed on this side the
River, and took from them 6. fowling Pieces, and one Musket: In the afternoon
the Lord Lieutenant of the Army with some troopers going to take a view of the
Army, a horse of Mr. James Cootes, was shot in the forehead, and the enemies
scouts rode between the bridge and them; but nothing done, and about three of
the clock in the afternoon, were hanged eight Rebels, one of them was Brock,
an ancient English Papist, and a most subtle Seducer of the English, a man of
acute wit, and well spoken; as also an Intelligencer of the Rebels, abold and
malapert knave, not daring to tell the English in Athy, that before Christmas
next, that he hopt to hear Mass said in the Church there: nay, that he would
read it there himself (which is a marvel in a Romish Catholic, their Church
not allowing a married Clergy; yet this Rebel having a wife at the Galhouse.)
This night it was the general report that the enemy would give us battle next
morning, whereupon order was given by the Lord Lieutenant General, that we
should be ready to march by break of day the next morning, the news giving
cause of Joy to all our Army, they being all desirous to fight, I conceive, as
to eat or drink.

15. About 6. a clock in the morning, our army began to move in a fair and
easy martch, at which time were 3. hanged one Rebel by name Done, and the
other two, soldiers of ours, who would have run to the Rebels in our
absence; Two of the Kealings of Sir George Wentworths troop, ran to the
Rebels before we had fully marched 2. mile, to a place called the Mortar
Ascull where it was supposed, the enemy would ly in ambush; by our scoutes, the
Rebels were discryed, that they had passed the old Bridge, and were marching on
this side Kilkey, a House of the Countess Dowagers of Kildare, a great
Fortress of the Rebellion, as we thought to meet them on the Hill adjacent
unto Kilsonan Castle, which caused the Army to march faster, whereby we might
obtain it before them; so to have the Hill wind and Sun: the enemy
conceiving as was after confessed by one taken prisoner that we did sly from
there puisant power, when in my hearing a Captain unknown to me, demanded of
the Lord Lieutenant General, why he did not martch an other way, (as I
conceive to the carrow of Kildare,) his Honor answered laughing, he would not
boodge afoote out of the way he came, for all the Rogues, not long after we
did see them apparently martch in three full bodies, and that so fast, which
caused us all to mend our pace for attaining the aforementioned Hill, on which
were already some of our troops, but we drawing within half a mile of the
foot of it, the Rebels marched very fairly, having about 40. Colors, and
pitched on the brow of a Hill, adjacent to Castle Town (a Town of the Lord
Vicount of Elis,) having Hill, wind, and Sun of us, yet had we a very fair
champion to order our battle in (the Rebel having set themselves ready to
entertain us in 3. bodies;) The Earl of Ormond taking infinite pains with
much alacrity to give the enemies battle: neither can I without injury forget
the extraordinary care and industry of that checkmate of Rebels, Sir Charles
Coote; now our army being divided into 3. bodies, the outmost wings flanked
with our horse, and our 5. pieces of Ordnance marching between the bodies, and
two loose wings, whereof, that of the left hand was led by Captain Prime
Rochford, each man committing himself to God, and care of his duty; Drums and
Trumpets, declaring our willingness to meet with the Rogues, every man marched
forwards with as much joy, as if he went to a wedding; our men approaching
near our enemy, the Lord General gave order, that if the Gunners thought,
they were within reach of execution, they should let fly at the enemies middle
body standing on a Hill, the first shot out of a Saker Drake being 400. paces
at the least being given fire unto by Captain Stutvile Master Gunner of
Ireland, divided an ensigns body into two parts which was strange, in regard,
the Rebels were seated on the brow of the Hill in a natural Fort, that we had
no other mark, but half head the Color and pike, and with two Drakes we
made eight shots, which did little hurt in regard of the situation, our two
Sakers and Demi-Culverin playing on the enemies right hand body, one of the
Sakers whereof Will: Hampton had the command, making a lane by shattering the
upper parts of the pikes the bodies of the men, being secured as is related
before; he shot seven shots, and at the seventh shot, beat down three of the
Rebels Colors; immediately, after which, a shot made out of the Demi-Culverin,
put the Roges to astand like a heard of dear that gaze at the opening of a
hound, in the mean time, our private soldiers being led on by the Lord
Lieutenant General, all came within musket shot of the Rebels, which caused
the two last Pieces to forbear, least they should hurt our own men in there
going on, going on said I, nay rather dancing, such was there resolution, and
discharging so continually quick, that there was not space of the motion of the
heart, or the twinkling of an eye for an hour and a half together; such
music did they make, that I am persuaded to a soldiers ear, chamber fidling
will be hardly accepted, but with little hurt to the Rebels, in respect of the
bank before them, yet were they so astonished that to run or stay they knew
not: and now behold an act of the Divine providence, for at this very time, the
wind that was South East, and so against us, turned Northwards, being a great
help to us, but the enemy seeing our men come on so courageously, turned tail
like hagard faulkon, and likewise run away; our horse men and foot pursuing,
with might and main, until they came to a long Bog wherein the Rogues took,
but were bravely fetched off with our firelocks, and troops; part of our
Troops that flanked on the right, thinking the Rebels would have took to
Castle Town, rod that way, but they not appearing, fired the Town and
returned to the Chase, in which was some 500. men amongst them slain; one
Butler, Son to the Viscount of Iberring, and Son in Law to the Wolf
Mountgaret: as also Birne a Lieutenant Collonell, and Collonell Cavanaugh;
there was taken a Cart of the Rebels with three barrels of powder, aqua vitae,
and other good provision drawn by eight Oxen, which made me wonder, that they
discharged no more shot at us, but it was their policy not giving us, I think,
a 100. shot, for by an Englishman that was taken who was a Sumpter bearer to
the Lord Viscount Iberring, it is reported, that he confessed, there was a watch
word, that though with loss, they should rush upon our army, rout us, and so
become Masters both of the field and all our ammunition; there Achitophell
Mountgarret having set in order the day before, how all the pillage should be
divided, but having failed in his purpose: I hope he will conclude as his
former Projectour in a halter, such ends God send the enemies of our Church,
King, and State, and let all true hearted Protestants, that shall read this, say
Amen.

There were in this battle of the Rebels, the Viscount Mountgarret, and
Iberring, the Barron of Dunboin, the flower of the Gentry of Kildare Wicklow,
Catherlow, Kilkenney, Queens County, Westmeath, and other parts adjacent, who
did really believe to have destroyed us; but God our God rose up and delivered
us from the hands of those bloody minded men, who thought to have devoured us
having now nothing to glory of, but there shameful flight with the loss of 4.
of there Colors, and the parts, which were painted on them, being not able to
deliver them out of our hands; but as Trophies of Gods mercy and our
deliverance, we brought to Dublin as also the three heads of the three
forenamed Traitors, which stands as spectacles of Gods justice, on perfidious
Traitors and Devilishly minded Monsters, begotten by the Locusts by the Whore
of Babylon; after the chase, we found only two Troopers slain, and one hurt,
with one Ancient, and some seven private soldiers of our army; glory be to
God.

When having drawn our forces into good Array, in came that valiant Commander
Sir Charles Coote, who was so eager in the Chase, that he lost his Mountero
and rode bare head amongst the thickest of them, so marching forwards toward
Kildare, we thought to have lodged in it that night, it being night when we
came within two miles of it.

But the Rebels had the Castle, so that it was dangerous to adventure thither,
whereupon the Lord Lieutenant General, and Sir Charles agreed, that we should
march that night to Newconnel a Town of Sir Nicholas Whites standing on this
side the River of Loffie, to which we marched over the Carrow of Kildare, and
passed through the River with our pieces, am nunitions, and carriages between
twelve and one a clock that night; our van lying at Connel, and our carriages
lying on this side the River, and the reere of the farther side of the same,
and came in the next morning about right of the clock.

16. About eleven a clock, we marched toward the Naas, the way we went being
about some four miles and a half, and in the way amongst many houses that we
burnt, we burned the House of Fitz-garret Steward to Sir Nicholas White and
Captain of the Rebels, who the day, the battle was fought came to Connel
aforesaid with one Sutton of the Naas; and being demanded what news from the
armies, he replied, that the Irish were shamefully routed and run away;
further adding these words, that he thought God fought for the English, and
the Devil for them. Thus does the Governor of all things, made false
Traitors speak the truth to his glory, and our comforts: at the Naas we
rested that night, but found little provision but what we brought with us, and
over night warning given us, that we should be ready to march by the break
of the day.

17. And being ready in the morning, and our Wagons droven out to march; even
as our pieces were going, a command came, that the Demiculverin and the two
Sakers should stay at the Naas, and also 600. men and two Troops, the Lord
Liles, and Sir Charles Cootes Drogoones, who also stayed with them, we
marching and burning all the Rebels houses in the way home, and when we came
near, we heard, and that with joy of the arrival of 700. horse more for the
further service of Gods glory, the Kings honor, our Churches peace, and the
hopeful enjoyment of our ancient liberty, and thus much concerning our first
march out of Dublin, being above 40. miles in the Country of the Rebels under
the conduct of the right honorable and truly hopeful Commander James Earl of
Ormond and Ossory etc. and diverse other brave valiant Captains, whom to
nominate would be too tedious though their acts are fit to be eternized by a
more able pen, then a point blanke Gunner.

Deo Gloria Solo.
FINIS.

