THE CLERGY in their COLORS; OR, The Pride and Avarice of the Presbyterian
Clergy hindering Reformation: SHOWING, How from time to time they have not
only been the Fomenters of this first and second War, but also by their horrid
fallacies have to this present time deluded the Commonwealth. Discovered in a
plain and familiar Dialogue betvveen Philalethes and Presbyter.

LONDON, Printed for T. M. and are to be sold by T. Brewster and G. Mould at
the three Bibles in St Paul's Churchyard neat the West End. An. 1651.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou have here (in a plain and familiar Dialogue) discovered the carnal ends,
and poor shifts of the temporizing pretended Clergy of this Nation, whose
pretense is Reformation; but their maine design indeed the preservation of
their Parishes, and thereby the advancing of their honor, and profit. The most
part of the Presbyter's Answers are collected out of certain Sermons, or
rather polititicall Lectures and conferences which I have heard with mine own
ears, and the rest is made good out of their practices. It is not to be
conceived, that all the Ministers of all the Parish-Congregations in England
and Wales, are guilty of all the superstitious and Popish practices, and other
crimes and offenses herein mentioned; for I do aknowledge many to be pious and
conscientious men, who have not submitted to the Bishops yoke, nor received
the mark of the Beast: But the generality of the Ministry being led by some
few in every County (whose Oracles are at Sion-Colledge) are so settled on the
lees of their old Conformities and subscriptions, and in the courses which they
learned from their Predecessors that they will not easily be removed. Nor have
I much hope, that any of the Ringleaders of this Faction, will hereby be
brought to acknowledge their error, much less to lay aside their gainful
callings, which make them Lords over their whole Parishes, but rather expect,
that some galled proud Parsons, Vicars, or Curates, or other inferior Priests
or Deacons (as they cal^ed them) will rail against me as one not fit to be
answered; and, least others should hear or understand, will fill the Air and
Ears of all the multitude with senseless noise and outcries in vindication of
their great Diana. Yet I doubt not but the wise in heart will understand, and
some of the most ingenuous amongst the Formalists will at the least take a view
of their present condition, and be put upon some serious consideration of their
bypast courses, and remember that without Repentance, those that receiv the
mark of the Beast, shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God and be
tormented with Fire and Brimstone. Apoc. 14.9.10.11.

But that I chiefly intend, is to lay open to the plain and weaker sort of
Christians the subtilties, falsehoods and vain delusions of our pretending
Church-reformers; upon consideration of all which almost the weakest judgments
may see sufficient to satisfy them, that we can never expect any Through --
Reformation whilst the Parliament consults these men who are so many ways
engaged against Reformation by their own Interests of Honor and Profit, the
two main Hinges of all their Designs.

I conceiv many will be ready to say, I trouble my self too much to rake into
the Dunghill of Popish and superstitious Ceremonies being dead and buried,
but therein I desire to be excused, being enforced thereunto by such as I
heard defend them in the Pulpit and in private, since they were Damned by
Ordinance of Parliament. The defense of which (and of others their Popish
Trinkets) is brought in to take away the scandal of their Popish callings from
the Bishops, and to justify their former conformities, least their
Parishioners offended should seek out other Pastors, or (as they call it) Run
to separation or Independencie.

I have one thing to add by way of request to the Reader, which is this, that
where he finds any Satirical jests or sarkasme's, savoring of too much
levity or bitterness, he would consider whether the matter occasioning the
same from the Presbyter be not more ridiculous, (and yet it is such as I have
heard divulged by one or more of the most learned of that faction in the
Country where I live) which may in some sort excuse my expressions. What I
have herein set forth repugnant to the Truth, upon conviction, I shall, I hope,
gladly retract. So wishing this little Treatise may be profitable to some, and
hurtful to none,

Reader! I bid thee farewell. Abraham Boune.

The AUTHOR'S Protestation.
I Do hereby declare and protest in the presence of Almighty God, that I do
not put forth this Tract with any intent to vilify or bring into contempt the
preaching of the blessed Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ after the manner of
such, who say they live above all Ordinances; for I acknowledge the preaching of
the Gospel to be the ordinary means of salvation and that withoUt preaching,
ordinarily none can be saved. Romans 10. But I desire to discover those builders
who refuse or set at naught the Lord Christ and his Ordinances, to uphold their
own honor and profit.

A. B.

The Pride and Avarice, OF THE CLERGY: viz. Parsons, Vicars, and Curats,
hindering REFORMATION. Discovered in a plain and familiar Dialogue between
Philalethes and Presbyter.
SIR, you are well met here at London, I am glad to see you, what is the reason
you look so sad?


Pr. Sir! I thank you, I am in health, but perplexed in mind.


Ph. What is the news in your Country from whence you com: or what is it that
trouble's you?


Pr. There is no news but new distractions both in Church, and Commonwealth,
arising by reason of old Errors and Heresies countenanced every where.


Ph. What Errors and Heresies do you mean?


Pr. They are so many I cannot easily count all, that the Sectaries and
Schifmaticks of this age have broached.


Ph. Do you conceive that these are the occasion of the distempers in the
Commonwealth as well as in the Churches?


Pr. Yea without all doubt, for the unsetledness of the Church (occasioned by
Sectaries) causseth the distemper of the Commonwealth, both sympathizing in
each others misery.


Ph. What do you think might cure these distempers?


Pr. There is no other way of cure but by settling Church Government with the
Classes and Synods.


Ph. How will that cure all things?


Pr. 1. Hereby Errors and Heresies will be discountenanced, and the Sectaries
the broachers of them restreined and punished.

2. None will be admitted to the Ministry but such as were brought up at the
University, or licenced by the Assembly.

3. Private men will be enforced to continue in their callings, and not meddle
with the Ministers Office in expounding the Scriptures.

4. Every man will be forced to pay his Tithe and dues to his Ministers that
thereby they may be honorably maintained.

5. Lastly every one will be ordered to keep their own Parish, and not follow
Sectaries and seducing teachers. If these, and such like, were looked to and
observed, the Church and Commonwealth would soon be quiet. and the want of
these things is the occasion of all the miseries which we lie under, as well
the late Wars as all the sad effects thereof.


Ph. Indeed War is an heavy judgment, and I think I may truly say that the
rigid Presbyterians, to advance those things you have mentioned, and other
worldly respects and carnal ends, have been the occasions thereof.


Pr. How can that be?


Ph. By their preaching and prayings they have every where disgraced the
Parliament, stirred up the people against the Army, encouraged Neuters and
Malignants, and put the English and Scot's Malignants in hope to find a party
strong enough in England to destroy both Parliament and Army.


Pr. I confess we have justly complained against the Parliament and Army,
because the one did not settle the Presbyterian-government, and the other
countenanced all Sectaries and Heretics, but we did it not to the end to
destroy the Parliament.


Ph. What ever your intents were, I am sure your practice was abominable, you
filled all places with your clamors and outcries against the Parliament and
Army, as the Scotch Ministers likewise did, until you and they had con jured
up more evil spirits then you could allaie. And I am confident, had it not been
for the men of your faction, who prepared the people for a new War by the
courses aforesaid, neither our conquered enemies at home, nor the Scots durst
have attempted any more to make head against us.


Pr. What prejudice can the Parliament or Army receiv by the Ministers? It Is
well known we prayed for them both. And what can you object againstour Prayers
or Preaching?


Ph. I could fill a volume with your reproaches and evil surmises, scandals
disgraces, calumnies, and other unsavorie matter by you cast upon the Parliament
and Army in your Sermons (for a taste whereof view the book called the
Pulpit-Incendiarie) and let any man judge whether this did not much alienate
the people's hearts from the Parliament and Army. And for your prayers for them
they were for the most part like your Sermons: and still in your Sermons and
prayers you speak of the Army as enemies.


Pr. Well, it was time for the Ministers to speak and pray and deal plainly
with the people, when all things were grown into such confusion and disorder as
they were, far wors then under the Episcopal Government.


Ph. I do confess, there were disorders, but the Churches are not in so bad a
condition as under the Prelacie: for that Hierarchy was Antichristian.


Pr. I deny that, it may be some things injoined by the Prelates were
Antichristian; but not they as they stood in the Church of England: for
Antichrist, wheresoever he is described in Scripture, is described by his false
doctrine: and many of our Bishops were. Orthodox men, free from Popish Errors
and Heresies.


Ph. I Will grant you, they might hold fundamental truths, and yet their calling
be Antichristian, for who know's not that Antichrist is described as well by
his power, pride, cruelty, blasphemy, hypocrisy, and idolatry as by falls
Doctrine. Rev. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 18.3. and 13.2, 6, 11.


Ph. Well, notwithstanding what you say, if Episcopacie had been lopped, the
abuses taken away, those which were naught removed, and good men put in their
rooms, we had never seen these disorders and confusions: for that government,
although but prudential (as some would have it) was an excellent means for
staying the growth of errors and heresies in the Church.


Ph. Indeed that was the pretense at first, but the cure was worse then the
disease; for it proved a heavy scourge to the Church of God, and out of that
egg grew the Serpent, that Antichrist the head of Prelacie: and I conceive
that Government could never have been profitable to the Churches of Christ.


Pr. I will say no more of that Hierarchy, seeing the same is abolished, and
the State has thought fit to take it away: but why is not the Church settled?


Ph. What do you mean by a Church in Gospel sense?


Pr. The word CHURCH (besides the general acceptance of it signifying all the
Elect) has a double signification. 1. It Is taken for a particular
Congregation, so many as may or do meet together to partake in divine
Ordinances, or as we call it a Parish, and so the word Church is strictly
taken. 2. But the word Church in a larger sens, comprehends not only such a
company, but also the Christians in a whole country, as Ephesus and Achaia,
and so many Thousands who could not possibly meet together in one place: yet
they are called a Church. Act. 2.41. and 21.20.


Ph. Time will not permit me to enter into that controversy, but for mine own
part I am satisfied that the Churches under the Gospel are not Ecumenical,
National, Provincial, or Diocesan, but Cotton upon the 16 of Mat. ver. 19. Way
of Congregat. Chur. Pa. 2. pa. 5 Par. 1. pa. 20. where Parker, Ames, and Banes
are cited.
Congregational, which Congregational Churches ought to consist of so many
Christians as may join in Christian fellowship and communion under one Pastor,
who ought to convers with them, and know their state and condition, and apply
his Ministry answerably unto them: but for your greater Church and Parish
Church I acknowledge none such.


Pr. However you think, yet it is plain in that place of Act. 2.41. and 21.20.
where the Christians were many Thousands (Myriads) they are called the Church,
etc. Ergo etc.


Ph. It Is evident the word Church applied to so many Thousands as you speak of,
is not to be taken properly, but tropically, and so by a Synechdoche it may
be taken for many Churches: or else for part of the Catholic Church, which
manner of speaking is usual in Amesius Medul. cap. 32. 3, 4, 5, 6, 15.18. Cap.
39. 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
Scripture. But I marvel why you should endeavor to prove that a Church in
Gospel sense should contain more Christians then can convene in one place, to
partake in Divine Ordinances.


Pr. I do it to let you know that men of greater parts and learning may have
more dignity and superintendencie, and also a greater reward and
encouragement.


Ph. So plead the Papists and the politicians amongst the superstitious
Protestants (of this last age,) for the Prelacy and Hierarchy who affirm that
the Angels of the seven Churches of Asia, and Timothy and Titus, (who were
Evangelists) were Diocesan Bishops. And the same argument likewise serves for
maintenance of the Bishop of Rome his preheminencie above all other Bishops,
which, I think you will not defend.


Pr. I will not dispute the right of Episcopal government, seeing with us it is
abolished, but you must admit a difference and degrees amongst Ministers and
Churches, or greater inconveniences will follow: for the Parishes which are the
particular Congregations are not all of a bigness nor equal, and I think they
are well divided, conducing much to my purpose.


Ph. The Pope and his agents dealt not so equally in that point as they might
have done. Its true, that devotion in such as founded Churches, and such as
gave Tithes to them, did it in such sort as they saw good or convenient for
their posterity: but the great Lateran Council at Rome, Anno 1215. held under
Pope Innocent the third, (the most abominable conspiracy that ever was against
Christ's Gospel, except the Council of Trident) took away the liberty which
men before time had viz. to give their tithes to whom they pleased, and tied
them up to pay them to their own Parish Priest, which absolutely enthralled the
people, and causes that the worst deserving have had commonly the most means,
and this perfected the division of the Parishes, as now they are. Look Repor.
L. 2. p. 44. Parsons Laws, pa. 66.


Pr. I confess the Parishes are not equal, but the greatest is little enough,
and as its well for the Church that they are divided, and their bounds known,
that every Parson, or Vicar may know his own sheep, and the bounds of his
Parish.


Ph. You reason carnally, and aim at earthly respects.


Pr. What can you allege against the Parishes?


Ph. I must tell you they are Popish in their very institution and original:
and some Parishes, especially about London, and in other Cities and places are
so populous, (containing twenty thousand people, or more) and of so huge
extents, that no Minister of the Gospel can converse with the people of the
whole Parish, as a man of God ought to do: nor discharge his duty to them all
with a good conscience.


Pr. You would open a wide gap to our brethren, or rather adversaries (for they
are both) the Brownists and Independents, who long to see our Parishes broken
in pieces.


Ph. I will not so far enter into that Controversy, as to maintain all things
held by all men called by those names: but this I say, I dare pawn my life
there can be no Reformation whilst the Parishes and Ministry stand as they
do, let the Government be Presbyterial or Independent.


Ph. Why say you so?


Ph. First, for the Parishes I told you before, some of them are so vast in
greatness, and populous that they need ten Ministers where there is but one.


Pr. I grant it, that if more means could be found out to maintain them, it
were well there were more Ministers: but you must not take the Tithes from the
Parson, Vicar, or Minister, to whom They are due Jure divino, and give them to
others. The Minister ought to have all the tithes of his Parish, as well by the
Law of God as man, and the contrary by consequence is Sacrilege.


Ph. You cannot yet make me believe (though I have heard and seen it much
pleaded for) that Tithes are due to the Ministers of the Gospel Iure divino.


Pr. I doubt not but you may very well have heard them pleaded for as Jure
divino, for the stream and current of Antiquity runs clearly that way.


Ph. I confess the Papists generally hold it; some of the Fathers, and some of
the more covetous and superstitious Protestants: and yet [ Car. Bellar. Cont.
l. 1. de Cler. pa. 316, 317, 318.] Cardinal Bellarmine and Suarez the Jesuit,
the great Patrons of this opinion have not agreed with the rest: nor between
themselves what part of the Tithes the Priest or Minister ought to have: nor
whether he himself should have all which the Priests and Levits had. I would
know of you why Tithes should be due jure divino under the Gospel, more then
all other offerings and profits which the Priests had under the Law: The Tithes
then were not only for the Priests, but for the Levits, the poor and the
stranger, who were more then the twelfth part of the people: our Ministers not
the hundredth part. They did bodily service about the sacrificing, and had
garments for that purpose, which (the formulists say, the Surplices resembled,
and which are condemned as superstitious and Jewish: or rather since taken from
the Pagans. The Priests and Levits might buy no land in Canaan, but be content
with the portions and Cities which God gave them. These Jewish Ordinances are
abolished, and the Priesthood is changed. Our Ministers are content to leave
the killing of beasts and doing of such service, and hold it not unlawful to
buy Land when they can get Money. But they will have all their Tithes jure
divine: whereas the Christians in Africa and many in other places paid no
Tithes till after Augustins time. Bellarmine, Contro. li. 8. de Cler. pa. 315.
Pope Innocent the third brought in payment of privy Tithes (about anno 1215.)
Fox Act. and Mon, val. 1. pa. 336. Col. 1. And in the disputation at Prage upon
the Articles of John Wicliffe, Art. 17. its concluded that Tithes are mere
alms: and Augustine and Chrysostom are cited to the same purpose upon Luc. 11.


Pr. We do not take the Tithes as by any judicial or Ceremonial Law, for they
were paid by Abraham to Melchizedech before the Law, and by Christ himself,
and there is nothing in the new Testament for abolishing of them.


Ph. I have no intent to enter into that controversy, further then to let you
know, that were it not for the upholding of the pomp and pride of the pretended
Clergy, this could be no controversy at all. For that which you say
concerning Melchizedech and Abraham his paying Tithes to him before the Law, I
conceive the Law was the same in substance in tradition before it was written;
and without doubt Adam taught his sons to sacrifice, and instructed them in the
things appertaining to the Worship and service of God. Abraham gave the tenth
of the spoil of his enemies, and that freely; what is that to the payment of
the Tithes of the fruit of the Land and increase of the beasts, etc. especially
you being no Priests after the order of Melchizedech. And touching Christ his
paying of Tithes (which indeed I have heard insisted upon) if it be taken in a
proper or Grammatical sense is a mere fable, for Christ had nothing of which
he could pay Tithes, not so much as a smoke-penny or a garden-penny. And I do
not find he wrought any miracle to provide ought to pay Tithes as he did to
pay Tribute.


Pr. But I pray you what inconvenience would follow if Tithes should continue
to be paid as formerly under that notion as due jure Divino.


Ph. I could tell you of many evils which must of necessity follow such payment
of Tithes, of which I will give you a taste and omit the rest: 1. Its a
retaining of part of that Law which is abolished by Christ, Heb. 7.11, 12. If
the Priesthood be changed, then there is a change of the Law. 2. It upholdeth a
main point of Popery, which is, that upon the same ground the Ministers take
the Tithes, the Pope as high Priest over the Clergy is to have the first fruits
and tenths, and his Prelates their Procurations and Synodals. To salve up which,
our State, not by color of Divine Law but by humane law, gave these tenths and
first fruits to the King. 3. Hereby is condemned the practice of all other
reformed Churches, as living in a National sin, where the Ministers are not
thus maintained by Tithes, which is a very uncharitable censure. 4. If Tithes
be due jure divino, then must the division of the Parishes be jure divino, else
why may not the Tithes be divided to many Ministers, as I formerly told you,
and that some of you hold as bad as living upon stipends.


Pr. I will not reason with you further whether Tithes be due jure divino, you
and I differ in our opinions. Suppose we should take them as the allowance of
the State by humane Law, they are little enough to maintain the Ministers, who
ought to have double honor, the honor of reverence and the honor of
maintenance, and we do exact of you as due to us by the Apostles rule,
honorable maintenance, and not to live upon Alms, or as the Ministers of
Germany upon mean stipends.


Ph. I confess that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to live of the Gospel,
and to be honestly provided for, that they need not through want or necessity
be encumbered with worldly business, but attend their Ministry without
distraction: but to exact honorable maintenance savours too much of ambition
and avarice unbeseeming the servants of Christ. I conceive the faithful
Ministers are worthy of double honor, as Antichrist is worthy of double
punishment, not so much in kind and number as in weight and measure. And if
that will not content you, I affirm you are unlike to the Apostles of our Lord,
and the Ministers of the primitive times, and savor of the leaven of Popery:
as the Ministers did in the end of the third and in the fourth Centuries after
Christ, who strove for honor and dignity until Antichrist came to his height.
And upon what I now hear from you, comparing it with the practice of these
times, I do conclude that it is not the perverseness and peevishness of the
people, so much as the pride and avarice of the pretended Clergy, which
hinders the Reformation; and that I shall make appear unto you.


Pr. What can you say against the present Clergy of the Land, as they are
established by the known Law; they are generally all desirous to further the
intended reformation.


Ph. I dislike the name Clergy in your sense, for if you mean Gods lot or
portion, then are all Gods people properly so called. But (whatever the present
pretended Clergy intend, I know not) it is plain that their pride and avarice
is the cause of all the evils in the Land, as well Heresies and Schisms in the
Church, as troubles and distractions in the Commonwealth.


Pr. It may be giddy heads take occasion of offense (when none is given) to run
out of our Church, and to move sedition in the Commonwealth: but that is not
the fault of the Clergy, but of themselves, who are causlesly offended; and I
believe the Clergy are much troubled at it, that reformation goes not forward,
and that there is no better order in Church or State.


Ph. I conceive the Clergy which you mean may be divided into four ranks.

1. First such as were professed for Antichrist so far as to bring in all his
Ceremonies, Crosses, cringinges, Altar-worship, and other bodily exercises and
superstitions devised by the man of sin to captive souls, and were fully bent
to join us to the Church of Rome, and might probably have prevailed, but that
the Popes Supremacy was conceived dangerous, and might have been a curb both to
the Clergy and superstitious Statists, who yet liked Popery well enough, but
feared the Popes Supremacy as it is feared in France. And I doubt not but many
of these men through Gods just judgment were so blinded, as to think they did
God good service in their superstitious ways, and by the prosecutions raised
thereupon.

2. The second sort are those dumb dogs and Idol Shepherds who either could
not, or would not preach at all, nor give any alarm when the woolf comes, and
these were all ruled by the former as their Oracles and Leaders.

3. The third sort are they who pretend more conscience, and are more strict in
their lives, and more orthodox in their opinions then many others, and were so
far enlightened as to condemn the two former sorts (the one as too
superstitious, the other as ignorant) and well know and acknowledge the
Ceremonies and other injunctions of Antichrist to be naught, and yet subscribed
to all, and used many, but upon other grounds then the former sorts, viz. That
they might get into, and keep their Livings, and be capable of preferment; and
these corruptions of the times they yielded to (as they pretended) for
necessity sake rather then to leave their Ministry.

4. The fourth sort are those few faithful men who stood out and (as much as
in them lay) opposed the superstitions and corruptions of the times, and left
their Ministry rather then offend God, having learned that rule of the
Apostle, not to do evil that good may come thereof; and knowing that God has
no need of men's sins to accomplish his works.

The two first sorts of these Churchmen (as they call them) are cashiered; the
fourth sort so discountenanced, that they either lurk in obscure places, or are
gone beyond the seas; for parish Churches they meddle with none, under the
notion of visible Churches. The third sort are the men for these times, who
have so great influence upon all sorts of men, that if the Parliament and
Army, and all other men dance not after their pipe, they are Heretics,
Schismatics, Sectaries, disturbers of the peace, and hinderers of Reformation.


Pr. I do confess that in our Church there have been Ministers of all those
sorts which you have described: but the third sort whom you seem to blame are
they who suffered under the corruptions of the times, and yet fulfilled their
Ministry, and subscribed for necessity sake, rather then the Church of God
should be deprived of their labors. These now are, and then were, constrained
to bear the burden and heat of the day; and of this sort (for the most part)
are all the chief actors in the intended Reformation, and we find many of them
have given a worthy Testimouy to the truth of Jesus Christ, and against the
Heresies of the times.


Ph. I knew no necessity there was for them to keep their livings upon those
terms. And for the Testimony which these men have given, if you mean in
writing, I think their Testimony is partly true and partly false. But very
few of these men ever gave testimony to the truth, so far as to suffer much
for Christ, not so much as to hazard their Livings. It Is an easy matter to
testify against Blasphemies against God and the Persons in the Trinity, and
against those errors, which being repugnant to diverse Articles of the Creed,
are declaimed against both by the Papists and loose Protestants. But I never
heard any of these men declaim against the corruptions of the times, nor
confess their own errors in Symbolizing with Antichrist, and receiving of the
mark of the Beast, to the scandal of the Gospel, and prejudice of the Church
of God.


Pr. Alas you know not what the mark of the Beast is; I can tell you what it
is, but I desire to know what you mean by it.


Ph. I shall declare that to you, not as any conjecture of mine own, but from
the learned, and some such as you cannot well refuse their testimony. Learned
Naper a Baron of Scotla. expounding 13. Rev. 16. says that the Cross is the
mark of the Beast; and amongst diverse reasons he gives for such his opinion,
this is one, viz. Because all men are enticed under the color of the Name of
Christ to reverence that Character. Bellarmine, who knew the use of the Cross
in the Church of Rome, says it is Gods mark mentioned Ezekiel. 9.4. Bellar, not.
in lit, P in Gram. Ebr. and cont. de effect. Sacram. lib. 2. page 221. and de
Sacram confir. li. 2, cap. 13. page 371. And he makes it the chiefest mark of
the Church of Rome, because nothing can be consecrated without it. A mark is
that by which any thing is known. Brightman in Apoc. 13.16. another learned
man, says, That the mark of the Beast contains summarily all those ways by
which men are bounden to the obedience of Antichrist.

Reverend Paraeus in Apoc. 13.16. agrees with profound Doctor Robert Abbot,
whose exposition upon the place above named he commends, and recites it
thus: To the common Character (or mark) appertain those things which are
practiced by all Antichristians, as the observation of Fasts and holy days
instituted by the Pope, the worshipping of their breaden God, and doing other
things not commanded of God. And Paraeus upon the next words says, No man may
buy, receive, or sell the holy wares of Masses, Indulgencies, Absolutions,
Dispensations, Tithes, etc. but these Spiritual Hucksters, marked with this
perpetual character, to wit, Bishops, Priests, Monks, and the like Merchants
of souls, citing that place, 2 Pet. 2.7. Through covetousness shall they with
feigned words make merchandise of you. And that of Paul, 2 Timothy 6.5. They
suppose godliness is a gain (or merchandise). What think you now is the mark
of the Beast?


Pr. These things may be the mark of the Beast, but what do they concern us?


Ph. They do most of them belong to you the pretended Clergy of England, I
mean to the Formalists of this age, who have held their Livings, and subscribed
for pretended necessity sake.


Pr. Show me how that can be, the things mentioned before agree to the popish
Priests.


Ph. So do they (for the most part) agree to you and your fellows, little
differing in these things from the Papists; and our pretended Clergy have
received them from the Church of Rome, and have practiced the same etc. Viz.

1. First they have subscribed to, and used the sign of the Cross, the chief
of all Popish Ceremonies.

2. Secondly, they have observed Popish Fasts and holy days, and many other
superstitions in the worship of God, without warrant of the Word.

3. Thirdly, they have subscribed and conformed to the Book of Common Prayer,
which makes their holy days equal to the Lords day. See the beginning of
that Book.

4. Fourthly in their subscription they made themselves the Prelates, and so the
Popes vassals and servants, and took their licenses to preach from them.

5. Fifthly they have dealt in those Wares and Merchandises, Dispensations for
non-residence, Absolutions, Tithes, and the bodies and souls of men, the proper
merchandise of Rome.

6. Sixthly they have received the names of such spiritual Merchants as are of
the devising of Antichrist, as Priests, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, although they
refuse the names of Monks, savouring of too much austeritie of life, yet more
ancient and inoffensive.

7. Seventhly and lastly, their kneeling in the act of receiving is little
better then bread-worship, or God under the form of bread.


Pr. You strain things very far; I shall not trouble my self to answer your
conjectures; only the last thing by you mentioned is very offensive to me, for
I hold kneeling in the act of receiving, to be the most reverend gesture, and
practiced it upon that ground, the rather because enjoined by the Church.


Ph. I intend not a large discourse about abolished Ceremonies, but advise you
so far to view them as they concern the matter we spoke of, which is the mark
of the beast, of which this is a part.

1. For first kneeling was enjoined in reverence to the Sacrament, as appears
by King Edward's second book of Commonprayer.

2. Secondly it was never used or known till after the Lateran Council anno
1215. where the carnal presence of Christ was decreed. The next Pope Honorius
the third, within seven years after decreed kneeling in the act of receiving,
in regard of that (supposed) carnal presence of Christ. [ Fox Act and mo.
Dial. between Custom and verity, Book 2. page 780. Col. 1.]

3. Thirdly upon that ground of the carnal presence, Bellarmine urges
kneeling, affirming it were dangerous to kneel, or worship: (for its all one)
if Christ were not corporally present. Bellar. contr l. 3. de euch. cap. 21.
pa. 633. A. and cap. pa. 634.


Pr. Well, notwithstanding what you say, I conceive the admitting and
submitting to the authority and supremacy of the Bishop of Rome to be the mark
of the Beast.


Ph. If that be so, and nothing else be the mark of the beast, then have not
many of the Popish Congregations of France received the mark of the beast: for
they allow not of the Popes Supremacy. Nor more did the very City of Rome
submit until about 230. years since. Call. Just. li. ca. 11. Ser. 14.


Pr. I have nothing to say to the Congregations of France, but these men whom
you thus mark with the mark of the Beast, are the chief actors in the intended
reformation.


Ph. If these Formalists be the men, who must reform, and teach the way to the
people, I shall never look for reformation: I told you they have received the
mark of the Beast, as his vassalls and slaves, and have acted for Antichrist:
not only doing wickedly themselves, in subscribing to, and using popish
Ceremonies, superstitious, and humane inventions in the worship of God, having
no foundation from the word of God, which is the rule of his worship: but also
many of them have persuaded others therein to transgress, and by their
examples have caused many to fall with them into the breach of the second
Commandment.

For these sins they have manifested no repentance, nor given any satisfaction
to the Congregations to this day: for which cause God will never honor them so
far, as to make them instruments to reform the Churches. My opinion therein is
grounded upon that Text of holy Scripture, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever shall break one
of the least commandments, and teach men so shall be least in the Kingdom of
heaven, which I take to be meant of the Church of God, under the Gospel. And
it is to be therefore feared, that reformation will be deferred until the
carcases of the chief of these men are fallen in the Wilderness, that they may
never see the promised land.


Pr. You censure the faithful Ministers of the Church very uncharitablie, why
should you suspect their faithfulness in reforming Gods house: seeing they are
painful in their callings, and faithful in that which is committed to them.


Ph. I honor the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, and I beseech the Lord to
increase their number. But besides, what I have formerly said, I will remember
you of what passed in these last years; and by that you may judge of their
faithfulness, whom you so much commend. Its manifest in what condition the
Parliament found this whole Nation at their first meeting: even posting in all
have to Rome, longing after the Garlic and Onions of Egypt: and they had
Captains made to lead them thither; the whole Rabble of Prelates as their
Captains and cheifs. And the inferior Clergy, Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Priests, etc. with the rest of their Apocryphal, Ecclesiastical Orders, as
their Lieutenants, and inferior Officers: And these faithful men you speak of
(serving the time) made no head against the rest: but patiently bear what their
Lords put upon them, and so marched with the throng toward Egypt.


Pr. I cannot say, but that the Church of England (although the most famous
Church in the World) furnished with a most learned, and orthodox Clergy, had
many in it who were very corrupt and superstitious. But these are removed and
orthodox, godly and learned Divines of whom we formerly spoke, put in their
rooms and places.


Ph. You glory like the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, in your gifts and
graces, and know not your want and poverty, Rev. 3.17. Its partly true, that in
some places the ignorant, scandalous, and others, who would not take the
Covenant have been removed, and some of these orthodox men put in their rooms,
and that is, and will be the bane of these Churches and Churchmen. Take but a
view of their practices, and let that speak, how well they have carried
themselves within five years past, since they got their preferments; I could
instance in many places, where superstitious and blind bussards were put out of
their Livings, and some of these Orthodox men put in their rooms: and when
they had got good Livings, were they, or are they contented? Some hold livings
in the Country, and live in London, hardly ever coming to the flock, but to
take the fleece: Some hold two or three Livings a piece; some leave one and run
to another, when they can find a greater; nay, they will fight for a better
Living rather then loose it. And yet falsely bewitch the filly people to
believe, that its the call of God so to do, when its nothing else but the
delusion of Satan, and of their own wicked hearts to satisfy their ambition
and avarice. See but how these men press the Committee for plundered Ministers
for augmentations, and removals from day to day, and how they engage Parliament
men to act for them, calling themselves in their Certificats, and Petitions,
godly, learned, and orthodox Divines. And it is observed in the Country, that
many of those who are thus put in, prove more proud, covetous, and contentious
then those which were put out. And I doubt not, but when these men's bellies are
full, and they at ease, they will agree to make a golden Calfe, and rise up to
play as their Predecessors did. And I do believe that those who serve their
cures as they (call them) by a Deputy, will without repentance go to heaven by
a Deputy.


Pr. Although I will not excuse all the Clergy of the land, who have two
Livings, nor their removal from place to place, where they had sufficient
maintenance before: nor the pride, contention, or avarice of some of them: yet
I know many of the Clergy, of whom I know there is no cause, to fear their
revolting or falling into popish errors, or superstitions, or other ill
courses, they being known to be religious and godly men. It is true, some are
constrained to take two livings, for that one will not maintain them, and
others for a time to hold two Livings, because they are not sure of the better
holding it, but during the Sequestration.


Ph. Sir, I doubt you have been a little tacked with that Epidemicall disease
of a pluralist, and guilty of removing from place to place. But I must tell you
your excuse will not bear you out at Gods Tribunal. The very Popish Doctors
and Cannon Law condemn plurality of Benefices in a Presbyter: men do not use
to put away their wives, nor take another to her, which formerly he had upon
such pretenses. The truth is, the preaching of the gospel is merely made a
trade to get money; they preach for hire, run before they be called, come in at
the window like a thief, and preach according to their pay: provided they may
have sufficient to keep contempt from the Clergy; be as powerful as the
Popish Doctors, and able through their abundance to contend with their whole
Parish, and swagger in their silks as their Predecessors did, they will be
content,: otherwise they will tell you, you rob God in not paying their Tithes,
and do not allow them honorable maintenance.


Pr. These things which you charge the Ministers with, are inconsistent with
honesty and religion; and I told you many of the Clergy, who intend the
reformation (according to the foundation, laid by the Parliament, by advice of
the Reverend Assembly of Divines) are godly Orthodox and learned men, whom in
charity you are bound to belive, can never fall into damnable errors,
heresies, or abominable practices.


Ph. Touching their final estate, I will not judge, but leave that to Almighty
God: yet this I dare say, none of these men are better then Peter, who once
acted the Devils part: nor better then Aaron, who upon like pretense, as these
men have, viz. necessity or convenience joined to make the golden Calf: nor
are they better then their predecessors, whose mouths were stopped, and their
judgments blinded with honorable maintenance and preferment. Consider but this;
Cranmer and Ridley (although godly Bishops and Martyrs) were two of those, who
opposed King Edward the fixed, and his Council in the case of Mr. Hooper, when
he would have omitted popish Ceremonies at his entrance into his Bishopric.
Act. Mon. vo. pa. 146. Also call to mind Jewel, Babbington, Chapel, Mr.
Hutton, Davenant, Morton, Whitgift, To: Abbot, Pilkington, and Hall, who all
deserved well of the Church of God, (and better then most of these Orthodox
men, whom you so much admire) whilst they continued in their uprightness,
before they were laden with honor, and honorable maintenance. But see how they
carried themselves afterward, some of them turned notable persecutors, others
grew idle, some erroneous, if not heretical in their judgments: And attained
with their Lordships, Hierarchicall superstitions. I could name others of
inferior rank, of great note for learning, piety, and soundness of judgment,
even in points controversall, who upon conformity (after long standing out)
accepted great livings, and presently became the very Atlas's of popish
Ceremonies. Upon all which I conclude, that these pretended reformers, having
heretofore tasted of the Devils broth in their conformity and subscription,
and having not yet repented of it, will shortly fall to eat the flesh, and
swallow up any thing which makes not against their honor, or profit.


Pr. You cast very foul aspersions upon our reverend Clergy, and have drawn
me into a discourse, which I never intended, I intimated to you before, that
it is the peoples fault that they do not join with their Ministers, to settle
the Church, and reform the abuses in the same. It Is an easier matter to find
a fault then to amend it: for my part, I think the perverseness, and peevishness
of the people is the cause which hinders Reformation, for that they will abide
no government, but every one will be of his own Religion without control.


Ph. I cannot excuse all the people, nor think I all faulty, who are afraid of
having their Religion measured out unto them by the Presbytery: especially by
the rigid sort, who account all error and heresy, which suites not with their
conceptions, and all men schismatics, and Sectaries, whose consciences are not
just of their size; and yet I am persuaded that reformation goes not forward,
is chiefly the fault of the pretended Clergy.


Pr. How can that be? or how does it appear?


Pr. Because most of the pretended Ministers must be casheired, before there
can be any reformation: for either the Ministers are dumb, blind guides: or
else so profane, irreligious, or superstitious, that if they be reformers,
their Elders in all probabilities will be of the same stamp to join with them:
And then I leave it to you to judge, what reformation here is like to be, when
Satan must cast out Satan.


Pr. This is the condition, but of few places, many being better furnished,
both with Ministers and people.


Ph. The most of the best sort of Ministers stand so much upon their own
interests: and besides are in so great slaverie to their Patrons, that we see
they strain their wits, to advance their own honor and profit, and to please
men; least either their Livings should suffer any diminution: or some one find
a hole in their coat, some Symonie, lapse, or other flaw in their Title,
whereby to put them out of their Living, which before they will loose, the most
will adventure their souls. And upon these grounds it is, that every one living
within the compass of their Parish, or their perambulation walk must be
acknowledged one of their flock, and coming to Church, he is (without doubt) a
member of the visible Church, how ignorant or wicked soever; or else how can
they demand any Tithes or offerings from them. And for the same reason the
Ministers labor to preserve their Parishes entire, and not to leave out any
part thereof, least they loose the Tithe and benefit which comes by it. And
hence is it that they maintain every Parish to be a visible Church, although
there be neither lawful Minister, nor any Congregation of faithful people
there, who have given any testimony, that they are members of Christ, or of
the household of faith.


Pr. These things may easily be amended: and I presume when the Church is
settled, and the Presbyterian government, with the Classes and Synods confirmed,
these things which are amiss may be altered, or changed; they are but petty
blemishes, and the Ministers will therein satisfy the weak, and such as are
offended: But its well you have no greater matters to charge them with.


Ph. I could acquaint you with other abominable things, maintained by your
Ministers on purpose to satisfy their lusts of pride and covetousness (to
which all other things are but drudges) besides, what I formerly told you off,
which although you account them petty matters: yet are they repugnant to the
essence of a Church of Christ: And I see none goes about to amend them: they
have Elders and Officers chosen as if they intended reformation; but the
Ministers and their confederates, the Elders do but provoke the Lord, grieve
his holy Spirit, and mock and abuse the people of God. Where is any of your
great Presbyters that ever confessed that his Parish was too great, and the
people too many, although they were twenty thousand, and his Living worth 500
l. per annum: or that any of the people were so wicked that he would spare
them out of his Church: or desired to have his Parish divided that he might
make way for others more able or worthy then himself. Least also he should
part with some of his Tithes and so diminish his revenue and greatness, which
is against his honor and profit.


Pr. I have already given you satisfaction to that you now said, and tell you
again we must not expect to have a reformation at once; its a matter requires
time and authority to compel obedience to the Orders of the Church, and then
you shall see the Presbytery act vigorously, and reformation will undoubtedly
go on apace. But I pray you what are those other things to which you take
exception, as things abominable, and yet maintained by the Clergy?


Ph. They defend and maintain their Popish callings from the Prelates, their
old conformity and subscription (which engaged them to be the Prelates, and
so the Popes Vassals) the Patrons right to present to the Churches, the Popish
and Apocryphal names of Priests, Parsons, Vicars and Curates; the Book of
Common Prayer, and Homilies, and use of popish Ceremonies, maintenance by
Popish and superstitious offerings, double benefices, leaving one living, when
they can get a greater, thrusting themselves upon people without their suffrage,
consent, maintaining Popish Vestries, being a mear mockery of Christ's
Ordinance, as if they intended to separate the precious from the vile, when
they do nothing less. All which things with others might easily be showed to
be abominable, and not to be suffered in the Churches of Christ. Besides
these, they plead stiffly, that marrying, burying, and funeral Orations belong
to the Ministerial function: and allow of all children to be baptized,
although the Children of Turks and Infidels, (but especially those of their
Parish) if they be offered to them, how wicked soever their parents are. And
in like manner they admit all to the Lords Supper, how unfit soever, if they
come but to Church. These, and others such like have I heard pleaded for with
great confidence, whilst they have blamed others, who take upon them to
preach, not having such callings, as they howsoever gifted; and yet for
advantage they will bear with any novice, or ignorant fellow, having been two
or three years: or it may be less at the Universitie, and put him up into the
Pulpit, not doubting of his calling to the Ministry: And all these in order to
the service of these men's pride and covetousness.


Pr. I perceive you find fault almost with every thing, although never so
ancient and inoffensive: What can you say against Marriage, why it should not be
accounted to belong to the Ministry, having been so long used in the Church.


Ph. I answer, that Marriage is a civil action, and belongs to the Magistrate
to see it orderly done, and so was used under the Law, and is so used at
New England, and in other reformed Churches at this day. Ruth. 4.9. Lechfield
news, etc. page 39. Its true, that in corruption of time when Antichrist
prevailed above the civil power, it was brought into the Church that the
Priest might have an oar in every boat, and no man marry but whom they
permitted. And by this means it was looked to that the Priests might not
marry, and those persons who did marry must have the Parish Priests
Certificate, or License, least any grist should go by their mill.


Pr. This may be true, and yet the thing not unlawful; for the Minister in the
face of the Congregation to join the married couple, and to give them some
good exhortation fit for such a Solemnity.


Ph. Why may not as much be done by a godly Magistrate being a civil action,
and common to all Nations? But that is not all: after the Marriage was annexed
to the Ministerial function, the Church of Rome soon made it a Sacrament, and
the Ring must needs be added as the outward sign of love, the invisible grace,
that as the Ring is endless, the married couples love should be endless. A
worthy Sacrament, and without doubt fit to be retained in the Church, for the
benefit of the Clergy, both in respect of honor and profit, the two maine
things of all their designs.


Pr. But I pray you, why may not burying the dead be a fit action for the
Minister, and a funeral Sermon requisite for them which are living?


Ph. For burying the dead. Its also a civil work of Charity for Christians to
accompany the corp's of their dead friends to the grave, and to lay them there
without more ado: and the dead also may bury their dead; And what the
Minister has there to do more then another man I know not.


Pr. Its fit he should give some exhortation to the people: and if he preach a
Funeral Sermon, its done for the edification of the living, and not for the
dead, and preaching is good in season and out of season.


Ph. I confess the word ought to be preached in season and out of season: but
some times and places are so unseasonable, as no christian prudence will admit
it convenient to preach (as the times now are) for a man to preach in
Westminster Hall when Judges are sitting (though Paul preached upon Mars-hill
(the Judges Court) at Athens) or to preach a Sermon in a common hall, when a
company are at dinner, where no man regards, these times and places are too
unseasonable, there being convenient times and places for such religious
actions. And for your exhortation or funeral Sermon, they are more inconvenient
and unseasonable, then at any other time and place, being more abused; and the
very original being naught.

1. First, we read of no such thing in the Scripture, only we find godly men
used to accompany others to the grave, and sometimes made lamentation for them.

2. Secondly, these funeral Sermons (or rather Orations) were first used by the
Heathen, and then taken up by the Church of Rome, who used at these Solemnities
to praise the dead.

3. Thirdly, thence the Church of Rome came to pray for the dead, and to this
day defend it stiffly. And therefore as a learned man once said in a Sermon in
my hearing, we have left praying for the dead, for the evil of it; we may as
well leave off praising the dead by reason of the abuse of it.

4. Fourthly, now besides this the corruption of the times are such, that the
gift for the funeral Sermons, so blinds the eyes of the Ministers, that
generally they always find out one thing or other, to commend the dead for,
although most prodigiously wicked (as what man in his sickness, or at some
other time, will not do or say some good) for which the Minister presently (in
conceit) places the dead party in Paradise: to the woeful hardening of the
wicked (many of their auditors) in a course of sin, when they hear as bad as
themselves absolved by the Minister, as a Saint departed, and a faithful
brother, according to the blind charity of our Service Book. And were it not
that some profit comes to the Clergy by these funeral Orations, they would as
easily be laid aside, as their prayer and exhortation at the grave, for which
they had nothing given unto them.


Pr. You seemed before to take exception to the Baptism of Infants, and truly
you reason like an Independent, who are for the most part Anabaptists.


Ph. I do not disallow of the Baptism of some Infants, whom I conceive to have
right to Baptism: but I do not allow of the Baptism of all children
indifferently: nor of all such children whose Parents profess Christianity.


Pr. The ancient Fathers testify the Baptism of Infants in the Church to be
an Apostolical Institution, and to have been used from the Apostles times,
when whole households were baptized, and no exception of children. And there are
many reasons, and unanswerable arguments grounded upon Scripture, both in the
old and New Testament, to warrant it. And the very Text it self is clear, Acts
2.39. The promise is made to you, and to your children, etc. And if the promise
be made to them (children) they then have right to the sign, or seal of the
promise.


Ph. Touching what you alledg from the Fathers, I confess, I have not all those
books in my custody, which I find cited for this purpose; but I have searched
diverse of them, and if you please to examine them, they make nothing for you.
All agree in this, that Infants were baptized in the Primitive Church: and
Augustine affirms it to be an Apostolical Tradition. August. contr. Donat. l.
4. ca. 23.24. Lib. 10. de genesis ad liter. ca. 23. Ciril. in levi. l. 4. But this
does not prove that the children of Heathens; nor of all such who professed
christianity were baptized, how wicked and lewd soever their parents were: or
whither of the Church, or excommunicate. And such as hold all ought to be
baptized, hold that children dying without Baptism cannot be saved. Cipri.
Epi: ad fidum. 137.

And for your Arguments from Scripture, you can thence conclude nothing, But
that the Infants of believers have been, and may be baptized. And if you
observe where you find whole Families baptized, as the Jailor, Acts
16.14.15.33, 34. and Lydia's, the Parents, at least one of them were believers.
And touching that place in the Acts, which only seems so plain to you, If I
should admit the promise there mentioned to be that which you mean, which may
very well be questioned, it makes nothing to prove that for which its
intended, by the men of your opinion, who will have all the children in their
Parish, if their parents come to Church, to be baptized. The next words clear
it from such construction, and give you a full answer. The promise is made to
you and to your children, and to such as are a far off; (but the Apostle
further adds) even as many as the Lord our God shall call, so that by your
construction, this must be concluded. Converts have right to the promise, and
so have their children, etc. You conceive the State has done well, in
debarring the wicked and abominable from the Lords Table, and if the Parents be
separated, or excommunicate (so I account them who are debarred from that
Sacrament) how can their children have right to the other, as being born of
believing Parents.


Pr. We conceive, we have sufficient warrant to baptize all Infants that are
brought to us, being offered in the Church to be baptized: For although their
immediate Parents were neither of them Beleivers, yet some of their ancestors
might be (and we are bound in charity to believe they were) Believers: for God
shows mercy to thousands of generations of them that love him.


Ph. You are without doubt singular in your opinion, and upon this ground all
the children of Turks are to be baptized (if offered in the Congregations)
because they proceed from Abraham by Hagar; and all the Jews, because they
proceed from Sem: yea, and all the Gentiles, because they proceed from Japheth;
and all the world, because they proceed from Adam, I never heard asserted,
until of late, nor do I think any Orthodox Divine will maintain it. I confess,
I once heard something to that purpose, from a Minister whom you know very
confidently affirmed. But afterward he having to deal with the Anabaptists,
forsook that hold, and stood only upon that point to prove, that some Infants
had right to (or might be) baptized, which he then, and at other times proved
by Doctor Featleys arguments against the Anabaptists.


Pr. How ever it may be with the children of Turks, and other Infidels, yet
there is no doubt, but the children of such as are members of the Church by
outward profession (although we see not the signs of grace and election in
them) have right to Baptism.


Ph. I account godless, impenitent persons living in the bosom of the Church
as Infidels, and Heathens, and the Apostles rule is so, and in the language of
the Scripture, they are dogs and swine, to whom holy things are not to be
given, nor the childrens bread to be cast to them, Matthew. 7.6. And their
children (where neither Parent can be judged a believer, which no notorious
wicked man or woman can be) are pronounced unclean, 1 Corinthians. 7.14. How ever
God may show mercy, the Church ought to judge according to outward appearance,
and not to admit the wicked Parents to the one Sacrament, nor their children to
the other, without reformation in the Parents, or one of them.

But I pray you, why was not the child baptized, which was brought (from
another Parish) to your Congregation to be baptized, I understand the Minister
refused to baptize it.


Pr. Its true, but it was not refused upon your ground, the Minister consulted
with the heads of the Parish, and upon debate of the matter, they concluded it
was not fit it should be baptized there, least it might be chargeable to the
Parish.


Ph. I am sorry to hear this carnal resolution from such a Minister, and so
long taught a people. It seems some Ministers and people dare transgress the
Law of God, if it be for advantage. As the Pharisees taught upon pretense of
their Corban (the Box) But how does this agree with that tenet, that all
children of such as are members of the Church, by outward profession (which all
are in that Parish where that Child was born) ought to be baptized.


Pr. If it be a fault, let him, or them answer for it, who did it, it may be
they are able to give satisfaction therein. But touching that which you said
before, that some are to be accounted unclean; we cannot censure any, as
profane or unclean: nor keep them from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: the
Minister cannot do it of himself, without the Elders, (Church Officers) join
with him: Although the Minister know the Communicants, to be prodigiously
wicked or ignorant, and in all probability eat and drink their own judgment,
or damnation, he cannot keep them from the Sacrament: Such must be suspended by
the Church, before the Minister can refuse to admit them; and until then their
children ought not to be denied the Sacrament of Baptism, for the reason
before alleged.


Ph. Touching admitting all to the Lords Supper upon that ground, because the
Minister cannot refuse them, not being prohibited by the Church (you mean the
Presbytery) I answer, the Minister is bound to forbear to administer the
Sacrament to them, whom he knows eat and drink their own judgment for the
reasons aforesaid: Although you have not the power of the Church Censures in
your hand. The reason is clear, because it is always a sin to give holy things
to dogs, and to profane Gods Ordinances. But its no sin to forbear, to
administer a Sacrament upon just occasion for a time. The Jews were not
reproved for omission of Circumcision in the Wilderness: Joshua 5.5. and the
Passover upon just occasion might be deferred for a month. Numb. 9.9.10. And
although I think it no sin to communicate with the wicked in the Ordinances,
where I am not a personal actor, nor approver of their sin, but a partaker. Yet
its without doubt, a sin to be an actor in such a case; for the actor
transgresses the rule, and causes others to transgress.


Pr. It seems you stumble at mixed Congregations, do you ever think to find a
Church on earth so clean, as not to have wicked men in it. The tares will grow
in the field with the wheat until the harvest which is the end of the world.


Ph. I confess, your mixed Parochial Congregations do so far make me stumble,
that I much question whether they can be reputed true visible Churches of
Christ; And I hold that many of them are not, having not the essentials,
either the material, nor formal causes of a Church, in Gospel sense; but are
rather the Synagogues of Satan, like Priests, like people, and the best are
leprous, and very unclean.

I know the Tares shall grow with the wheat; Matthew. 13.38. but if you mean by
Tares, profane wicked men, they shall grow in the field, that is, in the world,
not in the Church: the Tares which shall be in the Church until the harvest
are hypocrites; profane men shall be cashiered, or rather never admitted into
the Churches of Christ. But I cannot devise, how its possible these Parochial
Congregations can be purged without disbanding, there are so few, who are fit
to be Church Members, and so many of the wicked.


Pr. Although we have not the Discipline set up to sweep, and cleanse the
Church: yet we endeavor to put a difference between the precious and the vile,
and to give every one their portion, and to order things in the best manner we
can, both for the Ministry and people.


Ph. Its true, you have the Image, or rather counterfeit of some such thing, as
putting a difference in he Popish Vestries. But I pray you what garments have
you to keep there, that the Vestrie must needs be upheld, the Whoores smock,
with the Cope, Rochet, Tippet, and other trumperie are gone. And I know not any
of Baals Priests here, who now use such vestments, that there is any need of a
Vestrie to put them in, or that so many men need be trusted with them.


Pr. That meeting which you scoff at is no such Vestrie, its only a place for
the heads of the Parish to meet in, to consult about the affairs and Orders of
the Church, and for settling and choosing the Minister, when there is need, and
providing maintenance for him.


Ph. It seems then that those Vestrie-men, who are there to consult, are more
worthy then the rest (who are without) and may not intermeddle with these
things about which they consult. These do very well resemble the conclave of
Cardinals at Rome, advising about the choosing, deposing and ordering the
affairs of the Pope, and his Church. But I pray you, by what Law of God have
these your Vestrie men authority to elect, and put out the Minister, and to
prescribe rules and Laws for the residue of the people; I protest against all
their Orders and agreements, how just soever they may seem, as not daring to
submit to such an usurped power, being contrary to Christian liberty, in
which the Apostle Paul commands the Galatians, and in them all Christians to
stand fast, and to maintain the same as being purchased by Christ himself. Gal.
5.1. compared with chap. 3.1. 3. chap. 4.10.


Pr. I confess this Vestrie is not a right Presbytery, nor claim they any such
power by color of any divine Law: But yet for order and conveniencie, I think
they ought to be tolerated until the time of reformation. But Sir, what does
this concern you: It becomes you to be a hearer, and a learner, rather then a
Teacher having no calling thereunto.


Ph. It concerns me, and every Christian as a member of the Church (if your
Church be a true Church) to elect our own Minister, and not to have him thrust
upon us, either without or against our wills or consents, as the manner now is.
And he that comes in otherwise then by the suffrage of the people, enters not
by the door, but comes in as a Thief and a Robber, and has no lawful calling.
Calvin. Instit. l. 4. ca. 3. Sect. 15. Act. 14.23.


Pr. For our calling to the Ministry, we doubt not of it: nor ever questioned
it, being confident its warrantable. Those who ordained us being Bishops and
lawful Presbyters: or at least they stood in the place of such; and acts don
by them are valid; Sacraments administered by Papists and other heretics, are
right Sacraments, so they be duly administered, for the matter, although joined
with their corruptions. And I hold it unlawful for any man, to take upon him
the Office or function of a Minister, without a lawful calling.

And I find that in those ancient Canons, called the Canons of the Apostles,
it is ordained that one Bishop may ordain a Presbyter.


Ph. This is a poor and insufficient calling, if a Bishop had any authority to
ordain a Minister, or to judge of his gifts in order to his admission to a
Church, which I deny (and the same is a point of Popery) yet, that thereupon
the Churches suffrage, or assent should be by the Bishop conferred upon the
Minister, is against all sense and reason, much more against Religion, which
ought to be squared by the word as the Rule. Mar. de vulson. de libert. de le
Eglises, Gallicane. Page 148. ca. 9. And for your Canons of which you speak,
none regard them; but the more ignorant sort of Papists, they being known to be
of a later date then the Apostles: and are credited as much as Lucianus
scoffs: Tobits and Judiths stories, or Jeffery Munmouth his tales. And those
Canons were coined just at his time, some four hundred years since, by some of
Jeffery's Religion. But can you show no more then this for your calling, then
give over railing against others who have not the same, and yet it may be a
better calling then you have.


Pr. Why, what do our Ministers of the Church of England want, or what is
requisite to a lawful Calling to the Ministry.


Ph. Besides abilities of gifts, and inward graces, every Minister ought to
have a more due ordination, and this is to be performed by the Church or
Congregation, for the better effecting whereof, they may take the advice of the
learned, who are able to make trial of his gifts, and of his ability, and
aptness to teach.

And then the same is perfected by the free election, or suffrage of the people
who are Church Members: And in these things the Scripture is plain; show how
you have such a calling.


Pr. For the first, I had thought I had given you satisfaction already, when I
told you we were ordained by Bishops, who had ability to judge of the
Ministers gifts, and were (or stood in the place of) true Presbyters. And for
that which you call Election, or the Suffrage, or assent of the people,
although it have no place with us, regarding every circumstance in the
formalitie of it, yet we have that which is equivalent to it.


Ph. I pray you what is that?


Pr. We, at the least some of us have the consent of the Parish, or at least
the most of them, either before, or after our admission, and if not, we are
presented by the Patron of the Church, who is instead of all the Congregation,
being their representative, in as much as he was entrusted by them all, to
choose for them all in regard of their weakness, and to avoid confusion in the
election: and his act in presenting is the act of all the people, as the Acts
of Parliament, being made by those who are chosen by the people, are the Acts of
the people. And the people are bounden as well by the Acts of the one, as of
the other: yet, if any man except against the person presented, he bath his
liberty to do it.


Ph. O most profound divinity: or rather notable popery. By the same Rule,
and upon the same ground, the Pope collated to many Churches in England, and
the Bishops had the oversight of all the Churches in their Diocesses (some
peculiars excepted) and put in, and put out at their pleasures, and this must
be allowed for the people surrendered (or rather yielded up by compulsion) into
the hands of these wolves (pretending to be Shepherds) all their right and
power. But alas, this grew through corruption of time, when Antichrist was come
to his height, then he and his Prelates inthralled the Churches, and wrested
from the poor people that right which the Gospel gave unto them, and which
continued for the first three hundred years after Christ; as is confessed by
the Papists and Protestants. Fullers holy state, li. 2. ca. 12. pa. 87. Acts
1.23. and 6.5. Calvin. Instit l. 4. ca. 19. Sect. 31. and 14. Se. 31. Cath
Divine. An. Caudrey Case. Prefa. sect. 8. Magd: Cent. 2. ca. 7. cent. 3. c. 7
Cipr. epist. l. 1. epist. 4. and epist. 3. and l. 1.3. epist. 11.

But these Wolves made void the Law of God, by their Traditions; and the
slavish Ministry of England are unwilling to come out of this Babylonish
servitude; but with Issachar, because he sees rest is good (or rather his
Benefice fat) he croucheth down under the burden. But see the use and equity
of it in our days; it may be at the first this power of presentation was given
to a good man (or rather he took it) because he founded or endowed the Church)
but by revolution of times it comes by descent or purchase to an Atheist, a
Papist, a Symonist, or some wretch not fit to be trusted with the life and
death of a dog, much less with the souls of men. And by this means the souls
of men according to that Prophecy become the merchandise of Rome, for who
sees them not set to sale almost by every Patron? yea and their bodies too,
Rev. 18.13. (...). for according to the number of the people, and the profit of
their bodily labors is the Advowson sold for more or less. And I know no other
way in all the world, how the bodies and souls of men can be made the
merchandise of Rome, but by this means: nor is the Prophecy any other way
fulfilled; for if it should be meant of selling slaves, that properly belongs
to the Turks.


Pr. But I told you (although some Patrons prove Latrons, and sell the
Presentations) the people may except against the party presented, if he be not
a worthy man, and if they do not, its their own fault.


Ph. You had need to have more skill in Divinity then you have in the Law:
Alas this Liberty is but a mere gullerie and cousenage of the people. If any
one refuse to admit, or do keep out the party presented. And a quare impedit,
or such Writ be brought to try the right, Gods Law never comes into question,
but only who has the best title to present by the Law of the Land, which is
Popish in that point (as in many others the Lord of heaven amend it) and
looks only upon the presentation as a temporal right without judging the
matter, as appertaining to Religion: therefore I pray you speak no more of this
matter; for the more you stir in in it, the more it stinks: But show me some
better evidence of your calling.


Pr. I will show you sufficient; We have abilities and gifts fit for the
Ministry, being apt to teach, and able to divide the word of truth aright;
And our Ministry is sealed by the conversion of souls: and however our
outward calling in a nicetie may be defective: yet we have the inward, which is
most effectual; and therefore there is no cause of separation.


Ph. For your calling I account it not right, for what you formerly alleged:
And for that you last said its no proof that your calling to the Ministry is
lawful: for a private man may be abundantly gifted, yea, and convert souls, as
common experience shows, and yet have no calling to the Ministry. And this
I dare farther add, and know by mine own observation, that God does not bless
the Ministers labors, who have received the mark of the Beast (by their
conformities and subscriptions) as he does the labors of other faithful men.
And the reason is, because they stood not in Gods ways, for if they had, they
should have turned the people from their iniquities. But for want of a faithful
Ministry, it has pleased God to bless the endeavors of godly Parents and
religious governors of families, and private Christians (who with Joshua serve
the Lord) to the conversion of many more souls then are turned unto God by
these men's Ministry, how learned and Orthodox soever. So that where a man can
hardly find any converted by the Ministry of these men, he may find the
footsteps of Religion and godliness derived from religious Parents and
Families, for the continuance of the Church from generation to generation, even
to admiration. And your old conformity and Subscription, which you are
constrained to defend by Popish arguments, when you have to deal against the
Brownists and Independents, are a great blemish to the Ministry.


Pr. We subscribed to nothing which was unlawful, although many things were
inconvenient.


Ph. Thanks be to God that we be rid of the Hierarchy of Archbishops,
Diocesan Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, and the rest of that rabble, the Books
of Common Prayer, Homilies, consecration of Priests and Deacons, with the
spiritual Courts, Licenses, Dispensations, Commutations of Penance,
Consecration of days to Saints, and some to wicked men and Idols, as the
Cross and the Rhoode, days observed by some, forbidding of meats and marriage
at some times, with their Canons and Ceremonies, Crosses, Surplices, worship of
the breaden God, and many other popish trinkets. All which the most ingenious
amongst your selves have condemned, as not capable of purgation, but fit to be
abolished: else I could easily prove the whole body of them (which are
contained in your Subscription) most of them being enjoined and set forth in
the Rubric, and the rest comprehended in your Oath and Canonical obedience to
be relics of Antichrist invented by that man of sin and his vassals; and are
at the best humane presumptions brought into the Church without warrant of the
Word, Vid. Preface to the Common Prayer Book, or teaching Ceremonies which
Christ only ought to appoint, who is the Teacher of his Church; and serve for
nothing else but to mis-leade the simple, and to offend the weak, and tend
only to conformity with Rome: And therefore altogether unlawful. But chiefly
the Cross (which in Baptism is made the sign and Seal of the whole work of
Sanctification is the worst of all Popish Ceremonies, and the greatest Idol in
the Romish Church (except the Virgin Marie) for that blesses all the rest, and
therefore is the greater, as Bellarmine teaches, Bellar. Contr. de sacra.
Confer. l. 2. c. 13. pa. 371. These things you know better then I do; yet I
name them thus briefly, that you may consider of them, and not wilfully hudwink
your conscience, and imprison or withhold the truth in unrighteousness, but
that you may come to the sight of that your sin; and as you have publicly
offended, you may make public satisfaction, by manifesting your repentance for
this public breach of the second Commandment.


Pr. Peter offended grievously in denying his Master, and yet we find no
public confession which he made of his sin, nor any such satisfaction as you
speak of.


Ph. Although his form of confession is not mentioned, yet its clear he
manifested his repentance so that it was fully taken notice of. What greater
manifestation of sorrow then tears; and what greater sign of repentance then
sorrow for sin with amendment; both which were evident in Peter; his sorrow,
his weeping is mentioned by three of the Evangelists, and one says he wept
bitterly. And the Evangelist Luke, who wrote the Gospel, either saw it himself,
or heard it from them which saw it, Luke 1.2. as he did the rest of the story
of our Lord in the flesh. And therefore no private weeping. And for his
repentance, it was answerable to his offense, otherwise his conscience could
never have been so well satisfied, nor would he have been so confident in
professing his love to Christ as afterward he was, John 21.16, 17. Nor did
Christ upbraid him for not manifesting his repentance, as he did Thomas for the
hardness of his heart and unbelief. And why should you think much to confess
your offense more then Patrick Adamson the late Archbishop of Andrews in
Scotland, Bartro. Apolog. in Exord. who confesses his sin and error touching
Church Government, and others have done the like.


Pr. If I were satisfied in my conscience that conformity and subscription to
these things was a sin, I should be willing to make satisfaction: I shall think
upon it further hereafter, and do what I find fit to be done as near as I can.


Ph. You speak ingeniousy, I have not known many Ministers of your condition
would say so much. I only offer you this consideration; you deservedly exspect
that such as have committed offenses against the seventh Commandment, something
less then the gross act of adultery, and that in private before it was
revealed should publicly give satisfaction to the Congregation; and it was
done so; Spiritual Adultery is worse then corporal. And every breach of the
second Commandment is a degree of it, and yours not the least. I leave you to
apply it, etc. And if I could see you repent of this sin you would then hate
the garment spotted by the flesh: and would cast off the very names of Parsons,
Vicars, Curates and Priests. And every name and thing belonging to Baal, and
say to them get thee hence.


Pr. What think you of the late Prebends, I think you cannot find more fauits
in them, then you impute to our painful ministry: And all men condemn them
as useless, and unprofitable.


Ph. The Prebendaries, although but of humane Institution were more tolerable
then these Parsons, Vicars and Curates, more innocent in their foundation or
Institution (at least many of them) less destructive to the Churches, and not
so diametrically opposite to the Kingdom of Christ in the outward
administration of it.


Pr. I am sorry you should justify a company of idle drones, who are justly
abolished as unprofitable burdens, and such as have eaten up the fat of the
Land: and consumed that which might have maintained many faithful Ministers.


Ph. You mistake me, I do not justify them, but comparatively (for I think
they are justly abolished) I say they are more tolerable, etc. and that I will
justify.


Pr. I hold it it impossible to prove that our Ministers, Parsons, Vicars, and
Curates are worse or less tolerable in any respect then the late Prebendaries.


Ph. Touching their persons as men, Scholars, or Preachers, I shall say
nothing but this, these Ministers and the Prebendaries were as sheep go to the
fould, some good some bad, some learned, others unlearned, some Preachers,
others dumb Dogs, some idle droanes, others more painful, some sober and
temperate; others given up to Luxury and drunkenness, some Politicians; others
moral honest men, some devout; others profane, some more Orthodox: others
erroneous and heretical, some more sincere and Gospellike; others wholly given
up to superstition.


Pr. I do confess of both sorts of these Churchmen there were, which have had
their vices and virtues, such as have been eminent for virtue and piety, aad
others infamous for wickedness. But wherein lies the difference that you prefer
one before the other, the worse before the better.


Ph. I prefer the Prebendaries in two respects. First relating to their
original or Institution. Secondly to their practice and condition of life. For
their original, I consider these Prebendaries as a civil society or
corporation, as a Hall or College in the Universitie, and so they were the
Bishops Council or Assistents, who was a Baron or Peer of the Realm having his
place in Parliament. Secondly, and for their practice and condition of life as
they were not, so they stood not as Ministers having (as you call it) cure of
souls, as the Parsons, Vicars, and Curats usually had.


Pr. This was not all their employment, or office; they pretended to be
Preachers and Ministers, and had much of the revenue of the Church in their
hands.


Ph. I confess the Prebendaries as many of your pretended Clergy have had fat
morsells for their little labor: But that seems to be the simplicity or
devotion of those who gave it to them. Howsoever if they did any service (as I
told you what was their Office) it could not be expected they should wait and
attend the Bishop as his Council for nothing; especially they being the
supports of his magnificence. And the matter of that Hierarchy being to be
upheld with so much policy.


Pr. Our Ministers serve for better use, and therefore to be preferred before
these Prebendaries: Is this all you can say for them?


Pr. No, I can say something more, I told you what they were in their
institution positively; now I will add something of their negative
righteousness, which I formerly touched at, viz. They were not originally
instituted to stand in the room of true Pastors, As our Parsons, Vicars, and
Curats were. They were only bound to preach (by themselves or others) certain
Sermons yearly in the Cathedral, not pretending to any Pastoral charge: And
so as they did little good they did little hurt. But when with their Prebends
they got Church Livings, and became Parsons and Vicars; they became more
guilty of the blood of souls then ever their Prebends could have made them.
Then they became Pluralists, idle droanes, Non-residents, kept out true
Pastors, made a strong faction against reformation, and to uphold their
Parsonages they joined with the rest to keep Christ out of his Kingdom.

Now lay all this together, your Parsons, Vicars and Curats are of the devising
of Antichrist without warrant of the word, and are such as I have described:
The Prebendaries and their appurtenances are justly cashiered, see now if it be
not high time to pluck up those also.


Pr. It does not appear to me there is any evil in these names, you shall find
many godly and Orthodox Divines, Parsons, Vicars and Curats, who show
themselves glad to be quit of all the Ceremonies, and heartily desire a through
reformation, and some of these are not ashamed of the name Priest.


Ph. I pray sir forsake these Apocryphal and Popish names, for a great part of
the Religion of Antichrist is wrapped up in such names of his Creation, as
Cardinals, Abbots, Priors, Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
Chancellrs, Commissaries, Parsons, Officials, Vicars, Curats, Priests, etc.


Pr. For all these names and Orders; but the four last we have nothing to do
with them: and what harm is in any of these four names; or what offense comes
by them, I know not.


Ph. I shall endeavor to let you know somewhat of that evil which I conceive
of them.

1. First, in their Institution and original (they having no foundation in the
Scripture) are of Antichrists devising, and in their nature and use contrary,
or unlike to the Ministers of the Gospel, who are only Pastors and Teachers.
For their original, they grew up in this manner. The Diocesan Bishop (who in
corrupt times was conceived to have the care of all the Churches in his
Diocese, which for the most part were endowed with all the Tithes of the
Parish) did usually appoint the Priests or Ministers, which indeed were but the
Bishops Curates or Clerks.

Fullers holy State. Lib. 2. cap. 12. p. 87. cites. Conci. Toledon. An. 589.
Can. 9.

Now when the Bishop had given to the Minister, the cure of souls, and care of
the Church, with all the Tithes and profits thereof, undiminished by his
Institution, he was called the Rector, or Parson, which very Institution being
accepted, was an acknowledgment that the right to the Church was originally in
the Bishop, and that made the Parson but the Bishops Curate: or rather servant
or Clerk: and so it continued until the dissolution of the Bishoprics.

2. Secondly, the Vicar (as a Clergie-man said) was created, or rather made by
the Devil or the Pope: for when the Parson grew too great, or the Patron had
founded a Monastery, or other superstitious house toward the maintenance
thereof, the tithes of several Parishes which formerly belonged to the
Churches, were appropriated, and this was done by the Patron with consent of
the Bishop, and the incumbent Priest, if there were any, and sometimes this
Appropriation was made by virtue of the Popes Bull: and then the care of the
Church was in the Governor of the house (or otherwise according to the
foundation) who served the cure (as they called it) that is performed the
Idolatrous service by a Monck of their house who was called the Vicar: and to
him there was allowed for his pains, sometimes a stipend in money, sometimes
the small Tithes, etc. such a proportion as he could agree for with his Master,
the Governor of the house: And when the house came to the Crown by dissolution,
it stood charged with that stipend: or else the Vicar had the small Tithes, or
such part thereof, as formerly was agreed for, and the Bulk of the Tithes
became a Lay fee, and were sold out, and enjoyed as the superstitious house
held them, and the Composition or endowment of the Vicar remained, and so
continues as his portion to this day for serving the Church, etc. But usually
he had his institution from the Bishop.

3. Thirdly, the Curate grew in this manner; when the Bishop held a Parsonage
in commendam in his own hands, to augment his Bishopric, or a Parson grew
idle; or had several Church Livings; then they hired some inferior Priest for
what they could to supply the cure for a year, a month or as they could
agree; and he was called the Curate, who came and went according to his pay,
and at the discretion or will of him that hired him: and so he continues to
this day.

I tell you these things not because I suppose you know them not, but to put
you in mind how unlike these orders are to the Ministers of the Gospel; for
you see the Gospel had nothing to do to approve or disapprove of the pretended
Minister, Parson, Vicar, or Curate, but all was originally in the Pope (or in
the Bishop his Vicegerent) from whom the Bishop originally received his power,
which continued here in force for many hundred years.

Cath. Devin. Respons: Cook. l. Caudrey. Case. pa.

4. And for the name Priest, its true it is a contract of Presbyter; but as its
used, it commonly signifies a Popish Mass Priest, and is a a derogation from
the Office of the Lord Christ; for I know none other sacrificing Priest in
Gospel-sense; but Christ who was the last Priest and the last Sacrifice.


Pr. Well, I account there is no evil in these nams, yet for offense sake I
shall be willing to leave them: and do conceive that the Ministers of the
Gospel who are to continue to the perfecting of the Saints are properly Pastors
and Teachers, who ought to be maintained liberally, and to have all
encouragement by payment of all things due unto them.


Ph. I have already told you what I conceive of their maintenance, and
particularly what I think of tithes: But there is one thing which I wonder at,
why the Ministers should stand so much upon superstitious offerings and
mortuaries.


Pr. They have been anciently belonging to the Church: and although they of the
Separation say they were the things of Idolaters, I doubt not but they may be
used being converted from their Idolatrous use.


Ph. As for those offerings which it seems you agree to be Popish, as indeed
the most of those Offerings were, which were offered at the Altar (called the
Altarage of the Church) some to Saints, Idols, or Devils to whom the Churches
were dedicated; others to the Virgin-Marie; Some for Tapers and Lights, and
other superstitious uses; others taken from the Jews by the Papists.

I conceive all these unfit to be given to, or received for the service of God:
for that some things of Idolaters, not Idolatrous in State, as their goods and
houses may be made use of for maintenance of the service of God: But those
things of theirs which were Idolatrous in State, that is, such as were invented
by Idolaters for perfecting their Idolatry, and served for no other use (as
all Popish Ceremonies and popish offerings) ought not to be used by Christians.

And for those Jewish offerings, it is no more lawful to use them to retain
Circumcision and other Ceremonies of which Paul says, If you be circumcised
Christ profits you nothing, Gal. 5.2. for that the retaining of Circumcision is
a forsaking of Christ, and makes us bound to fulfill the Law; and with that all
other Jewish Ceremonies are abolished.

And touching Mortuaries, they are a foolish and ridiculous offering, and were
anciently given as an amends and satisfaction to God (but they went to the
Priest) to purge the guilt of the deceased; which he contracted by his
non-payment of Tithes whilst he was living, and ought as well as other
Offerings be laid aside; according to that, Thou shall not bring the hire of a
Whore, nor the price of a dog into the house of the Lord, etc. And what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols. Deuteronomy. 23.18.


Pr. But now I pray you according to your judgment, what must become of all
our Churches; It seems by your argument (if one may believe you) they must all
be plucked down as the Brownists teach, what say you to that.


Ph. Touching the name CHURCH, in your sense I do not greatly like it; for it
properly signifies a Company, and is used for the company of the faithful,
yet for the present I shall admit the word by a Metonymie, to signify the
place of their meeting: And I do not conceive there is any necessity to pluck
these Churches, or meeting places down. I confess I put no holiness in them,
and think the Congregation may as well meet in any other convenient place: and
that there is neither Legal nor. Evangelical holiness in them. And that
plucking down all the Popish and superstitious pictures, and Monuments of
Idolatry (I do not mean the Arms of men of renown) and placing a faithful
Ministry, there is a sufficient purging of these places to make them fit for
the people of God to meet in for partaking of the holy Ordinances of God.


Pr. Why say you so? These Churches were founded by Papists and have been used
to Idolatry: And therefore you may as well allow of the things you speak
against even now, as these Churches, I think both ought to be allowed
indifferently.


Ph. I hold there is great difference: First for those I spoke of formerly, we
are sure they were the inventions of the Man of sin; and its possible to show
when and how they were brought into the Church of Rome. But these Churches (at
least many of them) are more ancient then Popery or Antichrist; for its not
possible that Antichrist could come until the Roman Empire was broken and
removed, which was at least four hundred years after Christ. Before which
Christianity was plentifully spread in England, and many Churches and
Congregations planted for the true worship of God. 2 These. 7, 8. Reve. 13.2.

Antiquity with full consent agree that Christianity was here planted in or
near the Apostles days, and that upon occasion of the Persecution that rose
about Stephen Acts 11.19. diverse of the Apostles and Disciples came into
England, amongst whom the Ancients reckon, Peter, Paul, Joseph of Aramathea and
Simon Zelotes. And that some Britains, both men and women were famous
Christians, and some suffered Martyrdom here in the first ten Persecutions. Fox
Act. and Mon. vo. p. 147. 148. Speeds Chron pa. Now then we cannot conceive but
that the piety and devotion of those times (when they had a Christian King,
Lucius An. 180. pr. Christ. and Christianity countenanced and privileged by
diverse of the Emperors, especially Constantine and Theodosius) would stir up
the Christians to build them meeting places. Besides, about the year six
hundred, when Augustine the Monck (falsely called the English Apostle) came into
England, sent by Pope Gregory the Great, who had not taken upon him the Title
of universal Bishop) he found the relics of many Churches, and Congregations
of Christians, planted in England and Wales. Fox Act. and Mon. vo. pa. 150.151.
And he disputed with the Monks of Bangor about Ceremonies, by which its
conceived he brought not so much Religion with him, as he did superstition and
Introductions to Popery; for the Britains had learned Religion from better
Tutors: Its true, afterward these meeting places were generally all polluted
with Popish Idolatry, all which, with the Relics thereof, being swept out,
they are clean as before.


Pr. But what say you to this, many of our Churches were Idols Temples. Goodw.
Ant. To. ca. 20. de delubro.


Ph. The Parish Churches I conceive were built for the service of the true God,
the forms of them are unlike the Idol Temples: But I confess some of the
Cathedral Churches were the Temples of Idols, as of Jupiter, Apollo, Janus and
Diana; some of which are demolished, and some were new built, as Paul's at
London by Ethelbert the King about 1060 years since: At which time he put out
the Flammins and Arch-flammins, and set up Archbishops and Bishops. These
Churches were built and dedicated to Idols, or rather Devils and false Gods,
and therefore ought to be demolished, as I conceive, according to that Law; Ye
shall destroy all the places where they served their Gods, and break down their
Altars etc. Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3 etc.


Pr. Well, I hope shortly to see the Church Government settled, with the Classes
and Synods, and that thereby all things will be well reformed, for the Appeals
will regulate every thing which is irregularly done, and many will see more
then a few.


Ph. I should be glad to see a through Reformation; but I do much fear these
Prudentiall things the Classes, Synods, and Appeals to them, will prove but
imprudentiall, and Physicians of no value. And I doubt not, but those who put
the Parliament upon them, have their own ends and aims in them.


Pr. Why say you so? the Church of Antioch did appeal to the Council at
Jerusalem in a case of Conscience, Acts 15. and why may not we do the like?


Pr. I deny that there was any such Appeal as you mean; its true the Church of
Antioch in a case of conscience did voluntarily send Paul and Barnabas and
other brethren to Jerusalem, to advise with the Apostles, Elders, and Church
there about that matter. And accordingly they received the sentence and
judgment of the whole Church, as well Brethren as Apostles and Elders, which
Apostles had extraordinary gifts of knowledge and revelation, and what they
directed them, was in stead of the written Word: We have no persons so gifted
in these days, but must have recourse to the Law, and the Testimonies, the
written Word of God.


Pr. But do you not think that these Classes and Appeals will be of excellent
use for cropping and curbing of Errors, Heresies, and Sectaries, and keeping
the Church free from pollution?


Ph. I am unwilling to tell you what I think of Presbyterial Government, I Will
say nothing of it, but take thus much, mark the end and observe it. These
things the Classes, Synods, and Appeals can never profit the Church of Christ.
The Appeals are in effect the same we had before from the Archdeacon to the
Consistory of the Bishop, from thence to the Arches, then to the Audience, and
then to the Delegates, so from the Congregation Presbytery to the Classes,
from the Classes to the Provincial Synod, then to the National. Here is work
for the Civil Lawyers, to wyer-draw a cause (as a Proctor once said) until
dooms day, if he lived so long. These are not so likely to do good as the
superintendencie of Bishops, which grew up within the first three hundred years
after Christ, and were ordained as (was pretended) for a remedy against
Schism and Heresy, which yet proved more dangerous then the disease, and made
way for Antichrist the head of Prelacie. The Commission granted by King Henry
the eight to the Lord Crumwell; Fox Acts and Monum. vol. 1. page 503. to visit
the Clergy. And the. High-Comission ( Stat. 1. Eliz. chapter 1.) granted in the
first year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, had as great show and Probability of
doing good as these Classes and Synods. And for present I conceive did some
good: But when wicked men became High Commissioners, that proved a notable
scourge to the godly of the Land: And so will your Classes and Synods in a
short time (when wicked and ambitious men get into the chief places and Power)
prove as bad, if not worse, because they be more then the High Commissioners,
who were but two and thirty. And this through the just judgment of God,
because these Policies are not of his appointment.


Pr. Why should you say so?


Ph. Because God never uses to bless means devised by man, to accomplish his
work in things appertaining to Religion: especially when they come in
Competition with those things which he has appointed, when men's posts are set
up by God's Posts, or when Go'ds means are laid aside. For example, God has
ordained his word and the Censures of the Church, to keep and drive out the
profane, and to bring them to Repentance and amendment of life: Instead of
these the State erected, or rather continued from the Papists the Spiritual
Courts, or rather Baudie Courts whose Officers lived upon the blood of the
best, and the sin of the worst. I need not tell you what profit or rather hurt
came to all sorts of men by this means. To come a little nearer to that which
has a little more show of State-Religion: The Parlaments of this Nation have
made several Acts and Ordinances for reformation of offenses against profaning
of the the Lords day, and against swearing and drunkenness; but the
Church Censures have not been used for those ends; See but the effect, what
good these Laws have done, no reformation, much less any repentance in the
Delinquents, for the punishments touch not the heart and soul: But for the
present, cause the sinner to rage and rail, and some to vow to be avenged of
those who accuse them, and some to sin on purpose to provoke others who are
more grieved for their transgressions then they themselves, or because of the
slight punishment appointed for expiation of such offenses; whereas if Gods
ways were taken up, he would bless the same for the conversion and amendment
of such as belonged to him; and the rest would either be outwardly reformed, or
at least left without excuse: So then if these things be not of God, I shall
expect no good from them. And can those things which are. merely prudential
overtop those things which undoubtedly are of divine institution. The
foolishness of God is wiser then man.


Pr. But you said even now, that those who put the Parliament upon these things,
have their ends and aims in them. What good or profit can they have by such
Classes, Synods or Appeals?


Ph. They do much conduce to uphold their double honor which they labor so
much for.

I conceive the chief Engineers for contrivance of these things are the
greatest, and wealthiest of the pretended Clergy, who have the greatest power
in every County, which they extend to the utmost, having an oar almost in
every boat, and they take themselves wronged, if they may not order or contrive
all designs, both concerning peace and war: nay and their projects reach very
far, take but a view of the late great designs, wherein, besides their secret
interests in particular Statesmen, which they extended far, and wherein they
prevailed much: Their public preaching was almost nothing but Politics in
many places; Their fear was (and yet is) that the Parliament and Army
complying, would spoil their great livings and countenance their opposites more
then they, and so the wheels of their Chariots would fall of. This fear they
termed the misery and danger of the Church (as the late Archpriest Laud did
in a case not much unlike theirs) And their prayers and preaching must prevent
it (if possible) and further their design, which was: First to raise a new
war, and then to prepare the silly people to entertain the Scots (as avengers
of the Covenant) to perfect that design which was to set up that Government and
Platform which they had modelled as near the Scotch fashion as would stand with
their honor and profit, and by their subtlety and earnestness they prevailed
much upon the people, and many of the more religious sort believed them both
in City and Country. During this time they bent all their force against
Rebels, Heretics, Schismatics and Sectaries, which they said did much
endanger the Church (that is the Diana of their great Livings.

Well, it pleased God (by part of that Army of Sectaries whom some of these
men had cursed, and scoffed at by the name of Saints) to frustrate the design
(by scattering the enemies Army, almost miraculously) which was not prepared
for relief of the Church, as our Clergy told us, but to root out and destroy
the godly of the Land. But the snare is broken, and we are delivered, blessed
be God; and there that design ended. Now these men fall to work afresh, and if
you will believe them, the Heretics and Sectaries do again threaten the
destruction of the Church of God: and more hurt comes to the Church by these
Heretics and Sectaries then did by all the Marian Persecution: and accordingly
the people in many places begin to believe them as they did before. But the
Center where all their lines meet, and the Axis upon which they turn, is their
honor and profit; for for if they can hold their own, they have and will have
all the best livings, all the peoples heads under their girdles, and all the
power in the Classes and Synods: and so upon the point the power of the
County, and of the whole Commonwealth, and will without doubt reign in the
Consciences of all sorts of men, and incroach upon the Temporal power as much
as their Predecessors the Prelates did before: And this must needs conduce to
their honor and profit.


Pr. Alas it cannot be conceived that so learned Orthodox men should aim at
such ends, being for the most part godly, painful Preachers of the word.


Pr. I do not judge all Ministers, but conceive many to be faithful: but I
speak of the most of those whom you account the best, the Ringleaders, chief
Projectors, and rigid of the Presbyterial Party, whose preaching for the most
part is but reading, and their Sermons for the most part Politics, either
concerning Monarchical Government, Liberty of the people, Municipal Laws,
Obedience to Princes, foundations of Government, Levying of War, disbanding
of Forces, exalting the Clergy, payment of Tithes, punishing of other men of
contrary judgments under the names of Sectaries and Schismatics, defense of
Classes and Synods for politic ends, under pretense of Order, defense of their
own Callings to the Ministry, and other such like tending to their honor and
profit; And in effect their preaching it self is but a preaching of themselves,
when they tell us of the great honor due unto them, and of their great labor:
that they travel as those that bring forth labor as the husbandman, may as
under Rowers in Turkish Galleys, from whence one said the Metaphor is taken:
although there was no Turkish Galleys within the space of 620 years after that
was written. And of their honorable maintenance which they plead for, All which
are but mere Policies: and oftentimes with these things they mingle divinity,
as Thomas Aquinas does Philosophy with his School divinity. And upon the
whole matter Preaching is made but a trade to get money, and to live by, and
the Conversion of souls comes in but as a subordinate end, to their other
advantages.


Pr. I wonder how you dare thus vilify the Ministers of the Gospel, they take
no more honor to themselves then the holy Prophets, Apostles and men of God did
assume; and for their painful callings, they say no more then Paul and others
of the Apostles said: And for their preaching its a matter of labor, and
always founded upon some Text of Canonical Scripture.


Ph. What I have said is no way dishonorable to the holy Prophets, Apostles,
Penmen of the holy Scriptures, to whom agree all those things properly which
these Politicians falsely and arrogantly take to themselves.

First for honor, it stood in this that they were the Secretaries of almighty
God, and of the Lord Christ, the unerring Scribes and Penmen of the holy
Ghost, holy men of God, and are all in heaven. And for their labors I refer
you to a Catalogue of them, left recorded by the holy Apostle Paul. 2 Corinthians.
6.5.11.23. etc. But above all their labors there mentioned, behold the
sufferings who (as the Prophets did) most of them laid down their lives for the
Lord and his Christ, and for that truth of God which they delivered. 37, 38.
Hebr. 11.36, Where are any of these men who dare say this honor belongs to
them, they have undergone these labors, or have suffered thus for the Lord
Jesus his Cause or truth.

All they can say, is, that they are Ministers of the Gospel, I wish that were
true, from my very soul if it be not, but I doubt the most part of these men
make merchandise of the Gospel, and in managing thereof use as many sleights
and deceits of men, as others do in secular Callings, carrying all their
business aloft in a mystery that they may be accounted Oracles; and will have
every one bound to believe all they deliver, how false, frothie, and erroneous
soever, because their Text is a part of the holy Canonical Scripture, but a
great part of their Sermon no kin unto it: but composed to further their own
honor and profit.


Pr. You talk of many sleights and deceits which they use in their Ministry,
I pray what are they?


Ph. I could tell you many: but I will only name two of these men's sleights
(besides what I have already pointed at) which tend much to their ease and
profit, and are invented of late.


Pr. What are those?


Ph. The first is this, when they are young and have little or nothing to do,
They make them a common place book of the Body of Divinity (as young Lawyers
make them a common place book of the Law) And this they gather out of such
writings as suit best with their genius or fancy; the most fantastical, who
would be counted most learned, collect it out of the Schoolmen (a sort of
rotten Divines) and Fathers, especially Origin. The superstitious out of
Schoolmen, Postillers, and other Friars; the most discreet and sober out of
the writings of modern Divines, as Perkins, Amesius, Chemnisius, Musculus,
Calvinus, Vrsinus, Vossius, Beza, Rivetus, Weames, Peter Martyr, Piscator, and
such like. The more ignorant sort make use of Boyce's his Postills, or collect
a company of Sermons, either as they hear them preached: or as they think fit
to cull them out of the great store of English Books, which are in every place
to be had. And this may be some two years work, and that is time enough: when
this is done they are ready for a Church Living, and without doubt (as one of
the sons of the Prophets) have an especial calling to preach. Then they come
from the Universitie, and bring with them the curse of Elie's house, crouching
to some or other to put them into the Priests Office, that they may eat a
morsel of bread (have a Living to maintain them and keep from want) or use
their friend Simon Magus his wisdom to show an apparition of Angels, and by
that means wrap for a thousand bodies and souls of men or more or less as their
purse will speak. Well, the bargain is made, the man is approved of, rung into
his Church, and gives great hope that he will be a peaceable man, and use the
Parishioners well for their Tithes. And so falls to preaching so soon as he
has had sufficient time to fit himself, to satisfy the humors of his
auditorie (which is a main Policy at the first.) And to this purpose (if he
have not his Sermons already written) he takes a a Text suitable to his common
place upon which he will preach, and writes his Sermon in a Book verbatim. Then
when he comes up into the Pulpit; instead of preaching he reads his Text, and
all his Sermon out of his paper Book, which sometimes for the credit of his
Cause is bound up like a Bible; And this is the pains he takes, and is as
confident that he discharges his duty as if he exercised all the gifts of the
Spirit: and this Sermon serves for twenty Texts being reduced to his common
place: This course the most learned and Orthodox amongst the rigid
Presbyterials (whom I know) do take from day to day, some making better Sermons
then others; but generally all are tacked with these diseases of idleness and
hypocrisy in this respect. The idlest and most unlearned read over their
tasks of Sermon, having but a certain number (as I have seen proved upon oath)
and then begin again: And I once heard one that lately was a Minister in
London, charge another that he never studied, but on Saturdaie night wrote out
of a book half an hours matter, and then read it in the Pulpit on the Lords
day, and another that he thought not of his Sermon until the bell ringed. And
yet all these men in my knowledge pass for constant preaching Ministers, and
neither Readers of Homilies nor dumb Readers of the old fashion: whereas indeed
they that thus read, are either such as with the evil Servant and sloathfull,
hide their Talent in the Earth, or are not Ministers of the Gospel, not being
apt to teach, and so not of Gods sending, and without repentance shall have a
reward according to these works.


Pr. It may be some men's memories be short, and have need of helps; I take this
to be no great fault: If the other slight you speak of be like this, I shall
make no great matter of it.


Ph. There is a vast difference between walking with a staff, to stay a man if
he should slip, and going upon crutches without legs: the same proportion is
between reading a Sermon, and having some notes for help, if need be; the last
may be allowed, but the first is no more then a child's work, who can read
without the exercise of other gifts. And the dumb dogs of this last age, who
are cashiered, were judged by all learned men to be no Ministers of the Gospel
for that very reason. And to defend themselves they were constrained to hold
that reading is preaching.


Pr. There is something to that purpose, Acts 15. Moses is preached being read
in the Synagogue every Sabbath day. And when it is said, Acts 20.7. Paul
continued preaching (at Troas) until midnight, the word signifies homilizing:
Its not certain what Sermon he repeated, whether his own or some others.


Ph. This indeed I heard once from a learned man; and it is the Argument of
Doctor Heilen (a Geographer of more learning then conscience) a superstitious
Divine. But it is a shame for any Minister of the Gospel to take for his refuge
such a Burrow of a dunce. To what end go you to the University, only to learn
to read? For answer to these Texts, to that Acts 15. I confess in a general
sense reading is preaching, that is, declaring, or showing forth, or
publishing, but when it is applied to the Minister, it is taken in a strict
sense, for reading and giving the sense, or expounding answerable to Ezra's
reading the Law, Neh. 8.3, 4, 8. and so it must be understood; which preaching
is also called teaching or prophesying; to which that a man may be fit, he must
be 1 Timothy 3.2. apt to teach, and able to divide the Word of truth aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. to anatomize, as it were to lay open every vein, joint, and sinew.
And touching that of Paul, The word is likewise indifferently used for
preaching or rehearsing; but it is a senseless thing to conceive, that Paul
having extraordinary gifts of Prophecy and Revelation, besides ordinary gifts
fit for the Ministry, would lay all aside, and betake him to another man's
Sermon, and become a pattern of idleness to all dunces to the end of the
world. But because no such Sermon appears, we must presume he spoke as the
Spirit gave him utterance. If our Ministers had Paul's spirit and gifts then
they would sure be ashamed of such reading.


Pr. What is that other slight (as you call it) of the Ministers, with which
you find fault?


Ph. It is their removing from place to place, for none other cause but ease
and profit.


Pr. How can that be, removing is chargeable, and the saying is, The rolling
stone gathers no moss; and it is also painful and troublesome.


Ph. Its true, it is so to other men who remove upon necessity, or upon hard
terms, as they do when they over-buy their Livings; for some of them are never
able to give a dog a crust of their own afterward. But the most take a wiser
course, never to remove but to a greater Living, or for some great advantage
one way or other: and upon every remove commonly they endeavor to take the
Summers profits of both Livings, or get some other help to bear charges.
Howsoever they have commonly no loss in removing: and for the most part they
double or treble their Revenue: And if not, they have this benefit, That when
all their old Sermons are read over, which is commonly done in two, three or
four years, and sometimes sooner, then they are all new in a new Living; and
then they confidently say them over again, which does abundantly save their
pains, and afford them leisure to oversee their Tithes, to build, plant, take
their ease and pleasure, or follow any other employment beseeming their
qualities and conditions. And this is the other shist of which I told you.

Now I have given you my reasons wherefore I conceive these men of so great
honor and credit intend no reformation. And that their pride and
covetuousnesse absolutely hinders the same more then any thing in the Land.


Pr. Why should you not think they intend Reformation, have they not submitted
to the Ordinances of Parliament injoyning Reformation, and conformed themselves
so far as the State has appointed, and what has been done by the Parliament,
has been done upon the Assemblies advice, unless it be in some few
particulars.


Ph. I confess the Assembly has done something which is in effect as good as
nothing, if we rest there; and it may be observed they have not acted any thing
against their honor and profit.


Pr. Why say you so? show me how or wherein that may appear.


Ph. I shall easily do that in many particulars.

1. First they have renounced the Prelacie being a curb to them, and obscuring
their magnificence, and some say they were Antichristian. But they defend their
Callings from them least they should be accounted no Ministers.

2. Secondly, they have left the Ceremonies as unprofitable; but they retain
their Popish offerings.

3. They give over reading and praying at the grave, for which they had
nothing; but for their fee they will make you a Funeral Oration.

4. Fourthly, they tell you they desire the Call of God and his people to their
Livings: but if they can get the Patrons presentation, or the Committee for
plundered Ministers Order: they will fight for it ere they will leav it, let
God and his people say what they will.

5. Fifthly they are content to lay aside the Common Praier-Book, and reading
Homilies as empty forms and nurses of idleness, but they will read all their
Sermons, many of which are scarce so good as some of the Homilies Vide Homily
against the peril of Idolatry.

6. Sixthly they will not buy two Livings, and so become Pluralists, for
sometimes the bargain is hard and too dear; But they will take take three
Livings or places during the Sequestrations (so they can have them freely)
which may continue during their lives.

7. Seventhly, they at least most of them put no difference in admitting to the
Lords Table (although the Parliament have enjoined some to be debarred) least
those debarred should be thought to be none of their sheep, and so they loose
their Easter offerings and Tithes. But they are content to complie with the
heads of the Parish in their Vestrie to keep out the poor, and others not of
their faction, and so (in conceit) separate the precious from the vile, who
might make head against them.

8. Eighthly, they leave of caufing the Corpse to be presented in in the Church;
But they will have the Corpse present or mortnarie; or what covers the corpse,
where the Law will give it them.

9. They say, the Church and Chancell (regarding the materials) have no
holiness in them, and they account it superstitious to hold otherwise; But you
shall neither lift up axe nor hamme to break the ground, especially in the
Chancel, unless you pay to the Parson a large Fee, besides what will repair the
ground, and then you may bury the dead as high as the Altar Place.

10. Tenthly they are content that the Altar smelling of Idolatry should be
taken away: But they expect the gift or offering called the Altarage; used to
be offered at the Altar.

11. Eleventhly, they scruple (and some have refused) to baptize the children
of strangers by whom they have no profit; but they will baptize all the
children whose Parents live within their Parish (being offered within the
Church) least they should seem to be none of their flock, and so they loose
their fleece.

12. Twelvethly, they have laid aside their superstitious Procession; But they
must preserve their perambulation walk and limits of the Parish, least they
loose any of their tithes.

13. Thirteenthly, they cried down the High Commission, as a Rack for men's
consciences; and yet they will needs be spiritual Judges and Commissioners of
Appeal too, so that they (Pope like) may have the sole Power and the Laietie
may have nothing to do there.

14. Fourteenthly, they will Petition for an augmentation to be granted to them
by the name of the Ministers, etc. And yet for advantage you may be permitted
to call them Parsons, Vicars, Curates and Priests: And in conclusion whatsoever
is burdensome, and tends neither to their honor or profit that they are
willing to part with all. But if any thing conduce to either of those ends that
they retain.

I have now showed you in some sort the Character of these Reformers, to the
end you and others may know your selves and your fraternity better then before.


Pr. Do you believe that all these men sin against their own consciences in
what they do in their Ministry.


Ph. I do not say so, nor do I believe so: but rather think that many amongst
them are godly men who through inconsiderateness (taking things of trust from
the chief actors and forward men, and some merely through simplicity being
willing (as every man is) to be persuaded of the lawfulness of such things as
serve for their temporal good, especially being controverted, and so many
subtle heads, some reputed for godly men employed to defend them) have fallen
into (or rather been misled up at the Universitie in) these sins and
corruptions, and thereupon they retain the taste of that wherewith they were
first seasoned: every man being unwilling to be accounted imprudent, which is
ar gu ed by making retractations of former errors, and being also suspicious
and loath to entertain any new custom, or to decline from the Traditions of
their Ancestors: especially if they were reputed wise and learned. And that is
the reason why the Ceremonies and other corruptions in worship and Discipline
which are lately abolished stuck so long upon as they did, namely, because
Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, and other learned godly men left them to us
at the beginning of Reformation: although all those who left them did not
approve of them ( Vide Fox Acts and Mon. vol. 3. pa. 146.147.) nor intended
they should continue, but that there should be a further Reformation, as
appears by the very Rubric of King Edwards Common Praier-Book: and these had
been soon abolished but for the reasons aforesaid. And because the Prelates
grew worse and worse, as all men do (who walk in an evil way) until they
return.


Pr. But what course is most probable and likely to bring on a Reformation.


Ph. Truly not to believe men that are interested: and especially such who have
hitherto labored to drive on their own designs of honor and profit, and are
guided by principles of pride and covetousnese: as the Ringleaders of the
established pretended Clergy are: who fearing to lose their fat morsels (as a
godly man said) for their little labor, abuse the State with false surmises
and pretenses of Reformation which they will never accomplish.


Pr. Why? This famous Assembly of learned Divines have long consulted about
the affairs of the House of God, and have propounded to the Parliament ways of
Reformation, and where it sticks I cannot tell.


Pr. I had almost said, the Mountains have traveled and brought forth a mouse.
I wish for their good, many of them had less learning upon condition they had
more conscience and honesty: And that some Paphnutius (who would not be lead
by the multitude in their opinion; but convince them soundly, not by
Philosophy but by the word of God) were amongst them them, to stir up those
that are sincerely godly, who I doubt are but few; and those wearied out with
the noise of the multitude of them who vex their righteous souls from day to
day by their ungodlie deeds. And therefore not to trouble you further, I must
tell you I do so far despair (not of any Synod, as one of the Fathers said,
but) of this Assembly their doing any good in point of Reformation, That I
hope and expect shortly that the Parliament will find cause to send them away
from Westminster, with a charge to preach abroad in the Counties, to leave
Politics and preach Christ, and so endeavor to prepare the people for
Reformation, where their preaching may surely do more good then their
State-Policie can do at Westminster: And when that is done (if the Parliament by
fasting and Prayer will solemnly seek and consult with God, and then advise
with such godly and learned men, who are no way engaged as formerly was done in
the days of King Edward the sixth, when Paulus Phagius, Martin Bucer, and Peter
Martyr, and other strangers were called into England for that purpose who never
received the mark of the Beast) then I doubt not but to see a Reformation to
some purpose, and not before.


Pr. Well, however let us not loose that we have to seek for that which it may
be we shall never have; our Parishes are true visible Churches of Christ, and
so confessed by the Ministers of New England, and by Mr. Cotton in particular.


Ph. It may be some Ministers of New England will say as much as you say, yet
that does not make your Parishes true visible Churches. As for Mr. Cotton, he
refused to take upon him the Charge of any Parish Church, and upon that ground,
separated and renounced his Calling from the Bishops diverse years before he
went to New England. Lichfords news page 7.8. and 22. And the practice at
New England, shows that they are not of our opinion; for all the people
professing Christianity are not members of the visible Church, but such as are
admitted as Church Members.


Pr. Well, what ever some others think in all places in this Land where
Parishes are divided, there is either a lawful Minister, or one who stands in
place of such who in some degree preaches, or at least publishes (by reading)
the word of God, and administreth the Sacraments to the people: therefore in
charity they ought to be accounted the Church of God.


Ph. The division of Parishes, and such a Ministry and Ordinances as you
speak of, are not sufficient to give the Parish Congregation the denomination
of a visible Church of Christ. For then must almost all the Congregations under
the Papacy be visible Churches: for amongst them the Parishes are divided, and
so they were in England almost 340. before any Reformation: And those Popish
Congregations had the word of God daily read: nay and preached constantly, and
expounded in many places by their Friars and Postillers, as may be seen by
their works in Print; Nay, and their very Mass-Books have much of the word of
God in them: although most miserably corrupted, and mingled with their own
inventions. They have also had both Sacraments amongst the Papists for a long
time, and have yet at least. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. ca. 3. Sect. 11. Baptism
(mingled with Popish Ceremonies, of which the Cross is the worst) and some
other footsteps of a true Church. And if these had made a Congregation a true
Church, poor Penry was unwise to publish that a great part of Wales never had
the face of a Church of Christ, the Parishes being divided, and the Churches
furnished with such a Ministry, and Ordinances as you speak of. Yet (he and
others) have formerly charged the State with refusing the Gospel, and rejecting
Christ and his pure worship, in as much as there was no Reformation, although
it cost him and others their lives for their boldness. Entri. Cook. Judit. pa.
352.


Pr. You speak of dark Corners of the Land, as if none were in better
condition: you may find amongst the many thousand Parishes of this Nation,
many visible Churches of Christ, and mine in particular.


Ph. I doubt not but there are many visible Churches of Christ in this
Commonwealth, and true Ministers of Christ lawfully called. But when I pray
you became your Parish to be a true visible Church of Christ.


Pr. My Parish has been a visible Church ever since it was instituted, and the
Church founded; you know not the contrary, and therefore ought to admit it,
having so continued beyond the memory of man until this day.


Ph. When was your Church founded?


Pr. You your self have confessed that the Gospel was planted in England,
before Popery came to its height, and the Ministry and Churches were then
settled, and had succession from the Apostles days: show me when the Succession
failed.


Ph. If I should admit the place that you call Church, viz. the meeting Place
to have been built before Popery, yet this proves not that the Congregation is
a visible Church: your succession has had several interruptions and
discontinuance.

First, it is to be considered that the whole Current of History agree that
the Romans commanded the better part of Britain from the time of Julius
Caesar until Theodosius the younger, which was almost five hundred years; and
the tenth Persecution about 337. years after Christ, during which time there
were not above five of the Emperors who were either Christians, or showed
favor to Christians, but generally all the rest first or last in their times
were wicked Persecutors, Heathens and worshippers of Idols, some of which by
exquisite Torments wasted the Churches of Christ, and drove the Professors into
corners, they not daring to meet in public. When the Roman Empire was broken,
or at least was grown to an ebb, the Saxons invaded this Island, and about the
year four hundred and fifty the Britains were beaten into Wales by
Gormundus, and thence grew the great College of Moncks at Bangor, with whom
Austin contended.

And the Saxons as well as the Romans were Heathens, and had their Idol
Priests, Flammins, and Arch Flammins (like the late Bishops and Archbishops
for dignity and Power) and these continued until about six hundred years after
Christ: where is now your Succession?


Pr. But yet there were many faithful Christians, both Pastors and others in
the worst times, and I could tell you of many who suffered Martyrdom for
Christ's cause in this Nation; and if we cannot prove Succession, it is rather
for want of the light of History, then for that there were no such Churches or
Pastors. Nevertheless from the time of the abolishing of the Heathens
Hierarchy, and Idolatry which was done by King Ethelbert above a thousand
years since: we have a very fair Succession.


Ph. This indeed many of you boast of, but it makes little for your purpose.
To omit to speak of the misery brought upon this Land, and the decay of the
true Religion by means of the incursions, or rather Conquests of the Saxons
and Danes after Ethelberts time. It is certain, and you cannot deny it, that
all your successions both of Ministry and Parish-Churches came from your
Mother the Church, or rather the Whore of Rome, who had all at her devotion
until King Henry the eight drove out the Pope and kept Popery.

Cath. Divine An. Caudreys Case. P. 108.109. Bed. l. 1. Hist. Angl. ca. 22. and
27.


Pr. Well, its true, that for about five hundred years, until the Reformation
began, the Bishop of Rome usurped authority over the Church of England; but
yet all did not submit alike: some faithful men escaped both Ministers and
people; as John Wickliff and his followers persecuted by the name of Lollards,
who grew in great number, even in our Country about two hundred years before
the Reformation. From which time of Reformation you cannot deny, but that my
Parish in particular has been a true visible Church: where there has been a
competent number of faithful people, and a Minister who claimed nothing from
Rome: for the Popes Supremacy was abolished by King Henry the eight as you
now said.


Ph. If the rejecting of the Popes Supremacy make your Parish a true Church,
then likewise are the most of the Popish Congregations of France true Churches;
for they likewise have rejected or refused to receive the Popes Supremacy, and
have not received the Council of Trent; but have had a Pope (a Cardinal) of
their own for many years past. And Cardinal Richelieu (called a Prince of the
Church) was as great a Pope as William Laud late Prelate of Canterbury.

Marc. de vulson des Libert. de'l Eglise Gallicane. lib. 3. pa. 233.234.235.


Pr. You cannot deny the Succession of faithful Ministers, which if you admit,
you must also admit the Succession of Churches since the time of Reformation.


Ph. For your Succession its a mear dream, If at any time there was no visible
Parish-Churches, then was there no Pastors of those Churches: for although
there may be a visible Church without a Pastor (as when the Pastor dies the
Church is not unchurched) yet can there be no Pastor of a Church unless there
be such a Church in being. And for your Succession since the last pretended
Reformation, it was interrupted in Queen Mary's days, when a Popish Priest was
your Predecessor, who had his authority from the Bishop, who was a Papist and
held of the Pope, I could tell you their names if need were. And neither that
Priest or any of his Successors ever since have had any other calling, or
Ordination, but from the Bishops as long as they were standing.


Pr. If this were true touching Succession, yet you cannot deny but that we
have the word and Sacraments; and a company of faithful Christians
communicating in those Ordinances under a faithful Pastor, are a visible
Church of Christ.


Ph. Touching the Word and Sacraments, I have already given you an answr, and
indeed the Papists and almost, all Heretics pretend as you do, and have the
word amongst them, and their Ministers or Priests have as orderly a Calling and
Ordination as yours have, and yet this makes them not the true visible Churches
of Christ, as all you do acknowledge.


Pr. I do not conceive that the Papists have either the Word or Sacraments
amongst them for that, the word is so corrupted by their false Glosses and
Translations, that its made a leaden rule to be bowed every way to serve their
own turn for upholding their superstitions; and their service is in Latin
which the common people understand not. And for the Sacrament of Baptism, it
has so many additions that the Nature of it is destroyed. And for their
Ministry, they are professed Papists and adversaries to Christ in all his
Offices.


Ph. I do confess their Ministers are no Ministers of Christ, but lims of
Antichrist in respect of their Callings: yet I do not condemn them all as
Reprobates no more then I do Pope Gregory the great, Thomas a Kempis, Ferus,
Stella, and other their Preachers, whom I think to have been godly and devout
men in their times. And for corrupting the Scriptures, if putting false Glosses
upon them, make Gods word cease to be Gods word, then are you Formalists deeply
guilty; for the vulgar Translation is abominably corrupt: and yet you allowed
it, and many of you used it translated in the late Service Book. And all that
you allege for your succession of Ministry and visible Churches, your
Classes, Councels and Synods, their authority over other Churches compelling
others by the Temporal Power to believe and worship God as they see best, is
in effect grounded upon or agreeing with the corrupt Glosses, and notes of the
Rhemists upon the New Testament, and other popish Authors, and thence fetched
by the late Formalists to defend themselves against the Puretans. And for the
Latin Service, it is much like our Organ Anthems, both edifying alike, and the
one as tolerable as the other. See the old Protestant and New Formalist. Pa.
36.37. And concerning the Papists addition of Cream, Salt, Spittle, etc. to the
Sacrament of Baptism. I confess the addition wicked and abominable, and yet no
worse happily, nor so bad as the Cross (which you received and used) for that
serves to bless, or rather conjure all the rest, and is honored with Divine
honor, and an holy day appointed for it. And yet I must tell you that with
one consent you allow of this Sacrament administered by the Papists (who do not
administer it but with these additions) to be a true Sacrament: And you hold
that those who were baptized by Papists are not to be rebaptized.


Pr. For my part I have cast off these corruptions, and am constant to those
principles tending to Reformation, which others my Reverend Brethren of the
Clergy have approved of, and I am now about to set up the Government of Christ
in my Parish.


Ph. I fully understand your design, you and your fellows intend the old (but
not the oldest way of pretended Reformation, wherein you shuffle and cut as
fast as Hocus Pocus, and your proceedings are so ridiculous that every
indifferent capacity has light enough through your figleaves to see your
nakedness.


Pr. Wherein are we guilty of such shufling, or why are we so ridiculous?


Ph. In your proceedings for upholding your Parishes, you pretend one thing,
viz. Reformation: but your end and design is to avoid the danger of loosing
your Livings, in case the Parishes should be dissolved.


Pr. I know nothing we do for which we can be justly censured, we continue our
preaching, and do endeavor to settle Presbyterian Government according to Gods
word.


Ph. For your preaching I earnestly desire you may sincerely apply your selves
to it, for that probably may do some good: but for your other fetches and
devices they savor more of Politics then Religion squared by Gods word.


Pr. What Policy can there be in settling the Presbyterian Government with the
Classes and Synods? we settle nothing but what we are willing likewise to
submit unto, and to be judged by as well as the people.


Ph. Let the Government be what it will, so your Livings and estates may be
secured, its no great matter, if the Parliament please but to declare that all
your Parishes are visible Churches, that you may hold them entire, and the
people be enforced to pay you all your Tithes, Oblations, obventions,
Mortuaries and other dues, you will be satisfied and wait for further
Reformation when it may stand with your honor and profit. And upon that
condition you will submit to the present Government of the Commonwealth. But
if your interest in these things be interrupted or in danger, you know no other
way to secure them but by settling this Government. And this is the mark at
which you shoot: take but a view of those places (your own Parish for one)
where the Elders are chosen, do they serve for any thing but Ciphers, or do
you and they act any thing toward Reformation, but merely to this end and
purpose?


Pr. I do confess if the Churches were equal or independent, so there were
Government, as well in Church as Commonwealth and other things in order it
might be well. And where the Elders are chosen if Reformation go not on, it is
because the Elders refuse to act or join with the Minister.


Ph. I confess, I know some nominated for Elders who make scruple to join with
you in your business, happily because they have found out your deceit, which is
merely to make a show of Reformation, but your chief end is the securing your
Livings.


Pr. That is not the cause of their refusal, it is because the Parliament does
not arm them with power to execute their Offices, and compel obedience to
their injunctions, as is fit for Ecclesiastical Magistrates.


Ph. If your proceedings were of God, you would not need the secular Power to
compel to obedience such as are within the Church (and for those which are
without, you have nothing to do with them) The censures of the Church are Gods
Ordinance for that end, and are most effectual. But for that compulsive power
you speak of, it savours of the Tyranny of Antichrist, and so does your title
of Ecclesiastical Magistrate: which title I have not heard used by any
Orthodox Minister since the Lord Bishops those Popish Ecclesiastical
Magistrates were cashiered, who were indeed neither Magistrates nor Ministers,
but like the Pope between both.


Pr. I confess the Elders formerly chosen (some years since) in my Parish have
refused to act to my great grief. But now lately I my self and the
Churchwardens have nominated others, and the Parish have assented to the
choice: and although the persons chosen will not take upon them the Office of
the Eldership: yet they have assented to join with me in debarring the
scandalous and profane from the Lords Table, which is a chief point of
Reformation, and I rejoice much in it.


Ph. How did you prevail to bring the business so far?


Pr. I had found some difficulty in it, but that at last I gave the honest
party (who best liked our proceedings) good satisfaction, and so the choice
was very free and unanimous, none opposing.


Ph. How was that possible, seeing all the people within your Parish liked not
of your proceeding, how came it to pass that none declared against it.


Pr. I do confess some few there are in my Parish, whom I knew to be of
contrary judgment, and some stick not to say our proceedings are
Antichristian, and have no foundation in the word of God, but I took a course
to have all such absent when the matter was debated, and at the choice of those
Assistants.


Ph. What course did you take? I desire to know, for I have heard you censured
for that business.


Pr. First, I conferred with the wealthiest, best, and most leading men in my
Parish before I came to the choice, some in private and some in company with
others at several meetings, and gave them satisfaction, and these I knew would
draw the most of the common sort: And for the rest whom I knew I could not
convince, I warned them publicly in the Church to absent themselves, and by
message privately I desired such as I thought would oppose to forbear to hinder
us in that business. And by this means and by telling the men who were to be
chosen, that they should only assist me in keeping the scandalous and ignorant
from the Communion, and do nothing else, they assented, and I hope whll
cheerfully join with me in that work.


Ph. Now do you think this is a sufficient Reformation?


Pr. It is a principal part thereof, we must wait until we can bring on the
rest.


Ph. It seems there your pretended Elders are no Elders, but assistant, I am
sorry you have showed your self so bold, as to set up a new Office in your
pretended Parish Church: show me where ever any man pretending to be a
Minister of Christ by himself, or with two, three, or four more usurped that
power over a thousand persons, as you and your new fashion Elders if they be
ruled by you intend to do. I confess in the Popish Congregations, and lately
here in England the same was practiced. The Bishop or his Chancellor with a
Presbyter or Minister did excommunicate, or debar from the Sacrament, but in
worst times no man could be suspended without a Presbyter joining in that act.
And the Churchwardens which are yet in request were assistants to the Priest,
as your new fashion Elders are, and both alike keep Christ out of his Kingdom:
and so most suitable to your Parish Churches, which are not fit for lawful
Elders, no more then they are capeable of lawful Ministers.


Pr. I have erected no new Office, but the same which the Scripture holds
forth: only their power is limited by mutual assent of them and the Minister.
And for the exercise of that power in keeping the scandalous and profane from
the Sacrament, it is included within, and is part of their Office, Mat. 18.17.
where the Church signifies the Ministers and Elders, who are the
representative Church: for the rest its answered before.


Ph. That question concerning the Church, I will not enter into, but leave it
to the learned, who have sufficiently discussed it; But for my part I am
confident no such construction can be made of that place: for the Church
always signifies the whole body, Ministers and people, or the members
distinct from the Officers.


Pr. This question being one of the principles upon which all the Controversies
between us, and the Independents are founded, I shall wholly wave you; you have
heard my opinion in public to which I adhere, and shall do until I see better
cause to alter my judgment.


Ph. Let that pass, but what was the reason why you carried the business of
choosing your pretended Elders, so clandestinely and with such policy, without
hearing other men's opinions, who were of contrary judgment.


Pr. To tell you the truth, I feared opposition and that the work may be
hindered, and therefore I desired to avoid all occasions, and to carry on the
work as smoothly as I could, and I am glad of it.


Ph. Its a sign you think your metal is naught, because you fear the
Touchstone. The truth seeks no corners, but in light shines more clearly.


Pr. The truth may have opposition, and yet is the same still. We fear not the
touchstone, but the sleights of men: who most oppose those things which are
best.


Ph. It seems now you have your desire, what proceedings have you made toward
Reformation, do your pretended Elders act according to your mind, do you think
they perform their duty.


Pr. Yea truly, I have much comfort in them, and doubt not but we shall
separate the precious from the vile, and yesterday we made a very hopeful
beginning insomuch as they undertook to do in joining with me to keep the
scandalous and profane from the Lords Table.


Ph. What course did you take to make that separation.


Pr. The Elders refer it to me to examine all those who were to communicate the
week before they came to the Sacrament, and accordingly I published my
intention, not to admit any who did not come to the Church at the time
appointed to be examined. And many of my Parish came and submitted themselves
to be examined accordingly.


Ph. Your pretended Elders are very confident: it seems they see with your
eyes, and hear with your ears: But I pray you what did you find by examining
those who came to you, and concerning what did you examine them?


Pr. I questioned those whom I suspected to be ignorant about the grounds of
Religion, and touching the nature of the Sacraments; and and for others whom I
feared not, I did not examine them at all, although some of those came to me,
and others sent in their names, and I entered them all in a Book, as well such
as appeared as those who sent in their names, and did not appear.


Ph. But did you all this your self, I mean examine the people judicially in
order to their admission to, or suspension from the Lords Table, and that by
the advice of your new Elders or assistants; surely herein they made you an
absolute Pope and sole Judge of that which the Bishops never allowed, nor do
your Brethren of the Province of London approve thereof. But was this all you
did? I do suppose you and your Elders should have informed your selves whether
such as intended to communicate had set up Christ in their Families and places,
in the exercises of Religion, and had showed forth by their conversations the
signs of faith and Repentance, these things are necessary for all Communicants.


Ph. For the lives of the Communicants they are better known to others then to
me, and for my part I shall not take notice of them, but do desire that those
who are privy to such offenses as may justly debar the receivers from the
Sacrament will make it known to me, and I shall acquaint the Church, viz: the
Elders with it, and take their advice what to do: And so shall I likewise crave
their assistance in Judicial Examination for the future.


Ph. It seems you go no further, but only to bring the people to conform to
your new Government: for I understand you had some of your Communicants were so
very ignorant that they could not tell you how many Commandments there are:
and others knew not what Faith was; and others answered as ignorantly: And yet
the names of these were taken by you, and they admitted to the Lords Table, and
none were refused.


Pr. Its true, I confess I found some ignorant, but very willing to conform
and receive instruction, and that gave me good hope of them: And therefore for
the present least I I should discourage others, I admitted all that offered
themselves at the Table whose names I had before entered in my Book: and diverse
others who were not of my Parish came also to my Church to receive at the same
time for the encouragement of others.


Ph. Do you account this superficial dealing separating the precious from the
vile, when none are refused: It is just as I expected it would be: this is but
the Counterfeit of Reformation, and much like the Reformation which many in
the Church of Rome would willingly have, for they have written diverse Books
tending to Reformation, so it might not demolish the stately Fabric of their
pretended Church, but might rather polish it by taking away those things which
all men cry shame of, and which do therefore endanger their Church, the
reforming of which would give them more hope of the continuance of the old
Idolatrous Babel, which yet together with all your devices will ere long come
to ruin.


Pr. Nothing is perfect when its first brought forth, what ever you think, I
conceive this to be a good beginning of Reformation, and I hope we shall proceed
in it, to more perfection. But touching the Reformation of the Church of Rome,
I never expect any, they being appointed to destruction. These are but the
discouragements of you and others who oppose the setting up of all Government
in the Church.


Ph. I have often told you, we do not oppose all Government, we would only have
this building demolished, that a better might be set up in the room of it.


Pr. What course would you have for preaching the Gospel, if the present
Ministry should be removed, and the Churches disbanded.


Ph. Without doubt the Parliament sees how that may be provided for. For my
part I wish that all the Parishes were dissolved as to the matters of the
Church, and all the Tithes belonging to the late Bishops, Archbishops, Deans
and Chapters, Donatives, Parsons, and Vicars were released, or sold at a
reasonable rate to the owners of the Lands out of which they arise. And these
probably without any addition may raise a sufficient revenue for maintenance
of a godly and able Ministry, through this whole Commonwealth, to preach the
Gospel to all who will hear the word of God. And all who shall be found worthy
may be employed.


Pr. What will this conduce for Reformation?


Ph. By this means this plant (I mean this Popish Order of Ministry, who
unjustlie usurp authority over the bodies, souls and States of men calling
them their Churches, their Parishes, their flock, their sheep and their Tithes,
as if all were theirs nothing Christ's) not being of the planting of our
heavenly Father, will be plucked up, which being removed the faithful will
have liberty and opportunity to separate themselves from the wicked and
profane, and be gathered unto Christ under true Pastors and Church Officers,
who will lead them in the paths of righteousness and truth, where being
associated together in Church Fellowship they will be more reformed then ever
can be expected from any company in any Parish-Congregation.


Pr. Well, I now fully perceive what your intent is: in a word, you set your
self to cast contempt upon our learned and reverend Clergy, and to take from
them their double honor both of reverence and maintenance; and to bring them
as low as the stipendarie Clergy of Germany. And I see no hope if your
amendment: I will therefore spend no more time with you: yet I doubt not but we
shall hold our Parsonages and Church Livings as formerly we have done. And if
some will needs separate, let not that hinder us of our Tithes and profits, and
then let them run after what new Teachers they please: If they run from us we
are discharged of that care, which we should otherwise have of them.


Ph. Sir, it may be before you and I meet again, you may wheel about and change
your mind as you and some others have done already: Remember what I say, and
so fare you well.


POSTSCRIPT.
REader thou may perceive by some passages in this Dialogue, that the same
was written some months (if not years) since: which is true, and the Author
was resolved (finding it difficult to get it pass the Press) to bury it in
oblivion: Hoping also that the pretended Clergy of the Land would have
considered their ways, and been wise: But finding the folly of some of them
through their Pride and Covetousness to grow into madness, this Messenger is
sent to stop their way; farewell.

FINIS.

