FIVE MATTERS OF NOTE.

AS FIRST, A continuation of the weekly Occurrences in the high Court of
Parliament, from the 16. of May to the 23. more fully then before Printed.

2. His Majesty's resolution concerning Yorkshire; Together with many other
Occurrences concerning his royal Majesty, and the high Sheriff of that County.

3. Sir JOHN HOTHAMS learned Speech; wherein is manifested the manifold Reasons
why the Subject, being commanded by the Parliament, ought not to disobey.

With a remarkable passage concerding the Lord Littleton, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal of England, and many other persons of note.

As also other occurrences upon Saturday, May 21.

An Order from the high Court of Parliament, dated the 20. of May.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.

Loneon printed, IT 1642.

Occurrences in the high Court of Parliament, from the 16. of May to the 23.
1642.
MOnday the 16. of May in the morning a Committee of both Houses met about the
drawing up of the Remonstrance, for the Uindication of the Parliament touching
disposal of the Militia, but they determined not thereof.

Upon the meeting of the Lords House there was a Petition delivered unto them
by the Ear of Essex from the County of Stafford (in effect to that presented to
the House of Commons on Saturday before) as giving them thanks for their great
care of the Republique and in ordaining of the Militias and praying their still
corespondency, and happy continuation with the House of Commons, in what
conduced to the common good: which being red, and gratefully accepted, thanks
was returned for their fidelity to the State and Parliament.

On the 18 day the Earl of Stamford, one of the Committees sent to Hull, being
returned, gave an account of his said service; ^s the shipping of part of the
Magazine at Hull which contrary winds kept from coming about; acquainting the
House further of the fears in those parts of his Majesty's intention to raise
Arms against the Parliament. And also for the safe keeping of Hull. Sir John
Hotham desired that some ships might be sent to lie in the river and that the
Garrison might be enlarged; which the House being acquainted by Message, there
was a conference concerning it, where many things were propounded as convenient
to be done, but nothing fully determined of.

And they then likewise Ordered, that notice should be given to the Sheriff of
Yorkshire, and other Northern Counties that if any rose in a warlike manner,
under pretense of taking part with his Majesty against the Parliament; that
they should raise the trained Bands of those respective shires to suppress
them.

Then the Houses received Information from York, that those Noblemen sent for
to attend the House, that went thither without the Houses consent, My Lord
Savell, Lord Seymer, Lord Rich, etc. had denied to come, saying they were bound
by the Oath of Allegiance to attend his Majesty. The consideration whereof took
each House some time in debate.

Thursday morning upon the completing of both Houses each House took into
consideration both the Messages from the Committees resident at York, and
having severally some while debated thereon, for the security of the Kingdom,
and preventing of succeeding Evils (if not timely remedy were taken) upon a
Message there was a Conference, whereat these joint notes were concluded of,
that touching the Magazine of each respective shire in the Kingdom of England
and Dominion of Wales, it should be put into the custody of the Lievtenants and
Deputy Lievtenants of each County nominated by the Parliament for the more
security.

Sabbati 18. Maii. 1642.
Lords Committees appointed by the House to join with a proportionable number
of the House of Commons, to consider of a Declaraon or Message sent to both
Houses from his Majesty touching Hull, viz. L. Admiral. E. Pembrooke. E.
Essex. E. Leicester. E. Holland. Vic. Say and Seal. L. Paget. L. North. L.
Spencer. L. Kimbolton. L. Brook. L. Roberts.

Their Lordships or any five are to meet with a proportionable number of the
House of Commons in the Painted Chamber.

ON Friday last; the Lords fell into consideration of the malignant party of
the Kingdom, and of his Majesty's intention to raise Arms against his
Parliament. And having some while debated thereon they at last unanimously
Uoted,

1. That it appears the King intends to levy war against the Parliament 2.
That whenever the King makes war upon the Parliament, it is the breach of
the trust reposed upon him by the People, and against his Oath, and tends to
the desolation of his Government. 3. That whosoever shall serve or assist the
King in such War, are Traitors, and to be proceeded against as Traitors,
according to a Statutes of 11. Rich. 2, and 1. Hen. 4.
Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. de Com.

The KINGS Majesty's Resolution concerning Yorkshire.
Loving friend,
AFter my hearty Commendations remembered unto you, and to your wife, I thought
it necessary to send you these Occurrences, writing them with a sad and heavy
heart, by reason that there is such a great dissension here, in this our
County; there is no talk now in these parts but Wars, as we are very fearful
that they will ensue very suddenly; for there is great preparations in this
City, and we dare not say to the contrary: His royal Majesty is resolved to
stay there as yet, and does assure us that there shall be nothing done contrary
to the will of this Kingdom,

The great and manifold dangers which are like to ensue (courteous and judicious
Reader) are many for these two or three years; but I pass them: they have been
a hatching, and are now-almost dome to a full ripeness, as may appear by this
ensuing Relation.

Upon this present month of May, there has been many fears and jealousies
entering into the hearts of true hearted Protestants in the Northern parts of
Englands, and especially in the County of Yorkshire, and they are now fully
entered more is the pity, we may all say, for they had some hopes that. His
Majesty and the honorable high Court of Parliament, would by degrees have
assented one with the other, and have all joynd with one constancy of mind for
the future and public good of this Kingdom, but now in the conclusion, they
are far further off then they were at the beginning, and their intentions are
more apparently known to the World: for it is absolutely thought that a Civil
War will so ^ainly ensue, unless God of his great mercy stir the intentions of
many.

There were many assembled together in a warlike manner in the County of
Yorkshire, but to what intent is not yet known; but at last each man departed
to his own home; yet this is for certain that there is great preparations for
war made in this County, and diverse other adjoining Counties, but to what
intent is not yet known; it strikes terror to the hearts of all true
Protestants, and makes a great provision in this County, some of the Malignant
party saying, that the world will never be good til there be some blood of the
Puritan shed, but the Lord of his mercy send us a sudden prevention, that the
bloodthirsty Papists may lose and miss of their intended purposes.

There is in this County a great number of Papists, and likewise in many other
Counties adjoining to this, and it is thought that they are well provided and
furnished with great store of Ammunition for war, whose Design is to bring a
civil War upon the face of this whole Kingdom; that while we are in
dissentions among our selves, a Foreign Enemy may have the more advanrage to
work their damnable and mischievous designs.

There was upon the two and twentieth day of this Month, many that went to his
Majesty, saying, They would lay down their lives for the safety of his Majesty:
it is generally thought there will be suddenly Wars in this County of York and
all other places thereabouts: so I rest,

Your loving friend Edward Saunders.
From York. May the 22. 1642.
Another passage of Note that happened in the County of York between the high
Sheriff of the said County, and certain men assembled in Arms.
THE high Sheriff of Yorkshire having Order and command from both houses of
Parliament, to suppress all those that appeared in a warlike manner in those
parts; and having intelligence that there were some that had put themselves
into a posture of War he commanded some certain persons to make toward them
with all speed to certify the Command he had from both houses of Parliament,
to suppress all those that appeared in a warlike manner: they having heard
what the Messengers had said immediately departed from them, and every man
withdrew himself to his own home.

An Information received from York the twenty two of May, 1642.
Upon the ninteenth day of this present month, 1642. the honorable Houses
received Information from York, that those Noble men sent for to attend the
House that went thither without the Houses consent my Lord Savell, my Lord
Seymer, and my Lord. Rich, etc. had denied to come; saying, that they were
bound by the Oath of Allegiance to serve his Majesty.

A learned Speech made by that much honored and renowned Gentleman, Sir John
Hotham, a member of the honorable House of COMMONS.
ON the 23. day of this instant month, Sir John Hotham summoned some
particular Knights and Gentlemen to Hull, to advise with him concerning the
present estate of the Town in regard his Majesty was so highly incensed
against him; likewise the Major, Aldermen, and all other men of good rank and
quality were at that time assembled to whom Sir John Hotham (after an affable
salutation to all) began to address himself to speak, which being observed,
a general silence covered all the place, each man with attentive admiration
caught every syllable as soon as it uttered, fearing the air delight with that
Candor should snatch them up, and rob them of their only happiness; since
it was a comfort to all loyal Subjects to hear and learn their duties from him
that had given an ample testimony, how well he knew his own.

The substance of his Oration, as near as could be gathered, is set down in
this ensuing Treatise.
My loving Friends,
YOU may perhaps expect that I intend to make a large Narration with intent to
clear your doubts and make my Actions to His Majesty seem (as they are) fair,
Legal and Loyal.

But it is not my intention, nor will I waste so much time in that business,
but leave it to the end, not doubting but when my Actions shall define their
wished event, that the end shall crown the bad that is past with a more full
renown. The Scope of my words at this time shall be confined to these two
heads, which indeed are twins, not to be separated.

The first is an encouragement to gain perfect honor from your Sovereign.

Let Loyalty be the rule of all your actions, if you intend to be truly
honorable; for honor not grounded on loyalty, is like friendship without
love, lost in a moment, and often times grows the greatest Enemy; to the
greatest Title, the vastest Wealth the greatest Wisdom, if not guided by
Virtue, and so employed proves ruin to the injoyer. Next, let your Loyalty
take its limit from Law; otherwise, in doing things seemingly good the end may
prove dangerous and your loyalty prove worse them disloyalty. Therefore the
next thing that I insist upon is Obedience to the Parliament, that pious and
judicious Council, whom you in particular, and all the Kingdom in general,
have chosen as fit men to discuss and examine all causes that have dependency
on his Majesty's safety, and the Kingdoms security. Now to disallow of what is
by them thought convenient both for his Majesty and the Kingdoms security, is
to condemn your selves of folly, that you have chosen men in whom you cannot
confide, but I presume (though there be many that these words may and do
concern in this Kingdom) that there is no one here that would not lay down
his life for the defense of his Majesty and the Parliament; neither are there
any, I suppose, that need this motive to Obedience to the honorable Houses of
Parliament their own safeties depending on the happy issue of their religious
Councels.

Only my aim is, to give you one general reason and apparent testimony, why
the Subject being commanded by the Parliament, ought not to disobey their
Commands, though by the King commanded the contrary. Because the Parliament
being called and established by the authority of the King and consent of the
Kingdom, has power to command and effect all things that are agreeable to Law,
tending to the preservation of his Majesty's peace and welfare, and the
general good of the Subject; they being by King and People, in trusted with
that weighty and great charge; and if they should sore-see an imminent danger
threaten his Majesty's Person, or the general good and should not take speedy
care to prevent it, they should make a violation of that Faith and Trust
reposed in them: so on the contrary part, if they foreseeing a danger, by their
Councels and Commands endeavor to prevent it; and the Persons by them commanded
falsify their trust; they are traitors both to their royal Sovereign and
destroyers of the Kingdom. This is the truth and this is my glory, that God
has so far enabled me to undergo so great a task; and this is my hope that
all of you will manifest your loyalties to his Majesty, and obedience to the
Parliament.

Many other matters I have to tell you concerning an Information of the Lord
Keepers having left the Parliament.

Other occurrences upon Saturday, May 21. 1642.
Saturday, there was a conference of both Houses; the Lords moved that the
Commons would join with them in requiring reparations for a great breach of
their privileges; which was, that the Lords having sent Messengers to York,
to require the attendance of some of their Members at their own House, the
Messengers were imprisoned at York. Whereupon there was a Committee of both
Houses to inquire thereof.

After this, the Lords by a Message sent certain notes to the Commons, which
they had agreed upon in their House, concerning the Kings late proceedings at
Hull and York, desiring the Commons would join with them in the notes, which
were red then in the Commons House: the effect whereof was.

That it does appear to the Parliament, that the King being seduced by wicked
Councillors, does intend to make war against the Parliament; who in all
their consultations have propounded nothing but for the good of the Kingdom,
and safety of his person.

That when the King makes war against the Parliament, it is a breach of the
trust committed to him, and tends to the dissolution of this government. That
whosoever shall assist his Majesty in the war are traitors, and have bin so
adjudged by two Acts of Parliament; and are to suffer as traitors by the
fundamental Laws of the Land.

With their notes, the Lords sent a Petition, which they had drawn up to his
Majesty; declaring the grounds and reasons of their proceeding upon those
notes, and to dissuade his Majesty from his intended purpose of raising the
trained Bands of the County.

After the reading of which Petition and notes there was a long debate in the
Commons House, which held till night, and diverse Speeches were made upon them,
all of them concurring in the just grounds and causes both Houses have had for
the making of the said notes, and of their agreement with the Laws of the
Land: after which, they were put to the question, and noted by the Commons that
they should be forthwith sent to York to his Majesty.

Die Martis, 20. Maii 1642.
It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That
the Magazines of the several Counties in England and Wales, shall be forthwith
put into the power of the Lord Lievtenants of the said Counties, respectively,
(being such as the Parliament does confide in for the service and safety of
his Majesty and the Kingdom.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Order shall be printed and
published.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parl.

FJNJS.

