THEOPHRASTus PARACELSUS
The lively Portraiture of the most famous and profound Philosopher and
Physician Aureolus. Philippus Theophrastus Paracelsus Bombast of Hohenheim. who
was Poysned ye 47th. year of his age.

portrait of Theophrastus Phillippus Aureolus Bombastus von Hohenheim
(Paracelsus)

PHILOSOPHY Reformed and Improved IN Four Profound TRACTATES.

THE I. Discovering the Great and Deep Mysteries of Nature: By that Learned
Chemist and Physician OSW: CROLLIVS.

THE OTHER III. Discovering the Wonderful Mysteries of the Creation, BY
PARACELSVS: BEING His Philosophy to the ATHENIANS.

Both made English by H. PINNELL, for the increase of Learning and true
Knowledge.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Lodowick Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornhill. 1657.

THE Translators APOLOGY, Caution and Retraction.
READER,
THOU art sick in body, or soul, or both; it is the gracious care of thy
merciful Creator to prepare and apply means for the Cure of them both. It is,
and ought to be thy duty principally to respect the more worthy, and give all
diligence to attend the most noble part of thy self: (...).
Dead bones and rottenness are but such and no better in a painted Sepulcher;
whatever be neglected, let not thy soul run to ruin. Thou have plenty of
provision set before thee, starve not at a feast of fat things; if it be not
dish'd out in the best fashion, forsake not good meat for the Cooks
unskilfulnesse. Indeed the princely dainties of this royal banquet call for a
neater hand to carve them abroad; and I (for manners sake) have a great while
excused the service, ut detur digniori, prefering and proffering it to some of
greater abilities, more fit to have undertaken it, which if they had accepted,
these incomparable Mysteries and unsearchable Truths had been more Chymically
prepared, and not offered to thee in the gross body of so dull a language.
This only I have for my Apology, viz. that I have been more careful to be
faithful than curious, not striving so much to trim the garment as to
proportion it to the body; if others would have showed their skill, I had not
been censured for a bungler.

But, Reader, I am not so intent to make my own excuse as to leave thee
altogether without a Caution: what therefore that most profound Teutonick
Philosopher Jacob Behmen, somewhere in his writings says to his Reader, that I
counsel thee, viz. if thy mind be not spiritual, forbear to read these
things, for they will do thee more hurt than good: if thou art not illuminated
in the true Mystery of Emanuel; if thou know not the extent of the Incarnate
Word; if thou understand not the Angelical ascent and descent on Jacobs
ladder, how can thou cast thy suffrage into that Seraphicall acclamation,
Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of hosts, Isa. 6.3.
the whole earth is full of his glory? Let no carnal mind cling to the posts
of Wisdom's house, or come near the gates of her Temple. The Oratories of old
were by Oraculous care guarded from profaneness with this inscription over the
doors, Ite profani; Fanum est, Fanum, nihil ingrediatur profanum: this place is
holy, let no filthy thing come into it. I may say of this following Preface, it
is Holy; let no carnal mind profane or pervert it. The learned and Religious
Author would have thee wise unto salvation, that thou may be saved from thy
own wisdom, thy greatest enemy. I cannot say whether he was a better Physician
or Divine; whether he may do thy body more good or thy soul: sure I am his
Prescriptions may well be called Basilica Chymica, Royal Receipts, being the
rare Extracts of the most choice spiritual Truths out of the gross body of
natural Things. Bear with the prolixity of his Introduction, the rest will
recompense thy patience: I once thought to have abridg'd it, but durst not
meddle with so good a Symmetry; I have sent it abroad without any alteration
but what a German has by a garment of the English fashion.

The best Physical Method, in order to thy Eternal welfare, is here observed;
the maine scope and principal intention being, first to rectify the Archeus
of the inner Man, that it may attract health from the heavenly Iliaster, and
distribute the same to all the faculties of thy soul, and members of thy body;
then to prostigate and chastise the peccant humors of thy outward and natural
man: and all through the Grace of God revealed in the great mysteries of the
Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Mediatorship, etc. of our
blessed Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ. Let it not offend thee (at which many
have stumbled and fallen) that the Father and the Son should be so nigh unto
thee in All Things; that God and Christ should condescend and humble themselves
to walk before thee, Romans 1.20.
and with thee, and in thee; that things Invisible should be seen in Visible
things. Vniversus mundus nihil ^liud cumque.
It was the common faith of the Ancients both Ecclesiastical and Profane, Deus
explicatus, Athenagoras. Prefente monstrat quaelibet herba Deum.
that the Creation is but the Revelation of the Creator. May God be seen in all
things, and not Christ also by whom they were made? The Gentles that knew God
might also have known Christ, had they been obedient: Hos. 6.3. John 6.4
if we follow the Father he will draw us to the Son. All things call loud unto
us to behold the mystery of the Father and the Son, to hear their voice; and
cry shame upon us that we hearken not nor obey. The wicked heart says to God,
Depart, Job 21.14. and 22.17, 18.
though he fills his house with good things. The corn and wine and oil, the
silver and gold which God multiplyeth unto men, they prepare for Baal, and
spend that upon their Lusts, Hos: 2.8.
which should be motives of their love. Psalm. 19.2. Act. 14.17.
Times and seasons are the faithful Tutors and witnesses of God, but men
regard not their doctrine nor receive their testimony. The brutish man does
not know, Psalm. 92.5, 6.
nor does the fool understand the deep thoughts of God in his great Works: but
the wise in heart that take pleasure in his works, they search and find them
out; these seek till they have found the Pearl in the field, the Messiah, Mat.
13.44, 45.
the Christ of God in the things that are made, and these shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 107: 43. and 111.2.
Oh the blindness of the men of this world! whose minds the god of this world
has so blinded, that though the true God be in all his works which men may see
and behold afar off yet they magnify him not. Job 36.24, 25.

The Lord Jesus Christ, the true and only Wisdom of God, Prove. 1.20, 21. and
8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
cries without, and utters his voice in the streets, in the chief place of
concourse, in the opening of the gates, in the city, in the top of high places,
by the way, in the places of the paths, at the entry of the city, at the coming
in of the doors, with plain words of righteousness, without frowardness or
perverseness unto us men, the Sons of men, etc. Does not Christ Jesus stand all
the day long in the broad way to stop and turn men from destruction, calling
and crying unto them, Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye die, ye children of
Adam? but they with a stiff neck, like their Fathers, do always resist the
Holy Ghost. Is any part of the Creation destitute of the glorious presence and
power of Christ? Psalm. 19.6.
can any thing be hid from the heat and light of this Sun of Righteousness?
Romans 10.18.
Is there any place where the Evangelicall Trump has not sounded? why then do
we close our eyes and stop our ears against the glad tidings and ministry of
our salvation? What care and cost and charges are many men at to purchase their
own vexation? at how dear a rate do they buy their misery who accumulate to
themselves Teachers after their own lusts, 2 Timothy 4.3.
who yet after a multitude of Academicall expenses are not able to guess
aright at earthly things, Wisd. 9.16.
or find out that which is hard at hand? With what care and industry then ought
we to pursue the knowledge of things above, which are more noble, to be had at
a cheaper price, and (because of a better guide) with more ease and safety? we
need not ascend or descend, or send to Athens for it; the things that do not
appear are present in the things that are seen. It Is not incredulous or
rediculous that a true Chemist (so much now in derision) should find light in
darkness, darkness in light; bitter in sweet, sweet in bitter; good in evil,
evil in good; body in spirit, and spirits in bodies: and by a Spagyrick
extraction separate each to its proper use and end, distinctly drawing out the
great Mysteries of Godliness and Iniquity.

In the high way and open streets, the common Road, concourse, condition and
conversation of men, does Wisdom stand and call to them, Turn ye, Turn ye,
why will ye die? Christ the great Angel of God stands as an Adversary, like
the Angel in the way of Balaam, Number. 22.22.
to withstand men in all their ways of iniquity, excess and vanity: the
madness of the false Prophets (in us) is rebuked by the voice of Man (that Son
of man) speaking in the dumb Ass (of insensible and irrational creatures.
Pet. 2.16.
) Thus the Wisdom of God stands in the drunkard's way to turn him from wine,
Ephesians. 5.18.
wherein is excess, that he may be filled with the Spirit: It would have the
Covetous man to covet earnestly the best things: 1 Cor. 12.31.
it persuades the lascivious wanton to abandon his uncleanesse, and entertain
the modest kisses and chaste embraces of the celestial Bridegroom: Cant.
1.2.16. and 2.6.
it bids the Thief steal no more, (Ephesians. 4.28.) nor consent to thievery,
Psalm. 50.18.
but labor with his hands the things that are honest, Rev. 16.15.
watching for the coming of that good thief: it forbids the Tyrant, the
hypocritical, ambitious, perjured, selfseeking Tyrant to oppress and do
mischief, Psalm. 52.1.
but rather to take the Kingdom of Heaven by force and violence: Mat. 11.12.
it exhorts the treacherous, undermining, by-ended soldier to put no man in
fear, Luke 3.14.
nor accuse any man falsely, not to make the pretense of Religion or Civil
Right a stalking horse to proud and imperious designs and ends, but to fight
the good fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. Jude 3. 2 Cor. 10.4.
and earnestly contend for it, not with carnal weapons, but spiritual. It
stands in all the Creation to point out the Creator: Mal. 4.2.
in the Sun, to show us the true Light: in the springing Fountains, Psalm. 36.9.
to tell us of the Well of Life: in the Rocks, to show us our refuge: in the
trees of the field, Psalm. 18.2. Isa. 26.4. Ps. 92.12, 13. and 1.3.
to put us in mind of the planted of the Lord, and the Tree of Paradise, and of
what the Cross was made: in the seasons of the year, at Fall and Spring, to
preach the Death and Resurrection of Christ, the mortification of our vile, and
quickening of our pure body: in the Clouds and Rain, to open to us the
Mediatorship and Intercession of our blessed Lord, who took upon him the dark
nature of the earthy Adam; John 1.14. Col. 1.19. and 2.9.
which dark cloud (the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3.) was full of grace
and truth, the fullness of the Godhead: when the Heavens are as iron and the
earth as brass, Lev. 26.19.
when wrath is over us, and judgment under us; when we see nothing but
vengeance and indignation above or below, Genesis 9.12, 13.
then this faederall Cloud elevated to the middle air ( John 3.14. and 12.32.)
as the true Mediator between God and man (1 Timothy 2.5.) does rend the veil of
his flesh (Mat. 27.51. Heb. 10.20.) and showreth down the Gracious rain and
heavenly dew of Divine love through the eternal Spirit upon the parched soul
to cool and quench the fierce anger of the Almighty, Nubes est vapor humidus
and crassus a Sole ad medium acrum elevatus, etc. Arist. 1 Met. c. 9.
and cause the heart to bud forth and grow in the grace, faith, knowledge, love
and obedience of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, reconciling all things in
Heaven and Earth throughout the Passion of his Cross. Col. 1.20.
Thus every part of the Creation does its part to publish the great mysteries
of man's Salvation; Romans 1.20.
else how should the Gentiles be left without excuse? Let all the Works of God
praise him in all places of his Dominion: Psalm. 103.22. and 145.10.
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. Isa. 28.22.
Be not mockers least your bonds be made strong: bless, magnify, extol and
praise the Lord in all the works of his hands: Enter into his Gates with
thanksgiving, Psalm. 100.4.
into his Courts with praise, be thankful unto him, bless his Name; Psalm.
92.13.
flourish ye in the Courts of the House of our God. Let your knowledge, love,
obedience, and thanksgiving, spring forth and increase abundantly by these
outward and visible things, Romans 1.21. Rev. 11.2.
which the unbelieving Gentiles, like brute beasts, tread and trample under
their feet: set God always before ye; preserve the faith of his Omnipresence,
so shall ye never be moved: Psalm. 16.8.
draw something of him out of every thing which he has made. O rare Art, that
can rarifie the condense and mixed bodies of earthly things into a sublimate
Purity of Divine knowledge and use! Heretofore when Kings, Princes and
Potentates studied their neighbors Good more then their own Greatness, the
Hermetick Philosophy was more Venerable, and he that listed himself a true
Chemist, had fair hopes to become a great Trismegist, the Royal Diadem in the
hand of God being more desirable than three Crowns on the head of Man; let not
the Royal Race degenerate and forget the employment of a noble mind. Eccl.
24.34.
Behold now that I have not labored for my self only, but for all them that
seek Wisdom.

Hitherto I have desired to prevent thy mistake; now let me endeavor to
rectify my own miscariages. It Is not long since I resolved to be silent as to
selfe-vindication or justification, Postscript to Nil Novi.
but I can no longer refrain from selfe-accusation and condemnation; two
things afflict me very much, and for the third I am sore grieved.

I am sorry that ever I yielded to any provocation, and harnessed my self to
fight in my own (yet not altogether my own) quarrel, as I did against Parson
Goffe and others, In Nil Novi.
whose injurious and unrighteous dealings, though they might justly have been
aggravated by another pen, yet was it not of so much concernment to me to
recompense as to suffer wrong. This fault I might extenuate to a very small
guilt, having taken the old Protestation to preserve and defend the liberty of
the Subject, and seek the Reformation of the Church, which have been so much
violated and obstructed by worldly-interested men. For the future I trust so to
demean my self as one committing his way to the Lord in patience and
well-doing, bearing the Cross daily and sinking down into the Death by
cheerful obedience and selfe-denyall, whereby I may fill up the sufferings of
Christ that are behind in my mortal body.

I repent also of the hasty publishing and disclosing of that blessed, In a
Letter before my Word of Prophecy.
glorious, and unspeakable Discovery which once I had full of assurance and
consolation. I have since learned by dear Experience, that I should have hid
that Pearl till I had sold All, (Mat. 13.44.) and pondred those unutterable
words longer in my heart, Luke 2.19.
that they might come forth in more maturity; fourteen years time being little
enough to have ripened and prepared so deep and inward a Vision for public
participation. 2 Cor 12.2.
The prejudice of this rashness has been most to my self: let me alone;
labor not to comfort me till I have bitterly bewailed it. If ever God be
gracious to me again in the like manifestation, I hope to improve it with more
wisdom: and if ever the Lord shine and send into thy heart any rich discovery
of himself, be careful to swaddle it up in the silent meekness and patience
of the Cross, till it be grown old and strong enough to dispute with the
Doctors and convince the Scribes of this world. If hereby I shall be a land
mark to prevent thy running aground or splitting against the Rock, I shall
rejoice more in thy safety, than blush at my own repentance, it being less
shame to confess then to commit an error.

But that which has wounded my soul and pierced it more deeply, has been my
compliance with men of violence, bloodthirsty and deceitful, whose feet have
been swift to shed the blood of men more righteous than themselves, but the way
of Peace they have not known: I have been a companion of thieves and
murderers; my hands have been defiled with blood: Since I professed to preach
the Gospel of Peace, I have walked with those of strife and contention in the
spirit of this world. The sense of my sin, and the wrath of the Almighty, force
me to cry out, Cleanse me from blood guiltiness O God, Psalm. 51.14.
whereby I have rendered my self incapable to build the House and finish the
Temple of the Lord.

So contrary have I walked to the pure Principle of the truly Godly and
Christian life that it cannot be but that I have been Unsavory to those who are
enrered into that holy Rest where no unquiet spirit is, before whose feet I
prostrate myself, like that humble penitent, Conculcate me sal insipidum, Orig:
to have all my pride, strife, lust, etc. trampled and trod down under foot.

What secret sins besides (which are infinitely innumerable) have lurked in the
thievish corners of my nature, I am to mourn for in my Closet, and confess
them to him only against whom I have sinned: but wherein I have been an open
transgressor, I stand bound to do penance before all men.

Nor let any say that disappoyntments and disconient have thrust out a glozing
and feigned Recantation; but rather know that my vows are upon me, which were
extorted from me in the anguish of my soul long since, when the heavy wrath of
God lay upon me. Non egoventosae plebis suffragia venor: -- Ad haec ego naribus
uti formido.
It Is not the praise of man I hunt after, nor his dispraise that I flee from; I
care little for his day of Judgment; I scorn to fear it, but hate much more to
flatter it. I can expose my self to all the hard sayings of men; let them
censure and spare not, I stand their Butt with a naked breast. Only from the
pure minded and upright in heart I beg assistance at the Throne of Grace: let
me be mentioned in your prayers, that I together with you may be delivered from
evil, and kept from the snare of the Hunter; that we may go on and grow up in
all welpleasing to God and Man; putting on, and keeping our weding garment
clean, watching the coming of our Bridegroom; and walking as those those that
are redeemed from the earth, even so Amen.

Brinkworth, May 10.1656. H. PINNELL.

Postscript.
READER,
WHereas I have proposed and pressed the Creation of God as an object of thy
admiration and motive to his adoration, it is not, in the least, intended any
way to diminish the due Reverence rightfully belonging to that more rich mercy
of the Lord added to man in giving and preserving those sacred Records of
heavenly mysteries contained in the most holy Scriptures; my desire rather is
that both those Books of God (Nature and Scripture) might be better studied and
more observed. Do I seek to make void the Word of the Lord by his Works? God
forbid; nay I establish the one by the other.

Added by a Friend of the Publisher of this Piece of Crollius and Paracelsus in
English.
CROLLIUS.
TWo things are seen within this Volumn small
the great and the less Worlds Original,
Here may man see as in a glass his shape
by which he may corruption quite escape.
The Author was divinely taught that writ,
so likewise was he that translated it.
Here may be seen, what nature is and grace.
what God his back parts are, and what his face.
Here is both heaven and earth in Harmony,
a cure to ease us of our vanity.
The true Elixir's here, the stone that does
transmute the outward and the inward both:
And make all heavenly like to Crystal fine,
yea like to Christ the prototype divine.
What is above is likewise here below,
as this Anatomy of man does show.
The man in all the parts of him consists
of what the Macrocosme composed is.
The World it selfe's a man, though great and big,
and Man himselfe's a World; do but here dig,
A treasure will appear more worth then all,
by which be may be ransomed from his fall.
The Physic then that is of Use to man,
but he that is Divine prescribe none Can;
He too that is of Nature quite unskild,
'the man has the world with dark error filled:
Both were conjoynd in one of God at first,
in One again they shall be found at last.
Nature, grace, physic and Divinity,
so returning to their first unity:
God blessed for Ever, whence is all Good,
which Devils and wicked men alone withstood.
PARACELSUS.
It Is strange; what hints of things unknown are here,
of worlds, and ghosts, and men do not appear.
Sure Paracelsus had obteind the skill
through permission of the holy will,
To ensee the secrets of each thing
and so of it to mortals tidings bring.
Praise too the attempt of him that made him speak
in English, and the sealed Ark to break;
That so this treasure might in Common be
to the great wonder of posterity.
THE Admonitory Preface OF OSWALD CROLLIE, Physician: TO The Most Illustrious
Prince CHRISTIAN ANHALTIN.
COURTEOUS READER;
ALTHOUGH the Romans extolled Angerona, and the Grecians admired Hapocrotes for
their silence; and all the ancient Philosophers, by the example of Actaeon,
have strictly forbidden to profane the Secrets, and rashly to prostitute the
Treasures of Nature to unworthy and filthy minded men: Notwithstanding seeing
our Heavenly Father who is that Sun which richly preventeth us all with his
gifts, Psalm. 145.9. Mat. 5. Luke 19. John 1.5.
shining on all alike (for he communicates his light, without respect or envy,
to the good and bad, to the thankful and unkind) We are bound to immitate him
whose Children we ought to be, Then ^o men imitate God, when they do good.
Strabe.
and of all other, they especially who by his gracious mercy are brought back
and recovered from the dark Labyrinth and Circumference of toil and error, to
the plain and clear path and Center of Rest and Truth. The gifts of God grow,
and are improved by communicating. Victor.
Wherefore I thought it not good by a kind of inhumane ill will, any longer to
hide as in a Napkin, the Talent committed to me by the Father of Lights, by an
impious silence; since the Gates of Wisdom ought always to stand open to
ingenious men; though the doors of the Muses have never been unlockt, but envy
has endeavored to shut them again. It is, doubtless, a most civil and humane
Office, willingly to instruct and guide our erring neighbor, and to keep him in
the right way who is already in it.

Upon which account, Friendly Reader, to the praise and glory of the Divine
Majesty and bounty (whose Instrument or pen, at least, in the publishing
hereof, I both desire, and hope to be, who am far less then all his mercies
and benefits bestowed upon me) and also for the profit and advantage of my
neighbor in the study and profession of Chemistry, Some of these have been
prepared by others for the Emperor Rudolph to whom I voluntarily imparted them.
I do here out of the most deep secret of my heart, set before thee two of the
most excellent Spagyrik Mysteries (whose preparations, after the mistakes of
expense, time and labor, have all of them been first proved by my own handy
experience) which neither by report nor ancient Records, I could yet understand
that they have together and at once been published unto this very day. It has
ever been far from me to overcharge the Reader with trifles and falsehoods,
whereof this Age (the scum and dreggs of the world) is very fruitful; much
less to fill up a huge Volume with the copies of large Receipts (though I have
many lying by me, which with great labor and pains I have got together) with
which hodg-podg-Physitians are already so entangled and overwhelmed, The
greatest Receipts the greatest Deceits for the most part.
that they are almost pressed to death under so heavy a weight of their Receipts;
but those things which for the space of almost twenty years, in many troubles
and painful peregrinations of various fortune through France, Italy, Germany,
Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, It is a Civil thing, and full of ingenious modesty,
to acknowledge by whom we gained any thing. Plin in Epist. ad Vesp.
by unwearied diligence and exact examinations, I have obtained from men of
greatest learning and experience in Chemistry, partly by entreaty, partly by
purchase and permutation (to say nothing of those things, being not a few,
which by the blessing of God upon my endeavors, I have found out in the
practice of Physic) preferring the public good before my own private
advantage, being moved also by Charity, Christian compassion, and the necessity
of sick people, according to my trust in the profession and practice of
Physic, I would first take my eyes in my hand, as I may so say, and by the
help of Vulcan search and diligently examine the chief and choycest things,
before I would commend them to public use and profit, that so the Children of
knowledge, those searchers out and lovers of Truth may attain that at a cheap
rate which has cost me dear the learning, viz. not fallacious opinions (as
hitherto in such a deal of Legerdemain they have complained of) but the truth
it self so long desired, by many experiments most certainly found out and
known. So that many things after the revolution of the Platonic year have been
returned gratis, and with usury to their owners, whole and entire, and far more
complete, which before I had from them ragged and torn at a great rate. For
many, whose rumor of many hidden secrets enticed me unto them with much
difficulty of travel, and no small expense, their very presence or sight of
them much abated of their report, as it often falls out in such cases; so that
those things which they bragged of as great secrets, seemed to me either
common, or so faulty and defective, that the imperfection of their many
descriptions, was to be made up by me, being all reduced into one only, and
that same first proved by my own Chymicall trial. Also by exchange to their
advantage (according to that common Chymicall custom, Give something, and take
something) comparing my studies many times with theirs, in our Conference they
got an Egg for a Nut, which when I had cracked with long and fruitless pains,
I found at last nothing but a worm-eaten kernel, or instead of a kernel I got
only husks and shells.

Hence it comes to pass, that without Nature's Vulcan, which the Poets commend
as the most true Inventer and Teacher of Arts Mysteries, the greatest part of
them (without offense to those great men be it spoken) who have written in our
time of the more secret Spagyrical preparations from other men's relation and
not their own handy experience, they have brought this fruit to the Students in
Chemistry, that for the most part after great cost bestowed in vain, they have
in the end ascribed to them the cause of their lost labor, and long spent time.

That it is so, they will easily acknowledge with me, who not content with my
example and others loss, had rather be made more wary by their own experience,
and examine the like things again by the help of Pyrotechnye, or the Art of
Fire and Chemistry; as many things are spoken of which are never done, so many
things fall out between the Theory and the Practice; Learn by other men's
warnings to beware, le^^ it repent the of thy lost labor.
which he shall find to be so, who desires to make another experience his own,
and be deceived by them who have been deceived by others; therefore in this
study no man is further to be believed, then as every one finds by his own
proper experience, handling and seeing by the due approved trial of fire,
which discerns and separateth that which is false, from that which is true.

(...).
And because according to Aeschylus, Not he that knows many things, but he that
knows those things that are most profitable, is to be accounted a wise man, I
had rather present but few things which are rare and choice, considering that
of Damascen, Let thy Medicines be few, whose virtue and operations thou have
often tried. Howbeit in this paucity or fewness of Medicines, I dare
confidently affirm that in all the riches and plenty of Nature, See Anaxagoras
in his Book (...).
there does not lie hid any more choice and efficacious, then these chief
secrets of the more hidden Medicines here offered, except only that universal
and most famous Medicine which the most ancient wise Philosophers had from the
beginning of the world, and have extolled it as a miracle to their just and
lawful Heirs; (...). etc.
for that which is good is not always to be found in that which is great, but
that which is great in that which is good. He that devoting himself to
Philosophy, The fruit and great gain will over and above recompeuce the labor
and pains of the Artist.
shall sincerely and as he ought come to the inner rooms of Nature by a holy
assiduitie of preparations, joining thereto a diligent contemplation of
natural causes, and withal shall refuse no pains and difficulties to get
experience, by the industry of his handie work he shall (if the grace of the
most high favor be infused into him) bring forth far greater things out of
this open bosom of Nature, than they seem to promise at the first sight.

And although I have proved but some of those virtues and operations which are
assigned to every one in order, according to which I esteem the Medicine, as I
have set down and showed their preparations in the work it self: Nevertheless,
because in the use of Physic I have found the chiefest part true, the
Spagyriks, or those who know how to discern between true and false, who are
well grown and exercised in Chymicall employments, I mean the Sons of Art, who
know the terms and bounds thereof, and have bathed themselves in the springs
of true Philosophy, who can even by a glance and sight only make a good
construction and easily guess of these things (for these preparations do
require such an Artist, and not one of a froward and sottish disposition, who
have nothing to do with the common rabble of Alchymists, because of that
unworthy reproach and slander (i. e.) The errors of the Artists are imputed to
the Art. He that misseth his end for want of wit, let him thank his own
ignorance, and not lay the fault on Nature, or me.
) To the Artists aforesaid (I say) who are their Crafts-masters, there will be
no scruple but that other operations also which have been proved by the long
practice and certain experiments of most expert Chemists and now published in
one work, will satisfy the desire and earnest expectation, by an undoubted
performance of the desired effect.

Therefore the true and more profound Physicians, who have been Divinely
inspired, moved with a Samaritan-compassion toward their sick neighbors, of
what rank and condition soever, who in the fear of God also shall use these
Medicines rightly prepared by their own labor, in a convenient and artificial
method, and not trusting (unless they would be succeslesse) as many do, to
the Sophistical and fraudulent preparations of others, they will know by
experience far greater efficacies and operations by the cures they do, then I
can or ought to set down and assign, especially if they be administered
according to the nature of the diseased, and with the approbation of a
Physician present; all which by Gods help Truth the daughter of time, will make
manifest.

But to what danger do I now expose my self by this public service? What I
pray is to be done in this diversity and hazard of Opinions? What shall a man
do in the midst of so many carping Critics, Ignorance is the inseparable
companion of pride and mischief.
which cast the worst censure on the best things? I shall oppose all with the
buckler of my sincerity and earnest endeavor of deserving well in the
Spag^yrik profession, with which I can defend my self without fear; for this
(Buckler) cares not for the proud censures of ignorant men, it will easily
blunt the edge of all the foreseen darts of the adversary, to wit, anger,
evil speaking, envy, scornful contempt, the truest testimony of ignorance.

1 The Mystical Hermetick Philosophers who heretofore in part have pryed into
these excellent secrets, will rise against me, and be very angry with me;
complaining that they are wronged in those things, which with greatest industry
and long spent time have been found out and hitherto concealed in deep silence;
should so soon be brought to light, and made common to every one. They will
accuse me for breaking open the seal of Chemistry, as one that has not been
taught the close Pytha^orean silence, (...).
or forgotten the Rule of Hippocrates, which is, To impart sacred things to
sacred persons, in that I have set open the doors, loosed the bonds, brought
the truth of Chemistry, till this time held captive in the prison of shadows
and envy, freely communicating it to posterity. But in as much as these are the
heirs of true wisdom, Citizens of the Philosophical Kingdom, always
lovers of God and their neighbor, without envy, or at least ought so to be,
whose heads being lift up on high, and their eyes Divinely enlightened, these
shall know that in the true Cabala, Magic and Woarchadumie, there are laid up
far better Treasures, A word I do not understand.
to be got by them with the help of the Oratory and Laboratory, I mean by
asking, seeking, and knocking with unwearied pains and watchfullnesse, which
Treasures are to be manifest indifferently to all in due time by the light of
Grace and Nature, Eccl. 43.33.
after the Bloody Judgment of the Son is first finished, which undoubtedly
will follow the Watery (Judgment) of the Father, then in the third Age of the
Holy Spirit (who to make that manifest which was hid, is wont to renew by fire)
Elias the Artist, Zeph. 3.9. Mal. 4.5, 6. Zech 14.9. Ecclesiasticus 48.1,
who is to restore all things, shall come: For every person of the Divinity
has his own proper and appointed Age, ministry or dispensation, as may plainly
be gathered out of the twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed, divided into
three parts, very fitly answering to so many hours of the great and One Day,
viz. The continuance of this world. And thus they will not with me begrudge
these present crumbs to our thankful posterity (the beloved heirs of knowledge
and wisdom) who by the light of Nature shall be skillfull in the Chymicks,
and stirred up of God to the preparation hereof: Only they that are worthy
shall understand these things, viz. They whose humane reason God has
enlightened by the mind. Let none therefore judge rashly, passing sentence
before he know the truth of the cause.
For these Chymicall secrets will never be fingered by those sluggish,
slothful, or sottish despisers of them, by reason of their indisposition and
unfitness to manual operation: As also, of the profane, lewd, and unworthy
Philosophical men, there will be little danger of their apprehending and
discerning these Divine revealed Mysteries, which are mingled together in a fit
place, because they want the spirit of wisdom, and are not quick of
understanding in these things which the wise-hearted can apprehend in few words.

2 As for the spurious and adulterous Theophrasteans (the worst and wickedest
sort of men) they will not forbear to accuse my fincerity with all
outragiousnesse, being not able to endure that hereafter they may not carry
their cheating impostures up and down the Country to put them off by their
feigned experience, counterfeit friendship, disguised piety, various and vain
promises at a great rate, to them that never knew how to look to themselves,
and deceive others. These seek the commendation of ingenuity from the theft and
calumny of their benefactors.
Now as it is the artificial craft of some who do not presently discover
themselves by their countenance and clothing, while they snatch up some
sentences from the society and conference of other men afterward hunt after a
name of learning, wisdom, and prudence among great men, concealing their
Authors; and those things which they have fished out of other good men by many
wiles, as their fraud and subtilty of a deceitful and turn-coat craft, they
sell according to their custom at the usual price, the more to distract men,
much less do they in a pompous show sell their forged Cachochymicall and
Sophistical Arts, which have not so much as a spark of truth in them, but
deserve to be utterly rejected; because thereby they think that their
Pharisaicall skin which hides the Fox-like and cursed mind would be plucked
off; by which means those base Impostors which deserve to be made Mine-diggers,
those treacherous and fame-murthering villains whose very shadow is
pernicious, are wont not only falsely to accuse many innocent men of upright,
virtuous and blameless life, but also to bring their honest and commendable
name into hatred and hazard. This lewd and dishonest Generation, which
delights to deceive and cheat, had rather have a great then a good report,
and because for the most part they cannot be famous for their virtues, they
will for their vices; therefore it is truly praiseworthy to displease and vex
these Cheaters that are for ever banished the society of all true Philosophers,
These are not the vices of the Art, but of men abusing the Art.
as ignorant and unworthy of the mysteries of God, and the secrets of Nature,
by reason of whom the most laudable and honorable name of true and noble
Alchymistry, has been unworthily made infamous and odious, not only amongst
the rude multitude, but also among learned men, who yet have judged of others
knowledge by their own ignorance. But what can make a man more renowned then to
be dispraised of those most wretched Juglers and effeminate Yonkers, who are
more fit for a Pig-sty, than that Spagyricall or Divinely-distinguishing
Sanctuary, whose commendation is oftentimes to be suspected, who never hate any
but the best and most learned of men.

3 But the more single and subtle part of the Galenists, who like Nicodemus are
of a milder temper, and as yet, for fear of being excommunicated by some
Athenian Rabbis, durst not openly profess the truth; these with open Arms
will most readily embrace this so long looked for, and desired light; however
far off be that unhappy Omen, When envy and hatred give counsel, the Judgment
is nothing worth.
which I presage not with any idle conjecture of mind, least after they have a
full and clear knowledge and understanding, Envy which will certainly arise
from hence, should grieve and be troubled that these things should be made
common for public use: So that the same men afterward do either by a
counterfeit contempt more vehemently carp at them, or sometimes that they may
seem to be more wise, knitting their brows, and snaffling through the nose,
they will a little coldly commend those things, which notwithstanding are
secretly reserved for their uses, though (to such) without Gods blessing upon
them. But virtue can never be found without the marks and wounds of envy, I
study not to please all, for neither all men nor all things please me.
which is the inseparable companion of those that desire and endeavor the good
of a Commonwealth: Yea Jupiter himself, whether he send fair Weather or
foul, cannot please all; and it is the hardest matter that can be, to do an
acceptable work to an ungrateful world, these deserve pity rather than envy,
till in good time they willingly deliver themselves out of the Purgatory of
their own malice, which does so much torment them.

As for the more dull and drossie sort of them, who, rejecting the truth, take
error for their Companion, being altogether rude and void of all humanity, and
true Philosophical literature, these will angrily challenge and provoke this
my good endeavor toward the public, with most scornful reproaches. Howbeit,
seeing according to the Comaedian, there can be nothing more unjust then these
lewd haters of Chemistry, and despisers of wisdom, who are buried in the
graves of their own ignorance: Nor can these men's minds be in love with any
high thing, being plunged into Scholasticall dirt and dust over head and ears,
yea and had rather dye in their old tract, and gross folly, then be thought to
learn of those whose Masters they accounted themselves to be. There is a
twofold Alchymy. Natural, much esteemed by Artist. Sophistical, as much
detested by them.
Let no man wonder if these insolent and open contemners of Natures secrets,
who tremble at the very name of Chemistry, are not afraid hitherto with a proud
disdain, shamelesly to scoff at this Divine Art, slighting it with a sottish
and barbarous kind of arrogance, impudently abusing it with all manner of
revilings, and like Dogs barking at what they know not, maliciously pursue, and
mischievously abuse it, whereas they never yet so much as saluted it at the
threshold. And being destitute of Divine wisdom, they have no other Weapons
to fight against, and trample upon the Truth, and those Pearls cast before
them, then what their Captain, that railing Binarius, supplieth them withal in
defense of their sottish mind and ambitious folly: for whose rage also and
Cyclopean fury there is no other reason why it should be sent to the Isle
Anticyra, but (as they themselves will privately and openly confess) their
ignorance of the just and due preparation of things.

But whereas things unknown are not at all desired, and to determine of those
as if we were well acquainted with them, is not only foolish, but filthy, how I
pray can such Scholastic Doctors, who for want of wit could never find the way
into Natures Sanctuary, how dare they, how can they condemn the most rare
industry of excellent men? And why do they so unworthily usurp the Titles and
Honors of Philosophy and Physic, and with much importunity procure the
public stipends of such Dignity, if they, being convinced, and at length
compelled by the truth, do no less then the common people, admire, as Magical
Miracles, those eminent works wherein the whole power of Nature flourishes?
Nor cease they to condemn many famous Physicians of our time, equal to the
most learned of men, who have spent all their life in the works of Art, men
skilled in the secrets of Nature, John 5.44.
yet because they have not taken upon them those most vain Honors of the
world, See Paracels. Tom. 5. in fragm. Medicis. fol. 167, 168. It is a wicked
Tyranny to captivate the fancy of Students to certain Authors, and take away
the freedom of finding out and following the truth from young Scholars. Money
and Friends advance more then desert.
and (as they call them) the Authorities and Titles of Doctorship^ (with which
neither Hippocrates nor Galen, nor any Physicians that we read of in their time
were endowed or adorned, and yet authentic too in these men's opinions) which
for certain Reasons they refuse, especially least they should be made to swear
to the Heathenish errors of the School-Gods, against the naked Truth, and be
bound by an Academicall Oath, to live and dye in them.

And truly though these personated Titles heretofore by a commendable
institution were the spur of virtue, and the deserved reward of Learning, yet
now adays, especially in Physic, they are bestowed either through flattery or
bribery, The Earth hides the error of such Physicians, who, as Socrates says
of rash Physicians, sport and play with man's skin, or rather the Image of God,
and escape scor-free, while they enrich the Churchyard, with the loss of their
own souls.
upon many who are altogether unworthy of them, who (I speak not of those who
obtain the true Titles and Bays of their, Degrees by their deserts in
Learning) being to make experiment of their studies for the first two or three
years standing, they have found the brittlenesse by the loss of so noble a
vessel, proceeding according to their method whereby they excuse all their
errors, whether the Patient live or die. At last in the fourth, fifth, and
following years, they come to consider the insufficiency and shortness of all
their great skill in Physic, both from the stain of their credit, and sting of
their conscience, and then not without cause they may question whether Galens
Axioms (as he writes) do any more concern us, then they do wild Bears and
Bores, and whether his Method of Physic, wherein this Age so much triumphs,
has any good foundation, being not supported with any Authority of Antiquity,
for they are Ocularly convinced that the end does not answer his beginning in
the great Cures of Diseases.

And whereas they lightly esteem the Learning of other good men, not knowing
that the Art of Physic is so immense and large, that we may well account it as
a very great blessing if (which is sufficient) we attain unto it even in the
beginning of our old Age, although they plead in defense of their sloth and
idleness, that they need not take any more pains for further knowledge,
having the benefit of other men's labors and observations, yet when they shall
disclaim their pernicious arrogance, God only is Lord and Master of Nature:
but the Degree or Title makes none more wise or lea^^ned, although it may give
greater authority in the world, and vain glorious estimation of a Name.
wherewith they proudly endeavored to disparrage men far more able then
themselves and nothing desirous of popular applause and vain glory; they will
then see a necessity to begin all a new again, and that they ought to become
Scholars and servants, not Doctors and Masters of Nature, if so be they would
defend their profession for the time to come with credit and honor, and avoid
the disgraceful taunts of their ignorance and coveteousnesse among the vulgar.

How many of this sort of Physicians have come with their gray hairs
complaining unto me? Fooleries are to be forgotten. (...).
who with unfortunate frowardness have fruitlessely spent the greater part of
their time almost in the common toys of School-vanities, and in Physical
notions, nothing at all availing to the effecting of their cures; like those
that feed on Crabs and Crevises, they find much shell but little meat: But
being allured with the sweetness of confessed Truth, they have heartily
repented of those wild wanderings, after they have come to a serious, though
lateward knowledge and confession of their errors, follies, and false
persuasions, having first cast away Opinion and Scorn the lets of learning.
The world is ruled by Opinion.
They have not blushed in their old age, even when all hope of recovery was
past, to put off their old skin, like the wise Serpent, and putting on a new
one, to become Scholars of Chemistry, and spend the rest of their days with
those Secrets which are both in God and Nature. God is the first book that
teaches us eternal life: for the rule of life is from God.


For it is a lovely thing for old men to study Wisdom, and with Diogenes, not
give over the Race that they are running.

The firmament or heaven with all therein is the second Natural book conducing
to a mortal life, for the knowledge of Physic is got from the Stars.
And next after the great book of Grace, wherein the eternal health of our
souls consists, more diligently to pry into that other also of Nature,
treating of those Secrets which respect our bodily health, not passing by
without taking notice of those choice treasures of Nature, wherein the most
High has laid up medicines for our greatest and worst diseases.

But least by any unhappy mistake they should die, and be buried in the dead
shadows of mere outsides, The happiness of this present life consists in the
knowledge of Nature, therefore next to eternal things, in temporalls the
chiefest thing is to find out the secrets of Nature.
or the external Galenicall qualities, they have built a stately Structure and
a Temple as a most honorable monument to their old age and Nature: Out of
which next to the more clear knowledge of the Creator (unto which they have
attained as well by the sedulous search and admiration of the works of God, as
by their laborious examination, and Phylosophicall sequestration of the
Creatures, or Natural things) they have obtained also this excellent fruit of
their labors, watchings, time and experiences, One shall not repent of such a
Physician who has the true knowledge of earthly things. Vid: Agrip: lib. 6.
Epist. c.
viz. That when they shall be sent for to the sick (where not many words to
dispute, but much skill to cure avails most) they may come as well
experienced Physicians, not pretending now to study that disease which they
intend to patch up with some outward flattering plaster; to wit, making a
great show of much ado, with a multitude of frivolous services, and sugured
words to cloak their simplicity, sneaking away and giving the slip to the
disease, World (...) Physicians (...) nothing out for prosie and praise:
whereas the end of Physic is not to scrape up money, but to discover the
secrets of Nature, and the love of the Physician to the sick.
discouraging the Patient with the difficulty of the first and chiefest
performances, as the common sort of proud conceited Physicians use to do,
insinuating into the richer sort for base gain, but altogether slighting
others of meaner fortune.

Moreover such is the baseness and malice of some of this ribble rabble, that
with swelling words they vilify, slight, condemn, and every where forbid, as
poisonous, those Physical Secrets, and inventions of (Chemists, which they
call) Collier-like-Phisitians, notwithstanding they have a secret and subtle
desire to learn those things which they hope to use with success and profit;
yet they in the mean time challenge to themselves the due praises of the true
Author, robbing the Inventers of the Art, and their Benefactours, of their
deserved honor by a mendacious and inverted theft, that they might more
handsomely and with greater oftentation use those medicines which they have got
with such craft. To these A pule jan Bravadoes, whether they put on the Lions
or the Foxes skin, admission to the Bath of Diana is not to be granted, because
Pythagoras forbids to put our victuals into a close stool; nor should we
bestow our choicest herbs on such as rudely rush into the Chemists garden,
seeing brambles and thistles will serve their turn: But since the calumnies
and reproaches of lewd and ignorant men are, in the opinion of the wise, not to
be regarded by heroike spirits, The boiling pot does ^ot ^ear the siege of
flies.
and the fly never falls into the seething pot, the more humane and civil
inclinations also of some make me expect better things; the unjust hatred of
Truth being laid aside, and violent Censures abated, wherewith some have
endeavored to make such gifts of God suspected and hated by poor and rich: I
would not that good men who are innocent should any otherwise have trial of
the loss then as it is due to base ingratitude; no^ would I for the
unworthiness of some shut these doors against those that seek after the true
and Ancient Physic, who are seriously considering and daily hammering out the
Ancient knowledge thereof, seasonably forsaking their errors, and without envy
or evil speaking, give place to Paracelsus according to his desert in practice
and preparations.

Now because the abundance of accusations is often troublesome, and suspected
of the Judge, yet because of the worlds wickedness, where iniquity abounds,
and the charity of many waxes cold which ought to be more fervent in
Christians toward their brethren, these things here mentioned in this place,
and in these times, may not be at all judged superfluous or beside the matter
in hand; neither will this Discourse offend any holy and Learned Physician,
which I intend only against those proud, envious, ignorant vassalls, who
oppose the Chymicall verity against conscience, to the reproach of God and
Nature, and to the hinderance of the Common good.

But before I come to describe the Remedies I suppose it will not be altogether
lost labor, if first by the assistance of the great God, I handle some things
in this Admonitary Preface, which with greatest intention of mind, and most
diligent scruting, are to be explained by a Philosophical Physician. Viz.

What that Physic is which cures men's diseases, and few Physicians know it.
Whereunto is added a perfect Philosophical Description of the little World
Man, almost forgotten and unknown.

Where that True Physic lies hid, and may be found.

That it is to be fetched out, and prepared truly, by fire.

With what virtue, and after what manner, that Physic works on man's body,
and expels his diseases.

What manner of Physician that Physic does require for its Minister.

Of the universal and chief Medicine or Physic of the most Ancient
Philosophers, commended of many, possessed, yea seen, or believed of very few.

Some thing in defense of the published Truth, as an Epilogue or Conclusion.

CHAP. I. Of the True Physic.
THE true Physic whereof by the Devine assistance I intend here to treat, is
the mear gift of the most high God; it is not to be sought for or learned from
the Heathens, but from God alone, See Paracels. his Labyrinth of Physicians.
the Ancient of days, the Father of Lights, who cannot err, the One only
Governor of the supreme Universe. Wisdom therefore is not to be got from the
Creatures, but from God, who being the first inventer of all Secrets, alone
knows with what properties he has endued every creature: Therefore no
mortal Master or dead letter can ever teach it so well as he, who is the
perfect Artist of all things, even the most high Creator and glorious God,
from whom it flows unto us as heat from the Sun beams, which produces all
kind of flowers and herbs; for what has Man which he has not received from
above? The Master teaches that Scholar in vain whose Nativity is not
disposed to that Art by the Sears.
All learn of the first by retrogression or going backward, and this first of
God, who gave him knowledge in his Creation: A Physician should be born out of
the Light of Grace and Nature of the inward and invisible Man, the internal
Angel, the Light of Nature, which like a sound Doctor teaches and
instructs men, as the Holy Spirit taught the Apostles in fiery tongues: It is
perfected and brought to light by practice, not established by Humane, but by
the institution of God and Nature; for it is not founded upon any Humane
figments, but upon Nature, upon which God has written with his own sacred
finger in sublunary things, but especially in perfect Mettalls; God therefore
is the true Foundation thereof.

Physic is a favor given of God, whereof University books are not the
Foundation, but the invisible mercy of God and his special gift: so are those
things also which are written that depend upon the true foundation and
experience. This Physical essence in Physic is called Gold. Physic is
written in the book of Nature (1) in Heaven and Earth, and may there be read
and found out by Chyromancy and phisiognomy, through the miraculous
illumination of God.
Wherefore Physic is nothing else but the created and incarnate Mercy of our
Heavenly Father, bestowed upon poor afflicted Mortals, that the sick Patient
might sensibly perceive and have experience of the bountiful love,
mercifulness and assistance of his Creator toward him in his afflictions,
that so God may be glorified in all his wonderful works.

Now this Medicine, as natural Mummy and kernel of Nature, is contained in
the vital Sulphur, as in the treasure of Nature, and is founded in the Balsam
of Vegetables, Mineralls and Animalls, from which every action in Nature has
its beginning: By its only power all diseases are cured, if (as shall be
showed anon) it be rightly prepared, and separated from all impurity, and in a
due order conveniently administered by a Godly skillful Physician to the poor,
weak, decayed Nature of Man.

The Foundation of this Physic is according to the agreement of the lesser
World Man with the greater and external world, as we are sufficiently
instructed by Astronomy and Philosophy, which explain those two Globes, the
superior and inferior. Philosophy teatheth the force and properties of Earth
and Wate,-as Astronomy does of the Firmament and Air. Philosophy and Astronomy
make up an internal and perfect Philosopher, not only in the great World, but
also in the lesser: And therefore it is necessary to accommodate the
disposition of the great World as of a parent to the little World as to the
Son, and duly compare the Anotomy of the World with the Anotomy of Man.

The outward World is a speculative Anotomy, wherein we may see, as in a
glass, the lesser World Man; for so much of his wonderful and excellent
fabric and creation as is necessary for a Physician to know, cannot be
understood from the man himself: For they agree not in outward form or
corporal substance, What the Light of Nature is.
but in all their powers and virtues; as is the great world, so is the lesser,
in essence and internal form they are altogether one and the same thing,
Without the knowledge of Light of Nature or the great world no Physician can
have an exact knowledge of diseases in Man.
the outward form at least differenceth the World and Man. This is most evident
from the Light of Nature, which is nothing else but a divine Analogy of this
visible world with the body of man; For whatsoever lies hid and unseen in Man,
is made manifest in the visible Anotomy of the whole Universe, for the
Microcosmicall Nature in Man is invisible and incomprehensible: The great World
is a speculation and glass of the little World Man.
Therefore in the visible and comprehensible Anotomy of the great World, all
things are manifest as in their Parent: Heaven and Earth are Man's Parents, out
of which Man last of all was created; He that knows the parents, Man is the
End of Philosophy and Astronomy.
and can Anotomize them, has attained the true knowledge of their child Man,
the most perfect creature in all his properties; because all things of the
whole Universe meet in him as in the Center, and the Anotomy of him in his
Nature is the Anotomy of the whole world.

The external world is the figure of Man, and Man is an hidden world, because
visible things in him are invisible, and when they are made visible then they
are diseases, not health, as truly as he is the little world and not the great
one: And this is the true knowledge, that Man may Microcosmically be known
visibly and invisibly or magically. The knowledge of every sound and perfect
Physician proceeds from the true and full Anotomy both of the great and
little world, unto which he may safely trust as to a most sure Anchor.
Considering then the original of all diseases, it will appear that the Nature,
as well of the Macrocosme as the Microcosme, is its own medicine, disease, and
Physician; A Physician must spring out of Nature; for in him, and of him, and
from him is nothing but all of Nature only; Nature, not man, makes a
Physician. And because the Matter of Man is the Extract of the four Elements,
it is requisite that he have in himself a familiarity with all the Elements
and their fruits, inasmuch as without them he cannot live. For what man can be
without Air, Earth, Water or Fire, or their effects? God created the Elements
for their fruits sake, that they might sustain and preserve Man with food and
Physic. The knowledge of the 4 Elements do show every disease in man and its
cure.
Therefore all the external Elements represent unto us the whole Man, which
being known, Man also is understood, for they are alike, and are the very
Microcosm; and in the four Elements there is but one Anatomy essence and
matter, all the differenc being only in the Form; The knowledge of Physic in
the outward world is to be fetched from the Limbovn, and depends upon the
knowledge of Man.
Thus in all things there is Fire, Air, Earthy Water. Again there is Water,
Caelestiall Earth. Likewise Terrene, Fiery, Airy Water. Lastly Airy Fre, Airy
Water, Airy Earth. There are also four kinds of Mercury, and four sorts of
Mettalls, a fourfold Snow, four sorts of Ametheists and precious stones; There
are Four of every thing, one in the Firmament or Heavenly Element, Every
Element perfecteth its power and operation in all the four Elements.
another in the Air, a third in the Water, a fourth in the Earth. So there is
a fourfold Man; For God is far more wonderful in his invisible works then in
his visible.

Paracelsus faith, that to avoid an Emptiness in all the four Elements, he
created living creatures, inanimate, that is to say, without an Intellectual
Soul; which should be the four kind of Inhabitants of the Elements, who differ
from Men created after the Image of God, in understanding, wisdom, arts,
operations, and habitations.

To the Water there belong Nimphs, Undens, Melosyns, whose Monsters or bastards
are the Sirens that swim upon the water.

To the Earth do belong Gnoms, Lemurs, Sylphs, Montans, Zonnets, whose
Monsters are the Pigmyes.

In the Air or our airy world there are Umbratils, Silve^ters, Satyrs, whose
Monsters are the Giants.

To the Fire or the Firmament do belong the Vulcanals, Pennats, Salamanders,
Superi, whose Monsters are Zundell; Besides those Flagae which Theophrastus in
his works affirms are in many thousands of several forts incorporated to the
Soul of the World.

Thus also there is a fourfold Medicine; For example, the fiery, airy, watery,
earthy Heart of the Macrocosm in all things agreeable to the Heart of the
Microcosm Man; For all things are of one operation in Man. So also are we to
understand of the rest of the members of the body; for the Microcosm the child
ought always to answer to the fourfold members of the Macrocosm its parent;
Thus we shall find that every malady and medicine is of the same Physiognomy,
Chyromancy and Anotomy; He that knows not this Fundamental cannot be a good
Physician. Thus also we find out of ancient Records that Astrologers and
Chymiologers were very near of kin; for the Caelestiall Astronomy is as it were
the Parent and Mistress of the inseriour, for as much as both have their own
Heaven, their own Sun, their own Moon, their Planets, and their own proper
Stars; yet so as that the Astrology of superior things has to do with the
Chymiology of things inferior. Those Chemists who by the assistance of divine
Grace have attained the Mind, and rightly know how to accommodate the
properties of those bodies in the superior Globe, which are seen in the
Astra's and bodies of the inferior Globe, these can easily and truly unfold
all Phylosophicall difficulties that have been wrapped up in aenigmaticall
obscurity, and will confess that henceforth they need not travel to India or
America to get the knowledge of Philosophy. For by the providence and goodness
of the Creator, it is so ordered that the invisible Astra's of the other
Elements should be represented by a visible appearance in the supreme Element,
and that they should clearly discover their motions and seasons, although there
be nothing in the whole course of the inferior Nature which by the inbred
Astra's is not able to justify the lawful use of Astronomy.

In his Idaea of Phylosophical Phifick. They that are troubled with the gout
have a foresence of the sudden change of seasons, their pain many times makes
them Prophets and Astrologers against their will. So many sick folk perceive
before hand the change of weatherin the four Elements. The Internal Elements
of man have a foresence of the change of External. As Reason rules the outward
Astra's, so Physic rules the inward. The Astrum of Man and Heaven is but one.
Thus as P. Severinus the Dane does learnedly observe, the (Sidus) constellation
of Summer, Winter, Spring Autumn, are contained in the Earth, Water, Air,
which unless they did conspire with the Astra's of the Firmament (to which
only many of the common Philosophers by a great mistake have ascribed all
Astronomy) we should blame the impressions of the Heavenly (Astra's) as barren
in the time of dearth.

There is a twofold Heaven; External, as all the bodies of the Astra's in the
Heaven of the Firmament; and Internal, which is the Astrum or invisible and
insensible body in all the Stars of Heaven. That invisible and insensible body
of the Astra's is the Spirit of the World, or Nature, as Paracelsus calls it,
the Hylech, spread abroad through all the Astra's, or rather it is all the
Astra's it self; And as that Hylech in a particular manner contains all the
Astra's in the great World, so also the internal Heaven of Man, which is the
Olimpick spirit, does particularly comprehend all the Astra's. And thus the
invisible Man is not only all the Astra's, but is altogether one and the same
thing with the Spirit of the world, as whiteness is with snow. As all things
spring and proceed from within, from (things) hidden and invisible; so also the
visible corporal substances proceed from incorporall, spiritual (things) out
of the Astra's, and are the bodies of the Astra's, and remain in the Astra's,
one in the other.

Hence it follows that not only all living things, but also all growing
things, even stones and mettalls, The Formation of things is in the Astra'^, as
iron in the imagination of the Smith. Hence also Nativities are to be cast: See
P^racel. in Paramiro de eme Astro^um.
and whatever are in the Universal Nature of things, are endued with a
syderiall spirit, which is called Heaven or the Astrum, the secret Forger, from
which every Formation, Figure and Color of things proceeds. From this proper
and internal Astrum, viz. The Sun of the Microcosm (which Paracelsus calls the
Ens or Being of the seed and virtue or power) is Man also generated, produced,
figured, formed, and governed.

But when we say that all the form of things proceeds from the astra's, it is
not meant of the visible coals of Heaven, nor of the invisible body of the
Astra's in the Firmament, but of every things own proper Astrum; so that the
superior does not power forth its virtues and hidden secrets into the inferior
spectificate Firmament, as the false Philosophers think that the stars of the
Firmament do infuse virtue into herbs and trees; no in no wise: every growing
and living thing carry its proper heaven and Astrum with it self, and in it
self; the superior stars in their course through the Zodiak excite and stir
up the growth of inferior things, they provide for them by dew rain, seasons,
but do not infuse the internal Astrum into things that grow, neither smell nor
color, nor form, but all things proceed from the inner Astrum or secret
forger, and not from without: the external stars do neither incline nor
necessitate Man, Man governs the Stars and not the Stars him.
but Man rather inclines the Stars, and by his Magical imagination infecteth
them, and causes those deadly impressions; For we receive not our conditions,
properties, and manners from the Ascendant, nor from the Constellation of the
Planets, but from the hand of God through the breathing in of the breath of
life; Read the eight Psalm.
So that Man's Reason ought to rule the external Stars. For if we that are the
children of Adam did not provoke our Father with our sins we should always
find him meek and gentle toward us, Vid. Paracels.
see Paracels. in Paramiro lib. 2. de origin morbor. cap. 7.

The course of the external Firmament is free with its constellations, and is
governed by none: So the course of the Firmament and Stars in Man is free, with
their Constellations, and not at all governed by the outward Firmament, which
course is not finished materially, but in the spirits of bodies. For as the
Air or Sun cannot set an apple or pear upon the tree, which must rather grow
ou^ of its own internal Astrum, or inward Heaven, from the Center to the
Circumference, much less can the external superior Heaven infuse any virtue
into the things that grow. Nevertheless the fruits of those Astra's or
Caelestiall, Ayry, Earthy, Watery seeds do endeavor and bend to one general
Good as Citizens of the same Anotmy: and therefore do mutually cherish and
succor one another by a sweet felloship and vicissitude of actions.

Plato's Rings and Homers Chains are nothing but a Divine Series and Order
serving Providence, a graduall and concatenate Sympathy of things.
This visible and invisible fellowship of Nature is that golden chain so much
commended, this is the marriage of heaven and riches, these are Plato's rings,
this is that dark and close Philosophy so hard to be known in the most inward
and secret parts of Natare, for the gaining whereof Democritus, Pythagoras,
Plato, Apollonius, etc. have traveled to the Brachmans and Gymnosophists in
the Indies, and to Hermes his Pillars in Egypt. This was that which the most
ancient Philosophers studied, which by the Light of Nature that singular
inspiration of God they also obtained, wherein the wonderful and infinite
power the incomprehensible Wisdom of our Creator so shines that we cannot
sufficiently admire and extol his inestimable goodness in the Creatures and
the unutterable infiniteness of his Mysteryes.

It is also to be considered that there are THREE Principles of all things
which are found in every compound body. For it is most certain that those
things, into which every natural body is resolved, had their being from the
beginning of their composition, and also those parts of which they did consist:
No body composed by Nature can by any dissolving skill be parted into more or
less then Three, viz. Into Mercury or liquor, Sulphur or Oil, and Salt; every
created thing is generated and preserved in these three; For the Holy Triunity
when it spoke that Triune word FIAT created all things Triune, as in a
Spagiricall resolution is plainly to be seen. i. e. A separation of purity from
impurity, or truth from falsehood.
By the word FIAT (or Let there be) God produced the first matter, which is
threefold in respect of the three Principles contained in the first, and
afterward these three Species are separated into four diverse bodies, or
Elements, just as if a skillfull Artist should out of lead make red lead, white
lead, Glass, and the Spirit of lead. So the world with all created bodies in
it is nothing else but a fume or smoke coagulated or curded together of the
three substances, Sulphur Salt, Mercury, which three are the matter out of
which all bodily things are created; The Spagyricks can make this plain by
visible experience and uncontrollable certainty. In green wood also there are
three kinds of moystures, the first watery like fugitive Mercury or Quicksilver;
which preserves the wood from burning; Another very fat and oily making it
like brimstone to flame and burn, these two are consumed by the fire; The
third, viz. the Salt is unctuous, very little, thin and lasting, and remains in
the ashes. Thus also the Earth as it is endued with that threefold substance of
Salt, Mercury and Sulphur, is the cause of the material body of man: The Salt
by coagulation gives Solidity, Color and Taste to all bodies: The Sulphur by a
pleasant mixture tempereth the coagulation of the Salt, and gives the Body
Substance and Transmutation: Mercury, which like the Elixir gives the virtues,
When the Salt or Mummy is spent things br^^ed nothing but worms.
Operations and Secrets, by a diligent and constant supply of the vital and
vegetative moisture does cherish the two former, which by frequent action
continually grow dry and old, making every mixture easily by a fluid and
slippery substance.

These three Principles which are in all bodies are altogether distinct in use
and properties by reason of the mixture of the virtue or operation, although to
sense they present but one simular substance of bodies.

Some Theophrastaeans, who have more narrowly and exactly searched out the
causes of hidden things do add a Fourth, The Spirit of God upon the face of
the waters.
which they call the Spirit, which though it may be got out of Mineralls and
Vegetables, yet in Animalls by reason of its subtility it is subjected unto,
nor can it be extracted or separated by the skill of Art, and therefore cannot
be had; thus Sulphur or brimstone may answer to Fire, Salt to the earth,
Mercury to Water, Spirit to Air.

And seeing we have entered into a Discourse of the Elements, we shall add a few
things concerning them out of that short Treatise of Severinus. The true and
purely spiritual Elements are the keepers, nurses, places, Mines, wombs and
receptacles of the whole Creation; yea the very essence, existence, life and
act of all Beings. Places are not without Things, but are filled with their
properties, which administer life and nourishment to the things that are in
them, to wit, to the Seeds that they may produce out of themselves the things
that were secretly treasured up in them. These (places) are divided into two
Globes, viz. the superior Fire, or the Firmament, and Air, much like the
shell and white of an egg; the inferior, Water and the Earth, like the yolk
of an egg.

In these four incorporeall, empty, void Natures, the Creator by virtue of the
Word opening the united multitude, Genesis 1.
and of the Spirit moving upon the face of the Waters, did plant the Light and
Seminall causes of all things, which he once filled by his heavenly
Benediction, and shall ever be supplied by an incomprehensible Magic out of
the Eternal Treasures of Divine Wisdom; knitting the Principles of bodies
together wherewith they might be covered as with a house or garment, and which
are to last as long as this worldly frame. The Seeds and Astra's, those bonds
of things, lay hid in the invisible Treasures of the Elements from the
beginning of the Creation, as in a great deep, springing up in their appointed
times, joining visible things to invisible, the highest to the lowest, by whose
advantage the Elements conspire and agree, and the whole sympathy of Nature is
preserved; by their help the World is governed, indeavoring to imitate Eternity
by a continual addition of fresh supply. The knowledge of the Elements cannot
be attained unto without these Seeds, because they declare or open the use and
services of the Elements, and as the seeds are to the Elements, so the
Principles of bodies are to them; which Principles being the inseparable
companions of the Seeds, cleaves to them as intermingled by an indissoluble
tie, and are furnished with incomprehensible variety of gifts for the service of
Generations; For the Seeds and Principles of Things receive strength of
Generation and Multiplication from the authority of His Word, whose command all
things obey: Hippocr. in lib. de Antiqua medic.
But as the Seeds and Elements can hardly be separated one from the other by
the sharpest wit, All things proceeds from their powers.
so neither can the Elements and Principles of bodies, the laws of Nature
scarce ever suffered them perfectly to be separated by any industry of Art.

Here also it is to be observed, that some bodies have only properties without
Arcane or hidden secrets, nor have they in them that Cherionium ( i. e. that
wherein Nature cannot be changed but are only barren Relollacaeous qualities,
( i. e. qualities whose force is only from the complexion) in which there is
no virtue for curing diseases.

Again, some bodies do imitate the properties or qualities of Seeds, and have
the Tinctures in which though heat, cold, moisture and dryness accord, yet no
actions proceed from them, but only for the present do assist (as it were)
the companions of the deputies; in such bodies there may be a separation made
of the strong from the weak, of the pure from the impure. There are to us four
Elementated Elements, viz. Fire or the Firmament, Air, Water, Earth, which
conceive, bring forth, and again receive or take into them all things; they
are the Fruit of the Seeds and the other Elements, which by a constant and
perpetual flowing and watering do serve unto generation: from the three first
are all compound bodies, into which they are again resolved; these three are
found in every matrix, In living creatures the bones resemble the earth, the
flesh air, the vital spirit fire, and the humors water.
and in every birth of every matrix. The Soul in man is a Caelestiall Fiery
Element; the solid and Spermatick parts are the Earth; the moist parts, as the
Blood and other Humors are of the Element of Water; the Air is all that that
is hollow without substance: But these things, as we have said, are to be
understood of Elementated Elements (for the true Elements are Spiritual)
because all the least and smallest Seeds strive to imitate the economy of the
world, and hold forth a dark resemblance of the Elements and Principles; after
this sort we acknowledge that the Elements are in all Things, and that they are
mingled with and preserved by the Balsam and Radical Tincture; Thus Water it
self having the four Elements in it cherishes its Seeds with a fruitful
nourishment and multiplication. Thus much out of Severinus; but least that
which he has said should seem obscure to the inconsiderate Reader, we will now
speak more clearly of the Elements.

He that is a true Phylosophicall Physician and would know the four Elements or
those four Pillars of the World; shall understand himself and his own
Original; From the Outward he finds the frame of the Inward, viz. the true
Anotomy of the great and little World.

Every Creature is formed out o^ the Elements; Living crea^^ es are assigned to
the Air, Vegetables to the Earth, Mineralls to the Water; the Fire is that
which gives life to all. These are the wombs of all things.
The Earth, as is said, with the Water is the Center; the Air circularly
compasses the Earth and Water; the nine Sphaeres or Firmament with all the
Stars are the Fire: The true Elements with their proper Astra's are not visior
sensible, but as the Soul in the Body is insensible, so also are the Elements
in their bodies. The body of the Element is a dead and dark thing; the Spirit
is the life, and is divided into Astra's which out of themselves give their
growth and fruit; And as the Soul seperateth its body from it self and (yet)
dwells in it, so also these spiritual Elements in the separation of all things
have severed the visible bodies from themselves by separation. The potentiall
Heat separated the Stars from it self, as in the Earth the herbs separate the
flowers from themselves; So Moisture the Air, Coldness the Water, Dryness
the Earth; that is, from the Element of the Earth proceeds an Earthy body,
from the Element of Water flows a watery body, from the Element of Air an
Aerie body breaths forth, and is compact in its own Nature, from the Element
of Fire a body of Fire shines out, viz. the visible Heaven, and is compact in
its own substance. Every thing brought for an^ gr^w^^ is (...) generating
matrix, as the fish in the water.
From these bodies of the Elements things that grow do proceed and come forth,
and out of these the fruit by the mediation and operation of the Astra's; for
no visible body is of it self and from it self, but from its own invisible
Element and Astrum.

The visible Astra's or Stars in the Firmament flame forth from the Fiery Body;
Of whatsoever, any thing is begotten of the same also is i^ nourished and
preserved. A Herring will not live out of the water.
therefore fire is the food and preservation of the Stars: Nostoch says, they
feed on fire, and at last sever it from themselves; although in the lower part
of the Air it be turned into a Mucilaginous matter upon the Earth. Mettalls,
Salts, Mineralls grow out of the body of the Water. From the body of the Earth
spring Trees and Herbs. Our visible Elements are but the bodies and houses of
others, This Rule both Divines and Physicians make use of.
which hinder and withold their force and efficacy. All things that are joined
together in a visible body choke and break the force, power and operation of
the inner Spirit.

The Earth of it self is dead, yet is it the Element of an invisible and hidden
life.
The Earth is twofold, External or visible, Internal or invisible. The
External is not the Element, but the body of the Element, and is the Sulphur,
Mercury, Salt; For the Element of the Earth is life and Spirit wherein lie the
Astra's of the Earth, which bring forth all growing things through the body of
the Earth; Though the Earth seem to be dead, yet has it in it self the seeds
and seminall virtues of all things; therefore it is said to be Animal,
Vegetable, Mineral, as it is made fruitful by all other Elements, it brings
forth all things out of it self; Thus trees, herbs, grass, flowers,
mushromes and all growing things of the Earth are the bodies of the Astra's and
fruit of the Earth, out of the invisible Astra's they bring forth their fruits,
as flowers, pears, apples, cherries, and every one of these fruits is again
the Astrum and Seed.

Such is ^he virtue of the Element of water that spiritual regeneration cannot
be without it as Chr. said to N^c. Our Fire is not the Element, because like
death it consumes all things. Heaven is the fourth and first Element
concluding all things in it self as the shell does the egg. No one Element
can be without another, but there is always found the commixture of the four
Elements in the generation of all things. Paracels. in P^ram. de Ent^.
There is also a twofold Water, viz. the Body, which is Mercury, Sulphur, and
Salt; but the Element is the life and Spirit in which the Astra's of the Water
are contained, which like a mother out of her Abyss, bring forth all
mineralls, salts, mettalls, stones, jewels, sands and all the fruits of the
Water, which yet are dug out of the Earth. For the Astrum of every Element
brings forth and bays its fruits in a strange region or matrix: By a singular
Providence all things seem to tend to the Earth and to further its
fruitfulness.

Thus the fruits of the Firmament are perfected in the Air, and from hence
imparted to the lower Globe, as Snow which is bred of Fire is found in the Air
and Earth. The fruits of the Air proceed from the Center to the Circumference,
and there attain to coagulation and perfection. The Seeds of the Water do
bring forth in the inner part of the Earth, and from thence tend to the
superfices or outside: For the Earth wherein we live and flourish brings
forth its fruits into this Circumference; for the corn that grows in the Earth
is reaped upon the Earth in the Air; so the procreations of all the Elements
do voluntarily and earnestly bend toward Mankind as to their desired limit,
and by a liberal supply of moisture do cherish all the parts of Nature; So
also we see that by an imutable decree of Eternal Law it comes to pass and is
so ordered that the Water does not bring forth more then the Earth can bring
up, Astrers says, that the Air was created before any Creature. All m^yst
things ^t^r^cted by the Sun from the E^^^h are consumed in the Air, whose
fruits are the likeness of the Tere^i^bi^ or far of Manna.
the Air cherish, and the Fire consume.

The Air also is twofold, for it has its Element as an Inhabitant in it
self. It is the Balsam of all created things, and the life of the other three
Elements, nor is there any Element that God created more subtle or thin, which
lives of it self, and gives life to all, without which neither Firmament,
nor Water, nor Earth can bring forth their fruits; the Fire cannot so much as
burn without the Air, much less can the coals of Heaven, those Crescences
of Fire shine.

The Element of Fire according to Paracis the Firmament of Heaven.
The Firmament or Fire is likewise is twofold, and has its own Element as an
Inhabitant in it self, which Element has in it all Astra's and Seeds: The
Element of Fire, or the Corporeal Firmament sends the bodies of the Stars,
Sun, Moon and Planets out of it self. For as herbs, flowers, trees did grow
out of the Earth, and yet remain in the Earth, so at the Creation did the
bodies of the Stars grow out of Heaven, and yet abide in the Firmament or
Heaven, swiming in their Orbs as birds fly in the Air.

The twelve Caelestiall Signs in the Zodiak, with the other Stars of Heaven,
are the fruits of Fire, and come from the invisible Astra's of Fire; By how
much the Firmament is more subtle or thin then the Earth, by so much the fruits
thereof are more subtle and operative then the fruits of the other three
Elements. Thus the seven Rulers of the world are nothing else but the fruits of
Fire; As the flowers in earth show the Colors of the Stars, so the
constellations in Heaven show the field or meadow of the Earth.
which fruits are separated from the Element of Fire, and by separation do
increase, as flowers and herbs in the Earth, only the flowers of the Earth
abide immovable in their place, but the Stars do not so in the Firmament, for
they move up and down in the Firmament, and those Sphaericall bodies do by the
Providence of God swim in their Orbs as fish in the water, or a feather in the
Air, and are nourished by the Heaven. These like all other created things are
twofold; we see their visible body as a shining light, the invisible Astrum or
Sydereall Spirit in the Stars we cannot see; so that not the body of the Sun,
but the Spirit in the body, is the Sun properly; the like also may be said of
Man.

Moreover, the four Astra's of the said Elements are the Seeds in the four
matrices or wombs and always two are together and in one, to wit, the Body and
Astrum, the invisible and visible: The Bodily grows out of the Spiritual, and
abides in it, and so the invisible virtues, Seeds and Astra's are propagated
into many Millions through the corporeal Visible body, as fire increases in
wood or in convenient and fit matter, one Fire always proceeds from another.
Angels cannot increase themselves because they want a body, but Man may because
he has a one. All things that grow, as herbs, trees, fishes, birds, living
creatures, may augment themselves by the help of the body after this manner;
(for the Seed or Astrum can do nothing without the body) so soon as ever the
Seed or Astrum dies and rots in its matrix or womb, the Astrum goes forward
into a new body, and multiplyeth it self, as Christ himself sets it forth by
a similitude and example in a grain of Wheat, John 12.24.
and afterward brings forth much fruit or many grains, which in time come to
have the same power or virtue that the former had out of which they grew.

Putrefaction consumes and separateth the old Nature, and brings new fruit.
Therefore Eternal life cannot be in any but where the body is first dead,
because death is the cause of the glorifying of the body in eternal Life, as
Corruption is the cause of the new generation of a Divine substance.

It Is necessary that the first life of herbs and medicines should die that the
second life by the Chemists help may be attained through Putrefaction and
Regeneration, wherein the Three First discover themselves with their hidden
virtues, which are necessary for a Physician to know, for without Regeneration
no hid Secret of Physic can be attained to, which is without all complexion of
qualities When the external World is known the Phylosophicall Physician does
also understand the Physical body of Man, which is nourished from the Earth,
and Sydereall body which lives by the Firmament, he sees that the Physical
body is nothing else but Sulphur, Salt and Mercury (for all bodily things are
contained in these Three, as has been said a little before) and that the
things that grow do not spring from the four visible Bodies, nor from the four
humors, but out of the invisible Seed, as an herb or tree grows out of its
seed.

The Anotomy of the diseases of the body is to be ferc^^c from the internal
Astra's or impressions which cause the diseases, and is more necessary for a
Physician them that Local Anot of Carcasses.
It is not the Local Anotomy of a man and dead corpses, but the Essentiated and
Elemented Anotomy of the World and man that discovers the disease and cure;
The Members or parts of the great world are the Remedies of the members and
parts of man by an agreement between the external and internal Anotomy, not
settling one degree against another; As there is but one Anotomy of a man and a
woman, so the Anotomy of the diseases and of the medicines is but one; As in
Man, Man is the Anotomy of the disease, so also in Physic Man is the Anotomy
of the Physic. Anotomy is the Basis of true Physicians, Diseases and Things.
And though the hidden virtue of Herbs, or the Stars of that Physician Heaven
may be known to us, yet the chiefest thing that the Physician is also to
consider is to know the Concordance of Nature, viz. how he may make the Astrum
of the Physic or of the magical Heaven agree with the internal Astrum and
Olimpus of Man; because of the like Anotomy it is that Mummy will stop the
bleeding in Man.

The Nightingale that is subject to the deseases of Spiders is cured by eating
them: The cause and subject of diseases.
the external leads to the internal, as in the great so in the little
world; He therefore that knows the things that grow and the fruits of the
Earth, as of herbs, trees, etc. Viz. that all things proceed out of the seed
or Astrum, he likewise knows that there do such various diseases lie hid and
lurk in the Physical body, which diseases do not proceed from the four
fictitious humors or qualities, but rather from the Seed, by reason of the
Analogy or proportion that is between the great and little world; he that
knows the diseases of the great world, cannot be ignorant of the distempers
of man; As many kinds of Mineralls as are in the world, Many diseases proceed
out of the mineralls of man, which Iliad contains all things in it self.
so many there be in Man; So many kinds of diseases are there, as there be
sorts, bodies and seeds of things that grow; No man knows the number of
diseases but he that can tell the number of all things that grow.

The Seeds which the Caelestiall, Airy, Watery, Earthy Astra's are succored in
the Element which agree with man's Nature, which in fit and certain seasons
bring forth fruits as messengers of health or sickness. The Original of all
diseases is from the Three First upon which the Astra's c^n make some
impression, as upon wood or Straw, or Saf fron upon water.
So that the Three First are the cause of all diseases; for in what body soever
they are united that may be concluded to be a sound body; but where they are
not united there we may be sure that sickness and the root of the first death
has taken footing. Hereditary diseases which proceed from the Seed or Astra's
are partly Elementary, because they are known by hot, moist or cold qualities.
There are other diseases whereof the most part are Astrall or Firmamentall,
Elementary diseases are cured by Elemental means, and Astrall have Astrall
remedies. The Galenists do know nothing of these Astral cures, which the grave
experienced Physicians do well understand.
which spring out of the Firmament of Man, which is as integrally contained in
Man as the Elements are: And as the visible body has its meat from the Earth,
so also the Syderiall spirit of Man or the invisible Man (which is the In-mate
of the body) has its food from the external Air and Fire or Firmament, viz.
from the Fire of the Firmament, as all arts, workmanships, faculties of the
tongue; For Heaven is the Father and teacher of all Arts, except Divinity and
holy Righteousness, which cannot be learned from the Stars, but from the holy
Spirit immediately; for all Believers and Regenerate men are hid from, and
unknown to Astronomers, as you may find in the Sage and deep Philosophy of
Paracelsus.

Iron shows that man is divided into the external and internal: in the
external, dust and earth the matrer of the diseaseand that which afflicts us
does lie hid; therefore the cure is to be sought for in a medicine that is like
it, separated from the dregs Spagyrically. The internal and Astrallman also
has his proper medicines which the skillfull Physician knows well.
As the Loadstone by drawing the Iron to it does suck out the spirit thereof and
leave it rusty, so man in respect of the body has a twofold Loadstone; For
partly he draws the Astra's to himself, from which he sucks his food, as Bees
do honey from flowers and herbs, viz. wordly wisdom, sense, cogitation, etc.
And partly by his attractive power he inticeth and allureth to him the daily
nutriment of his flesh and blood from the Elements; And as the Elementall body
draws the Elementary bodies to it by hunger and thirst, so the syderiall
spirit of Man attracteth all Arts, sciences, and faculties, and all humane
Wisdom from the Rays or beams of the superior Stars or constellations; for
the Firmament is the Light of Nature, which naturally supplyeth man with all
things.

Furthermore, the Astra's or Elements (which are Spirits) are (...), that is,
without any quality neither hot, nor cold nor dry, nor moist, but the things
that are produced out of them are endued with qualities. That whereof any thing
is bred, of the same does it live, is fed nourished, preserved, cured, made
sick punished and ^^stroyed.
For out of the Earth grow Poppy, Opium, cold Darnell, the herb Trinity or
Heartsease, hot biting Arsesmart; thus contrary things grow out of the
Elements. From the Fire proceeds Snow, Rain, Dew, Winds, Rainbow, Thunder,
Hail, Lightning; all such Meteor-like impressions proceed from the supreme
invisible Spirit of the Firmament out of the Three First, i. e. Mercury, Salt,
and Sulphur: For, as Paracelsus says, they are the fruits and egestions or
disgorgings of the Stars of the Firmament; the fruits of the invisible Astra's
which are in the Stars and make that which is invisible to be visible; for the
Stars succor and supply their fruits as the Trees of the Earth do theirs.

Hence it is plain that diseases are not cured by contraries, as if heat were
to expel cold, as though man were to have the Elements banished and driven out
of him; but by the secret things or Astra's which the Chemist can reduce out of
the last matter into the first: These Arcana or hid things are actually neither
cold nor hot yet removes all diseases, as the Axe cutteth down the tree, which
is neither cold nor hot; Of this sort are the Fifth Essences, Magisteryes, and
the like.

Now by Gods assistance I shall say something concerning the Generation,
Dignity, and Excelency OF THE MICROCOSM, Or Little World MAN.
For a man to know God and lightly esteem of his own self is the highest and
profitable knowledge.
AS the most excellent Philosophy is that which enlightens the mind to the right
knowledge of it self, so to be ignorant of that knowledge is the greatest
shame and most pestilent disease of the mind. Ignorance, says Trismegistus to
his Son Tat, is the greatest Enemy and principal Tormenter in every Man. Woe
be to thee o Man, Luke 16.
who neglectest the large patrimony and Talent and the thing committed to thy
charge, 2 Cor. 4.
who considerest not the Treasure that is hid in thy earthen vessel, and may
thereout be dug: John 14.17.20.
Thou see not God in thy self, whom the world sees not, neither can
receive, though he be more in us then we are in our selves, inasmuch as the
Spirit of God dwells in the midst of our hearts. And to speak truly, we can
learn more in the whole course of our life then that Divine lesson that God
has set us, KNOW THY SELF. (...)
Therefore Agryppa holily and learnedly reasoning about the right way that
leads to true Wisdom and Eternal Happiness, The first knowledge of God is
to know what man is. August.
says, it is for a man to know Himself; according to the Oracle of Apollo
written over the doors of his Temple at Delphos.

Because man has the true and Real possession of all things and Natures in
himself, as also the special and perfect Image even of the Creator of all
things; He that knows himself knows God; for God will dwell no where but in
man, in whom he is most plain to be seen. We see God from within.
Therefore the knowledge of all things and natures, and of the Creator himself
(wherein alone true Wisdom and Blessedness consists) must take its rise
from the knowledge of a man's self: So that Man, when he does rightly
understand himself, may in himself, as in a kind of Deified glass, behold and
understand all things. In which respect David says, Psalm. 139.14. I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, mavelous are thy works.

On the contrary, He that knows not himself cannot have any true
intrinsecall and essential knowledge of things, but like a bruit beast, what
he knows without him, shall remain without him. For there is no knowledge,
whether infused from the Heaven, or attained to by labor of industry and
earthly diligence, that will abide in the soul for ever, but is subject to
forgetfulness and will vanish, but that only which is inwardly received by
Essential knowledge in the secret understanding: which Essential intrinsecall
knowledge is not from flesh and blood, nor from the multitude of Books and
reading, nor from the abundants of Experience and old age, Dionys. lib.
Divinors Nominum.
nor in the inticings of man's Word or wisdom, and warangling of reason, but
the mind of man is perfected and completed by a passive reception of Divine
things; not by study and pains; but by patience and submission. The whole
business stands in knowledge, because we are of every thing, and do carry
about every thing in us, even as God himself our Father. The Son does equally
posesse all things with his Father: Joh. 4. and 17.
Therefore all Natural and Spiritual good things were, and are in man at
first, but as by sin that Divine Character was darkened in us, so sin being
satisfied for, and done away, that Character shines out again more and more:
The Notion of all things is created together with us and in us; and in the very
middle of the Spirit by all things hid; we are only to awake out of our
slumbring and snorting, who through sin have fallen asleep in the gifts that
God has bestowed upon us, so that we can neither see or perceive and believe
that these good things are at present in us. The Understanding of man is
capable of the highest learning and seize, or according to Plato, it is
full of all Sciences before it be joined to the body, which being oppressed by
the body lies hid, as fire raked up in ashes, but being roused and stirred up
from the said humors it shines forth and discovers those riches which
before lay hid in their Treasures. Unless all the Treasures of Heavenly and
Earthly wisdom were in us before, surely Christ would never have commanded us
to seek, nor should we ever find any thing if God had not given and laid up
something in us.

When we therefore know our selves aright according to both kinds of Light. God
is known when the Light of Nature i^ well understood. Apoc. 3.20.
(1) according to the Spirit and Nature, then by Gods help we enter into the
gate that is opened in us, and we open to God who stands and knocks at the door
of our heart, living according to the will of God, we have all things necessary
as well for wisdom as for life, both for present and ever hereafter. From this
diligent contemplation and knowledge of a man's self, the true knowledge also of
God does immediately arise (for neither can be absolute and complete without
the other) from the consideration of himself a Man may attain to a good and
great measure of the knowledge of him who IS, all men being indeed bound to
know according to the measure of their capacity.

Dionysius says, that we cannot know God from his own Nature, but from that
most orderly disposing of all the Creatures proceeding from himself, which
(creatures) hold forth as it were images and similitudes of his Divine
Presidents or Examples. Man that does not know God, is not known of God; and he
that forsakes and rejects the knowledge of God, is rejected of God.

He that knows not God is inexcusable; He that does acknowledge God, but not
serve and worship him i^ accu^sed. The more we know God the more we love him,
and steadfastly belive in him. He that believes God by loving of him does cleave
to God, he that does cleave to God is one Spirit with him.
To be ignorant of God is the Rise or Spring of all diseases, the root of
wickedness, by which all vices are increased and grow ripe.

As on the contrary, the perfect righteousness, true wisdom, and chief
happiness of Man is to know his Principle, God the Creator of all things and
to love him in all purity and uprightness: To which purpose our Savior says
truly ( John 17.3.) This is life eternal to know the Father the true God and
JESUS CHRIST, viz. That the Believer should acknowledge and worship the
Trinity, which knowledge only gives eternal life; for he that lives the
life of Christ is born the Son of God, he that is born the Son of God must of
necessity have the Father, he that has the Father is sealed with the holy
Spirit: He that knows the Son knows the Father also, for they are but one
(thing) The knowledge of God is Blessedness and eternal life; for he that
knows God in Christ is made the habitation and Temple of God, and so is
Deified, for he is the Son of God born out of God: And as by the knowledge of
the visible world we come to the knowledge of the invisible Workman; so and
from Christ visible or the life of Christ we learn to know the Father, for he
is the way to the Father: And as none can come to the Son unless he hear and
learn from the Father, so none can rightly know the frame of the world but he
that is taught of God.

Hence it is plain that what the Heathen wrote concerning Nature is for the
most part false, because their Philosophy and other abilities were polluted and
corrupt. In vain therefore it is to seek knowledge from them who have spent
all their life in looking after it, and have wasted all their time and study to
no purpose, not finding out any truth, though many of them were seduced by
ignorance rather then malice, the Light of Truth not yet risen to them, nor the
Light of Nature as yet kindled by the holy Spirit. Divinity is the Fountain of
Natural and Supernatural knowledge.
All true Philosophy should be grounded on the Scriptures and so return into
God, that so the Regenerate Christians might reap and receive the full increase
of that seed which among the Gentiles was choked for want of the Sun, like
that among the thorns: No Art can be perfected without Regeneration: Christians
should not be ruled by Heathen Philosophy.
True Philosophy must be grounded on Christ the corner stone. We ought
therefore to be most wary that we suffer not the Philosophical errors of the
Heathen to bear down or dominiere over the rules of Christian Philosophy.
Christians only in whom the Truth is planted, who have their seed from God, by
the means of Regeneration which the Heathen have not, do truly know to use or
teach Philosophy without mistake or error, and how to manage aright all other
faculties: Believers shall be taught of God when the Holy Spirit is powered
forth.

To be short, the knowledge of God is the Treasury of the whole world wherein
all things are laid up, so that without this knowledge no man can come to
eternal life: For Faith, Hope and Love, follow knowledge, Adhaesion or
cleaving to follows Love, Union follows Adhaesion, in Union is Blessedness
and Wisdom. This Regeneration that holy man Hermes and others of clean hearts
and godly lives before the Word was incarnate being enlightened by the holy
Spirit, though they concealed it among other Secrets, they knew it better then
many of us who call our selves Christians, and had rather seem to know God then
love him. O great miracle! 1 John 4. W^sd. 1. John 17.
Man whose mind by Christ is united to God, possesses the true wisdom of all
things, and the most absolute knowledge of all Secrets.

Furthermore, he that knows himself, does know all things Fundamentally in
himself, and being set between Time and Eternity, above him he sees God
eternal, his Creator, The soul is the offspring and image of God. Apoc. 22.
after whose image and likeness he was with other Angels created by an
unsearchable love: besides or about him he knows the immortal Angels his
fellows and companions, from whom he differs only in body and the Judgment
to come: Under him he sees the visible World whereof he is a pattern, and all
the Creatures with whom he has a likeness, even his parent of whom he was
born as to the external and mortal body. Man who is a true Proteus of a
fickle and wavering disposition received a flexible mind from Nature, Eccl.
15.14.
that being set in the midst of the Paradise of this world, by the assistance
of Divine Grace raising himself upward he might be regenerated into a quiet
Angel or, the Forger of his fortune winding and creeping downward degenerate
into a restless Brute. But the free R^asonable Creature, neglecting the
fatherly admonition, and his due obedience, Gen 2.
turning from the mean to (the extreme) himself, dispising his Creator, He
that seeks to himself that which is another un^voydably ^u^^ himse^fe into two
^nconveniences, i. e. theft and robbery of himself, and death The F^^l wa^
a^swering from U^i^y to Alte^i^y.
learned by experience what his own proper Evil and Nothing was to his
voluntary damage and perdition, like a Thief and Robber: And thus abusing the
bounty of his most indulgent Father, he made choice of death rather then of
life, and like Lucifer, not content with his lot, ambitiously desiring higher
things, he set himself in opposition against God, at last by an unexpected
change was cast out of the Garden of pleasures into this doleful and darksome
valley of Misery and Ignorance. The first man was left in the hand of his own
counsel ( Eccl. 15.14.) and of his own accord turned from the strait path into
the crooked way of Misery, greedily desired the possession of good and evil to
his own destruction, as Herms and Moses sufficiently demonstrate.

God created man that the number and loss of the rebellious Angels might be
made up in the kingdom of Heav^n.
Man, the bond or buckle of the world, the last wonderful and honorable living
creature was, upon the sixth day, after all other things, drawn or taken (e limo
terrae) out of the slime of the Earth or visible frame of the whole consisting
of Heaven or Heavenly Sphaeres and the Earth, viz. out of the most thin or pure
substance of the whole frame of the world concentred into one body; fashioned
by the great Spacyrus into a bodily shape, made to supply the place of the
fallen Angels: Man was formed of the most excellent Compound and purest
Extract of the whole Word, out of the Center of all Circles. Therefore
Nazianzen speaking of the workmanship of Man says, God made Man last, that in
him, as in a short and brief way, he might set out or express all that before
he had made at large, viz. all the members or parts of the whole world.

As an Oration is made up of letters and sillables, so the Microcosm or Limus
Terrae, Man is compacted of all bodies and created things. The great God
eternal and Creator of all things took the Quintessence out of all things
created and thereof fashioned and composed Man as the Prince and End of all
these, and congratulated him as his Son holding or possessing the honorable
place of the high Divinity on Earth: In respect of the Body or corruptible
Nature he bears the Image of the great, sensible and temporal World; In
respect of his soul or immor-Nature, he bears the Image of the Archetype or
original copy and pattern of the world, that is, of the immortal Wisdom of
God himself: So that all the properties of Animalls, Vegetables and Mineralls
entered into him, and withalla living Soul inspired into him. God is all things
of himself; Man is made all things of God, and was therefore created last that
by him the compleatnesse and perfection of all the Creatures might be
signified. Man is the tie, bond, knot, joint, Psalm. 8. Thou have put all things
under his ^eer. Parace^s. excepteth the Spirits and inhabitant of the ^^ur
Elements.
packet or bundle of all the Creatures. All things created were disposed of to
him, and they respect and honor him as Gods steward set over the Orchard or
Garden of this world. God is the Center and Circle of all things that he
brought out of himself (for all the works of the Divine goodness are circular
and perfect, sphaerically wheeled about to him from whom they proceeded) He is
the Center in that all things flow from him, and because the Essence of all
things pierces also through all things: God the Center and Circle of all
things.
He is the Circle, because like an all-capacious Tabernacle he concludes and
comprehends all things. Within God are all things, and at the worlds end
nothing shall be without him, either of what was before, or what has been
since the Creation, what was either before it was brought forth or since it was
brought forth.

So is Man.
Thus Man in imitation of his Creator is the Center of the Creatures, and the
Circle of them all. It was Gods pleasure that all things which he made should
honor him by Man.
For all things in the world do not only look to him as their Guide and
Governor, for whom also they were all created: but likewise on him all the
Sphaeres bestow their beams, operations, reflections and influences, and on him
all the Creatures pour their virtues and effects as upon a middle Point and
Retinacle or that by which they are stayed and supported. As the Earth is a
Receptive body of all seeds, so also is Man.
Man is said to be the Circle in that he contains all things in himself, and
with himself leads back all things that gushed out of that Summum Bonum, or
chiefest good, unto the fountain of Eternity, from which they did originally
spring and flow.

The world was the first figure or image of God, Man is the image of the World,
the Animal or living creature is the image of Man, the Zoophite or sensible
herb is the image of the Animal, the Plant is the image of the Zoophite,
Mettalls are the image of the Plant, stones represent the likeness and images
of Mettalls. The great world is in every thing one with the little world, as
the child with its parent; the prudent Ancients wilsely called Man a Microcosm
or little World, which few now a days understand, that the great visible World
was made Man. As the great world is bipartite, consisting of two parts, visible
and invisible, so also the little world man is twofold, visible in respect of
his Body, invisible in respect of his Spirit. There are two Spirits in Man, The
first Spirit is from the Limbus or greater world; the second from the word Fiat.
one a syderiall Spirit from the Firmament, the other from the breath of life,
which is the Intellectual Soul inspired from God, and the mouth of the most
High. Man has three parts, a mortal Body with a Syderiall Spirit, and an
immortal Soul, which is the cottage of the Image of God or of the holy Spirit
in Man. There is a two f^ld wisdom in Man, Angelical according to which he is
to live, and Animal which is not to be regarded. Regeneration overcomes a bad
birth.


If a man live sensually by his own proper and proud Will according to flesh
and blood only, he is but a Brute or Beast, and is known whether (according to
those Epithites in Scripture) he be a Dog, Fox, Wolf, Sheep, Sow, or
generation of Vipers, of which I shall discourse more at large in my Treatise
of Signatures, and therefore shall forbear to speak more thereof at this time.
If he live Rationally, then he is a Man, The invisible or immortal body of Man
from the breath of God is not subject to Stars or Astronomers.
and has dominion over the living Creatures in his body.

But if he live, according to the God-like Spirit, upon the Tree of Life,
observing the property of the Image of God, if (I say) he live according to the
Talent and Treasure laid up in his Earthen Vessel and committed to him, then
has he dominion over the Stars and all things else. Man comprehends and
carries all things about in himself; whereof he is made that bears he in
himself: He was made of the world, he bears the world about in him, and is
borne of the world.

Again, as the first matter (which was a kind of ineffigiate confused Essence,
which Philosophers call the Chaos and Hylen, or Mother of the world) was the
seed of the great world, so the great world is the seed of Adam or Man: As the
world was hid in the invisible Waters upon the Abyss or great deep, Water is
the Matrix of the world, upon which the Spirit of God moved, Genesis 1. The Earth
plunged or swam up out of the Water, 2 Pet. 3.5.
so Man (Adam) lay hid in the world. The first matter was made a world, and the
great World was made Man. As a Tree grows from the seed, the seed is the
beginning of the Tree, and the seed also is the end of the Tree, for in every
grain or seed of the Tree there lies hid another Tree: So the First Matter
(which Paracelsus calls the Limbus, whose Earth was the WORD of the Lord) was
the seed of all things that were to be created, As a C^rver and Potter out of
word and clay can make a hundred several shapes at pleasure, so God extracted
every creature out of the first matter.
and Man was the last of all as the perfect seed, which again is able out of
himself to beget another Man like himself; And though Man be not a seed as
other seed is, yet has he power to cast seed out of himself, whereby is
begotten another Man like himself. As Adam or Man carries the world and every
creature in himself and is preserved by the world, so every one that is borne
of him bears about him that which he did, viz. the whole world, and is born and
preserved by it as Adam was; Man is^ that Earth or field which has all seeds
in it self. As the Son is not lesser then his Father, so Man is not lesser then
the World.
all men are but one man, of flesh, blood, and spirit: Therefore the knowledge
of Man is to be taken from both Lights, as the Son cannot be known from
himself alone but from his Father. Man has two Fathers, an Eternal whose
Image he bears, and a Mortal one, which is the whole world with all the
creatures, that is, that Limus Terrae, that slime of the earth, or hidden
Secret thing, None can know the image unless he first know him whose image he
is. Hermes calls Man an earthly God. Genesis 2.7.
and the most precious Esse or Being of all creatures, which all Philosophers,
Physicians Astronomers, and Divines are to consider and diligently inquire
into. In the lesser world Man there is no member or part that does not answer
to some Element, some Planet, some Intelligence or other, and to some measure
and number in the Archetype or first pattern. Man has a visible body from the
Elements as a fit garment and suitable cottage for the Soul; From the Heaven or
Firmament he has an invisible Syderiall, The perfection and dignity of Man.
Aetheriall and Astrall Body or chariot and vehicle of the Soul, wherein the
Intellectual Soul and earthy Body like two Extremes are knit, glued and
confederate together, and in this third mean which partaketh of the other two
they are coupled and united into one entire man.

Thus God and Man cannot be united but by a Mean, even our Savior who
partaketh of two Natures, the Caelestiall and Terrestrial, the Divine and
Humane. Paracelsus says that the soul or bre^t^ of life is infused by God into
the Elementary body through the Astra's as a Medium.
Through this Medium, this middle Aetheriall little body, the Intellectual
Soul (by the command of God, who is the Center of the great world, and by the
employing of his Intelligences or Spirits to that end) is first poured and
descends into the middle point of the Heart, which is the Center of the
little world, and from thence is spread into all the parts and members of his
body, as soon as it joyneth its vehicle to the natural heat, by which heat it
joyneth to the Spirit begotten from the heart, by the spirit it drencheth it
self into the blood, by the blood it cleaves to all the members to all which
it has an equal nearness. And because the said Aethereall body participateth
of Heaven therefore it holds and keeps the same course with that of the
Firmament, whose operations it draws to it self by a peculiar magnetic
virtue, just as the visible body does the efficacy of the Elements; and so
remains one (thing) with the visible and invisible world, John 10.30.
as the Son with his Father, as redness with wine, as whiteness with Snow:
The whole Firmament is in us with the Planets and Stars; As heat pierces an
Iron Furnace, and as the Sun does glass, so does the Stars with all their
properties pierce into Man, so that of the syderiall spirit of the Firmament we
may learn all Natural things. The MIND.


Man has an Intellectual and immortal Soul, Zach. 12.1. Genesis 2.7. Es. 42.5.
Wisd. 2.23.
or Spirit by the inbreathing of God, created (with the four foresaid
inhabitants of the Elements, which the bruit beasts have not) after the Image
of God and the Divine Triunity, with the similitude also of Unity, 1 John 2.27.
Chap. 4.14. Acts 17.28.
that so in all things he might be one with his Heavenly Father, who is in us
by his Spirit, from which we learn sacred Divinity and all heavenly and earthly
secrets without error; yea, in him we are, and live, and are moved.

As God is One in Essence, Trine (or Three) in persons, so Man is One in
Person, Trine (or Three) in distinct Essence, that is, composed Triune, of a
Terrene Body, an Aethereall Spirit of the Heavens, and a living vivifying Soul
which God breathed into him, and is the house of God.

This the holy Scripture witnesses, Luke 1.47. 1 These. 5.23. Genesis 2.7. See the
Amphi^halce of Rhunrad worthy of perpetual memory. Paul the greatest
Philosopher and Divine shows three parts of Man, Spirit, Soul and Body. There
are two Souls or two Spirits in Man, Mortal from the first matter which is the
life of the body, and Immortal from God. The Spirit is the Life of the Soul,
the Spirit and Soul are the life of the body. John 14.
even the wonderful Agreement between the Creator and the Creature, in whom
the great Creator would show himself to be Unitrine or Triune, One in Three,
or Three in One: As also the unanimous consent of all that truly professed
Philosophy from the Light of Nature.

If happily there should be any that deny these three parts, yet they must
acknowledge that Man was created e Limo Terrae, out of the clay or dust of the
Earth, by the word FIAT, and that he received an eternal Spirit or breath of
life from the mouth of God, which is that Linum Caelorum, or slime of the
Heavens from the Lord.

The Limus Terrae, or dust of the Earth, is twofold, visible and invisible: He
has his Body or cottage from the Earth and Water; but the life that dwells
therein is from the Air and Firmament of Fire, which life is the Syderiall
Spirit, and is properly the Man, not flesh and blood. As the Syderiall Spirit
is the life of the Body, so the Spirit of the Lord is the life of the
Intellectual Soul.

And as the Sydereall Spirit dwells in the Body and works therein day and
night, for this invisible is himself the Firmament, God created Man to be his
Tabernacle as well in this as in the world to come.
and has all things in him, so the Spirit of the Lord, the WORD of God, the
eternal man dwells in the Soul: the house is the habitation of the Soul, the
Soul is the habitation and cottage of God. Therefore when Man the most perfect
compleatnesse of all Gods works, the most complete figure of the world, and
express image of God, in whom he rested from creating, as having nothing
before him more honorable to be created, all the wisdom and power of the
Creator being shut up and perfected in him as the supreme artifice in that he
contains all things in himself that are in God, when (I say) he was on the
sixth day made up of all things, the last of the Creatures, and image not only
of the eternal God, but also of the great world, because with it he
comprehends and contains all things in himself: it follows that there
are three worlds or Heavens in Man, and that he is born about of three Worlds,
or rather is all the world, and a most sure and undoubted Pattern of the whole
Universe. Exemplumque Dei quisque est in imagine parva, Manilus. That which is
Naturated savoureth of the Nature of that which did Naturate it. God dwells
in the Soul as in the Heaven of Man.
And therefore some have called him the Fourth World, in whom are found all
those things that are in the other three, for which cause also he may be called
by the name of every Creature. He has a Spirit or Mind from God; for what else
is the Spirit of Man which God breathed into him but God himself dwelling in
us? The invisible Body or true Internal Man consisting of Reason and an
Astrall Spirit, agrees with the Angels, and is their fellow; And if he be a
true Magician, he is not inferior to the Angels in all Magical operation,
and is Lord and Possessor of all things. His mortal Physical Body he has
from the frame of the world and all things created therein, for all External
things are nothing else but the Body of Man. So that he partaketh of a
threefold world, of the Archetype or God-like world in God, of the Intellible
or Angellicall, of the sensible Elementall or corporal world, and has a
symbolicall operation and conversation with them all.

The Mind, (...), is the cha^ret driver or Stern-man of the Soul or Rational
Spirit, and like the eternal God concludes all Beings, Times and Places.
1. He communicates with God in his Soul or Mind, because by the breath of
life he was made after his image, the Intellectual Soul is a certain particle
of the Divine Soul, in which very Soul God has sown certain seeds and
resemblances of his Mind in us, much like to that of an Echo which sends back
its voice from the resemblance of the air by which it expresses a lively
soul. The mind raised up into the most High God and united with him converseth
with God, and does the same works, neither is there any disposition or any
thing in Man that does not clearly hold forth something of the Divinity,
neither is there any thing in God which very thing is not represented in Man.

2. He has a semblance with the Angels in respect of the invisible Body and
Rational Soul, by whose help he works and is preserved with the Angels, and
has the same wisdom that they have, for he is Gabalis socius Angelorum, a
curdled companion of the Angels, or one mixed with in fellowship.

3. He participateth with the Firmament and Stars of whom he received that
Astrall body or Syderiall Spirit, which is the true Astrall Man, for flesh and
blood is not the Man, but the Spirit contained in them, which Astrall Spirit is
the subject of humane Reason that contains the senses and wisdom in it, and
is made (Animal) a living creature with the body. This Spirit and the Astra's
are but one thing in Man, but the body is the subject of this Spirit; and so
the Astra's rule man in the Spirit, and the Spirit of a man rules the Body in
flesh and blood. This Spirit is mortal; only the Intellectual Soul which
God breathed into man is immortal.

4. He partaketh of the Elements, for from these he had his mortal Physical
Earthy body: And because the world, which is the Parant of Man according to
Paracelsus, has in it the four Elementary Spirits of the four inhabitants of
the world, as also the fifth kind of Flages of a thousand sorts incorporated
into the Soul of the Microcosm, the Imagination also of these five Spirits in
the Elements must be in the Microcosm Man; but the use of Man's Reason according
to the will and command of God, is as a Chain were with those five Spirits are
knit and bound together that they may acquiesce with his Imagination.

5. He partaketh of all Elemented Animalls, Vegetables and Mineralls; for he
has in him the Nature and properties of all these.

All things were made of nothing and Man was made of all those things. The
great world was the matrix of Adam, thus the whole frame of the world is the
mother of all things that are brought forth.
Man therefore who was the last is the most excellent and noble of all
Creatures, because he has the parts of the whole world, nor is there any thing
in the great world which may not really be found in man. The Son is like the
father in all things, the father being known the Son is known also. Therefore
Man the greatest miracle of Nature and most admirable Extract and kernel of
the four Elements, the choycest workmanship of God and most perfect Samplar of
the world, is truly every Creature, for he is all the world, and he alone has
this honor to have semblance with all things, and operation with all, and
conversation with all: Yea he rises to such perfection that he is made the Son
of God, transformed into the same image which is God and made one with him,
John 17.11, 12.22, 23.
which is not granted either to Angels, or the world, or any other Creature,
but to Man only that he should become the Son of God, and be united to God.

That which is sensible and that which is insensible has a sydereall spirit or
a sydereall body in it.
But before we proceed any further it is requisite that we treat here a little
more largly of the Syderyall or invisible man, to wit, of his Original and
power. If Aristotle had taken notice of this Olympic Spirit, and Galen made
more account of it, there had not such errors crept into Philosophy and Physic
springing from the heathenish masters of errors to say nothing of Divinity at
present. Eve is Adam transplanted. The first men were created, the rest proceed
from the Being of the seed or Esence.
The invisible man or Olimpick Spirit is borne in us after this manner. Adam
and Eve did not proceed from other parents as we their posterity do, but were
taken (as has been said) ex LIMO TERRAE, out of the dust of the ground or
great world as to the mortal Body which is visible and invisible. The Spirit
of life is the Spiracle or breathing hole. The Spirit of the Limbus is
Syde^eall the Animal spirit. The body of the Limbus and spiracle ought to make
one Marriage, otherwise there would be an adul^e^ous and b^stardly b^ood For as
in all thing the marriage or joynting together of two is the perfection, so
Adultery hinde^eth the ^ight of Nature. vide Parace^s. in Phyl^s^p. ag^^^.
^^^acelsus says that the El^ment of fire or the Fir^aemee (...) althought it
be th^^ ^^st sub^^ll and (...) thing (...) it is a body because bodies are the
fruits thereof and without a body such fruit cannot grow. So the wind is a body
and like a visible body has power to overturne another body: Not only visible
things are bodies, for God created as well visible as invisible bodies of the
same power. The inner Man ascends the inward Heaven. A particular
Cons^^llation. This Spirit is tha Doctor of true Astronomy.
For the whole frame of the world is collected and reduced into the Microcosm,
so that there is nothing to be found in all the world but the same also is in
one man. The Physical, Elementary, visible and Tangible body is from the
Earth: but the Invisible, Insensible, Sydereall body (which is the house or
cottage of the Spirits life) is from the Astra's of the Firmament: Thus Adam
had two bodies, that is, a visible Elementall, and an invisible Sydereall body.
So that now by propagation there are always two Men born, a Corporeal,
Elementall, Visible Man, the Organ and Instrument of the invisible, and an
incorporeall Astralick man which moves, guides, and performs all skillful
matters. For the Astra's now in Man do by Man always in generation produce
those two: The visible Elementary body of flesh and blood in the mothers womb
out of the four Elements; but the invisible Sydereall body that is capable of
attaining Philosophy is from the Astra's of the Firmament; For that little
world Man is one and the same in all things with his-Parant, the great world:
But as the great world is distinguished by its shell or outside from the
Angelical world, so man the little world is distinguished by his skin or
outside from the great world.

Hence it is that the Sydereall, Internal, Olimpick. Incorporeall, or (Gabalis
Homo) coagulated or curdled Man is the same with the Firmament of the Astra's,
as has been often said, like redness with wine, whiteness with snow, or the
luster of the Sun with the Air: The other part therefore of Man, or this
sydereall body is called the Genius of man, because it proceeds from the
Firmament; it is called Penates, because it is in our power and born with us,
the shadow of the visible body, Lar domesticus the good or bad household or
private Angel, the Umbratile or shadowy Man, the familiar Homuncle (or little
Man) of the Sophies (or wise men,) the Demon or Genius of Man, Paracelsus his
internal Adech ( i. e. that which first inwardly forms in our mind what we
afterward outwardly fashion with our hands) the Spectrum, ghost, or fantasy,
the Light of Nature, the presaging or Prophetical Euestrum that foretells
any thing by signs (in Man) It is also called ahe imagination, which incloseth
all the Astra's, and is indeed all the Astra's or Stars and holds the same
course, Nature and power with heaven. Now the Astra's or Stars (by which I do
not mean the seven visible coals of Heaven which are but the bodies of the
Astra's but I mean the invisible and insensible body of all things or Astrall
Spirit) they are nothing else but the verue or powers of the Angels: The
Angels which live only upon the vision of God, are the created wisdom of God;
Hence it is that he that knows God, he knows the Astra's also: He that knows
the Astra's cannot but know the world, and consequently man the offspring of
the world. The eating of the apple produces this body the sydereall seed into
force and vigor. Astrum, Vulcanus and Archaeus are the same thing, and but one
Spirit yet without Reason, and diverse, as are the diverse forms of several
things.
The Astra's form and bring forth all bodily things out of themselves, and
multiply themselves together with those bodily things that are brought forth:
the seeds of any grain or Wheat is the Astrum, viz. the invisible body, which
being cast into the Earth it produces a visible body, and begets many other
Astra's out of it self; So is it in other growing and living things. But the
Astrum is nothing else but the insensible, invisible body, or living Spirit,
yet without Reason in things that grow; but with reason in living things, as in
man, and is diverse according to the form of diverse things. Bodies are nothing
else but the Excrement of the Astra's, which are brought forth into a bodily
Being by their operation. This every Astrum can do of it self, as by
imagination to bring forth of it self another Astrum in a body, forming it by
operation. There is no body without an Astrum, The Astralick Spirit is every
growing thing stands in need of a corporeal habitation. The inner Man is
Heaven it self or all the Astras. Read in Picus how Trimethius put upon
himself the various Evestra's of the threefold world one after another, and
transformed himself into several shapes, and thus by real Magic he showed to
that great Picus the hidden virtue or power of Man who was created after the
image of God. We are transformed into that which we most intently gaze and
meditate upon. The understanding of Man is assimulated to all things. The
impression of the Imagination from fear, terror, and grief, is the ^ife of
sickness and death. The Astra's send the plague into us through our skin as
the Sun does his beams thhrough the glass.
as there is no Astrum without a visible body.

And whereas the imagination of Man is not one, but all the Astra's, it is as
true that it produces not only one, but many operations* and although the
Imagination be incorporeall and invisible, yet being joined to a heightened the
Gate of Wonders, the spring and original of all Magical operations, and has
power to beget and bring forth visible bodies without detriment or diminution
of the Astrall and sydereall Spirit, and can work any wonderful operations
whatsoever, present or absent, above the reach of humane Reason. The Light of
Nature makes bodily things visible, but Eternal things are to be seen only by
Faith: The child in the mothers womb is strangely marked by the impression of
the imagination without any bodily touch; What we do visiby by the body, that
do we by Faith after the manner of Spirits; Thus the Imagination breeds the
Plague and such like Firmamentall diseases; it brings sickness and health.

The Pestilence which comes by fear, trouble and terror, rises by the
imagination of the Spirit of the lesser world or of the Sydereall and Animal
Spirit (which is the mechanic Astrall Spirit) in Man, as we see in women with
child who give marks and tokens to the young in their womb by the same
sydereall Spirit; This sydereall Spirit which is born of the Astra's together
with Man (and therefore remains united to the Astra's) is the Load stone and
has a magnetic nature in man. As the Earthy Load stone in its body is a
spirit and draws to it self; so also the body and spirit in Man do draw
unto him by a visible body, this is the Load stone of the Microcosm: The
sydereall body and spirit attract unto them the force of the Astra's, as we see
in those that are Lunatic, in whom the agreement, properties and affinities of
such magnetic virtues with the Spirit and sydereall body of Man has with the
Astra's are made manifest.

This fourth kind of Natural Magic called Gamahaea does all things invisibly
and spiritually, by the help of Art, which Nature is able to do visibly and
corporally without such help. The House is as it were dead, but the Inhabitant
to wit, the Spirit of perpetual motion of invisible Nature or the magnetic
spark of the Soul of the world lives and works effectually. All Animal
wisdom, Wisdom is the beg^nning of Enchantment, the Astra's do those things
which Humane wisdom desires. In respect of the Elementatary body it is a
Spirit and performs all spiritual operations. Heaven knows all things most
certainly, all actions and events of Men are pictured in the Astra's, every
living Creature has its Ascendant sign in Heaven, so has also the Brut^sh
Man. Every Body is proceeded of an invisible and incomprehensible subsisting
Spirit. The (...) is a three fold NIHIL or Nothing, a Divine, Privative and
Negative NOTHING, the O^gan of the L^ght of Nature or of the Astra's. The whole
Heaven is nothing else but the Imagination; It breeds the Plague and and
Fevers in M^n any bodily instrument.
workmanship, Arts, Sciences, and the knowledge of all things lie hid in the
Astra's of the Firmament. There is nothing so hidden in the world which is not
praefigured in the Astra's, yea all the Astra's of the Firmament, which are the
Tincture of the speculation of our mind, can of their own inbred or natural
force by imagining produce bodily and visible things out of that which does not
appear, as in a clear Heaven a great cloud suddenly arises from whence come
rain, mire, snow dew, thunder, hail, which though they were Nothing before
production, yet being produced out of invisible things, they become great
bodies. Whence we may observe that all things in the first Creation were
produced out of the DIVINE NOTHING, or invisible Cabalisticall Point, into
something, which God did in a moment, for his works cannot be delayed by time:
All things proceeded out of the invisible Darkness, and were called out to the
visible Light by the WORD speaking, and the Spirit cherishing. Now whereas Man
had his Sydereall body from the Astra's of the Firmament, and the whole
Imagination of Man depends on the Astra's of the Firmament, yea is the same
and abides one with them, it must needs be that the Firmament also has an
Imagination but without Reason, as Man the offspring of the world has with
Reason. One man strikes and hurts another, and that with Reason, a nettle
and fire burn and hurt without Reason.

Moreover whereas Man is the Quintessence of the greater world, it follows that
Man may not only imitate Heaven, but rule it also at his beck, and reign over
it at his pleasure. All things naturally obey the Soul, and must of necessity
move and work toward that which the soul earnestly desires, and all virtues
and operations of Natural things obey it when it is carried with a vehement
desire; it makes all the powers of the world serve us, when by holiness we
draw virtue from him who is the true Archetype, and when we ascend to him, then
every Creature must and will obey us and the whole Host of Heaven follow us. By
Faith we may do good or evillus God permits.
By the help of Imagination all Magical operations and all wonderful things
are done through the Natural inborn Faith, by which we are at peace with the
very Spirits themselves. The Imagination works in Man like the Sun; for as
the bodily Sun works without an instrument upon the subject burning it to
coals and ashes, so the incorporeall cogitation of Man works on the subject,
by the spirit only as with a visible instrument; what the visible body does
that also does the invisible body, This (...) the Ga^ae (...) Art.
as the sydereall Man does hurt unto another: The Imagination of Man is the
Loadstone that attracteth above a 1000 miles off, yea in its Exaltation it
draws unto it whatsoever it wilout of the Elements. But the Imagination is
no: efficacious, unles first it attract the thing conceived by the attractive
force of the imagination, that it may beget the Architect of the Imagination as
a native spirit out of it self: afterward the Imagination being as it were
with child makes impression, which though it be not tangible, yet it is
corporeal like the wind.

Magic or Faith transplanting minds has power over all Spirits and Ascendants.
Hence the true Magician or wise Man can attract the operation of the Astra's,
stones, mettalls, etc. into the Imagination to make them exercise the same
force and power with the Astra's; as for example, by a burning Glass the beams
of the Sun are derived unto us with its heat: The Imagination can produce
whatever we see with our eyes in the greater world; Thus by Imagination and
true Gabalia all herbs, all growing things, all mettalls may be produced. This
part of Magic is called Gabalisticall, and is supported with three Pillars.

First, with TRUE PRAYERS made in Spirit and Truth, when God and the Created
Spirit are united in the Holy of Holyes when God is prayed unto in the
internal Spirit, not with noise of words, but in a sacred silence, without
opening the mouth and groaning.

Secondly, by NATURAL FAITH, or in-born Wisdom, which God the Father equally
communicated to all men in the Creation, as to his own proper flock and common
patrimony.

Thirdly, by a strongly exalted IMAGINATION, how great and how wonderful the
strength or force thereof is, the Light of Nature does manifestly show, Genesis
30.37, etc.
as well in Jacobs Rods mentioned by Moses, as in pregnant women who imprint
the mark of that which they long for upon the child, as has been said. The
Imagination or Fantasy of Man is like the Load stone in its Nature, attracting
the Fantasy of other men, as we see in those that gape and yawn.

A vehement Imagination does not only cause a transmutation of ones own body,
but sometimes also of another, by way of imitation, to wit, by a certain kind
of Virtue which the similitude of the Thing has unto that Thing that is to be
changed, which is moved by a vehement Imagination, as appears in astonishment
or swouning, in crashing or creaking of teeth, in grating one piece of Iron
against another, etc. whereby the teeth are set on edge; in like manner yawning
provokes yawning.

Many by their melancholy Imagination and diffidence have exposed themselves
to the temptation of the unclean Spirit, and sometimes have been overcome by
it.

True Faith is the cure of a false Imagination. Many fall sick and recover
again by the Faith of Imagination.
Many also by their intent Imagination, without distrust of their weakness, by
a constant and most firm Faith toward God, by a mind lifted up most high, by
infallible hope, constant and most ardent prayers, have so prevailed that on a
sudden they have become the Temples of the living God.

The Sum of all is, that we worship God devoutly in honesty and holiness, as
the more secret Theosophers or wise-hearted to God well know: for by the ardent
and devout intention of him that prays with Fear and Trembling, the
Understanding or Mind flaming with a Religious love, is joined to the separated
Intelligences. For internal Prayer proceeding with abundance of affection from
a Godly mind, and continued with a fervent desire, uniteth the mind with God,
and learneth and knows all things of God. Few men think what the Mind can do
that is disposed by true faith, and more few by far there are who know how to
exercise the same by a supernatural influence which does rule and govern the
body; The purified Mind, like a river, enters into the very inmost secrets of
things, beyond all shadows.
though there be many who know this disposition, yet by reason of worldly cares
and thoughtfulness wherewith they are overwhelmed, they can do nothing that
favors of true Wisdom. But thus much of these things: Such like
contemplations as these which are of greatest Antiquity will seem harsh and
crabbed to the rude and vulgar sort of men; for few read them, and fewer
understand them; and they require a larger narration then can be made of them
at this time. To return therefore to our purpose.

It is of greatest concernment that all Chemists should bewell acquaintedwith
this true Fundamental of the occult Phylosophycal Physic, because of the
Harmonicall concord and conspiration between the superior and inferior things
of the greater and lesser world, in clearing which (Foundation) next to
Paracelsus, Petrus Severinus the Dane, together with Pratensis that faithful
Achates, deserves to be numbered among the Ancient wise men, having got
perpetual praise by discovering to the Children of Art and Truth, this firm
and unmovable Foundation with much solid and unshaken verity in his Idaea of
Paracelsean Physic, maugre the malice of all his adversaries, who have been
sufficiently confuted and for ever silenced by my honored friend Joseph
Quercetan Counselor and most worthy Physician to the King of France, by Th:
Bovius an Italian of Verona, and Th: Muffet an Englishman, the best Hermetick
Physicians of this age, in their golden writings of Eternal memory.

CHAP. II. Where that True Physic is to be Found.
EVery thing that God created Good is extremely perfect and incorruptible, as
the heaven: but whatsoever is in these sublunary inferior things has a
twofold Nature, Wheat does norgrow without a place, nor can we have meal
without bran, neither is honey without a sting. Such Secrets are regenerated
without any complexion of qualities.
a perfect and an imperfect, that is, a fifth Essence and the dreggs may be
separated one from the other by fire. Seeing therefore the true medicine (or
Physic) is wrapped up in rindes, barks, matrixes, receptacles, husks, garment
and cottages, as Almonds and all kernells are covered with bark and rind (for
Nature does not bring forth the kernel of the Chestnut with a shell and
prickly husk) it is of necessity that the same must be separated from the
impure Elements by the artificial Anotomy of Chemists before we can come at
the pure Medicine; For the bonds are loosed by art and industry, and the
faculties of healing set at liberty.

Therefore in all orders of things that are cherished in the bosom of the
Elements, to wit, in those three Families of Nature, the Vegetable, Animal,
and Mineral (out of which are commonly had medicines enough to preserve the
health and cure all bodily diseases) there is contained that True and specifix
Physic of material distempers, which as has been said, does not consist in
the four outward, naked, superficiary and Relollaceous qualities (as
Theophrastus learnedly discourses) but it is a certain specifix virtue
concealed in the very Seeds, naturally proceeding without art, which the
Creator, that great Workmaster of all things, in the beginning of all the
Creation planted in every growing thing by virtue of that omnipotent Word,
whereby all things were brought out of darkness into Light.

The faculties and virtue therefore wherewith mixed bodies are endued (like the
soul in man's body from the beginning of the Creation) is not from without,
Heaven is the framer of the external edifices, not of the Secrets, Wonders and
mysteries that dwell in them.
nor infused into them by a momomentaneous position of the Stars, nor made up
of a fortuitous meeting of Atoms, it proceeds not from the body nor the
mixture of the body or visible form, for then it could not be separated
without the destruction and corruption of the body and form, as we see in
Cinnamon and Pepper, whose virtues being extracted either by art, or vanishing
by age and long keeping. For as all Natural actions proceed from Spirits and
spiritual Tinctures, in which the mecanick sciences of the Three principles
have their vigor; so the actions of Cures proceed from the Spirits and vital
Tinctures of the spirits, not from the bodies or dead Relloceous qualities.

And seeing it is granted by the Interpreters of Secret Nature, that there is
nothing in the whole Universe, every particular whereof is not also in that
Microcosm Man, as has been said; yea and that the seeds of all things lie hid
in him, as of the Stars, Meteors, Mineralls Vegetables, Animalls, Spirits, even
of Daemoris, in respect of the Spirit of Man: upon diligent consideration of
this Symmetricall concord and Physical anagoge, it has been the part of True
Physicians to enquire, that if the internal Heart of the Microcosm or Man
should be sick, how they might borrow strengthening remedies from his Parent or
the external Heart of the Microcosm which is one like the other (if not in
outward, yet in inward figure and form) which remedies are analogically
represented, All the whole inferior Nature is divided into three principal
parts, i. e. Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral.
such as may many ways be got out of those three shops of Cures. For God
created an inexhaustible supply of medicines, and distributed to every Country
sufficient for it self.

Thus among Mineralls men may find Gold (which cheareth up the Spirits when a
man has enough of it in his purse) Antimony and the like, which are produced
out of the Element of Water, as Gemms and precious stones in shells are
generated of drops of water, as also all bodies of Oysters, Musles, and shell
fish, which by a specific and Harmonicall virtue serve to cure and comfort the
heart, etc. Thus also among Mineralls there Magical and Hieroglyphicall
Characters, which sage Antiquity has without rashness or superstition
attributed to them, that do sufficiently insinuate to Enlightened men, and
Magically disclose their hidden virtue to those more secret Philosophers that
are instructed therein. Although the choycest things among them which are most
exquifitely and laboriously prepared by Nature do, As he that has much Gold
may know nothing of its medicinal virtue.
by Natures just decree, withold their benign and vital Element from those
that possess them: And many there are who confound the Universal Laws of
Nature, and yet thinks to partake of her Banquet in the end. There is no
question to be made but the Gold would discover most Divine actions if it were
rightly refined, and had its power reduced into act by a Natural and due
Resolution, that it might exercise its virtues, Art imitateth Nature and
supplyeth its defects; it corrects, chastises, assisteth and promoteth, yea
it exceeds Nature.
(for there is but one way to Resolve and to compound things, because Art and
Nature, like mother and daughter, consent to each other) but few men have this
gift of God bestowed on them, so as to make solid and massy Gold potable, that
it may be drunk.

Amongst Vegetables there is Saffron, Rue, Balm, Scordium, Celandine, Mace,
Ocymum, with six hundred of the like.

Amongst Animalls there is Hart's horn, Unicorns horn, the Bone in Staggs
hearts, etc. All which being rightly prepared in due manner, do cure the
diseases of the Heart, not (as I have said) by their External superficiary
qualities, but by an Internal, proper, specific, harmonious, similer virtue;
for all things whatsoever serve to our health, are all contained in the
Spirits, which only know how and where to find out the disease; the earthy
part is altogether dead, husks and rinds beget nothing, the Spirits only in
the bodies of things do all: The Forms in thee medicines or Astra's of the
medicaments separated by Alchymie from their bodies are the true Directoryes:
not the body, but the Astrum or hidden Heaven gives all the direction: for the
horse knows his manger, the birds their nest, the Eagle the carkas, and every
medicine striveth to get to its place, and seeks after that member that is
like unto it by an^mbred magnetic virtue which may well be called the
inexpressible property, (...).
like to like domestieks to domestics naturally apply themselves, as the true
Phylosophicall Physicians have diligently observed by long Experience the most
undouted Rule of all. Wherefore Celsus the Roman Physician confesses of all
Arts, Experiment, as also judgment, without knowledge is but fallacious
difficult and fortuitous, but with Science it is true and infallible.
where by many good old country women have gone beyond great learned
Physicians. The same may be said of the other six principal members and parts
of man's body: The external Macrocosmicall Brain is the Oil of Silver, Water
of the Sophire Emerold, Moss, Vitrioll, etc. cherishing and strengthening the
internal Brain of man. The flower or CHIBUR or Brimstone are a Balsam for the
lungs and the whole breast.

There is no cause to complain of the want of medicines but only of our
ignorance of them. There are two sorts of Physicians, one cure miraculously,
the other naturally by means. So there are two originalls of every disease, the
one natural, the other caelestiall; the Caelestiall is cured by the Word of
the Lord, the Natural is recovered by natural means.
After this manner not only ordinary diseases are cured by every Dunce, but also
those Chronicall, Astrall and fixed diseases which by many are accounted
desperate by reason of their long continuance, and the common sort of
Physicians who know not the seat, seeds, nativities, roots, and centres of
diseases judge to be incurable. For there is no disease, as it is a disease,
but there is a medicine for it, unless such as prodeth only from the anger of
the Divine Majesty by secret predestination, which cannot be found out by man;
the cure whereof was never given to Physicians, but to the Apostles, who by
true faith in Christ healed all Diseases: unless with Pliny we should belie
Nature in its perfections as an unjust Stepmother, whereas indeed she is the
benign Parent of all Things; provident and wise Nature has by natural
instinct bestowed upon poor brute creatures the knowledge of their Remedies.
It were therefore great folly and sottishness to think that the great Creator
would hide these things from men; in vain had he created these things,
especially seeing he would make them known only to such creatures as have no
understanding.

Every Creature knows his proper remedy.
The Stork having eaten a Serpent, is cured with Organy. The Sow stung with a
Serpent, is cured by eating Turnsole, or Waterwort. The Bore with Ivy. The
Crane with Bullrushes. The Tortuise and Snaile with Organy. The Toad when stung
or poisoned with any other venomous creature, eats Rue, Sage or Plantin, or
rubs the wounded part therewith and is recovered, therefore it is not good to
eat Sage before it be washed. The Weasill eats Rue when it is to fight with
the Basilisk. The Pie when sick carries a Bay-leafe into her nest and is well.
The Lapwing sick with grapes is made well with Maidenhaire. The Bear eats
Pismires to expel the distemper of Mandrakes. Geese, Ducks, and other water
foul, are cured by Pel^itory of the wall: Pigeons by Vervin; Swallows with
Celandine; Hawks with Sowthistles. And other living creatures have found out
other innumerable Herbs.

No M^n therefore that is in his right wits will question that the Caelestial
Father (as becoms the pious and sacred Parent of all things) would in this
particular neglect his own children, which he created after his own Image, and
prefer the Beasts before them, for whose sake all things were created; For he
that gave us his Son, and commanded us to pray for his Holy Spirit, how much
rather will he subject the whole Creature, both things visible and invisible?

The most High Author of Nature ath created Medicines out of the Earth, Eccl.
38.
not defectives but perfect, he has commanded the Physicians to search them
out and seasonably administer them to every distemper being by due faith
prepared and made up: It is also diligently to be observed, that all medicines
which are appled to man's body become efficacious and obtain their wholesome
effect, not of it self, but by the gift of God. For unless God be present and
infuse virtue into the Herbs what good can Dittany do, or any other
sovereign medicine.

All these inferior things, as living creatures, herbs, stones, mettalls have
their force by subministration from the Heaven, and the Heaven from the
Intelligences, and these from the great Worker, in whom all things praeexist in
the greatest virtue. The Natural life is from God the fountain of the
Universal life. For the Elements live by the Firmament, the Firmament from the
Intelligible World, and this only in God, or his Eternal Word; For he is all,
In all the things of the God of Nature, not Nature but the Will of the Lord is
earnestly to be implored.
and the only life of all, and in all, yet variously sprouting forth according
to the subject into which it flows. Wherefore if we intend to do any good with
herbs, we must not trust so much to them as to God, and so we shall obtain a
desired and happy success in recovering our health; otherwise all our
endeavors will be to no purpose if we forget the Worker, and have no faith in
him, from and by whom all our undertakings become prosperous. 2 Chro. 16.12.
Asa dyed because he trusted more to the Physicians then to God.

The Caelestiall Medicine only, or the WORD of God (which is the Firmament of
all Physic, Psalm. 33. and 107.20. Eccl. 38.9, 10, 11, 12.
without which no drug will do good) is that which heals all things, and by
the efficacy of the WORD (in which lies hid, and from which proceeds all
force beyond any natural actions) all Medicines become powerful: As the bark
is not the kernel, so herbs are not the medicines, but a sign only of the
Word signified.

Physic is twofold in the Earth, Visible, which the Father has created, and
ought not to be administered before there be a separation of the pure from the
impure; Invisible, from the Son by the Word, and is but one: the Physician
cures by means which are the Herbs in which the medicine is, the Herb is not
the medicine, for that is invisibly hid in God himself.

These things wisely and rightly considered, we shall not wonder that Almighty
God could (and can) make men whole by the Prophets and True Cabalists with a
word only. Acts 3.6.
God is a living God, the NAME also of the living God is lively, and so the
Letters of the living Name are also lively: God lives for himself, his Name
lives because of him, the Letters live by reason of the Name; as God has life
in himself, so has he given to his Name to have life in it self, and the
Name also to the Letters.

Great things have been affected by True Magicians (by whom I do not mean
Nicromancers or them of the Black Art) those accurate searchers out of Nature,
by a Word written and Characters or Signs, Such Names are the Divine Power.
framed at a certain time according to the power of Heaven, far from all
superstition, which arises only from ignorance, without any profanation or
scandal of the Divine Majesty, or any wrong to Faith and Religion; otherwise
it were better for us always to be sick then to be cured with the dishonor of
God: For Characters or constellated Names according to Agrippa, have no force
from the Figureors Pronunciation, but by reason of the Virtue or Office which
God or Nature has ordained to such a Name or Character: There is no virtue or
power either in Heaven or Earth which descends not from God, nor can it give
or actually exercise any thing it has but by his permission.

Medicines are visible bodies; Words are invisible bodies: whether the Herb or
Word heals, it is by God the Natural Virtue thereof, to wit, Paracels. says
that Characters are ^^e Compounds and Syrups of Spirits.
by the Spirit of God made One with Nature by his Word FIAT. Concerning
Characteristicalll Cure which affects Natural operations by words
pronounced, written, carved and hanged about the neck, by the caelestiall
properties of the Stars through a mavelous Influence agreeing with our
bodies, if any desires to be satisfied herein let him read Rog. Bacon of the
wonderful power of Art and Nature.

Physicians also have wrought great cures by the Created Word, or the incarnate
Mercy: for all these things are done by the efficacy of the Triune and Divine
Word only, which heals and preserves all things, Luke 11.14.
as we see in our Savior miracles, who when he restored the deaf and dumb (to
whom the Pills and Syrups of all the Shops in the world could do no good) he
did it not by Nature, but by himself; he did it by One Word, and he is that
Word, to wit, the increated Mercy of God, John 1.3. Not by bread alone, Mat.
4.4. Grace exceeds Nature, and the thing signified excels the sign.
by which are all created things, from which all simples flow, which also with
the Father daily works all in all. What virtue and operation soever there is
in the Creatures, as well in the great as in the little world, all that for
certain is wrought of God incarnate in his explicit and manifest bond of one
Spirit filling all things inseperably gathered into one, which Spirit therefore
is the only fulness of the whole world, Eccl. 24.8, 9, 10, 11.
and may well be called The Fullness. Nothing is made out of God, for in him
all things live, are moved and do subsist.

This WORD of God, the First begotten of every Creature, is truly our Daily
Bread for which our Savior commanded us to pray; it is the supercaelestiall
Mummy, the supernatural Balsome comforting poor Mortals more then Man's own
Mummy or natural Balsom. Without this benediction the staff of bread is
broken, a God threatened his people by his Prophets. It is of mere mercy and
goodness not of justice that we have both the bread of nourishment and of
healing.
The virtue in bread is the blessing of God, yea God himself: the Word in our
Earthly food is the true Bread which is given to good and bad; Man lives not
by bread alone, but by that which is in Bread; So that our Food and Life are
not of the Earth, but of God by his Word: If the Word were not, or of it self
were not the only Bread, then the Earth would be our God, but that may not be,
therefore is it not of the Earth, but of God by his word.

This Word then is the true medicine that heals all things, but is not known
to every one, nor can every Scholar treat and write of it though plunged over
head and ears in the dusty learning of School Divinity: (...).
our friend Theophrastus Paracelsus a Disciple of the Mosaicall and Living
Philosophy has written of the Secrets of Nature and the Wonders of God, to
wit, of the WORD of God INCARNATE which may be found in the Creatures, John
1.10. Heb. 11.3. Psalm. 107.20.
and is the Physic and Staff of our Life; by this Word, FIAT, the seed of the
whole world, were Heaven and Earth created, and this is that which is
efficacious in all the Creatures, and to which the Creatures are justly in
subjection as to their own soul.

Whatsoever therefore the Physician does effect Naturally or by HERBS working
successively by the space of time, The explication of a common saving (1) in
Herbs Stones and Words there are great virtues.
that the MAGUS, the Wise man or Caelestiall Physician performs suddenly and
much sooner by Characters and Stones with a most powerful impression, to wit,
the Gamahaea of Influentiall Wedlock to the Terrestiall sign, by matrimonial
combination of the Superiors and Inferiors ASTRALLY: For such is the mutual
tie and continuity of Nature, that like a stretched cord, all the Superior
virtue flows through every inferior thing even to the utmost, dispersing its
beams by a long and continued order and succession; on the other hand, the
inferior pass through all to their Superiors, because the working Virtue is
one, and the participation of the species is diffused through all; Divine
Matrimony; Hence is that wonderful tie, continuity, influence and simpathy
between inferior and superior Natural things: many things may be done in
Magic and Cabal by the intercession of the worlds marriage.

And the True Cabalist (whom Paracelsus calls the Natural Divine, who is
equal to the Prophets, and whose mind being united and coaequant to God does
whatsoever he will, for he wills only what God does) he does above Nature,
DEALLY or like God accomplish complish in a moment by firm confidence and
strong faith, Every Creature fears and reverenceth his Name that made it.
the very GATE of miracles in that Only Divine Name ISHUH in which all things
are reckoned up and contained, that is he does perform it in the WONDERFUL
WORD by the Mind, Faith and Prayer, to wit, prayers made in Spirit and in
Truth. The New Birth is the Field of Caelestiall Physic which heals with a
word without External means: that one operation is in respect of God as the
Artificer, and in respect of Man as the Instrument; every creature is at the
beck and command of their faith who are men innocent and taught in the Law of
the Lord, Read the books of the Kings. 1 Kings 3.12. Wifd. 7.
who are heard in all things whatsoever they pray for, witness Elias, Elisha,
etc. By prayer in Faith we obtain all things, I mean (not a lazy, sluggish
prayer, but) a constant asking, seeking, knocking: by faithful Prayer we
ascend in a strait and most sure way to the highest Wisdom of Divine and
humane Things; For in these Three principal Points also consists the whole
Foundation of the Magical and Cabalisticall Art, as appears by Paracelsus in
his third book of the Signature of Things.

We are not to ascribe our bodily health to the Physician but to God. Mark this
O ye Physicians who slight and undervalue God like the Heathen, whereas he
only heals all our sicknesses: also ye regard not the appointed time
according to the Divine Will, but proudly and rashly promise a set and certain
time of recovery which is to be left to God only.
Honor and Praise and Glory therefore belongs to the Creator, who works all
in all, for the desired success of his Medicine or Word which he has given.
But to the Physician who is the obedient Minister of God and Nature, there is
no other reward due but that of his faithful pains and Charity in that by his
hand as an Instrument he has duly administered the power which he received
from God to miserable and needy mortals, that so he may not usurp to himself
those things that belong only to God: For there is nothing at all of his own
in it besides Art and right preparation, whose good will, not his help, is to
be respected. God who alone is to be praised and blessed in all, and over all,
will not give his Honor to another, and because he gives all he also will
have and take again all unto himself.

Nevertheless the true and sincere Physician, who among all arts and faculties
is most accepted of God, is to be honored as the Scripture commands.

First, because God works and does his own will by him as by his Minister,
when he sleeps and knows it not, by affording Physic enough from the
Earth, and his Word from above, without which nothing can be efficacious to our
health, For without me, John 15.
says our Savior, ye can nothing.

Secondly, because (Health being the greatest Good to men) he ought to excel
all mortals in the search and knowledge of Nature and the Light thereof: Not
in vain therefore did Homer require a Physician to be furnished with all
knowledge in respect of those small cures which he is to do. (...).


Thirdly, because he alone manifests to all, the wonderful works of God both
in the great and little world, so that through the Physician the Praise and
Glory of God may passing much be heightened and extolled, not only by opening
his mysteryes and hidden secrets, but also by curing the sick.

Therefore among all Sciences and Faculties, Physic is to be accounted the
most excellent, wherein the greatest wonders of God are miraculously seen. It
takes its rise from Theology or the Light of Grace, and ends in the Light of
Nature.

CHAP. III. How the True Physic, which is covered bark and rind, is to be got
out, and rightly prepared by Fire.
The Physician perfecteth the Creature of God by Fire.
ALL things in respect of the first matter were created perfect, but the Chemist
perfecteth the last matter by Fire, because nothing in this lower world (which
is subject to generation and corruption) is so noble but has Poison in it
self and in respect of another very near the Essence or Physic. In all the
chief works of God, where there is hurt there is also help, where there is
venom there is virtue. Therefore nothing was created in vain, but all things
for some use. For so has Nature ordained, that Good and Evil, Eccl. 39.26,
etc.
which the sublunary Elements bring forth, should always be joined together in
all things, to put us daily in mind of the Fear of God.

As soon as the Omnipotent gave Power to Man, presently he raised up an enemy,
least the Power growing lazy should loose its Nature^ says Firmianus. Nil ex
omni propte be^um.
So that as the Poet said, nothing is in every respect happy; that man partaker
of the Divine Nature, and Lord of all living creatures, should be vexed with
Ghosts, and hurryed with Furies.

The severe Justice of God is the disease and venom in all things: on the
contrary, the Mercy of God is the Physic in Nature and in all things. Wisd.
18.15, 16. Eccl. 39. and 33.14, 15.
Roger Bacon the English Philosopher says, that God who made Darkness and
Light, in the same place or thing where of his MERCY he appointed plenty of
Physic, even there also by the power of his incomprehensible Justice he
substituted Poison to guard it, Thistles and prickles of Roses the inseparable
companions and avengers of transgressions. Good cannot be known but by evil,
and the Enemy being discovered the danger may be avoided.

Thus also Holy Hermes the most Ancient Divine (together with Ecclesiasticus)
writes in his Key that all sublunary things ought to consist of contraposition
and contrariety; and this after another manner may be of things Impossible in
respect of the generation and corruption of things. (...)
All things that are awlesse are also lawless: nor can Man any other way
attain to the highest pitch unless he resolve constantly to maintain the
good fight that is finished in faelicity.

Eccl. 3.14.7.15. Eccl. 42.25. The cause of Simpathy and Antipathy.
For so God by his Wisdom has ordained that Sympathy and Antipathy should be
alike good, by which spectacle of Nature he would stir up mortal men to
contemplate and search out his secrets, that if one man hate another, he that
is hated might cover and cure the defect of the malicious. For which cause
Heraclitus called Nature the daughter of War, and Homer called it Contention.

Man is his own enemy; the Cause of dissolution and death in this our Kingdom
divided in it self, the intestine duel; for in the little world, the body,
there lurketh perpetual strife, in it lies hid the preserver and destroyer of
health; in which regard the Saints have called the mortal body Hell and
Purgatory, wherein continual war is to be made. Eccl. 38.15.
Therefore seeing the Anotomy of Death finds entertainment in the whole State
of our Life, Nature has commanded the Physicians to be ministers, and to
separate, not masters to compose. For our Remedies require preparations,
separations and exaltations before they can impart their hidden and restrained
virtues.

As all things are proved by Fire, so also the Trial of the knowledge of
Physic is to be made by Fire: Physic and Chemistry cannot be separated. For
Chemistry (not that which Mountebanks use to paint Faces with to make them
White and Red) does make manifest, not only the true Simples, Wonders,
Secrets, Mysteries, Virtues, Forces respecting health, but also in imatation of
the Archaeon Ventricle or Natural Inbred Chemist, it teaches to segregate
every mystery into into its own reservacle, and to free the medicines from
those scurvy rags wherein they were wrapped up by a due separation from the
impurities and corruptible and filthy mixture of superficial and external
Elements, that that pure and Christiline matter may be administered to our
bodies. But to deliver this from prison and captivity, Hoc opus, hic labor est,
is a hard task to perform.

It is an honorable Calling when the Physicians live long and are not idle in
it, for without this Chymicall Philosophy all Physic is but livelesse; Without
Alchymicall skill there can be no Speculative or Practick Physic. He that
rejects that knowledge being disheartened by the difficulty thereof shall
never find where the disease lies. In this therefore our common sort of
Physicians are not to be followed, who patronize their sloth under other men's
pains and study, and use to leave the preparation of their medicines most
commonly to some careless and covetous Apothecary to the great damage of
their Patients: I speak not against the conscientious Apothecaries who by
their trusty diligence serve the Common Wealth as the Alchymy of Vulcan. By
this artificall resolution of bodies the propertyes which before laid in the
compositions of them are now brought to light. By it also as by a certain
kind of artificial Tynosure, or figures of stars the Chemists have not only
made curtains extending to all the borders of Nature, but also to the very
admiration contemplation and perseption of the whole Creature, and of every
obstruce virtue thereof, and have attained to a noble knowledge in most things;
and not without cause. Therefore a Physician should be exercised much in this
true Analysis and vital Anatomy of bodies (as has been said) because there is
no constant quality of any body which is not to be found either in the Salt, or
Mercury, or Sulphur of the same body.

Vegetables comprehend plants, trees, Zoophyts. Animalls are the beasts in
their order, creeping swimming, flying, four footed creatures.
But first all compound bodies of the inferior Globe are to be distributed into
three orders or companies; into Animalls, Vegetables, and Mineralls: the
individualls of all these, and the parts of the individualls are diligently to
be examined; and so we shall find out the notable differences of the three
First things ( viz. Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury) in every particular order: For
in the shop of Nature there is Animal, Vegetable, Mineral Salt; Animal,
vegetable, mineral Sulphur; vegetable, animal, mineral Mercury.

The first face of Things was pure, sound, perfect without corruption and
death: For the great and all working God for his infinite glory sake, created
all things good by his Will, that all things might glorify him and live holily
and incorruptably according to the prescribed order.

Man at first was created healthy, (sickness entered by the Woman, not by the
Man) but when he came into the world he found out an entrance unto death,
because there appeared two contraries, the external corruptable, and the
internal complete, which could not long continue in one without unavoydable
corruption. Therefore after the transgression and fall from unity to alterity,
by the curse of God new Tinctures came in (even infinite evils) by whose
mixture with the miserable state of our life, (...)
together with that troublesome companion the world the beauty of the whole
Creature was transplanted: The transplantation of the Creature is by the
calamity and coming in of sickness upon it: since the Fall me carry in their
own bosom their enemy both of creation and propagation, which causes
sickness and death by inbred contrariety and corruption.
Impurity was joined to the pure roots, which was the predestination of
diseases. For the roots of sicknesses in certain individual or species do
not consist apart by themselves, but are implanted and mixed in the pure and
first seeds of things: but the nourishments of Natural things are the fruits
of those seeds which spring up in the four wombs or Elements.

Nature therefore, as it is now, gives us nothing that is pure in the world,
but has mixed all things with many impurities, that as by the spur of
necessity, it might often put us in mind that we should begin to learn the
knowledge of Chemistry from our cradles, that so long as we are shut out of
Paradise into the subburbs of this world, we ought to till and manure the
EARTH, to wit, the whole frame of the world by admiration, searching into, and
knowledge of both the Visible and Invisible (Limus) Earth, and that we should
labor to get our bread, and other necessary things for this present life, as
Natures Laborers, not lazily, but in the sweat of our brows, that by this
means, by laying the Cross upon us which we should bear with patience, it
might stir up our industry in this LAND of LABOR to attain the fruits of
Terrene and Caelestiall Wisdom, least base and sluggish idleness make us wax
lean and pine away, or (because we are more prone to all kind of sin and vice)
by doing nothing we should learn to do naughtily.

He that has learned to know God and himself has ordered the Earth with good
husbandry: by ^oo much licentiousness men grow worse and become like brute
beasts, but idleness the pillow and cushion of the Devil is removed by labor
and diligence.
And this is the true end of Man's Creation, that in the fear of God and love of
his neighbor he should manage the Earth, recovering what he has lost, and not
be idle, but walking i^ the Light of Nature not after his own, but according to
the will of his Creator, he should continue the Instrument, Habitation and
Tabernacle of God, and that he should walk in the Ways of the Lord for
avoiding evil and idle thoughts, that he should through Nature search out the
wonderful works of God by consideration of Temporal and Caelestiall
observations, thereby to make known the invisible works of God, celebrating the
infinite Wisdom, Power, and perpetual Goodness of the Creator in admiration
of his mavelous works, wonders and mysteries which he has revealed.

But to pass from Food let us come to Physic, concerning which there is no
man so sottish or stubborn (unless he had rather eat the husk and shells with
the kernel, as the former and more rugged generations have done) who will
dislike this Separatory art which teaches rightly to discern and separate the
Good from the Bad, the Profitable from the Unprofitable, the Stupefactive from
Fire, the mineral Spirit from the Anthos or blossom, the Homogeneans from the
Heterogeneans, Poison from healing Medicines and Balsoms, Light from Darkness,
Life from Death, Day from Night, Visible from Invisible, Putrefications only
are the true Correctives of all Physic. As Death separateth eternal and
perishing things, so does Fire the good from the bad, the Quint-Essence from
the body.
that which is pure Celestial, the kernall and Marrow, from that which is
Terrestrial Impure, the Rinds, and Membranes, the Covers, Shells, Husks and
dreggs, the Coat aed Cottage of Physic which are enemies to man's body from
the Soul the Inhabitant thereof, the Super-elementall mystery the
Quint-Essence, which is the true Internal, suitable, freindly and correspondent
Balsom of our bodies; that so at least that quickening essence may be got, whose
faculty mounts more high and quick being loosed from its chains, and brings
forth far greater virtue and more efficacious to then before. All Venomous
things have a Balsom agreeable to Man's Nature, and there is no poisonous
Creature but has in it an Antidote against its own poison, and in its kind is
good; though it be poison to Man, yet many times is it common food to another
Creature: Spiders are good for hens and Sparrowes, Toads for Serpents, Serpents
for Staggs and Storks; but these Forms of Physic work better when they are
extracted, then whilst they are drowned in Matter, which always hinders and
restrains the power and operation of the Secret.

Even the Soul or Form of every kind of thing has not only more, but more
excellent virtues and operations by far than either the very body, or the
matter of the same thing; For as every thing has its being from the Form, by
how much the more it has of the Form, by so much the more is there of the
Entity. And this the very Enemies of Chemistry are forced to confess, being
compelled by their own conscience, and convinced thereof by ocular demonstration.

Hence many advantages follow.

Reasons why the Spagyrick Physic duly prepared is to be preferred before other
Hetroclite mixtures in the shops.
First, Because many sick people will take it more easily and willingly, for
many sometimes are so unwilling that they had rather dye then drink such a
deal of those muddy and pudly potions, which spoil the complexion of a man's
body, and which the Physician himself that prescribed it, and the Apothecary
that mingled, would abhor and altogether refuse to drink in the like case.

Secondly, Though these medicines be often used, yet they hurt not the stomach,
seeing nothing hinders but that they may do their work and quickly both
affect the body and be affected by it, for being separate in the stomach, they
are by a natural force carried without hinderance to their known lodgings,
that so the harsh and Earthy parts of them sticking to the inwards, might not
ulcerate, nor make them sickly who take often, as it falls out with the common
use of vulgar medicines.

Thirdly, Because all the hurtful quality is altogether cast out of, or at
least easily kept under in these Essences by the permixture of other most
exquisite propertyes. And which cannot be denied, this Spagyrick art is so
necessary that he can be no safe Physician who has it not: For many times in
one simple thing there are different substances, sometimes of contrary
qualityes, whereof one may be hurtful, the rest healthful, as we see in Opium
and honey, which can no otherwise be known but by separation of the
substances, which cannot be done without this Art. By this Art only the
Galenists may make good their Axioms, who affirm that all bitter things are
hot; whereas Opium though it be exceeding bitter yet the stupefactive virtue is
predominant, Roses also and Succory though they be bitter, yet are they applied
as coolers. The knot of this Answer must be cut with an Anatomicall knife fire;
for thus we come to understand the temperature of simples, by making a
separation of the substances, and so we find that in Opium there is a sweet
Narcotick Sulphur, and a bitter hot Salt penetrating by a subtle resolution
and causing sweat without any stupefactive virtue.

Poison reduced to its Arcanum is not poison, but a sovereign nedicine, thus
the earthy ^lnets are healed of their Lepr^sie, and stinking smells by
degestion are turned into sweet savours.
And which is much to be admired, though the poison of mettalls is most
pe^n^^ious, yet may it be so corrected and amended by the help of this Art and
of Fire, that it may be taken into the whole body without danger, as skillful
Physicians well know, who can tell how to pick and cull the best things out of
the worst; this is plain by the example of Ars^eck, which being of an unruly
malignity, yet it is tamed artificially with Saltpeter, by the assistance of
Fire.

Mineralls whose spirits exceed ours in subtilty, and precious stones, ought to
be accounted medicinable, which rightly prepared do much excel all Vegetables
in effecting cures.

First, Because so great virtue and strong operations cannot be stamped upon
such soft matter, as is that of Plants and living things, so as to retain and
hold such impression: Nor can it be that Vegetables which are obnoxious to
corruption should so free Man's body from corruption, as the Spirits of perfect
mettalls do, which are not subject to corruptions.

Secondly, It is clear that Miniralls and imperfect mettalls are endowed with
great medicinable virtues, as appears in Chyrurgical medicines, there being
scarce any Ointment prepared that is not made of an imperfect metal or
mineral: Therefore perfect things doubtless have received of the Omnipotent
far greater force and virtues.

Thirdly, Because Nature, which desires to bring forth living things and
Plants fit not for any one action only but for many virtues and performances,
could by no means so contemper the mixture of those bodies that they should
attain to such admirable power and admit of the solid and stable Nature of a
Balsom.

Fourthly. Because stones require a long time of generation, but perfect bodies
are generated in a shorter space: Nature therefore by length of time can adorn
precious stones and other metallary bodies with a greater faculty of working,
for they are not distracted with the variety of sensible and movable offices.

Add also. That precious stones are more to be commended then others for their
excellent temper and splendour, which in the Bohemian Garnat is such that it can
hardly be spoiled or corrupted by any force of Fire, and that only because of
the fixation of spirits that may be seen in it: in which respect it striveth to
be as medicinable as Gold, and may well be preferred before the Oriental Rubie
in Physic, which can scarce endure the Fire as many hours as the other can
months.

Gemmes are Elementary Stars.
This also by the way is to be observed, that precious stones have the Color,
Form and Tincture more or less from Mettalls by formation of the Stars, for
they are transplanted Mertalls. Rubies and Garnats have the Tincture of Gold,
Saphirs and Turcoides of Silver, Emeralds and Chrysolites of Copper, the Jacint
and Topaz of Iron, the Diamond of Tinne-Saturn adds a gluish matter to the
weight or heaviness, as may be ocularly demonstrated from those factitious and
fictitious gemms that are made of the powder of red lead and white flints
proportionably mixed, receiving a mettallick Form from Fire. And though they
are no whit inferior in splendour to those that are Natural and genuine, yet
the skillful Stone-gravers can easily discern the cheat and fraud by their
softness and lightness.

See Theophrast. his Manuel. Minerals conduce much to the health of Man: for
since Man has Physic for his body from the world because he is a world,
therefore all Mineralls are for Man's good, and that which is contained in the
Physical body is applied to his mineral.
If there be any who out of their simplicity shall say that mettalls are of no
use in Physic, at least in the civil life, although they are the fruit of
Elements as well as living things and Vegetables, and created, though not for
Man's food yet for his Physic, or that there is no agreement or likeness
especially of those perfect Mettalls with man's body, although man partaketh of
those Three first, let them know that the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral sperm
or seed have but one rise or original, and differ only in Quality of Place
and Receptacle.

Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral principles are one and the same in all
things, but have various Receptacles; for there is one of Vegetables, another
of Mineralls, for all these proceed from one most principal and general
principal kind (which is the general seed of all things or subject of the
first matter, and to be distributed into three principal kinds, Animal
Vegetable, and Mineral) from which Nature has the nature of Quicksilver to
create every other Compound.

All things are from one Principle, and tends to one: In Orpheus his Night
and Hippocrates his river Orcus all things are but One, like Anaxagoras his
Pamsperm, which Aristotle unjustly condemned, (...).
because he did not well understand it. Thus also the Spirit of life is united
through out the whole body of man, but is various according to parts of the
body in which it is.
But when that one only Nature the Essence and Matter of all things came forth
upon the Stage of this world, by the pleasure of God, which Nature is the
Specific of every Creature, it brought in with it various wonderful bodies
and of manifold distinction according to the disposition and variety of the
Place and Receptacle, and according to the agitation and operation of the
Universal spirit, here Vegetables grow, there Mineralls are dug, in another
place living creatures are generated, and one gives place always for the
nourishment of another. This is the set Order for the government of the
sublunary Family, that Mineralls should nourish Vegetables, Vegetables feed
beasts, and beasts men; which could not be if the nature of one thing did not
by affinity partake of the nature of another, and this by propinquity and
vicinity partake of the first kind from which all things proceed.

Romans 8. See Paracelsus his Apocalypse of Herines. The Soul of the world is a
kind of united life, filling, gathering and knitting together all things, that
of the three sorts of C^catures, the Intellectual. Ce^e^^^, and Corrup^ible,
it might make up one Mass and frame of the whole world, by the virtue which it
has from the Idea's or pattern it makes all things both natural and
artificial I to be fruitful by infusing into them occult qualities which are
commonly called the Fifth Effences. Nature the Image of Go^ is the invisible
Fire or fiery vigor by which all things are multiplyed-Nature many times makes
it self merry with its magistery or mastership and rejoices in its master,
and in its art and virtues.
All things flow from one Fountain, which after they have done their work and
quitted the Stage of Vanity, are returned to their own places, Where they are
blessed with unchangable Rest: That universal Spirit which lives in and
quickneth this whole Mass, which works all in all, and fills the whole
world; that Power of God, which comprehends all the world in it, Agrippa
calls it the subject of all mirability, the Ens or Being that cannot be
comprehended by sense; Avicen says, it is the Soul of the world powered into
all things, building on the authority of Plato, the Arabians and Caldeans; but
this we must hearken to without any superstition or Idolatrous worship, giving
honor only to One God, and ascribing to him his glory, which we will not give
to another.

Nature, I say, is that medium which by an Harmonicall consent joyneth the
lowest things to the highest and sometimes is called Animal, sometimes
Vegetable, sometimes Mineral, according to the diversity of the subject or
receptacle, and does often work even to amazement in the three Families of
Nature, as has been manifested, among other things, by a memorable example in
that Silesiac child in our age, which was born though not with a golden yet
with a gilded tooth in the left and lower jaw, which I did both see and handle,
when I was at Prague, in the Court of that most Illustrious and Famous Prince
D. Peter Vrsin a Rosis.

Nor is this so strange to those who diligently seek out the Hermetick
Philosophy and the mavelous works of God, they that chase the secrets of
hidden causes all throughout Nature, and would know all that is to be known
(for it is not unlawful to pry into those things which exceed even natural
order) these are not so much astonyed at the sports of Nature, because from the
intimacy of more hid and secret Philosophy they know that that same Spirit and
mineral Nature which produces Gold in the bowels of the Earth is also in
Man. That Spirit in Gold is the same with the generating spirit of all
Creatures, and is the same and only generative Nature diffused through all
things: This Spirit now has assumed a Natural body; It is that which first
moves and rules Nature in all natural things, it preserves all things, and
all inferior things by a kind of Harmonicall consent are governed by it.

Albertus Magnus writes, that in his time there has been Gold found in the
bodies and heads of some that were hanged; in his Book of Mineralls he says
that Gold may be found every where: There is not, says he, that thing
Elementated of the four Elements in which Gold Naturally may not be found in
the last subtiliation thereof. And therefore the Philosophers say that the
matter of their Mystery may be had every where, because it consists in every
Elementated thing.

In his Mineralls.
Albertus also proves, that the greatest Mineral virtue is in every Man, but
especially in the head among the teeth: and writes that in his time in the
graves of them that had been long buried there was Gold found among the teeth
in little small and long grains, which could not be if there were not a
mineral virtue in Man, which mineral virtue is in the Elixer of Philosophers.

Thus Morienes that excellent Philosopher, the most skillful and expert
Chymiologer, when he answered King Calid who inquired after the matter of the
Elixer; It is of thee O King, said he, Lullius was a divine and most complete
Philosopher, whom Paracel. blamed without a cause. The matter of a stone is
said to be in every thing in respect of the first mov^r in natural things,
which is called the Vegetall Spirit, by whom our matter of a stone goes beyond
the rest; this Spirit is in Animalls and Vegerables, as well as in Mineralls.
and thou are in its Mine: Wherein he never a jot differed from Raymund Lully
that fearcher into this Magistery (of which two I know not whether was the more
diligent and studious) when he says that he got his matter out of a mean and
worthless thing.

Riplaeus a Portis agrees with them both: Remember that Man is the most noble
Creature of all, in whom there is the Natural Mercuriality of the four
Elements, which Nature has proportioned, which is of little worth, and may be
got out of its Mine by art.

Add Rhasis to Riplaeus, as one that does not altogether dissent from him: In
his Book of Divinity, You may easily, says he, perceive that the things of
Nature are so coucht together by a subtle artifice, that in every thing there
is every thing potentially, though it does not actually appear.

But I forbear to cite more Authors, though I might produce a great heap of
Philosophers, who confirm these things, not by common and outside arguments,
but by solyd reasons drawn from the inside of things, such as would be weighty
witnesses and beyond the exceptions of any Sophisters. But these things are by
the by.

Moreover, The Chymicall way of Subtiliating Extracting, and Separating being
imperfect, was not much used in Galens days (for they knew not how to separate
the bark and husk from the kernel) it was altogether unknown to him, which yet
being ignorant of it, he very much desired, as may be gathered from his own
words, when he says, Lib. 1. cap. 19. Whey, Butter and Cheese are the three
first things of milk, for all Terresterity is Salt.
that he tried all ways and means to distinguish the facultyes of simple
medicines, and discern the hot parts of vinegar from the cold, if possible he
might find out any devise to separate the contrary parts of vinegar as well as
of milk; who in this thing might have obtained his desire if he had been well
skild in the Distillatory Art. Nor is it any disgrace to Hippocrates or Galen
that they knew not these things: For God and Nature (which is the order and
series of Gods works, and obey the power, word and command of God, and
borrows all its virtue and efficacy from him) who do nothing in vain, they
do not bestow upon mankind all things together and at once, but do
communicate particular gifts to several ages, nor do they inrish one man with
all, but distribute to every one his particular gift. Hence it appears how
contrary the judgment of many now is to the judgment of the Ancients, who if
they knew not any thing which they heard was known to others, though in very
far countries, they would run all hazards of sea and land to find it out.
Doubtless if Galen had lived when Paracelsus did, he would not have envyed,
but reverenced his learning, nor would he have been ashamed of his Coals; but
as he was desirous of learning, so would he gladly have served Theophraestus
for nothing many years, if it had been for nothing else but to know how to
separate the three first (qualities) in vinegar, but especially to learn the
preparations of those high Magisteryes and Elixirs, neither would he have
refufed to blow the coals or temper his stuff, or watch his work; he would
have undergone any condition so that he might have gained this worthy science:
nothing regarding the rage of Colerick and Melancolick Philerastian Physicians,
who have not learned so much as their A. B. C. in the Spagyrick Physic, nor
know any thing of the Creation and composition of the internal Astrall Man,
much less of the Mechanic Spirits of diseases; Yet they blush not rashly, and
proudly, without any conscience of shame, purposely passing by meaner persons,
to rail bitterly upon that never sufficiently commended Paracelsus, a
thousand-fold more worthy then his adversaries, and the immortal glory of
Germany, (who had the absolute knowledge of all Divine and Humane sciences,
beyond what will be believed of him) whom these men fear not to call a
circumforaneous or rambling rayler, one that was no Philosopher at all, and
maliciously, though with lost labor, to load him whom they understand not, to
their own disgrace; with viperous hatred they accuse his course of life,
aggravating his humane fraylties, and so very unadvisedly enact an unjust law
against themselves: We have all our faylings, happy is he that has least; they
see not that part of the wallet which is behind them, as though they themselves
were not men that are, or have been, or yet may be guilty of the same, if not
greater vices, which so eagerly inveigh against; thus we quickly epsy our
brothers mote, but cannot see our own beams.

I wish the ambitious Physicians of that time, who robbed others of their due
praise, who cast a Serpents eye upon Theophrastus, could (according to his
command, who is the End of all Humane actions and Physic, viz. that we should
love the Best and Greatest God, and all our neighbors as our selves) have
endured that rising Sun without gazing on his clouds, and have spoken of him
more soberly according to his dignity and desert: his human imperfections which
none will excuse, they should have born with the like tenderness of compassion
where with they pardon Galens impiety who scoffed at the doctrine of Moses and
Christ: In his second Book of the difference of Pulses.
Doubtless he would have more clearly have manifested to thankful posterity his
Secrets which God disclosed to him, and written more plainly and perfectly of
Preparations: nor would the present Spagyrick Profession to their great trouble
and grief, have had experience of the wicked and cursed ingratitude of some of
his time, by being again put to seek out the certainty and truth of that which
Theophrastus discoursed and writ of, and to long for the true Preparations in
the practical proceeding. Thence it comes to pass, See Paracelsus in Paragr.
that there are so few to be found who have the true medicines prepared
according to Theophrastus his mind, of which he treats at large in his
Books: for they require solutions, mortifications, cohibitions, resuscitations,
etc. truly Phylosophycall, which cannot be understood without true Physic, A
Physician must be an Astronomer, otherwise Paracelsus says that his Physic is
but imposture and a cheat. Therefore many with Icarus are drowned in a great
Sea.
Astronomy, and Chemistry; nor are they completed in a short time, but with
much tediousness to Phylosophists who are impatient of delay.

But truly I think this wicked generation is not worthy of such medicines. For
God usually in his just Judgment, for the sins of the world and the great
ingratitude of it, withholds his (...), his mighty and mavelous works from
unworthy Men: He will never suffer those Secrets to be known, especially in
these corrupt and perilous times, when Honor and baseness, Virtue and vice.
Truth and lies are equally esteemed by the malicious world.

Besides, almost all men have a burning desire after making Gold, There are
four Pillars of Physic, Philosophy, Alchymistry, Astronomy, and the Physical
virtue or medicine.
but regard not the due preparation of their Medicines, the only cause thereof
is their not knowing the Metaphysics of Paracelsus, the true Philosophy, and
not first reading diligently those large Books which Theophrastus directs
unto in his Labyrinth of Physicians, before they set upon the preparations,
separations and resolution of Natural things.

I observe also that most Chemists betake themselves to Court, and are turned
from the truth by the glitter of Court-service, deceived by vain Courtly
flattery, that they either neglect those great works of God, or rather are made
incapable for such stupendous miracles of God, as for many years I have taken
notice that many have begun well, but deluded with these toys, have made an
ill end.

By which means this Divine Spagyrie, the most wonderful and approved Art
(though for many ages suspected of greatest uncertainty, and most abominable
deceit) has been very much disparaged by the ruder sort (which often befalls the
best things) and cast aside as contemptible, with other deeper sciences, even
by those who intend the same business, undervaluing it as not fit to get a
living by it: What is said of, or spoken against abuse, imposture, and wicked
arts, is not that for which things otherwise good may or ought to be condemned;
For what is that thing which will not turn to Man's hurt or ruin if it be
abused? so that the bettter the thing is, the more destructive is the abuse of
it. But who dares to oppose himself to the Athenian Thrasos who will have
Light to be Darkness, and Darkness to be Light? They have almost all the
whole filthy world standing in defense of their most vain Vanities: For the
world seeks not the Truth but its own Honor: And therefore God gives us up
to a reprobate sense, to hate and envy one another, and that we our selves
should be the cause of the imminent destruction of our own Kingdom.

O fountain of Truth and Wisdom, consider our condition, and the hearts of
those who with holy desires and ardent prayers strive night and day against
this imminent and approaching change: But the mow High will also in his own
time put an end to these things, and that of his goodness and mercy ere it be
long, I hope; that God would stir up the minds of some which may bring to
light the Truth that is in sciences and Faculties) for as yet the Invention of
Arts has not attained the utmost end) that they may root out the Tares of
sciences, and confute the delusions and errors of the schoolmen not with
words, but deeds; not Syllogistically, but Really and indeed: For when that
which is perfect is come, the time of Revocation and Regeneration drawing nigh,
every imperfect thing will of necessity come to naught: For where Titles,
Degrees and glistering Names make men proud, their is no humility, no life of
Christ, no holy Spirit, as appears too manifestly in most, who suffer the Old
man to be ruled by the Sydereall Spirit. Now then the Lord enlighten all the
lovers of Truth with his Holy Spirit, and graciously deliver them from the
chains of Utter Darkness and incessant janglings of Putatitious and conceited
Scholars.

CHAP. IV. How, and with what Virtue, Physic works upon Man's body and cures
his Diseases.
THat which Physicians commonly dispute and contend for, In lib. de flatibus.
is, Whether, according to Hippocrates his Maxim, that Contraryes are to be
cured with CONTRARYES, or Like with LIKE, according to Paracelsus?

Note, that these Maxims may be both received in the Anatomy of Nature, though
they seem thwart one the other. Thus many attain not the Mind of Philosophers,
which to them seems to be at variance, because they cannot understand how to
reconcile them by a seasonable and suitable interpretation. For Physic is
nothing else but an opposition of those things that are desired, to wit, a
refreshing of the strength and Balsom, and a removing of superfluityes or
impurities that cause diseases. Paracelsus therefore does not find fault with
Hippocrates for saying, that hunger is to to be cured with meat, thirst with
drink, fullness with evacuation, inanition with reflection, labor with rest,
idleness with labor; and generally, that Contraries cure Contraryes: But he
is point blanck against Galen, who applied that Contrariety of Hippocrates
chiefly to those bare and naked qualityes which Hippocrates utterly disclaimed,
for he by an unhappy mistake referred the first and principal Idaea's of Cures
to Refrigerations, Calefactions, Humectations, Exsiccations, with their
companions.

The only and alone NATURES of Physical medicines, as has been said, or
those Hippocraticall virtues are they which do the cures, the Physician is but
the minister or servant. And this very self same Nature, which is our Life and
Balsom, or balsomicall Mummy, that preserves the body from all corruption, by
means of the Saline moisture, that is, of the inferior Balsom springing up in
the inferior from the superior, I say, this very Nature of ours (which
sometimes works wonders, when the Physicians to their great disgrace and
shame of their Profession could do no good, but have left their Patient to
their Prognisticks) is its own proper Physician in Man's body, who asks
nothing of the outward Physician but Instauration, or as it is commonly called,
fortification applied to the diseased part by a most pure medicine when the
like Nature is not at hand: And thus the Medicinal Balsom like a coadjutour or
privy counselor assisteth the Vital or Radical and Natural Balsom because
of the simpathy and common agreement between them. Thus it recovereth the
Natural decayed strength, Nature cures with like things.
which being restored it is of it self able as an inward and unknown Antidote
to chase all its enemies out of its Monarchy by the only power of the Vital
facultyes.

To go about to cure a disease with contrary qualities, is to raise and stir up
intrinsic commotions to the utter overthrow of Nature, which is to much
weakened and wasted already by intestine quarrels.

Besides, Contraryes will not willingly entertertaine each other: And if they
close not one with the other, nor work one upon another, nor suffer any thing
from each other, then where there is no true action and passion, there can
follow no true Natural effect.

Wherefore medicines should not be contrary to the grieved part, but very
agreeable to it, and have the same External Nature (because of the Harmony
between the great and little world) as the place affected has the Inward, that
the Internal Nature which stands in need of it may both be strengthened and
succored by the superabundance of that External Nature: Man is therefore
called a Microcosm or little world, because the whole world preserves,
nourishes and cures him. When the fruits of the Earth, Air, Water and Fire
of the Microcosm are sick, they must be restored by fruits like themselves of
the Macrocosm. Thus Nature does strengthen and help its own Nature: For Nature
strengthened and assisted by its own Nature does more forcibly drive out all
its enemies, seeing every Nature is Naturally the best preserver of it self.
Thus Nature is not only our companion, but our friend and ready helper, it
alone being the genuine Physician of all diseases, as Galen witnesses in his
13 Book of Method. It is the First Mover of every cure, without whose strength
and vigor all Physic is in vain and to no purpose, Nature continued in its
Temperature is in it self medicinable, and it self heals its own
infirmities by the innate Mummy; when that inward Nature is not the medicine
all dise^ses prove mortal. It Is we^^ enough known that every thing by a kind of
natural instinct desires to be perfected and preserved: On the contrary, it
does most vehemently abhor the destruction of it self, and desires as much
as may be to be kept from it: daily experience makes it plain, as when any
part of our body is wounded with a sword or other weapon: for those that are
wounded perceive a presentaneous succor from Nature as of one hastening to
help, and so unwearyed that it will never be at quiet till it has first cured
the ugly wound and restord the wounded part to its former soundness. And
whereas some say that contraryes are to be cured by Contraryes, they are not
much mistaken if they have not respect to the qulaityes, but the virtues of a
contrary Nature; For there are as many cross and hurtful virtues to nature as
there be good and healthful for it; the goodness of these is always busyed
about, and consists in the preservation of Nature, as the continual malice
of the other is to the destruction of Nature: If they therefore would destroy,
those are sent to succor struggling Nature that by their goodness they may
preserve the twofold goodness of Nature, but chase out and overcome the malice
of the other: T^us the cross and contrary virtues which are hurtful to Nature
are vanquished and driven out by the adverse and contra^y virtues in Nature: but
contrary qualityes, are not rooted out by contrary quallityes, but rather are
irritated and provoked to strife by each other; by which discord Nature is more
weakened then strengthened, because Nature is not a quality but a virtue, and
chooses to be ass^sted rather by virtues then qualityes when it would
succesfully prevail and fight against its cruel enemy: for its not the
Physician that hunteth out the disease, but Nature her self (who is the
Internal Mummy or inward Balsom) expelled all ill contrary to her self, when
her own inward strength fails she is to be supplied with outward help by
her servant the Physician: Though sometimes it may be the best medicine not to
use any medicine at all but to leave the ooperation to the sole Archaeus or Art
of Nature, The Inward Physician does the work, when the Natural Physician
fails.
for the Nature of the inward body cures more diseases then the Physician does
with all his medicines. Wherefore if any be preserved in a raging pestilence by
Opium which is most cold, it is not by the coldness of Opium, but but by the
Specific venomous virtue of the Opium which has a greater degree of poison
then the occult venomous power of that Pestilence. Thus Nature destroys one
poison by another, it subdueth a weak evil by a stronger; and fights against
her enemy both with healthful and hurtful weapons, that so she may keep her
own things in safety, and beat her enemy out of her posession by any means
whatsoever: As winter does not destroy summer, nor summer winter, but one gives
place to the other, so one quality does not destroy another; for without virtue
the quallity is dead and wholly accidental, and consequently cannot afford any
life or substance which the medicine must of necessity do if it would succor
Nature indeed. And here also it is worth the noting, that Roots of diseases in
the body of Man are neither hot nor cold, but whereas nothing can be without
heat therefore the disease also is said to be either hot or cold though those
Accidents and Excrements are but the signs of the disease, and not the disease
it self. For the most pernicious diseases and Traitors of the body do not
spring out of the matter of the body, or out of the four Humors, but from the
Nature of the Seed or Astra's and Invisible mechanic Spirits of the Three
principles, which Spirits also build their outward house and habitation with
shells. These Forgers and Invisible Astra's of diseases were not known to the
Ancients. Physic is a Spirit (not a body) which the Magician or wise man only
can discern: Therefore the body or Earth of Simples is to be cast away* and
the virtue Heaven or Astrum of it only to be taken: For in the Microcosm and
Medicine it is necessary that the life should work upon the life, and the
Spirit upon the Spirit by sepration of the impure body, as the intangible Sun
Melts Snow and causes it to vanish away: Such is the Nature of all Secrets
that they work without the matter and body because the diseases also are not
bodies: This is the true and lively Anatomy. This Mechanic and Forger of
diseases is to be subdued and destroyed in his Root and original, Paracelsus
in the Tincture of medicines.
as the whole Tree cannot be destroyed in the branch but in the Seed: thus the
Mechanic Forger or principle of a Pear's generation has his habitation in the
Root, not in the branch: So the grass which grows of its own accord is
hindered from growing, not by evultion but corruption of the Earth: See the
first Tract of the second book of great Surgery, Degrees and complexions are
not considered in diseases.
when the Center, Root, and Seed of diseases are plucked up and removed the
work is done: Not the smoke arising from fire, but the fire it self is to be
quenched: That Physician which cures by complexion is like him that would
extinguish the hurtless flame and let alone the fire in the coals: That which
springs from the seed is not to be taken for the disease, but in doing the
cure the Root of the seed which contains the virtues is to be taken in hand.
In his Book of ancient Physic.
When Paracelsus says that like preserve their like, and are destroyed by
their contraryes, he does not mean the first nor second qualityes which he
always calls Recollaceous and invalid ones, but the substance, (...).
at least the Cherionic, Hippocraticall powers and virtues, as appears in the
18. Chap of ^he first Tract of the second part of his great Chyrurgye, and in
other places. Like things are said to be the Remedies of diseases because they
are of the same Anatomy of Nature, and because they have the like Signatures,
Qualities and Roots: But Contraryes cure because they piece up the defects and
wants, because they appease the spirits and consentaneous impurities with a
friendly saturity, and because they attempt resolutions, consumptions and tacit
ablations.

Diseases are cured by applying that which is proper for them.
That Like are to be preferved with their Like is thus to be understood, viz.
that the Salt, Sulphur and Mercury of the Microcosm is preserved by the Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury of the Macrocosm analogically agreeing together: And as in
the Microcosm there are various Sulphurs (one of the head, another of the
heart, etc.) and various Mercuryes and Salts, so also in the great world
answerable to these there will appear variety of Sulphur, Salt and Mercury in
herbs and Mineralls: The ministry of Fire discovers their agreement,
operation, and difference, and because he distributeth all material diseases
according to those three substances of which our bodies are composed, and
according to the excrementitious superfluities arising from meat and drink:
Those diseases in Man's body which arise from the kindled and flaming Sulphur
(as Sulphur may be deprest or heightened four ways, viz. by the four Elements)
he called them Sulphurean diseases, such are all Inflammations and Fevers.
Those that proceed from moisture he Mercuriall.

Mercury may three manner of ways be exalted above the Natural degree as by
the heat of an Accidental digestive Virtue, or by the heat of Exercise and
labor, or by heat proceeding from the Astra's: By the heat of digestion it is
distild, and so causes all sorts of Apoplexies; by the heat of Exercise it is
sublimed* whence follow madness and Phrensye: by the heat of the stars it is
precipitated, and then causes the Gout in hands and feet etc. from eating and
drinking those things that have too much Tattar in them: those diseases that
are bred of Salt, he calleh Saline and Nitrons. Salt destroys health 4 ways,
by Resolution, Calcination, (loosing its liquid and humid Temperament)
Reverbertion. Alcalization, and so breed grievous diseases as Ulcers, Scabs,
Tetters, Ringwormes, Itch and the like, all which are diseases arising from the
Salt dissolved. Surfeiting and gluttony which destroy the digestion is the
cause of the Salts destruction: Excess and Luxury dissolve and melt the Salt
of man: The stars also thrust the Salt out of its degree: Which Salt may be
changed and turned into all sorts of Salts, and such as is the Transmutation
such also is the disease. He says therefore that the Sulphur kindled in man's
body is to be quenched with the Sulphur of the great world, which harmonically
agrees with the other, but he that considers to what end he spoke it will
find that such a remedy will be contrary to the disease, for to quench such
burning Sulphur in Man's body (to wit, if the feverish fire be universal and
flow from the heart) his meaning is, that appropriate Sulphur should be used,
such as whereof* there are many to be had in Natures Garden, and the Family of
Herbs and Mineralls, as Sulphur of Vitriol, Niter, common Salt, and such like.

Likewise he says that Ulcers proceeding from Salts must be cured by Salts:
but if we observe his drift, such Salts are contrary to that which was the
cause of the disease, and quite opposite to the disease it self; All
Terresterity is the Salt of Paracelsus. Cumfry cures the corrosion of Salt.
S^ffron restores the dissolution of Sulphur. Gold thickneth the too much
sublimation of Mercury. Our Nature cures all diseases when he impediments are
taken away: we are to assist Nature against these impediments which are the
causes of diseases.
for they are incarnative and consolidative, as Frankencense, Mastick, Myrrh,
Aloes. Whence it is plain, that sometime he calls that Salt whatever it be that
will melt, and may be resolved into a watery moisture, and then dried and
hardened by Fire, such are the thickened sap and juyces of Trees and Herbs.

As there are Three from which all Physic proceeds, Mercury, Sulphur, Salt;
so likewise there are three sorts of diseases, Mercuriall, Sulphurean, Saline:
All Ulcers are cured by incarnating Mercury; All mattery gluish sores by Salt;
All Inflammations by Sulphur. This needs no Reasons to confirm it.

Medicament though they be contrary to the disease, yet they must of necessity
be altogether courteous to Nature; for she seeks a sweet Peace in every
controversy, and that only by the help and assistance of her friends; if she
sinck or miscary the Physician can do no good.

On the contrary, if she abide and be kept safe and sound she works
incredible wonders.

A stupendous and true Story.
As was seen in the New City at Prague, Anno 1602. in a certain rustic or
countryman of Bohemia, whose name was Matthew, about 36 years of age; who for
the space of two years by a strange and unheard of dexterity of throat would
many times among his potcompanions hide an Iron knife of a good bigness in his
huge and wide throat as in a sheath, thrusting the horny haft of it foremost in
imitation of a Jugler, and under that name call for a good draught of Ale and
drink off, after that at his pleasure he would by a singular art pull it out
again by the point: But, I know not by what dismal and witless fool
hardiness, so it was that the morrow after Easter day, the same year that he
swallowed it so far that it went down quite into his stomach, so that he could
by no means get it up again; after he had kept it there seven full weeks and
two days as a man half dead from the apprehension of unavoydable death, at
last by application of drawing Plasters made of the Lodestone and other
things, the point of the knife began to force its passage, by a natural
impulse, near the mouth of the stomach, which when the man perceived he begged
with much importunity (though many persuaded him to the contrary for fear he
should dye whilst 'twas doing) that it might be cut out, which at last was
granted, and by Gods blessing with many prayers for good success in so
doubtful a case it was prosperously performed by Florianis Mathis of
Brandeburge chief Surgion of the Kingdom and City, upon thursday after
Whitsunday at seven a clock in the morning: The knife was nine fingers breadth
transverse in length, his stomach had changed the color of it just as if it
had lain so long in the fire, it is now laid up among the Emperors rarityes,
and has been showed as an incredible Miracle to many both in Court and City:
After a few weeks the Country man could eat and drink and sleep, as he told
me, without any manner of pain or trouble after the Chyrurgion had applied
such things as he saw fit, and thus by Gods help and many men's liberallity to
the poor fellow, he was made as sound as ever he was in his life and cost him
nothing (contrary to the determinate assertion of Physicians Aphorisms) and
shortly after he was married.

Likewise in the year 1606. at Prague a certain Silesian to get money did in
the presence of many swallow six and forty white flints which he gathered at
banck side, weighing almost three Physic pounds, the least of which was about
the bigness of a Pigeons egg, all of them being almost four of my handfulls:
by this bold adventure, without impairing his health, he went up and down
getting his living for many years together, etc.

CHAP. V. The Duty of Natures Minister, the Physician.
ALL common Philosophy was not bound up in Aaistotle, as P. Ramus has soundly
proved; nor was the whole Light of Nature drawn into Galen and limited in him
only, witness Paracelsus. No man ought to deprive another of the liberty of
human ingenuity, that Light of Nature, the power to discern and judge as well
as himself; the Grecian Monarchy is at an end. Therefore he that would be an
Excellent Physician he must be free from every kind of Sect. (for no man can be
said to be truly and thoroughly learned who is bound up to the rudiments of any
one faculty only) and not to be tied. to the opinion of any one Author, but to
follow the naked Truth, and subscribe to it alone, always remembering that of
Horace,

Quo me cunque rapit tempestas, deferor hospes-Nutlius addictus jurare in verba
magistri.
I think and judge as cause I find:
My rule is not another mind.
Not that other men's inventions are altogether to be slighted, by stickling
only for one sect; for all sects, be they never so many, may well be admitted,
because in every one of them there is some thing excellent which is not common
to another, as said that most noble and wise Picus Mirandula the Phaenix of
Philosophers, the inimitable pattern of most profound ingenuity, and variety
of learning.

There is no book so base and bad but has some good in it which the best
Authors have sometimes let slip without taking notice of it. This latter age,
says Fabius, has endeavored to make the former more complete, and because
knowledge thriveth as ingenuity is improved, therefore many loathsome errors
of the Heathen have been as by a second song, All Secret are by divine
Ordination to be discovered.
wiped away by men of greater wisdom coming after them.

Doubtless there are more secrets yet concealed in the Treasures of Wisdom
and Nature then we perceive, which (being ordained for Times and Nations, by an
immutable decree, to the end of the world) are to be sought out by wise-hearted
men.

For Nature certainly, being Circularly, can hardly be wholly comprehended by
any mortal man by reason of the shortness of his life.

The case so standing, neither the Physic of the Ancients, nor that of
Theophrastus, is totally to be rejected; Many errors of the Ancients are
discovered by daily experience, which yet has not attained its end neither.
nor yet so to be embraced but that if there be a better found out it also is
to be received, for one day teaches another to morrow may be master to this
day, both should be compared together, what is best in both let that be
cetained. For being but men, they have their failings, in some places they
mistake, in other they write one thing contrary to another, and thwart each
other, sometimes they differ from themselves, in many things they are deceived,
nor does every man see all things. The holy Spirit alone has the plenary or
full knowledge of all things, who distributeth to every man according to his
particular measure, blowing where it lists, and reserving many things to
himself that we might always acknowledge him to be our only teacher. A true
Physician should be the minister, not a master to Nature, and a Philosopher
skillful to cure acording to the conclusion of Hippocrates and Galen: But since
there are several sects of Philosophers, some after the Vulgar manner will be
looking below the Moon after the Elementary Nature of things, others far more
excellent and more truly deserving the name of Philosophers investigate the
Arcana and more secret things of Nature, they go into the very inner rooms and
Sanctuary of Nature, and have the true knowledge and Expeeience of Nature's
Light, which makes a true Physician indeed: A Physician is completed by 3
things, the Natural innate virtue of things that grow of the Earth, the
Celestial influence causing that virtue, the uniting of it by Chemistry with
the Constellation of the firmament, the dexteri^y of the Physician mediating
the same.

In Chirurgia magna.
But first, as Paracelsus says, let him be the legetimate INTERPRETER of
NATURE, who alone searches out its economy, and the universal latitude
thereof, prying into all the Species and kinds of all the Creatures that may by
themselves be known, and then comes to consider and look into man.

A true Philosopher ha^h the original from the knowledge of Heaven and Earth,
whose Nature and quality he does perfectly understand. Philosophy has i^s Rise
and R^^t in Admiration.
Philosophy teaches the virtues and qualityes of the Earth and Water, as
Astronomy does of the fire and Air: Philosophy and Astronomy make a perfect
Philosopher, not only in the great, but also in the little world. A Physician
should have the knowledge of Philosophy and Astronomy; Chyromancy, Pyromancy
and Geomancy are the Elements of Astronomy and Philosophy.

Theophrasteans contemplate and admire the workmanship of Nature throughout
this mighty frame of the whole Creation; who give themselves to a vary
examination, and a wise inquisition into the qualities, affections, motions,
courses and recourses of the Heavens and fiery bodies; as also into their rise,
fall, antecessions, consecutions, progresses, digressions, stops and sudden
passionate motions; and lastly into the seeds, principles, dimensions, and
instincts of all sublunary bodies, all which they do with great observations,
and no less diligence: by which industry and that perpetual thirst which they
have of meditation and cogitation, By this meditation, which is a frequent
cogitation, the manner, cause and reason of every manner of thing is found out.
together with their pra^ers and earnest desires, they do at last attain not
only to understand, but also really to imitate the greatest mysteries and
secrets of Nature; and, that which is more then all, they can tell how to
improve and employ them.

When the Philosopher comes to a stand in the Natural Light of the Macrocosm,
then the Physician begins to move and proceed in the Analogicall Concordance of
the Natural Light of the Microcosm with that of the great world.

Secondly, a Physician must be a good SPAGIRUS, A Philosopher and Physician
spring one out of another, are the root of each other, the only Spagyrick cook
of all things. Philosophy is the mother of Physicians ^^d the ex^lai^er of
(...) ^^^e^ and their ^^^^^dye^.
one that can separate the pure from the impure, and restore his Patient to
health by a wise Alchymicall preparation: As Gold is tried seven times in the
fire, so should a Physician be proved by Chemistry, which sepereteth the good
from the bad: also he must have something of his own Experience confirmed by a
diligent inspection into Natures works: For Philosophy is a practical Physic
helping the Physician to any medicine in a readynesse, and he it is who at
length becomes a good Physician, born of the Light of Nature, to whom Nature
communicates his Experience. But never was there any man that ever knew and
published such hard and hidden secrets in all Philosophy and Physic (by
Heavens undou^ted blessing) as to speak but truth, did that THEOPHRASTVS
PARACELSVS, a man and a Philosopher most worthy of an Eternal Name and honor,
whose skill no man ever yet attaind unto, much less exceeded, the true Monarch
of Physic, and first Physician of man, who alone since Noe's time has
written of the Internal Astrall Man and the service which God created him for,
as also of the original both Natural and Metaphysicall of great and incurable
diseases, which none of the former Physicians did ever so much as dream of;
much less our Students of Heathenish Philosophy from whence all error
springs, so that, as has been said, they have taken no notice of that
twofold unknown body of the Creatures, to wit, that Mortal, Elementated
Physical and visible Corporeal body of the Elements; and the Astrall Sydereal
and invisible of the Firmament and the stars.

All Sciences are perfectly attained unto by the Fundamental of Faith and new
Regeneration or Celestial Transplantation.
The Intellectual Soul of Man, that divine Light flowing out of that spiracle
of God and Divine springs pertains to the Invisible Philosophy, whose
foundation is CHRIST: Our study therefore and profession of Philosophy should
be Christian-like, not after the manner of the Heathen in hollow empty language
and temporaneous Arts, preferring the mortal and perishing before that which
is Eternal; Nor are we only to know all Nature externally and internally, but
we are also to make it our only business, that according to the Fundamental
knowledge of the same by the supernall help of the Light of Grace we may
together with Christ and all the Elect possess that Eternal Life unto which
God has created us, A man cannot have better Philosophy then from God in the
Regeneration.
this is true Theological Philosophy: Wherefore the New Birth is first to be
sought for, and then all other Natural things will be added without much
labor.

But let us return again to Theophrastus. He was a man singularly well skild
in Chemistry, though he were not the Auther of that Art: There have been
abundance of Philosophers who have made use of there ingenuity and memory
instead of books, This kind of Philosophy has been in good esteem among many
Nations.
who were famous by that Art before Theophrastus was born, and from whom
Paracelsus has secretly borrowed many things; For that noble Pyronomicall Art
has been most ancient against which none but Dolts and Dunces have unworthyly
cried out which heretofore was known only to Kings Princes, and some few of
most diligent searchers out of Natural Philosophy, which of late has not been
a little improved by that Monarch of Mysteryes Paracelsus: Who by the singular
providence and impulse of God endeavored to bring to light, restore and
amplify the Ancient doctrine, which by a fatal depravation and neglect of
times and men, was lost and obliterated for many years, to wit, the True and
Philosophical Physic which none in his time assayed to restore; the great
obscurity of which art he labored also to evolve and illustrate, The Physician
that God makes can do all things. All power is from the Lord God without whom
no Creature can do any thing; therefore all wonders, mysteries and secrets are
to be attributed to God onel^* not to the Devil, Creature, or Stars, James
1.17.
and to purge it from the fucous guile and vizard of imposture, yea even to
recall the universal consonancy of the Sciences and Muses by a kind of divine
copulation from the compass of the whole circle unto the one only Center:
Behold therefore the Divil that perpetual enemy the inseparable and malicious
companion of man, and the approaching and the appearing Truth, has stirred up
his Emissaries and catch-poles, whom he does yet daily egg and set on with a
dogged hatred to keep others from the manger in which they cannot lie
themselves, and envy that singular Good which was ordained for man's necessityes.

I know not whether their impiety or blasphemy be the greater, that whereas
they ought with all humble and thankful acknowledgement and due reverence to
ascribe unto the Author of Physic (from whom as from the Father of Lights is
every good and perfect gift) those singular gifts for the curing of those
accustomed and desperate diseases, which gifts were bestowed upon Theophrastus,
who by peculiar influence was born a Physician, they do notwithstanding with
an impious and sacrilegious boldness, yea also with a nefarious and inexpiable
wickedness attribute these gifts, according to the venom of their heart
against the truth, like the Pharisees of old, to the Devil himself, as though
the wicked one were the worker of those cures, and thus they make the Devil
stonger then the blessed and glorious God, though he be bound fast with the
cord of the Omnipotent, and is kept deprived of the Light of Grace and Nature.

Those things are to be ascribed to God alone and to his Law, as to the Author
of the whole Universe and of Nature, which they are not afraid to fasten on the
Devil, who has no power over the Will and Understanding of Man. And thus they
worship Devils instead of God, blaspheming the Glory, Goodness, and
Omnipotency of God, and by a malicious ignorance obscuring his Wisdom or
hidden Image in Man.

It does not become our German Physicians to do their own Country of Germany
such wrong, and to contemn those Secrets which God has granted to their
Nature; they commend only that which is none of their own, but rather greedily
desire what is of strangers, and with an unworthy and base spirit suppress and
trample upon what is from among themselves, just as it befell Pet. Ramus from
his malicious populer adversaries, because he stopped the current of youthful
studies in the silly, common, and corruptible Philosophy; For as the
Aristotelians unworthily rose up and set themselves against him, even so do
the mingle mangle Physicians against Theophrastus Paracelsus, whose learning is
deservedly admired and wondered at by Foreign n="*" For he has written to
than it is impossible for any to imitate him. See Paracels. de Fundamento
Sa^ientia. and his Book called Sa^s^m Corda. He that does not carelessly read
but inwardly examine his writings will perceive as much.
Nations.

And not content, in respect of his Physic, to thrust their sickle into
another man's harvest, Divinity should dwe^l in Physic as the Soul in the body.
they blush not also to wrangle against his Divinity, which they have neither
seen nor read, nor by reason of their blockishnesse can they understand,
inasmuch as he only is able to judge of Truth who is inspired with Divine
Wisdom; in which (his Divine writings) he has successelesly endeavored to
make known to the ungrateful grateful and unworthy world that invincible
united Fundamental of Theological and Phylosophicall Truth and perfect Piety,
Numen and Lumen, Divine Power and Light, these two make a perfect Man. When the
Light of Nature is well known, God or the Divine power of Grace is well known
also. By meditating or contemplating we know, by knowing we are delighted, by
delighting we adhere, by adhearing we possess, by possessing we enjoy the
Truth which is the food of our souls. Read Div. Dionys. and Pic Mi^an^d. Cant.
1 8
taken out of the Book of Grace and Nature, that is, that our mind should be
raised up to God, and our eyes lifted up to look after the Truth, and to a
desire of future Blessedness through the Regeneration.

Without Philosophy it is impossible to be absolutely godly; nor shall any man
be ever able completely and Christianly to Phylosophize in either Light, who is
not truly godly: The two Lights are well known, within which are all thing,
without which is nothing, and no perfect knowledge of any thing. The Light of
Grace, begets a true Theologer, yet not without Philosophy: The Light of
Nature, which is the Treasury of God confirmed in the Scriptures, makes a true
Philosopher, yet not without Theoligie, which is the Foundation of true
Wisdom. The works of God are bipactite; Philosophy comprehends the works or
way of Nature; Theology only knows the works and way of Christ: In these
two ways we are to walk and spend our short time, that we may die in Peace and
Joy. Hence it is plain that every true Theologer is a Philosopher, and every
true Philosopher is a Theologer.

After Paracelsus others attempted this study, following the same strait and
compendious tract, most holy godly men of blessed and honorable memory and
most sound both in innocence and learning, such as Paulus Brawn of Norimberge,
Valentinus Weigelius, and Petrus Winzius, men educated and enlightened not in
the sensual school of fools, nor in the rational school of Scholars, but in
the third school of perfect Men, that Mental or Intellectual school of
Pentecost, in which the Prophets, and Apostles, and all truly learned men
walking in the Life and steps of Christ, have been taught and learned without
labor and toil, these gave themselves wholly thereunto as the manuscripts of
their ingenuity and engraven monuments which they have left behind, are no
less then divine witnesses thereof unto eternity, and by the favor nf the
most High will in their time come to Light, unless the indignity and
ingratitude of the world keep them back, that so according to the good pleasure
of the Divine Will, the minds of those that read them* who yet are withheld in
this hell of the body, under the yoke of misery, may by the assistance of
divine Grace, after a serious knowledge and lamentatation of our Fall through
frequent and daily contemplation of Heavenly things, and the annihilation,
abnegation, immolation and mortification of themselves by Christ, casting all
shadows behind them, and turning inward unto themselves into the Temple of the
heart, that so, I say, they might by a daily practice of Piety fetch out that
huge Talent and Treasury which is hid and shut up within themselves; least like
miserable mortal men who know not themselves, and consequently nothing else,
lazily neglecting God within themselves, and in their blindness and ignorance
going backward after the steps of his flocks, The more we seek after things
without us, the more we forget and loose our selves; what will it profit us to
hunt through all things and neglect our selves? 1 John 2.20, 27. Psalm. 98. Hab.
2.20. Psalm. 58.84, 85. Phil. 3. Zech. 2.13. 1 Cor. 3.9. God is to be waited for
with a quiet mind when the senses are laid asleep, who bestows his
benediction where in he finds his own vessels. Christ is to be found in the
Temple of the Heart.
should in vain seek those things without them by many books, mortal masters,
long journeys, with great and constant pains, study and weariness, which yet
inwardly they might possess abundantly within themselves, if they were indeed
dead to themselves, even to the whole Animal Man, who is nothing but EARTH,
and were suppressed by the Sabbath and oblivion of Temporal things, and entered
into themselves with David, Psalm. 40 1. patiently waiting for God our master
who dwells in his holy Temple, in the Abyss of the heart or inward parts of
our Soul, Psalm. 5.7. speaking in us by his spirit, and that they should not
hinder him who is willing and desirous to inlighten our mind, and to work all
our works in us, which is the utmost happiness and Blessedness of Man, and
the very determinate and appointed End of the Cabala or secret wisdom. But,
alas for grief! unhappy, foolish and miserable men had rather abide in
themselves to their greatest damage and detriment of their right, then to be
happy and wise in God, with God and always in the presence of God.

The heart of a Regenerate man is Gods Eden or Garden of Pleasure, wherein he
dwells; For God made the World and Man that he might dwell in them as in his
own proper house or Temple, though now he is not discerned by reason of the
Dark Point of the Quaternary: but at the end of this world which is to be
Renewed by the Ternary of Man, Apoc. 21.23.
the Regeneration according to Soul, Spirit, and Body (the New Jerusalem,
wherein the Unitrine Essence of God and the Holy and most Holy Trinity
inseperably dwell) will sparkle and glitter out with a radiant fiery color
like a Rubie or Carbuncle through the clear, spotless, beautiful body. O,
thrice happy is he and more, in whom as in a Bodily Angel God himself is the
Man, in the Temple of whose incontanimate mind God is the Ghest, where Man's
Left hand knows not what Gods Right hand does.

Unto this God the one and only scope and end of all men's eyes should look,
The Creature is ju^ily oblidged to obey the Creator, that our will may be one
with God. Genesis 6.3. The Fall of Man and our great evil is to depart from Unity
to Alterity. I never go abroad among men but I come home less a man then when
I went forth, Seneca.
casting aside all impediments in the way, there being nothing in this world
but Vanity of Vanities, all is vanity but to love God and cleave to him by
serving him alone, and so to be united to the true Being by an humble
subjection, least through disobedience, a proud will, and self-love,
neglecting the Nature and property of our Image, casting off God, we should
slide into our selves or the Creatures as claiming to our selves the property
both of them and of our selves, and so inevitably fall back into that vain,
wicked or our own Nothing.

If the Soul run back within it self and be converted into the Mind it
draws near to God, sees all things, and has no need of outward teaching,
like the Angels, who-learn, hear and see all things from within: But when the
Soul turns into sense it is carried far off from God and departs from God,
the impure forsakes the pure. The Academicall spirit cannot not understand
this Mystery; for Holy and Devout Humility alone, the most noble of all
virtues, is capable of Illumination.

O what pains do they take to become sools, who once drown themselves in
Humane wisdom.
But since this Truth cannot be comprehended except our Understanding be kindled
by the Word of the Lord, and our Reason receive the Divine Light through the
Mind, nor may I in this unfit place openly speak more of these Mysteries, I
return again to that Physician Paracelsus from the digression unto which I
had occasion to step aside.

It had been more becoming our Physicians to have extolld and huggd those great
gifts of God in him, and rather have loved the man for his most ingenious art,
then to hate him for some kind of behavior and using such words which every
one does not understand; (...) facilius. quam (...).
it is easier to carp at him then to imitate him. The age wherein he wrote may
excuse the harshnesse of his language, the malicious ingratitude of men may be
the cause of the bewailed obscurity of his Commentators, the unusual custom
of Philosophers plead for the strange novelties of names, for the Philosophers
have ever driven from their hives of most sacred Sciences those sluggish and
lazy Drones who are good for nothing but to devour other men's industry, for as
Plato says,

Arts ut lateant sua perque Aenigmata crescunt.
Arts wrapped in Riddles safe do lie,
Their fruitfull'st soil is Secrecy.
A man may live any where, Laws and Liberties are allowed in every Dominion:
But let any man look into himself and consider if he had that which
Theophrastus knew, whether he would tell it to every man; in so doing he would
break the Oath of Hippocrates, who would not instruct every one in the Art of
Physic.

A Secret indeed is to be concealed, it belongs only to God to reveal it; if
it be disclosed, commonly it exposes to death, or prison, or reproach, or at
least to continual fear and voluntary exilement from our friends into a far
country for safety, unless we will brand our reputation with a perpetual blur
of lying and deceit to conceal the same; Lully; Arnold, Zachary of Paris, and
others, are witnesses hereof, besides many examples of latter ages. The true
Hermetick Philosophers took an Oath that they would follow the footsteps of
their fathers and masters, and not by any teinerity defile the virginity of
Nature, which has been preserved from the beginning of the world: yet have they
bequeathed their secrets to their sworn disciples who are engaged by perpetual
faith and gratitude and made worthy of such their precepts by Nature or
Education, Without paines-taking none is fit to enjoy that Art.
which yet are with much sweat to be searched out.

Men of shallow judgment are ready to think if Paracelsus speak any thing
against those that follow the rule of their Experience, or inveigh against
Empericks who have no skill at all, that he approves of no sort of Physicians,
but that he would profess himself to be the sole and only Physician in all
the world; whereas he only condemns the common rabble of Physicians who are
altogether ignorant both of Theory and Practice: Nor truly are they to be
accounted Physicians, who Verbally and Syllogistically only make a great
flourish of Physic, but do no cures at all, a true figne of a foolish
ambition, boasting that they have the Method of Physic, a sort of men swollen
with contempt and pride, and born to crush the truth of the Physical Art. Some
of them are so incensed against that Theophrastus (because he might and maine
set himself against those proud and impenitent fellows) that they had rather
let their Patients perish then make use of his prescriptions; Many also for
that cause despise his medicines, least if they commonly use them and their
wonderful effect appear, it would be some blemish to their repute; and
therefore the better they are, the more do they undervalue them.

And though the Censurers of Theophrastus, those fallacious Medodists (who
linger out the cure, and lengthen the disease by their compendium) falsely
charge the genuine Chemists that they have lost the right method, that's as much
as nothing, for it is plain to those that have their understanding enlightened,
that Paracelsus observed only that method that was agreeable to Reason and
Experience. Nor should we be so addicted to any man's Authority, as not to
prefer the Truth before it, for without the Truth all Authority is pernicious,
and all wise men will slight it as of no value without that: we are not so
much to regard by whom, as what it is that is spoken; no man should be so
wedded to another man's judgment, as altogether to be deprived of his own.

True Method consists in the knowledge of the Disease, and the Cure of it,
viz: what food in reason with convenient Medicines drives away sickness, and
procures health. Therefore Wimpeneus learnedly shows that greatest and most
grievous Diseases now a days are in three respects cured by the Paracelsians.

First, Because the Diseases are more perfectly known, for heretofore when all
were reduced to the four humors, those that sprang from Tartar cleaving to any
part could not be cured, because it cannot be referred to any of those four
humors. And since we are here fallen upon Tartar I will speak a little more of
it.

Every member has its own proper digestion, separation, emunctory, excrement
in it self. The first digestion of the stomach is not digestion, but
apparation for the digestions of the particular members.
The first Ens or Being toward life, from whence the body has it is nourishment
and food arises out of the last matter of the Meat by the Archaeus, or
digestion of the Stomach, it is separation, and generation of separation: It Is
reduced unto Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, as is plain in the three chief
Emunctories: the superfluity of Salt is separated by the Urine, that of
Sulphur is divided and purged through the Entrals. Mercury or the moisture of
that which nourishes; if there be too much of it passes through the pores by
sweat.

Whatsoever we eat and drink has in it a mucilagenous, clayish, and sandy
Tartar hurtful to our Health: Nature takes nothing but that which is pure; the
Stomach which is the instrument of Man's Archaeus, or the Internal, innate
Chemist which God has planted in Man, as soon as it takes any thing into it
self it seperateth that which is impure, dreggy, and Tartarous from the pure
Nourishment; if the Stomach be strong in it is full separative force, the pure
passes to the Members for nourishment, the impure goes out by success: If
the Stomach be weak and feeble the impure also is sent through the Mesaraick
veins to the Liver, and there separated and digested the second time: The Liver
therefore of these two in their course, and by turn seperateth the pure from
the impure, viz. the Rubie from the Crystal: The Rubie is the nourishment of
all the members, the heart, brain, etc. the Crystal or that which is not the
nourishment it sends to the reins, The first separation of Tartar, which is
by the Live^^utneth into moss, the second which is of the stomach into hail;
the third of the kidneys and bladder into a little stone. Every Man has moss
and hail, but not a stone in him.
this is urine, which is nothing else but the Salt pressed out of the
Mercurialls, forced into resolution by the violence of separation, which the
Liver resolves into Water and then throws it out; If the Liver be weak and
cannot well separate it sends it to the kidneys mucilaginous and stony, there
for want of good separation (that is, when the spirits of Salt, viz. of the
flesh and of the urine are united) the Spirit of the Salt coming between by the
power of predestination, it is coagulated into Sand or Tartar, either cloddy or
mucilaginous.

Tartar therefore is the excrement of meat and drink, which by the spirit of
Salt is coagulated in Man, except it be mixed together with the Excrements by
the proper expulsive virtue and so cast our with them, whence otherwise would
arise four kinds of Tartar, the stone of the bladder, the Sand of the Kidneys,
the clods or gobbets, as also the Slime or lutous matter of the stomach, with
many other diseases which the Ancients knew not.

Again, Paracelsus distinguishes Tartar into that which is strange or
foreign proceeding from meat and drink, and that which is innate of the cruor
or hereditary blood, which innate Tartarous disposition cannot be cured by the
Physician who knows not how to force Nature, but only by the Quint-Essence of
Gold which renews the whole body.

Tartar therefore or the Natural superfluity (the mucilage of Salt) is the
mother of almost all diseases of all coagulate bodies. For all kind of food,
Paracels says that the Matter, viz. the Tartar of diseases is twofold; Bolous,
such as in milk meats, fish, and flesh: and Viscous, Bituminous, mucilaginous
such is the excrement of pulse, coleworts, roots, fruits, etc.
by Divine ordination, has Poison or a Tartarous Mucilaginous Impurity hard by
or close unto the medicine or Physic thereof.

There are four sorts of Tartar, springing from the fourfold fruits of the
Elements by which we are nourished.

The first sort arises from the use of those things which grow in the Earth,
as Pulse of all sorts, Herbs, etc. upon which we feed.

The second comes from the nourishment which we have from the Water, as Fish,
Shellfish.

The third is in the Flesh of Beasts and Fowls.

The fourth from the Firmament, which is most like to the Spirit of wine in its
subtilty, and has the strongest impression of all; if the Air be infected by
the vapors of the Earth, and Water, and Firmament, afterward it affects us
also, as we see in those acute and pernicious Astrall diseases, the Pleuresie,
Plague. Prunells or raging burning diseases, which diseases proceeding from the
impressions of the Stars the universal medicine powerful expels.

Those four kinds of Tartar show themselves in the Urine, and are judged of by
the art of separation, by which it appears from what kind of Tartar the
disease proceeds. He that knows what sort of food any one eats, may also
know his disease, or he that knows the disease may know what he eats; The
disease is cured by the same Element that was the cause of it. If Galen and his
followers had had the true knowledge of these Excrements of meat and drink,
which for the most part breed all our diseases (which Paracelsus comprehends
under the name of Poison and Tartar) Choler and Melancholy had long since
been rooted out of the Physicians Garden.

He that knows not this Tartarous matter of diseases which proceeds from
the excrementitious superfluities of meat and drink, cannot possibly understand
how the Author of diseases afflicts us, by destroying the frame of the little
world and taking away our life. If we know not the Tartar, we cannot tell what
that is which infringeth the spirit of cogulation, and separateth the Tartar
from the Nourishment, viz. our Natural Heat, or the microcosmicall heat of the
Sun and Moon that is in us, whereby the Nutriment is digested, like fire that
burns up the wood, and from which good blood is begotten, if it be not
hindered by sickliness and weakening of the separative virtue of the stomach,
Liver and Kidneys, and then it must be strengthened by its like, that is, by the
macrocosmicall Heat of Sun and Moon, if it could be got, even the most simple
matter which the most Great God generated of the spirit of the world (one and
the same with the spirit of our body) for the restoration and conservation of
Humane Nature, or with those things wherein the power of the Sun and Moon is,
The Vital spirit in Man and the Elementall is but one spirit.
and is deduced by art into act, viz. turned into such a simple spirit as is
the spirit of our life, which is done by resolution and conjuction with the
Nutriment. But if the Archaeus of our stomach, liver or kidneys, which
separateth the pure from the impure be infected, Tartar differs according to
the places of the bodies pores and passages, as of the mouth and bottom, of
the stomach, of the intestines, liver, bladder, reins, flesh, blood, marrow.
or their separative power be hindered by any external accidents, then the
excrements stay in the Chylus, and cause stomachall diseases in the stomach,
Jecorall in the liver, Athriticall in the g^ew, sinews, ligaments and joints,
and breed the Gout in the hands, feet, knees, from congelation of the glue by
the spirit of Salt, besides those diseases of the Reins and Intestines:
Therefore the Archaeus of the stomach must destroy the Tartar of the Elements
least it be turned into the Tartar of Man, for the spirit of the Sun which is
Lord and Master of coagulation in various subjects will breed the Stone if it
find matter resolved or separated from the nutriment and excrement. So much
for Tartar.

Secondly, Because we have more perfect medicines now then heretofore, that is
to say, of Mineralls, whose preparations and due administrations were
discovered to those skillful Chemists the Sons of Cadmus: A knotty piece must
be cloven with hard wedges; Therefore Paracelsus would have a steely medicine
applied as proper for an iron disease, for extreme diseases call for extreme
remedies.

Thirdly, Because now the Harmony between the great and little world is made so
plain, and so well understood, that it is easy to know among those choice and
most excellent of them, what medicine is most familiar and friendly to this or
that member, as Silver, Saphir, Vitrioll, Emeralds, for the brain; for the
heart, Gold, Pearls, Saffron; for the lungs, Brimstone, etc.

Moreover, Whereas Paracelsus offends Galen, Galen did the same to others:
Hippocrates wrote many things, which most Galenists reject at this day; nor do
the stoutest of common vulgar Physicians agree among themselves. How many
things are controverted and contended for with undecided discord about
particular diseases, by those that differ in their most pugnacious opinions,
and that are ignorant Mechanic forgers of diseases?

As between Schekius and Fuchsius about the continent Cause of diseases. You
may find more jarring in opinions in Agryppa de vanit te Scientia^^m. cap. de
medicina.
Between Argenterius and Fernelius about Agues and Fevers. Between Galen and
Rondeletius concerning the Palsy, Epilepsie and Stone. Between Francaneianus,
Rondelatius and Fallopius about the French Pox. Between Altomarus and Fernelius
concerning the Gout.

How many millions, according to the disagreeing and jarring method of these
men, will still perish, before the genuine cause of the said diseases be
determined in the Commencement of Physicians, their brawling disputations
ended, and the College of Physicians be of one mind? Here for brevity sake I
willingly pass by the Herbarists, who commonly squabble and rail at one
another with endless jangling about the Wool of Plants, tyring themselves with
questions and frivilous names from a proud contentious spirit. It were idle
here to recount those infinite and endless contentions and wranglings.

Therefore I exhort and admonish all Students of Hippocraticall and Galenicall
Physic, in whom the Philosophical vein is yet warm, who are not bitterly
bent against the preparations of medicines, and know that what our industry
has found out should not shut the door against that of the Ancients, as if all
the strength of Nature were hatched in us only; I do (I say) persuade them
that they would forsake their Fathers faults and other men's errors, and be
warned of their ill resolved purpose, that being instructed by prudence they
may timely be converted from a known error, and that they would also spend
some time in reading the works of this new Philosopher and Physician, not
superficially and prefunctorily, but with greatest diligence and attention of
mind. For in this kind of study we are to imitate the experience and industry
of the Bees, who suck and gather their honey out of the most fragrant juice of
the flowers, segregating the best from the worst and drawing out only that
which is for their turn.

Wherefore I do not so far persuade men that they should so adore every thing
of Paracelsus (inasmuch as he himself has recanted something of his over
hasty writings) as if they were all Gospel-Oracles, as we see many who even
worship the conclusions, and opinions of Hethen Authors, but because the
diligent and accurate reading of him may give us greater light, and be no small
advantage to us for the more intimate and right understanding of Hippocrates
his works.

They are not to be praised who rashly condemn all that Paracelsus has
written, when yet they have not read so much as his marginall notes, or if they
have, yet truly they understand not fully the third part of them.

Here this ye Phylosopasters, who throw away the kernel and pick up only the
husks of Philosophers, pray to God, and seek to Books of Paper, for the spirit,
that ye may understand the dead letter of Theophrastus, and the Philosophers.

His works which were Printed for the public good, by the encouragement and at
the cost of that most Renowned and Reverend Ernestus Prince Elector of Coleine,
have given occasion to his adversaries to charge him with implicit and evident
contradiction, because to the unskilful and unlearned he wrote in a Magical
style; not for the vulgar sort, but for himself and the understanding children
of Wisdom trained up in the School of Magic; not for the Sophistical
Alchymists, such as are bewitched with a greedy desire of Gold; incensed with a
righteous hatred against some most wretched, wicked, inhumane Physicians and
Druggists of his time, who often lay in wait to poison him to the shortning of
his life. If he he had written more plainly, ^hen those circumforanceous and
vulgar Alchymists would have surpassed all other Physicians, and prostituted
the Art to the great wrong and injury of Nature.

He concealed his mysteries under vulgar and various names; therefore we must
not take the similitudes for the truth it self, or that which is intended by
them: For there are few that understand the Physical Secrets, that is, the
hidden power of God, or the Magical WORDS in Paracelsus; therefore they need
and require a Delian swimmer, a most acute and sharp wit, a Magical
Understanding, even that purified eye of the Mind, which can pry into and
search out their sentences and secret-mysteries. By Mag^ck every were I mean
that which is True and lawful (not the infamous and profane (...) or
wichcraft, which is fit for none but Vulcan, and deserves to be burned, which
Men of a wretched wit and studious of most obominable curiosity hunt and search
after, but) the absolute perfection of the whole most noble Philosophy, the
chiefest Wisdom of Gods works and the plenary knowledge of occult Nature,
which commonly works incredible wonders, and does things exceeding the usual
order of Nature, by a fit application of Agents and Patients, observing the
consent and dissent of things.

The intelligent Readers will take notice that Paracelsus has joined the
exercetation of either medicine together, as well that of Physic as of
Chyrurgie, in imitation and after the example of Great Hippocrates: For he
assigned or set down a twofold Medicine, Physical or the knowledge of all
diseases, and Chyrurgicall or the curing of the same, which like the Carpenters
work cannot be done without hands: Nor can either without the other safely
consist or be exercised but with great hurt and danger of the sick; Therefore
it is necessary that every Surgeon should be a Physician, and every Physician a
Chyrurgion, that there may be a sound Bridgroom for a sound Bride: The choice
also of the Medicines must always be considered, and their preparations and
compositions made by the Physician himself, and not carelessly left to others.
He is truly a genuine Physician, who can tell how (not only by Reason, as mear
Rational Physicians do, but) by their own hand to prepare the medicaments
which they know, to separate and purge them from their poison and dreggs, to
reduce them to their pure simplicity, and not leave them to an unskilful cook:
For the Bad and Good are mixed together, neither is Sugar free from faeculent
impurity, nor is honey void of a venomous bitterness: when they are prepared
he must with true faith and acurate skill or judgment accommodate them to man's
necessities, that the root of the disease may be plucked up; by this means his
honest and quick dispatch will prevent the patients complaints.

A Physician therefore should have both the Theory and Practice, he must both
know and prepare his medicines, for judgment without practice is altogether
barren and fruitless. Physic is learned by the labor of the hands and
practical working or making it up, when the Fire discovers new and most
pleasant Remedies continually, which Nature daily more and more purges from
their superfluities, and then delivers them to her Servant to make them up:
But the great Doctors of our time, who are grown gray in the vulgar art of
Physic, will not become scholars and school-boyes again, to dig they are
ashamed: And as it is hard to remove an old tree, or to bring an old dog to the
collar and make him a good hunter, so these men will openly contradict the
truth, and with a canine obstinate bawling bark at it, and bite it rather then
endeavor to reform their errors, least they should not seem to be wise
enough, or be thought to learn something better from others: But though they
exclaim and cry out against the Chemists as if they were no Physicians, though
they be the most skillful of any, but that they are the only Physicians who in
judgment and Reason (undervaluing Chemistry) know how to apply any Remedy to
every disease, yet these Rational Physicians when they come to the sick man's
bed know not what to do or which way to turn themselves, but stand wondering
and as men amazed, speaking smoothly, and giving their patient a parcel of
good words only, being able to do nothing toward his recovery, because they
can prepare their medicines but only with their Reason, not at all with their
hand.

These Receipts being lost by chance, all the Wisdom vanishes from them:
Experience, without Philosophy the mother of Experience is uncertain.
Yet here I will by no means undertake to defend them, who reteining the works
of Hippocrates and of the Ancients, yet boast themselves to be the Scholars of
Paracelsus, but neither acknowledge the mind of the Author in his Theory, nor
do any thing praiseworthy in Practice.

There are also false and lying Theophrasteans profaning by their avarice and
timerity that Divine Physic (which at this day is made the plough of many, who
shamelesly endeavor to hold up a good opinion of themselves) to cousen and
cheat with a brazen face, who under disguised names vaunt and vapor that they
make use of Theophrastus his medicines, being altogether ignorant not only of
Phylosophicall, but even of vulgar and common medicines, who disdaining the
writings of the Ancients, These men get their knowledge piece-meale out of men,
and gain their experience by the death of others, their skill fullness makes
them rich.
thrust themselves into the profession of Physic with unwashen hands, I know
not what Secrets and Experiences they trust to, yet with a foolish confidence
without Reason and judgment, they presently undertake to cure any disease;
Nay, they doubt not to attempt and take in hand the cure of greatest and most
dangerous diseases before they scarce know how to put fire into the furnace.
With a covetous eye and Thrasonick boasting they brag that they can perfectly
cure all diseases, they glory in it, and are not ashamed of this their lying,
but when all comes to all, they cheat their Patients with sweet and sugared
promises, after they have fingered their larg fee, drilling them along indeed
with a grateful, but most false presage of their recovery, and many times
betake them to their heels and leave the sick to shift for themselves, or else
cure the party and his disease at once with a turse of the Churchyard.

But notwithstanding we may sometimes see in great and difficult diseases, when
all the subtilties of the senses are benumbed that all the Medicines both of
the Arabians and Grecians, are desperate and without hope of doing any good,
and so become laughing-stocks to the disease; and though all Judications and
Analogisms may fail, so that many times the cure is left to the absurd
Remedies of Old Wives and Empericks to the great dishonor and ignominy of
Physicians: And though it be evident that these circumforaneous and adulterous
Theophrasteans, with their unlawfully prepared Remedies, No rabble of
Physicians in the City is more numerous then these.
do sometime exceed many Galenists in many great and perilous diseases; yet no
conscientious man will ever approve their uncertain, bold, rash, dangerous,
impious practice of Physic, wherewith they put the sick in danger of death by
doubtful and uncertain experiments.

We should always be employed for the good of our ne^ghbour and avoid idleness
because it is the Devils cushon, the mother of vice and the stepmother of
virtue. Beginning with small things we should by little and little go on to
greater things. By the contempt of sciences we lose the good and get the evil.
That this mischief may be prevented for time to come, and the brand of
Physicians, by reason of the outcry against their uncertain art, be taken
away, it would be wisely done and worth their labor if those who study
Physic, who are the Priests and Ministers of the Muses, and are married to
their study in a godly wedlock, in whom pride and envy have not yet taken root,
and who prefer labor and sweat (for which God is engaged to bestow all things)
before idleness and sloth, which most men so much desire, because the
Paracelsian Theory of Chymicall Physic as yet is wrapped up in perplexities and
some obscurities which are not easy to all, that therefore they would not be
so shy to black their hands, but learn of Paracelsus and other Chemists to
prepare and make up their Medicines, but to observe the method of Hippocrates
in curing diseases, as it agrees with their own Judications and Inventions:
For by this means these two Schools of Old and New Physic may be reconciled
without contradiction, and consist very well in a Physician without any error
or notorious scandal, after that overgrown damnable Custom of our time is
worn out, according to which men use indifferently to dislike and reject the
good with the bad.

The best and chiefest Foundation of Physic is faith in God, and love to our
neighbor, if this be wanting all Art is nothing worth. Paracelsus would not
have Physic be concealed.
This also is diligently to be considered, an honest and able Physician (in whom
besides a fidutiall fear of God and Love to his sick neighbor, a singular
Conscience and Experience is also requisite) laying aside all pride and
covetousness, if he administer any thing it is to be accounted of as the hand
of God; but if he be a wretched Miscreant, and an Ignoramus, what he gives is
to be looked upon as poison. And though great part of Physicians, who cheat us
of other men's good things, cannot endure that Physic with its preparations
should premiscuously be imparted to all sorts of men, for fear if it should be
made common, or as they say Profaned, they should lose their gains, for it is a
foolish conceit of the frantic vulgar sort, who think that a Secret loses
its virtue when it is made known: Nevertheless those greedy covetous
gaine-getters will cease their murmuring and forbear to curse and wish my eyes
out for my good will, when they consider that neither God nor Nature has made
every man a Physician, Every one has not the gift, not is he fit to be a
Physician; and though all experiences are secrets, yet Novices know not the
Dose and true quantity in which the virtue of Physic consists: for if we
take too much Saffron or Treacle it is poison, if too little it will do no
good. Thus it will be the experience of the Physician only.
though he may rightly administer some known Physic to the Patient according
to art and the methodicall and set proportion or quantity of the Dose (to say
nothing of other circumstances requisite to a godly learned Physician) as one
saddle will not fit every horse, nor can a child handle his weapon like a
fencer. That which is the proper duty of a sincere, true and expert Physician
only, who is more religiously and holily instructed, in the exhibition of
their medicines they will follow the steps of pious and venerable antiquity;
and imitate that most commendable and religious custom of the Hermetick
Physicians, who always use to pray for a blessing upon their endeavors,
striving to be equal to those who will not take in hand the smallest matter
without Divine Invocation; Whosoever uses any Creature without craving a
blissing, God imputes it to him for no other than theft and rapine. We who
profess CHRIST ought to administer in that Wonderful Name of JESU: for so the
Doctor of the Gentiles commands the Colossians, saying; Whatsoever ye do in
word or deed, Col. 3.17. and 1 Cor. 10.31.
do all in the NAME of the LORD JHSVH Christ, giving thanks to him and to God
by him. Gods blessing is to be obtained by prayer; Call upon me in the day of
thy trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, says our Creator.

First, then before we give or take any Physic we are to pray to the good and
great God that the Physic which he has ordained as the means, may work
Divine and healthful effects, that his name may be glorified.

Secondly, after we have recovered and made them well, let us never cease to
give him hearty thanks, in respect of gratitude, as it is to be considered in
it self as a duty, and for time to come to avoid the heavy wrath of God
against unthankful men.

These two points are scarce thought of by most Physicians, which is the chief
cause of their ill success, and then all the blame must be laid upon the Art.

It is also to be observed, That, as for example, though a Cathartick medicine
does work equally effectually in a knave as it does in an honest man (which God
permits for his praise and glory, and to make his mercy known) yet the end
in both may be far different and unlike, for it may be healthful to the one,
and hurtful to the other: For what medicine soever it be that is administered
and taken without imploring the Divine Grace, Ecel. 39.28. etc.
does become a greater inconvenience of a more grievous disease that will
certainly befall the impenitent unbeliever.

Here also it is to be considered, that sometimes the sick person is not
recovered by the best and fittest medicines that can be applied, and that for
these eight causes, Viz.

Paracels. lib. de resuscitatione naturalium, sol. 295.
First, Because the Term of Life approaches, which cannot be prolonged by any
art or help of Man. No Medicine can preserve the corruptible body from death,
the wages and punishment of sin; but there is one thing that hinders
corruption, renews youth, and prolongeth the short life, as in the
Patriarchs: But although, as we shall show anon, the life may be shortened or
lengthned, yet by the immutable decree of the Eternal Law, we must of
necessity die at last in respect of the punishment of sin, least with Plato we
conclude a recesse after such a time, for the conjunction of diverse things
necessarily implies a dissolution; Our domestic enemy which we beat about usis
the cause of our death. The Curse in the Creature is removed by death. Eccl.
10.11. and 14.18. and 41.5.
And in this case the universal and chiefest medicine is of no effect, because
no industry or skill of Artist or Nature can perpetuate the wedlock of life and
death, which by an immutable necessity is destined to a divorce; for the Laws
of Nature are inviolable: we are not therefore to desire, much less may we
think to find any help beyond that utmost bound which God has set us.

Secondly, Because through the ignorance of unskilful Physicians, and their
naughty medicines, the sick is brought to that pass, that the disease is
corrupt, pernicious, and incurable, so that he cannot be repaired or recovered
by good medicines: And to such commonly the Chemists are sent for, (...).
whom Plutarch calls Physicians of Trophilus, who said that he was a complete
Physician who could judge what might be done, and what not; such never make use
of their noble and undeserved Remedies, with a vaunting ostentation to their
disgrace, when the sick is past all hope of man's help, for it becomes a wise
man to prevent (an error) rather than repent of it: Let them take heed also
they mix not their own medicines with others poison, least the miscarriage be
ascribed to the good and the recovery to the bad, for it is a lamentable thing
to see the cursed hatred of some Physicians, who rather than they will allow
another his due honor, who is more able than themselves, to maintain their
tottering credit, will utterly cast away the Patient, who might be recovered by
another skill, such as these men commonly (and justly) call Honest Hangmen.

Thirdly, Because the Physician is sent for too late, when Nature is overcome
and the disease has got the mastery: Otherwise if the Physician had Seasonably
cast fit leed of Physic into the sick man's body, resisting the disease at
first, no doubt but by Gods blessing the expected fruit of health would have
sprung up.

Fourthly, Because the sick does not follow directions: For so it is many
times, that the sick lays the fault on the Physic or Physician when he
himself committed it by his disorderly living contrary to the Golden law of
the Locrians recorded by Aelianus.

Fifthly, Because some men's Natures or peculiar qualityes are not so easy to be
cured; As we see some extraordinary hard knotty wood so much degenerate from
its natural softness that it can hardly be cloven and very often the Time or
Season, together with the bad inclination of the Astra's is very cross and
contrary to the health: In cures respect is to be had to the season, for in
summer one course is to be taken, in winter another, in Autumn another.
For whatsoever is cured before the time is subject to a relaps it is a very
instant of the Season or time of the harvest only that makes a sure and
certain cure: A ripe pear or apple will fall of its own accord, but before we
shake the tree in vain to get it down. If those things be not considered,
especially in the cure of Astrall diseases, all things are of no moment, and we
go about the work to no perpose Physicians also should make it their care that
they and their Physic do not more hurt than the disease it self, therefore
let them never advise with that which tends to the destruction of soul and
body, but make it their chief care that they do no hurt when they can do no
good. So shall they keep a good conscience, which is the constant joy of the
heart.

Sixthly, Because diseases are come to their appointed period, and then by the
Laws of Nature there can be no recovery, as in perfect, absolute and complete
bituminous, Colar, stony and sandy coagulations: For of such like consummated
diseases their is no cure, as we so in those that are born blind and deaf.
For what Nature has once taken away the Physician can by no means restore,
None can reform the errors of Nature.
if the substance of the body be misshapen, and the parts thereof misplaced from
the conception, there is no setting of them right again.

Physicians should take nothing of the poor for their Physic; Charity toward
the sick should be their most eminent vertae.
Seventhly, As the base nigardlynesse of the sick (though there is no money
more honestly got, and more unwillingly parted with) make the Physician
negligent in his office; So also many times the sick parties doubt, distrust,
and unbelief of the Physicians diligence and care, does either retard the
effect of the Physic, or altogether hinder the endeavor of the Physician, to
say nothing of those who despise the Order of God, and will take no Physic in
the greatest extremity, but think to be made well by God (though indeed he be
the only Physician) without the use of Means by which he works. We ought not
to resist the Ordinance of God: Ecclesiastic: 38.
There is a twofold Physic; Visible or created, and Invisible even the WORD of
GOD: The Physician and the Physic are the very true mercy of God.
It is by the WORD of GOD therefore that any one whosoever is restored to his
health, he that despises his WORD, despises Physic, and so on the contrary;
for he that says Physic is worth nothing, does upon the matter affirm that
there is no God.

^^merry heart is a continual feast.
Moreover, as has been said, the Mind of the Patient being raised with much
confidence does take the Physic with a stronger desire: Therefore seeing
sorrow is the venom of Life, Eccl. 38.19, 20. and 30.25.
it was not without cause that Hippocrates in his Aphorisms speaks so much
of the Confidence of the sick in the Physician and his Physic. That Physician
does most good of whom most ^^ve a good opinion.
A firm Faith, undoubted Hope, Love and Confidence toward the Physician and his
Physic, does very much conduce to health, yea sometimes more than the
Physician and his Physic too. Natural Faith (I speak not of the Faith of
Grace by Christ) inborn of God the Father in the first Creation, which is our
IMAGINATION, is so powerful that it can both cause and cure diseases, as is
plain in time of Pestilence, when out of his own proper Imagination, from fear
and terror it breeds that Basilisk of Heaven, which intoxicateth the
microcosmicall Firmament from his own superstition, even as the faith of the
Patient assisteth thereto. The Natural Plague becomes Firmamental and
supernatural, that is to say, when the Iliaster or Evestrum of the Sun,
provoked by the sins of men to wrath and punishment, infecteth and punishes
mortal men through the influx of the Stars, The Stars are the rods of the
Astra's. Paracels. tract. 2. depestili^a^e.
by reason of their offenses, because of the singular participarion it has
with the Evester of Man, nor is there any medicine so potent that can resist
and help against it, for by its invenomed malignity and sinister aspect of the
incendiary Stars it infecteth the Mummy and Sulphur of the microcosm, Man, who
hiddenly possesses all innate macrocosmicall poisons.

The Will and Imagination of Man is the mother of the plague; so that a Man by
his Imagination may infect a whole country with the Plague.
Such is the force of the Sydereall spirit upon the body, that whithersoever it
imagines and dreameth it carries and leads the very body up and down with
it, as we see in Noctambulaters. All things are possible ^o him that believes,
because Faith certifieth all things that are uncertain: God can no otherwise
be overcome but by Faith; whosoever believes in God he works by God, and to
God all things are possible, but how that comes to pass cannot be searched
out. Faith is at least a work, I mean his work in whom we believe. The
Cogitations surpass and go beyond the Operations of the Astra's and Elements;
For when we think, and have faith in our cogitations, then faith does the work,
but without faith we can do nothing. Faith gives the Imagination, Read
Paracel of invisible diseases, and the efficacy of the faith of Nature, which
by God can do all things Naturally.
the Imagination gives a Sydus or Constellation, the Sydus, (by reason of the
Matrimony with the Imagination) gives the effect or work.

To mix Faith with the Physic is that which gives spirit to the Physic, the
spirit gives the knowledge of the Physic, the Physic gives health. Thence it
follows that a Physician springs out of Faith, The Imagination is like
pitch, it easily sticks and quickly earche^h she.
according to his Faith so does the Spirit further and assist him, I mean the
Spirit of Nature or the Sydus of the medicine. A man many times through the
Faith of Imagination does that which the best Physicians with their chiefest
medicaments cannot do: Many times also that Faith or persuasion cures more
than the very efficary or virtue of the medicine which the Physician
administreth, Therefore ^ai^h D^^^^en, (...) b^^^veth to (...) p^int and
prom^schealth in and to the sick and not to (...) off H^pe though he des^^ire.
as we saw some years since in that famous Anwalding Panacaea, and may now see
in that new medicinal Spring which brake out this year in the coasts of
Misnia and Bohemia, unto which almost an incredible number of sick and weak
people daily resort: For which there can be no other reason given but the
constant excessive affection of them that use it, which power is in the very
soul of him that takes the medicine, when without any fear or sinister
imaginations, it is carried to some great excess of its desire. For the
rational soul rouzed up and inflamed with a vehement imagination overcomes
even Nature it self, and by her strong affections renueth many things in her
own body, and causes sickness or health, not only in her own body, but in
others also: He that falls mad by the biting of a mad dog will have the shape
of dogs appearing in his urine: Thus the lust and longing of a pregnant woman
works upon another body, when through oblivion of her self she imprints the
mark of the thing longed for upon the child in her womb, as saffron colors
water; For by her Imagination she forms the infant, as a Potter does the
clay. Fear, trembling, and appetite, are the chief cause of the fancy,
estimation, and imagination, of women with child: Therefore when she begins to
imagine, There are impressions of the inferior (...) Astr^^^.
then the Astra's of the microcosmicall Firmament, or the Astra's of the humane
Mind are moved with the phant^cy, estimation, and imagination, just as the
external Astra's of the microcosmicall Firmament, where the Astra's ascend and
descend every moment till the impression be made, in which impression the
Astra's of the Imagination of the great bellied women do print an Influence
and impression upon the child, as Engravers mark their work with an iron stamp.

Therefore it is better the body be sick, than the soul: good words are the
Physicians of a sick Soul. In lib. de Anima. The body is corrupted by the
passions of the Soul^ and the mind is nor impassible of the ^^^tions of the
body. This Natura^^ Faith (...) the Wi^^^ (...) the Creator, bestowed upon the
Creature tha^ was made after his likeness, although it can do all things; yet
ought it to keep and observe the property of the Image. All things are possible
to him that believes and is willing; All things are impossible to the
unbeliever and rebellious: as he thinks and imagine^h the thing to be, so it
must be. Unbelief is the greatest and most powerful enemy of Faith: For the
Imagination joined with Faith can do all things. The Fares also make diseases
incurable, when we perceive by the deny all of such help which we expected from
the ministering of fi^ medicines.
Thus it is manifest that the affections of Mind when they are most vehement are
able to deprive of Life, as in histories we read: And this is well known to
every man, that many through overmuch joy or too much sorrow, by too much love
or hatred, have dyed, and many times by the like passions have been cured of
long diseases; because, as Avicen says, Nature obeys the cogitations and
vehement desires of the Soul, and when the spirit is affected, the body in
which the spirit lies hid, is affected also.

Again, the aforesaid Natural Faith its efficacy manifested it self in the
woman that had the bloody issue, and in the Centurion. Man who was created
after the likeness and image of God, and savouring as it were of a Celestial
Majesty, has great things in his hands and power, Genesis 32.25, 26. It is well
known to all what great matters a constant Credulity in an elevated or raised
Mind can do by a strong imagination, even so great, that in false intense
opinions and operations, it works miracles But haesitation of Credulity and
diffidence do not only shatter and break the virtue or force of the operating
mind, which is the mean between both extremes, but do also weaken every work,
as well in Superstition as in true Religion, and enervate the desired effect
even of the most powerful Experiments.

And that which is here diligently to be observed, Mar. 13.58. Mark 6.5. (...).
our Savior, as Holy Writ says, was not able to work miracles in Capernaum,
because they believed not, but with their incredulity and false faith resisted
him. For as man can done nothing without God, Mat. 9.1, 2.
so likewise God will do nothing without Man, as his Organ or Instument, God
and the Creature both together, neither without the other. Therefore no Man
ought to will without God, because no Man can Be without God, in whom we are,
and live, and are moved.

Eighthly, Least the sick party recovering should commit greater sins against
God, his neighbor and himself to the loss of his Soul, for every sickness is
as it were an expiation or propitiatory of sacrifice, either the just Judge by
this Divine innate revenge, penance and scourge does call him to amendment of
life for the time to come, or that by this Fatherly visitation and imposition
of the cross which he ought patiently to endure, he may be a pattern to
himsefe and his neighbor for the more fervent Fear and Worship of God, for God
many times permits some men to fall into many and great sicknesses, whose
minds have been greivously infected and distempered by the gladsome and
pleasant health of the flesh, together with the continuation of their sins, to
the loss of their Eternal health: For health is nothing worth, seeing it is
but condemnation to us, if our sins be not forgiven. Moreover, sins weaken the
powers of the Soul, and make it impotent to the Natural Government of the
body: Therefore the powers of the body are enfeebled and hasten to death. Job
33.19, 20
Or else the sick is held under this yoke and bridle of infirmity, as by a
wholesome Purgatory (though few are reformed by their sickness) to the duty of
Piety at least, whilst that loose licentiousness of sinning is lopt and cut
off, which he would abuse if he should live and be well any longer.

In these diseases that arise from the resisting Astrall, impression, and wrath
of God, A Physician begins in appeasing Gods wrath. Job 33.26.
no Corporal medicine (because God has shut the doors of Nature) can do any
good, but only Celestial and spiritual, viz. by serious repentance, heartily
to bewail the sins that we have committed, to allay the provoked wrath of God
by Amendment of life and Reconciliation to our neighbor, to be reconciled to
God through our Savior the Celestial Physician of our Souls, and to submit
our Will to the most righteous pleasure of the Divine Will, devoutly, patiently
and humbly in all things, with a most assured perticipation of Divine Mercy.
Paracelsus calls them Deal diseases, which are from the Ens of God, who
inflicteth all such diseases, and who alone works by good and bad men; the
Cure, says he, is by Faith, or when the purging is perfected the Physician may
then try his skill. The Causes of those diseases that are of the Ens of God are
unsearchable, here the cure must be sought in Faith, not in Nature; as also in
the cure of Deal diseases, that are of the Ens of God, or in the deificall or
faithful cure, the predestinate Term or period according to the Divine
pleasure is to be observed.

CHAP. VI. Of that one only chief Medicine of the most Ancient Philosophers.
This occult Minerva of Philosophy and this only most precious Jewel is
inestimable.
FUrthermore I shall here supply what yet pertains to that chief and universal
Phylosophical Physic, than which a greater gift of wisdom we never read that
divine bounty bestowed on man; Not excepting so much as the very Reasonable
Soul, which, next unto God in Heaven and Earth, cannot consider or find out any
thing under Heaven bestowed upon Man more admirable, more sublime, more noble
or excellent than this most secret Secret of secret Secrets, by which even
wonders, yea all things may be done, both as to the Plannets of inferior
Astronomy, whose imperfection and dross it causes to vanish by piercing them
with its most powerful impressions (for it segregateth all extraneous
Sulphureity and impure Terrestreity from metallic and Humane bodies) as also
to the recovering covering and preserving of the languishing and lost health of
the Human body, by its fiery vigor, besides infinite other things; to say
nothing now of the Magical and super Celestial use when the Gonetick influence
of the beams of the Sun and Moon and the fourth revolution is finished upon its
native Earth, See the Mo^ade of John Dee of London, and Roger Bacon.
it is endowed absolutely with all created Influentiall power as well in the
Elementall world, as in the Celestial or super celestial it is the most
wonderful of all wonders, for as God is wonderful in all his works, so does
he usually hide his wonderful Gifts in wonderful men. All antiquity, also all
Verity of all Nations and Languages in the tradition of this doctrine, the
consent of all those most learned men who in every age have lived with the
greatest admiration and praise of many, do bear witness that this is so:
Moreover, besides the ocular inspectation and certification of many of our
time, it is easy to determine this from their writings, which are woven of so
many Hieroglyphicall, Magical, and Mathematical Coverings in so great and
certain a series of Phylosophicall Truth.

Who then would not admire and embrace so great a Gift of the greatest GOD, the
immortal price of his study, pains and virtue, which to the Pious and holy
Philosophers dignified by Nature and Education, does warrant and assure a
removal of old age and renewing of youth, perpetual health, and honest food
and raiment, without hinderance to our neighbor, not by usury and fraud, nor
cheating wares, nor by oppression of the poor (as most of our rich men are now
enriched) but by industry of work and labor of the hands?

God forbid therefore, that, sleighting the example of the Ancients, I should
either deny such precious Wonders of GOD, and darken the wonderful powers of
Nature (for he that despises knowledge, him the glorious and high God
despises for rejecting this most true Art) or which is worse, to revile them
as the most do, as if they were but the speculations of idle men, or the empty
dreams and fictions of a sottish and doting mind, who yet among wise men do
but betray the weakness of their judgment and openly call witness of their
folly: Those therefore that revile and are ignorant of these divine Banquets,
whom the Philosophers call fools, are not to be admitted to them, those also
that dote in their Fantastical dreams are utterly to be excluded.

Here some are listening, whether trusting to my own ingenuity I dare boast also
of the preparation hereof in this place, or whether fot ostentation sake I
ambitiously arrogate to my self the absolute knowledge of this Art, Here I
would be taken as an Index, or as one standing at the door to direct others the
way they should go, whom I may profit more then my self; or as a whetstone to
encourage them on.
as those covetous Mountebanks and greedy Phylosophists use to do.

But because I promised the Courteous Reader a little before, that I would set
down at least those things which I had made trial of, I was unwilling in this
place openly and most wickedly (which is not the part of a wise man, but of
cheaters) to falsify any thing concerning the undoubted certainty of this
matter.

For this Sacred and Divine Art and Science, not of Sophisters, but
Philosophers, which the ignorant basely and wretchedly condemn of falsehood (for
doubtless among all Arts, as well Liberal as Mechanic, none abounds with
so many Imposters as this) does deserve to be reverenced for the wonderful
Secrets that are in it, and to be preferred before all other earthly Sciences
by those that are true Physicians, who being enlightened with the Spirit of
Divine Wisdom, content and furnished with honest food and raiment (for it
cannot be that a poor or covetous man should spend his time in the study of
Philosophy) do with religious veneration pray unto God after the example of
Solomon, not for wealth, but wisdom, that he would open to them the Magazine
of Divine knowledge.

And who measure their happiness at least by Heaven, and the Love of God the
giver of every good thing.

Who also are moved and spurred on to search it out by the love of Secrets and
of Nature, according to the Divine Grace.

And who through a desire of getting knowledge, without any foolish hope of
gain or affectation of vain glory, By Wisdom the heart is made constant.
do in the fear of God refuse no honest, constant and possible labor of the
hands.

And lastly, who without any malignant intention, neglecting the spring of dry
humane thirst, do most humbly with fear and trembling desire to use such great
gifts to that End which belongs to the Master of Nature, to wit, the Praise and
Honor of God, and the good of his needy neighbor, in a constant Taciturnity,
without pride, which provokes the envy of all men.

They that carry about their Treasure and use it publicly. Job 22.25.
By ^hese, I say, among the Children of the golden doctrine (whose gold is the
Omnipotent God) that most rare Good, which is to be preferred before all riches,
is justly and of right to be searched out for the health sake of men, who
quitting all other business and employment, and leaving the mettalls to those
who with an impious hunger, and a thirsty and insatiable desire of being rich,
making no difference between right and wrong, do horribly vex and torment
themselves night and day, to the great hazard both of body and soul.

A Philosopher must covet Nothing but Wisdom, which is conversant about Divine
things; therefore a true Philosopher never sought after nor desired riches, but
is rather delighted with the Mysteries of Nature, for verily he that is adept
or has attained the same may carry about with him in his purse, not the worth
of one Kingdom only, but the wealth almost of the whole World, and in God and
with God posesse as a Lord all things of the whole World, and in the Fear and
service of God command the whole Creation. But that gift is acquired, neither
by wrath nor forced violence, but either by the immediate inspiration of the
most High, or by the expert ocular demonstration of a wise Master in this Art.

That without all controversy this is so, no man that does apply himself to
Philosophy will deny. But who among many thousands is it, who while he seeks
this very knowledge by a certain and subduing judgment and due means, to whom
the Stars are so benign, that he can by another diligence and endeavor pass
through the porch and gate of the Heavens into the Oratory or Chapel of
Apollo, and get to the top of the mount of Chemistry?

But where is that Egyptian Bird to be found, that we may commend such a
Phaenix? See Paracel. in his fragments of Physic, which are to be referred to
the 4 Tome fol. 311. No man has entrance hereunto bu^ by Divine revelation, or
by word of month from him that has the Secret, and teaches it while he
lives. There is no perfection of things without the help of Divinity, and its
demonstration.
For who durst lend a hand to another herein, except he hat for a long time, and
by much experience known him to be singularly eminent in the Fear of god,
Holiness of life, pure and Harpocraticall Faith?

He that desires this Art, must not be a slave to other men's judgment, nor
live upon their purse, and must retire himself, For

Praebet amicorum, nil nisi copia damnum.
Too much acquantance hinder them
Who labor to find out this Gem.
For certainly that morose inhability even of our companion, the arrogant
loquacity, the pertinacious incredulity, the envy and detestable infidelity and
an Epicurean indignity, does hinder and much disturb the effect in any
operation. Reverend antiquity, with one consent acknowledges that never any
from the first man to the last could find ont the Divine secreu of that Art by
(...) even Natural ingenuity, according to Nat^^^ll Reason only, nor according
to Experience, se^ng it is something Divine and hid, and that which is above
Reason, even as the perpetual and tedious pains especially of those who have
labored and toyled to find out this knowledge by daily reading and comparing of
Authors, do witness; But that the glorious God and most blessed bestower of
all graces has reavealed and made it plain to his faithful wise ones,
Ecclesiastic. 38.
to such as fear and honor him, that they might understand, meditate upon and
love his omnipotent goodness, and by glorifying him in his wonders and all his
power and virtues, serving him without any blemish, vice or sin in his
holiness, and true Righteousness, they might see how much he has done for
men of good will: And so finally they that are inflamed with a most fervent
love of piety and Gratitude might find him that is worthy of infinite thanks,
who is infinite in mercy, whose most holy and Fearful name be blessed for ever
and ever.

The one only and true way to all Secrets is to have recourse to God the author
of all good, according to our Saviors command.
These things seriously considered, no man will wonder if (when men seek the
Kingdom of God, and study to find out the Celestial Stone in the last place)
among so many thousands that seek, there is not one to whom the doors of Nature
are unlockt, and that has the Divine bolt removed, the Will no doubt of the
Omnipotent God resisting the same, who tries the Hearts and Reins of men, who
gives his gifts to whom he will, and withdraws them from whom be pleases.
For this W^^^ is not in the power of him that wills, but in ^^e will of God
that shows mercy, who knows that it is not expedient for all to their
salvation, that they should have Honors and riches with their health.

And though happily some one or other may get the key of the Phylosophicall
Garden (as I know some that have) yet because the Gate was bolted, that is, the
Divine Grace and Benediction was denied and did resist; they could never open,
much less enter, and gather those desired fruits of the Hermetick Tree, and
eat the most sweet kernells of this mystery. Thus some Impostors in our age
who right or wrong by unlawful means having got the most true Phylosophycall
Ferment or Leaven (but prepared by others) have not been able to improve or
multiply it any further by reason of the ignorance of the principle or
beginning, for verily this most holy science never admitted any such unskilful
Thraso's into its inner rooms.

This is that work that is hid under the robe of the Phylosophicall Virgin,
which even one brother would not teach another; and therefore it is to no
purpose to tempt an Adept Philosopher with promises of rewards, favor, or any
other kind of respects that can be imagined, to part with it.

This is that Secret laid up and buried in the most secret Treasury of the Mind
and Memory, concerning which the genuine and more occult Philosophers (who
fearing the malediction of God, and execration of those Sophe's or wise men
which they leave to their posterity, God would not manifest this knowledge to
all, to avoid offense.
do study and strive to be harsh and rugged, least they should disclose their
more abstruse or dark sense to any, and expose the most noble Gemm of this
Science to hogs and swine) have in a wise and ingenious craft covenanted and
sworn they would never write it plainly in any Book: Nor has any of them who
kept this knowledge in the secret of their heart, made it known to any but such
who had an understanding allegorically. For doubtless that liberty is granted
to the Philosophers, that because they are made Lords of Things, they should
also have power to dispense or give Names at their pleasure, This is not
believed, but being proved with the gain of labor, toil and hazard, it is made
plain toward the end which proves the work. On this the hinge of the whole
business turns, as Gold animated by the Salt of Niture is made the chief
subject of the Philosophers metallic Physics
and cloth their children as they listed. Though True Philosophers exactly and
with greatest ingenuity, have mutually engaged and set themselves upon one and
the same thing; they that till the field have ever observed it, for certainly
in their precepts, as in a glass, it has been sufficiently made known to men
of a wise understanding, who are chosen of God to such mysteries, worthy men,
and sworn in this Art. But they have attributed it to the glorious God, who
according to his good pleasure may inspire whom he will, and deny it to whom he
please: Nevertheless religously affirming, that none can attain the desired
end (though they slight all particulars, which naturally do altogether want
the virtue of tincturing, unless they proceed from the first fountain) before
the fat or blood of the Sun and the Dew of the Lunary, be joined into one body
by the circular wheel of the Elements with the help of Art and Nature in the
form of an Hexagon, Read Genesis 1.27, 28. Hermes his Table, Morienes, Alan.
Rodargir. Monad. T^evisan. Lull.
which can never be done except the most High God please, who alone of his
special mercy graciously bestows this singular gift of the Holy Spirit, and
impreciable price, both to whom and when he sees good. And to whom he will not
bestow any of his Treasures, let that man use what Arts soever he can, yet
shall he never get any thing against the Will of God; for the Spirit proceeds
from Grace, who inspireth whom he will.

Seeing therefore all man's endeavor is but vain except God prosper it (unless
any with the loss of this most undoubted Truth, Levit. 26.20.
will deny that God is the moderator of the universe, and will set himself in
opposition to the Will of his gainsaying Creator with a rash gigantick,
sacrilegious boldness, and with manifest danger incur the indignation of the
Divine Majesty) I cannot wonder enough, that in our age many great men, Great
men commit great errors. Psalm. 25.14. Prove. 3.32. Wisd. 1.4. Eccl. 43.32, 33.
wasting their time and estates, should suffer themselves to be cheated and
deceived, with the greedy world by the golden promises of circumforaneous,
vicious, and most lying Impostors, against their own conscience, not
considering that without the liberal and right noble arts (of which those
Phylosophists and Imposters are altogether destitute, having not tasted so much
as a drop of the Springs of Nature) no perfect perception of Mysteries can be
attained to.

Those Gymnosophists with their Fantastical and Frantic inventions, enrich
the ears of credulous men that they may make their pockets poor, they promise
great matters and feign that they can do all things, but their unwary
disciples get nothing from them, but after three or four cheats, to be again
deceived by fresh and most subtle juggling, deceit and fraud; whose company we
should avoid even as the most raging torments of hell.

And that which is the chiefest thing of all, the Wisdom of the Lord, whose
mystery is only with them that Fear him, Great gain is the scope of
sophistical craft, because Dust and Ashes is the end of such smock-sellers.
enters not into such wicked and unworthy souls who have spent the whole
course of their life in searching out Vanities and Deceits, and of set purpose
maliciously have deceived almost all the world, with their guilfull devices of
painting white and red, and pargetting women's faces.

Thus these men playing away and losing the story of Pandora, at length nothing
else falls to their share but what Alphidius foretold should happen to them,
that when their brains grow giddy, instead of the Tincture they should find
only the color, instead of the Hermetick Stone a pibble or glass, and instead
of great Treasure and riches nothing but coals and ashes.

Piety is the most necessary key to the knowledge of all Secrets. See
Rodargirus BRITTO SARMATUS his verse in Zodi^co Pisciu^^ against those
sacrilegious soldiers who threatningly and malepertly rush into the Vestry of
Philosophy. It is not expedient to reveal it to any carnal man, because thou will be accuised for making known so great a Secret. He that publishes this
Art, let him die an evil death, says Lully, because it is a secret to be
given and revealed by God alone who has created Nature, and no other, for he
will reveal it to whom he will, and to whom it does belong to be revealed, and
not to others, because it is the Gift of God and not of any mortal Man. Job
34.11. Prove. 24.12. Apoc. 2.23. and 22.12. Es. 3.10, 11 Jer. 17.10. and 32.19.
Ezekiel. 33.20.
And who would not admire this efficacious transmutatory virtue of these
Impostors, which makes wise men fools, strong men weak, rich men poor, and poor
bankrupt men desperate and vagabond beggars?

But as the envy of Philosophers is not against the Children of Art and
Science, who seek not their own but Gods glory, and who have lived to the
praise and honor of GOD, the good of their Neighbor, and the Salvation of
their own soul: so he that is an Adept and complete Philosopher, a keeper of
Gods Secrets, and is conformed to the dignification of his work, after he by
the Blessing of God has happily labored like Hermes more then twenty years,
fearing to offend the Divine Majesty, will be less afraid to die an hundred
most cruel deaths, and endure all manner of miseries and punishment, rather
then by any means, whether through wrath or what force soever shall be used, to
publish to the wicked enemies of the Children of Art and Science, or to such as
are unworthy of it, this greatest and richest Terrene Treasure, the Perfect
Benefit or good gift of GOD, descending from the Father of Lights (as a Kingdom
that will suffer no Com-peer) from the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, that
terrible and fearful avenger of every unrighteous person, who has entrusted
him only to keep it, which Secret would by evil men, with the ruin of the
whole world, be abused to judgment or condemnation of an Eternal curse,
because he knows most certainly that he shall be most grievously punished
with the damnation of his soul, and loss of eternal salvation, by the Holy
Trinity, and Christ the just and severe Judge of quick and dead, except he can
give a good account of his Stewardship and the Talent committed to him, at the
formidable and terrible Tribunal, before which we shall all stand, even of that
Greatest and Eternal Judge (whose Terrible and Ineffable Majesty all mortal
men ought to stand in fear of) who at the great Judgment day will examine our
deserts, who will justify the works of none that has done evil, and deprive
none that has done well, of his reward.

When, I say, in that Terrible day he shall hold the exeltrees of the poles
from turning about any longer, and the motion of the Elements shall cease, then
all things shall run to ruin, and the heat of the Center united to the heat of
Sun shall set all corruption of the Elements on fire, when every evil and
impure thing shall be cast like lead with the damned into Hell, Apoc. 20.10.
The end of the world is by fire. There is a Sea of glass mingled with fire.
Apoc. 15.2. The property of fire is to separate the impurity of the Elements.
Read Isa. Holand in opere minerali. Romans 8.19, 23.
where all things shall be tormented for ever, yet not consumed, with
unquenchable brimston like molten glass, continually burning and never wasting.

And all that is of the Virtues and pure Truth and Nature of the Elements,
which fear not the Fire of Heaven shall remain like a pure, clear,
incorruptible and fixed Essence in a serene resplendent Chrystalin Earth, and
be for ever at rest with the happy saved Ones, carried upward like an Eagle, or
as Smoke excited by the Fire: For when God shall change all things by making
them new according to his will, and shall make them all like Crystal, then
the motions of the Supernatural Nature shall abide in those things without
corruption.

I wish the Great Ones of our time who are sufficiently enriched with Gold and
Silver from the revenues of their subjects, would bestow some part of their
wealth upon men piously and consciensciously learned and skillful in Chemistry,
and that they would set every man his task, as he is fit for it, and as he
shall desire it, to find out one out of those Three Families of Nature, that
out of the same things in which all Physic is founded, viz. Animalls,
Vegetables, and Mineralls, they might fetch out the most choice Physical
Mysteries, All beauty, corporeal and incorporeall is nothing else but the
splendour of the Divine countenance and Light set in created things, glittering
and sparkling out through fair bodies, and making all that love it to be
amazed at it like the Image of God. For so much Light as a King has in him, so
much Majesty has he. Quantum Luminis, tantum Numinis.
separating them by Fire into their Three First (things.)

The Phylosophicall Conclave of any Prince furnished with such most precious
and wholesome a Treasure, might compare even with the riches of Pactolus, for
questionless it would delight, and, like a Loadstone, attract the eyes of the
spectators to contemplate the open riches of secret Nature: From the beholding
of whose pleasant and insatiable beauty, what recreation I pray of the eyes,
and what admirable elevation of the mind would it cause to the Creator
himself? To behold here the most choice and select store of the Vegetables
answering to the members of our body by an Harmonicall Anatomy, discovered in a
wonderful and most acceptable variety in their Three First (principles) with
their garments put off; made naked and visible: There (to see the like) of
Animalls; yonder (to behold the same) of Mineralls and Mettalls, viz. the
TRIUNE naked DIANA shining with so many colors of variety and always with a
Triple Form in every classis or distribution, a most limpid or clear MERCURIAL,
a most garnished SULPHUREAN or oily, and a most bright pure SALINE form, who
otherwise covers her self from the dishonest looks of mortals, and desires
not to come into the company of men in this worldly scene with her veil: A
work truly becoming a great King and Prince.

Francis the First King of France, the greatest Favorer of Philosophers and
learned men, intended to go about one of the Three, but was prevented by death.

And (the sole fountain being reserved to it self for its own uses, but by
drawing forth spare streams) is it not a work of Humanity and Liberality, and
the duty of an Almoner in this great Hospital of Piety most worthy of all
praise and eternal memory, to do good to God, with this Talent, in our poor
neighbor and his members?

By the Light of God, secret and hidden things are revealed and made manifest.
For without him no good and perfect thing can be attained. Psalm. 145.19. Prove.
10.24.
Without question the Father of Lights (from only as from the Efficient,
Principal, and Final Cause of all Creatures and Operations, every good Gift
upon amendment of Life is by asking, seeking, and knocking, to be obtained)
would load this pious and laudable purpose heap upon heap with far greater and
perhaps unlookt for blessings (for he performs the will of them that Fear
him) to them that proceed this way in the Fear of God, and love of their
neighbor.

For this only is the Kings highway, not only to come all the desired
Secrets of Nature, but that which is the chiefest thing of all it leads even
to the very workmaster of the universe, Divine confidence never left any
without help to do good. He that knows One knows All things, he that Earneth
many things learneth nothing Eccl. 34.12, 13, 14. Blessedness consists in
the apprehension of the chiefest good. God is the Immutable Rest, after which
every Creature does gasp and groan with all its endeavor. Levit. 25. Tob.
12.13. Eccl. 2.5. Prove 17.3. We cannot get the Victory and Crown of Patience
without striving and fighting. Per Angusta i^u^ ad Angusta
by which ONE infinite OCEAN of all Divine GOODNESS through Regeneration
(alterity being swallowed up of unity) in the Sabath of Sabbaths or when the
eternal Jubilee is come for which we were created, we do by consent of divine
Clemency, attain the scope and true mark in the full fruition whereof we shall
hereafter be delighted, just like a miserable Exile and pilgrim (tossed up and
down through various hazards, hardships, streights, and miserable sufferings)
restord again to his rightful Country: for he deserves not sweet, who has
not tasted of bitter things: There is no recovering or returning to what we
have lost but by the Cross and Death: Nor will God have mortal Man who now is
wandering from him that he should come to immortal blessedness and glory in a
delicate journey, but through the Fire of Temptation and Tribulation, with a
sad and sharp death, because the Coronation and wiping away of all tears is
after the victory, when we have overcome all our enemies, eternal Life will
recompense greater wars and wrestlings.

But, to return to the supreme, though cross fortune has not only hindered
me who have always been desirous of the honest and most sincere Truth, many
times though in vain aspiring and earnestly desiring to enter into the inner
rooms of that supreme Phylosophicall Oratory, (not to the end that I might make
Gold and Silver, for truly they are rich enough who are content with a little
and make it not their business to get much, but with an exceeding love to find
out the True Physic and upright desire of the wonderful works of God) but I
know not by what sinister and most unhappy destiny of mine it so fell out, that
with how much the more fervent endeavor of mind I have followed those most
secret Studies, by so much the more bitterly have I been worryed hitherto by
the slanderous Envy of malevolent men, and waves or fruits of of Fortune; the
necessity of equity enforces, that though I cannot proceed further as yet, I
comfort my self with the cogitation only, and thinking upon so great a Thing.
God himself knows what, to whom, when and how is fit, whose Name be
glorified and blessed for ever: who many times turns away those things which
happily might do us hurt, because he is good: Number. 11.33. Psalm. 78.30, 31, and
104. and 105. Tob. 12.7.
nor do I think their miserable life is to be desired whose felicity is their
ruin, and who loose by that that should advantage them: and who in the height
of fortune do yet desire fortune for the chains and fetters sake, even when the
indulgents of Fools could scarce add any greater happiness: and on whom God
bestows somethings as a punishment when he is angry, which he denies as a
blessing when he is pleased.

Yet since the works of God are to be published and celebrated, and that by
this monument here left it may hereafter appear that that Divine Benificence
has not been denied to men of our age also who did not begrudge posterity
their felicity, I cannot but in attestation and confirmation of the Truth here
remember that singular Divine Clemency to me, which, not without the clear
favor of God, was showed to me as an eyewitness in my travells, which was
denied to many others who earnestly desired it, that I should see and taste it,
at some Great man's house, Cui in aeternum been sIt, and Cumprimis egregium
Helioch Antharum bor EaLem, nunc in Christo quiescentem: cujuSmodi lENtis
DenIque consueVerunt latitare tempOrum currIcVlis. Which I forbear to English.

The Physophycall Basilisk like Lightning suddenly and unawares burns up any
imperfect metal whatsoever, and on a sudden Produces another new form.
Therefore the searching it out is most to be commended to all that are studious
of the Truth.
Whence being a long time astonished and amazed at the greatest miracle of
Nature wrought by Art, among the various and manifold metamorphosis of the
Inferior Astronomy made in the cold (the Moist way of the Ancients not as yet
intensly exalted to the eye of the Basilisk) this one prodigy, passing the
admiration of all wonders, seemed strange and most worthy to be seen, that by
giving one only drop of that Latex or liquor (in which as in a storehouse the
dispersed virtues of all Celestial and Terrestrial bodies were by a
wonderful artifice invisibly gathered together in an heap, nay, in which the
whole world was centred) a man desperately sick and at the point of death was
recovered by its Fiery, Astrall, and Celestial Invisible Nature conveying to
the Heart a beam of the Natural Life, and renewing the organs of Life, and
repairing Nature, which (by an accidental sickness causing a remotion) was
spent and wasted, restoring him to firm and perfect health in one night: For
this Kingly medicine, and the Empress of all other, causes Humane Bodies
immediately and as it were miraculously to rise again from what desperate
diseases soever, There is no Physician can cure death, but Christ.
if God has not otherwise decreed, for many diseases are a Divine innate
punishment, for which there is no cure in Nature. For surely this whole new
regenerate world is able by virtue of its Regeneration to renew the little old
corruptible world Man, to restore whatsoever is amiss in Man's body, to consume
what is superfluous, to mend what is defective, and reduce the whole Microcosm
into a true Temperament, and preserve it therein till the appointed Term of
death imposed on mortals for their sin.

Imperfect and impure mettalls are cleansed from their infirmities and
accidents by the same spirit of the world, by the same Heat of Sun and Moon as
men's bodies are, they are restored to their True Health, which is aureity or
goldness, without a new motion of generation and corruption, by way of
alteration only, and remotion of accidents which are the cause of the
sickness and distemper, for metals do not differ in specie but only in
accidents.

This incredulous doubtfulnesse will fall out to the gain rather than to the
loss, as heretofore to our ancestors so hereafter to all posterity, because
there are few that believe that this Art is true, and with (...) steadfast
confidence are persuaded of it: for upon that account God provideth for the
security of those that give themselves truly to the study of Philosophy. Exodus
32.20. Job 14.19.
No marvel if this secret, by reason of the proclaimed uncertainty of so great
mysteries, shall seem incredible, and justly not to be made known (though it be
truer then true) to our Vulgar sort, though Athenians of a clean nose, as being
ignorant because they never heard any thing in all their life of the Heat of
the Sun and Moon, who know not these Vulcanean metamorphoses and this Power of
GOD joined to Nature, but admire the Heathenish Physic, who to excuse their
own ignorance do (foolishly enough) account the sayings of Prudent men but as
fables and fictions, no marvel I say, when the understanding of the
intelligent, clouded with no precepts or traditions of foolish men, can hardly
apprehend it; much less that the Element of EARTH should by the help of
Mechanic Magic swim upon the water.

To know this Phylosophicall Secret truly is principally necessary to an
Astrall Physician, none of which Physicians can come to any operation or
knowledge of wonderful effects, nor be certain in his Art, except he cleave
to this Science, especially in the cure of desperate diseases in our body, to
wit, the four Monarchs of all diseases, the Epilepsie, Gout, Dropsy, Leprosy.
These four chiefest kinds of Diseases, Paracelsus, It is not Christian-like to
ascribe to the Devil a greater possibility and power, than to the Infinite
divine Wisdom and omnipotence. The chief Foundation and Scope of true
Physicians, because it is not the first but second birth that produces it.
through the help of Christ, not of the Devil, cured by a wonderful Art,
proving in some of his works that God taught him the medicine, for he did it
not by our common ordinary medicines, but by Restoring or regenerating ones,
which are known to very few, by which Nature being renewed afterward of her own
accord she expels all things that offend her, as his Epitaph at Salisburg
does truly and sufficiently witness to posterity.

All diseases proceeding from the corruption of humors, how great and desperate
soever their cures be, are healed by this universal medicine, as a Carpenter
that squareth all kind of timber, except the party be at the utmost Term
appointed him by the supreme Being; or the disease be inflicted by God, besides
Nature, as a punishment and special affliction.

But no man, as has been said, can make use of this peculiar and celestial
Gift, but he on whom God himself has bestowed it, who only both inlightneth
the obscurity, and darkneth the clearness of these mysteries, so that none can
understand the plainest things, except he enlighten them, nor be ignorant of
the darkest if he illustrate them; for so great a faculty is there given by the
rich and peculiar Grace of the most high Creator.

Therefore Lullius that Divine and most perfect Philosopher, rightly concluded,
that between the Artist and God the first cause, there ought to be an agreement
without contrariety, that the first mover, as the principal Form should move
the Intelligence or Soul of the Artist to a true Understanding, that he may
open to him what is hid in the magistery of this Art. Blessed will he be to
whom the Lord God shall be pleased to inspire the Gifts of his Grace: For it is
the Lord of Heaven who knows the heart of those in whom he would use the form
and measure. Notwithstanding we see men sometimes offend not only against God
by their ingratitude, but also against their undeserving neighbor by strange
devices not becoming an Aedpt Philosopher: with which some eminent men
heretofore and two public Philosophers of diverse Nations in our time abusing
the Gifts of God against those most horrid Anathema's of Philosophers,
afterward (as doubtless every man according to his dexterity which the
sydereall spirit causes and exciteth is the forger of his own fortune) they
came to doleful and lamentable end, to the perpetual reproach of their Name
answerable to the unworthy publishing of this most True Phylosophicall Art,
miserably wasted and restrained by the Wrath of GOD the Righteous Revenger, as
well for their arrogant pride, punishment and repentance accompanying their
provoking loquacity, as also for their cheating Impostures of the first
Hapocraticall silence, The original of the Philosophical Magistery. Most do
otherwise now, who make their boast among others that they have the clear
knowledge of it, when it is only but imaginary, and so hinder themselves by
their credulity and persuasion, so that they cannot profit or proceed to learn
any more.
which they did by turns to cloak the matter for their safety.

Those more ancient and skillful Philosophers who were born in a happy sign,
the children of Hermes who first found out the science, among whom nothing was
more ancient than Truth, nothing more filthy and abominable than falsehood and
deceit, and who have even judged it a thing more safely worth their labor to
have it indeed without the witness of a sottish ignorant multitude, then seem
or be supposed only to have it: who also have endeavored to leave behind them
an unspotted memory to posterity, not as many too credulous imagine, that being
deceived with their own vain imaginations they would deceive others in like
manner, which is not the property of an honest man.

In the first age of the world God made it known by the Light of Nature.
I say, these private not public Secretaries of Nature, who have, in the
Natural Light fresh and flourishing in them, followed Reason the best guide,
according to the ability God gave them, all of them with greatest attention
both of body and mind pressing chiefly to one and the same end and scope of
Virtue, accounting nothing more glorious than that they might peaceably rejoice
prudently and in Quiet Silence, with a Mind truly Sound in a Sound Body
according to the Fear of God and Love of their Neighbor.

This is Philosophy Adept, which Paracelsus in the Tincture of Physics
explaineth them to be Long Life and free from all infirmity, even till the
Natural death, and an honest support of that long life in this vale of
miseries, that we might serve God without poverty and prejudice of our
Neighbor.

Though there may be many hunting after this happiness with a kind of great
and continued greediness of mind, yet have been persuaded that they should
never attain the same, either by other means or any Arts, but by a wonderful
and most abstruse comprehending of all the virtues of the whole Creation
flowing and running together in one certain mass, in this Rode or Kings
Highway and Phylosophical Reason is to be accomplished.

The defect of Nature must be supplied by the industry of Art* seeing Nature
with her offspring always tends unto, labors and breaths after their
perfection. Prove. 3.16.
All these spiritual virtues and active qualities being by great help of
ingenuity and Art like the lesser world heaped up together and concentred into
one mass (as united force is stronger dispersed) besides a kind of sweetest
and admirable illustration of the Mind (for the Light of Nature is glittering
in the Darkness of the world) as also the knowledge of all Natural things and
Heavenly seerets, and a perfect operation, yea, they have even miraculously use
of this choycest and admirable Magisterie, together with a flowing plenty and
Abundance of all Things.

Of which the Philosophers our predecessors that have been trained up in Hermes
school, They durst not under pain of Anathema to speak of it, but in a picture
of Aenigmaticall words, because the Master of Nature gave them not leave lest
they should endanger themselves, and give an occasion to others of a wicked and
hurtful study or practice, Prove. 10.10. It exciteth motion in our bodies and
reviveth the Elements, now the Elements are excited unto their acting; for the
Natural life is nothing else but the actings of the Elements.
though they have been altogether dumb in keeping close the secret of the Art
by a constant Taciturnity (knowing to what dangers the searchers out of
difficult Arts and the public Secretaries of Nature are obnoxious, that, full
of despair concerning their safety and peace, they have been compelled to deny
the same) yet usually give this Reason: because the greatest Medicine, being
artificially prepared with the help of wise Nature the Mistress of Science,
should be (or is) the Life and inlightning Light and that which quickneth or
makes alive our Balsom, that is, the spirit or celestial* not visible vapor
of life; it may be the Essence of our Life: the Fifth Essence compounded of the
four Elements, in which are all the Elements actually, and all their arts, with
greatest agreement made equal with true equation according to all possibility
of Nature, and bound together with a golden chain without any contrariety; But
all things are aggregated in so subtle a Matter and a Form so subtle, and so
near to simplicity in a respective manner in the curing of diseases and the
metamorphosis of Mettalls, like as in Lightning and the eye of a Basilisk, as
is manifest by Experience: This is so in respect of the four qualities of the
body as the Heaven is incorruptible in respect of the four Elements.

The most High created this Fifth Essence as the root of life in Nature for the
preservation of the four qualities of the Humane body, The life of natural
things is the Union of the Ideall Light, as also with the Ideall of Heaven and
Earth.
as he did the Heaven for the preservation of the universe. The celestial Fire
that burns not, is the soul and life of all Creatures; the subject in which
besides the force and operations of the Elements, even all the celestial
virtues of the Firmament, as well of the Fixed Stars as of the Planets, are
infused and imprinted after an invisible manner, for the Influences of all
celestial bodies which are communicated to the sublunary to every one in
particular, these are concentred in this one: The Theater of the secrets of all
Natur's Light; By this Art the knowledge of almost all things, and in this
Stone the universal Nature of things shines forth. The Tincture is the Fife
Essence of the Microcosm and comes v^ry near to the first and most perfect
Being and that Cabalisticall unary number. Paracelsus calls it the perfect,
perpetual, and C^thol^ck Balsom of Physicians or Philosophers; the Defensive
of old age, the Universal medicament, which like the invisible Fire consumes
all diseases.
the Glass of God's Mysteries, and the Miracle of universal Nature; the Fifth
Essence of the whole frame of the world, and the whole world Regenerated,
wherein the Treasure of all Nature lies; Subject and Instrument of all
Natural and Transnaturall Virtues; the Son of the Sun and Moon, who by his
ascending into Heaven and descending into the Earth has obtained all power of
superior and inferior things; the Habitation of all metallic, mineral, and
vegetable Forms, which God created under the Globe of the Moon; yea that it is
truly the spirit of Life which pierces through all other spirits, Those
Ancients who had most perfect knowledge of Things have called this Fist Essence
the middle nature of Souls.
and is altogether one and the same with the spirit of our body, the bond
between the Body and Soul, wherewith that super-celestiall thing is delighted
and retained that it fly not from its bodily prison, for that peace may be made
between those enemies the Soul and Body, there is need of the Balsom of life as
a means to be sought from Externalls, by which the internal is restored to
retain or sustain the Fire of a long life, without which fuel it goes out
of the body as a flame from the lamp-wick for want of oil; it is the most
simple Matter which the Best and Greatest Lord generated out of the spirit of
this world for the restoration and preservation of Humane Nature, which has
been altogether unknown to the Physicians of our time: For it never came into
their Schools who go not into the Temple of Apollo through the right door, but
break through the Roof, and sit in his seat, as the Scribes and Pharisees
heretofore in Moses chair. And while they hold the keys of Sciences in
unrighteous captivity, they bring to pass nothing with their decrees, and
ordinances but like false Teachers, they themselves enter not into the Academy
of Nature, and others who desire to enter in a right way they hinder in their
laudable course by their pernicious dehortations, so that they never come to
the knowledge of the Truth, and are forced to be ignorant where it may be.

But because the true original of all corporal diseases, in the judgment of
the best Physicians, is the enormity of the Natural proportion of the Three
First (or as common Physicians say, the disorder and ill disposition of the
four Elements or Humors) of which the Humane compounded body is sick or well:
this foresaid Medicine, which is in it self the matter of our Creation may be
congeneous and uniform to the substance, consisting in equality, When the
purified Elements are reduced to a pure and equal simplicity then is got the
Medicine that prolongeth life, because thus the Elements are equal; for the
inequality and dominion of one over another is it that breeds diseases.
the most subtle Soul, separate from dregs, and as it were the simple
substance of the Elements, the Fifth Essence or Fifth Virtue resulting from the
purer Essence of the four Elements, purified, incorruptible is compared to
Heaven, nor does it admit any malignant spirit, but they all fly from it; And
because it is obnoxious as little as little may be to a Tempred corruption or
putrefaction, therefore it expels as much as is possible by Nature all
accidental corruptibility from which any sickness or weakness may arise, and
restores the inward vigor throughout all the members, and by reconciliation
cures again the diseases that happened by the exaltation of the Three
Principles.

Man's health consists in the agreement and union of the Three First
Substances; Health consists in a Temperate body.
but when they are exalted and set on fire by the Stars, the intestine wars
follow: And because the Three First Substances of diseases are valitile, Let it
not seem strange to any that the sole act of one Thing should be variously
diversified, not as to it self, but according to the Nature of that which
receives it, as the celestial Sun hardneth the Clay and softneth the Wax.
they give place to the Essence of Fire which consumes the disease and
separateth the pure from the impure.

Moreover, that Fifth Essence of the Human Body binds the Elements or Humors
in Peace and Harmonicall league, and reduces to the true Temperament by making
equal the unequal, and strengthens the natural heat and substantificall
moisture, it keeps the oil and spark of Life in an equality by its
celestial vigor (for so long as the Radical Humor, the Vital Balsom and most
precious Nectar of our Life abides in its quantity, we are not sensible of any
disease, for the strengthening power of the Human body and of Animalls
proceeds from the spirit of Life) and restores the sick to health and a good
temper, it holds its Nature in her Being, and preserves the Nectar of our
Life in a good and laudable Temperament, and so will keep the predisposed or
fore-qualified Man safe and sound from sickness, with the comeliness of youth
for the time of his continuance (which is the age of Beauty and Human
Fortitude) even to his Natural death, that is to that Term of Life which the
Omnipotent God has appointed to Man for disobedience as well that of every
one, as that of our first Parent; I say, such a man who shall use it prudently
and seasonably with a devout calling upon the Name of the Lord, if the
constitution of the body and its complexion be not extremely wa^^ed.

Therefore in this Fifth Essence and Spiritual Medicine, which has the Nature
and Heat of Heaven (not of our mortal and corruptible) it is possible to find
out the True Fonntaine of Physic, the Conservation of Life, the Restitution of
health, the Renovation of lost youth, and the desired clear health; and to
speak Naturally, there is no Balsamic Medicine in all the world better than
this true Triacle of Philosophers, which like the Elixir of life is the
superlative and last consolation of Man's body, preserving all activities in the
Humane Nature, and restoring the diminished power through the defect of Nature:
For in every kind there is a certain One that holds the first degree in that
kind, therefore because this Medicine is made of the more incorruptible and
efficacious Matter that can be under Heaven, that is, the Soul or Spirit of
the world, which has in it the force of all Celestial and Terrestrial
things, The Heat of the Sun and Moon is that Natural Heat whereby every thing
is digested for the sustentation and multiplication of Individual^s. The Spirit
is the life and Balsom of all Natural things.
therefore it ought to hold the first degree in the order of Physic, and the
Man that uses it with the moderation of other meat, may live as long as the
ancient Fathers.

From those two fountains the SUN and MOON, as Suchtenius learnedly
discourses, springs the Natural and Vital Spirit of the world, which
runs through all Beings, giving life and consistance to all things, by which
as a mediator every occult quality, all virtue, all life is propagated into the
inferior bodies, into herbs, mettalls, stones, animalls; so that there can be
nothing in all the world that may or can be without a spark of this Spirit. The
Life of Man is the Astral Balsom. the Balsamic Impression, the Celestial and
Invisible Fire, the Air shut up, and the Tincturing Spirit of Salt.
This Celestial Spirit which is one and the same with our Natural spirit,
when its breathing in our body is not lesned or hindered by outward things, is
that Natural Heat of ours, whereby every thing is digested for the
sustentation and multiplication of every particular; It digesteth the
nourishment that Man takes, and breeds good blood in all the members: so long
as the blood is pure, it continues, and is the strong vital, pure and sound
spirit of the Heart, so that the whole body lives orderly and well; But if it
be hindered by sickness that it cannot so well do its office, the nourishment
is not well concocted; and that breeds bad blood by which the vital spirit of
the Heart is weakened. Whence comes Old age, that house of oblivion, at last
follows a full extinction, consumption and dissipation of that spirit, which
is the Natural Death; that the consumption and dissiapation of the said spirit
may be prevented, (as much as by Nature may be) that spirit and Natural Heat
in Humane bodies so weakened and hindered must be increased and strengthened, that
it may be the better able to do its duty.

But seeing every agent when it begins to act, does not move toward any thing
below it self, but to that which is equal like and suitable to it; Therefore
this strengthening also must be by its like, that is, by that Celestial Heat of
the Sun and Moon, and the other Planets, or with those things in which the
Virtue of the SUN and MOON is most potent and does most abound, or is less
restrained by matter: The Celestial or that Spirit of the world and the
Natural Spirit of our body is one and the same Spirit; and therefore the Heat
of the Sun and Moon generated of the very stroke of the spirit is a ^bing more
concoct and by consequence more perfect.
For these things work more quick and perfectly, and do more readily beget
their like: and, what is more easy, the spirit or that supernall Fire is got
out of them by art; to which the Heat that burns not like the Elementall, but
that which makes all things fruitful, and Light giving life to all things,
are proper. But burning Heat, consuming all things, and darkness, making all
things barren, are proper to the Elementall and Inferior Fire.

That same (Heat) therefore is excluded, as also with it all diverse and
contrary things, such as are all the inferior Elements. For this and all things
else that include a Natural composition in them (so far as they are yet
drowned in a thick gross matter, and as yet not separate from it) are subject
to corruption and transmutation. But Medicines ought to be preserving and very
durable, and remote from corruption: For whereas they should preserve the Human
body from corruption, they ought first to be of a long and lasting nature,
otherwise they would corrupt rather then preserve.

Besides, it is but in vain to think to preserve a corruptible body by a putrid
and corruptible thing, to cure the weak by a feeble thing, to form a Thing by a
thing subject to deformity. Every corruptible weak and feeble thing added to
its like, augmenteth it, One Like added to its like makes it more Like.
and so that corruptibility is increased, not diminished, as we see some and
truly too many Physicians of our time who labor in vain to cure Men of their
maladies by their gross and corporal compositions of Medicines; but a higher
speculation is here required; The vital spirit in Man and the Elemental is one
spirit.
For whereas diseases are not corporal, but spiritual and lurking in the
spirits, they also call for spiritual medicines.

They therefore that would preserve that vital spirit (which is the Radical
Moisture and Heat, The Innate Heat and Radical Moisture of the Microcosm are
sustained by the MacrocoMacrocosmicall Heat and Moisture of the Sun and Moon,
as being thato^e and the same Celestial and Natural spirit of ours.
the innate Mummy, and has its seat in the midst of Man's heart, as the
sustentacle of all our life) in young men, and repair it languishing in old
men, and, as much as may be, make them young again, and so bring Man's life
into the greatest health, they must seek after not the Elementall, but that
Celestial Heat of the Sun and Moon that dwells in the more incorruptible
substance that is to be found under the Globe of the Moon, to make this like
our heart or spirit, which is done, when it is prepared and made up into a
medicine and most pleasant meat, so that being taken by the mouth, it may
presently pierce and pass throughout the human body, keep every thing
incorrupt, especially the flesh that is united to it, nourish the power and
spirit of life, increase and restore, digest every raw thing, lop and prune all
excess of every quality, make the Natural moisture abound, and strengthen,
inflame and augment the weak Natural Heat or Fire. This is the duty of a true
Physician, and of the more sound Philosopher.

The Tincture does so cleanse the Balsom, that our children in the tenth
generation may see the effect of it living so long, Paracels.
For thus he might preserve our body from corruption, retard old age, keep youth
flourishing in its vigor to the very point of death, and were it not for the
wages of sin, withstand death, preserve (our body) in perpetual health and
defend it from destruction.

Paracelsus calls it the Element of FIRE, which like the Sun of the Terrene
or inferior Firmament may be the greatest Secret for the removing all
diseases, and refreshing the cold benumbed members, for that Essential Fire
works in the body, as the Flame and Nettle does without the body. Whose
meaning was (that of right he may here be vindicated from the unjust calumny
wherewith he was branded) where he treats of the virtues of this perfect Fire
of Life, that the Balsom of Nature, The Humors of life do nourish the spirit of
life. See Paracel. in the sift Tome among his Physical fragments, sol. 162.
Cease therefore henceforth to blame Paracelsus in that he promisedlong life to
others, but scarce came to full age himself. Many more such devices they
devise and revile out of their malicious ignorance which Paracelsus never
thought of.
the Balsamic Mummy, the Vital Body, the liquor of Life, the Native or
Radical Humor which the Spirit of Life moves or acts, may be restored,
strengthened and preserved as in corrupt even to the very utmost consumption of
it, that is, to the last gasp of Life without any sickness, pain and grief,
which thing though he performed in curing the most desperate and dangerous
diseases of other men, yet was he stopped from continuing so doing any longer,
being Poisoned in his body by his malicious and inhuman adversaries, who had
often attempted the same before they could effect it, (for he came to the
Natural Term of his Life by an untimely and violent death of a draught of
Poison) and not as many maliciously scoff in their strange fictions, that he
by this his medicine would presumptously prepare himself an entrance and way
to the immortal health of his body, which the dead Philosophers his Ancestors
in this wicked world and true vale of miseries, of which they as strangers and
Pilgrims of this world never so much as dreamed.

God is to be seen beyond the horrizon of Eternity and (...) the other side the
wall of Paradise, which is the proper place of those that contemplate him. He
that continues united with God in Christ does like God and the Angels never
wax old. In vain will those husks and scraps of Paracelsus rise up that use to
do, who exclaim that this interpretation is forced and far setch'd.
GOD is the Center of all Creatures, by how much the more any draw near to him,
by so much the more blessed, and less variable, and mutable is he; But the
farther any thing departs from that Center or One, to wit, the immutable will
of God, to the circumference, variety and plurality of the Creatures, the more
unhappy, imperfect and mutable is it: Blessedness is in unity, not in the
circumference; in Christ, not in the world, is Peace and the Rest of Souls.

He therefore that by the immense Goodness of God which runs before us without
intermission, shall forget all Things and leave sensible and Temporal things
behind him, which are to be used but only in our passage, and shall be united
to that one Center, he waxes young rather than old: And this is the true Long
Life of the Cabalists, and of Paracelsus, which he so often and so earnestly
begged for by Prayer and holy hope in his Hymns and Soliloquies, the true
Enochean Life.

As on the contrary, he that is not united to this most united Fountain-like
and only Unity by adhaesion, must of necessity perish for ever, and be
separated from the Light and Life by the second death, and be cast into the
utter Darkness of the Caliginous world, which deprivation and want of the
sight of God is the most bitter of all punishments.

To know GOD himself the maker of all things, and pass into him with a full
image of his likeness, as with a kind of essential touch without a bond,
whereby thou may be transformed, and made (as it were) a God, this at last
will prove the True and sollid Philosophy.

The MIND therefore of Adept Philosophers, whose (...) or conversation is in
Heaven, Phil. 3.20. The Mystery of Divine Matrimony with Man.
they having enough of the Terrene Life, to whom one is All in all, and All are
one in One: and who always look upon these transitory things with the left
eye, but on Heaven with the right.

The MIND, I say, By the access of this beam, ray, or celestial Stone all
dross is purified, and the darkness of ignorance is driven away. Eccl. 18.9,
10. Psalm. 90.10. Romans 8.
of these Adept Philosophers has ever been far off and estranged from the
Cavil above mentioned. For when through Divine Grace cooperating, they have by
a quiet and religious meditation been raised up out of the sepulcher of their
body or out of the dead Works of Darkness, the world that lies in the
malignant one being cast behind their back, they could open the Eyes of their
Heart, and be turned to God in the Sabbath of their Heart by a separation of
the Mind from Terrene obsticles in themselves, and see all things in one by a
most Blessed Spectacle, to wit, Whatsoever is not God, is Nothing, and ought to
be esteemed as nothing.
one simple (intuitive vision or) sight from within, a kind of an Essential
touch of the Divinity, and to contemplate the beauty of the Chiefest Good in
the Light of GOD as in the glass of Eternity, which beauty is incomprehensible
to the Old Creature, INFORTUNIUM.
they have esteemed it the Unhappiness to stay so long in this Vale of miseries
and ignorance: For our heart is not at Rest till we have cast behind us the
most beautiful Nothing (that is, the shadow and region of Darkness and Death)
and returned to the BEING of BEINGS (from whom we are wandered) as to the
prefixed scope of all our desires and will, toward whom every Creature pants
and breaths. Therefore being stripped and forsaken of every Crreature, they
leave themselves, and totally go out from themselves contemning all things
corporeal and incorporeall, in sighing and earnest desire they hasten from the
imperfect to that which is one and perfect, the knowledge and contemplation
whereof (that which the most wise Hermes and most pious Philosopher of reverend
antiquity the Antesignan of Natural Philosophers and first Prophet, Lactantias
mentions Hermes not so much among the Natural Philosophers, as among the
Sybylis and Prophets, as the true Orpheus.
does also acknowledge in his Monade) is a sacred, Heavenly, and hid silence,
the quiet or Rest of the senses and all things, when at length after the task
of miseries, labors, and peregrinations is ended, all minds, by an unanimous
friendship, after an unutterable manner, shall be altogether but one thing, in
one MIND which is above every MIND. All things are seen and looked into with one
presentiall glance.
It is the intimate vision of GOD, and the Intuitive knowledge of GOD, which
also happens by the Light of Grace to the separate Soul even in this world, if
any man set himself about it now, and be subject to God. Thus many holy men by
virtue of the Deifick Spirit have tasted the First fruits of the Resurrection
in this life, and have had a fore-taste of the Celestial Country. I mean that
spiritual Death of the Saints (which the Jews call the kiss of Death) which
is precious in the sight of God, Exodus 33. Es. 6. 2 Cor. 11. Psalm. 116.15.
if the fullness of Life may be called death; We must die to the World, Flesh,
Blood, and the whole Animal Man, who would feign have got into those Inmost
secrets, and entered into Paradise by the excess or going out of the MIND: the
Man that lives in nothing but the Mind, is as an Angel, and (as I may so say)
conceives and apprehends God after a sort in his whole breast. The scope and
mark unto which all the most dear, beloved, holy, and intimate Friends of God,
who live after the Image or inspiration of the most High, and not after the
Limus Terrae the Eearthy Mind, do bend, who from Divine Love willingly cast
themselves headlong into the fountain of the Abyss and into the Sea of
Nihilitude or Nothingnesse, and enter into the Holies of Holies by the Life of
Christ, that in the Sabbath they may live with God in Rest and Blessedness,
and so drink of the everlasting Ambrosian Nectar of Eternity. By the Soul
abiding and standing steadfast, embracing its Image of Divinity or MIND united
to GOD by Christ, we enjoy actual Blessedness.

It Is possible to extend a long life farther: Therefore Porta reject the opinion
of those that cast men's fortune from the day or hour of their nativity
prefixing the bounds of life, affirming that he that is wary of his infirmities
and avoydeth those things that are hurtful may live a longer life. Parac.
chap. 7. of the Labyrinth of Physicians.
Though it may go for the discourse of Vain men that the life may be lengthned,
yet it is repugnant neither to Nature nor Reason that a Man may prolong his
life beyond the common ordinary age of Men, even to a long time, and that for
two Reasons.

First, Because in NATURALS there is no certain appointed Term apparent what
day we shall die, but it is in our own hand and power to put an end to our life
if we will, and to prolong it without offense to GOD if so be we may, and have
wisdom so to do: I speak here Phylosophically of the Natural death, which is
only the wasting of the Natural Moisture and Heat, as may be seen in a
burning lamp, not Theologically of the Fatal death and utmost Term which God
has prefixed to every one, by which we are enforced not only to pay the debt
of Nature, but are compelled also to undergo the punishment for sin. Death is
the Bound which we cannot pass, nor is there any day or hour, for by the Grace
of God we live the Term without hours. As God has numbered our hairs, so also
does he reckon our years, leaving them in our power: And because it was the
good pleasure of God that Man should live for ever, thence it is easy to
discern that for the lawful matrimonial propagation and augmentation of
Mankind, a long and lasting life of Man in this world is not displeasing to
him, especially if it be spent in the Fear and Service of his Creator, yet
always short of that utmost and fixed Term or determined point of DIVINE
PREDESTINATION which is unknown to mortals, See Paracelsus of long life.
imposed on our first Parents and their heirs, for their Fall from Original
Righteousness, beyond which Bound no man can go. See Paracelsus in lib. 8.
As Man many ways may not attain to the appointed Term of life, it being
compassed about with diseases, Archid. of the Elixirs. It is the conservation
of the Human body from all accidental corruption. Death Gods minister
expects our intestine war. There is a two fold death, from the Iliad or first
principle, and from the Ens or Being. The Soul of perpetuity or the Spirit of
Light joined to Nature with the light is perpetual, and will not suffer such a
conjunction and such a life to be short.
and so his time may be shortened; so may he prolong his life by removing these
impediments, so that at last he may attain to the appointed Term of the
Nature of life.

Secondly, Because God has created the aforesaid Medicine for the preservation
of life, which may preserve our body as well from the corruption of our
Parents, as from the defect of our own government, cure its infirmities, and
repair what is wasted; yea, chase away from us all diseases which cause the
natural death, until ultimate death the most Terrible of all Terrible things
(which is the destruction of the Mummy) which God the most high Creator has
ordained as the wages of sinners. Therefore Paracelsus says that the death
which is from the resolution of the Iliad may be hindered by the industry of the
Physician, but that which is from the Ens or Being cannot: as we may preserve a
little fire by laying on more wood; so also may our life be prolonged by
administering such Remedies and secrets as are derived from the fountain of
Gods gifts, with which the Rays or little beams the weakness of the Moisture
and innate heat is nourished and cherished as the Fire with wood: This at least
is desired in us, because we being destitute of wisdom know not that wood
wherewith our life might be cherished and prolonged. Adam who was full of
wisdom and the perfect knowledge of all Natural things, and many more of his
time, who lived a more frugall life than we, did attain to so many ages, not
by Nature and property of Time, for then all had been Long-lived, but by the
help of Secrets and by Wisdom which was revealed but to few, and by special
knowledge which God gave them in this particular, whereby they lengthned out
their life to so many years beyond the ordinary time that men lived. Many holy
men used this universal Medicine before the flood, which Adam also had in his
Family, as Lactantius witnesses, which strengthens the Internal Balsom, and
like Fire congregateth Homogeneous things, and segregateth Heterogeneous, which
are of a contrary nature. Nor are we to rely upon their judgments, who being
ignorant of the Mysteries of the Element of Water, dream that the Deluge washed
away the efficacy of fruits and of growing things, or that the power and
strength of men's bodies was spoiled by the Water: For all things that grow by
the benefit of Water do yet sprout and spring forth in the same vigor and with
the same efficacy as they did in Adams time. When men multiplied in the world,
wise men lived together in the Center reserving wisdom among themselves, but
banished those that had it not into the circumference. Paracels.
Wherefore we want nothing but the knowledge of Secrets, and their use. And
thus the Flood did not wast the things that grow, but washed away our wisdom
of knowing them. These most secret of secrets have ever been hid from the
common sort of them that profess Philosophy, and especially sincemen began to
abuse Wisdom, using it to an ill end, which God bestowed upon them for their
health and advantage.

But as few reach the Natural Term, so also few have known the reason of
prolonging the life: And hereof there are many Causes. For the life is broken
off, or shortened, two manner of ways.

MEN'S and ENS abrumpunt nobis vitam.
First, Either by the MIND, whence arise mental diseases which are invisible,
and affect us in our Mind, as Enchantment, Imagination, Estimation, Influence;
Superstition, all which proceed from a spiritual affection: No corporal guard
or shelter avails any thing against such like violences, but only Faith
which is able to resist them* or some other Magical means is requisite against
witchcrafts and to cure those that are bewitched, and though the cure be
difficult, yet is it possible. Notwithstanding what may be said, i. e. that the
act of the imagination is immanent, and that one man's body cannot be altered by
another man's imagination.
And these diseases which only Adept Physicians know, are healed without the
help of Natural Physic. For in the minds of men there is a kind of a hidden
Virtue, of changing, attracting, and binding that which it desires either to
attract, or change, or bind, or hinder, especially if it be set against it with
the greatest excess of the Imagination of the Mind, and of the Will: This is
no strange thing to them that know the operations, those wonderful virtues in
the Nature of the Antipathicall Loadstone, which does (as it were) bewitch
spiritually and invisibly. But least our spirit should be suffocated with these
five supernatural mischiefs, i. e. Enchantment, Imagination, Estimation,
Influence, Superstition.
or left the life should utterly be destroyed by them, their malignant Astra's
must be averted by a supernatural cure and magical help into something else,
without any profanation of Gods Name: Thus those diseases that proceed from
the Mind require a mental cure, of which see more in Paracels. his Philosophia
Sagaci: Godliness is the chiefest remedy, guard, and preservation against such
like evils, for certainly the auxiliary hands of God are the best preservative
in all diseases.

Or Secondly, The life is shortened PER ENTEM* by the Being, as by Entall or
Corporal diseases: (...) and (...).
For many who live to eat only, and prefer a voluptuous superfluity before
the Natural necessity which is content and satisfied with a little, have
surfeted themselves to death, and found death in the pot: Health is preserved
by fastings, and a moderate Diet is the best Governance to prolong the life.
And this cure of the harms of the Natural members which come from the Ens or
Being, is to be sought from Natural causes and means, to wit, from the Elements
and hidden Secrets: For all diseases require their own proper cure, and reject
any other remedy: Corporal medicines do no good to mental or supernatural
distempers, nor can mental medicines be profitable to bodily diseases. This
also is to be considered, that many times wear corrupted in our mothers womb,
sometimes in the birth and education, and by many various accidents may we be
hindered and kept from attaining to the Natural Term of life, as Theophrastus
in his Books very often observes.

But not to forget what we intended, and wander wider then the bounds of a
Preface, I shall now draw to a conclusion.

Whatsoever advantage therefore I have made by my labors, watchings, studies,
and peregrinations, which may as well illustrate Physic and Philosophy, as
make manifest the Light of GRACE and NATURE, (though divine Mysteries are far
greater than to be set forth by the splendour of man's words) so far as divine
Minerva has given leave, I have inserted in their proper places in this Prolix
and Admonitory Preface, and so far as was lawful, and so much as was allowable
by God, have I imparted heartily from the intimate and inmost Armory or
Treasury of my Heart, Read them over and over, and over again, and again; I
hope it shall not repent thee of thy pains.
to the Children of Learning and Heirs of Wisdom, who with second thoughts
which are the wisest, shall clearly and with a considerate judgment pass
through these things with a pure Mind and tongue, reading them over in the light
of God, without any superfluity or diminution, by often reiterated and evident
speculations: For surely it is not enough to know, We ought not to prefer our
private profit before the public good.
that thou may know, but it concerns the public good to make known also in
public writing what belongs to the public, not out of pride or vain glory,
but moved with a desire of doing good, that posterity may be instructed, and
the great bounty of God spread abroad and reverenced; both because at this time
I see it taught in public Schools for the most part rather for the glory of
Education, than the good and profit of the Auditors: as also, because every one
is not so happy as to desire to learn and improve his time, whether he be rich
or poor, The School of Physic is not covered with tile, but with the Firmament:
which yet by peculiar assistance of the divine Majesty fell to my lot, in that
I lived freely to the great advantage of my studies above ten years in two of
the very best and most honorable Families, Therefore that Physician that
walks according to the mind of Paracelsus is only able to open the Book of
Nature.
in that of ESNE at Lions in France, and in that of BAPPENHEIMIE in the
Segniory of Mareschall: It fell out, that when I instructed the Noble Prosapia
committed to my trust and diligence, that in my various and most profitable
peregrinations (especially while I was with the Illustrious and Noble
MAXIMILIAN sollicitous of his Fathers liberty, that gallant Hero Conradus of
Ancient Repute and Virtue, now at rest with Christ, then unhappily a prisoner
in Marshall) when I had special and private converse with learned men, a thing
most longed for by a Physician that desires chiefly to turn over the BOOK of
NATURE (in which every region is a leaf) not profunctorily and superficially,
but practically and experimentally, to which learned men I should hardly have
been admitted, but for the Relation I was then in. Besides, I had this chief
and special help, in as much as that most Illustrious, the most worthy of
perpetual respect from all learned men, and Heroic Prince CHRISTIAN ANHALTIN,
with his more then singular favor and laudable patronage toward the more secret
Studies, supplied me with necessary expenses, who was altogether unable to bear
and undergo so great a burden as all these Medicines come to, which must be
prepared and tried by Fire. By which singular care toward the whole Spagyrick
state, and most deserving pattern (which I here set down for other great Peers
and Noble men to imitate) his most Illustrious Highness will deservedly and of
right purchase to himself not only an eternal good Report and honor of his
Name next to the happy reward of his expenses, but will also for ever to all
posterity be thanked by foreign Nations. Moreover in respect of what concerns
the order and Disposition of medicaments, I have proposed and set down this to
my self (every man having the freedom of his own sense) according to the
measure and fancy of my Genius and skill: It will be safe for every man to add
hereunto the further Experiences of his own, and dispose it otherwise according
to his discretion for his private use when he has enlarged it; And so I doubt
not but that this harvest of Chymicall Corn, and the First fruits of my
increase, and this Spagyrick present of my difficult and laborious diligence
(than which I suppose I could not leave behind me a better to my Country and
Commonwealth) will be most acceptable to godly learned men (for I regard not
Hogs and Dogs that have no grace nor goodness at all, those Beetles which I
leave to their own dunghill) but of all especially to them who have wasted their
youth with infinite pains to follow after and get Knowledge, and who have been
trained up in the Spagyrick and Hermetick School of Vulcan, being not yet
deprived of the Light of understanding, and have been well instructed by
approved Authors in the general rules of Physicians before observed, as well
touching the causes of diseases, as the methodical way of curing them. I have
not spoken of so many things, but there yet more left to be spaken. These
things are written for them who by aprospicocious and happy wit have their mind
enlightened by God and their Soul seasoned with the salt of Wisdom. A few
things or words are sufficient for him that understands.
I have not handled all things here in this place, to avoid prolixity; I know
there are not a few doubts left unresolved; and no wonder, for they that are
ignorant of many Things must needs doubt of Many things: It is provided for by
the Philosophical law that some tedious things should be left obscure to young
Scholars and for intelligent and wise men to find out; for thereby their wits
are tried, and made fit for the School of Philosophers. He that can receive it
let him receive it; and he that does not understand, let him either learn or
hold his peace and be silent: Nevertheless the young Pupil that is a diligent
Searcher out of the Ancient First and Sacred Philosophy, who in the Fear of God
has given holy attention, laid aside his Fantasy, and has had his Reason
well disposed with a subtle wit and profound understanding, he may apprehend
and conjecture the signification of MANY things by a Few in this open market of
Nature, not by a vulgar sharpsightednes but by the assistance of the Almighty:
He that can endure the Truth lay aside rancor, and read those things with a
sincere mind, and shall inwardly and more thoroughly examine all things with a
diligent and considerate judgment of the MIND not depraved by his affections,
shall at last with great thankfulness acknowledge that the doors and Inner rooms
are unlockt to him by the favorable virtue of the most high Creator, and from
all these things rightly understood, through PRAYER and PAINS, shall reap much
more fruit than he expected. If happily there be any of a contrary opinion,
ignorant of the Truth and Men of a testy and wayward nature, who in their rash
ignorance shall account this courtesy for an injury, unthankful for what I
have endeavored, and think they have no need of this publik worth, which from
the hand of God I have sincerely communicated to a State that stands in need of
it, to the glory of God and furtherance of my neighbors welfare, let them not
vex and trouble without cause the laborious diligence of undoubted experience,
and other men's pains and sweat, with those their proud and rash censures like
Aesop's Crow, or reproaching them for a patched and mixed hodg podg of good and
bad together (to get the corn from the chafe, and separate true from false, is
sometime a most tedious and difficult task, let them judge who have toyled and
sweat in the like case) nor let them with Timon that Man-hater seeing a dogged
churlish spirit or disposition ratify it to posterity, or publish to all the
world their cruel and detestable inhumanity or most unrightous hatred which
they have against the Truth by rising up against it, unless (quite excluded
the company of learned men instead of an answer) they would be called stubborn
enemies of mankind, and adversaries of public safety, who (as already before)
are justly to be casheer'd: And let them not a fright those that are studious
of the truth, who take those our labors and faithful diligence kindly and in
good part: or if they can discourage any, let them open their own fountains,
having an occasion given them hereby of publishing their Observations, let them
take their lited candle from under the bushel, lest the curse of the figtree
befall them, Mat. 21.19
and letting pass all idle contentions of words and Scholastic questions and
fruitless disputations (for it is that which a cunning and contentious Sceptick
Philosopher is inclined unto, whose purpose is not to find out that which is
True but to wrangle about it, and with brawling words to prove and maintain any
thing, and to put by or away what he pleases) let them be spurd on and
provoked by my example, as becomes good and sincere citizens of the Physical
and Spagyrick State and profession, to bring forth better things than these out
of their own experience, For who can find out the end of Physic.
(for surely Physic is not yet come to the Limit of perfection, but many
things remain to be discovered to future ages) and to succor poor Lazarus, not
with Sylogistical or Levitical Words, but with a Samaritan Help and Aid. This if
they shall do, and cast away the Signatures of cursed Sloth, of Drones, in
their hollow cracks and clamors which at least make a terrible noise, they may
become Bees, and after that in a grateful agreement, godly love and mutual duty
conspire together with us into an union and Spagyrick mellifice divorcing the
multitude and abstaining from all fornication, and Really and indeed may
maintain and defend the Excellency of Chemistry against all that reproach it,
and with their ingenuity and learning, without envy and evil speaking,
endeavor to render this our good endeavor better then the work it self: No
doubt but after other secret Sciences which yet lie in the dark, that Ancient,
True, and Philosophical Medicin, which by reason of the long continuance and
injury of time, as also the unworthines of our age (men's sins doubtless so
meeting together) is not yet fully known, may in a shorttime by the heavenly
assistance, be restored to its lost luster and ancient splendour, to the most
healthful advantage of all man kind and the due honor of Spagyrick Physicians,
whose endeavor and pains that immense sea of divine Mercy would be pleased to
make use of as an Instrument and Pen to accomplish so healthful and saving a
work.

Which that holy Triunity grant, whose unspeakable Name be blessed for ever and
ever,
AMEN.
Three BOOKS OF PHILOSOPHY Written to the Athenians: BY That famous, most
excellent, and approved PHILOSOPHER and PHYSICIAN Aureal. Philip. Theoph.
Bombast. of Hohenheim, (commonly called) Paracelsus.

With an Explicatory TABLE alphabetically digested; wherein the hard words that
are found in this Author, and in the foregoing Preface of Osw: Crollius, are
Explained.

Done into English for the increase of the knowledge and fear of God. By a
young Seeker of truth and holiness.

O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth?

Ps. 8.1, 9. Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of
his glory.

Es. 6.3. Ex perpetuitate creaturarum intelligitur creator aeternus, ex
magnitudine omnipotens, ex ordine and dispositione sapiens, ex gubernatione
bonus.

Aug. l. 11. de Civ. Dei. c. 21. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for L: Lloyd at the
Castle in Cornhill. 1657.

THE First BOOK OF PHILOSOPHY Written to the Athenians BY Theoph. Parac. H. H.
H.
TEXT 1.
ALL created things are of a frail and perishing nature, All creatures in the
world have but one principle.
and had all at first but one only principle or beginning. In this (principle)
all things under the Cope of Heaven were enclosed and lay hid: Which is thus to
be understood, that all things proceeded out of one Matter, and not every
particular thing out of its own private matter by it self. This common matter
of all things is the Great Mystery, What the Great Mystery is.
which no certain essence and prefigured of formed: I daea could comprehend,
nor could it comply with any property, it being altogether void of color and
elementary nature. The Great Mystery is the mother of all things.
The scope of this Great Mystery is as large as the Firmament. And this Great
Mystery was the mother of all the Elements, and the Grandmother of all the
Stars, trees and carnal creatures. As children are born of a mother, so all
created things whether sensible or insensible, all things whatsoever, were
uniformly brought out of the Great Mystery. So that the Great Mystery is the
only mother of all perishing things, out of which they all sprung, not in
order of succession or continuation, but they all came forth together and at
once, in one creation, substance, matter, form, essence, nature and inclination.

TEXT 2.
That this Mystery was such as never any creature besides was, or ever saw the
like, and yet was the first matter, out of which all mortal things proceeded,
cannot better be understood than by the Urine of man, which is made of water,
air, How man's urine is made.
earth and fire, but is neither of these, or was it like to either, yet all the
Elements, by another generation arise from thence, and so pass into a third
generation. But in as much as the Urine is but a creature there may be some
difference between this and that. The Great Mystery was not created.
For the Great Mystery is increated, and was prepared by that great Artificer.
Never shall there be any like it; nor does this return or is it brought back
again unto it self. For as cheese becomes no more milk, so neither does that
which is generated [of the Mystery] return into its first matter. And though
all things indeed may at length be reduced into their pristin nature and
condition, yet do they not return again unto the Mystery. That which is
once consumed can by no means be again recovered. But it may return into that
which was before the Mystery.

TEXT 3.
How the great Mystery is the mother of all things.
Furthermore, though the Great Mystery be indeed the mother of all things, both
sensible and insensible; yet were not all things that grow, nor the living
creatures, nor such like things, formed therein: but thus are we to consider of
it, that it left and assigned general mysteries to all things, that is, to men
and living creatures and those of one sort it gave a mystery to propagate
themselves after their own form. In like manner it bestowed a peculiar mystery
on every other thing to bring forth its own shape by it self. From the same
original also (which the primary mystery ordained) spring those mysteries
from which another mystery may be produced. For a Star ( alias mucke) is the
mystery of beetles; flies and gnats, etc. Milk is the mystery of cheese,
butter, and such like. Cheese is the mystery of worms that breed in it. So
again worms are the mystery of perished cheese. And thus there are two sorts
of mysteries: Mysteries are of two sorts.
The Great Mystery, which is uncreated; The rest, being of the same kindred,
are called special mysteries.

TEXT 4.
All things came out of the Great Mystery at one and the same time.
Now seeing it is plain that all perishing things did spring and arise out of
the uncreated mystery: we must know, that nothing created was brought forth
sooner or latter one than another, nor this or that thing apart, but altogether
and at once. For the Greatest Secret, to wit, the Goodness of the Creator did
create or lay all things together upon that which is uncreated, not formally,
essentially, or by way of qualities; but every thing lay hid in the uncreated
as an image or statue does in a piece of timber. For as the statue is not seen
till the wast wood be cut away that so it may appear: So is it in the uncreated
mystery, that which is fleshly or sensible, and that which is insensible, both
came forth and got to its own form and kind by a right and instituted
separation. Here was no hacking or hewing, but every thing passed into form and
essence, The wonderful art of the Creator.
etc. Never was there workman any where to be found so accurate and industrious
in separation, who with like skill could make even the least and lightest grain
useful, and put life into it.

TEXT 5.
A comparison betwixt the mystery and a medicine.
Understand it thus, not as if a house were built out of the Great Mystery, or
that the living creatures were first gathered together and laid in an heap, and
then perfected, nor the other things that grow likewise: but as a Physician
makes a compound of many virtues, though the matter be but one, wherein none of
those virtues appear which lie hid under the same. So must we think, How all
things were in the mystery.
that all sorts of creatures under heaven were set in order and put into the
Great Mystery, not perfectly according to their substance, form and essence,
but after another subtle manner of perfection (unknown to mortal man) whereby
all things were shut up into one. We all were created of that which is frail
and mortal, and are born much after the manner of Saturn, who in the
separation of himself brings forth all forms and colors, yet none of them
appear visible in him. Since then the mysteries of Saturn yield such like
procreations; much more doubtless the great mystery has in it this miracle,
What kind of separatinn Saturn has.
in whose separation all other superfluous things are cut off, yet is there
nothing so needless and useless but can bring forth out of it self some
other increase, or fit matter thereof.

TEXT 6.
Know therefore that several and various chips or fragments fell out in the
cutting or carving of the great mystery, whereof some became flesh, of which
there are infinite sorts and forms: others were Sea Monsters, of wonderful
variety also; some became herbs; other fell into wood; abundance into stones
and mettalls. A twofold art of the Creator in the separation of the Great
Mystery.
A twofold way or manner of Art may at least be considered by them that ask how
the omnipotent God did or could carve out those things. First, in that he
always ordained life and increase. Secondly, in that it was not one only
matter that fell off every where alike. For if a Statue be cut out of a piece
of timber, all the chips thereof are wood. But here it was not so; but every
thing received its own form and motion by it self.

TEXT 7.
Thus the distribution followed the operation of the great mystery, and the
things that were separated from those that were superfluous appeared more
excellent; at the same instant also diverse other things proceeded out of those
very superfluous things that were chipt off. For the great mystery was not
Elementary, though the Elements themselves lay hid therein. Nor was it a
carnal thing, though all sorts of men were comprehended in it. The mystery
was all things but without difference or distinction.
Neither was it wood or stone; but such was the matter that it contained every
mortal thing in its essence without difference or distinction, and afterward
endowed every one of them with its own particular essence and form in the
separation. An example whereof of we have in meat: If a man eat it, A
comparison between the mystery and meat.
he gathers flesh, to which the meat was nothing like before; when it is
putrified it breeds grass of which it had not resemblance before at all: which
holds much more true in the great mystery. For in the Mysteries it is most
manifest that one thing became stones, another flesh, another herbs, and so
afterward passed into various and infinite forms.

TEXT 8.
Now when the separation was made, and every thing brought into its own form
and property, so as that it could subsist alone of it self, then might the
substantial matter be known. That which was fit to be put together, was so
compacted; the rest, in respect of substance remained void and thin. For when
things were first set together, all could not equally be joined, but the
greatest part remained vacant. This is plainly to be seen in water, which when
it is frozen, the ice thereof is but a very small quantity. Whence, and of how
many sorts the things are that were compacted.
So was it in the separation of the Elements. Whatsoever could be compacted was
made stones, flesh, mettalls, wood, and such like. The rest remained more rare
and empty, to wit, every thing according to its nature and property of the
Planets. For when things were first compacted that great mystery was just like
smoke, which spreads very wide; A comparison between the mystery and smoke.
yet has it very little substance besides a small quantity of soot. All the
other space, where the smoke is, is very mere and pure air, as may be seen in
the separation of the smoke from the soot.

TEXT 9.
Separation is the beginning of all generation.
Separation was the principle and mother of all Generation. The greatest
miracle of all in Philosophy is Separation. Yet should not men study these
things beyond their capacity and reason. How such things were, and might be
made, is somewhat to be known by this example, viz. If you put vinegar to warm
milk, you shall see a separation of the heterogeneous parts many ways. The
force and nature of vinegar. Truphat.
Thus the Truphat (or Traphat) of mettalls brought every metal into its own
nature. So was it in the Mystery. For as the macerated tincture of silver, so
also the great penetrating mystery, reduced every thing into its essence,
distinguishing and separating all things with such wonderful diligence, that
every substance had its due form. The Magic that directed unto the Great
Mystery.
Now that Magic was a most singular secret that directed such an entrance.
Which if it were divinely done by the Deity, it would be to no purpose to study
for it. Nor does the Deity make known himself to us hereby. But if that Magic
were natural, certainly it was most wonderful, very excellent for quickness
of penetration and swiftness of separation, the like whereof Nature can never
more give or express. For whilst that was busy at work, one piece fell into
the Elements, another into invisible things, another into the vegetables; which
doubtless must needs be a very great and singular miracle.

TEXT 10.
The first separation was made in created things.
In as much then as the great mystery was full of such Essence and Deity with an
addition of the most eternal one; the SEPARATION was before any creature. When
this began, then every creature sprang forth and appeared in its majesty,
power and free will: in which state also it shall still flourish even to the
end of the world, or that great harvest, when all things shall be pregnant with
fruit, which shall then be gathered and carried into the barn. For the harvest
is the end of its fruit, The harvest is the end of all things that came out of
the mystery.
nor does it intend ought but the corporal destruction of all things. And
though their number be almost infinite, yet is there but one harvest only,
when all the Creation shall be reaped, and carried into the barn. Nor will this
harvest, the end of all things, be less admirable, than that great mystery
was wonderful in the beginning, notwithstanding the free power of things be
the cause of their mutual affection and destruction. The simpathy and
antipathy of things is the cause of their mutation.
For there is nothing but has both love and hatred. The free will flourishes
and is conversant in virtues, but is either friend or foe in our works. But
these things belong not to separation. For that is the sequestratrix that gives
to every thing its form and essence.

TEXT 11.
When the great mystery first separated all things, The first Elements rose
out of the separation of the mystery. What fire is. What the air is.
the first separation was of the Element, so that before all other things the
Elements brake forth into their act and essence. The fire was made heaven and
the wall of the firmament. The air was made a void space, wherein nothing
appears or is to be seen, possessing that place wherein is no substance or
corporal matter; This is the coffer or enclosure of the invisible Destinies.
The water passed into liquor, and took its place about the channells and
hollownesse of the center within the other Elements and the sky; What the
water is.
This is the hutch of the Nymphs and monsters of the Sea. The earth was
coagulated into dry land, What the Earth is. It is sustained by the pillars of
the Arcealtes.
and is upheld by none of the other Elements, but is propt up by the pillars of
the Archaltes; These are the strange and wonderful works of God: The earth is
the chest of those things that grow, which are nourished by it. This kind of
separation was the beginning of all creatures, and the first distribution both
of these and all other creatures.

TEXT 12.
After the Elements were thus brought forth into their essence, and divided
from each other, that every one subsisted severally in its own place without
prejudice to one another, then a second separation followed the first, which
procceeded from the Elements. The firc's separation, and its kind.
Thus every thing that lay in the fire was transformed into the heavens, one
part thereof as into an Ark or cloister, another part proceeded out of it as a
flower out of a stalk. Thus the Stars, Planets, The second Stars sprang out of
the second separation.
and whatsoever is in the Firmament, were brought forth. These sprang out of
the Element, not as a stalk grows with its flowers out of the earth (for
these grow out of the earth it self) but the Stars came out of the heavens by
separation only, as the flowers of silver ascend, How the Stars came out of
heaven.
and separate themselves. So that all the firmaments are separated from the
fire. But before the firmament was separated from the fire, every jot thereof
was but one Element of fire. For as a tree in winter is but a tree, but when
the spring comes the same tree (if that be separated from it that may be
separated) puts forth leaves, flowers and fruit, which is the time of its
harvest and separation: Just such another harvest was there in the separation
of the great mystery, which could by no means withold or defer it self any
longer.

TEXT 13.
Another separation out of the Air followed the separation of the Elements,
The separation of the air, and its kind.
at one and the same instant with that of the fire. For the whole air was
predestined unto all the Elements. Yet is it not in the other Elements of
mixture in any manner and measure; but it does assume and occupy all manner of
things in all the Elements, only what was before surrounded it does not
possess. For no mixture of the Elements continued fast united, but every
Element betook it self to its own free power without dependence on another. As
soon as this Element thus parted from the rest out of the great mystery,
presently out of it were distributed Fates, impressions, enchantments,
superstitions, shrewd turns, dreams, divinations, lotteries, visions,
apparitions, fatacests, melosines, spirits, diemeae, durdales and neuferans. At
the separation of the things aforesaid every thing had its proper place and
peculiar essence appointed it. Hence things invisible in themselves became
sensible unto us. No Element was by the supreme Secret made more thin than the
Air. The Diemeae dwell in the rocks, Diemes live among the stones.
for such there created with the Air unto a vacuity. The Durdales betook
themselves into woods, for their separation was into such a kind of substance.
The Durdales Neuferans and Melosines.
The Neuferans inhabit in the Air or pores of the earth. The Melosinies stepped
aside into man's blood, for their separation from the air was into bodies and
flesh. Spirits.
The Spirits were distributed into air that is yet in a Chaos. All the rest
are in peculiar places of the Air, every one keeping its place assigned to it,
and separate from the Element of the Air, yet so as that it must of necessity
live therein, nor can it change that place for another.

TEXT 14.
The separation of the water and its kind.
By the separation of the Elements the water was gathered into the place which
the mystery had allotted it. Thus every thing whatsoever that lurked in the
Elementary virtue and property thereof was more fully divided by a second
separation, and the water parted into many special mysteries, all which had
their matrix from the Element of water. One part thereof became fishes, and
they are of many forms and kinds, some beasts, some salt; much of it seaplants,
as Corals, Trines and Citrons; Coral, trine and citrons, sea-plants.
a great deal of it sea monsters contrary to the manner and natural course of
the Elements, very much became Nymphs, Syrenes, Drames, Lorind, Nymphs,
Syrenes, Dramae, Lorind, Nesder.
Nesder; some reasonable creatures, having something eternal in their body,
and propagating themselves; some also that die totally, and some that are
again separated in time. For the perfect separation of the element of water is
not yet made. But as the great harvest hastneth and comes on, a new increase
may spring up every year in the Element of water. And this separation is made
at the same instant when the other Elements are separated, in one days work,
and by the motion of sequestration. So that every thing thus living in the
water was at once in a minute and moment of time created and made manifest by
the separation.

TEXT 15.
The separation of the earth, and its kind.
In like manner when the Element of the earth was disjoined from the rest, the
earthy separation was made, to wit, the separation of all things that do or
did spring in or out of the earth. For at the first creation the four Elements
lay hid in all things alike in the great mystery: which things also were
separated after the same manner and in one instant, and were divided among
themselves one after another by a second separation, which is Elementary. And
by this kind of Elementary separation out of the Element of the Earth things
sensible and insensible, those that are eternal and those that are not
eternal were parted from one another, every one obtaining its peculiar essence
and free power. All that was of a woody nature was made wood. The next was
mines of mettalls. A third became marcasite, The difference of Mineralls.
talk, bisemute, pomegranate, mettallick cobalt, milsto, and many other
things. A fourth precious stones of many sorts and shapes, as also stones,
sands and lime. A fifth was made into fruit, flowers, herbs and seeds. A sixth
into sensible living creatures, whereof some partake of eternity, as men,
others do not, as calves, sheep, etc. Whereof many kinds and differences might
be reckoned up; for many more kinds were separated in the earthy Element than
in any other. Earthy things are propagated by seed.
For by the seed of two are all things propagated, that is, by the coming
together of father and mother; which was not predestined and ordained in the
other Elements. Here also are the Gnomi. Gnomes, Sylvesters and Lem^res.
Sylvestres and Lemures; of which some are allotted to the mountains, some to
the woods, some only to the night. But the Giants were parted into a third
separation. There are great distributed essences too, as also strange miracles
amongst men, cattle and all things that grow, which is a hard matter for any
Philosopher to find out, and therefore it is thought they were made besides the
order and measure of nature.

TEXT 16.
How the complexions were brought forth.
After the four Elements were from the beginning separated from each other out
of the only matter (as has been said) in which matter notwithstanding their
complexion and essence was not; the Complexions and natures issued out by that
separation. The hot and dry went into the heavens and firmament, each cleaving
apart into its own property. The hot and moist went into the air, by which the
hot and moist are invisibly separated. The cold and moist turned into the Sea
and the parts adjoining. The cold and dry degenerated into the earth and all
earthy things. And even contraries arose from the separation of the Elements,
which have no likeness at all to their Elements. Of this sort is lime, Lime
comeeh out of the fire, yet is not of a fiery nature.
which in respect of its own nature is not fire, though it arises out of the
fire. The cause whereof is this, because the dissolution went too far off from
the fiery nature in the separation of the Element; for the fire has both cold
and moist in it. The fire of lour sorts.
There is a fourfold fire. Therefore the colors that are from the fire are not
always like unto it. One fire causes a white and azure color. The dry fire
makes a red and green. The moist fire makes an ashie and black. The moist
fire casts a color like saffron and red. For this reason one procreation is
hotter then another, because one fire is more or less in degree than another.
Nor is there but one simple and only fire and no more, but there are some
hundreds of fires, Diverse degrees of fire.
yet never a one of the same degree with another. The procreation therefore of
every of them is from its own subject, as a kind of mystery so ordained.

TEXT 17.
Nor did the water obtain one kind of complexion only. Various complexions of
water.
For there were infinite waters in that Element, which yet were all truly
waters. The Philosopher cannot understand that the Element of water is only
cold and moist of it self. It is an hundred times more cold, and not more
moist, and yet is it not to be referred as well to the hotnesse as the
coldness. Nor does the Element of water live and flourish only in cold and
moist of one degree: no neither is it fully and wholly of one degree. Some
waters are fountains, The differences of waters.
which are of many sorts. Some are Seas, which also are many and diverse. Other
are streams and rivers, none of which is like another. Some watery Elements were
disposed of into stones, as the Berill, Crystal, Calcedony, Amethist. Some
into plants, as Coral, etc. Some into juice, as the liquor of life. Many into
the earth, as the moisture of the ground. These are the Elements of water, but
in a manifold sort. For that which grows out of the earth, from the seed that
was sown, that also belongs to the Element of water. Nymphs.
So what was fleshy, as the Nymphs, belong also to the Element of water. Though
in this case we may conceive that the Element of water was changed into another
complexion, yet does it never put off or pass from that very nature of the
Element from which it proceeded. Whatsoever is of the water, turns again
into water: that which is of fire, into fire: that of earth, into earth; and
that of air, into air.

TEXT 18.
In like manner must we think of the Element of the earth, that all things that
are out of the earth do retain the nature thereof. What the mineral moystures
are. Why brimstone burns.
And though the mineral liquors may be taken for fire, yet are they not fire.
Brimstone does not therefore burn because it is of a fiery Element. For that
which is cold will burn as well as that which is hot. That which burns to
ashes is not the Element of fire, but the fire of the earth. And that fire is
not to be taken for the very Element. Nor is it the Element, but only the
wasting of the earth, or of its substance. Water may be made burn.
Water may burn and flame as well as any thing else: and if it burn, then is
it watery fire. Again, whereas the fire of earth will burn and blaze, it is not
therefore to be accounted fiery, Whence a Philosopher should denominate things.
though it be somewhat like to fire. He is but a silly and sensual Philosopher
that calls the element according to that which he perceives. Thus rather
should he think, that the Element it self is far another thing then such a
fire as this. And for what cause? All that moystneth is not the Element of
water. Even the Element of Earth may be brought into water, Earth may be
reduced into water.
yet it remains earth still. Whatsoever, likewise is in the earth, is of the
Element of earth. For it is, and is known by the property of that our of which
it proceeded, and to which it is like. A man may strike fire out of a flint and
calcedony. A flint and calcedony give fire.
That is not elementall fire, but a strong expression out of great hardness.

TEXT 19.
The Element of the air has many procreations in it, all which are yet mere
air. Every Philosopher should well understand this, that no Element can begat
another thing out of it self but that which it is of it self. Like ever
begets its like. Like to like.
So then, seeing the air is invisible, it can bring nothing visible out of it
self. And whereas it is impalpable, it can produce nothing that may be
touched. Therefore (as I may so say) it does melosinate. And though that be
from the air, yea be the very air, and nothing else; What Melosinie is.
yet the conjunction is made in another Element, which is the Earth. For here
may a conjunction be made from the air to a man, as it comes to pass by
Spirits in all witchcrafts and enchantments. The same may be said here as was
of the Nymphs, who though they live in the Element of water, What the Nymphs
are.
and are nothing but water, yet have they freedom to converse with things on
the Earth, and to generate with them. The like compaction also is there from
the air, which may be seen and felt; yet as a procreation of the first
separation, but only as a consequence. For as a beetle is bred of dung, so may
a monster of the airy Element assume a bodily shape with airy words, thoughts
and deeds, by a mixture with that which is earthy. Nevertheless such kind of
miracles and consequences do at last decay again into the air, as Nymphs
turn into water, just as a man by rotting is consumed and turned to earth,
because he came from thence.

TEXT 20.
And thus the procreations proceeded one out of another by the great
separation. From those procreations arose other generations, which have their
mysteries in those procreations, not in like manner as the separation of the
things aforesaid, but as a mistake, or abortion, or excess. Whence thunder is.
Thunder comes from the proceations of the Firmament, because that consists
of the Element of fire. Thunder is as it were the harvest of the Stars at that
very instant of time when it was ready to work according to its nature.
Magical tempests rise out of the air, and there end: not as if the Element of
air begot them, but rather the spirit of the air. The fire conceives some
things bodily, as the Earth does the Gnomes. Likewise ordure comes from men and
beasts, not from the earth. Whence Lorind is.
Lorind rises from the original of water, yet it is not of the water. Many
other things also proceed out of the store either through mistake or in due
time. Crooked men, ^orms, plague famine.
Deformed men, worms, and many more such like generations proceed from the
impressions. The infection of countries, the plague, famine, is from the fatal
storms. Beetles, cankers, Dalni.
Beetles, cankers dalnes, breed in dung. By Lorind is found out the Prophecy
of that country, What Lorind for esheweth.
which is a kind of presage or guessing at strange, wonderful, and unheard of
things to come.

TEXT 21.
What the fourth separ^tion is.
As we have seen a threefold separation made out of the mystery into three
sorts of forms; it remains now that we consider the fourth and last
separation of all, after which there shall be no more; for then all the other
shall perish, and be no longer a mystery. After the fourth all things shall be
reduced into their first principle, and that only remain which was before the
great mystery, and is eternal. Which is not so to be understood, as if I
could be turned into any thing, or as though any thing could be made of me
after the last separation, unless by death: for I shall be brought to nothing,
as in respect of my beginning I came out of nothing. How al^ things are reduced
into their principle.
Now we must know how it comes to pass that all things are brought again into
their original: When they are turned into nothing, then do they consist in
their first Being. Frst of all then we must look after that which is the first
of all. And what that is that goes i^to nothing is no less than a mystery.
My soul in me was made of something, therefore does it not become nothing,
because it was formed of something. But of nothing nothing is made, nothing is
generated. A picture drawn on a table, as it is a picture, The difference
between a man and an image.
was doubtless made of something. But we were not so made of something, as an
image in the air. And why so? but because we came out of the great, not out of
the procreated mystery. Therefore are we brought to n="*" He means as to the
body.
nothing. If you wipe off a picture with a sponge, so that nothing thereof
remain, the table is as it was before. Thus all creatures shall be reduced to
their first state, to wit, to nothing. That we may know wherefore all bodies
must return into nothing, it is because of that which is eternal in the bodies
rational. The last matter is most wonderful.
The last separation of this kind is the ultimate matter. Then will there many
procreations, mixtures, conversions, alterations, transmutations, and such like
things be done, all which are past man's finding out.

TEXT 22.
Again, by Philosophy it is manifest, that whatever is for the succor and
preservation of any frail mortal thing is therewith also equally mortal, nor
can that be joined again that is divided, as milk once turned into curds
becomes milk no more: Milk once turned into curds is no more milk.
thus may we reason also, that the great mystery returns not into that out
of which it came. Whence we may conclude, that all creatures are the picture of
the highest mystery, The creatures are the pictures of the great Secret.
and so nothing else but as a painted color is to the wall. Such is our life
under heaven, that one thing as well as another may be destroyed and turned
into nothing. For as the table or frame of a picture may be destroyed and
burnt; so also may the great mystery, and we with it. And as all the things of
the creatures are wiped away, minished and do perish with the mystery, as a
forest which the fire burns into a little heap of ashes, out of which ashes
but a little glass is made and that glass is brought into a small-beryll,
which beryll vanishes into wind: in like manner we also shall be consumed,
still passing from one thing into another, til there be nothing of us left.
Such as the beginning such is the end of the creatures. The Cypres grows from a
small grain.
If the Cypres tree can spring out of a little grain, surely it may be brought
into as small a quantity as that little kernel was at first. A grain and the
beryll are alike. As it begins in a grain, A grain is the beginning, a bery^^
the and of things.
so it ends in a beryll. Now when the separation is thus made, and every thing
reduced to its nature, or first principle, to wit, into nothing: then is there
nothing within the sky but is endless and eternal. For that by which it is
for ever will there flourish much more largly than it did before the creation,
it having no frailty or mortality in it. As no creature can consume glass, so
neither can that eternal essence be brought to nothing by that which is
eternal.

TEXT 23.
The last separation being the dissolution of all creatures, and one thing
consuming and perishing after another; thereby the time of all those things is
known. What mortal things are eternal.
When the creatures once were, they had no utter ruin in them; for a new seed
still supplyeth the room of the old decayed thing. Thus there is somewhat
eternal, not subject to ruin, in the things that are mortal, by renovation
of another seed, which thing the Philosopher knows not. No seed does admit or
constitute that which is eternal. Yet does it admit putrefaction, when that
which is eternal is taken into the eternal. Man is a companion of the eternal.
In this respect man only among all the rest of the creatures has that which
is eternal in himself joined with that which is mortal. According to what
has been said, the mortal and eternal are joined together: Understand, that
which is mortal prepares an essence in the stomach, and upholdeth the default
of the body. The only cause whereof is, that that of man which is eternal
might live for ever, and that which is mortal might die according to its
frailty. Such as the body, such is the eternal that comes from that body. This
is that which confounds all Philosophy, that the mortal should domineer, and
as it were bear sway as it lists over that which is eternal and that this
also should depend on man: Who thereby is made more a companion of that which
is eternal than if his mortal and eternal both flows from himself. Whence
we moy conclude, that all creatures should live together, the reasonable and
unreasonable, one being serviceable to another, the eternal planted into the
mortal, and these two dwelling together. Hence Philosophy teaches, Destruction
is from contraries.
that all those things cannot be destroyed and confumed that live together
without squabling and fighting, without guile and deceit, without good and
evil. Which otherwise would be, if one should oppose another. Those have no
knowledge or judgment in whom the eternal dwells not. But those things in
whom the eternal is, cannot be destitute of understanding. When things so fell
at odds as to clash one with another, one eternal was forced to give an
account and make satisfaction of wrongs to another. And whereas recompense
belongs to the eternal, What things are subject to destruction.
it must not be repaid by that which is mortal. And though bodies may pacify
and bear with one another; yet if any thing be left here, that is eternal.
Therefore that only is judged that is eternal in us. And though one exact
upon or judge another, yet all mortal things, which have the eternal in them,
must die whether they will or no, so that the eternal only shall stay behind
here, without company of the body. Thus the judgment is finished. For that
only is eternal, nor is there any more of it to come in the last destruction
of every mortal thing. Now if those things, that had the eternal in them,
have so perished, nothing now remains but what was eternal of it self, and
did nourish and increase that which was mortal. That which is good for nothing
does not tarry in the creature. All other things are only for the sake of that
which is eternal. Hence also it is that which has the erernall in it self,
and with it all things that maintained it, may die and perish together. That
only remains that is eternal. Whence the end of all bodily things is
evident, even nothing, to which they all revolt. For they are separated from
their ownessence into nothing that is, from something, into nothing. But man
desires a perfect separation, i. e. of the eternal from the mortal. Now is
the judgment, when the fickleness of all things under heaven is proclaimed.
If there were no reason why a thing should be fragill, the creature should
never die, no death should be in it, but all things would be eternal. The
only reason whereof is this, because we mortals live not in righteousness,
we judge not right judgment among our selves one toward another, nor have we
received the power of the eternal to judge. These things belong to the
eternal. Which seeing it ought to be so, all we must of necessity be brought
and come together. Thus have we found the dissolution of all things.

TEXT 24.
Seeing then all things were created and have their end also out of the first
great mystery, as has been said: it is evident by consequence that there is
some great mystery. Which is no other than as if a house should be built by
(the command of) a word. Understand it thus, that [the mysterie] it applied it
self to the sole supreme; so it is possible that a man may bring fire out of
that which is not fire, where no fire is. A flint has no fire in it self,
though fire come out of it. Know therefore, that all the first mysteries lay
hid and did exist in the great mystery in a threefold manner; The dignity of
the great mystery. Three sorts out of the Mystery.
in respect of things vegetable, elementary, and sensible. The vegetables were
many hundreds, many thousands. Every thing had its own special kind in the
great mystery. To the Elements did there but four belong, for they had but 4
principles. But men had six hundred. The infinity of mysteries.
Crump-feeted men had one, the Ciclopes another, Giants another, the Mechili
another. So had they that dwell on the earth, in the air, in the water, and in
the fire. Things also that grow had every one its own proper mystery in the
great mystery, whence came out many kinds of creatures. So many trees, so many
men, so many mysteries too. But the eternal only does bear rule in man, and
in his whole mystery, and no more in one than in another. In the great
mystery there was not any kind but might infinitely be formed and digested, one
different from another. All which must perish. What more might have been made
from thence we forbear to mention. But that there should be a New great
mystery is impossible; unles that could be made more miraculous, which by
reason of its wonderful nature we cannot sufficiently search out.

THE Second Book.
TEXT 1.
The difference of the creating Gods.
Seeing then there was something by which, when it was separated, all things were
created: first we must conclude that there is some difference of the Gods,
which it this. Since the things created are divided into eternal and mortal;
the reason whereof is, because there was another creator of the mysteries,
besides the chiefest and most high. For the most high (Creator) ought to be the
Judge and corrector of all the creatures, who should know how much was bestowed
on them whereby they might do either good or evil, though they had it not
(immediately) from him. Moreover, the creatures are always egged on and provoked
rather to evil, Man's inclination is to evil.
compeld thereto by the fates, stars, and by the infernal one; which by no
means could have bin, if they had proceeded out of the most high himself, that
we should be forced into those properties of good and evil, but should in all
things have had free will, without any such violent instigation: yet
nevertheless the creature has not so much wisdom as to know good or evil,
to understand the eternal and mortal. For there are many fonles and mad men,
scarce a wise man of a thousand; most are false Prophets, Teachers of lies,
Masters of folly and ignorance, who are accounted for the most eminent, though
they be nothing so. And the reason is plain, for such creatures are we, whose
Masters teach us no perfect good, but are rather seasoned by the mortal God
who had some power in the great mystery, yet n="*" or, They were ordained from
the beginning.
are they ordained by the Eternal for judgment both to themselves and us.

TEXT 2.
Now if it were necessary that all things that were made should consist of, and
proceed from four only, The four Elements are the mothers of all things.
as by the separation we know it was: those four only must be the matrixes of
all the creatnres, which we call the Elements. And though evere creature be yet
an Element or may have some share of the Element, yet it is not like the
Element, but like the Spirit of the Element; Nothing can subsist without an
Element. Nor can the Elements themselves stand together. There is not any thing
that consists either in four, three, or two Elements, but one Element
stands by it self apart, and every creature has but own element. They are
altogether blind who take that which is Moist for the Element of Water, or that
which burns for the Element of fire. We must not limit an Element to a body,
substance, or quality. What an Element is.
That which we see is only the snbject or receptacle. The Element is a Spirit
of lives and grows in those things, as the soul in the body. This is the first
matter of the Elements that can neither be seen nor felt, and yet is in all
things. What the first matter of an Element is.
The sttst matter of the Elements is nothing else but that life which the
creatures have. If any, dye, that subsisteth no more in any Element, but in the
ultimate matter, wherein is no taste, force or virtue.

TEXT 3.
All things consist of the four Elements.
Whereas althings that could be created were made of four mothers, viz. the
four Elements. Take notice further, that those four Elements were fufficient
for all things that were to be created, nor was it requisite that there should
be more or less. In things mortal there can no more but four natures subsist.
But in things immortal the temperaments, may subsist, though the Elements
cannot. Whatever is (as I call it) an elementure, that may be dissolved.
Wherein the Element differs from the temperament.
But on the contrary, the temperature cannot be dissolved. For such is the
condition thereof, that nothing can be added thereto or taken from it, nothing
thereof can putrify or perish. And seeing that condition is mortal, as has
been said, we must know that all things do subsist in four natures, and that
every nature retains the name of its Element. As the Element of fire is hot;
The names of the four Elements.
the Element of earth cold; the Element of water is moist, the element of air
dry. Where we must as well consider, that every of the said natures is
peculiarly such a one by it self apart. For fire is only hot, and not dry,
nor moist. The earth is only cold, not dry, nor moist. The water is only
moist, not hot, nor cold. The air is only dry, not hot, nor cold. And
therefore are they called Elements; The nature of the Elements is simple.
having only one simple, not a double, nature. But their manifestation through
all the creatures must be understood as an Element, that may subsist with a
substance and body, and can there work. The highest knowledge concerning the
Elements is this, that every one of them has but one only simple nature,
either moist, or dry, or cold, or hot. Which is from the condition of spirits.
For every Spirit has a simple, The elements and simple Spirits.
not a double nature; and so have the Elements too.

TEXT 4.
Though we mortals have compounds in us, as hot and moist; yet far otherwise
then the Ancients imagined. The Colic whence it is.
For the Colic is of the Element of fire, yet not compounded of hornesse and
dryness, but is only hot. And so the other complexions. Therefore if we find
any disease mixed with heat and drought, we may suppose that two Elements are
there, one in the liver, another in the spleen, and so in the other members.
There are not two Elements in one member. For certain it is, that every member
has a peculiar element, which we leave to Physicians to define. But this
cannot well be affirmed, that two elements should consist both together, or
that one and the same element should be both hot and moist. Nor can there be
any such compound. There are no compounded Elements, for the reason before
given. Where there is heat, there is neither cold, nor drought, nor moisture.
So where there is coldness, there is none of all the rest. The same may be
said of moisture and dryness. Every Element is simple and solitary by it
self, The Elements are not mixed.
not mixed in composition. The possibility which Philosophers talk of,
concerning a conjuction of the Elements, is as much as comes to nothing. For no
Element of water has any heat in it. Nor can there be any heat in moisture.
Every Element is alone by it self. So also cold cannot of it self endure
dryness: It subsisteth pure by it self. And thus much be spoken to be
understood of the proper essence of the Elements. All dryness is a dissolution
of cold. As moisture and dryness cannot be mixed; so much less can coldness
and dryness or moisture, or heat and dryness close or consist together. For as
heat and cold are contrary things, so heat and cold have a contrariety against
moist and dry.

TEXT 5.
Because all things are constituted of the four Elements, therefore to go
about to prove that those (Elements) must necessarily be mixed together, is very
erroneous. For every mixture is a composition. Therefore they cannot be a
Mystery, because they are compounded. Every mystery is simple, and one only
Element. Now the difference betwixt the elements and compounds is this: How an
Element and compounds differ.
An element, and so may a mystery too, can generate n="*" Divertallum.
something else out of it. A compound can generate nothing, but what is like it
self; as men beget men. But a mystery does not produce a mystery like it
self, but a contrary thing, as a divertallum. The element of fire is the
generatrix of the Stars, What fire is, and does.
Planets, and the whole Firmament, yet neither of them is mede and formed like
this. The element of water made water, which is altogether contrary to the
Element of water; for that of it self is not so moist as the element of water.
The Element of water so^tneth mettalls and stones.
The very element it self of water has such moisture that will soften stones
and hard mettalls. The substantial water takes away that excellent virtue of
mollifying, that its power is not perfect. The element of air is so dry that
it can dry up all waters in a moment. The Element of air dries most
scorchingly.
But that force is taken away and broken by the substantial air. The element
of earth is so cold, that it would bring all things to the ultimate matter, The
Element of earth cools most vehemently.
as water into Crystal, and (*) into Duelech, living creatures into marble,
trees into giants. The fundamental of the elements that may be known is this,
to understand, that they are of such an excellent and quick activity or
efficacy, that nothing besides can be found or imagined like them. The things
wherein those are, be attracted and assumed by them, as fate, that may become
corporal, yet has not one whit of virtue without them.

TEXT 6.
That we may more fully understand what an Element is, we must know that an
Element is nothing but a soul. Not as though it were of the same essence with a
soul, but that it has something like to it. The difference between the soul of
an Element and the eternal soul is this. A comparison between fire and the
soul.
The soul of the Elements is the life of all creatures. The fire that burns
is not the Element of fire, as we see, What fire is.
but its soul which we cannot see is the Element and life of fire. Now the
element of fire may be no less in a green stick than it is in the fire: But
the very life is not alike there as it is in fire. This then is the difference
between the soul and the life. If fire live, it burns: But if it be in the
soul, that is, in its Element, then it cannot burn. Nor does it follow, that a
cold thing must needs proceed from a cold Element; for often times it is from a
hot one. And many cold things come from the Element of fire. Whatsoever does
grow, What are the properties of all the Elements.
is from the Element of fire, but in another form. Whatever is fixed, is from
the Element of earth. That which nourishes, is from the Element of air. And
that which consumes, is of the Element of water. To grow is the property only
of fire. When that fails or goes out, there is no increase. Were it not for
the Element of earth, there would be no end of growth. It Is that that fixes,
that is, it limiteth the Element of sire. So were it not for the Element of
air, there could be no nourishment. For all things are nourished by the air
only. Also nothing could be dissolved or consumed, were it not for the Element
of water, by which all things are mortifyed and brought to nothing.

TEXT 7.
The true Elements are insensible.
But though the Elements are thus hid and do altogether exist invisible and
insenfible in other things, yet have they power to bring forth their mysteries.
Thus the Element of fire sent forth the Firmament; not in respect of the
bodies, but in respect of the elementar essence. The Sun has another body
besides what it had from the Element of fire. Yet this is essentially in it
with heat. Nor is the heat thereof by motion and rotation, but it is from it
self. The Sun warm as well as shine if it stood still and did never move at
all. The Sun is hot though it stood still.
Crystal made the Sun of the element of fire, though this has no other body
but what it had from the Element of fire. Thence (as I may so speak) are the
bodied Elements. Whence the Elements had their bodies.
The Moon and other Stars also had their beginning from the Element of fire:
but only of a red color, in which is no heat or burning, but has only a
kind of deadish luster cleaving to it. And though various signs in respect of
form and shape appear in heaven; of which we will not now speak: yet such a
form is such a form is meant as we have here on earth. And not one only, but
diverse, some whereof we know, others we do not. For when the mystery of the
Element of fire was separated, every thing came forth, such as we now see it.
The Stars are the children of fire.
The Stars then are the daughters of the Element of fire: and heaven is nothing
but a chaos, that is, a vapor breathing out of the Firmament, but so hot as
cannot be expressed. That fervor or burning heat is the cause of lightnings,
glooms and appearances. In that region is the pure Element of fire, of which
more largely in its place.

TEXT 8.
As the fire brought forth various shapes and essences: in the same manner also
did the Element of air produce the like. Elementary things differ from one
another.
Though the four Elements differ somewhat in those things that are gendred out
of themselves. For every of them gendred some one thing in special and
peculiar to it self. The Firmament is like none of the other three. Fate is
from the air, yet is it not like any of the three rest. Those that belong to
the earth are not in the least like any of the other three. So likewise is it
with Sea Monsters in relation to other things. Every creature begat both
reasonable and unreasonable creatures in it self. Heaven, There are rational
and irrational creatures in every Element.
as well as the Element of earth, has rational creatures in the Firmaments. In
like manner the fate of the air is distinguished in its signature by reason
and bruitishnesse. The same also is true of the earth and water. Now who is he
that can tell us what the truth is which within the four sealed Elements, who
are they to whom the true faith and right way of salvation is committed and
entrusted, or who alone are they that shall inherit eternity, which we will now
pass by? Men live in all the Elements.
It must needs be, that men live in all four, as if they did but in one
Element, to wit, the earth. As touching destiny, we are to understand, How sa^e
is generated.
that its generation out of the Element is manifold, yet without any body and
substance, according to the property of the air (which is not corporeal) and
its habitation. Some are corporeal, others cannot be touched, as we know.

TEXT 9.
Most manifest it is, that out of one seed the root sprouteth into many sprigs,
then into the stalk, afterward the boughs shoot out, lastly the flower, fruit
and seed put forth. Just so is it in the various procreations out of the four
Elements. The various procreations of the Elements.
All which procreations that are from one Element cleave close to each other,
as an herb grows from one seed. Though they be not all permiscuously alike
to their seed. The creatures which are made of the water, are partly men,
partly living creatures, and partly the food of both. One Element clearly
discovers its own signature, want, and sustentation; as also hinteth its
course and coming, which may easily be known by the stars, not as though the
stars do guide and govern us, but they keep pace with us, and imitate the
inward motion of our body. Whatever is made in the Element of earth, is also
made in the Element of water. For Lorind is the commotion of the change of that
Element of water. What Lorind is.
When this moves it self in the Element of water, yet then is the Element of
earth moved too. Lorind is like a comet or blazing star. The monster of the sea
may be considered, as the error of the Firmament. So that a peculiar world,
with its mystery, to the end of the world, may be found out in the water. They
have the same principle with the other Elements. Their end is no other, but as
the rest of the Elements is. The only difference is of the forms, essence, and
natures, that happen to them, with their signatures and Elements. How there are
four worlds.
Hence we may find four worlds, according to the four Elements and primary
habitations; but there is but one Eternal, in righteousness, equally to be
known in all four.

TEXT 10.
From the Element of Earth we may learn very much, that out of it we came. Man
was made of the earth.
Every like knows its like. The knowledge of the other Elements flows from
Philosophy. But this is a thing like (us) issuing from experience, out of which
afterward Philosophy grows up. But as the Element of Earth procreated a
signature, so likewise did all the rest. As we have stones, There are sto^es in
every Element.
so have the other Elements as many. Indeed those stones are not like ours, but
are made after their own proper form. The rest of the Elements have their
mineralls too as well as we. The celestial Firmament has mineralls both of
flowers and stones, which we may rank amongst the miracles. A mistake about
celestial minera^ls.
Though here we may easily be deceived, and quickly run our selves aground
while we stickle so much to have the natural courses reckoned among prodies,
and that this or that hue of the Firmament fore-sheweth some singular thing;
thus we praesage like Prophets, whereas we should rather conclude that such
things come to pass according to the natural course of the Firmament. But if
any such thing should at any time so f^ll out, we should believe, that such was
our course and state. Mean while if any thing of the Elements be faulty, that
same will enfeeble the rest. For all things should run in a perfect and
uninterrupted course. And though the other three Elements serve to nourish us;
yet are they ready to serve the Firmament, and the air, and the water too, and
those things that are in them. One thing is nourished by another, as many trees
in an orchard. And we may take notice of the slips and failings of the
Firmament, as well as the Firmament does observe our defects. The same may be
said of all the rest.

TEXT 11.
It is silly and vain Philosophy to place all happiness and eternity in our
Element of earth. Earthy men are not happy.
A foolish opinion it is, to boast that we only of all creatures are the most
noble. There are more worlds than one, nor are there none besides us in our
own. But this ignorance is much more capital, that we know not those men who
are of the same Element with us, as the Nocturnales, Gnomes, etc. What the
Nocturnales and Gnomes are.
Who though they live not in the clear glory of heaven, nor have any light of
the Firmament, but hate what we love, and love what we hate, and though they
are not like us in form, essence, or sustentation; yet is there no cause of
wonder: For they were made such in the great Mystery. We are not all that were
made, there are many more, whom we know not of. Therefore we must conclude,
that there were more bodies than only one simple body shut up in the great
Mystery, though in general there was but eternal and mortal there. But in
what various shapes and sorts they brought forth, no man can tell. This doubt
will be wholly removed when the eternity of all those things shall meet
together. Then certainly many unknown things shall be fully found out and made
known many ways, not only of those things which have the eternal in
themselves, but also of those things which have sustained and nourished that
eternal. There is a twofold eternal: The eternal is twofold.
One of the kingdom and domination; the other of ornament and honor. That
flowers should not be eternal is clean contrary to Philosophy; Flowers have
the eternal in them.
which though they wither and perish, yet at last they shall appear in the
general meeting together of all things. There is nothing created out of the
great Mystery but shall have an image without the Firmament.

TEXT 12.
There ought to be neither more nor less than four mothers of all things, as
all procreations show. Not that the great Mystery, whereof we now treat, can
be found out by way of universal demonstration what manner of thing it is,
according to its properties in the beginning: But the great Mystery is rather
known and understood by the last mysteries and by the procreations which did
spring and proceed out of the first. By what the great Mystery may be known.
It Is not the beginning, but the end that makes a man a Master and Philosopher.
The knowledge of a thing according to its perfect nature is found out only in
the end of its being. Possibly there might have been more Elements made than
now there be. There are but four Elements in all things.
But in the utmost knowledge of all things there are but four to be found. And
though we may suppose that it had been easy for God, who created but four, to
have made them many more; yet when we see that all mortal things consist but
of four only, we may conclude that more than these could not well stand
together. And it is most likely that when the said four Elements perish, that
then others shall arise according to every essence unlike the former: or that
after the destruction of the creatures already made, there shall be a new great
mystery, the knowledge whereof will be greater and better than of the former.
But this we lay not here as a fundamental, yet he that would understand the
beginning of the world must of necessity consider that it had its rise out of
the Elements: Four world for four Elements.
and as there are four Elements so there are four worlds, and in every one a
peculiar kind, taught how to subsist in their necessities.

TEXT 13.
But though all things subsist in the said four Elements: All the Elements are
not in all things.
we do not mean that the four Elements are in althings, or that the four
Elements dwell in all. The reason is, because the world which is separated and
procreated of the element of fire has no need of air, water, or earth. So the
world of air needs none of the other three. Which is true also of the earth
and water. Concerning the elements, we teach not that the world cannot be
preserved without the four Elements: but rather that every thing is preserved
by that one element from whence it sprang. And though I deny not, but that the
firmament does nourish the world by its elementary virtues which do wholly
descend fiery on the earth: How the Firmament nourishes the earth.
yet that nourishment is not necessary. Nor will the world perish of it self,
for it has sufficient to sustain it self, as the other world maintains it
self without the help of the earth. As for example. The waters earth
contributeth nothing to its proper essence; nor the earths water to it. So is
it with the air. But it is not sufficient that every world does solitarily or of
it self subsist in its Element; What the light of heaven is.
but rather that the light from heaven is as a kind of extract of the four
Elements, most exellent in a full and perfect propriety. But let none think
that the Sun or Planets did receive their luster or motion from the Element of
fire, but rather from the Mystery. The brightness of the Firmament that does
irradiat the world, did not flow from the Element of fire, but from the
mystery. The earth brings Trone, Tronus, Turas, Samies.
the water Ture, the air Samies: These proceed not from the Element, but from
the Mystery, yet are in the Element. Thus the four worlds that came out of the
Mysteries do agree to help each other, to nourish and sustain one another: Not
from the nature of Elements, for they themselves are Elements.

TEXT 14.
Man's life, fight, etc. whence it is.
It is not from the Elements that man does live, see, hear, etc. but from the
mysteries, or rather from the monarchy; And so all things else. The Elementary
thing is but an Inn and a repast. Know also that whatsoever is eternal comes
from the Mystery, and is the same thing. Dogs die, but their mystery does
not: Man dies, but his mystery surviveth, and much more his soul whereby he
is by so many degrees more excellent then a dog; The same may be said of all
things that grow. The mystery of all things shall an last be manifest.
Hence is that mistake, that all creatures that ever were shall not appear
essentially as they do now, but mystically in the last great new mystery. We
say not that the mystery is an essence like that which is immortal, What a
mystery is.
but that it is perfectly a mystery. The Element of fire has a mystery in it,
How mist. and the Elements differ.
from which the other three have their light, luster, influence, growth, and
not from the Element. Those mysteries also may subsist without an Element, as
an Element may without a mystery. Observe further, that the Element of air
has a mystery in it, by which all the other three, What the Elements be, and
what kind of mysteries they have.
and it self too, are nourished; Not Elementarily of it self, but mystically
by the Element. The Element of Earth has in it a mystery of mansion and
fixation, by virtue whereof the other continue and increase, that nothing
perish. The Element of water has a mystery of sustentation for all the rest,
and preserves all that is in them from destruction. In this respect there is
difference between an Element and a mystery: One is mortal and corruptible
from the Elements; the other is durable in the last great mystery, wherein all
things shall be renewed, but nothing made that was not before.

TEXT 15.
The Elements are all alone.
We conclude then that all the Elements cannot be joined together; but that they
be solitarily and unmixedly altogether either aerie, or fiery, or earthy, or
watery. The elements nourish themselves.
We have also dispatched this, that every Element maintains it self, and
that which does come from it, as its own world. Therefore a medicine of the
Element water will do no good to those things that are of the Element of
earth, or of any other Element, but only to the Nymphs, Syrenes, Nymphs, etc.
and such like. So a medicine of the earth will not help the other three
worlds, but only the living creatures of its own world. And so of the air:
There are diseases, Physicians, skillful, and unskilful, in the air, which
have their peculiar motion there, as in their own world. The same may be said
of fire. The Nymphs gender with earthy things.
Now if it so chance that at any time the Nymphs couple with earthy things and
beget children, that is to be imputed to the faculty or power of ravishment. So
do Melosines and Trifertes.
Aerie things, as the Melosines, may ravish earthy things. The Trifertes are
snacht out of the fire by earthy things. If then those three foreign worlds
plant men in our world, as we have said, they are to be known in their whole
essence as Gods in respect of us, by reason of that huge distance and very
strange essence which they have. How Elements may be joined.
But on the other hand, if any of us be caught away by them, there is a
contrary rape from us to them. Thus one Element has no need of another: one is
but the cabinet or conceptacle of the other. As water and earth separate from
each other: so air and fire have their peculiar lotts, without any other
contiguity, but like walls, and according to the inclination of the mysteries
out of all the four.

TEXT 16.
But if there shall be any such meeting or conjunction, whereby althings return
into their former essence: then that will be a mystery, according to the aspect
and face of the Element. For there no bodily thing by generation can appear,
but the appearance and presentaneous exhibition shall fill that place wherein
all creatures were contained, and so every one shall know those things that
were made either before or after him, as if he had seen them before with his
eyes, yet nevertheless here the sense of the last great mystery is hidden.
Nor shall that be known by nature, but by the knowledge of the causes of the
last separation of the Elements and all the creatures, when every one shall
give an account of his death: this is the case of the mortal, and of the
living, and of that which endures to the end. There is one Judge from
eternity. Whence the variety of Religions comes.
There will be the only Judge that has eternal power, and who has been the
alone Judge in all ages. This is the cause of all Religions and the original
of religious men worship the Gods: all which custom is false and erroneous.
For there was never any other but one God, who is the eternal Judge. It is too
blasphemous foolishness to worship a mortal, frail, perishing rotten creature
instead of the author of all things, and ruler of eternity. Whatsoever is
mortal has no power to rule and reign. There is then but one only way and
Religion, and it is madness to affirm more.

TEXT 17.
What Predest^nation is.
When all creatures thus return their predestinations, then there will be a
mystery. Predestinanion is the last matter, which will be without an Element,
and without a present essence^ but the things that shall then abide will be
more temperate and incorrupt. This must not be understood of the spirit, but of
nature, with this evidence, that something eternal comes in the room of that
which is mortal. Things mortal leave behind them that which is immortal.
For if insensible plant perish, its place is supplied by that which is
eternal. Nor is there any one frail or mortal thing in all the world which
does not substitute something that is eternal in its place. Nothing is empty
or vain, no corruptible thing was created without a succession of that which
is eternal. When all creatures come to an end, then those things that are
eternal shall meet and come together, not only as nourishments, but rather to
the office or chief rule of nature both in the mortal and eternal. Thus the
eternal is a sign or token of the dissolution of nature, and not the beginning
or principle of things created; it is in all things which no nature is
destitute of. And though the Fatalls also, as the Melosines and Nymphs shall
leave the eternal behind them; yet we shall say nothing of their corruptions
at this time. There is a fourfold putrefaction of the creatures.
As there are four worlds. so we must know that there is a manifold
putrefaction. There is an earthy, there is an airy, there is a fiery, and a
watery putrefaction. Every thing, and what was created with it, together with
the eternal that remains, is brought and turned to destruction. Yet those
four putrefactions shall bring back their eternal into one similitude with
renown and glory, not with its works, but with its essence. A solitary
habitation is a kind of eternity, but abounding in many seperations or
distinctions.

TEXT 18.
We are come now to speak of the EVESTRUM, What the Ever is.
which according to its essence is either mortal or immortal. The Evester is
a thing like a shadow on the wall. The shadow rises and waxes greater as the
body does, and continues with it even unto its last matter. The Evestrum takes
its beginging at the first generation of every. Things animate and inanimate,
sensible and insensible, and whatsoever casts a shadow, all of them have
their Evester. TRARAMES is the shadow of an invisible essence. Trarames is the
Evester of invisible things.
It springs up with the reason and imagination of intelligent and brute
creatures. To discourse rightly or Philosophically of the Evestrum and Trarames
requires the highest wisdom. The Evester makes to Prophecy. Trarames gives
sharpness of wit. To foretell what shall befall a man, beast, tree, etc. is
by the shadowy Evester; but the reason why it should be so, is from the
Trarame. The difference of Evesters.
Some Evesters have a beginning, some have not. Such as have a beginning may be
dissolved, with the surviving eternal. That which is without beginning has
power in the understanding to whet or provoke that which has a beginning
toward the Traramium. The mortal Evester knows the eternal. This knowledge
is the mother of a Prophet. The ground of every understanding is extracted and
culled out of the Evester, as it were by the light of nature. A Prophet
therefore does Evestrate, that is, he does Prophecy from the Evester. But if a
spirit Prophecy, it does so without the light of nature. And therefore may
deceive us, being full of guile and doubtful, as well as prove certain and
true. Thus Trarames also would be divided in the shadow of reason.

TEXT 19.
Again, when all things shall be dissolved then Evester and Trarames too shall
come to an end, yet not without some relics of eternity. The Evester is no
otherwise but as it were the eternal of the firmament in the four worlds. The
Firmament is fourfold, There is a fourfold Firmament.
divided into four perfect essences, according to the four worlds, every world
perfectly respecting its own creature, being just such another thing as it
self is; one creature out of the firmament in the earth, one in the water,
air, fire. The firmament that is in the Evester is dispersed: those be not
Stars which we see, they are the firmaments of the Nymphs, which are not Stars,
nor have any use of Stars, but have their peculiar and proper firmament, as the
Fates they have a fiery one, every one has an heaven, earth, mansion,
habitation, firmament, Stars, Planets, and other such like, which are not in
the least one like anonother; As water and fire, substance and that which
cannot be felt, visible and invisible are to each other, so are those things.
In these the Evester is divided in the fatalls, and its shadow stays behind
the essence after the dissolution; and the Evester when the fire is out
cleaves to the fiery man, as another to the watery, A great number of Evesters.
and so to the earthy. This Evester is that which deceives and makes the
world mad, cunningly covering it self from one world to another, showing
visions, flashes, signs, forms and shapes. Hence arises the Evester of
comets, the Evester of impressions, the Evester of miracles. The Evester
Prophesies and shadoweth.
But these three Evesters are Prophesying Evesters, or shady Everters. The high
and noble mind is with the Prophetic and Umbratick Evesters.

TEXT 20.
The Prophetic Evester is first necessary to be known. For the great Turban,
What the great Turban is.
which presageth all things that are in the four worlds, is of the same kind of
essence. Whatsoever shall fall out monstrously, or happen contrary to nature,
or contrary to life and common expectation, is known by the Prophetic Evester,
which overshadoweth it self, and is taken out of the great Turban. A Prophet
must of necessity know the great Turban. It is united to reason, and hard to be
found out. The excellency and height of it.
But it is possible for man to know the great turban, even to its utmost
resolution. From this it was that all the Prophets spoke. For in it are all the
signs of the world. Out of it are all Evesters begotten: by it the comets,
those prodigious Stars, which are besides the usual course of heaven, are
shadowed. All impressions have their original from the Turban, not from the
Firmament or Stars. When any strange and uncouth thing is at hand, there are
forerunners and harbingers sent forth, by whom the evil that shall befall a
people is presaged to them. And those presagings are not from nature, but from
the Prophetical Evester. All pestilences, all wars, all seditions, have their
presages from the turban. He that knows the Evester is a Prophet, and can
tell things to come. The most high over all does not discourse with mortals,
nor does he send his Angels to them from his throne and dwelling place to
declare such things; but those things are fore-known and understood from the
great Turban, The great Turban worshipped as God.
which many Pagans and Jews, darkened in the true sense and understanding,
have worshipped as a God.

TEXT 21.
What the Umbrate Evester signifies.
Since that the shadowed Evester begins and springs up with every creature:
we must know, that the fortune and life of that thing where the Evester is may
be prognosticated by it. For example. When a child is born, at the same time
the Evester is born with him, continually manifest in him, that it presageth
from the cradle to the very hour of death, and can show what will become of
that infant. So when one is ready to die, death seizes not on him till the
Evester has first past sentence, either by blow, bruise, or fall, or some such
other kind of example; by which if a man perceive the Evester, he may see a
sign of his approaching death. The Evester is united to the eternal. The
Evester abides in the world after death.
For a man's Evester remains in the earth after his death, and hinteth in its
kind whether the man be in bliss or misery. Nor ought we to say that it is the
spirit or soul of a man, as simple people speak, or that it is the dead man
that walks; But it is the dead man's Evester, which departs not hence till
the last minute when all things shall come together. This Evester works
strange things. The Saints wrought miracles by their Evester.
Holy men wrought miracles by their Evester only. As the Sun by his shining
gives forth his heat, nature and essence; so is it with the divining and
Prophetical Evesters in us, to which we should give credit. These rule and
moderate sleep, fond dreams, prefigurations of things to come, the natures of
things, reason, concupiscences and thoughts.

TEXT 22.
Whereas things to come may thus be known before in the Elements, by that
wherein the Evesters dwell; some Evesters will be in the water, some in looking
glasses, some in crystalls, some in polished muskles; some will be known by the
commotions of waters, some by songs and by the mind: For all these can (as I
speak) Evestrate. The mysterious Evester of God.
The most great and blessed God has a mysteriall Evester, in which his essence
and property is beheld. Every good, and every enlightened thing is known by the
mysterious Evester. On the contrary, What the Evester of the damned is.
the damned has his Evester in the world, by which the evil is known, and all
whatsoever violateth and breaks the law of nature. Although those two may
Evestrate, yet do they nothing belong to our life. For we shall not know our
selves but by our own Evester. All creatures have Evesters.
Every thing has an Evester; all which likewise are Prophets, either
reasonable or unreasonable, sensible or insensible. The Evester is a spirit,
What an Evester is.
which teaches Astronomy. Not that it is learned by nativities and
prognostications from the Stars; but its esse (as I may so say) is from the
Evesters; its Ens (or being) is in these, as an image in a glass, or as a shade
in water or the earth. As growing things are increased and diminished, just so
it is with the Stars. Not that their course is such of their own nature, and
that moist and cold rise out of the earth; but only because the essence of the
earth is such. It is shadowed in heaven but by parts, yet as an Evester, but
not as a power.

TEXT 23.
Such kind of Evesters also will be corrupted, yet shall they not perish
without something eternal. Nor shall the Evesters themselves be so much
regarded, for they shall fully and wholly dwell with or in those things to whom
they belong. Hence let every man now advise with himself, that above all
things he admonish and learn to know himself. The infinite number of Evesters.
The nature and number of the Evesters is infinite. These lead men about in
their sleep, fore-shew good and evil, search out the thoughts, perform work
and do business without bodily motion. So wonderful a thing is the Evester, A
commendation of the Evester.
the mother of all things in the Prophets, Astronomers, and Physicians. If the
understanding come not from the Evester, there can be no knowledge of nature.
As theft poynteth to the gallows, and the clouds to rain, and urine to the
disease, so the Evester shows all things without exception, The Sibylls and
Prophets spoke by the Evester.
From it the Sybills and Prophets spoke, but as it were drowsily and
dreamingly. After this manner are the Evesters in the four worlds, one being
always a presage to another, communicates an image and a miracle: which by
there disolution and regeneration will be much more to be admired. Nor shall we
forbear to say, that the Evester is an Eternal relict, the support of
religions, and the operation of the Celestialls. Nothing but felicity,
blessedness, the chiefest good and the last judgment move and stir us up to
seek and search more narrowly and exactly after the difference between those
two, (things or Evesters) that is, between the true and false: which is to be
considered and known, not spiritually, but naturally.

THE Third Book.
TEXT 1.
Nothing is without a body.
EVery thing that has a Being must nf necessity have a body. The manner and
reason thereof is, that we may know it is like a smoakie spirit that has
neither substance, nor body, nor can be felt. And though it be neither of
these; yet both bodies and substances may proceed out of it. Thus may we
conceive of fuming Arsnicke, that after the generation of a body there is no
more of the fume of the spirit to be seen, no more then if all were turned into
a body. Which yet is not so: for it still remains most subtle in that place
of generation. And so both the visible and invisible are brought forth together
by separation. After this way and manner all things are propagated. How al
things are imbodied.
Wood has still a surviving spirit from which it is separated. So have stones,
and all things else, none excepted. For their Essence still remains just as
it was separated from them. What man is, and how made.
Man likewise is nothing but a relic and the remainder of smoke separated.
But yet note that he was a kind of spirit before. Of this dross was man made,
and is a thing most subtle in spirit. Yea, he is that very spirit, that is, A
twofold eternal.
a discovery or sign of a twofold Eternal; one of Caleruthum, the other of
Meritorium. Caleruthum, what it is.
Caleruth is a note or discovery in the first Eternal. This seeks or
desires the other, that is, God. The cause thereof is natural, Like seeks
its like.
because all things affect and contend for that out of which they came, and
desire those natures that are nearest to them. Whatsoever the Creator did give
or use when he made a thing, that very same thing also does the thing created
earnestly desire and press after. Yet we must know, that the creature does not
desire his Creator by nature or natural instinct, but rather seeks after that
out of which it came. Thus man's body does not desire God, but the matter out of
which it was separated; for it was not taken out of God. And that matter is the
life and habitation wherein the eternal meritorium dwells: thus every thing
returns to its own essence.

TEXT 2.
Now seeing every thing is greedily desirous of its original, viz. of the
mystery out of which it proceeded: we are further to consider, that that thing
is everlasting life; and that which comes from thence is mortal.
Nevertheless in the mortal there abides that which is eternal, to wit, the
soul, as may elsewhere be learned. And though corruptible things must return to
their former state, How corruptible things return to their first state.
it is because the durable things may be knit together, and so there may a
collection and union of things be made. The form and substance of things both
perishing and permanent is from the spirit of smoke, just as hail or lightning
is from the cloud, which things have a body; Althings proceed from the
invisible.
but that matter out of which they came is invisible. We must conclude that all
things proceed from the invisi^ly, but without any hurt or damage to it; and
that matter has power always to renew the same thing again. Hence it is,
that the whole world passes away like a ship, and returns again to the same
matter of the spirit of smoke, and gendreth and nourishes without any tangible
essence. In this respect the first may be brought forth the second time. Hereby
also we know there was no creature begotten, but made and procreated. For so
the chiefest good ordained in the beginning, that every thing should fo proceed
out of the invisible, and be made bodily; and then be separated again from the
body, and so become invisible again: then all things are coupled and united
again, and brought back to the first matter. And though they are so united, yet
is there some difference and diversity among them. One receives entertainment
from another, one gives entertainment to another. That (first matter) is the
habitation of all things, both sensible and insensible must all return to that
place and condition; whether ^ationall or irrational, nothing can escape this
change, but shall certainly repair and hasten to its dwelling whence it came.

TEXT 3.
The body is (...) curdled smoke.
Every body or tangible substance is nothing but a curdled fume. Whence we may
conclude that there is a manifold coagulation. One of wood, another of stones,
a third of mettalls. But the body is nothing but a fume, smoking out of the
matter or matrix in which it is. So that which grows out of the earth is a
Fume rising out of the moisture of Mercury, Bodies are made as it were out of a
fume.
which is various, and sends forth several fumes for herbs, trees, and
other such like. Which fume when it breaks forth of its first (matter, essence
or original) or as soon as it does first breath out of the matrix and touch or
stop the outward air, is presently curdled. This fume then does constantly and
continually evaporate. So long as that appulse keeps warm, so long a thing
will grow; when the boiling cease there is no more steam: And so the curdling
and increase comes to an end. Wood is the smoke of Derses. Therein lies the
specific (matter) of which is made. Nor is it made of that fume only, Wood is
from the smoke of Derses.
but it may be made of some other dersick matter. In like manner Leffas is the
seething matter from whose fume all herbs do spring. Herbs spring from the
smoke of Leffas.
Only Leffa and nothing else is the sole predestination of herbs. God is much
more wonderful in specificks than in all other natures. Stannar is the mother
of metals* Stannar is the mother of mettells.
which ministers the first matter to metal by its stream. Mettalls are
nothing but thickened smoke from Stannar. Enur is the smoke of stones. Enur is
the matter of stones.
Briefly, whatsoever has a body is nothing but curdled smoke, wherein a
particular predestination lies hid. And all things shall at last vanish like
smoke. For that specific which does coagulate has power but for a certain
appointed time. The same must be understood of the coagulation. For all bodies
shall pass away and vanish into nothing but smoke, Bodies vanish into smoke.
they shall all end in a fume. This is the end of things corporeal both living
and dead.

TEXT 4.
Man is composed of smoke.
Man is a coagulated fume. The coagulation of the spermatick matter is made of
nothing but the seething vapors and spermatick members of the body. This shall
be resolved again into the like vapor, that the end may be as the beginning
was. We see nothing in our own selves but thickened smoke made up into a man by
humane predestination. All food is but a curdled fume.
All that we take and eat is but a thickened fume from the humors or moisture.
What we eat is consumed by the life, upon this score, that the coagulation
might melt and be dissolved again, as the Sun thaweth the ice, that it may
pass into the air like smoke. Life wastes all things. It is a spirit that
consumes all substances and bodily things. Take notice here of the separation
of the digested mystery: If every thing return to its first state whence it
came, then that which we eat will be consumed together with our life. This is
meant of those things that are not changed. For transmutation cannot be beaten
back or hindered. Life makes every change.
Life is the cause of all transmutation. So then transmutation is altered into
fragility of body, but is separated again from the body. When it putrifieth
transmutation has no more force, the mystery of that which is separated
follows in putrefaction. All the properties which man has in him of herbs and
other things are separated one from another, every thing packing to its own
essence. This separation is like that when ten or twelve things are mixed
together, and then separated again, that so every one may receive its peculiar
essence. Thus often eating is nothing but a dissolution of bodies. Whence the
matter of bodies is separated by vomits and purges, that it becomes nothing but
a stinking fume, mixed with something that is good. Nature only affects
that which is subtle or pure, the gross it rejects. The life dissolveth
stones, mettalls, the earth, and all things; they have no other separation from
the body but by the life.

TEXT 5.
Again, we are as well to understand how every thing receives its essence.
This cannot more fitly be compared to any thing than to fire, which we strike
out of a hard flint, flaming and burning contrary to all natural knowledge. As
that hidden fire breaks forth, and burns; in the same manner and form is the
essence brought into its nature. Here consider, that in the beginning there was
but one thing, without any inclination and form, from which afterward all
things came forth. An example from colors to explain the Great Mystery.
That rise or original was no other but as a temperate color, suppose purple,
having no inclination in it to any other color, but plainly to be seen in its
just temperature. Yet in it are all colors. The red, green, azure, yellow,
white, black color cannot be separated from it. And every one of these colors
have many dark colors come from them, yet every one thoroughly and rightly
tinctured by it self. And though various and contrary colors lie hid in them,
yet all are hid under one. After the same manner every thing had its essence in
the great mystery, which afterward the supreme workmaster separated. Crystal
will strike fire, not from a fiery nature, Crystal has all the Elements in it.
but from solidity and hardness. This also has the other Elements in it, not
essentially, but materially, viz. the burning fire, the breathing air, the
moystning water, And color too.
the black and dry earth. Besides all these it has all colors (but hidden in
it) in the mixture of their qualities, as fire in steel, which discovers it
self neither by burning, nor shining, nor casting any color. In this respect
all colors and all the Elements are in every thing. If any be desirous to know
how allthings should thus come and penetrate into all things, he must believe
that all this came to pass and was exactly and accurately ordered by that
only one who is the former and Architect of all things.

TEXT 6.
Invisible things are made visible by bodies.
Although nature, as we have said, be invisibly in bodies and substances; that
invisibility comes to a visibility by means of those bodies. As is the essence
of every, so is it visibly seen in virtues and colors. Invisible bodies have
no other, but this kind of bodily consideration. Therefore observe, that
invisible things have all the Elements in them, and do operate in every
Element. They can send the fire and virtue of their Element out of themselves;
they can send forth air, as a man does his breath; also water, as a man does
urine; they have the nature of earth too, and came from the earth. Take it
thus, the liquor or moisture of the earth does boil daily, and sends an high
that subtle spirit which it had out of it self. Hereby invisible things and
the Firmament it self are nourished, How the Firmament and things invisible
are nonrished.
which without a vapor cannot be. Things incorporeall can no more live without
meat and drink than corporeal things. Therefore stones grow out of the earth,
but from a spirit like their own nature. Every stone draws its own spirit to
it self. Whence fiery Dragons and Ghosts are.
From such like proceed Ghosts and fiery Dragons, and many more. If then
invisible things as well as visible be conversant in their essence, it is from
the nature of the great mystery, as wood is set on fire by a candle or taper,
which loses or wastes nothing thereby. And though it be not corporeal, yet
it must have that which is corporeal to preserve it self alive, Things
invisible are sustained by visible things.
to wit, wood. Likewise all invisible things must be sustained, nourished and
increased by something visible. With which also at last they shall perish and
come to an end all alike: yet nevertheless still keeping their operation and
activity in them, without loss or damage of other things; except there be an
effusion of those corporeal and visible things. Although that be done by the
invisible, and found out or known in the visible, etc.

The rest (for doubtless the Author wrote more) are not to be found.
READER,
WHat I have done in the Version of these two singularly eminent men,
Paracelsus and Crollius, has been rather as a Translator than an Interpreter,
that the Authors sense more than mine might be searched out. Although the
translation be not so elegant and significant as the original, yet (if my
judgment fail not) the matter is preserved entire and sound. In both Tracts
thou will meet with some uncouth and unusual words which for thy better
understanding (who art not acquainted with such language) I have here
alphabetically explained, as follows.

A
ADECH, is our inward and invisible man, which first shapeth those things in
the mind that afterward are done with the hands. Arcana, secrets or mysteries.
Arcanum, a secret; or (according to Parac.) the hidden incorporeall virtue in
natural things. Archaltes, the prop or p^^lars of the earth. Archeus, the
chief, exal^^d, invisible spirit: the occult virtue, artificer, Physician of
nature in every one. Astra, Stars; also the force and virtue of things by
preparations. Bisemutum, the palest or worst sort of lead; it is Tin-glasse.
C
Cabala, that most secret knowledge, which the Hebrew Rabbis say was given by
God with the Law of Moses. Caleruth, a note or sign of the desire, when a
thing tends to its first matter and would return whence it came. Cobaltum, a
stone whereof matter is made behoofull to Medicine. It is a Mineral.
D
Derses, a secret vapor of the earth whence wood grows. Diameae, spirits
living among stones and rocks. Divert^ilum, the generation that is from the
Elements. Dramae. Duelech, a kind of tartar in man's body, a spongy stone very
precious. Durdales, spirits that have bodies and live among trees.
E
Enur, the occult vapor of water from which stones are bred. Evestrum, is that
perpetual thing of the Firmament in the Elemementary world; it is taken for a
Prophetical spirit foretelling things to come by precedent signs and tokens:
to Evestrate is to speak by that spirit.
F
Flagae, spirits that know the secret and hidden things of men.
G
Gabalum, Gebalum, a thing repaired, restored, or curdled. Gabalis homo, such a
man. Gamahaea, is when a living thing is affected or wrought upon by its
figure, as when a Pigeon is cast dead from the top of the house only by
thrusting a pin through the picture of it on paper. Gnomes, Gnomi, are little
men, dwarfs, or rather spirits with bodies living under the earth, Pigmies
scarce half a foot high. Gonetick.
H
Hilech; astrum medicinae, or the spirit hid in medicine.
I
Iliaster, the first matter of all things, consisting of salt, sulphur, and
mercury: generally it is taken for the occult virtue of nature, by which all
things increase, grow, multiply and are nourished. Vid. Lex. Chym.
L
Leffa, Leffas, is the juice of the earth newly drawn into the root of the
vegetables, by which they grow. Lemores, Lemures, are the spirits of the
element of water, not the shapes and ghosts of dead men, as the heathen
imagined. Limboan, alias Lymbus, is the first matter or seed of the world, or
all things in it. Lorind, is the moving of the waters, with a musical noise,
and is a sign of some change at hand.
M
Marcasita, the raw or unripe matter of mettalls. Mechili. Melosinae,
despairing women, now living in a phanstaticall brutish body, nourished by the
Elements, into which at last they shall be changed, unles they chance to marry
with a man. Vid. Lex. Chym. Montans.
N
Nesder. Neuferani, spirits living in the air.
P
Penates, spirits of heaven and the element of sire. Pyrotechney, the Art of
preparing or working things by fire.
R
Relollaceus, Relolleum is the virtue from the complexion; there is a three
fold Relolleum, of which see Lexicon Chymicum.
S
Samies. Spagyrick. that separateth the false from the true, the impure from
the pure. Stannar, is the mother of mettalls, a secret fume of which metals
aremade. Sylphs, are pigmies or dwarfs. Sylvesters, airy men, airy spirits
living in woods and groves. Syrenes, sea monsters, bred of the Nymphs.
T
Talcum, a bright, clear matter, of which oil of Talk is made, there are four
sorts of Talck of which see Lex. Chym. Trarames, the actions of the spirits and
ghosts of dead men, heard but not seen. Tronum, caelestiall dew made of the
air. Truphat, the occult virtue of mineralls, preferring every metal. Tura.
Turban, an innumerable multitude of Stars in the firmament of heaven; also a
presage from all things which the fourfold inferior world of the elements
contains.
V
Vmbratiles, bodies once rotted and after made visible again by the Stars by a
magical virtue. Vndenae, airy men and earthly spirits.
W
Woarchadumie.
Z
Zonnets, fantastical bodies of the Gnomes. Zundell, somes, in English,
tinder.
FINIS.

