THE SCALES OF COMMERCE AND TRADE: Ballancing betwixt the Buyer and Seller,
Artificer and Manufacture, Debtor and Creditor, the most general Questions,
artificial Rules, and useful Conclusions incident to Traffic: Comprehended
in two Books.

The first states and Ponderates to Equity and Custom, all usual Rule^,
legal Bargains and Contracts, in Wholesale or Retaile, with Factorage,
Returns, and Exchanges of Foreign Coin, of Interest-Money, both Simple and
Compounded, with Solutions from Natural and Artificial Arithmetic.

The second Book treats of Geometrical Problems and Arithmeticall Solutions,
in dimensions of Lines, Superficies and Bodies, both solid and concave, viz.
Land, Wainscot, Hangings, Board, Timber, Stone, gaging of Casks, Military
Propositions, Merchants Accounts by Debtor and Creditor; Architectonice, or
the Art of Building.

By THOMAS WILLSFORD Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1660.

A DEDICATORY EPISTLE TO THE Illustrious and most Ingenuous MERCHANTS, The
Patrons of Commerce and Trade, wishing Success may crown their good Endeavors.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
ADVENTURERS (the Primum mobile of this Subject) whose Negotiations are dilated
beyond the Suns annual progress, as both the Indies and Polar Stars can
clearly witness; to your candid censures I address my self, as competent judges
of Commerce and Trade; and to avoid obstructions from fond Informers (with
license of the Court) I will render here a breviate of some occurrences, and
the motive wherefore I have harbored this so long, not becalmed, as some
suppose. When first I framed this Abstract of Commerce and Trade, (and having
shipped the chiefest Rules depending upon Arithmetic) I thought good to balance
them with Geometrical Problems and Propositions of Magnitude, with sundry
Questions mixed and appl^ed to both those liberal Sciences. Thus fraught with
variety (according to the Vessels capacity) rigged and made ready for a voyage
to the public prospect of the worlds inhabitants, indigent of Protectors for a
Convoy, until reflecting upon the Right Honorable Societies, under whose
colors I weighed Anchor, and stood to Sea, willing to strike sail to men of
Art, in Peace or War, yet scorning to submit unto a Fleet of vapouring
Romancers, or empty Liters, whose Topsails are filled with vain glorious
words: these verbal Rovers (perhaps) will question and charge me of Piracy, or
surreptitious Goods from manual Trades, and ingenious Artificers.

To all rash and Malignant censurers I shall plead Not guilty; animated, that
this noble Consistory of Senators will vindicate my endeavors, and write upon
the Plantiffs Bill Ignoramus; since all Humane Knowledge depends upon Time (the
Worlds grave Tutor) ratified by the sage experience of your selves and others:
and as for these, they have been lawfully gained, selected and recollected by
my Industry, under the conduct of Art, and registered upon the account of many
years revolutions, applied to Practice, seconded by Reason, and inserted in
this form, modeliz'd to my Sense, without prejudice, or intrenching my self
upon any others Ground, Claim, Title, or Prerogative.

Neither have I set forth one Adventure (as some have done) and never appeared
upon this Theater again, nor heard of, as if exploded, or cast away at Sea by
some evil steered course, not Regulated by Demonstration, shaped by Experience,
nor rectified by Compass, or lost by spreading too great a Sail, unable to
stem a tumultuous current of the Times without a Pilot, Masters and Mates now
termini covertibiles; yet notwithstanding them, the acceptance of my former
Labors has given me fair hopes of an Insurance for these purchased by
Barter, Exchange, or the expense both of Time and Money, transported from
several Regions, under your protection now arrived and delivered out, for the
benefit or pleasure of others.

My request is (worthy Patrons in this Metropolis of Trade) that ye will sign
these with your Magisteriall Impressions, and condescend to own my Adventure,
although intended as a guide to young beginners only, and to attend your
vacant hours, as an Index to your memories, and a Directory to your dilated
courses, since Nature has provided the biggest Whale but a little Pilot, and
Art a small Rudder, to steer the greatest Ship. From hence if this may find a
reception in your Society, the Charges are all defrayed, but Custom to the
Stationers Office, my intentions (to a serene Auditor) will balance the other
Accounts, and the next Voyage or Return, the Tare and Errors shall be
deducted, and ye (Noble Merchants) represented with an ampler Cargazone, if I
be admitted, and this to your Patronage (which Hope bids me to believe) so I
will subscribe myself,

DEBTOR to ye All, THOMAS WILLSFORD.

A GENERAL PREFACE TO ALL Adventurers and Negotiators, conversant in Commerce
and Trade, with a compendious Discourse, which is to be preferred in an happy
Republic, viz. the Lawyer, Merchant, or Soldier; wishing well to all honest
Endeavors.
MAn is a sociable Creature (according to his natural inclination) and in
respect of temporal employments, the noble Merchant transcends all others, as
the Superior to the Corporation of Tradesmen; they being the supporters of
Traffic, conservers of Amity, friends to Peace, patrons of Plenty, and grand
coadjutors to All, by supplying the indigency or defect of one Country, with
the excess or superfluity of some others. For what part of the habitable world
is so sterile, but can export Commodities and Necessaries useful and
advantageous, for the Inhabitants resident in pregnant and fertile Soil^? And
thus Virgil says: -- Non omnis fert omnia tellus.

If Adam had not transgressed, his Race had never been expulsed Paradise, nor
humane Industry urged by Necessity, terrified by Poverty, solicited by
Ambition, or prompted by Riot: it is probable several countries had diversity
of endowments out of Natures treasury conferred on them, whereby to attract
exiled men (as brothers) either with a coercent or an obligent Fraternity, by a
continual league of Amity, and intercourse of Trade, whether situated under
the temperate, frigid, or torrid Zone; all which the honorable Society of
Merchants do perform, keeping a correspondency with the habitable world,
surveying Neptunes watery Regions, discovering the Bounds, imbarking the Indie
and treasury of the Seas, transporting their Magazines over the proud and angry
Surges, slighting dangers and the fury of impetuous Storms, thereby to support
themselves, please and supply the defects of others.

Poverty renders Man despicable unto those who honored him in Prosperity, it
makes him a stranger to his intimate acquaintance; perhaps pitied by many, but
relieved by few; it divorces the society of friends (like some mortiferous
infection) especially the Parasites of the Rich, or the Idolaters of Fortune,
who are the worlds mercenary Slaves in golden chains; she appears (to the
enamored of temporal blessings) a more formidable disguised Spectrum then
Death; the first is Fortunes Preludium to Contempt, the other Catastrophe to a
Tragedy of Cares, or a Comedy of Errors, where true Hope attends their
Transmigrations from this Scene of Miseries, ushering them to his fatal
attiring-room, with a Plaudite for those whose parts were acted well; yet
Penury in the Interludes often provokes noble minds to act ignoble things, and
usually expulseth the fear of any enterprise, and exasperates some to the
contempt of penal Laws; therefore humane Industry is urgently necessary,
whereby to shun those mischiefs entailed on want; for all desperate and unjust
courses are to be abhorred, as the endeavors of Societies, and the lawful
adventures of Merchants are to be commended. And thus writes the ingenious
Poet Horace: Impiger extremos Mercator currit ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens per saxa, per ignes.


In English thus: The nimble Merchant runs to the Indian shore
Through fire and water, fearing to be poor.


The ingenious Syrians, Phoenicians and Chaldaeans restored Arithmetic,
conducing much to the furtherance of Commerce and Trade, and the Merchants
since, have illustrated the practick part of Astronomy, applied to the
perfecting of Navigation, by which Art new Territories have been happily
discovered, and the Colonies since the General Deluge traced into America,
whereby sacred Religion has made procession thither, embraced and received in
climates unknown before to Europe, Asia, or Africa, not inferior to them all
three together. Thus God has graciously pleased to make them instruments of
his Mercy, but to keep within their sphere, or in the circumference of mundane
affairs; the mighty Monarchs, with the Peers of this British Island, by custom
condescended to have been made free of some Trade, Company, or society of their
Subjects, in the Metropolitan of England: the Lucitanian Kings, with their
Nobility, have not only accepted the title of Merchant, but have really
employed adventures at Sea, to encourage their subjects in advancing their
public good, and strengthening themselves both by Sea and Land.

States by Traffic have risen out of a Fisherboat, dilating their
jurisdictions equal to the potent Princes of the Earth; and to descend unto
particulars, how many great and eminent Families in all Countries have been
raised out of the dirt, or from despicable degrees, and yet elevated to the
most illustrious Titles that subjects could be capable of, or Princes could
confer on them, sitting at the helm of their Republics? others again with
ship-wrackt conditions, emerg'd in their estates, through their own extravagant
courses (not steered within compass) the injustice of others, or the injuries
of Fortune; yet it has often pleased God to allot this means whereby they have
been buoyed up again, and prosperous gales have filled their sails, until they
have anchored in the w^althy harbors of their eminent Predecessors?

The Pen, Sword and Merchandising, have been generally in all ages the
isntrumental means of accumulating worldly blessings, and preferring men to
eminency in Honors, and temporal possessions; as for those who rise by the
exposition of political or municipal Laws, I do not deny but it is of it self
an honorable employment, especially to all candid breasts, in whom Justice
keeps her Courts of Judicatory, her Scales not used to weigh their gold, but
the cause; where bribed Rhetoric is not allowed to gild over an unjust
Process, to make the richest cause (though the foulest) seem fair, to
procrastinate with Demurs, or Fines and Recoveries without end or recovery;
when as the controversy is but about Meum and Tuum; and the general reason
wherefore, the sins of the people, and civil dissentions; yet cases may be
doubtful, though often visibly unjust. Those Ovid seems to check.

Turpe reos empta miseros defendere lingua,
Quod faciat magnas turpe Tribunal opes.
Base is that bribed tongue which guilt defends,
Base that Tribunal which seeks private ends.
Secondly, for the Sword, grave Cicero prefers the unjustest Peace before the
justest War; besides, it raises but a few by the suppression of many, and the
common Soldier, or general part, are but the back stairs for others to climb
up by to eminency, and all the others have nothing to glory in, but how Princes
and States are indebted to them; or in their badges of grinning Honor, which
they bare before them as Cognizanses of their valor, ingrav'd in their bodies
with capital Characters by the fatal Steel, where one may read (as in an
History at large) the storming of Forts, razing of Towns, or affronting the
Canon, disgorging Death's Commissions, wrapped up in Fire and Smoke; some with
half faces, or dismembered bodies, repaired with wooden limbs, like
weather-beaten Statues, that have stood century many years in the open air,
until defaced by the hand of Time.

O wretched state or Principality, where crooked justice must be rectified in
iron bodies, her scales thrown away, and appeals made to the Sword as Umpire,
licensed by incisions to cure Wounds, contentions to decide Controversies,
injuries to support Right, Injustice Innocence, and tumults Peace! These are
dire punishments from above, phlebotomising distempered Commonwealths, or
politic Bodies falling into a Frenzy: as in humane actions we often see,
desperate Diseases have desperate Cures, and by Medicines or Corrosives, many
times more violent for the present then the malignancy of the Malady, fearing a
relapse, or a total subversion; whereas the adventurous Merchant is
beneficial to all, in Barter or current Coin, and by his happy arrival
inricheth himself and those he trades withal, exchanging his Cargazones, and
distributing his Treasure for the accommodation of others. Thus raises many,
ruins few, a free Trade, by compulsion nothing, only damnifying others.
Volenti non fit injuria.

Here I have touched at the three chief Employments, tending to Riches and
Honor, as the sole scope aimed at by worldly men, one of them no friend to
Peace, nor necessary at all times, of Necessity rarely; litigious men are the
Lawyers Stewards; and which of these three Vocations ought to be preferred in a
glorious Commonwealth, most candid Reader, judge, I will not be one of the
Inquest to give my verdict, because most will censure according to their
educations, or as their natural dispositions incline them, which renders man
partial, by being prone to what he loves or follows: yet that I may not be
censured for what is past, I will thus far expose an account of my self. Before
the uncivil Scots commenced a civil War, I had served both by Sea and Land in a
just defensive quarrel, which the Law of God and Nature does allow; the
Maritine Employment pleased me best, by reason my former studies had initiated
me in the grounds of Mathematical Sciences, whereby Navigation seemed facile
and delightful: as for the Common Law, I never loved contention, nor put on
the Gown, but only have observed the practice of men, and found all these
courses good and laudable, if not abused by sinister ends, and the lawful
endeavors of every man (in honest vocations) highly to be commended: so I will
make no farther a progress herein, but retreat to my subject and intended
course.

Many will start Objections (as Huntsmen Hares) and pursue them over others
unwarrantable grounds, which incited me to make my former books of Arithmetic
better for use, and more perspicuous to the understanding by this Treatise,
once before attending the Press, and now you, with the regulation of Commerce
and Trade, accommodated to all ingenious capacities; prescribed rules being
equally necessary to all; for those who know not how to buy, will be ignorant
how to sell, or how to borrow, that know not how to lend. Besides these, here
are diverse Geometrical Propositions appertaining to Manufactury Trades, and
some for the Surveyer, Soldier, Engineer, and Accountants, all of good use,
and convenient for the illustration of my former books of Arithmetic,
proportioned with Lines and Numbers, composed more for speculation than
practice, and this designed more for practice then the Theory; whereby none
shall be deluded with words, nor deviated with doubtful directions in
diversity of ambiguous Tracts, or bewildred in Mazes, out of which these Rules
shall be your conduct, if you please to accept them for a guide: In witness
whereof I give you here my hand, by the subscription of

Your benevolent Friend, Thomas VVillsford.

To the Tyron of Merchants Accounts, short Advertisements, as to the Debtor
and Creditor, with some precautions to prevent mistakes, for the right use of
it.
THou have here presented thee for thy practice what is really promised in the
Title, viz. Merchants Accounts epitomized; yet is it so furnished with variety
of useful, practical and necessary Resolutions, as may render it to be
nothing deficient for thy initiation into the famous art of Accountantship by
way of Debtor and Creditor, here being both the Introductory part and
Practical, so fitted to the meanest capacity, that the more common Trades may
hereby be informed to keep their Books Merchant like, and an ordinary capacity
may in a small time hereby learn a method whereby they may be rendered capable
of keeping any accounts after the Italian manner. This Book is so complete,
that I thought it unnecessary to annex a Wast-book to the Journall, it being
complete enough without; by the reading of the Introductory part, thou will be
able of thy self to frame a wast-book, whose office is nothing else but to set
down at large and explain the time when we buy or sell, the person of whom we
bought or to whom we sold, and what, and in what nature, whether for time, or
for ready money, or exchange, thereby to refer every particular parcel of Wares
and Contracts to their proper places in the Journall, there to be inserted
their true Debtor and Creditor; the use of which Book and all others
necessary, thou have in the Introduction page 206, 207, and what volume they
ought to be of. Now before you proceed to put any thing in practice, you are
desired to amend the Errata's committed in the printing of this Deb. and Cr.
(some of them being occasioned by absence from the Press, and the unusual
printing things of this nature, the greatest being the misfolioing, which are
insufferable in books of this kind, by reason of the several referrings the
Journal and Leager has to each others true place or folio. You shall find the
second folio in order of the Leager to be by the printer numbered folio (1) the
reason was because that stock which is there placed was in the original copy
in folio (1) but by reason in the printing it could not be brought into one
folio, it was put into one by it self, bearing its original folio, by reason
of its several references to the Journall, which in all places has it noted in
fol. (1) the rest of the errors you have in the Errata following.

ERRATA.
THe pages 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209. should be entitled, An
Introduction to Merchants Accounts. p. 217. line 7. dele Creditor, in fol. 1.
of the Journall, l. 7. dele to, l. 3. in the 2. column it should be ^/1. fol.
4. in the first l. of the 4 last, read or for our, but that which is fol. 2. in
the 6. fol. should be 6. in line 5. in the col. of pence, for 8. r. 4 d. l. 21.
for 1659. r. 1658. l. 6. in the col. of pence r. 8 d. that which is fol. 7. in
order is f. 3. and for that 3 r. f. 7. and in dito f. l. 19. just against A.B.
in the col. of l. s. d. insert 1 l. 2 s. 8 d. l. 22. just against Middlesex,
for 1 l. 2 s. 8 d. r. 12 l. l. 26. just against A.M. in the col. of l. s. d.
for 12 l. r. 200 l. f. 9. l. 1. for fo 1. for. l. 6. for Vigmys r. Virginia. f.
10. in the col. of ls. for 430 l. r. 304 l. l. 11. in the col. of l. for 3 l.
r. 4 l.

In the Leager.

Fol. 4. Debtor side, l. 3. in column 2. on the Debtor side to the left hand,
7. dele 3. fol. 4. Cr. side col. 2. to the left hand, for 8. r. 9. in l. 4. f.
6. the total and last sum of profit and loss on the Debtor side should be
588 l. 19 s. 4 d. f. 9. col. 2. the Debtor side, l. 1. dele 5.

Reader,
ALthough the benefit of my Country and my own Recreation has put me upon
the study, and publishing of these Curiosities, for the knowledge of these
Arts, wherein all things cannot be so plain, but that there may be some need of
the further assistance of an Artist, I here make bold to acquaint thee with the
perfections of Mr. Nathanael Sharp, who writes all the usual hands writ in
this Nation, the Art of Arithmetic, Integers and Fractions, and Decimall
Merchants Accounts, also youth boorded, and made fit either for Foreign or
Domestic Employments. He lives in Chain Alley in Crutchet-Friars.

To his Honored UNCLE, M. Thomas VVillsford, etc.
WHat sacred Apathy confirms your breast?
And in loud storms rocks you to peaceful rest?
Calm Studies, and the gentler Arts you ply;
No outward airs untunes your Harmony;
Resolved how bad or mad soever we be,
Not to revolt from your loved Industry;
The great Archimedes amongst blood and rage,
Smoke, and the cries of every sex and age,
Smiled on the face of Horror, and was found
Tracing his mistique figures on the ground.
Thus He and you seem to look down on Fate,
For it is not Life, but Time, we ought to rate:
Which you improve to Miracle, each sand
Attests the labor of your head or hand:
While Arts Arcana, and new Worlds you find;
The blessed discoveries of a trav'ling mind.
Nor are you to one Science only known,
For every Muse, all Phoebus is your own.
Edward Boteler.

AN INDEX TO THE FIRST BOOK, Divided into three Parts.
PART I. OF Wholesale and Retail, without gain or loss, or the contrary,
whether relating to the whole parcel, or part, or to any Interest per cent.
per ann. as in page 1. to the 15. Propositions.
Equation of payment, p. 19. prop. 16. Barter, with the dirivation, p. 20. pr.
17. and 18. Tare, Neat, Tret, and Cloff, p. 22. pr. 19, 20, and 21. Exchanges
of foreign Coin, Assurances and Returns of Money, p. 27. pr. 22. to 28.
Reduction of Weights and Measures, p. 35. pr. 29. to 32. Factorage, p. 39. pr.
33. to 36. Cambio Maritimo, Sea-hazard, or Bottom-ree, p. 44. pr. 37.
PART II.
Definitions and Etymologies of Usury and Interest-money, p 47. Simple Interest
in Forbearance, where the Principal, Interest and Time, are of whole or mixed
denominations, p. 50. pr. 38. to 45. Discount or rebate of money for any
Interest or Time, p. 59. pr. 46, and 47. Tables of forbearance and discount in
compound Interest, calculated by Decimall Arithmetic, from 1 day to 25 years
inclusive, at 6 l. per cent. per ann. p. 64, 65, 66. The construction of
Decimall Tables, p. 67. in forbearance and discount of Money, Rents, Pensions,
Annuities and Reversions, with the purchase of them, to p. 78. The application
of these Tables, p. 79. quest. 1. to qu. 21.
PART III.
Rules of Practice by memory, and the assistance of one Table, p. 103. and 105.
The description and use of this Table in 9 Examples, p. 107. A Julian Calendar
for the receipt and payment of money, or other business, as to find what day
of the week any day of the month shall fall upon for 11 succeeding years, p.
112. A Gregorian Calendar, for the receipt or payment of money beyond sea,
where that account is received, p. 114.
The Contents of the second Book, divided into five parts.
PART I.
The dimension of all plain or right-lin'd Triangles, page 117. Problem 1, 2,
3. The dimension of Board, Glass, Hangings, Wainscot, Pavements, Land, etc. p.
122. pr. 4, 5, 6. Reduction of any squared Superficies, from a greater to a
less, and the contrary, p. 129. pr. 7. How to make the Carpenters Ruler, for
the dimension of any Superficies, measured by the foot or yard square, p. 136.
pr. 8. To find the content of a Square, including any Circle propounded, p.
134. pr. 9. The Diameter of any Circle known, to find the greatest
circumscribed Quadrangle, p. 135. pr. 10. To find the nearest Quadrature of a
Circle, p. 137. pr. 11. The dimension of solid bodies, p. 139. prob. 12. to pr.
14. A Demonstration in the commensuration of tapering Timber, p. 147. To divide
the Carpenters Ruler, for the measuring of solid bodies. p. 151.
PART II.
The dimension of round and concave Measures, p. 155. prob. 1. The gaging or
measuring of Casks, from the Runlet to the Tun, either of Wine or Beer, p. 158.
pr. 2. By the diameter of any Circle, to find the Circumference, p. 160. pr. 3.
With the diameters of two Circles, and the circumference of the one how to find
the other, or the contrary, p. 161. pr. 4. With the diameter and superficies of
one Circle, to find the content of any other, the diameter being known, p. 161.
pro. 5. With the superficial content of two Circles given, and one Diameter to
find the other, p. 162. pr. 6. To find the unequal superficies of any Sphere or
Globe, whose diameter or circumference is known, and that four several ways,
p. 163. pr. 7. By the diameter or circumference of any Sphere or Globe known,
to find the solid content 3 several ways, p. 194. pr. 8. With the diameter
and weight of any sphere or Globe, to find the weight of any other, whole
diameter is known, p. 166. pr. 9.
PART III.
With the diameters of 2 Bullets known, with the weight of one to discover the
other, p. 169. proposit. 1. By the weight of 2 Bullets known, and di^meter of
the one to find the other, p. 70. prop. 2. Compendious Rules for martialling of
Soldiers, in all right angled forms of battles, with their definitions, p.
172. prop. 3, 4, 5, 6. The incamping of Soldiers in their several quarters,
p. 176. pr. 7. The height of any Wall or Tower being known, to find the length
of a scaling Ladder, p. 177. pr. 8. To find the height of any Wall or Tower
that is accessible, p. 178. To find the distance to any Fort or place, though
not accessible, p. 179. pr. 10, 11, 12. In a City, Castle, or Fort, to be
beleaguered, how to proportion the Men and Victuals, Guns and the Powder,
whereby to make the Works tenentable for any time limited, p. 182. pr. 13. to
pr. 16. General Rules and Observations of experienced Engineers and Gunners,
p. 189.
PART IV.
The form of keeping Merchants Books of Account after the Italian manner, in
form of Debtor and Creditor, p. 233 Architectonice, or the art of Building, as
an Introduction to young Surveyors, of the Estimates, Valuations, and
Contracts, from p. 1. to p. 5. The manner in taking of a survey of Masons work
by the great, p. 6, 7, 8, 9. A bill of Measure, with the charges in money
according to the articles of agreement. p. 10. Estimates, Contracts, Rates,
Rules and Proportions, observed by Carpenters, p. 11. Proportions and
dimensions of a Roof, p. 12. The Materials, Valuations and Proportions in
covering of Structures, and finishing of them, to make them tenentable and
commodious, by sundry Artificers, p. 15, to 30. The five orders of Columns or
Pillars described, with the Artificers and Inventors of them, p. 31. to 34.
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
PROPOSITION I.
A Grocer bought 5 C gross weight of Wares, which lay him in (with all charges
defraid) 163 lb: 13 ss: 8 d. sterling: and it is demanded what one lb cost: or
how to sell it by the pound without gain or loss.

The Rule.
As the quantity of any one Commodity or wares is unto the total price with the
cost and charges, so will a l, or an unite of the first denomination be in
proportion unto the rate it may be sold for.

An Explanation of Wholesale and Retail: Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
Observe in all Commodities ^ where a hundred gross is mentioned, it is 112 lb
usually noted with a C. for Centum, as in this Example, where five hundred and
three quarters is given, which 5 C multiplied by 112 lb and, or 84 lb added
unto it, the product with the addition will make the sum of 644 lb for the
subtle weight, and the first number; the second number in proportion, is the
price, viz. 3273 8: the third number is 1 lb, on which the demand is made:
these compound f^actions you may reduce into the least denomination, or the
least but one, as in the Table; where by the Rule of Proportion in either way
you will find that one lb of those Wares stood the buyer in 5 ss: 1 d: or as
in the Table 5 2/^2 ss: with all ch^rges defraid, according to the demand and
state of the Question propounded.

PROPOSITION II.
How to sell a^y Wares or Commodities by retail, the pr^ce or value of the
whole par^el being known, and to gain a certain su^me of money in the whole
quanti^y requ^red.

The RULE.
As the quantity of the whole Commodity bought is unto the sum of the price
and gain required, so will 1 C. 1 lb; or 1 yard of the first denomination be
proportional unto the price it must be sold at.

An explanation where gain is imposed upon the parcel: Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
Admit a Draper bought ^ 58 yards of Cloth, which stood him in (with all
charges) 13 lb: 1 ss: at what rate by the yard must he sell it for, whereby to
gain 1 lb 9 ss: add the required profit unto the price, the sum will be 14
lb: 10 ss: that is 58 Crowns, or in shillings 290: to avoid fractions, the
least denomination is usually best: here the fourth proportional found will be
5 ss, the price of one yard according to the gains required, as by the
operation in the Table is made evident.

PROPOSITION III.
A Tradesman bought a whole piece of Cloth containing 28 yards, which did stand
him in (with all charges defraid) 19 lb: 3 ss: 4 d. sterling, how should he
sell it, whereby to gain 1/10 part in every yard, or forced unto so much loss
in retail.

The RULES.
RULE 1. As the Denominator is to the price known, so the fractions sum.

As the quantity given,

RULE 2. so an Unite of the same.

An explanation, where gain or loss is imposed upon a part, Lib. 2. Parag. 10.
This Question ^ is stated according to the Double Rule of Proportion, either
for gain or loss, by changeing the extremes in the first Rule, viz. in this 10
for 11, the fraction in all such cases making two terms; the Denominator in the
first place being Divider, the price of the Wares or Merchandises the second
term, and the sum both of Numerator and Denominator must possess the third
place, if for gain; but must be made Divider, if the Proposition be for loss:
the first number in the second Rule ought to be the quantity propounded, either
in Number, Weight, or Measure; and the last Number an Unite on which the querie
is made, of gain or loss: or, which is all one, if an improper fraction as in
the Table 4/4, the Denominators being made equal, viz. 135/4 and 4/4 and
consequently may be omitted, one being a Multiplier, the other a Divider; their
Products are these 1150/4 ^ 115/6 ^ 44/4 ^ the first and third Numerators may
be reduced by 2, and their Denominators cancelled; they will stand thus, as in
the third Table, viz. As 575 to 115/6 so 22 unto 253/345 which is in money 14
ss. 8 d, the price of one yard with the profit required.

The reason is evident; for if 20 ss were the Integer, the Numerator would have
been 2 ss and consequently the proportion as 20 to the middle term, so 228 the
sum of Numerator and Denominator to the gains required. This question may be
easily solved without a Double Rule, as thus: by the first Proposition you may
find that one yard cost 13 ss. 4 d. 1/10 part of it is 1 ss. 4 d, the sum 14
ss. 8 d. as before: but this may be of good use in other questions, and
therefore conveniently inserted.

PROPOSITION IV.
How a Commodity must be sold by retail, upon any certain loss of money in the
whole parcel or quantity.

The RULE.
As the quantity of any Commodity or Parcel is to the difference betwixt the
Price and Loss, so shall 1 C, 1 lb, or one yard of the Commodity it self be
proportionable unto the rate it must be sold at.

An Explanation upon Loss sustained in any Commodity. Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
A Grocer bought 340 lb subtle ^ of a Commodity which cost him in ready money
with his charges 13 lb. 16 ss. 3 d. and by this parcel he lost 1 lb. 1 ss. 3 d.
what was it sold for a pound? the loss in the whole subtracted from the price
it cost, the remainder or difference is 12 lb. 15 ss. which in pence is 3060 d.
so the proportion will be as 340 lb, is to 3060 d, so shall 1 lb be to the
price of it; which is 9 d, as in the Table appears: and as for the trial of it,
the proportion will be as 1 lb is unto 9 d, so will 340 lb be unto 3060 d, or
12 lb. 15 ss. as by the first Proposition.

PROPOSITION V.
Upon the price of any Commodity known, how to sell 't by whole-s^le or retail,
with gain or loss, at any rate in the 100 lb that shall be requi^ed.

The RULE.
As the sum of 100 lb sterling is in proportion unto the price of the Wares,
so shall the rate in money for gain or loss be in proportion to a fourth
number, which added to the price of the Commodity, gives the gain, and
subtracted from it, shows the loss sustained at the rate required.

An Explanation of gain or loss as any ^ate per Cent. Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
Suppose 1 Gro^e bought 4 C ^ weight of Prunes, at 16 ss. 8 d. the hundred, how
must he sell them by wholesale again, and to make of his money 20 lb in the
100 lb. or after that rate? The answer will be 3 ss. 4 d. which if taken from
the price at which they were bought, the remainder or difference is 13 ss. 4 d.
and if sold at that price, there will be after the rate of 20 lb in the 100 lb
lost: and if 3 ss. be added to the price, at which 'twas bought, the sum is
20 ss, and if vended at that rate, it will bring the desired profit.

If this had been Cloth, and the whole Piece had contained yards 28, which co^t
in money 23 lb. 15 ss: by the first Proposition find the price of one yard (if
it must be sold by retail) the answer will be 16 ss. now the question at 20 lb
per centum will be the same by retail, as was the former in wholesale. Many of
these Questions may be performed without calculation, as in this Example, where
20 lb per cent. is required. The profit in money here is, and so the gain or
loss in the Commodity must also be: the price in this was 16 ss. 8 d. that is
50 groats, and part of it is 10 groats to be added or subtracted accordingly as
it is gain or loss.

PROPOSITION VI.
The price of any Wares or Merchandise by which the said Commodity was bought
and sold: what gain was made, or loss sustained in the 100 lb: or after what
rate or proportion.

The RULE.
As the price (by which any Merchandise was bought) shall be in value or
proportion unto 100 lb sterling, so will the price of the Wares by which they
were sold, be in proportion to the true gain or loss sustained.

An Explanation of Gain or Loss sustained, at any rate per Cent. Lib. 2. Parag.
8.
A Draper bought Kerseys ^ at 6 lb. 13 ss. 4 d. the Piece, and sold them all
again for 7 lb. 10 ss. how much he gained, and after what rate in the 100 lb is
the thing required: the price by which 'twas bought, and likewise the rate at
which 'twas sold must be reduced into one denomination, or by the Rule of
Fractions, viz. As 20/3 lb the price is to 100 lb, so 15/2 unto 112: by which
it is apparent that he gained 12 lb, 10 ss. in the 100 l. or after that rate;
for 100 l. thus employed will return 112 l.

If any question of this kind should depend upon Loss, the Price at which
'twas sold must be less then that by which the Commodity was bought at, so the
fourth proportional number will be discovered by the same Rule; the state of
the Question not differing in any thing, either by Wholesale, or Retail, so it
requires no Precedent or Rule but this, which will bring your stock short home,
as unfortunately true, as prosperously with increase.

PROPOSITION VII.
By the Price which any Wares or Merchandises were sold at, with the rate of
Gain or Loss in one Piece, how to discover what the whole Commodity cost.

The RULE.
As 1 Piece, 1 Hund. 1 Yard, or 1 Pound weight, etc. shall be in proportion
unto the price thereof, so will the number of Pieces, or quantity sold, be
proportionable to the price of them all together.

An Explanation of Gain or Loss in one Parcel, to find the rest, Lib. 2.
Parag. 8.
Admit 15 Clothes or ^ Pieces were sold for 340 l; then was the price of one
Piece 22 l: 13 ss: 4 d, as by the first Proposition; in this there was present
gain 19 ss. 4 d, upon every Piece, which subtracted from the Price 'twas sold
at, viz. 22 l. 13 ss. 4 d. the difference is 21 l. 14 ss. for the price it
cost: then will the proportion be as 1 whole Cloth is to 21 7/10 l, so shall 15
Clothes be unto 325 l, 10 ss, as in the Table appears.

If this Commodity had been sold to loss, the differences betwixt the prices
makes it evident, and then what one Piece, or any part had co^^, will be
discovered as before, with all the whole loss sustained; and if it should be
required after what rate in the 100 l. the last proposition will unfold it
according to the Rule of Trade.

PROPOSITION VIII.
To find the Gain or Loss upon Merchandises bought and sold, with time agreed
upon betwixt the Debtor and Creditor for payment of the money at any rate per
cent. per an.

The RULES.
Rule 1. As 100 l sterling is to any interest so a sum given If for 12 Months

Rule 2. What for the time.

An explanation of Gain or Loss with time at any rate per Cent. Lib. 2. Parag.
10.
Admit a Tradesman ^ had bought a Commodity at 5 d the pound, and after 6
Months time sold it again for 6 d the l. or suppose the Merchandise was bought
at 5 ss the yard, and sold it presently again for 6 s the yard, but with 6
Months given for day of payment, or to abate so much as the interest should
come unto at 8 l per cent. per annum, by the sixth Proposition, the gain of
those Wares will be discovered after the rate of 20 l per cent. if present pay;
but here is to be rebate of money, or forbearance of the stock and profit for
six Months: suppose 100 l disbursed for these Wares at first, which would make
120 l if paid down on the nail; but here use is to be considered for that
sum, and six months time with the increase to be deducted: the interest of
which sum is thus found: in this Proposition it is six Months, and 8 l per
centum, as in the first row or rule in the Table; in the second row under 100 l
stands the term for a year, in the same denomination with the time given, viz.
12 months; and under the third term, the time limited for payment, viz. 6
Months, the products of them (according to the double rule of Proportion) in
the third line is, as 1200 to 8 l. so 720. these are again reduced in the
operation of the fourth Table, as 120 to 8. so 72 unto 4 l. 16 s. and might
have been reduced again to 5.1.24. which will also produce 4 l. 16 s. that
subtracted from 120 l. the remainder will be 115 l. 4 s. which shows 15 l. 4
s. clear gains in relation to the rate by which it was bought and sold at, with
the interest for the forbearance, agreed upon according to custom and contract,
but not exactly true.

PROPOSITION IX.
By the price of any Wares bought and sold, with the time limited for payment,
to find the gain made, or loss sustained, and at what rate per cent. per
Annum.

THE RULES.
Rule 1. As the first price shall be unto 100 l. so the gain or loss. If for
12 months.
Rule 2. So the time limit.

An Explanation in Gain or loss with Time. Lib. 2. Parag. 10.
A Merchant bought Mace at ^ 6 s. 4 d. the l. ready money, and he sold the same
again unto a Grocer for 7 s. the l. at this rate, the Mace was delivered, and
upon condition to be paid at the end of 4 months next ensuing the receipt
thereof; and it is required what gain the Merchant made of his money, and at
what rate per cent. per Annum. In all questions of this kind make the price at
which it was bought, and as 'twas sold, of one denomination, the difference shall
be the third term in the first rule, 100 l. the second number, and the price
for which 'twas bought, the first term: in the second rule under the first
number I place the magnitude of a year, in that denomination, in which the time
limited is given; as in Months, Weeks, or days: in this it is Months, as the
Letter M denotes; the space of time given for payment is 4 Months, subscribe
that under the third number; then draw a line from thence toward 19 G, and
that cross with another, as from 12 M t 2 G in this Example; these multiplied
crosse-wise (the second rule being reverst) for the less time is given for
payment, the profit will be the greater: in the third row stand the products in
the Rule of 3 direct; and in the fourth Row or Table is placed the form of
operation, wherein the desired product is discovered to be 31 1^/19 l that is,
31 l: 11 ss: 6 d 1^/19: the profit required at the rate per cent. per annum.

PROPOSITION X.
A Grocer bought Cloves at 4 ss 3 d the l. and after 6 Months time sold them
again for 4 ss the l, what loss did the Grocer sustain, and how much per cent.
per ann. by the last proposition you will find his loss to be 11 l. 15 ss. 3
9/17 d.

PROPOSITION XI.
By the difference of prices in any one Commodity bought and sold, by
wholesale, or retail, to find what time must be allowed for to gain after any
rate per Centum per annum that shall be assigned.

The RULES.
Rule 1. As 100 l sterling is unto 12 Months, so the rate propounded Unto the
1 price.
Rule 2. so the gain or loss.

An Explanation in Gain or Loss with time unknown. Lib. 2. Parag. 10.
A Tradesman bought Nutmegs ^ at 8 ss the l, and sold them all again at 9 ss
the l, what day of payment must he allow, whereby to gain after the rate of 20
l per cent. per ann. in all such like Cases, as 100 l to 12 Months, so 20 l.
secondly, as 8 ss the price, unto 1 ss the gain made: the first rule is
reverst, the other direct: in the third row of the Table stand the products,
and under that again (in the fourth Table) is placed the operation in a reverst
proportion, but may be made direct if you please: the answer to the question
here in this, is 7 Months and 15 days, the time of payment; which makes the
gains proportionable unto 20 l per cent. per annum, the thing required: had the
Proposition been of loss, the operation is the same, so it needs no example
but this.

PROPOSITION XII.
If 124 l of Cynamon cost 20 l sterling, and that sold again for 23 l what day
of payment was there given, when the Merchant made after the rate of 16 l per
cent. per ann. of his money so laid out? this question will be solved by the
last Proposition, and found that the day of payment was at the term of 11
Months and of a Month.

PROPOSITION XIII.
With the price and quantity of any Wares on Merchandise, to find how they
must be sold, upon several days of payment, either in Gain or Loss, at any
rate given per cent. per ann.

The RULES.
Rule 1 As 100 l sterling shall be to the gain so the price of wares so shall
12 Months
Rule 2. to the prod. of times

An Explanation of Gain or Loss in several payments, Lib. 2. Parag. 10.
A Merchant had certain ^ Wares which stood him in 60 l: these goods he sold
unto another, who paid him so much money for earnest, as that the Merchant made
of his money laid out 12 l per cent. per an. yet was to receive it at two
several payments, viz. 40 l or of his money 2 Months after the Wares were
delivered; and the other 20 l, or at the term of 3 Months after the contract:
now to find what money the buyer paid down, observe this table, where in the
first row stands this proportion, as 100 L is to 12 L gains, so 60 L the price
of the wares; in the first place of the second rule the term of a year (in
months) is inserted; lastly or 2 ^/3 months, which number is composed by the
sum produced of the terms for payment and the money, viz. as 2 months, by
^/3 of the money to be paid, and ^/3 of the money by 3 months, whose sum is
^/3. these terms multiplied according to the double rule direct, will produce,
as in the third table; these three numbers, viz. 1200. 12. 140. which in the
fourth table are reduced to 120.12. 14. and maybe made (retaining the same
proportion) 10. 1. 14. or 5. 1. 7. the quotient will be found by any of these,
or reduced unto 1 L. that is 1 L. 8 ss. the earnest given, and the rate at 12
L. per cent. per ann. as was required; if there had been more times of payment
given, the proportional sums to be paid, multiplied by their peculiar terms
or respite of time given, and those sums collected into one total, the
operation will be as in this last example.

PROPOSITION XIV.
By the gain made, or loss sustained per cent. per ann. to find what any
other s^^me must gain or ^^se in any part of a year.

The RULES.
Rule 1. As 100 L in money Is to the gains or loss, So any other sum; If for
12 Months
Rule 2. What for 3 Mo.

An explanation of gainer loss proportionable to a stock and time. Lib. 2.
Parag. 10.
Admit a man employes ^ his money in the way of trade, by which he gains 16 L
per cent. how much does he gain with 80 L in the same employment for 3 months
time? The state of the question, or any of this kind by the first rule, is
thus: As 100 L to 16 L the gain or loss, what 80 L in the second rule there is
12 months and 3 months: their products (according to this double rule of
Three) are 1200 and 240, as in the third table, and in the fourth table as 120
to 16 L gains, so 24; or reduced, it will be as 5 to 16, so 1 unto 3 L, or 3 L
4 ss, the proportional gains made by 80 L in 3 months time: if it had been
em^loyed to loss, then 3 L 4 ss must have been subtracted from the stock, which
in this proposition was 80 L, the remainder will be 76 L 16 ss; the question
solved.

PROPOSITION XV.
By the profit of a small stock in money, and a short time to find what gain is
made in the hundred per ann. or the contrary in loss.

To solve this, and prove the last, I will reverse the former proposition; and
suppose a Tradesman employed 80 L for the space of 3 months, in which time he
gained 3 L 4 ss. and here it is required to find after what rate it was per
cent, per ann. the state of the question will be as 80 L to 3 L the gains, so
100 L, and if in 3 months, what in 12 months, or a year? The answer to this
will be as in the last Prop. 16 L per cent. per an.

PROPOSITION XVI.
Diverse tradesmen join their stocks together, with which they buy a Commodity,
whose price and quantity is known, from whence they take unequal shares, what
part then must every one pay?

The RULE.
As the whole quantity of any Merchandise:

Is in proportion unto the whole price thereof,

So shall each particular man's part or share

be proportionable to the money he must pay.

An explanation in equation of payments in gain or loss. Lib. 2. Parag. 11.
Four Grocers did lb L ss A 240 30 00 lb L B 300 37 10 1656 207. C 516 64 10 D
600 75 00 The totalls 1656 207 ^0 join their stocks together, and bought with
it 1656 lb of Pepper, which cost them ^07 L, whreeof A did take for his part
240 lb B 300 lb, C 516 lb, and D 600 lb; the total sum of the wares must be
the first number, the whole price the second, and each particular the third
number, and then A must pay 30 L. secondly, B 37 L 10 ss. thirdly, C must
disburse 64 L 10 ss. and lastly, D must pay 75 L. and in the same manner it
will be proportioned with gain or loss, to each respective part as in the table,

PROPOSITION XVII.
In wholesale, or by retail, if the price of any two commodities be known with
the price and quantity of the one to find what quantity of the other shall be
equivalent to it.

The RULE.
As the price of any Wares (the quantity unknown)

Shall be in proportion unto 1, or a unity of it,

So the price of that whose quantity is known,

Will be to a parcel of the first, and equal to the other.

An explanation of Barter, or vending one commodity for another. Lib. 2. Parag.
8.
A Tradesman exchanged ^ Salt at 20 d. the bushel for Sugar at 15 d the lb, of
which commodity he desired 1 C weight gross; how many bushels of salt will
there be required to be equal in value unto 1 C weight of sugar: by the first
table here you will find that 112 lb of sugar at 15 d the pound comes unto 1680
d. then acccording to this rule and in the second table, you may see the
proportion, viz. if 20 d bought 1 bushel of salt, then 1680 d will buy 84
bushels of salt, being equal to 112 lb of sugar. This trading with one
merchandise for another is called Barter, derived from Barato, implying an
exchange of commodities, the most ancient way of commerce.

PROPOSITION XVIII.
The worth of any wares in ready money, if valued at a greater price in barter,
how to set a rate upon the price of any other commodity to be bartered for it,
that shall be proportionable to the first.

The RULE.
As the price of any Merchandise in ready money

Is unto the value of the same Wares in barter,

So the second Wares (in the first denomination)

Shall be proportionable to the price of it in barter.

An explanation upon the rate Wares made proportionable in barter. Lib. 2.
Parag. 8.
If 8 Bolts of Holland ^ cost 37 L 10 ss, and valued in barter at 40 L, and
this to be exchanged for Wool at 6 L 5 ss the hundred, what must it be rated
at in the barter? according to the rule and state of the question, a fourth
number will be found (as ^n the table) 6 L 13 ss 4 D, the rite put upon the
Wool in barter proportionably answering the enc^ease, as the Holland is
prized, which is the thing required.

PROPOSITION XIX.
In any gross weight, as Sugar, Currens, etc. upon the allowance of Tare, to
find the Neat weight, and the price of it; and if there be Cloffe allowed to
find also the Neat and the price, by knowing what the gross ^o^ind was valued
or bought at.

The RULE.
As 100 gross weight of any Wares or Merchandises

Shall be in proportion to the pounds allowed for Tares,

So will any gross wares that are known or weighed

Be unto the allowance given for the Tare thereof.

An explanation of Tare, Neat and Cloffe in gross weights. Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
Tare is an allowance ^ betwixt the Merchant and the Grocer, for all such
commodities as are weighed in boxes, chests, casks, etc. for which the
allowance is agreed upon when they bargain, as from 6 lb to 18 lb in the C, and
is called the Tare; which subtracted from the gross weight (that is, the
chest, or cask and wares together) the remainder is the Neat; as suppose here
are weighed four chests of Sugar, the one in gross weight 6 C and 14 pound, the
second 7 C and 10 pound, the third 8 C and 4 pound, the greatest 9 C, the sum
or total of them in all 31 C gross: then the proportion is as 1 C is to the
Tare given (which admit 14 lb) so 31 C unto 444 lb. or by the rule of Three
without fractions (as in the table) and then to the fourth number found, viz.
434 lb. add in the Tare for the parts, as: which is for the 7 lb and for add
3, the sum is 10, the total 444 lb. as before, which divided by 112 l is 3
C. 24 lb, the true Tare of the gross weight 31 C: from whence subtract 3 C 24
lb, the remainder will be 27 C 3 3/2 lb, the Neat weight, as in the table
appears, and so for all questions of this kind.

As for Cloffe, it is only an allowance for the refuse of the commodity, which
hangs upon the chest or cask, for which is usually allowed but 3 or 4 pound in
every parcel, with the parts of pounds, if there be any; but yet in this I
strike off C 3 lb, and there will remain 27 C 14 lb Near: now to find what it
is a pound by the whole weight, or the contrary, see Prop. 1.

PROPOSITION XX.
Upon any Indian Spices sold by wholesale, with the allowance for Trett, to
find the subtle weight Neat, and how much it is a pound; or by the pound subtle
of one sort, to find what any other quantity did cost.

The first RULE.
As 26 pound weight of any Indian Spices

Is in proportion unto 1 pound for the Trett,

So shall any quantity of the same Wares

Be proportionable unto the Trett thereof.

The second RULE.
If 50 lb weight subtle of any Spice propounded

Did cost a certain and known sum of money,

What is the price of another quantity of the same,

When 4 pound per cent. shall be allowed for Trett.

An explanation of Trett, with reduction of the pound subtle. Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
Here first you are to ^ know, that the custom betwixt the Merchant and Grocer
is to weigh all sorts of his wares by the C gross, which contains 112 pound,
for which in some he allows Tare, as was said before; but in Tobacco and
sundry other commodities, with all Indian and Arabian Spices, their gross
weight is reduced into simple pounds, usually called the pound subtle, and in
every such hundred there is commonly four pound allowed, which is called the
Trett; that subtracted, is by many called the Neat weight: this is readily
found by dividing the whole quantity by 26, according to the first rule (which
produces the Trett) and that quotient subtracted from the total of the pounds
subtle gives the Neat of the refined weight. As for example: A Grocer bought
50 pound of Mace subtle, which cost him 18 L 15 ss, what shall the subtle
weight of 4 C 1 lb gross of the same commodity stand him in, with abating 4 lb
per cent. for Tret? first the gross weight of it reduced will be 533 lb
subtle, which divided by 26, gives 20 lb for Trett, and subtracted from 533
lb, the remainder is 512 lb subtle Neat, as in the first and second table; and
in the third table the question is stated, if 50 pound of Mace cost 18 L, then
512 lb will stand him in 192 3/16 L, that is 192 L 3 ss 9 D, as by the
operation in the table will appear; and to find what it is a pound, the first
Proposition will resolve the querie.

PROPOSITION XXI.
If 1 pound of Cloves cost 3 ss 6 D, what is the price of 676 pound, deducting
4 pound in every hundred for Trett?

The subtle weight here propounded is 676 lb, and abating 4 lb per cent. for
Trett, which comes unto, by the last Proposition, 26 lb, which deducted from
676 pound, there will remain 650 pound, then by the first Proposition, if 1
pound cost 3 ss, what shall buy 650 pound? the answer to this question will be
113 L 15 S, and so for any other of these kinds.

PROPOSITION XXII.
A man delivers unto a Merchant a certain sum of money to be received of his
Factor upon Bills of Exchange in a foreign Country and Coin, the rate and
proportion of the moneys in both places being known.

The RULE.
As a unite, or any one piece of a known Coin,

Is in proportion unto a Coin of another value,

So any sum of money delivered in the first Coin

Unto the quantity, to be received of the second.

An explanation of Exchanges betwixt Foreign Coyns.
Exchanges of all Coins, ^ Weights and Measures of foreign places with one
another are easily performed by the common rule of Three (if first reduced unto
any certain proportion) by which means any one thing may be converted into the
species of another, in respect of value or quantity, as by some few
propositions with examples shall be illustrated, and first for this; suppose
that sixty pound received at a place where one pound is 13 ss 4 D sterling or
English, how much must the man receive in London at 20 s the pound Sterling,
whereby to make them equal in value: The answer to this proposition will be
800 s or 40 l, as in the table, equal to 60 Marks, the value of one being 13 s
4 d. had the question been stated in any other denomination, the solution would
have proved the same with the second term, as 1 l Scotl. to 40 groats, so 60 l
Scotl. unto 2400 groats, or in the fraction of a pound Sterling, thus, as 1 l
Scotl. to l Sterling. so 60 l Scotl. to 40 l. Sterling. Thus sometimes you may ease
your self by changing the denominations (all being true) depending upon the
seventh Paragraph of my second Book.

PROPOSITION XXIII.
Any pieces of Coin, if equal unto some one piece of another, and that
equivalent to a third, to be exchanged with the first; how much money of the
one will discharge a bill of the other.

This differs not essentially from the last; as admit 10 Ryalls were equal to
one Ducat, and one of them worth 5 s 6 d, how much money Sterling will
discharge a bill of Exchange for 4500 Ryals? the proportion will be: As 10
Ryals is to 5 ss. what 4500 Ryals? the answer 2475 s, that is 123 l 15 s
sterling, the question solved: for if A be made equal to B, and B = to C, then
A and C are equal, as by the second Axiom. Lib. 2 par. 7.

PROPOSITION XXIV.
If upon return of money a certain rare per cent. shall be required, to find in
any sum of money how much must be abated, at the rate propounded, upon such
exchange or return of money.

The RULE.
As the sum of 100 l with the allowance per cent.

Shall be in proportion to 100 l where it is to be paid,

So will any sum of money received of a Merchant

Be proportionable to the money that shall be delivered.

An explanation upon return of money after any rate per cent. Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
A Merchant of London was ^ to return money to be delivered at Durham, as admit
616 l received by a Carrier, which to secure and deliver at the place appointed
what was to be returned, the Merchant did allow 2 l 13 s 4 d per cent. upon
this abatement, how much was the sum paid at Durham? first add unto 100 l
the money to be abated per cent. the total in this proposition will be 102 l
13 s 4 d, which must be the first number in the rule of Three direct, and will
be in proportion thus, as 102 L, or made an improper fraction, viz. ^0^/3 to
every 100 L returned, so 616 L received will be proportionable unto 600 L, the
Proposition answered.

PROPOSITION XXV. Upon assurance and return of money at any rate in the pound
sterling. to find what a greater or lesser sum will be worth, assured at the
rate propounded.
Observe in any proposition made, the true state of the question, and whether
it be customary, or of that predicament; if customary, it is something
tolerable in small sums, although a little erroneous; this caveat concerns
other propositions, only note well the difference of these, in the last, the
Assurancer was to have so much money out of the sum delivered to him, as
should but discharge the money he returned, which the last rule does solve,
where the Assurancer had 16 L out of the 616 L, so answers the question in the
rate required, which admit imposed upon every pound sterling. the proportion will
be: as 1 L is to the rate given, so will the sum to be returned, unto the
money due upon it for the assurance. And for the probat of this, suppose (as in
the last proposition) 600 L were to be returned from Durham to London, allowing
the assurancer 6 D upon every pound sterling. the rule is as 1 L to 32/5 D, so 600
L shall be in proportion to 3840 D, that is 320 ss, or 16 L, as before, due for
the securing of 600 L, and not 616, as in the last proposition, which is
erroneous, though allowed of by many.

PROPOSITION XXVI. The rate or proportion for the exchange of any money betwixt
two places being known, to find how much money of the one place will discharge
a bill of exchange in the other city or town.
The RULE.
As any one pound sterling. or other piece of money,

Is in proportion to the difference of Exchanges,

So will any sum propounded of the first money

Be proportionable to the coin where it is payable.

An explanation of two ways concurring in one production.
The rate for exchange ^ here in this example is of a foreign coin, whereof
1 L 3 ss 4 D is equal to 1 L sterling, how much of that foreign money will
discharge a bill of exchange for 240 L 13 ss 4 D sterling? in this case 1 L or
20 ss is the first number in the rule, the difference in exchange is 3 ss 4 D,
the sum to be exchanged is 240 L 13 ss 4 D. with these 3 numbers you may
find 40 L 2 ss 2 D. which added to the money paid makes 280 L 15 ss 6 D, the
total to be received upon exchange: but the more usual way is according to
the table and prescribed rule, viz. as 20 ss is to 23 or 20/3 ss. so 1^^^^/3
unto 5615 9/^ ss. which reduced is 280 L 1586 D, as before.

PROPOSITION XXVII.
By knowing the money paid unto a Merchant; and likewise the sum received
upon bills of exchange in a foreign coin, to find how the exchange went
between those places.

This proposition is but the former reverst, and so requires no rule (but that
of proportion) nor example but the last, where the first money paid is 240 l 13
s 4 d; the foreign money received upon bills of exchange was 280 l 15 s 6 d,
the middle number here in the rule of Three must be 1 l sterling, or 20 s, if
you please: the former numbers reduced into improper fractions will stand in
the rule of Proportion thus, viz. As 14440/3 ss is to 20 ss, so will 50540/9 ss
be to 1 l 3 s 4 d, the rate which the Exchange went at, according to the former
Proposition, enucleated in this.

In all these questions, or any others (appertaining only to the exchange of
money) there is nothing more required, from the value or estimate of any known
Coins, to find what sum of the one, shall be equal or in proportion unto
the same quantity of the other, as if 1 l sterling were equal in value unto 25
s of some other coin, the proportion of equality would be, viz. As 1 l
sterling, or 20 s is to 25 s, so any sum of the first coin to an equal
quantity of the second, or which is all one ( ^ib. 2. parag. 1. Aziom 13.) as 4
to 5, so any quantity of the first to an equal sum of the second, and
likewise the contrary to these, viz. as 5 is to 4, so any known sum received
of the first coin, will be equal in quantity to the sum of the second due to
be repaid in exchange, which is the sole scope of this rule, or the mark that
is ^imed at in the exchange of money, as for the profit, experience in trading
will discover it.

PROPOSITION XXVIII.
A Merchant delivers so much money, with this condition, to be repayed in a
foreign Coin and Country, within any limited time, as a year, and at any rate
per cent. per an. for interest allowed of there.

The RULES.
Rule 1 As 1 L English or 20 ss Sterling To a sum of that money, So 1 L Sterling.
in another coin. If 100 L Sterling,
Rule 2. What 8 L Sterling interest?

An explanation of Exchanges. Lib. 2. Parag. 7. Axiom 13. and Parag. 10.
As in this example, ^ suppose 350 L of English money was delivered in London
to be repaid upon bills of exchange a year after the receipt thereof, and to
allow 8 per cent. per an. in that country where 24 ss was equal unto 1 L
sterling. from hence the proportion is, as 20 ss is to 350 L, so 24 ss: in the
second row of the table it is reduced unto 2. 35. 24. and in the third row to
1. 35. 12. by this or any of them you may find the fourth proportional number
to be 420 L, the sum to be paid in the foreign coin; and in the fourth row
of the table you will find 100 L of that money under 1. and beneath 12 stands 8
L for a years interest; these will make 3 numbers, viz. 100. 35. 96. from
whence a fourth proportional number will be produced, as in the fifth table,
viz. 33 L 12 ss, the interest due upon 453 L, so the total to be received is
453 L 12 S, according to the condition and state of the question.

PROPOSITION XXIX.
To reduce weights that are customary in one, or diverse Countries, to an
equality from one denomination into another, or the weight of any ponderous
body being known, to find the quantity of a greater or lesser weight.

The RULE.
As the proportional parts of 1 ounce, 1 pound, 1 stone, 1 C weight, etc.

Shall be to any quantity propounded in that weight,

So will the weight of any other place, town, or country

Be proportionable to the weight thereof demanded.

An explanation in reduction of weights, Lib. 1. Parag. 8.
The question here propounded is ^ of a commodity whose gross weight is 2 C or
16 stone, at 14 pound to the stone, and it is required to find how many stone
there are, where custom admits but of 8 pound: the proportion of a stone
weight in these two places is as 14 to 8, or as 7 to 4: in this rule the third
term is the least, and yet requires a greater number; from whence it is evident
the rule must be reverst, and the fourth proportional found in the table, will
be 28 stone, equal to 16 stone at 14 pound to the stone, the thing required.

PROPOSITION XXX.
How many hundred or pounds of Troy weight will there be found in 5 C Aver de
pois, when as 1 pound 2 ounces 12 penny Troy, is equal unto 1 pound or 16
ounces of the Civil, or Merchants weight.

An Explanation.
This depends upon the last Proposition, and so requires no other rule, but
only to reduce the gross weight into pounds subtle, which are 560 pound, and
since 1 pound Aver de pois is equal to 14 ounces, what 560 pound: by the rule
of Three direct you will find 8176 ounces, which divided by 12, the quotient
will be 681 pound Troy; and so for all other questions of this kind.

PROPOSITION XXXI.
The customary measure of any place being known, with the quantity of one
propounded, to find how much it will make by a greater or lesser measure of
another place.

An explanation in reduction of Measures. Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
An Inne-keeper bought 20 ^ quarters of corn, to be delivered where the custom
of the place required, 8 gallons to every bushel, how much must the Farmer
send in, according to the Statute measure, containing 8 gallons (commonly
called Winchester, where the Act was made) for to fulfill the condition as the
bargain was agreed upon: the state and operation of this question, or the like,
differs not in the form from the 29, as in the margin is evident, where 8
gallons, or 35/4 multiplied by 20 quarters, the quantity propounded in that
measure; which divided by the third number, viz. 8 gallons, the quotient will
be 21, that is, 21 quarters and 7 bushels of the lesser measure, equal to 20
quarters of the greater, the thing required.

PROPOSITION XXXII.
How many yards or else of any one place propounded will be equal, or make a
given number in some other, which has proportion to the measures of a third
place, etc. and that in any known quantity unto the first.

The RULES.
Rule 1. As 20 else or aulnes of Lions To 25 yards of London, So will be 60
else of Lions. 100 else Antwerp.
Rule 2. 47 else of Antw.

A plural proportion.
I II III IV V Antwerp Antwerp = Lions: Lions = London = 47 else: 100 else = 60
else: 20 else = 25 yards

An explanation in reduction of measures from plurality of proportion. Lib. 2.
Parag. 10.
In this Proposition ^ there is an equality or proportion derived from diverse
descents and collateral lines, and may be continued like a British pedigree:
the equality here rerequired is betwixt 47 else of Antwerp and the yards of
London that shall be equal to them, if their measures were not known (in any
certain proportion) but as derived from some other, and that from a third, and
so continuing a proportion until you arrive at one that runs directly from the
first. As for example: here is required how much 47 else of Antwerp will be of
London measure; if the proportion were known that four else of Antwerp were but
equal to 3 yards of London measure, there would be no more in it then to
multiply the else propounded, viz. 47 by 3, which product 141 divided by 4, the
quotient would have been 35 yards: but suppose this proporrion not known, but
by derivation, to be collected from others, as in this plurality of measures
you will find that the city of London, according to the English standard for
measures, has proportion to the else of Lions in France, and those again to
Antwerp, in the Low countries, from whence the proportion will arrive
(according to the first table) as 20 to 25, so 60; then in the second table, as
100 else of Antwerp, to so many yards of London (supposed to be found) what
will 47 else of Antwerp require, to have an equality in their measures: in the
third row or table they are both reduced into a single rule, and in the fourth
table unto their least denominations, viz. as 4 is to 1, so 141 in proportion
to 35 yards, as it was before, the thing required, and I hope explained, from
whence I will proceed to the customary rules used in Factorage.

PROPOSITION XXXIII
In the first place you must consider what the Merchant allows his Factor in
lieu of his pains, and the adventure of his person; as whether,,,, etc. that
proportional part taken from an integer, the remainder is the Merchants, the
other shows the value of the Factors person.

The RULE.
As the proportional part of the Merchants adventure

Shall be to the whole stock adventured in his charge,

So will the proportional part allowed to the Factor

Be to the estimate of his person in the employment.

An explanation of Factorage. Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
If a Merchant intrusts his Factor ^ with a sum of money, upon condition he
should have half the gains; in this case the Factors person was valued equal
to the adventure: but admit part of the gains were to be allowed the Factor,
and 1000 L committed to his charge, the Merchants share will be but, which is
in proportion to 1000 L, as is unto 500 L, the estimate of the Factors person
as by the rule and table appears: and if in this employment 2000 L were gained
by the adventure (with all charges defrayed) the Factors share would be 666 L
13 ss 4 D, and the Merchants 1333 L 6 ss 8 D, the one but half the other: if
the Factor had been allowed but of the gains (in this adventure) his person had
been valued at 333 L 6 ss 8 D, and his gains would have amounted to 500 L; if
had been his proportional part, then the Merchants had been; and his gains 1600
L, the Factors 400 L, and the estimate of his person in this employment 250 I,
etc.

PROPOSITION XXXIV.
If a Merchant shall deliver unto his Factor any sum of money, and does agree
for to allow him 2/7 parts of his gain, with this proviso, that he employes
such a stock of his own as shall be mentioned in the contract between them,
what shall the Factors person be valued at, and how much will his gains amount
unto? find by the last Proposition what the proportional parts are unto the
Merchants adventure, and from the Factors part subtract his stock adventured,
the remainder will be the estimate of the Factors person, and the 2/7 parts of
the whole gain will produce his profit. As for example, Suppose a Merchant
delivers to his Factors charge 2000 L, conditionally that he employs 300 L of
his own in the same adventure, the proportion will be, viz. as 5/7 is to 200 L,
so will 2/7 be unto 800 L, from whence subtract 200 L, the remainder is 600 for
the estimate of the Factors person in the employment; and admit the gains at
his return were 3675 L 8 ss 9 D, the 2/7 parts of it will be found 1050 L 2 ss
6 D, and the Merchants share will be 2625 L 6 S 3 D. both Propositions answered.

PROPOSITION XXXV. Of Factorage.
A Merchant did condition with his Factor, to allow him for the adventure of
his person a part of his stock, and according to that proportion of the whole
adventure, he should share in the gains, from hence to discover what the
Factors person was valued at, and the proportion of his profit is the thing
required. To explain this, suppose a Merchant intrusts his Factor with 1680 L,
and with this condition, that if he gained so much money he should have 240 L
for his pains, and so proportionally for a less or greater increase: in all
questions of this kind reduce the two sums (like fractions) into their least
denominations, viz. 240/1680 which will be 1/7, then by the 33 Proposition, as
6/7 is to 1680, so 1/7 to 280 L, the estimate of the Factors person in this
employment; and suppose he gained (all charges defrayed) 1481 L 7 ss 6 D, what
must he have for his pains? The answer will be 211 L 12 ss 6 D ( lib. 2. parag.
9. quest. 6.) that is ^/7, according to the Articles of Agreement made.

PROPOSITION XXXVI.
A Merchant conditions with his Factor to allow him, out of his gains, a
certain profit in the pound sterling, by which it is required to find what the
factorage will amount to in any sum propounded.

The RULE.
As 1 L sterling, or any other sum of money given

Shall be in proportion to what is allowed for factorage,

So the gains of the adventure in the first denomination

Will be proportional to the gains for the Factors share.

An explanation of Factorage, Lib. 3. sect. 1. cap. 7. table 1.
A Merchant had a due, ^ but doubtful debt owing him in another Country,
where he was to employ a Factor, who had letters of credence to demand his
money due, and with this condition, to have 13 D in every pound sterling, that
he should procure of it: the Factor by his industry recovered 1200 L of the
debt, what does his salary amount unto? by the rule of Three you will find 67
L 10 S, and so like wise in the table, according to the rule of Decimals (...)
by this you may state other questions of Factorage, and in this form.

PROPOSITION XXXVII.
A Merchant takes up money to freight his ship, with condition to allow 26 L
per cent. and that to be paid where the goods should be landed, with this
proviso, that the Creditor shall stand to such hazards as belongs to sea, viz.
Shipwreck, or Pirates, etc.

The RULE.
If the sum of 100 L sterling. or any other money

Shall require upon adventure 26 L for interest,

Then any greater or lesser sum of the first money

Will be in the same proportion to the required gain.

An explanation of Sea-hazard, or Bottom-ree. Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
Cambio maritimo, some call ^ this rule, wherein the Creditor stands to the
hazard with the Merchant at Sea, that if the ship be lost he loses the money
adventured: the operation of this rule is facile, the interest just, and the
explanation short: the money here contracted for (according to the conditions
of 26 L for interest per cent.) is 640 L, and the fourth proportional found
will be 166 L, or 166 L 8 S, as in the table of the margent does appear, which
with the principle makes 806 L 8 S, to be received where the money was payable,
or should be due, the ship being arrived with the adventure at the appointed
Port of the Country or Kingdom, as the voyage was intended.

THE SECOND PART.
Definitions and Etymologies of Usury and Interest Money, with the several
operation compendiously displayed.
USury is derived particularly from Usura, ab usu aeris, or generally from the
use and occupation of any thing, as Money, the worth or estimate of it, upon
some mutual contract, wherein the Debtor allows the Creditor a Loan in lieu of
the money or goods borrowed; which in times past has been at liberty as men
could agree; but when the unsatiable avariciousness of rich misers attracted
extortion from the indigency of borrowers, the corroding use of money was by
provident Laws confined to a certain rate, as to 10 L per cent. per ann.
afterward to 8 L, and now of late to 6 L, that is, if a Creditor lends 100 L
for a year, he may legally exact 6 L profit for the use of the money lent.

These are divided into 3 parts, viz. Principal, Time, and Interest: the first
signifies the sum, or value of the money or goods so lent: Time is the
forbearance of it, as Days, Weeks, Months, or Years. Thirdly, Interest is the
profit that arises from the other two, and is derived from two compound Latin
words, viz. inter and est, ab edo, to eat or devour, as it is the property of
Use to do; they have these proportions, as the Principal to the Time, the Rate
contracted for, and Interest to it self, and generally as commixt with one
another.

Interest resembles Janus with two faces, one looking upon the time past, the
other on that to come: i^ this tract the Principal runs, like a snow-ball
rising upon an even superficies, equally moving, but the increase unequal,
although proportional to the body, as it is magnified in the motion; and if
continued, in time it will gather up all: this is called Forbearance. And
Rebate or Discount of money is like the tract in which a snow-ball moved, and
in its descent takes up all until it is staid, leaving the ground bare from
whence it takes a seeming original, where Time has not arrived, but beholds
it, as seamen an object, which seems little at a great distance, and increases
to the Optic sense by unsensible approaches.

Use or Interest has in either Predicament two Species, viz. Simple or
Compounded, the first is computed from the Principal and Time only, upon a
certain rate given or allowed, whether ascending or descending, as in
Forbearance, or upon discount, which are thus explained; if 100 L be continued
for 2 years, at 6 L per cent. per ann. the creditor at that term of time is to
receive but 112 l, that is 12 L for simple interest in lone of the money
forborne; here 100 L is the principal lent, the term 2 years, the use 6 L per
ann. whereas in compound interest, the first payment attracts a proportional
use: as admit in annual disbursements, in the second year there is an use
required, or imposed on the 6 L due, if continued, and therefore it is called
interest upon interest.

Discount or rebate of money is upon a legacy, or sum due to be paid at a
time to come, yet satisfied or discharged with so much present money, as
immediately put forth at an interest or rate allowed forborne until the legacy
should have been due, returns again to its first principal or sum, the money
paid being computed at the same rate of interest for the forbearance, as was
the discount made, as by following examples shall be illustrated, observing
these proportions, viz.

The RULE.
As the principal and time for which a lone is allowed,

Shall be in proportion unto the interest thereof,

So will any other sum of money to be borrowed

Be proportional to the interest for the same time.

PROPOSITION XXXVIII.
What comes the interest of 145 L unto, forborne a year at 6 L per cent, per ann?

An explanation of simple interest. Lib. 2. Parag. 8.
Any question of this nature ^ is with facility performed by the common rule of
Three, as if 100 L principal forborne a year requires 6 L interest, the 145 L
for the same term of time will exact 8 7/10 L, as in the table, that is, 8 L 14
ss. the question answered.

PROPOSITION XXXIX.
A Money-Merchant employed at Use 250 L sterling for 5 months, at the rate of
8 L per cent. per ann. and the simple interest of it is here required.

An explanation of simple interest, lib. 2. par. 10.
All questions of this Prin. In. Prin. 1 Rule 100-8-250 M -- M 2 Rule 12-5
Product 1200. 8. 1500 Or as 3 to 1 so 25 Facit 8 L.. 6 ss 8 D kind do consist
of 5 terms, viz. 100 L Principal, secondly, the rate for Use, as in this, 8
L. thirdly, the Principal lent, as in the first rule; in the second rule under
100 l is placed the time for which 8 L was due, as at a year, or 12 months:
the fifth number is the term for the principal borrowed, viz. 5 months, the
products of those are 1200. 8 and 1250, and may be reduced (as in the 13 and 14
Axiom, lib. 1. parag. 7.) to 3.1. 25. the quotient here answers the question,
viz. 8 L 6 ss 8 D, the proportional interest, for the sum and time required.

PROPOSITION XL.
A Banker did lend 650 L. which principal was repayed at the term of 6 months
3 weeks and 3 days; what came the interest of it to at 6 L per cent. per ann.

An explanation of simple Interest. lib. 2. parag. 10.
In this double Princi. Inter. Princ. 1 Rule 100... 6... 650 D -- D 2 Rule 365
192 Prod. 36500. 6. 124800 Or as- 365 to 6. so 1248 facit 20 l 10 ss 3 d. 2
34/73 Q rule the first term is 100 l. the second its interest for a year, the
third is the princi^al lent: the first term of the second rule 365, the number
of days in a vulgar year; the last term is 192, the number of days
terminating the time, accounting 4 weeks to the month; the products of these
are 36500, and 124800, and reduced will be 365 and 1248. which multi^lied by 6
l the interest is 7488, and divided by 365 the quotient will be (in a direct
proportion) 20 l 10 ss 3 d 2 34/73, as in the table, the simple interest of 650
l. the time required.

PROPOSITION XLI.
A man received 8 l 6 s 8 d for 5 months interest of a sum unknown, but at
the rate of 8 l per cent. per ann. and the principal is here the thing
demanded.

An explanation of this Proposition, lib. 2. parag. 10. quest. 4.
^

In the first rule, as 8 l interest is to 100 l principle, what 8 the interest
received: in the second rule stands the terms of time, viz. 12 mo. and 5 m.
which multipliers and the 2 dividers increased reciprocally by one another,
they will produce these 3 numbers, viz. 40. 100. 100. all questions of this
nature are made either direct or reverse, accordingly as the products are
placed; but by either way the quotient will be discovered, 250 l the principal
lent, as in the table; the proposition solved according to demand.

PROPOSITION XLII.
What shall the simple interest of a mixed principal, as 265 l 13 ss 4 d 1 q.
amount unto at 6 l per cent. per ann.

An explanation of interest money by the rules of practice: Lib 2. Parag. 9.
Que^t. 4, 5, and 6.
The increase 100 L. 6 In. 265 L. 13 ss. 4 D. Products L 15 94. 00. 1 20 100 L
divid. 6 L multipl. S 18 80 12 D 9 61/4 Q 2 46 26/100 or 23/50 of any mixed
sum will be thus discovered; first place your proposition according to the
demand made, as here viz. if 100 L requires 6 L interest, what shall the
principal given, as 265 L 13 ss 4 D in this, 6 is the multiplier, with which
increase the principal, as in lib. 1. sect. 1. parag. 4. exam. 9. and the
product will prove 1594 L 0 ss 1 D. here draw a line as in the table, cutting
off two places on the right hand, a^ 94, because 100 is the divisor, the
quotient 15 L secondly, the remainder 94 or 94/100 reduce into. shillings, by
the multiplication of 20 the product will be 1880, and being no shilling left
in the last operation, sever 2 places with the line, the quotient is 18 ss, the
remainder 80, which by 12 reduce into pence, and add to it 1 D remaining in
the first product, cut off 2 figures on the right hand, viz. 61, so on the left
hand there will be 9 D. the 61 reduced into farthings by 4, produces 244, to
which add the D remaining yet in the first product, the sum is 246, that is
2 Q. and 46/100. so the total interest for a year of 265 L 13 ss 4 D at 6 L
per cent. comes unto 15 L 18 ss 9 D 2 2^/50 Q, as by the operation in the table
is conspicuous.

PROPOSITION XLIII.
To find the Use-money of any sum, whose principal and interest are of
several denominations; as 956 L 7 ss 6 D, at 5 L 17 ss 6 D per cent. per ann.

An Explanation.
To solve any question Prin. Inter. L ss D 100 5. 17. 6. 956 7 6 5 The products
4781 17 6 478 3 9 239 1 10 119 10 11 The interest money L 56 18 14 0 ss 3 74 17
6 D 8 88 ^ Q 3 55/^00 of this kind, state the proposition as in the head of
the table, then take the greatest denomination of the interest allowed, as in
this example, 5 L. which multiply through all the denominations of the
principal here stated, according to sect. 1. parag. 4. examp. 9. the product
will prove 4781 L 17 ss 6 D. had the interest been 6 L, the product would have
contained the principal once more; but being 17 ss 6 d, divide it into
proportional parts, lib. 2. parag. 9. quest. 4. as in the table at A, viz. 10
ss. 5 ss. and 2 ss 6 d. for the 10 ss take the principal, that is half of 956 l
7 ss 6 d, which will be 478 l 3 ss 9 d. next for 5 s take part of the
principal, or the last, which is 239 l 1 s 10 d, and the half of that again is
119 l 10 s 11 d. the total of all these is 5618 l 14 s 0 d. this done, divide
the greatest denomination by 100 l, or cut off two places on the right hand,
and you will find 56 l and 81 remaining, with which proceed as before, and you
will discover (as in the table) the interest to prove 56 l 3 s 8 d 3 5^/100 q.
the simple use for a year, as was required: and thus may all other propositions
be expeditely solved by this operation, and the rules of practice.

PROPOSITION XLIV.
What amounts the interest money unto upon a mixed principal, for a time less
or greater then a year, as 645 l 6 s 8 d, lent for 11 months, at 5 l per
cent. per ann.

An Explanation.
State the question Prin. Inter. L S D 100 L 5 645 6 8 Product 3226 13 4
Products 1613 6 8 806 13 4 537 15 6 The interest L 29 57 15 6 20 S 11 55 Months
11 D 6 66 6 Q 2 66 A 3 2 as in the head of the table; that multiplied by the
interest allowed in this 5 l, the product is 3226 l 13 s 4 d. now being the
money is to be continued but 11 months, take proportional parts, as in the
table at A, 6 M. 3 M. and 2 M. for the 6 M. take half the first product, then
and. or thus, of 3226 l 13 s 4 d. is 1613 l 6 s 8 d for 3 Months, the of that
is 806 l 13 s 4 d. lastly. 2 months part of the former, which is 537 l 15 s 6
d. this done, proceed as in the last, or by 42 proposition, and you will
discover the interest money to be 29 l 11 s 6 d 2 66/100 q. the demand
performed, and if it had been required for any longer forbearance, find the
interest for the term of years by the former propositions, and the parts of a
year by this.

PROPOSITION XLV.
What shall the Use-money come unto of any sum, whose Principal, Interest,
and Time, are all compounded numbers, viz. 543 L 13 ss 4 D, to be continued for
9 months, at 5 L 12 ss 6 D per cent. per ann.

An Explanation.
The proposition Princip. Interest L S D 100 5. 12. 6 543 13 4 Products of
interests per cent. per ann. 2718 6 8 271 16 8 67 19 2 The total is 3058 2 6
Interest in respect of time 1529 1 3 764 10 7 (A) L 22 93 11 10 5 l 12 s 6 d 20
5 L S 18 71 months 9 10 ss D 8 62 B 6 2 ss 6 D Q 2 B 3 being stated (as in the
head of the table) multiply the principal by the greatest denomination of
interest, viz. 5 L, as in the table at A, according to the prescribed rules of
practice, lib. 2. paragr. 9. quest. 4. for the 10 ss take half the principal,
and for the 2 ss 6 D or part of the last, so you will produce these 3 numbers
2718 L 6 ss 8 D. secondly, 271 L 16 ss 8 D. and thirdly, 67 L 19 ss 2 D. the
total is 3058 L 2 ss 6 D to be divided by 100 L, if forborne a year; but the
term of time here is but 9 months, as in the table at B, which I divide into
two parts, viz. 6 M. and 3 M. then take half the total, that is, 1529 L 1 ss 3
D, and for 3 months the half of that 764 L 10 ss 7 D. the total is 2293 L 11
S 10 D, to be divided by 100 L. now proceed according to the former examples,
and you will find the interest demanded 22 L 18 S 8 D 2 Q. the proposition
solved.

If this question had depended on months, weeks, and days, you must have
taken proportional parts, and proceed, as before is specified; so there needs
no more examples for the ingenious, to whom all other questions (in the rules
of practice) will be direct, and indirect for others, to incumber their
understandings with multiplicity of ways in this kind, therefore I will only
show you the discount of money, and proceed to Decimall Tables of compounded
Interest.

PROPOSITION XLVI.
Upon any interest per cent. and the sum of money that shall be due at the
term of a year, to find the worth of it in ready money, or present pay, the
interest deducted from the sum.

The RULE.
If 102 L and the annual interest due at a years end

Be worth a 100 L at one entire and present payment,

What shall any other sum due at that term

Be worth in ready money, the interest deducted?

An explanation of this rule in discount, or rebate of money, lib 2. parag. 8.
Admit the interest were ^ 6 l per cent. per ann. which added to 100 l makes
the sum 106 l to be rebated: for if this principal were due at the term of 12
months, it were worth 100 l present pay, because at 6 l per cent. it would
increase in a years space unto 106 l again: from hence this rule of antepayment
is framed, and all questions of this condition (if terminated by a year) are
solved, as in this example; suppose 546 l shall be due at the term of a year,
and desired presently, rebating at 6 l per cent. per ann. the proportion is
evident, viz. as 106 is unto 100, so shall 546 be to 515 09^/1000 l, which
decimal fraction is 1 s 10 d. so 546 l, which should have been due at a years
end, is worth upon discount present pay 515 l 1 s 10 d, as in the table is
demonstrated by a decimal, and in a natural fraction, it will be 515 5/53 l.

PROPOSITION XLVII.
A Legacy, or any sum of money not presently due, and to be discharged at two
several payments, as the first at 6 months end. the other at the term of a
year, how much money will discharge it at one payment, discounting 10 l
interest per cent. per ann.

The RULE.
As 12 months, or the true term of a year

Is in proportion to the annual interest allowed,

So the months, or term for day of payment

Shall be proportional to the interest for the time.

An explanation of discount or rebate of money, for days, weeks, months, etc.
In all questions upon rebate ^ of money at simple interest for the space of a
year, observe the last proposition: but if for a greater or shorter term of
time, viz. months, weeks, days, etc. or days, weeks and months; in all such
cases you ought to find a proportional interest for those annual parts, because
the money due at several payments is terminated therein, as the other in a
year. As for example: there is a Legacy of 1000 l bequeathed to T. W. at equal
payments, viz. 500 l to be paid at the end of 6 months, and the other 500 l at
the period of a year: what is it worth present pay, rebating at 10 L interest
per cent. per ann. as for the last payment, form the rule of Three according to
the last proposition, viz. as 110 L is to 100 L, so 500 L will be in proportion
to 454 L 6/11 L. now for that due at 6 months end, find a proportional intere
t for the time (according to the rate allowed) as by the first of these tables
in the margent, which is 5 L. and by the second tables operation you will find
for the fourth proportional number 476 4/21 L, the value of the first 500 L
present pay: the sum of both payments 930 170/231 L, 930 L 14 sh 8 48/77 D.
the Legacy as valued present pay upon rebate at 10 L per cent. per ann. simple
interest, which in the first table required no rule to discover it, but many
other propositions may, therefore it was inserted by me, and made plain as it
is general; if the respite of time had been for more or fewer months, with
weeks and days, the manner of operation is the same in effect, therefore to
write ane more of this would prove superfluous unto the ingenious
Arithmetition; so of simple interest I will here conclude.

Many rules do seem originally derived from Truth, or extracted from Art, but
if well observed, they are easily detected, being erroneously reered upon
falacious grounds, and their derivations from imaginary principles, viz. as in
interest, discount of money, Equation in payments relating to Time and
Interest, etc. These I have inserted to please some, but not to delude any, the
ways being common in general received customs, plain, easy, and of good
use, the errors not being great or considerable in small sums, or in a short
forbearance, as in Bonds, they rarely pleading prescription of years, or
exeeding an annual revolution, upon forfeiture in transgressing a penal Law;
whereas rebate or discount of Money often depends upon long terms, involved with
multiplicity of antedated years, as in purchasing of Leases, Pensions,
Annuities, Reversions, etc. therefore these were composed so compendious as I
could, since there be better rules extracted from Artificial numbers, and
Decimal Arithmetic in compound Interest, as those following.

A Decimal Table of Interest money forborne any number of days, weeks, months,
or years, to 25 inclusive, accurately calculated at 6 l per cent. per ann.
Days Decimall numbers Years Decimall numbers I 1.000160 I 1.060000 II
1.000319 II 1.123600 III 1.000479 III 1.191016 IV 1.000639 IV 1.261477 V
1.000798 V 1.338226 VI 1.000958 VI 1.418519 VII 1.503630 Weeks VIII 1.593848 IX
1.689479 I 1.001118 X 1.790848 II 1.002237 XI 1.898298 III 1.003358 XII
2.012196 Months XIII 2.132928 XIV 2.260904 I 1.004867 XV 2.396558 II 1.009760
XVI 2.540352 III 1.014674 XVII 2.692773 IV 1.019613 XVIII 2.854339 V 1.024576
XIX 3.025599 VI 1.029563 XX 3.207136 VII 1.034574 XXI 3.399564 VIII 1.039610
XXII 3.603537 IX 1.044671 XXIII 3.819750 X 1.049756 XXIV 4.048936 XI 1.054865
XXV 4.291871

The second Table of compound Interest money discounted for days, weeks,
months, or years, unto 25 inclusive, exactly calculated at 6 l per cent. per
ann.
Days Decimall numbers Years Decimall numbers I.999840 I.943396 II.999681
II.889996 III.999521 III.839619 IV.999361 IV.792093 V.999202 V.747258 VI.999042
VI.704960 VII.665057 Weeks VIII.627412 IX.591898 I.998883 X.558394 II.997767
XI.526787 III.996653 XII.496969 Months XIII.468839 XIV.442301 I.995156
XV.417265 II.990335 XVI.393646 III.985538 XVII.371364 IV.980764 XVIII.350343
V.976013 XIX.330513 VI.971286 XX.311804 VII.966581 XXI.294155 VIII.961859
XXII.277505 IX.957239 XXIII.261797 X.952643 XXIV.246978 XI.947988 XXV.232998

Table 3. Forbearance of annuities, rents, or pensions from 1 year to 25, at 6
l per cent. per ann. Table 4. Discount of annuities, rents, or pensions, from 1
year unto 25, a^ 6 l per cent. per ann. Table 5. Purchase of annuities, rents,
or pensions from 1 year unto 25, at 6 l per cent. per ann. Years Deci. N. Years
Deci. N. Years Deci. N. I 1.00000 I.94340 I 1.06000 II 2.06000 II 1.83339
II.54544 III 3.18360 III 2.67301 III.37411 IV 4.37462 IV 3.46510 IV.28859 V
5.63709 V 4.21236 V.23740 VI 6.97532 VI 4.91732 VI.20336 VII 8.39384 VII
5.58238 VII.17914 VIII 9.89747 VIII 6.20979 VIII.16104 IX 11.4913^ IX 6.80169
IX.1470^ X 13.18079 X 7.36009 X.13587 XI 14.97164 XI 7.88687 XI.12679 XII
16.86994 XII 8.38384 XII.11928 XIII 18.88214 XIII 8.85268 XIII.11296 XIV
21.01506 XIV 9.29498 XIV.10758 XV 23.27597 XV 9.71225 XV.10296 XVI 25.67253 XVI
10.10589 XVI.09895 XVII 28.21^88 XVII 10.477^6 XVII.09544 XVIII 30.90565 XVIII
10.82760 XVIII.09236 XIX 33.75999 XIX 11.15811 XIX.08962 XX 36.78559 XX
11.46992 XX.08718 XXI 39.99272 XXI 11.76407 XXI.08500 XXII 43.39229 XXII
12.04158 XXII.08305 XXIII 46.99583 XXIII 12.30338 XXIII.08128 XXIV 50.81557
XXIV 12.55036 XXIV.07968 XXV 54.86451 XXV 12.78335 XXV.07823

The construction of Decimal Tables for Use money, made proportional for any
interest, time, or term of years required, with the applications of these
illustrated with useful and compendious examples.
All questions of compound interest money may be comprehended and solved by one
of the 5 precedent Tables, calculated (without sensible error) and extracted
from the former prescribed rules, as in the 38 and following Propositions of
simple interest: And first, here observe that these Tables are composed upon
the worth or interest of 1 L principal per ann. after the rate of 6 L per cent.
yearly payments, as the Law now commands, with a prohibition of any greater
interest, upon the penalty of a forfeiture, excepting such cases wherein there
depends some apparent hazard, as in Exchanges, Cambio Maritimo, or in Bonds and
Obligations not satisfied, that antedate the Act, etc. and upon this foundation
are erected these tables, whose calculations I will first exhibit to your view,
both for farther satisfaction, and the composing of any others upon other rates
or proportions; and then proceed unto the use and explication of these.

The proportions of compound Interest Money, in Decimall numbers, due upon the
lone of 1 L Principal.
RULE 1.
As 100 L sterling lent for term of a year

To the sum of the Principal and interest allowed,

So shall 1 or an unite of the first denomination

Be unto the principal and interest in a Decimal.

RULE 2.
As 100 L sterling forborne the term of a year

Shall be in proportion to the last years Decimal,

So will the sum of the principal and interest

Be unto a Decimal for the succeeding year.

An illustration.
Prin. Decimal Principal Decim. I 100 l is to 106 so will 1 l be to 1.060000 II
100 l is to 1060000 so 106 l is to 1.123600 III as 100 l is to 1123600 so 106 l
unto 1.191016 IV 100 l is to 1191016 so 106 l unto 1.262477 V 100 l is to
1262477 so 106 l unto 1.338226

In the construction of these tables, take an unite with what number of ciphers
you please for the Radius, one place more then you intend to inscribe, but of
no necessity, as here 1,000,000, the seventh place being an integer, all the
other toward the right hand are fractions, or representing their places
according to my third book of Artificial Arithmetic: now for framing the
first table (wherein the principal is forborne) add the principal and interest
together; the sum is here 106, annex 4 ciphers or points to it, equal to the
Radius, and it is a decimal fraction for the 1 L forborne a year; or by the
first rule, as 100 L is to 106, the principal and interest allowed, so shall 1
L principal be in proportion to 1.060000, which is a mixed decimal fraction, and
comprehends the 1 L principal, with the interest 06/100, and reduced is 1 ss 2
d 1 q. but leaving it involved, as the increase of the first year, all the rest
will be discovered by the second rule successively, viz. as 100 L to 1.060000,
so 106 the principal and interest to 1.123600, the decimal for the second year;
then for the third year, as 100 L is to 1123600, so 106 in proportion to
1.191016 in the same manner of operation, you will find 1,262477 for the fourth
year, and 1,338226, a proportional decimal fraction comprehending 1 l principal
forborne 5 years, with the compound interest of it, which is 6 ss 9 d, and not
one farthing more: thus you may proceed to what number of years occasion shall
require.

To find Decimal Numbers for any parts of a year, as months, weeks, days, or
for half years and quarterly payments.
Take the Decimall for a years interest, viz. 1.060000, whose Quadrat Root
extracted as in lib. 2. parag. 1. examp. 5. you will find 102956, a
proportional decimal, for the interest of 1 l forborne 6 months, in money 7
0^44/10000 d. the mean proportional betwixt 1.02956 and 1.06000 will be the
decimal for 9 months, viz. 1.04467, and between an unite or 1, and 102956 will
be.1.01467, a decimal mixed number (according to compound interest for 3
months) equal in value to 1 L 0 ss 3 d. and thus you may with facility
discover all the other numbers: if the annual table had been for half yearly or
quarterly payments, you must find 1 or 3 mediums between every continued and
succeeding year; which to effect, I refer the Reader to lib. 2. parag. 6. prop.
1. and 4. and observe to annex ciphers to the Decimal (whose Root is required)
in such a number as to equal the places in the table, and point them from the
left hand to the right, so that the first prick of your pen may be over the
radius or integer. In other things observe lib. 2. parag. 1. exam. 5.

The framing of the second Table for discount or rebate of money.
RULE 1.
As 100 L with the interest due at a years end

Is unto the principal 100 L present payment,

So an unite or 1 L due at the same term of time

Shall be to a Decimal fraction interest deducted.

RULE 2.
As 106 L upon discount for the term of a year

Shall be in proportion to the Decimall last found,

So will 100 L Sterling, or its value, present payment

Be proportional to a Decimal for the time required.

An illustration.
Prin. Decimal Principal Decim. I 106 l is to 100 L so will 1 l be to.9433962 II
as 106 l is to.9433962 so 100 l is to.8899964 III 106 l is to.8899964 so 100 l
unto.8396192

The second Table for discount or rebate of money at 6 L per cent. per ann. is
thus composed for the first year and Rule 1. as 106 L due at a years end shall
be worth 100 L present pay, so will 1 L principal (according to the rule of
Three in Decimals) be in proportion unto 9.433962; which fraction is in money
18 ss 10 d 1 66/100 q. the value of 1 L due at a years end, and presently paid
upon discount: but if not due until 2 years shall be expired: say as 10 6 L is
in proportion to the first years decimal fraction, viz. 9.433962, what shall
100 L produce? 8.899964. then for the third year, as 106 L is to the last
decimal found, viz. 8.899964, so will 100 L present pay be in proportion unto
8396192. which fraction of 1 L reduced is 16 sh 9 d. and thus you may continue
it to what number of years you please, and inscribe what places of decimals you
think fit, but make them all to one Radius, and one place less upon discount,
being but fractions or parts of 1 L principal, viz. 943396/1000000 as in the
first year.

How to find Decimal numbers for parts of a year upon discount, or for half
years and quarterly payments.
These are composed after the same manner as the table of money forborne,
excepting only in pointing the numbers for the Roots extraction, the first
Decimals being all mixed numbers, and those of discount are every one proper
fractions, having only a point prefixed for the Radius or integer; therefore in
these make the first point under the second figure on the left hand. As for
example, 943396 is the decimal for the years rebate of 1 L, put the first point
under the figure of 4, and so in order to the right hand, the root thus
extracted will be.971286 in 6 places for the discount of 1 L, 6 months as 6 L
percent. the square root of that again will be.985538 for 3 months; and thus
proceed with mean proportionals until the places are all complete between the
radius and the decimal last found; as for half yearly and quarterly payments,
they are discovered as were those before in the forbearance of money, to which
I refer you, and Lib. 2. Paragr. 6. Proposition 1. and 4. observe the 2
Tables, for out of these grounds the other 3 are framed and erected as
follows.

The invention of Decimall Fractions, or proportional numbers for the third
Table.
Here are two tables Forbearance of money at 6 l per cen. (1) Forbearance of
Rents at 6 l per cen. (2) 1 1. 060000 1 1.000000 2 1. 123600 2 2.060000 3 1.
191016 3 3.183600 4 1.262477 4 4.374616 5 1.338226 5 5.637093 6 1.418519 6
6.975318 7 1.503630 7 8.393837 inscribed for 7 years, whereof the one is the
transcription of the first breviat, out of which the third table is composed,
and thus: an Annuity, Rent, or Pension of 1 L per ann. is but so much money due
at the term of a year, therefore on the head of the table I place the Radius,
against the interest and principal of 1 L forborne a year, viz. in the first
table 1.060000, in the second 1.000000. the sum of these two numbers is
2.060000, the rent which will be due at the two years end: in which time there
will be 2 L in arrears, and the annual interest of 1 L, to which add the
second years forbearance, viz. 1.123600, the sum will be 3.183600 for the
rents 3 years forborne, and thus in order, the 6 years added together will make
the seventh as 8.393837, and the seven years the 8, viz. 9.897467, which
reduced is in money 9 L 17 ss 11 d 1 q. and so much 1 L yearly rent or annuity
forborne 8 years does amount unto at 6 L per cont. per ann. annual payments and
compound interest: in this manner you may proceed, according to what number of
years the first table comprehends.

The construction of Decimal Fractions, or proportional numbers for the fourth
table.
The first of these 2 Discount of money at 6 l per cen. (1) Discount of rents
at 6 l ^er cent. (2) 1.943396 1.943396 2.889996 2 1833392 3.839619 3 2673012
4.792093 4 3465105 5.747258 5 4212363 6.704960 6 4917323 7.665057 7 5582380
tables is transcribed out of the second breviat, from whence the the 4th is
framed after the manner of the last, for 1 L Pension, Rent or Annuity due at a
years end is worth but so much upon discount as the interest rebated, which at
6 L per cent. is included by this Decimal 943396. and the second years number
must be increased by the Annuity, Rent, or Pension discounted for: therefore
add 889996 unto 943396, the sum will be 1833392 the decimal fraction for the
second year, and so proceed to the seventh year of the first table, by adding
that number, 665057 unto 4917323, the sixth years discount in this second
table, the sum will be 5582380. the Decimal for 7 years rebate of rent at 6 L
per cent, and in this manner continue on the tables to what number of years you
please. Here 1 L Annuity discounted for 7 years, is worth in ready money 5 L 11
ss 7 d 3 q. compound interest rebated.

How to find the Decimal Fractions, or proportional Numbers for the fifth
table.
RULE 1.
As the Decimal for 2 years rent rebated

Is equal in value to 1 L annuity for 2 years,

So is 1 L of annual annuity the same term of time

In proportion to the Decimal purchased by 1 L:

Or,

As 1.833392- to 1 L- so 1.000000 unto.54544.

Or thus,

As 1 L 16 Purchase sh 8 d- is to Annuity 1 L, so will 1 Purchase L be to 10 sh
Annuity 10 9/10 d.

An Illustration.
The Annuity, Rent, or Pension, which 1 l will purchase for a year, lies
involved in the decimal of 1.060000, according to the first table, there being
only one years forbearance of 1 L, then for the second year take the decimal
fraction of 1 L rent discounted for the term of 2 years, which is 1.833392, in
money 1 L 16 sh 8 d. and it is evident how this sum is equal unto 1 L annuity
purchased for 2 years, and consequently the proportion will be as in the rule
before: if 1 L 16 sh 8 d, or 1.833392 (the decimal for two years rent rebated)
be equal to 1 L annuity to continue 2 years; what annual rent or pension will
1 L purchase for the same term of 2 years? which fourth proportional number
discovered, will prove.54544, as in the second year of the fifth table, and
reduced, is in money 10 sh 10 9/10 d. the annuity or annual pension purchased
by 1 L for 2 years, which at 6 L per cent. in the term of 2 years returns to
its first principal, the interest considered: now for the third years decimal,
as 2.673012 is unto an unite with ciphers, so will 1 L for a purchase be in
proportion to 37411, in money 7 sh 5 d 3 q. an annuity to continue 3 years; and
thus proceed to what number of years you please, since by the third, fourth and
fifth etc. are framed out of the 3, 4, 5 years, etc. respectively answering the
years of discount or rebate of rent, as in the fourth table; the fifth being
thus finished, if the half years and quarterly payments be required, they may
be extracted by finding mean proportional numbers, as has been declared in the
calculation of the former table of Decimals; and as for parts of a pound
sterling, I refer you to lib. 3. sect. 1. cap. 7. but here note that the
precedent tables be continued to one or two places more, otherwise errors will
creep in at the root or end of these numbers by annexing of ciphers; for which
cause (as it is the common custom) these 3 last tables were framed on a lesser
Radius (as by one place or degree of figures and ciphers) then are the two
first.

The description, use and explantion of these Decimal Tables, accommodated to
the compound interest allowed, at 6 L per cent. per ann. calculated without
sensible error in the forbearance or discount of Money, Annuities, Rents,
Pensions, and Reversions, with the purchase of them due upon yearly payments.
The first Table is divided into 4 columns, and begins with one comprehending
the parts of a year, ascending by days, weeks and months; the third row
contains the years from 1 to 25 inclusive, both noted with numeral letters;
upon the right hand of these are placed (in Arithmetical characters) the
Decimal numbers made proportional for 1 L forborne, respectively answering the
times included, calculated upon the Radius of a million 1000000. the second
table is for discount of 1 L principal, after the rate of 6 L per cent. per
ann. made by the former Radius, viz. 1000000, for the same parts and term of
time as was the last. This discount or rebate of money is by some termed
Interest damageable, by reason it is ever less then the Principal, although
upon a days discount, or any shorter time, as you may see in the head of the
table, with a title to each column; the first has the Radius prefixed to the
Decimals, the second of Discount have only points to denote their places, as
Primes, they being all proper fractions, and parts of 1 L. the third, fourth
and fifth Tables have each 2 columns only, the first numbering the years from 1
to 25 in numeral letters, and against those annual computations are placed the
Decimal numbers depending on those years, as by their titles do appear: the
third and fourth increases, the fifth declines the Radius; which prolix numbers
in these the three last Tables, extends to 100000, and so much for the model
and form of them.

The first Tables use illustrated.
QUESTION I. If 1000 L be forborne 1 day, what shall be the interest of it,
after the rate of 6 L per centum per annum?
Look in the first Table for 1 day; against which (under the title of Decimal
numbers I find 1000160, which multiplied by the principal 1000 l, or annex 3
ciphers to it, the product is 1000, 160000, from whence sever the Radius by
cutting off 6 places from the right hand, you will find 1000 L for integers
struck off, and the remaining fraction.160000, which reduce, as in lib. 1.
sect. 2. parag. 1. paradig. 10. or multiply it by 20, and from the product cut
off 6 places, and so proceed; you will find the loan of 1000 L to be 3 ss 2 d 1
q.

QUESTION II. What will the interest of 300 L amount unto, if forborne 3 weeks,
after the rate of 6 L per centum per annum?
The decimal for 3 weeks is 1.003358. which multiplied by the principal 300 L
produces 301, 007, 400. from whence cut off 6 places and reduce them, you will
find 301 L 0 ss 1 D 3 q. the increase of 300 L for the time required, viz. 1 L
0 ss 1 d 3 q.

QUEST. III. What will the interest of 200 L rise unto, if forborne 6 months,
after the rate of 6 L per centum per annum?
The Decimal for 6 months forbearance of 1 L is 1.029563, so the rule is in
this and all the rest; as 1 L, or the decimal 1,000,000 is in proportion unto
200 L, the principal propounded; so the decimal of 1 L forborne the same term of
time shall be proportional to 205.912.600. from which compound fraction sever 6
places numbered from the right hand, the integers are 205 L, the fraction 912600
reduced, will be in money 18 ss 3 d, so here the interest of 200 L for 6
months proves but 5 L 18 sh 3 D, whereas, according to custom, you may
discover amongst the vulgar errors the loan of this principal forbo^n half a
year comes to 6 L, that is, 1 sh 9 D too much.

QUESTION IV. How much comes the interest of 150 L unto, if forborne 7 years, at
the rate of 6 L per centum per annum?
The Decimal against 7 years is 1503630. which multiplied by 150 L produces
225, 544, 500, and reduced, is in money 225 L 10 sh 10 68/100 D, so the
increase of 150 L, all interest forborne 7 years, swel^ to the sum in clear
profit 75 L 10 sh 10 68/100 D, which by the common current of simple interest
does multiply in the seven years apprentiship (when the Principal shall be
discharged the Indenture) but 63 L, which is less (I conceive) then the
intention of the English Laws allow by 12 L 10 sh 10 d. for if any loan upon a
principal can be legally exacted in equity, use upon the interest (so often as
due) may be as justly claimed by the same prerogative, according to Humane
institutions, not warrantable by the Divine Law.

QUESTION V. If 210 L be forborne the term of 3 years, 3 months, 3 weeks, and 3
days, what will be the increase at 6 L per centum per annum?
The Products I Decimals 1191016 2382032 II 25011336 Year: III 25378356
Months IV 25463576 Weeks V 25475773 Days The total is -- 254 L 15 ss 1 d.

In all questions of this kind, seek the Decimal for the longest term of time
allowed, as here 3 years, whose artificial number is 1191016, which multi^lied
by 210 L (the principal lent) or by 21, lib. 1. sect. 1. parag, 4. exam. 7. as
in this table and first row: in the second stands the product, viz. 25011336.
to which you may annex the cipher in 210 L. it is not material, the number
being one place greater then is the Radius, and yet the product one cipher
defective; therefore strike off but 5 places from the right hand, and the
fraction reduced, the sum would prove at 3 years end 250 L 2 ss 3 d. But to
proceed, the second row for the term of years multiplied by 10.14674 (the
Decimal for 3 months) produces in the third row of the table 25378356, the
number for 3 years and 3 months, as noted on the right hand of the Table;
which multiplied by the Decimal 1003358 for 3 weeks, the product will be in the
fourth row 25463576, the artificial number for 3 years, 3 months, and 3 week;
and lastly, multiplied by 1000479 (the decimal for 3 days) the fifth row will
specify in the product 25475773, the artificial number for the whole time,
viz. 3 years, 3 months, 3 weeks, and 3 days; from wh^nce sever the integers,
and reduce the fraction, the total appears (as in the table) 254 L 15 ss 1 d.
the true compound interest for the sum and time required.

The second Table of compound Interest illustrated by Examples.
QUESTION VI. At the term of 6 months A is to pay unto B 500 l, but do agree
in receiving it presently upon discount, after the rate of 6 L per cent. per
ann. what sum of money will discharge it?
In the second table (for discount of money) I find the decimal for 6
months.971286, which fraction of 1 L Sterling multiplied by 500 L, or 5 the
product will be 4856430, to which annex 2 ciphers, the number will be
485,643,000; from the right hand cut off 6 places, and reduce the fraction,
there will appear 485 L 12 sh 10 d, the true sum upon rebate, that will
discharge 500 L 6 months before it is due, which according to the best vulgar
custom comes near the truth, as by Pro. 47 of this book (the discount being but
for a short time) viz. 485 L 8 sh 8 d 3 q.

QUESTION VII. A had a Lease in reversion, which at the expiration of 7 years
was valued worth 1200 L. which Lease B would purchase present pay, rebating at
6 L per cent. per ann. what will be the value of i^?
This differs not essentially from the last, for it is no more but to find the
present value of 1200 L not due until 7 annual revolutions be completed. Look
in the second Table for discount of money, and in the column against 7 years
you will discover 665057, which Decimal multiplied by 1200 L, produces
798,068,400, from the right hand sever 6 places and reduce the fraction, the
sum will appear in money 798 L 1 sh 4 d very near; and so much money present
pay B must disburse to A for his Lease in reversion, commencing at 7 years
expiration, the thing required.

QUESTION VIII. A is to pay unto B a Legacy of 1800 L, which is to be
discharged at 3 several and equal payments, viz. at the end of 6 months 600 L,
at the term of a year 600 more, and the last payment 6 months after that: B
desire, it presently, and A is willing upon discount at 6 L per cent. per ann.
what sum will discharge it at one present and entire payment?
The sum here The decimals L S d 1 582771600 1 582. 15. 5 2 566037600 2 566.
0. 9 3 549784200 3 549. 15. 8 School. 593400 School. 11. 10 propounded is 1800 L at
3 equal payments: the Decimal for discount of 6 months is 971286. which
multiplied by 600 L (the first payment to be due at the half years end) the
product is 582771600, which reduced does prove 582 l 15 s 5 d, then is there
600 l upon a years rebate: the decimal for that term of time is 943396. which
multiplied by 600 L will produce 566,037,600. which reduced into money is 566 L
o sh 9 d due upon the years rebate, as in the second row of the table: now the
last payment is 600 L upon a year and a halfs discount, to find an artificial
number for this; the Decimal for a years discount is 943396, and for 2 years
889996. the product of these will be 83.96.18.66.64.16. the Quadrat extracted
as it is pointed will be 916307, a mean proportional number betwixt the first
and second year, according unto the construction of these tables before
delivered, and if multiplied by 600 L the last payment (due at that time) the
product will be 549784200, as in the third row of the table, and is in money
549 L 15 ss 8 d. the total School L 11 ss 10 d. which sum will discharge all
the 3 payments at one time, and present upon discount; and the 3 several
Decimals (whose total is 1698593400, and reduced, will prove the same total
sum: the money deducted is 101 L 8 ss 2 d.

The third Tables use of compound interest demonstrated by examples.
QUESTION IX. If an Annuity of 60 L per ann. be all forborne 7 years, how much
will it amount unto when that term expires.
Look in the third table for Annuities forborne the time specified, where
against 7 years you will find the Decimals 8.39384. which multiplied by 60 L
(the annual rent) the product proves 503.63040. cut off 5 places, whereby to
sever the integers from the fractions, which reduce into money, and you shall
find 503 L 12 ss 7 d. the true value of the 60 L annuity forborne 7 years; the
question solved.

QUESTION X. A did owe unto B 186 L, and upon covenant to pay unto the said B a
rent of 20 L 13 ss 4 d per an. until the debt should be discharged; yet after
this contract, they both agreed to respite the payments, until the last were
due, with this proviso, to pay it all in then, allowing interest for the
forbearance, at 6 L per cent. per ann.
Find what number of years ^ would have terminated the Annuitie first agreed
upon betwixt A and B, for the payment of 186 L by 20 L 13 ss 4 d annual rent,
which will be performed by the example in the Table, viz. as 62/3 L is to 1
year, so will 186 L be unto 9 years: which rent is to be respited during the
aforesaid term. Look in the Table of Rents forborne, where against 9 years you
will find this 11.49132 to be multiplied by the decimal of 20 L 13 ss 4. the
Decimal of 13 ss 4 d is (as in lib. 3. sect. 1. chap. 7.) 66667, to which
prefix the integer 20 L, the total is 2066667. this multiplied by 11.49132, the
decimal for the term of years, the product will be 237-4873183044, according to
the rules of Multiplication in Decimals, lib. 3. sect. 1. cap. 4. sever off 10
places for the fraction, the integer will be 237 L, reduce 5 or 6 places of the
fraction, making the Radius one place more, you will find 9 ss 9 d very near:
so A must be responsable to B, or their heirs at 9 years end for 237 L 9 ss 8 d
3 ^/10 q. This exactness was not required, nor yet so great a number taken for
the fraction of 13 sh 4 d. but these if understood, the ingenuous will ease
themselves by my labors, to which end I will proceed.

QUESTION XI. A was to pay unto B 200 L at the full term of 5 years, for which
debt A was contented to make B a Lease of a Farm to continue in force the same
time, whose annual rent was 35 L. which of them gained by this contract,
interest allowed at 6 L per cent. per annum?
In the Table of Rents forborne, under years look 5, the decimal number against
it is 5.63709. which multiplied by 35 L (the Rent respited the term of 5 years)
the product will be 197.29815, and reduced into money is 197 L 5 sh 11 d. which
subtracted from 200 L, the remainder is 2 L 14 sh 0 d. and so much A did gain
by the bargain or contract made with B.

The fourth Table exemplified in discount of Annuities, Rents, Pensions, or
Reversions, at 6 L per cent. per ann. compound interest.
QUESTION XII. What is the present worth of 80 L Rent or Annuity, to continue
25 years, rebating at 6 L per centum per annum?
Look in the fourth Table for 25 years, against which I find 12.78335. This
compound Decimal multiplied by 80 L (the Annuity propounded) the product proves
1022.66800. which reduced into money will be 1022 L 13 sh 4 d, the true value
of 80 L per annum yearly payments, rebated for 25 years according to demand.

QUESTION XIII. A man has a Lease of Lands or Tenements worth 15 L per ann.
more then the rent, and has a Lease yet 4 years in being; the Tenant desires
to take another in reversion for 21 years at the same rent, what must the
Lessee pay for a Fine, interest allowed at 6 L per centum per annum?
for 4 years for 25 years 346510 1278335 1 1732550 5 6391675 2 51.97650 6
191.75025 3 51 L 19 sh 6 D 7 191 L 15 sh 0 D 4 139.77375 8 139 L 15 sh 6 D

First seek the Decimal for the term of four years 346510. which multiplied by
15 L, or by 5, as in the first Table in the margent, according to lib. 1. sect.
1. parag. 4. exam. 5. the product in the a row will be 51.97650, in money 51 L
19 sh 6 d. and so much the old lease in being is worth, when the new for 21
years enters possession: now admit the term of the old Lease and the new added
together, the sum of years is 25, the profit or overplus of Rent is to
continue all the time, therefore 1278335, the Decimal for 25 years, multiplied
by 15 L, as in the fifth row of this table, produces in the 6.119.75025, equal
in value to 191 L 15 ss. the difference of the first Lease and the total time
in the 8 row is 139 L 15 ss 6 d. and so the difference of decimals in 4 row
reduced is very near, without a material error, being 139 L 15 ss 5 7/10 d.

QUESTION XIV. A Tenant has a Lease of 21 years, the present thereof is 41 L
per ann. during the term of 7 years, and after that time shall be expired, the
Lessee is to pay 50 L rent per ann. for the residue of the term, what is the
value of this Lease in ready money, interest discounted at 6 L per cent. per
annum?
for 21 years for 7 years 1 11.76407 5 5.58238 5 9 2 588.20350 6 50.24142 3 588
L 4 ss 0 d 7 50 L 4 sh 10 d 4 537 L 19 ss 2 d 8 537.96208

In the fourth table (of Rents rebated) the Decimal of 21 years is 11.76407.
which multiplied by 50 L (the rent of 21 years) the product is 588.20350, as
in the second row of this Table; which reduced is 588 L 4 ss 0 2/4 d, as in the
third row, which had been the true value of it, at L per ann. for the whole
term of time; but the first 7 years of this Lease was but 41 L annual rent,
therefore the first Decimal was too great, by the difference of rent, which was
9 L per annum; then look into the fourth Table for 7 years, and against it you
will find 5.58238. which multiplied by 9 L, as in the first row of this Table,
the product in the sixth, is 50.24142, and reduced is 50 L 4 ss 10 d very near;
which subtracted from the third row, the remainder, is 537 L 19 sh 2 d, as in
the fourth row; or subtract the Decimals found in the sixth, from the second
row; the difference will be 537.96208. which artificial number reduced would
be 537 L 19 sh 2 d, as before; the true value of the Lease required.

QUESTION XV. There is a Lease to be taken for 21 years at 30 L per ann. and
100 L Fine: the Lessee likes the bargain, but not the condition, desiring the
annual rent to be but 10 L yearly payments, and is willing to give such a Fine
as shall be proportionable to the rent abated, during the aforesaid term of 21
years, and here the Fine is demanded.
In all questions of this kind The Decimal 1 11.76407 2 L 235.28140 3 S --
5.628 1256 4 D -- 7.536 take the rent abated, which is here 20 L per ann. for
21 years, whose decimal (in the 4th Table of Rents rebated) is 11.76-407, as in
the margent; which multiplied by 20 produces 235.2814, that is, 235 L. reduce
the fraction (neglecting the ciphers) the value of 20 L per ann. (the
difference of Rent) for 21 years, is as in the 2, 3, and 4 row, in all 235 L 5
sh 7 D. this added unto the former Fine, 100 L, makes in all 335 L 5 sh 7 D,
the true sum to be paid for a Fine, in lieu of 20 L Rent per ann. abated
during the Lease of 21 years; the thing required.

QUESTION XVI. A had a Lease of 130 L per ann. to continue 24 years; B had
another of 210 L per ann. and 11 years to come; these 2 men mutually exchanged
Leases; A (upon the contract) paid unto B 20 L in ready money, which of these
had the better bargain, and how much?
A B 12.55036 788687 3765108 1 1577374 1631.54680 2 1656.24270 1631 L 10 sh 11
D. 3 1656 L 4 sh 10 D. 1651 L 10 sh 11 D. 4 4 L 13 sh 11 D.

Against the 24 year of the fourth Table, look and you will find the Decimal of
it 1255036, for A. secondly, the lease of B 11 years, has this decimal
7.88687. these 2 numbers multiplied by their respective rents, as in the first
row of this table, according to lib. 1. sect. 1. par. 4. exam. 6 and 7. or by
the vulgar way. In the second row of the margent A does produce 1631.5464, and
B 1656.2427, neglect the ciphers, and reduce the numbers: in the third row you
may find the Lease which A exchanged is worth in present money 1631 L 10 ss 11
d. and the lease which B was owner of being 210 L per ann. for the term of a 11
years, proves in current coin the sum of 1656 L 4 sh 10 D. and A mended his
in the barter or exchange 20 L, which makes the value of his lease, as in the
fourth row, 1651 L 10 sh 11 D. which still is less worth by 4 L 13 sh 11 D, as
in the fourth row (by subtraction) is evident, and that B lost so much money by
the bargain.

The fifth Table does demonstrate in its use the purchasing of Annuities,
Rents, Pensions, or Reversions, at 6 L per centum per annum compound Interest.
QUESTION XVII. What Annuity, Rent, or Pension, will 250 L in ready money
purchase for a Lease of 7 years; interest allowed at 6 L per cent. per ann.
Seek the seventh year in the fifth Table (which is the term of years that
the Lease continues) whose Decimal number is.17914, and if multipled by 250 L,
the product will be 44.78500, and reduced, is in money 44 L 15 sh 8 d. And this
Annuity or Rent to continue the full term of seven years, which the former
sum of money will purchase as a yearly revenue during that time.

QUESTION XVIII. There was a man who purchased a Lease to continue 25 years, at
10 L per ann. for which the Lessee paid a Fine of 150 L. how much was the
annual rent of this Lease valued at, when interest was rated at 6 L per cent.
per annum?
This differs little from Decimals 1 07823 39115 2 11.73450 3 11 L 14 ss 8 D
the last; for here you are to find what Annuity or Rent 150 L in ready money
will purchase for the term, as in the fifth Table against 25 years stands this
Decimal 07823. which multiplied by 15, as in the margent, in the first row of
numbers, whose product in the second row with the cipher annexed, is 11.73450.
that reduced, is in money 11 L 14 ss 8 D (the farthing neglected as not
material) and this annual Annuity 150 L will purchase for 25 years: therefore
add this unto the Rent paid, viz. 10 L per ann. the total is 21 L 14 ss 8 D.
the question answered.

QUESTION XIX. There is a Lease of 25 years to come, set at 10 L rent per ann.
and the Fine demanded is 150 L. the Tenant is willing to give 100 L, and a
proportional annual revenue during the whole term, what will be the rent
required, the loan for money allowed at 6 L per centum per annum?
This does not vary essentially Decimals 1 07823 5 2 3.91150 3 3 L 18 ss 2 D
from the former: for the Fine being diminished, the annual rent must be
increased: take the difference betwixt the two Fines, viz. 100 L, and 150 L, as
50 L the Decimal for the term of years 25 is.07823. which multiplied by 50, or
by 5 (as in the first table of the margent) the product in the second is 3.
91150. which reduced in the third row is 3 L 18 sh 2 D. the rent which 50 L
will purchase for 25 year; which added to the former Annuity of 10 L per ann.
makes the whole rent 13 L 18 sh 2 D, according to demand.

QUESTION XX. A Citizen gives over his Trade unto a faithful servant, leaving
him his shop ready furnished, the Wares prized at 1408 L, the Lease of his
house valued at 250 L, so in all 1638 L, which the Master was to receive by
equal and annual payments in the space of 7 years, the interest agreed upon
at 6 L per centum per annum, what annuity will discharge this debt.
To discover this annual Rent, look in the first Table for the term of years
specified, and against 7 you will find.17914. This multiplied by 1658 L
produces 297.01412. the Decimal^ reduced will prove in money 297 L o ss 3 D.
Which Annuity or Rent, for 7 years annual payments, discharges the whole debt
with interest, at 6 L per centum.

QUESTION XXI. A Tenant took a Lease of a House and Land for a term of 21
years, paying 160 L Fine, and 16 L Rent per ann. at 7 years end the Lessee was
resolved to put it off: What annual Rent or Annuity must he set the Tenement
at, to withdraw his former Fine, or reserving the same Rent, impose another
proportional for the years to come? Interest at the rate of 6 L per cent. per
ann.
Rent Fine 1.08500 5 9.2949^ 51000 13.6 2 13.60000 6 5576988 2788494 3 13 L 12
ss 929498 4 29 L 12 ss 7 126.411728

First to impose a proportional Rent, find by the first Table (of Annuities to
be purchased) what 160 L will buy for the full term of 21 years, whose Decimal
is.08500, which multiplied by 160 L, or 16, as in the first row of this
marginal table, the product in the second is 13.60000. in the third is reduced
to 13 L 12 ss. and this annual Pension 160 L will purchase for 21 years; which
added to 16 L per ann. (the Rent of the Tenement) does evidently show the
nature of the Lease, as in the fourth row 29 L 12 sh. and setting of it at that
rate the remaining years, the Tenant saves himself.

To discover what Fine must be imposed, the old Rent reserved, and yet a
^roportional part for the first Fine. The term of years remaining are 14, whose
Decimal in the fourth table of Discount is 9.29498, which multiplied by the
Decimal of 13 L 12 sh last found, viz. 13.6, as in the fifth row, in the s^xth
stand their several products, and in the seventh row the total sum, as
1^6.411728, from whence strike off 6 places, which are fractions (according to
the Rules of Multiplication in Decimals) and reduce the test, the Fine will be
discovered 126 L 8 sh 2 D, which saves the Tenant harmless, the old Rent still
reserved, without gain or loss; the thing required. As for the Decimal of 12
sh. find the fraction, or see lib. 3. ca^. 7. table 1.

Rules I have here delivered, equally balanced betwixt the Buyer and Seller,
Debtor and Creditor, whereby neither side might deceive, non yet be deceived
by falacious or ambiguous cont^^cts. As for Interest Money, here are composed
rules both according to Custom, prescriptions of Art, and the precepts of
humane Institutions, which tolerates Usury, confined to a Loan of 6 L per
centum per annum. I cordially wish the frugality of the people would lessen the
trade of money, and sink the Impost to a Land rate; yet there would be many
Money-corm^rants, and their pro^it great, because such Estates lie dormant in
Banks, obscured from the inquisition of a sax; and rarely appea o^ wake but
with the noise of a Forfeiture o^ the Owners Land, or the liberty of his
person. The Interest, like a Monster, by an unlawful conception, and a
prodigious birth (grown greater then the Principal) makes appeal to the rigor
of the Laws, against those who bore too prodigal a Sail, and now like to
suffer wr^ck betwixt Scylla and Charybdis, or swallowed by those yawning waves.

Usury is like a Cancer, which by an unperceptible Consumption ingratefully
wastes that body where by Corruption it took a being; I wish none to adore the
Golden Calf, nor yet slight the materials, their use being good and laudable,
where Virtue is Treasurer, Discretion Controller, and Charity Purse-bea^er: but
if abused by being cast in another mould, or the three adverse parties in
office, it will as e^ ly catch those (who make worldly wealth their Mammon) as
lime does Birds; so the danger is great, and the more, when usually the love of
Money multi^lies, as their Stocks and Magazines increase; and those who have
most are often most miserable in want, ignorant in the use of temporal
blessings, and glutted with excess, become immedicable by those surfeits; like
men in Dropsies, the more waterish they grow, the more they desire drink, with
an unsatiable thirst, so feeds the humors, and that the disease. And thus I
will conclude with the ingenuous Poet, Ovid.

Sic quibus in^umui suff^sa venture ab unda,
Quo plus s^n potae, plus sitiuntur aquae.
In English thus, Men s^ell'd with Dropsies grow excessive dry,
And drinking, covet more until they die.


THE THIRD PART.
General Rules of Practice, by the Art of Memory.
Merchandises and all Commodities are sold either by number, weight, or
measure, and those by gross o^ retail, viz, as in Tons o^ sized Loads, by the
Thousand, by the Weigh, Tod, Clove, by the Hundred, whereof there are accounted
4 sorts, as 6 Score, 5 Score and 12 lb, 5 Score, and also 60 Warp, and sundry
sorts by measure, as the Tun, Chaldron, Quarter, Barrel; the Gross, Dozen,
etc. as by the following Tables are delineated, whereby their values in the
least species or denomination may be computed in the greater, without obstruse
rules or incumbring the memory with ^eserv^tions, but by vulgar notions and
natures common dictates only, having imprinted in your memory the gross sums,
and what those amount unto in coin of the least denominations, as in shil.
g^oats, pence and farth. but for those, to whom these accounts are unknown, or
where for want of practice they have been obliterated, or the recollection
troublesome, I shall present you here with a Table ready calculated, for the
Numbers, Weights, and Measures, most frequently used in England, and generally
received either from former Statutes, or customary Laws, ratified by the
undeniable prescription of Time, and intermixed, are these: A TABLE of Numbers,
Weights, Measures, and what their several gross sums amount unto, in
Shillings, Groats, Pence, and Farthings, registered in Arithmetical Characters,
and by Numeral Letters.
lb Subtle Shill. Groats Pence Farthings Nu. Gross L S L S d L S d L S d 2240
or XX. C g. ^12 0 37 6 8 9 6 8 2 6 8 2000 M.M 100 0 33 6 8 8 6 8 2 1 8 2016 or
XVIII Cg. 100 16 33 12 0 8 8 0 2 2 0 1800 MDCCC 90 0 30 0 0 7 10 0 1 17 6 1680
or XV. C g. 84 0 28 0 0 7 0 0 1 15 0 1500 M D 75 0 25 0 0 6 5 0 1 11 3 1344 or
XII. C g. 67 4 2^ 8 0 5 12 0 1 8 0 1200 MCC. 60 0 20 0 0 5 0 0 1 5 0 1120 X C
g. 56 0 18 13 4 4 13 4 1 3 4 1000 M 50 0 16 13 4 4 3 4 1 0 10 896 VIII. C g. 44
16 14 18 8 3 14 8 0 18 8 800 VIII C 40 0 13 6 8 3 6 8 0 16 8 672 VI C g. 33 12
11 4 0 2 16 0 0 14 0 600 VI C 30 0 10 0 0 ^0 0 0 12 6 560 V C g. 28 0 9 6 8 2 6
8 0 11 8 500 V C 25 0 8 6 8 1 8 0 10 5 448 IV C g. 22 8 7 9 4 1 17 4 0 9 4 400
IV C 20 0 6 13 4 1 13 4 0 8 4 365 CCC LXV 18 5 6 1 8 10 ^ 0 7 7 336 III C g. 16
16 5 12 0 8 0 0 7 0 300 CCC 15 0 5 0 0 1 5 0 0 6 3 256 CCLVI 12 16 4 5 4 1 1 4
0 5 4 252 CCLII 12 12 4 4 0 1 1 1 0 5 3 224 II C g. 11 4 3 14 8 ^ 18 8 0 4 8
200 CC 10 0 6 8 0 16 8 0 4 2 166 CLX 8 0 2 13 4 0 13 4 0 3 4 144 CXLIV 7 4 ^ 8
0 0 12 0 0 3 0 120 CXX 6 0 2 0 0 0 10 0 0 2 6 112 I. C. g. 5 12 ^ 17 4 0 9 4 0
2 4 100 C 5 0 1 13 4 0 8 4 0 2 1 90 XC 4 10 1 10 0 0 7 6 0 1 9 80 LXXX 4 0 1 6
8 0 6 8 0 1 8 70 LXX 3 10 1 3 4 0 5 10 0 1 5 63 LXIII 3 3 ^ 1 0 0 5 3 0 1 3 60
LX 3 0 1 0 0 0 5 0 0 1 3 56 LVI. C g. 2 16 0 18 8 0 4 8 0 1 2 50 L 2 10 0 16 8
0 4 2 0 1 0 48 XLVIII 2 8 0 16 0 0 4 0 0 1 0 42 XLII 2 2 0 14 0 0 3 6 0 0 10 40
XL 2 0 0 13 4 0 3 4 0 0 10 36 XXXVI 1 16 0 12 0 0 3 0 0 0 9 32 XXXII 1 12 0 10
8 0 2 8 0 0 8 30 XXX 1 10 0 10 0 0 2 6 0 0 7 28 XXVIII. C 1 8 0 9 4 0 2 4 0 0 7
25 XXV 1 5 0 8 4 0 2 1 0 0 6 24 XXIV 1 4 0 8 0 0 2 0 0 0 6 21 XXI 1 1 0 7 0 0 1
9 0 0 5 20 XX 1 0 0 6 8 0 1 8 0 0 5 18 XVIII 0 18 0 6 0 0 1 6 0 0 4 16 XVI 0 16
0 5 4 0 1 4 0 0 4 14 XIV 0 14 0 4 8 0 1 2 0 0 3 12 XII 0 12 0 4 0 0 1 0 0 0 3
10 X 0 10 0 3 4 0 0 10 0 0 2 8 VIII 0 8 0 2 8 0 0 8 0 0 2 6 VI 0 6 0 2 0 0 0 6
0 0 1 4 IV 0 4 0 1 4 0 0 4 0 0 1 2 II 0 2 0 0 8 0 0 2 0 0 1 I 0 1 0 0 4 0 0 1 0
0 0

A description of this Table.
Be pleased to observe here are 13 Columns, whereof the first contains (in
Arithmetical Characters) the principal Numbers, Weights and Measure, noted in
the head of the table with lb for pound weights, or Number. for numbers, beginning
with 2240, a sized load, tun, or 20 hundred gross; from hence continued down to
an unite, in such an order or series of numbers most frequently used in the
Commerce and Trade of this our British Island: in the next stands their subtle
and gross weights, noted with numeral letters, distinguished in the postscript
by the letter g, denoting gross: the third and fourth Column shows what sum
of money they do make in Shillings: in the fifth, sixth and seventh Column,
what so many groats amount unto: the three next Columns what those gross or
subtle sums do make in pence: the three last (in the least denomination of
money) and what the value rises to Pounds Sterling, Shillings and Pence, as by
their titles in the head of these tables do evidently appear.

The benefit of this Table, by sundry Examples illustrated to ease the Art of
Memory.
EXAMPLE I.
It is required (without calculation) what 2240, or 20 C gross amounts unto in
shillings, look under its title and you will find 112 L 0 ss. in groats 37 L 6
ss 8 D. so many pence comes to 9 L 6 ss 8 d. and in farthings 2 L 6 ss 8 d.

EXAMPLE II.
In things sold by Retail. Admit a Commodity vended for 3 half pence the pound,
and it is required at that rate how much it comes unto by the Tun; I take it in
the least denomination of Coin, (that is 6 farthings) and at one farthing the
pound under that title I find 2 L 6 ss 8 D. for which you must impose so much
on every farthing contained in the price, which was 6. then consequently the
sum must be 6 times 2 L. secondly, 6 times 6 ss. and also 6 times 8 D. or for
brevity, 6 times 2 L is 12 L, and 6 Nobles is 2 L. in all 14 L, at 1 D the lb,
as was required.

EXAMPLE III.
At 3 D the pound, what comes a tun unto? under the title of Pence I find 9 L
6 sh 8 D, at a penny the lb. then 3 times that is 28 L. admit a commodity at 8
D the lb. you may work this as before, but being the price is 2 groats, under
that title you will discover 37 L 6 sh 8 D. and since 2 groats is the price of
one lb, that doubled is 74 L 13 sh 4 D. if the price had been 3 sh the lb, the
tun would have come unto 336 L, as by the table is evident.

EXAMPLE IV.
How much comes 10 D a day unto by the year? I look down in the table for 365
(the number of days in a uulgar year) and under the title of pence I find 1 L
10 sh 5 D. now 10 times that is 15 L 4 sh 2 D, or sum it up in your memory
thus, viz. 10 L then 10 Angels, 10 groats and 10 D. or take, it in groats and
pence, as 6 L 1 sh 8 D, and 1 L 10 sh 5 D makes 7 L 12 sh 1 D. this doubled
(the question depending on 2 groats and 2 pence) the sum will be as before,
15 L 4 sh 2 d.

EXAMPLE V.
If one pound of Cheese cost 3 D, what comes the Weigh unto? This properly
belongs to a certain quantity of Wool and Cheese, cons^sting of 32 Cloves,
whereof one contains 8 lb, so the Weigh is 256 lb. which having found in the
table, I seek it in the colume of pence, and find 1 L 1 sh 4 D. and in the row
of farthings 5 sh 4 D. the sum 1 L 6 sh 8 D. and being that there was 3 times
so much to be imposed in either denominaation, the sum is 4 L for the Weigh
at the rate propounded.

EXAMPLE VI.
Wine sold at 2 sh 5 D the gallon, how much is that a tun, containing 252
gallons? Having found the number, look against it (the column of shillings) and
you will discover 12 L 12 sh (at 12 D the gallon) which doubled is 25 L 4 sh.
to which add 5 L 5 sh (for the 5 D) the sum is 30 L 9 S. the column of pence
answering that number being but 1 L 1 sh, so it is easily multiplied by 5. Or
take it as mixed in their several columns of groats, and pence, 'twill be all
one in the total.

EXAMPLE VII.
Currants sold at 3 D the pound, how much comes 1 C weight gross unto? The
farthings contained in the price are 15, and against 112 in the last column I
find 2 sh 4 D to be imposed on every farthing, that is 15 groats and twice 15.
in all 1 L 15 S. or take it in both columns of pence and farthings, as 3 times
2 sh 4 D. and thrice 9 sh 4 D. if this question had been propounded on 100 lb
subtle, the answer will be 15 pence and twice 15 shillings, that is 1 L 11 sh 3
D.

EXAMPLE VIII.
Fish sold by the warp or couple, at 2 sh 10 D the warp, what co^es 4 C unto?
60 in this commodity is 120 Fi hes to the C. look 60 in the table, against
which I find (in the column of shillings) 3 L, then for the 2 sh I set down 6
L, or keep it in my memory; in the next column I observe 1 L, and for the 2
groats in the price 2 L, then for 2 D (in the column of pence) I impose 2
Crowns, and for the 2 farthings in the price 2 sh 6 D, in all 8 L 12 sh 6 D,
the price of 60 couple: now 4 times that is 34 L 10 sh. according to the demand.

EXAMPLE IX.
If 1 pound of Indico cost 8 sh 7 D 3 q. what comes a quarter of 100 unto
subtle? The answer will be 10 L 16 sh 1 D 3 q. look 25, and for the 8 sh in
that column impose 10 L. for the 7 D, 14 sh 7 D. and lastly, for D take 1 sh 6
D, the sum will be as it was before, and according to my rules of Practice,
lib. 2. parag. 9.

By these 9 Examples all obscurities in this kind are cleared, difficulties
made easy, and burdens to the memory removed, made facile even to common
capacities, without tedious rules of Art, the Numbers, Weights and Measures of
Commerce and Trade-being known to those who are conversant, or Masters in their
own occupations; and if otherwise, this will be a guide to conduct them,
without deviation, to the end of each gross sum, and may be accommodated unto
the Numbers, Weights and Measures of any foreign or transmarine place; if
occasion requires, or necessity urges, which I refer to the ingenious.

Any day of the year assigned for the receipt or payment of money, or other
business, to find what day of the week 'twill fall upon for any time to come.
The Julian CALENDAR.
Bis New Years day Months Days 1659 Saturd. I January 1, 8, 15, 22, 29 1660
Sunday II February 5, 12, 19, 26 1661 Tuesd. III March 5, 12, 19, 26 1662
Wednesd. IV April 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 1663 Thursd. V May 7, 14. 21, 28 1664 Friday
VI June 4, 11, 18, 25 1665 Sunday VII July 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 1666 Monday VIII
August 6, 13, 20, 27 1667 Tuesday IX September. 3, 10, 17, 24 1668 Wednesd. X
October 1, 8, 15, 22, 29 1669 Friday XI Novem. 5, 12, 19, 26 1670 Saturday XII
December. 3, 10, 17, 24, 31

The Tables use explained.
This Table contains 6 Columes; the first has only 3 Crosses, to signify
those years against them to be greater then the rest, being Bissextiles, or
Leap-years: in the next are the years that shall be elapsed since the birth of
Christ, from 1659 unto the year 1670. In the third Colume are placed the week
days, which begins each year respectively, or the first day of January: in the
fourth and fifth stands the 13 months: the last column shows the weekdaye, in
every month, on which New Years day did fall upon in any of these years.

EXAMPLE I.
It is required to know what day of the week shall be the fourth of December in
the year 1659. against which I find Saturd. for the first day of the year, and
likewise the third of December. the next is Sunday the thing desired. The
Saturdayes in this month 1659 are upon 3, 10, 17, 24, 31. Saturday concluding
both month and year, and Sunday beginning the year 1660, as in the Table.

EXAMPLE II.
Admit it were required in a Leap-year, to know what days of any month shall
be Sunday: here you are to observe that in Bisextiles, or Intercalary years,
there is one day added to February, which then has 29. so after that month
take one from the day found, as in the year 1660. the first Sunday in March, in
October, and the last day of December is required. New Years day I find to be
upon a Sunday, and in the Columns of Months against March stands 5, which
should have been the same day of the week; but being February had 29 days this
year, the 4, 11, 18, 25, are the Sundays in March this year. Secondly, against
October I find 1, which should have been the same with New Years day in a
common year, but now the last of September, so the 7 day of October shall be
the ^^rst Sunday, likewise 14, 21 28, and from any other number subtract 1. and
then for December, the last Lords day shall be 30, and the 31 to conclude the
year shall be Monday.

A Gregorian CALENDAR.
Bis New Years day Months Days 1659 feria 4 I January 1, 8, 15, 22, 29 1660
feria 5 II February 5, 12, 19, 26 1661 feria 7 III March 5, 12, 19, 26 1662
feria 1 IV April 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 1663 feria 2 V May 7, 14, 21, 28 1664 feria 3
VI June 4, 11, 18, 25 1665 feria 5 VII July 2, 9, 16, 23, 30 1666 feria 6 VIII
August 6, 13, ^0, 27 1667 feria 7 IX September. 3, 10, 17, 24 1668 feria 1 X
October 1, 8, 15, 22, 29 1669 feria 3 XI Novem. 5, 12, 19, 26 1670 ^eria 4 XII
December. 3, 10, 17, 24, 31

This Calendar of 12 years is made for the payment or receipt of Money, or
Merchandises assigned upon a prefixed day of the month in Foreign parts, to
find on what day it will fall upon: observe this Table does not essentially
differ from the former in construction, but in the days of the months, the
Reformed Account being 10 days before ours, so that the 22 day of December,
according to the Old Style or computation, is the first day of January in the
New, and so all the other month; precedes our 10 days, their Septimana, or
Weekdayes are diversely reckoned, but most usually thus, viz. Sunday, Feria
prima, Dies Dominica, or Dies Solis,. Monday, Feria secunda, or Dies Lunae,.
Tuesday, Feria tertia, or Dies Ma it is, Wednesday, Feria quarta, or Dies
Mercurii,. Thursday, Feria quinta, o^ Dies Jovis,. Friday, Feria sexta, or Dies
Veneris,. Saturday, Feria septima, Sabbath, or, D^e^ Saturni,. The f^r^t
computation is an Arithmeticall progression from 1 to 7. the other ac^ording to
the Planets, denoted by their Characters, as they are appro^riatod unto those
peculiar days: in other things this Table differs not from the former, so I
refer the Reader to those 2 Examples.

THE SECOND BOOK. Demonstrating a Sympathetical affection between Arithmetic
and Geometry, by solution of several Problemes or Propositions of Magnitude
with exactness by the assistance of Art and Numbers.
PROBLEM I.
In any right-lin'd Triangle propounded with the Perpendicular and Basis, to
find the Area or content of it in square Inches, Feet, Yards, Perches, etc, in
whole numbers or fractions.

The Theoreme.
The superficial content of any right-lin'd Triangle is half the Square
produced, in multiplying of the Basis by the Perpendicular. Lib. 1. Prop. 16.
Trigon.

diagram

IN the Triangle A.C.D. from the Angle at A. let fall a Perpendicular, as A. B.
upon the Basis or ground-line, C.D. This Perpendicular suppose to be measured
in inches or feet, etc. but here in this admit 4 feet, and the basis C. D. 5
feet, the product of these is 20 square feet, the half of this 10 feet
superficial content of the Triangle A.C.D. the thing required. All right-lin'd
multiangular and irregular figures may be reduced into Triangles, and thus
measured, a Problem of great use to the Surveyer.

PROBLEM II.
In all plain right-angled Triangles, with either of the two sides known, to
find the third side; from whence with any line how to describe or set out a
perfect square for any Plat or Building, etc.

The Theoreme.
In any lain right angled Triangle given, the square made of the Hypothenusal
(or Subtendant side) is equal to the square made of both the containing sides.
Lib. 1. Prop. 23. Trigon.

In the last Triangle A.C.D. having let fall a Perpendicular from the Angle at
A, as the line A. B. making 2 right angled triangles, viz. A.B.C. and A. B. D.
whereof A.B. is 4. and b.C. is 3. their squares 9 and 16, the sum of them 25.
whose quadrat root is 5, as by the demonstration may be explained in the second
book, page 122. the true length of A.C. the Hypothenusal required, and the
squares of A. B. 16. and B.D. 4. will be 20. wh^^e root will be A.D. as 4 4/9
or 4 47/100. but neither of them exactly true, as lib. 2. par. 1. examp. 5. but
to return, if the Subtendant side A. C. were known, and one of the other two
containing sides, the third side will be discovered; as admit A.C. 5, and A.B.
4. their squares 25. and 16. the difference 9. whose quadrat root is 3. for the
side B.C. or if the square of 3 (that is 9.) were taken from 25. the remainder
will be 16. the root 4. for the Perpendicular A.B.

In all plain right angled triangles, these numbers are only rational, to be
found without fractions, or their products and quotients increased or
diminished by some common number, from whence diverse mechanical men do use and
acknowledge it as a maxim in their trades in setting out Structures and
regulating their works in perfect squares, after this manner: Take a long line
(as your occasion requires) of which take 3 equal parts at pleasure, then 4
such succeeding parts, and from thence 5, so the line is now divided into 12
equal parts, by 3, 4, and 5. these parts extended will enclose a right angled
triangle, as A. B. C rectangled at B. and proportional in all the parts, as by
the first Book, 19 Prop. Trigon. This right angle found, you may describe a
Parallelagram, or a Quadrangle if you please, as C.D.E.F. and A.B.D.E. or
A.B.C.F. etc.

PROBLEM III.
The three sides of any right lined Triangle being given to find the
superficial content thereof, without knowing the Perpendicular.

The Theoreme.
From half the sum of the 3 sides subtract each particular side, the total of
their mutual products increased by half the sum of the 3 sides, the quadrate
root of that product will produce the superficial content.

Suppose a Triangle with all the three sides known or found by any true
measure, as admit in Feet, and the dimensions these, viz. 15 F. 20 F and 25
Feet, the sum of them is 60 F, the half 30 F. from whence subtract the
particular sides, the differences will be 5.10.15. these by multiplication
continued will produce 750, that product again increased by the sum of half
the sides (which here is 30 F.) will produce 22500. the Quadrat root of it is
150. the number of square feet contained in the superficies of that Triangle
required: having here the superficial content of this Triangle, by the first
Problem before you may easily find the Perpendicular, for 150 feet is but half
the long square made of the Basis and Perpendicular, then 300 the whole square
divided by 25 the Basis of this Triangle, the quotient will be 12 feet for the
Perpendiculars height, and so in any long square the superficial content
divided by the longest side will produce the shortest, and divided by the
lesser side will discover the greater. If in multiplying or dividing any square
figures or numbers (that happen in fractions) you must consider their sides,
for multiplied by an unite will produce but, and by is but of that Square, as
by the first and second little Quadrats made of the line A. B. in the Scheme,
page 109. to which Book and Parag. I refer you, and to my first Book of Trigon.
Prop. 31.

The 3 sides of any plain Triangle given, to find the Perpendicular, and in
what part of the Basis 'twill fall.
The Theorem.
Square the 3 given sides, add the 2 greater squares together, and from that
sum subtract the less, h lf the remainder divide by the Basis or greater
side, the quotient will be the greater Segment. As for example, admit the 3
sides of a plain Triangle given, 30 40. and 50. the Basis, which the
Perpendicular will divide into two Segments, in this 32 and 18. making 2 right
angled Triangles; now with either of the two sides, find the third as before,
which according to the state of the question will prove 24. the thing required.

PROBLEM IV.
The dimension of any plain right angled Superficies, and first of Board, by
square measure, as a foot, or 12 inches, whose Quadrature contains 144 inches.

The Theorem.
The superficial content of all rectangled figures are found by the
multiplication of any two sides by one another that incloseth the right angle.

A foot is here allowed the integer, by which board, glass, etc. is usually
measured, every one of these dimension^ is divided into 12 equal parts, called
inches, and are the next immediate fractions to that integer, as by the Scheme
page 103. Arith. does appear. Now suppose a stock of board to be measured in
number 20. each board is in length 18 feet, and in breadth 10 inches, the
length is in inches 216. which multiplied by 10 shows the superficial content
to be 2160 inches, that divided by 144, the number of square inches in one
foot, there will be found in each board 15 square feet, and consequently in the
20 boards 300 feet, the superficial content of the whole stock required: if the
boards be tapering (as most stocks are) the common custom is to take the
breadth in the middle, or the Arithmetical mean, that is half the breadth from
the sum of both ends; as admit the breadth of the last stock had been 9
inches at the one end, and 11 at the greater, or 8 inches and 12. the sum had
been 20 in either, the half 10 inches as before.

Admit there were 24 panes of glass propounded to be measured, each pane
containing in length 22 inches, in breadth 14 inches, and the superficial
content is required in feet; the breadth and length here given converted into
half inches produces 29 and 45, the square of them is 1305 half-squar'd inches
in each pane, which multiplied by 24 (the number of panes) the whole product is
31320. and since half the root or side of any insquar'd is bu^, as by the
demonstration of fractions page 109. divide 31320 by 4, the quotient will be
7830 square inches: which divided by 144, the quotient will be then 54 feet,
the true superficial content of all the glass required.

By Decimals.
Diverse questions that fall in fractions, may be readily performed by
artificial number, as thus, the length of one pane here propounded is 1 foot 10
inches, the breadth 1 foot 2 inches: for these fractions see the first Section
of the third Book, and fifth Table Chapter 7. where you may find the Decimall
for 10 inches to 5 places.83333, and for the inch or 5/10 this 04167, the sum
of them.875; and for 2 inches these.16667 and.04167 the total.20834, before
these prefix their integers, and then their numbers will stand thus 1.20834 and
1.875, the products of these are 22656375, which multiplied by the number of
panes, viz. 24 produces 54.3753000, which is 54 3753/10000 feet, and exceeds
the former not 4/10000, and that by reason of the irrational fractions which
cannot be exactly true, yet the greater number will have the lesser error.

PROBLEM V. For boarding a Room.
There is a Gallery containing in length 271 feet, in breadth 35 feet; how many
feet of board will floor this room?

To find how many superficial feet this room contains will be discovered by the
last Theorem, for 271 feet multiplied by 35 feet, that is by 71, or more
compendiously by increasing 271 by 7, according to my former rule, as in page
38. which will produce 19241 half feet, and that divided by 2 (as by the
demonstration in fractions, page 109.) the true superficial content will be
9620 feet. And here you are to consider in all such cases there will be loss
in their breadths by seasoning and joynting them, and in their lengths to fit
them on a joyce; some will prove faulty, as shaken or maim, and sundry other
casualties, for which you must allow, especially in good work, and rebated
1/10, in square joints 1/15 or 1/16 lost in well shooting of the boards,
although seasoned.

PROBLEM VI.
To measure Hangings, Wainscot, Pavements, Land, etc.
The last Theorem is an undoubted speculation to all these, so I will show the
practice of it compendiously with examples; and first, there is a Room to be
hanged, containg of Flemish yards, in height 4 of those measures, and in
compass 25, the product of them is 100. the superficial content; in this room
there is a chimney-piece containing 9 square yards, and the Window 10 yards,
the sum 20, which deducted from 100 yards, the remainder will be 80 Flemish
yards to furnish that room. And as for Wainscot, the operation's the same, but
differing in yards, and sometimes by custom, in takin those measures, as in
the height and compass of the room wainscoted, some using a small line
extended straight upon each pannell, and then rising over each style and
quarter. Thus Joyners will make their work both of a greater height and
compass then a line extended over all can do, the reason the workman gives,
they must be paid where their Plane goes; but their measures admitted of, find
the superficial content in the same manner as it was before, yet the Wainscot
of that room, by the same measure, may exceed the other 5 or 6 yards, yet more
or less according to the Joyners work.

Pavements are usually measured by the foot, or yard square, as Board and
Hangings are: the longest lineall measure used in England is the Rod, Pole, or
Perch, whose lengths are various for Land, as custom has introduced and
continued them in particular Countries, and those from 15 to 25 feet in length:
the most equal and generally received Perch is 16 feet long commanded by
Statute, yet 160 square Pole is one Acre of ground, according to the Rod by
which it was measured, and in that Province where it is allowed. But as for our
present purpose, the Survey being taken (though the field be never so
irregular) it may be reduced into Triangles, and then measured, as was said
before in the first Problem.

diagram

Example.
The Area here surveyed is represented by the figure A. B. C. D. E. whose
superficial content by natural Arithmetic will be thus discovered: Draw a
straight line from E to C. now A C in this proves a subtendant side to the
right angled triangle A.B.C. whereof A.B. was measured by the chain, and found
equal to C. D. 45 Perches: from E let fall a Perpendicular on C. D. as E.F.
measured with the scale (by which the Plat was taken) 39 Poles: the work thus
prepared, by the first Prob. B. C. 60 2^/33 or 60 2/11 P. multiplied by 45 P.
according to the rules of fractions (as in lib. 1. sect. 2. Parag. 4. Parad.
4.) will produce 60692/22 take of it, 'twill be 60697/44 which is 1379 21/44
square Perches. Again, by the first Problem, in the Triangle E.C.D. the line
C.D. 45, or 91/2 Poles, multiplied by the Perpendicular E.F. 39 P. produces
3549/2 square Perches, of it is ^549/4 that is 887 P. the true content of the
Triangle C.E.D. the sum of these two Triangles is 2266 ^/11 P. which divided
by 160, the square Perches contained in an Acre, the quotient will be 14 Acres,
0 Rood, and 26 square Pole, the superficial quantity of the Field, as was
desired. And thus the Triangle A.E.D. proves 3 A. 12 Pole.

Any Parallelogram or long square propounded, whose dimension is required,
multiply the length by the breadth, the product answers your desire: As for
example in Decimals, the figure to be measured is A.B.C.D. in length B.C. or
A.D. 60 P. 10 F. in breadth 45 perches 8 feet and 3 inches, what is the Area or
superficial content of this ground? 160 square perches makes one Acre, which
contains 4 Roods, and one of them 40 Pole; now from the dimension of this
field, in the seventh table of Decimals look 10 feet, that is 21 half feet,
whose Decimal is 6364, to this prefix the integers given as 60 Pole, which
number will stand thus, 60.6364. and 45 perches 8 feet and 3 inches, that is a
rod, will be 5 for the half pole, so the multiplier is 45.5, the product of
these is 2758.95620, which decimal fraction being very near an unite, the
integer I make 2759 square perches, which divided by 160 pole, the quotient
will be 17 acres and 39 square perches, the Area or superficial measure of the
Field required. This Proposition in Decimals is useful for Surveyers.

PROBLEM VII.
Reduction of any squared Superficies from a greater unto a less, and the
contrary, where the custom of several Countries allows of various measures.

The Thorem.
The Area or superficial content of any figure is in proportion unto a greater
or lesser quantity, as are the squares made of those measures by which the
figure was measured.

In the last Problem there was 80 square yards of Arras hangings according to
the Flemish measure, which has proportion to the English Standard, as 3 is to
4, whose squares are 9 and 16, and being they were in the lesser measure,
multiply 80 by 9, the product is 720, which divided by 16, the quotient will be
45, the true number of yards according to London measure, as was required.

In the Land measure there was last found 17 acres 39 pole, which admit
according to the Statute, the length of a perch was to be 16 feet, and it is
required to know the content of that field where the pole is but 15 feet long:
these measures in half feet will be as 33 is to 30, which reduced is as 11 to
10, the squares of these are 121 100, the Area found was 17 A. 39 P. and is in
the least denomination 2759 perches, which multiplied by 121 produces 333839,
and divided by 100 is 3338, rejecting the fraction, being less then half a
pole, and divide 3338 by 160, the quotient will prove 20, the remainder 138 P.
divided by 40 will be 3 R. and 18 P. remaining; so the field of 17 A. 39 P.
will prove in the lesser measure 20 acres, 3 rood and 18 pole, the proposition
solved in the Parallelogram A B C D, including the woody and marish ground.

PROBLEM VIII.
The making and dividing of Rules in proportional parts, whereby the
superficies of any right angled figure may be conveniently measured with more
brevity by instrument, yet with less exactness then by Arithmetic.

The Theorem.
With the breadth of any rectangled figure given, divide the square inches
contained in a foot, the quotient and fraction will show the inches and parts
of the figures length which shall be equal to a square foot.

The Carpenters Rule for measuring of board and timber is commonly in length 2
feet, a thing necessary, but of no necessity whether longer or shorter, for
this length will contain a foot of board, although but 6 in. b^oad, and what
the length of the Ruler cannot comprehend, is usually termed under measure,
with which I will begin. The side of a foot square is divided into 12 equal
parts, called inches, the quadrat of 12 is 144, the number of square inches
contained in a foot, and if it were demanded what length shall be required at 1
inch broad to be equal unto it (being an unite is divider) the answer will be
144 inches, that is in length 12 feet; if the breadth were 1 inch, with which
(according to the last Theorem) divide 144 the quotient will be 96 inches, that
is in length 8 foot, at 2 inches broad 72 inches or 6 feet in length, at 2
broad 4 F. 9 ^/^ inches, at 3 inches in breadth 4 feet in length, and so
proceed in the under measure by half inches if you please, until you come at 6
inches, with which divide 144, the quotient will be 24 inches, or 2 f. in
length: the board measure being now upon the two foot Rule, containing 24
inches, and each inch usually divided into 4 equal parts, the board measure
commonly proceeds also by quarters of an inch, so 144 divided by 6, in the
quotient will be 23 1/25 inches in length; then for 6 inches take in length
upon the Ruler 22 2/13 inches; at 6 take 21 inches, at 7 you will find 30 4/7
inches, and thus proceeding in quarters to 8 inches, which will require 1 foot
or 18 inches in length, and 9 broad 16 inches, at 10 broad 14 inches, at 11
inches broad 13 1/11 inches, and 12 inches is the side of a foot square; from
hence ascending, the square exceeding 12 inches the length will lessen, but
thus proceed by quarters to 24 inches, from thence to 3 feet broad by half
inches, and after that by whole inches only, the difference growing scarcely
sensible, and howsoever not considerable in things of this nature, for if they
should be continued to 4 feet, the difference betwixt 47 and 48 inches in this
square measure will be but 3/47 parts of an inch; these proportionals found,
you may inscribe them upon a Ruler, with figures to them, and so made ready and
apt for common use, if exactness be required, make use of the Problemes
delivered you before.

Yards are divided after the same manner, in their proportional squares to any
breadth assigned, but usually such measures are taken in feet, one F. being the
least in breadth that is commonly measured, 9 feet making a yard square, 3
being the side, and frequently without any under measure, beginning at 3 feet
for the breadth for any such superficies to be measured, from thence proceeding
by inches with their quarters to 10 feet in breadth, and more if need require:
the side of this square contains 3 feet, that is 36 inches, whose quadrat is
1296 square inches, that divided by 48 (which is 4 feet) the quotient will be
27 inches, that is 2 feet 3 inches in length equal to a yard square; 5 feet
broad requires 21 inches; 6 feet or 72 inches must have 18 inches in length, 7
feet broad 15 ^/7 8 feet broad 13 ^/2 inches in length, 9 feet will have 12
inches in length and a long square 10 feet in breadth, every 10 in length will
be equal unto a yard square; and according to these dimensions, having found
the parts in length answering to the feet in breadth from 3 unto 10 F. by the
parts found you may inscribe them upon a Rule 36 in. in length, then find the
quarters in the same manner to place between the feet and inches. The pole for
Land-measures is only divided into equal parts, is quarters, etc. and so
likewise the chains, distinguished usually with brass rings, and those again by
tenns, both ready, exact, and of excellent use, especially in Decimal
Arithmetic.

PROBLEM IX.
To find the Area of the least Quadrangle, or square figure that can comprehend
the circumference of any Circle propounded.

The Theorem.
The Diameter of any Circle squared makes each side a Tangent to the
Peripheria, or circumference thereof.

A Demonstration.
diagram

Definitions and terms.
A Circle is a Geometrical Figure comprehended with one line, as E F G H E,
termed the Peripheria or Circumference, the part contained (as in other
figures) is usually called the Area, in the middle of which there is a point,
denominated the center, as at 14; from whence all right lines drawn to the
Circumference are equal, and infinite, and if any one be terminated at both
ends with the Circumference, it is called the Diameter, as the line E G, 14;
whose square is 196, for the content of the Quadrangle A B C D, each side being
a Tangent, so named from touching, and not intersecting the circle, as in E F G
H, being the least square that can be made containing the circle: which in this
Problem is the thing required.

PROBLEM X.
The diameter or circumference of any Circle being known, to find the greatest
circumscribed Quadrangle, or square made within that Circle propounded.

The Theoreme.
The quadrat root extracted from half the square made of the Diameter shall be
the side unto the greatest Quadrangle that can be circumscribed by that circle.

An exact proportion betwixt the Diameter and the Circle was never yet
discovered unto man, his knowledge therein confined within a small
circumference of his own imagination; but as for circles within our capacities
accommodated to humane use, the proportions are usually these, viz. as 7 is to
22, or as 71 unto 223, so will the Diameter of any circle be in proportion to
the cicumference of it, the last is most exact, but the first most in use, as
in this, the Diameter E G being 14, the circumference of the circle will
contain 44 of those equal parts, so the one being known the other mey be found
wonderful near the truth; now as for this Problem draw a line, or suppose one
drawn from E and G to F, these sides are equal by construction, and by the 11
and 28 Proposit. Trigon. lib. 1. will enclose a triangle, right angled at F.
and by this second Problem, the subtendant side E G squared will in quantity
contain the squares of the two equal sides, and consequently half the square of
E G 196, that is 98, must be equal to the square of F G, whose quadrat root
extracted in tenths, lib. 2. parag. 1. examp. 5. Arith. there will appear 9
399/1000, for the side of the greatest inscribed Quadrangle, the content of the
whole square is 98 as before.

PROBLEM XI.
To find the nearest quadrature of a Circle, that is such a square, whose
superficial content shall without sensible error represent the Area of the
Circles Peripheria.

Three Theoremes.
A squared Diameter multiplied by 11, and the product divided by 14, the
quotient is the vulgar Area: or thus, the semidiameter multiplied by half the
circumference is the supposed quadrature, or the circumference squared and
divided by 12 4/7 will be equal unto the superficial content of the given
circle: these 3 do err, and yet agree in one.

1. In the last demonstration E F G H is a circle propounded, whose superficies
is required, or the nearest square in content unto it; the Diameter E G 14
squared is 196, which multiplied by 11 produces 2156, and divided by 14 the
quotient will be 154, the superficial content required of the Quadrangle I K L
M, the side of which square is the root of 154, that is 12 I K.

II. For the second Theorem I take again the same circle, the half of which
circumference is 22 of such equal parts in which the semidiameter was found 7,
which if multiplied by 22 will produce 154 for the superficial square of that
circle, not exactly true but wonderfully near, as by the former rule, and the
root extracted in centesms is 12 41/100 very near.

III. According to the third Theorem of this Problem, in the former figure
admit the circumference only known in this 44, which squared is 1936, and if
divided by 12 4/7 that is ^8/7, the quotient will be 13552/88 or 154, as
before; thus diversity of ways confirms your work upon a good foundation,
although an exact proportion betwixt the Diameter and Circumference is
inextricable to Art, but real in Nature, and conspicuous to Man, although he
cannot find it out, but leaving those that seek it, while I show you the use of
these last Problemes; and that you may find the Diameter or Circumference
mutually by the other proportion, if required, observe as 71 is unto 223, then
if 14 were the Diameter multiplied by 223 and that product divided by 71, the
quotient will be 43 69/71 for the Circumference; which if it had been 44, the
Diameter would be 14 2/223.

A Treatise of Solids.
All solid bodies usually measured, are divided into 5 Species, viz. Cylinders,
Squares, Pyramids, Cones, and Segments of the two last, the forms of which
figures I here present unto your view, as an ocular dedemonstration.

diagram

Definition of these figures, which in their several species are here
propounded, and their dimensions required.
Solid bodies to be measured are considered in general, whether they be
Circular, Right or Oblique angled; and these particularly in respect of each
superficies one to another, or in, relation to their sides and bases, and most
of them comprehended by some one of these 5 species.

I. Cylinders are bodies long and round, equal at either end, right angled at
their bases with their sides, whose length and circumference is contained under
one superficies, as is the figure A B C D.

II. Squared or rectangled Solids are all such bodies, whose sides are
parallels one to another, and right angled with the basis at either end, as the
figure E F. G H. I K L.

III. A Pyramid has but one basis, which is usually right angled in the 4
sides, the foot always acute-angled with each superficies, and terminated at
the other end in puncto, as the figure M R S T.

IV. A Cone has but one base, and that round, the other end is terminated in a
point, as was the former, and the length is contained under one superficies, as
is the figure V W X Y Z.

V. Segments are parts of either of the two last, the lesser end being cut off,
so making 2 square or 2 round unequal bases, one acute angled with the side,
the other obtuse, as the figures N O R S T, or P R, or W X Y Z, etc.

PROBLEM XII.
To find the solid content of bodies that have two bases, and those equal at
either end, the distance betwixt them or the length of which body is measured
in a right line.

The Theorem.
All bodies whose length is a straight line, right angled with either basis,
the superficial content multiplied by the length (in the same denomination)
will produce the solid content in inches, feet, yards, etc. as it shall be
required.

First for the Cylinder A B C, whose length A C is supposed 30 feet, the
Diameter A B or C D 3 feet, that is 7 half feet; by the last Problem you will
find 38 which divided by 4 (as in lib. 1. parag. 5.) the quotient will be 9 or
77/8 square feet for the basis, which multiplied into the length 30 feet, the
product will be 288 feet, the solid content of that Cylinder, as in the figure
does appear.

If this round and long body were a tree with the bark taken off, and intended
for board, slit work or building timber; in all such cases (according to common
custom) a fourth part of the circumference is taken for the square of all such
timber, called Girt Measure, which square multiplied by it self, and that
product in the length (of the same denomination) will show the total content:
As for example, admit the Cylinder were the trunk or body of a tree thus to be
measured be the former Problem, the circumference will be found 22 half feet,
that is 132 inches, the fourth part of which girt is 33 inches, whose square
1089 multiplied into the length, viz. 30 feet, that is in inches 360, the
product will be then 392040, which divided by the cube of 12, the number of
inches in a solid foot, viz. 1728, the quotient will be 226 1512/1728, or
reduced to 226 feet, the true content required according unto customary measure
for timber to be squared.

If the bark be on, as in Ash, Elm, or any timber felled in the winter season,
it is as the buyer and seller can agree, or referred to custom, which in some
places abating one inch in the square found, and for old Elms 1 inch, in other
places abating a tenth part of the solid content so measured, that is, allowing
1 foot in 10. of these two ways both are indifferent in timber, that is 17,
18, 19, or 20 inches square, but in small timber an inch abated in the girt is
too great an allowance, and too little when the timber is very great; but here
I will not prescribe you either way, for a foot allowance in 10 has as great
an error as the other, but contrary to the former, when one is too little, the
other is too much; so I will write no more of this but caveat emptor.

The measuring of square Timber.
Timber or stone cut four square, the sides are parallels one to another, as
the figure E F and I K, which here suppose 3 feet, the other two sides as H I
or G K 2 feet, their square or basis is 6 feet, as H I G K, which multiplied
into E H the length that product will be 180, and so many cubical feet this
squared piece contains; but here observe, that according to girt measure the 4
sides make 10 feet of that is 2 feet for the common square, which is apparently
false, custom herein exceeding the truth, and will prove 187 feet, which is
too much 7 F in this squared piece of timber.

PROBLEM XIII.
The dimension of Pyramids and Cones, either in Timber or Stone, and to find
the solid contents of either species in inches, feet, or yards, etc.

The Theorem.
The magnitude or solid content of these figures is found by multiplying the
superficial basis of either, in a third part of the length.

The Pyramid (whose dimension is here required) admit represented by the figure
M R S T, the side of the basis 3, whose square is 9, the Pyramid in length 30
of the same measure, the third part of it is 10, which multiplied by 9 (the
superficial basis) the product will be 90, for the solid content required.

If the solid content of M P Q were desired, the square at P or Q the basis is
4, the side being 2, which multiplied by 6 being a third part of the length M P
or M Q 20, the product of 4 and 20/3 is 26 the solid content required: if these
dimensions were in yards, it would contain 26 such cubes and 18 feet; or if
found in feet, then 26 F. and 1152 inches, as in lib. 2. page 154. Arithmetic
may be proved.

The little Pyramid M N or M O is but 1 yard or 1 foot at base, 10 times that
is the length, one third part of it, or 10/3, the product shows the content to
be 3, that is in cubicall yards 3 and 9 feet; if the dimensions were in feet,
the solid content would have been 3 feet and 576 cubical inches, the thing
required.

All Cones are measured as the Pyramids are: as for example, in the figure V Y
or V Z the Diameter at the base Y Z is 3, the superficial content of that
circle, by the 11 Problem will be found 7 1/14 or 99/14 which multiplied by 10
(one third part of the length) the product proves 990/14 or 70 5/7 the solid
content of the Cone in cubical inches, feet, or yards, according to the parts,
by which it was measured.

If the solid content of the lesser Cone V X had been required, whose length is
20, the diam. at X the base is 2, and by the 11 Problem the superficies of it
is 3 1/7 or 22/7 which multiply by 20 the height, produces 440/7 or 62 6/7 the
content in cubical parts of 3 times the Cone; the third part of 62 6/7 is 20
20/21 the true dimension of the figure V X.

To find the lesser Cone V W, the diameter at the base is 1, the square 11/14,
which multiplied by 10/3 the length, the product will be 110/42 or 55/21, that
is 2 13/21 the content of the Cone in cubical pars required.

PROBLEM XIV.
The dimension of all Segments in tapering Timber or Stone, etc. as they are
the parts of solid Pyramids and Cones.

The Theorem.
Unto the squares of the two extremes or bases, add the Geometrical mean
square, which sum multiply by part of the height, or of the total by the
height, the product will be the Segments solid content required.

Admit the solid content of the Segment P Q R S T were required (which is part
of the Pyramid M T as in the figure) the squares at the 2 ends are 4 and 9,
their products 36, the square root of it is 6, for the Geometrical mean square,
the sum of these 3 squares ( viz. 4, 6, 9,) is 19. which multiplied by part
of the length, that is by 1^/3, the product will be 290/3 or 63, the solid
content of that Segment.

To find the Segment N O P Q, the superficial squares of the 2 bases are 4 and
1, their products 4, the square root 2, which 3 number, viz. 4, 1, and 2, added
together makes 7, and multiplied by 10/3 ( viz. N O P Q by construction) the
product will be ^0/3 or 23, the true content of that Segment, and the sum of
these two, viz. 63 and 23 is 86 ^/^, to which if you add the little Pyramid
found by the last Problem 3 the total of this with the 2 Segments compleats
the solid content of the whole Pyramid M R S T 90, as before, which
demonstrates all the several dimensions to be true, in the same manner the
Segments of Cones are measured, having first found the squares at either end as
in Prob. 11. so to the ingenious Artist no more examples will be required, yet
being a thing in controversy, and not well understood by mechanical men, for
ampler satisfaction I will explain it with one demonstration more, Segments
being the most frequent form of all, and so more diligently to be observed.

An ocular Demonstration in measuring of all tapering timber, whether round or
square.
diagram

The Pyramidal Segment here proposed for to be measured is A. whose length is
15 feet, the square at the greater basis is 9, and the lesser end 1 foot, as at
A, and according to the last Problem the mean square 3, the sum is 13, which
multiply by ^/^ part of the length in this by 5, there will be produced 65
feet, the true solid content required; which to prove, take the Segment A into
pieces as B C and D, there would be 9 of them, and all of one length, but
several forms, viz. B a foot square taken from the middle of the Segment, then
will there be 4 pieces like wedges a foot square at the base, and ending in a
line at A, having no thickness, as the four corner pieces are perfect Pyramids,
containing one foot square at the base, the other ending in a point, as D, each
of whose dimensions, according to the last Problem, must be 5 cubicall feet,
being the length is 15, and consequently 4 of these will contain 20 feet, and
as for C, 2 such pieces turned end for end, will be equal to the figure B,
containing 15 feet; then one of them is 7 feet, and 4 of those will make 30,
the total of the 9 pieces in content is 65 cubical feet, equal as they are
all together in the figure A, which is evidently proved, as was required.

But this Segment (according to common practice) is measured in the middle) by
taking the Arithmeticall mean, that is by adding the sides of the two squares
together, and taking the half of that for the common square, as in this, 1 and
3 makes 4, the half 2, whose square 4 multiplied into the length, 15, the
product will be 60 feet, for the content, according to custom, which is
apparently erroneous, and 5 feet too little in this piece, as before was
demonstrated; diverse other errors (in measuring of solid bodies) are crept in
for want of Art, and having got possession of ignorant people, they plead
prescription and custom of the place, whereas Custom cannot establish a Law
upon a bad Title, and a false ground nor Error prevail against Truth, nor
Ignorance convince Reason, supported by Art upon Demonstration; but leaving the
rough-hewn and cross-grained people to their own imaginations, although
themselves confess a profit by some trees, and a disadvantage by others, but
know not from whence, as in flat timber, which some call ill weighed; as for
Cants, and multiangled figures, their bases may be measured by triangles
according to the first Problem of this Section: which found, their contents
will be discovered by some one species in the dimension of the 5 former
figures, according to the precepts of Art. Yet I would not have any man for to
exact upon the buyer, but wish him some advantage or allowance in every load of
green timber, as in every 40 or 50 cubicall feet; and my reason is, because no
green timber will hold measure when the bark is taken off, and some trees will
shrink more then others, as I have found by experience, in a months time 2
feet in a load and more.

Here I have briefly delivered you the manner and custom in measuring most
kinds of solid bodies, whereby to understand what you do, yet such exactness
is not always requisite in rough timber, especially where there is much to be
measured, and therein to avoid confusion, mark the trees as you measure them
with 1, 2, 3, etc. and enter them in a book with the year and day of the
month, the owners name, and the field or wood wherein they grow: this done,
make 4 columns, one for the number of trees, secondly for their lengths, in the
third column their squares, and in the last their contents; by this means any
tree will be quickly found, and if any mistake be you may correct it at your
leisure; observing this course many abuses will be avoided betwixt the buyer
and seller, as in cutting any tree shorter, or altering their marks, etc. and
will be ready for your own justification: and besides, it is necessary in some
place of your book to enter the buyers name, with the conditions agreed upon
for the price by the foot or load, with articles for measuring, as in girting
any tree more then once, and whether in the buyers or the sellers choice so to
do, also what allowance to be abated for bark, as in Elmes, Ashes, etc. and
sometimes in Oaks the bark will not run; besides a limited time should be
agreed upon how long after the fell the trees must be measured, and the ground
cleared; such things as these do often make cavils, when not agreed upon
before; below the middle of any tree the buyer may girt it where he pleases,
and this is general, diverse other particular things there are for which I refer
you to practice, and how the common Ruler is made for measuring of timber,
observe this following Proposition.

PROBLEM XV.
The framing and dividing of the Carpenters Rule, whereby the content of
squared solid Bodies (as Timber or Stone) may be discovered in cubicall feet.

The Theorem.
Divide the number of Inches contained in a Cubicall Foot, viz. 1728, by the
square inches of any common Basis given, the Quotient shows what length must
be required in inches of that body to be equal unto a Cubicall Foot.

All Timber to be measured by this common Ruler, is supposed to have four
equal and parallel sides, or reduced unto it by girting the tree with a small
line, and taking part or that for a common square. This done, and the Ruler
divided into inches, and every inch into eight or ten equal parts, begin
first with the under measure, as one inch square will require 1728 in length,
that is 144 feet, to make one cubicall foot; 2 inches has 4 for the square
with which divide 1728, the quotient will be 432 inches, or 36 feet in length
to make one foot; 3 inches square will require 16 feet in length; 4 inches 9
feet, 5 inches squared is 25, with which divide 1728, the quotient will be 69
3/25 inches, that is 5 feet 9 3/25 inches for the length, at 6 inches the side
of the square, that is 36, will have 4 feet in length: 7 inches must have 2
feet 11 13/49 inches in length to make one foot, at 8 inches square 2 feet 3
inches in length will be equal to one cubicall foot. Thus you may find the
under measure to each quarter of an inch, with Decimall fractions, if you
please, as at 8 inches, by my former rules of fractions, the square will be
1089/16 with which divide 17280, the quotient will be 2 feet 1 inche and 4/10
or very near: and a tree 8 inches square will require in length to make a foot
23 9/10 inches almost. Now having past the under measure, you may proceed in
the same manner to 36 inches, or more if you please, but it is unnecessary, the
increase being so little, as half inches not well to be distinguished; so in
case a tree shall prove above three feet for the side of the square, I have
prescribed rules in number how to measure it, or by the Ruler thus, Take half
the square and so measure the tree according to the length, the quantity so
found will be of the whole content, as in the Demonstration, page 109 of my
Natural Arthmetick. Thus having found all the parts from an inch unto 36 or 40
inches, you may make a table of them, or inscribe them on a Ruler, as you think
good.

THE SECOND PART.
PROBLEM I.
The dimension of round, concave and dry measures, as Pecks, Bushels, Strikes,
Cornhoops, etc.

diagram

THe Measures used in England of this kind are more various and uncertain then
are the Weights; few Market Towns, Villages, or Farm Houses, but have bushels
of several capacities, whereas the Statute made at Winchester commands them a
size of just 8 gallons: the modern Writers of this subject do affirm, that a
Wine gallon (according to the Standard) filled with water, and then poured into
a square or regular vessel, placed Horizontily, has been often measured, and
found to contain 231 cubical inches very near, yet perhaps intended for 230,
by reason that ancient Writers do affirm the proportion between the Wine and
Beer gallon to be as 5 is unto 4, and so consequently a Beer gallon to hold 288
cubicall inches, which is part of a solid foot; and it is very probable that
the measures instituted by the wise and just precedent race of this Age,
extracted their weights and measures as from a grain of Wheat, and thence
proportionally derived from one another, as a pint of good Wheat, equal in
weight to 1 lb Troy, and a bushel to weigh half a hundred gross, and something
more, but leaving this discourse and not measuring their actions by
imaginations only, but find the content of this bushel in Wine measure, the
depth of it being found 8 inches, the diameter 17, whose superficial square by
the 11 Problem will be discovered 227 1/14 inches, neglecting the fraction
multiply this superficies by 8 or 65/8, the product will be 14755/8, that is
1844 cubicall inches, which divided by 230 or 1152/5, the quotient will be 8
gallons, for the capacity of this vessel in Wine measure, as was required; and
with the former fraction 1/14 more, it will prove 8 7/1000 gall. but when a
broken number proves considerable it must not be omitted, but in such a case as
this reject it if you please.

This former Figure represents a Bushel, which was well approved of in the
Country, although I cannot; for having measured it (as before) I filled it
with a Wine quart, and found it to contain but 8 gallons Wine measure, whereas
(according to Winchest. Stat.) it should be 8 Ale gallons, and one of them to
contain 288 inches, as Mr. Windgate affirms, M. Outhred, and that excellent
Artist M. Briggs allows the content of an Ale gallon but 272 cubicall inches,
which is generally esteemed on, being sealed by the approbation of these 2
famous Geometricians, and equal to the Standard; yet I will not confine you to
their authority, nor persuade you to let another measure your corn by their
bushel, since measures are so various every where: the scope I here do aim at
is to find the capacity in cubical inches in concave vessels; which found,
apply them as you please, or as the place admits.

PROBLEM II.
Gauging of Vessels, by finding the capacities or quantities of liquid
measures, or cubicall inches contained in them, from the least Rundlet to a
Tunn, either of Wine or Beer.

diagram

Any Vessel of Wine or Beer may be thus measured; if the Diameter at the Head
and Bung be equal, it makes a perfect Cylinder; for the dimension of which
figure I refer you to the 12 Prob. and the last: but vessels of this kind are
commonly biggest in the middle; and from the bung to the head, or either end,
they have circular sides, which if continued would end in a point, as the Cone
does, and has 2 bases, yet is no segment of those which are bounded with right
lines, but rather a Sphaerocide or Sphaeroides, which Sphaerall Segment may be
thus measured. The length of this Butt or Pipe is 50 inches, the diameter at
the bung 30, and at the head or either end 21 inches. This known, by the 11
Problem find the superficial content at the head and bung, which in this will
prove 346 and 707 1/7 square inches, take part of 364, that is 693/6, and of
707 1/7 will be 9900/21, both which reduced are 231/2 and 3300/7, add these
together, their sum is 3217/14, which multiplied by 50 inches, the length of
the vessel, that product will be 410850/14, and reduced to 205435/7, which is
29346 3/7 inches. In this case you may reject the fraction, and divide 29346 by
231, the quotient will be 127 gall. and 9 cubical inches; or make the divisor
or dividend a unite more as you see cause; or if more exactness and less
trouble be desired, see 22 Axiom lib. 2. parag. 7. as for example, 205425 to be
divided by 7 and that quotient by 230 or 1152/5 the dividers multiplied will
produce 8064/5, that is 1612 or 1613, with which divide 205425, the quotient
will be 127 gallons, 1 quart and 1 pint fere, the content of this pipe in Wine
measure, which multiplied by 4 produces 509 G. 2 Qu. and divided by 5 the
quotient will be 101 G. 3 Q. 1 P. and, the content of this Butt in beer
measure. Such Propositions are exquisitely performed by the Decimall Tables.

PROBLEM III.
With the Diameter of any Circle known to find the Circumference of it in
proportional parts unto 100, 1000, or 10000, etc.

In all questions of ^ this kind, make choice of some proportion betwixt the
Diameter and Circumference, as in the 10 Problem and first, as 7 to 22, unto
22 annex 3 or 4 ciphers, which divided by 7, the quotient will be 31428, or
unto 223 annex ciphers at pleasure, 71 must be then divisor, the quotient will
be 31408, which proportionals may be made more numerous, if occasion requires;
but first suppose 17 were a Diameter propounded, whose circumference is
required in a Decimal fraction, the proportion will be as 10000 the supposed
Diameter is unto 17 the true Diameter, so will 31428, a supposed circumference,
be proportionable to 53.4^276. which differs but little from the 10 or 11 Prob.

PROBLEM IV.
With the diameters of two circles known, and circumference of the one to find
the circumference of the other, or a diameter with 2 circles given, to find
the other diameter.

The Theoreme.
Circumferences of all circles are in proportion one to another, as be their
respective diameters.

Admit the diameters of two ^ given circles were 17 and 21, the circumference
of the first (in a decimal fraction) is in proportion, as 7 to 22.53.43. the
second number multiplied by the third will be 1122^03, which divided by 17, the
quotient proves 66, the circumference of the second circle, which was required.
If the circumferences of any two circles with one given to find the other, the
manner of operation is the same, so it requires no example.

PROBLEM V.
With the diameter and superficial content of one circle, to find the
superficies of another, whose diameter is known.

The Theorem.
All circles have proportion one another, as the superficial squares made of
their diameters have.

As for example, Suppose the ^ Diameters propounded were 7 and 14, whose
squares are 49 and 196 (their proportions as 1 to 4) the superficial content of
the first circle is 38, but as a decimal in the table it is 38.5, which
multiplied by 196, the product is 7546.0, and divided by 49, the quotient will
be 154, the superficies of that circle, whose Diameter was only known, as by
the 11 Problem may be also proved.

PROBLEM VI.
The superficial content of any two circles propounded, with one of their
diameters given to find the other.

The former squares are here again ^ propounded with one diameter known,
whereby to find the other: in this example I take 14 for the diameter, the
superficial square of whole circle is 154. the diameter squared is 196 for the
second number, and the superficial square of the other circle is 38 or 77/2,
which multiplied by 196 produces 15092/^ or 7546, and divided by 154, the
quotient will be 49, whose square root is 7 for the diameter required, as in
the last Problem.

PROBLEM VII.
To find the content or unequal superficies of any Sphere or Globe, whose
diameter or cicumference is found or propounded by 4 several ways, according
to Art.

1. By the Diameter or Circumference, find the Area or superficial Content of
that Circle, according to the former Problemes; which multiplied by 4 produces
the unequal superficies required: As for example, admit 7 were the Diameter of a
Sphere, the nearest Quadrature of that circle is 38, which suppose inches, that
multiplied by 4 will produce 154 square inches for the superficial content
required, but not exactly true, Art being in all such cases defective, as was
said before.

2. To find the superficial content of any Globe, as thus; multiply the Spheres
diameter with the circumference of the same circle, the product will be the
thing required, as in the last Example, where 7 is diameter, 22 will be the
circumference, the product of these is 154, as before.

3. To measure the superficies of any Sphere, multiply the square made of the
circumference by 7, and divide the product by 22, the quotient will be your
desire: As for example, admit the circumference propounded be 44, whose square
is 1936, which multiplied by 7 produces 13552, that divided by 22 the quotient
will be 616 for the superficies desired in a quadruple proportion to the last.

4. The superficial content of any Globe may be also thus found, multiply the
square made of the diameter by 22, and divide the product by 7, the quotient
resolves the question: as for example, admit 14 the diameter given, whose
square is 196, which multiplied by 22 produces 4312, that divided by 7, the
quotient will be 616, as before: all those 4 agreeing in one.

PROBLEM VIII.
The dimension of Globes and Spheres by their circumferences and diameters
known, and their solid contents found by any measure assigned, and performed 3
several ways.

1. With the diameter or circumference by any one of the former rules, find the
unequal superficies of the Globe, of which take part, or of the semidiameter;
those multiplied together will produce the solid content of the Globe: as for
example, admit a sphere to be measured, whose diameter is 7 inches, the unequal
superficies will be found as before, 154 inches, the semidiameter of this
circle is 3, or 7/2, take part of either, as of the fraction here, which will
be 7/6; this multiplied by 154 produces 179 inches, the solid content of this
Globe required.

2. The diameter of a Globe being given, multiply the cube made of that
diameter by 11, and divide the product by 21, the quotient is the solid
content. Example, in the last question 7 was the diameter propounded, whose
cube is 343, that multiplied by 11 produces 3773, and divided by 21, the
quotient will prove 179 14/21 or the solid content of this Globe.

3. By the circumference of any Orb, find the solid content as thus, take half
the circumference, and multiply it cubically, and that cube by 49, then divide
that product by 363, the quotient gives the solid content required. Example, 44
inches is a circumference given, the half is 22, the cube of it will be 10648,
which multiplied by 49 produces 521752, this divided 363, the quotient will be
1437 ^21/363 or, and so many solid inches are contained in the Globe. If more
exactness, or ampler satisfaction shall be required herein, see Archimedes de
dimensione circuli.

PROBEME IX.
The Diameter, Weight, and Magnitude of a Globe being given, with the Diameter
of another, to find the weight or solid content of that Orb.

The Theorem.
All Globes and Spheres are in proportion one to another, as be the cubicall
bodies, composed of their Diameters.

Suppose 7 inches ^ were the Diameter of a Globe propounded, and the solid
content of it 179 or 539/3, and the Diameter of another Orb 14 inches, whose
solid content is required in the same parts: the Cube of 7 is 343, and the Cube
of 14 inches is 2744, the cubicall content of the first is given 539/3, which
multiplied by 2744 produces 1479016/3, and this divided by 343, the quotient
will be 1437 343/1029, or, as in the Table does appear, and also in the former
Problem: if the weight of the first had been known, and both their
Diameters, the weight of the second would have been discovered in the same
manner as was the magnitude: and if the Diameter of the one had been known,
with the weight or solid content of both, the other would have been found in
proportion of their Cubes, as shall be illustrated by the following
Propositions.

THE THIRD PART, Consisting of Military Propositions.
PROPOSITION I.
By the Diameter and weight of any Bullet known, with the Diameter of another
to find the second Bullets weight.

IT is a common received opinion, ^ that an iron bullet of 4 inches diameter
will weigh 9 lb, which if it be true, and that all iron will weigh alike in
equal magnitudes then this rule is a positive truth, viz. as the cube of 4 is
to 9 lb weight, so shall the cube of any iron bullets diameter, be
proportionable to the weight thereof, according to the last Theorem: as for
example,, an iron bullet, whose diameter is 6 inches, the cube of it 216; so
the proportion is as 64 is to 9 lb. so will 216 be to 30 lb, as in the table is
evident, which is 6 ounces.

PROPOSITION II.
By knowing the weight of two bullets, and diameter of one to find the other
diameter.

For illustration of this Proposition, ^ I will reverse the last question, viz.
if a bullet of 9 lb weight shall contain 64 inches, in the diameters cube, then
a bullet 30 lb or 243/8 will require 216 inches, whose cubique root is 6 inches
for the bullets diameter; these 2 examples are sufficient for any question of
this kind: but observe, if by the diameter of the guns concave you would find
what the bullet belonging unto it will weigh, the diameter of it must be of an
inch less then the diameter within the muzzle, although it be not a taper bored
gun.

To find what thickness they are in metal, their Cylindars, concaves with their
bullets diameters; Galaper Compasses are held the best for expediteness,
especially those that open with a quadrant divided proportionally in inches,
and to 1/10, commonly known to every Engineer: as for proposals of this art,
there be diverse books extant, to which I refer you, they belonging more to the
practice then any Theory; besides doubtful queries are made by them, viz. as
whether the quantity of powder can be proportioned by Arithmetic to the
weight of bullets, or whether they move in a right line, or circular; or if a
Canon be more fortified in metal upon one side then the other, wherefore the
gun discharged shall convey the bullet wide from the mark, and the concaves
cylindar incline to that side on which the metal is thickest, because most
resisted, or wherefore a piece of great Artillary mounted at 18 or 20 degrees
of the quadrant shall convey a shot the farthest, and almost twice the level
range, also how good powder is known; all which must be referred to experience.
This we know, that the sulphur makes it quick to fire, the Charcole maintains
it, and the Saltpeter turning into a windy exhalation by repercussion of the
air, causes such violent effects to amaze the world, as if ambitious to
imitate the thunder and lightning, from which good Lord deliver us. This tract
I will leave, and return to such Propositions as may be exactly peformed by
Arithmetic, and founded upon Demonstration.

Compendious Rules for marshalling of Soldiers in any rectangular form of
battle, either in one body, or in several Squadrons or Regiments.
Definitions.
Battles are considered in two several respects, one depending upon the number
of men to be put into a Military array, the other reflects upon the ground, on
which the Battalios are to be ordered.

A square battle of men has an equal number both in rank and file, yet the
ground in such cases longer on the file then upon the rank.

A square battle in respect of the ground has the rank and file equal in
length, yet the number of men in rank exceeding those in file.

In respect of the men to be drawn forth in battalio, it is either termed a
square battle, or in proportion, as the men in rank to the number of those in
file.

PROPOSITION III.
If a square battle of men be required of any number whatsoever, the Quadrat
root extracted from the list, or number of Soldiers delivered in, shows the
number to be marshalled either in rank or file: As for example, a Sergeant
Major delivers in a list of 22500 soldiers to be ordered in a square battle of
men, the quadrat root of that number is 150, and so many must there be placed
in rank, and so many likewise in file, lib. 2. parag 1. examp. 2. Arith.

PROPOSITION IV.
If the difference of the men in rank to those in file should be in any
proportion required, observe these Rules.

RULE 1.
As the term which is given for men in file

Shall be to the term propounded for the rank,

So will the number marshalled in this Array

Be in proportion to the root, or men in rank.

RULE 2.
As the term propounded for men in rank

Shall be unto the term which is for the file,

So will the whole number of soldiers marshalled

Be in proportion to the square root for those in file.

As for example, ^ 20184 soldiers are to be ordered in battle of array, and in
such proportion between the rank and file, as 8 to 3, that is as 8 men in rank
for 3 in file therefore 20184 (the number of soldiers) multiplied by 8 and
divided by 3, the quotient will be 53824, the quadrat root of it will be 232,
as in the first table, for the number of men to be placed in rank, the number
for the file is found, if you divide 20184; by 232 the quotient will be 87, or
by the second rule to find the men in file; as 8 the term for the rank unto
20184, the number of soldiers, so will 3 the term for the file be in a direct
proportion unto 7569, the quadrat root will be 87 for the number of men in
file, according to the second table in the margent.

PROPOSITION V.
To marshal in battalio any number of Soldiers, when there is a double
proportion stated, as in respect of the men and ground both for the rank and
file.

The RULE.
As the product of the two terms for the Rank

Shall be in proportion to the number of Soldiers,

So will the product of the two for the File

Be to a fourth number, whose square root is the File.

For the illustration of ^ this Proposition, suppose the number of soldiers to
be marshalled near 41160 in this order and proportion, viz. as for 3 in rank, 7
in file, and in respect of the ground as 2 is in proportion to 5; the products
of these terms are 6 and 35. then say as 6 is to 35, so will 41160 be unto
240100, whose square root will be 490, as in the first table, with which divide
the list of soldiers given, viz, 41160, the quotient will be 84, the true
number of men both in rank and file, or by the second table, as 35 is to 6, so
will 41160 be in proportion to 7056, the root 84; or with this divide the list
of soldiers, the quotient will be 490, as before, and so in all questions of
this kind, by the rank found you may find the file and the contrary.

PROPOSITION VI.
If an Army were drawn out in their particular Regiments, and those again
divided into several squadrons with their depth and proportion both in rank and
file.

This Proposition (although of most use) depends upon the former; for having
the number of Regiments, or lift of the army, they may be reduced into little
squadrons, as the Maj. Genesis shall think fit, and then marshal those according
to order in what proportion shall be required, betwixt the rank and file, by
one of the 3 last Propositions, of which I have given you examples, not
according to custom, or the Military Discipline practiced in any place, but
whereby you may solve any question of this kind, and not as precedents, but
rules only; for the Foot squadrons 10 deep is the most that I have heard of,
the usual custom in Europe is 6 deep for the Foot and 3 for the Horse, when
they charge the Enemy.

PROPOSITION VII.
For the incamping of Soldiers in their several quarters.

For a quartering of Soldiers in the field, it is performed by the common rule
of Three; as for example, suppose a Regiment of 1000 men may be quartered in a
square of ground containing 20 perches, what shall the side of a square be to
lodge a greater or lesser number; the proportion will be, as 1000 to 400
perches, so shall any number of soldiers be to a proportional square of
ground, whose quadrat root is the side required: and for example, admit the
number of soldiers were 24000, then say as 1000 men is to 400 the square of 20
pole, so 24000 men will be in proportion to 9600, the quad. root of it in a
decimal fraction is 97 ^/10 perches, the side of a square that will incamp
those men according to the proportion given: but here are sundry occurrences to
be consulted on, which must be referred to the experienced Master de Campo to
marshal up together, as in respect of the enemy, the Campanio, the advantage of
ground, the securing of passages; and multitudes of other things to be
considered, in preserving the Army so well as when engaged in fight, by
reserves, or how to draw off and make retreats, etc. depending more upon the
practice then any Theory, or prescription of Rules.

PROPOSITION VIII.
The perpendicular height of any Tower or other place being given, to find at
any distance (appointed from the basis thereof) how long any scaling ladder or
rope extended must be to reach the top or summity of it.

According to the state of this question, the rope or ladder will include a
right-angled triangle, and by the second Problem of this book, the quadrat
root extracted from the sum of the squares made of the two containing sides
will be equal to the Hypothenusal, which is the ladder or length of the rope:
as for example, admit there were a Turret in height 45 feet, there was a Moat
before it in breadth 22 feet, the square of 45 is 2025, and the square of 22 is
484, the sum of these squares is 2509, the quadrat root of it is 50 feet for
the length of the ladder or rope that will reach unto the summity or top of it,
if the remainder had been considerable, you might have extracted the root with
a fraction, as in lib. 2. parag. 1. examp. 4 or 5. Arith. but some (where
ignorance has got the upper hand of their reason) will say (peradventure) what
care they for this; give them rope enough; and so say I with all my heart.

PROPOSITION IX.
To find the height of an accessible Fort, Turret, or any other place, by a
common square, or with two sticks of equal length artificial joined together at
right angles.

diagram

Admit the height required were the Tower C D, I move my station from F toward
D, holding the triangle or square parallel with the ground-line and
perpendicular by help of a plummet, as at K, where by both ends of the little
square I behold the Towers summity, as at C. Now by the 19 Proposition of my
Geometry, A B must be equal to B C, and A B or L D is found by measure 48 feet,
the true height of B C, to which add B D or A L (the height of the square
above ground) viz. 3 feet, the sum 51 feet, for the altitude of C above the
Horizontal plain F D, the proposition answered.

PROPOSITION X.
To find the distance unto any Fort or place, although not accessible, yet
discovered by this square or triangle.

Erect a staff perpendicular, whose height is exactly known, as in the last
Scheme E G, which admit 6 feet, or 72 inches; upon the top of it cut a notch,
so that the square may fall down in it something straight, yet so as to turn at
E. suppose the distance required were G D, place your eye at E, then turn the
square upwards or downwards, until by the edge of it you see the basis of the
Tower, or place at D. the square being fixed, look down from E to F. at which
place a mark upon the ground, and measure the distance F G, which is he^e 8
inches: here you have 2 equiangled triangles, viz. G E F, and G E D, and by the
19 pr^position of my Geometry the sides are proportional: now admit this little
triangle were delineated in the greater, as G H L, then is G L equal to G E,
and G H to G F. thus are they in the rule of proportion, as G H 8 inches is to
G L 72 inches, so will E G 72 be in proportion unto G D 648 inches or 54 feet,
the true distance required.

PROPOSITION IX.
To find the height of any place approachable by the shadow which it makes,
with the help of a Pike erected perpendicular to the horizontall plane, or by
any Turret, whose height is directly known, or by the height of any Tower, to
find the distance, though not approachable.

diagram

The height of the Tower A B is required, to be found by the shadow which it
makes upon the Horizontal place, as in this figure; suppose B D by measure
found to be 12 per 6 3/10 in. upon the same horizontall plane, I measure the
shadow of some other body, or erect a Pike perpendicular, as C D, whose height
above ground is 7 feet, and the length of the shadow which it makes extends it
self from D to E, by measure 12 feet 3 inches: this known, the proportion is,
as E D 12 feet 3 inches is to C D 7 feet, so the shadow B D 198 feet 6 ^/10
inches unto 112. 98 for the height of the Tower A B, which caused the shadow,
that is 113 feet 3 inches and more, much exactness is required (in questions of
this nature) or else little truth to be expected, and shadows commonly falling
in broken parts, which made me herein use the Decimals, yet with more exactness
performed by Natural Arithmetic, and vulgar fractions, and so found 112 F. 11
inches 28/100, if the height A B had been known 113 feet, and the distance or
extent of the shadow B D required, the proportion would have been, viz. as C D
7 feet to E D 12.3, so will A B 113 feet be unto 198 feet 5 4/7, that is 198
feet 6 inches and ^/7 for B D, the distance required, which is very near the
truth.

PROPOSITION XII.
To discover the altitude of an accessible place by a mirror or looking-glass,
or by a Towers height known to find the distance unto it.

Let the position of your Glass or Mirror be horizontally placed at some
convenient distance; from thence go backward into a direct line, until you can
descry in the glass the top of the Tower, or object whose height is required;
then will the distance from your body to that part of the glass (where the
summity of the Turret was represented) be in proportion to the distance from
the glass to the ^er^endicula^ basis of the Tower or Sconce, as the height of
your eye is to the perpendicular height required; for by the Optic Science it
is an apparent Maxim, that the angles of Incedence and Reflection are equal,
as A D B, and F D E, and your body being parallel with the Tower, the Radius of
your sight incloseth a triangle, equiangled with that of the Turrets shadow, as
by the 8, 9, or 10 Proposition of my Geometry, and consequently by the 19
proposition of the same book those triangles are proportional in all their
sides; this is so visible that it needs no explanation, if they can see
themselves from their shadows, or shall ever behold my Trigonometry, to which I
refer them for 2 more ample satisfaction; and this to their impartial and
judicious censures, yet wishing a legal trial to answer unto my charge (if
there shall be any fomented) in the mean time, hopes of a candid construction
from a serene verdict free from all obstructions of malice to obtenebrate my
intentions, bids me with comfort to proceed.

PROPOSITION XIII.
A Captain of a Castle expecting to be beleagured, makes good his outworks,
and having fortified those best where he conceived most danger of being
stormed; he over-looks the inventory of his Magazine, and takes a list of his
Soldiers, with the supernumerary persons, in all 800. by which he finds his
provision of victuals good but for 3 months and 3 weeks, that is 105 days:
having more men then were necessary, and expecting no relief under 6 months,
or 168 days, the question is' how many men must be dismissed this fort (before
the enemies approach) whereby the same victuals might last the just time
required?

The Solution.
The rule thus stated, according ^ to lib. 2. parag. 8. Can. 9. Arith. in a
reverss'd proportion, viz. as the provision of victuals for 105 days allowed
for 800 men, what number will 168 days require, allowed in the same
proportion, which according to the rule, will prove 500 men, as in the
operation of the margent is made evident, and consequently there must be 300
meant dismissed of the supernumeraries, and Soldiers not able to perform their
duties, or of those least serviceable to defend the works.

PROPOSITION XIV.
The Castellain commanded the Master of the great Artillary (or chief Gunner)
to render a strict account of all the guns (mounted upon this Fort-royal)
whether offensive or defensive, with the diameters of each bullet belonging to
every piece of Ordnance, with the weight of the said bullet, and quantity of
powder; also the distances in Geometrical paces, that each piece will convey
the shot, so laden, both at point blank, and at the utmost random; which
accordingly was thus delivered in.

The Table or Inventory.
The number of Guns The names of this Artillary Each bullets diameter Every
bullets weight The due charge of powder. The distances in paces at pointblank
and random 10 Canon 7 48 15/64 26 lb 340 and 1600 10 Them. can. 6 30 18 lb 350
and 1700 8 Culvering 5 17 37/64 15 lb 420 and 2100 8 Them. culv. 4 inch. 9 lb 8
lb 320 and 1600 6 Sakers 3 6 15/512 5 lb 300 and 1500 6 Minions 3 3 51/64 3 lb
280 and 1400 4 Faulcons 2 2 101/512 2 lb 260 and 1200 4 Faulconets 2 1 1 lb 220
and 1000

PROPOSITION XV.
There are in this Fort 56 pieces of great Artillary, as are specified in the
Table, viz, the whole Canon has a bullet of 7 inches diameter, in weight 48 lb
and 4 ounces almost; to which there is allowed for every shot 26 lb of powder:
this Gun discharged will carry on the level-range 340 paces, and shot at random
1600. and note that all pieces for battery ought to be planted within or parts
at most of the paces they carry point blank; but as for our present purpose,
the magazine of powder was found here 10 T. 11 C. 4 st. and 12 lb weight, and
the question propounded is, whether this quantity of corn-powder will discharge
the 10 whole Canons 20 times round, the 10 Demi-canons 30 times, the 8
Culverins 40 times, the 8 Demi-culv. 50 times, the 6 Sakers 60 times, the 6
Minions 70 times, the 4 Faulcons 80 times, and the 4 Faulconets 100 times.

The Solution.
Reduce first the gross weight of powder delivered into pounds subtle, and you
will find 21100 gross to be 23632, to which add 4 st. and 12 lb, that is 68
lb, the total is 23700 lb.

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 20 10 Cannon 26 260 5200 30 10 Them. Can. 18 180 5400
40 8 Culverin 15 120 4800 50 8 Them. culv. 8 64 3200 60 6 Sakers. 5 30 1800 70 6
Minions 3 21 1470 80 4 Faulcons 2 9 720 100 4 Faulconets 1 6 600 450 56 Totals
79 690 23190

In the first column stands the number of charges imposed upon every Gun, in
the second the number of each piece, in the third are inscribed the Ordnance,
in the fourth each particular charge, in the fifth is placed the whole quantity
of powder that charges all the guns of each sort, the sixth and last column
contains the whole quantity of powder according to the number of their several
charges, whose total is 23190 lb.

PROPOSITION XVI.
The last Proposition was not judged convenient, being but 510 lb of powder
remaining: upon which, by order there was deducted from the Magazine 3000 lb,
viz. for small shot, for Grenades, for murdering shot (in case there should be
any breaches made) for wast and priming powder, the query next stated was how
many shot about the 20700 lb will make, which according to lib. 2. parag. 11.
Arith. may be thus stated: The fifth column (in the last table) contains the
quantity of powder that charges all this great Artillary once round about,
whose total at the bottom of the same column is 690 lb for the first number,
the magazine or whole stock of powder is the second number, viz. 20700, which
in this may be totally divided by the first, that is by 690. so the first and
second numbers are now 1 and 30. each particular for every species is
comprehended in the fifth column, to a proportional allowance, that each piece
shall spend, being once discharged, and then the fourth proportional number
found shall be the quantity that every kind shall spend at an equal number of
shot to be made, whose total (if the operation be true) shall be equal to the
second number in the rule, or the Ammunition delivered in for this purpose, as
by the following rule is made conspicuous.

260 7800 180 5400 As 690 lb is to 20700, so 120 3600 64 unto 1920 or reduced
30 900 21 630 As 1 in proportion to 30, so 9 270 6 180 690 totals 20700

By this it is made aparent the Canon must be allowed 7800 weight of powder,
whereof there are 10 in number, so each whole Canon must have 780 lb, which
divided by its proper charge, viz. 26 lb, as in the fourth column and former
table, the quotient will be 30 shot, again, for the 4 Faulcons there is allowed
270 lb, so for one of those guns 67 lb, which divided by its allowance of
powder the quotient will show 30 charges; and so many shot every piece of
Ordnance will make round with the allowance according to the last table. A
Castle that is fortified both by is Nature and Art, provided with Ammunition,
Manned, and victualled well, and all things necessary for a defensive War
closely beleaguered; if the men stand sound, and yet surrender it to the enemy
before 6 months being expired, it will be conceived the soldiers are better
fed then taught.

Ladles for guns are proportioned according to the bullets, the plate made
plain at first, and in breadth parts of the bullets circumference, the abated,
whereby to empty the Ladle in the Guns chamber.

General Rules and Observation, or a Contexture of various questions.
Iron bullets are proportioned to Lead, made in equal moulds, as 5 to 7, and
iron to equal bullets of marble, 7 to 3, the proportioning of their weights is
uncertain, when bullets of iron will differ, though cast in the same mould, one
metal being more pory then another.

The Demi-culvering bullet 4 inches diameter, is generally received as a gage
for the rest, whereby to find their weights or magnitudes: this bullet made of
some iron, will be just 9 lb weight, and it is a medium almost betwixt the
least and greatest sort of Guns upon carriages usually made, yet I have seen
and measured one, the diameter of whose concave Cylinder was above 20 inches,
the cube of the bullet 20 inches is 8000; then say as 64 is to 9 lb, so will
8000 be unto 1125 lb for the weight of such a bullet.

Gun-founders of brass pieces use an allay of copper and tin, proportioned to
every 100 lb weight of brass, but the mixture various; which you may find in
any piece of Ordnance, having the true weight of the gun and the allay, as
thus; suppose a Cannon to weigh 7000 lb subtle, and the allay for every 100 lb
of brass 40 lb copper, and 10 lb tin, then state your question in form,
according to the rules of society, as in lib. 2. parag. 11. Arith. as thus:

lb lb As 150 is to 7000, so 100 Brass 4666 or reduced by 50 40 Copper unto
1866 As 3 shall be to 140, so 10 Tin 466 150 totals 7000

All Guns more fortified with metal on the one side then on the other, if
discharged at a mark, the bullet will fall wide from the object, inclining to
that side which is most fortified or thickest in metal: the reason (I conceive)
is, that the thinnest part is soonest hot (by the agility of the fire) and so
from thence dismisses the bullet with the greater force, or else in imitation
of sulphurious Meteors fired in the wombs of clouds, break forth in their
deliverance with amazement to mortals, and strikes most at that which is
strongest, or most fortified to resist.

Two pieces equal in all things, but their length, and if charged and levelled
alike, the longest will convey its bullet farthest; yet if discharged together
at a mark within distance of either gun, the bullet from the shortest piece
will be at the place first, or the object aimed at.

Three Cannons discharged G lb G 3 156 10 2 30 6 156 300 Facit 7800 twice spent
156 lb of powder, how much will 10 equal guns to them spend? if 30 times
discharged with the same allowance, which stated, as in the margent, according
to lib. 2. parag. 10. quest. 3. Arith. or may be reduced to 1. 26. 300, or
thus, 1. 156. 50. the fourth proportional found will be 7800 lb.

Most guns will shoot at random 4 times so far and more then their level-range,
and some of the great Artillary 5 times; the best random of a piece is held
when elevated 22 or 23 degrees of the quadrant above the horizontal plain.

Always observe to keep your link, stock, match or fire, to lee-ward of the
gun or powder.

An iron bullet will fly farther then one of lead, but the greatest batters
most at 80 or 90 paces; and either of them with most force from a gunne a
little elevated, then on the level range, although within distance, and the
heavier bullet will raze a work the soonest.

No bullet from a gun, that is levelled and discharged, does move in a direct
straight line, but circular, ascending first with the violence of there, and
over-shoots the mark within the level-range; and as the heat lessens it tends
toward the seat of gravity, and at point blank crosses the line of level,
protracted from the center of its concave cylindar, which arch is greater
accordingly as the gun is elevated from 1 to 45 degrees of the quadrant, and
lesser if discharged below the level-range.

All guns, if over heated with often shooting, are apt to break; those
perpetrated with cold and frosty weather are most subject to an eruption at the
first shot; the reason is, that in all metal there is a radical humor, which
connexes and keeps the parts together, and is made weak by being dilated with
overmuch heat, or contracted with too much cold, leaves the parts enervated,
and each member of that body dissoluble, or easily discorporated, and the
sooner by opposition of its contrary, the agile and penetrating fire invading
the condensed cold.

Any bullet discharged from a gun does strike most violently against that which
is hard, firm and strong to resist, and soonest deaded where it wants
opposition, as being shot against wool, sand, any soft earth or moveable
object, and has more violence at reasonable distance then near the Cannons
mouth which delivered it unto a convoy of the subtle Air; the greatest force
of any bullet for battery, is generally conceived from to of the level-range of
that Piece which made the shot, and from ^/2, the force of the bullet lessens
in its raptile or violent motion.

The weight and content of Caskes for Powder.
A Barrel or empty Firken ought to weigh 12 lb, and should contain 100 lb of
powder neat; so the weight of a Firken thus filled is 112 lb, that is 100
gross, and 24 of such Firkens makes one last containing 2400 lb neat.

The common ingredients and quantities in making of Powder.
The ordinary Powder is composed of these 3 Simples, viz. to every lb of
Saltpeter add of Charcoal and part of Sulphur: To these take any 3
proportional numbers at pleasure, according to the 15 Axiom, lib. 2. parag. 7.
or 14 Arith. As for example, 60, 15, 10, or 12, 3, 2, the least without
fractions is usually best, as the least trouble, and admit one Last of Powder
were the quantity to be made, as 2400 lb, the proportion will be thus: lb 12
Peter 1614 3/17 As 17 is to 2400 -- so 3 Coal 423 ^/17 2 Sul^hur 282 6/17 17
Totals 2400

As for the quality and goodness of Powder, experience is the best tutor; yet
as a common and general observation, good powder will be bright in color, tart
upon the tongue, and very salt in taste, apt to burn, and quick in being fired:
the Brimstone makes it apt to kindle, the cole continues the inflammation, by
which the Saltpeter is resolved into a windy exhalation, and strives to dilate
it self restrained in the concave of the gun, vents it self at the mouth of the
Piece, being the easiest passage; but if the bullet be rusted in, or over
charged, and cannot get out, it will force a passage through the weakest part,
as subterranean Meteors do when much rarefied, and restrained in the concaves
of the solid earth.

PROPOSITION XVII.
If a barrel of powder will charge a Demiculverin 12 times, burning 8 lb at a
discharge, how many shot will a Last of powder make for a Canon that spends 26
lb at every charge?

This question is solved, ^ as in lib. 2. parag. 10. quest 4. Arith. in the
first rule; stand the quantities of Powder propounded, and the Shot made in the
Demiculverin in a proportion direct; the second is each charge of powder
reverst, and by their products made direct, as against III. in the last it is
reduced to 13. 6. and 192. these by the common rule of 3 will produce 88 8/13.
so in a Last of powder there will be 88 shot good for discharging the Cannon,
and the 8/13 is 16 lb of powder over, for pri^^ing and waste, etc. the question
answered, the thing r^quired.

PROPOSITION XVIII.
There is a Rope 3 inches in compass, and one 4 ^imes so big is required: the
greatness of these is according to the squares made of their diameters, as in
the Problemes of this book, their circumferences being also in the same
proportion; so the square of 3 is 9, which multiplied by 4 produces 36, the
quadrat root of it is 6 inches, the circumference of the Rope required.

PROPOSITION XIX. By knowing the weight of a fathom of any Rope, to find the
weight of another either greater or lesser.
A Rope in compass 4 inches, and every fathom of it admit does weigh 3 lb, how
much shall a Coyler Rope weigh that is 6 inches in circumference; which two
circumferences, if multiplied by 7, they would retain the same proportion: and
so likewise if those products were divided by 22, as in lib. 2. parag. 7. axiom
13. Arith. then institute the rule of Three, with the circumferences given and
squared, viz. as 16 shall be to 3 lb weight for a fathom of that Rope, so will
the greater square 36 be in proportion unto 6 lb, that is 6 lb and 12 ounces
for the weight of each fathom of that Coyler rope, whose circumference was 6
inches, the thing required. Many such propositions the Gunners do us^, which
for brevity I here omit, supposing these may suffice young practitioners, so
with strong hopes, and a slight fortification, I will conclude this work.

PROPOSITION XX.
A Mount or Platform is to be raised for battery, on which the great guns are
to be mounted; the General commands the Captain of the Pyoners to draw a trench
about it, as he and the Engineers should conceive convenient; which according
to order was thus designed: the Platform set out 4 square, 70 ^aces on every
side: at the line or verge of this Trench (where the laborers first break
ground) 16 feet over, to be 10 feet broad at the bottom, and 8 feet deep; the
turf to be orderly laid at the brim, and the earth dug out of the Trench
disposed of within that, for a wall to raise the Ordnance, and defend the men
within the Works; which wall is ordered to be made 21 feet at bottom, and 18
feet broad at the top. The query is, how high the wall will be made of the
earth dug out? and how many cubical yards is in the said Trench? and what
the laborers work may be worth if paid by the great, or task-work.

The breadth of this Trench at the brim is 16 feet, at the bottom 10, the sum
26 feet, the half 13, which multi^lied by 8 feet (the depth of the said Trench)
the product will be 104 superficial square feet; the wall to be made is to be
in thickness 18 and 21 feet, the Arithmetical medium 19 or ^^/2, a^ in lib. 2.
parag. 5. theo^em 1. Arith. with which divide 104, the quotient will be 5 feet
4 inches, the true height of the wall required.

The square of this Platform is 72 Geometrical ^aces, that is, 350 feet, and
the 4 sides contains in extent 1400 feet, which multiplied by the square made
of the Trenches breadth and depth, as before found 104 feet, the product will
be 145600 cubical feet; at each corner of these Trenches there will be a
Pyramidal Segment reverst with the greater end upwards, whose mean square is 13
feet, as is the Trench, the quadrat of it 169, which multiplied by 8 the depth,
produces 1352 cubical feet, 4 times that (for the 4 corners) will be 5408.
this added to the former sum 145600, the total will be 151008 cubical feet,
which divided by 27, the quotient proves 5592 cubical yards contained in the
whole trench; which at 6 D the yard to dig and carry on to the works comes unto
in money 139 L 16 ss, the true manner of measuring a Segment, and likewise the
fraction in the last division was neglected, as unnecessary in these gross
works. Each of these Segments contains 50 cubical yards of earth, which may
raise a Rampire, Sconce, or Bulwark at each angle of the Platform 6 feet
higher, 16 feet square at the bottom, an^ 14 f^e^ a^ the top.

diagram

As for the marshalling and quartering of Soldiers, with sundry other Military
Propositions, I have here instated proposals, and delivered Examples for
speculation only, and transferred the form to the judgment of experienced
Commanders; since most Propositions (depending on this Subject) are
undeterminable, but according to the custom of the Country, the advantage of
the Place, the number of Horse or Foot, the Enemies condition, with multitudes
of occurences intervening every day, and those circumspectly to be cons^derd by
the field-Officers, or Council of war sitting upon this Tragic Scene, as
Germany has learned by sad experience under the Swords tuition this later age,
whose Disci^les have been generally Separates, oppugnant in opinion, yet united
and armed with factions have commenced War under specious colors to procure
Peace, oppressed the Truth to support Religion, suppressed Kings to establsh
Monarchy, and by rude Anarchy, pretending to introduce Civility, with diverse
such zealous Paradoxes by an Hyperbolical Faith. But leaving all to God, whose
Decrees are inscrutable, his Wisdom infallible, his Justice certain, his Merry
without limit; Infinite and Omni^otent in all his works. To whom be all Honor,
Praise and Glory world without end.

Amen,
THE DEBTOR AND CREDITOR: OR A Perfect Method of keeping Merchants Accounts,
after the Italian manner.

By Thomas Wilsford.

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1659.

PRECEDENTS OF MERCHANTS ACCOUNTS, In form of DEBTOR and CREDITOR, According
to the Italian manner, and the most Modern method Epitomized.
THe efficient and final cause of keeping Merchants Accounts after this manner,
is for sundry respects in Commerce and Trade, by experience proved urgently
necessary in steering an ample course of Traffic, yet waving all doubtful
reckonings, and avoiding confusion in multiplicity of business, and diversity
of affairs, of various natures, which a good form will procure, and produce
these effects, viz. The Owner or Cash-keeper may at any time, and upon all
occasions, readily find out any contract, either by way of Barter or Money,
present pay, time limited, or mixed; also any sum of money, Goods imbarqued,
shipped off, returned, or remaining in their Warehouses, with the quantities,
qualities, and value of them; also all Receipts and Disbursments, whether
charged or drawn upon their Friends, Factors, Correspondents Accounts, their
own, or any Company trading by Sea or Land, with the ballancing of their
Estates betwixt Debtor and Creditor, as what he owes, or is owing him, with
all Bills, Bonds, Obligations, Debts or demands contracted on either side.

Any man that begins to drive a Trade or adventure a Stock into foreign parts
by way of Traffic, or Commerce in multifacious Negotiation, ought to take an
Inventory of his present and personal estate, whether it be in ready Money,
Goods, Debts, Wares, or Remainers, attracted by any state, Bonds, Bills,
Leases, or Reversions transferred unto him, or by transportation of a trade,
from some other Merchant or deceased Friend; which Inventory must be entered in
form of Debtor and Creditor, according to the engagements of the Factors,
Correspondents, Administrators or Assigns, inscribing the Creditors names, the
sum, time, and day of payment; and likewise all such debts as are due to him;
for all Contracts, whether by Paroll or Obligation in writing (if without
limitation of time) are always due upon demand made.

An Inventory.
The Title entered, the form of it is usually like a common Bill, bearing date
the year of our Lord, with the month and day when the Owners estate was
surveyed, his name subscribed thereunto.

Upon the right hand or margent of each folio or page make 3 columns, to
inscribe the pounds Sterling, shillings and pence, both of the Owners Cash or
ready money, with the Commodities, as Lands, Houses, Rents, Revenues,
Reversions, Bonds, Bills, and Obligations, etc. according to their values or
sums due, also the Wares (if any) in his hands unsold, with their quantities,
qualities and values in number, weight and measure.

These entered and summed up, take a rveiew of the engagements, as whether in
Factorage, Company-accounts, or entrusted for the use of others (expecting his
own share or part if any) with all his proper debts, as wares of others unsold,
ready money in his hands accountable to others; all Bills, Bonds and Obligations
by promises of payment, yet not satisfied; all under the notion of
debt-demanders, decreasing the stock. This Inventory is best reserved privately
in the owners possession.

Thus having balanced his estate, the party may plainly discover what is his
own, and so commence a Trade without confusion, employing what stock he shall
think convenient for any Adventure: and diverse Merchants do continually keep an
Inventory, but usually after this manner, viz. A book in a large Folio, every
page has 3 columns ruled in either margent denoting Pounds, Shillings, and
Pence; on the left hand page his debts are inserted, and on the right hand what
is due unto him, and from whom, the money and wares with quantities and
qualities inscribed between them; and sundry other books they use, the chiefest
they use are these following.

The number and names of Books usually kept in great Merchants Accounts, are
these:
I. A Book for petty expenses, and daily disbursments of trivial sums of
money, kept like a Compendium of the Cash-book, and these small accounts
collected into one sum, each week and month with a general total every year.

II. A Book of Letters, or missive Characters, received, or sent upon public
or private business into foreign parts, with the dates thereof, and some
breviate of the business.

III. A Copy-book of charges at home, or Foreign accounts, whether proper or
for company, by assignment for others, or Factorage, with abreviate of Receipts
or Acquittances.

IV. A Book in Octavo of Memorandums to help the memory, containing Bargains
and Sales, Promises, Engagements by paroll, or designed affairs in Commerce and
Trade, with the year, month, and day, the parties names, etc.

V. A Cash-book, for inscribing the sums of money in the Ca^heers posse^sion,
with all receipts and payments, whereby to find what remains in bank at any
time, and what debts are due, one inscribed against the other.

VI. A Wast, or Shop-book, wherein are to be inserted all Wares, Goods, and
Commodities arrived or shipped off, received in or delivered out, imported, or
exported, and to whom, with the year and day of the month, every parcel
distinguished by a line drawn betwixt them, describe in the margent the mark of
the said parcel, with some note of reference to the Journal page, and also the
number, weight and measure of each parcel, with the quantities, color,
charges, value, or price of them.

VII. Besides these there are Diurnals and books kept of Ship-accounts, whether
outward or homeward bound, viz. daily occurrences, Ship-expences, charges, and
disbursements accidental, etc.

VIII. A book of Fraighcage, Cargazones, or bills of Lading, Mariners wages and
necessaries for them, with diverse other supernumerary Accounts, not commonly
kept by all Merchants, nor yet convenient for this Treatise, or my intended
design.

The scope here aimed at is a compendious form in keeping the Journall and
Leager-books, by way of the Italian manner, included by Debtor and Creditor,
with diverse precedents, in posting and entering the Commodities or Merchandises
with the description of those books; for to nominate all those, which some
particular Merchants Adventurers do keep, would make a Catalogue in a poor
Scholars Library, and herein superfluous, each book of them being but a
relative Index unto the two last.

The Diary, or Day-book, ought to be in a large folio; upon the front thereof
write the year of our Lord and Savior in numeral letters, Arithmetical
characters or both, then the title of Journall noted with a capital letter, as
A B, or C, etc. Thus made conspicuous, the title of each page or parcel within
the book is dated with the year, month, and day of any Wares, Goods, or
Commodities bought, sold, exchanged, received in, or delivered out: every page
on the right hand has 3 columns in the margent, expressing in money the value
of the said Goods or Wares inscribed, in pounds Sterling, shillings and pence,
etc. and upon the margent on the left hand one column for 1.2.3.4.5, etc. as
quotations to the Leagers, page and folio. Besides all this, it is convenient to
enter the mark, number, weight and measure of the Commodities or Parcels, the
Debitors and Creditors names, with the time place and manner of payment, or
what is convenient to be inserted, in explaining the contract, whether imported
or exported Goods, without blotting or interlining any thing.

X. The Leager is a collection of all the merchants books drawn together in a
large folio, charged upon some account in this order: as the book is o^ened,
^lace the Creditors upon the right hand page, and all the Debitors on the left,
the pages numbered by 1.1.2.2. so as the Dr. and Cr. make but one folio u on
either side in both margents, there are also columns (which bound the matter
inscribed) in number various as the Merchants please, or the multiplicity of
their employments shall require, whereof I will r^nder some precedents
hereafter: the words (most frequently used) in transporting or posting of Wares
or Commodities from the Journall or Diary into the Leager-book, are these: In
the first place (on the Debitors side) inscribe the word [To] after which let
the Account immediately follow: and on the Creditors part, usually the first
word is [By] preceding the name of that Account; and note that every parcel is
charged and discharged with the same sum: and observe that most Accounts are
best written in one line, or so compendious as you can; some men of very great
Commerce and trading keep a Calendar, Register, or an Alphabeticall Index, of
the names of Men, Wares, Ships and Voyages, with a mutual reference of numbers
to these and the Journal-pages, where the Goods are e^^red, according to
Debtor and Creditor: and this is always annexed before the Leager, either
side or page of the Leager being noted with one and the same numbers.

The Definitions of Debtor and Creditor.
By Debtor or Debitors in Merchants books, is understood the account that
owes or stands charged, and the word Creditor or Creditors signifies the
discharge. So all things received, or the Receiver is always made Debtor; the
things delivered, or the Deliverer, is the Creditor: all which are
compendiously com^rised by some Accountants according to these following
breviats. And thus stands all Bills, Bonds, Obligations of things lent, or
promises to lend, or cause to be lent or paid, included in the same predicament
with the two former (whether simple or mixed) the foundation of this structure.

What Debtor and Creditor contains in sum, unfolded in the Merchants books,
viz.
All Goods, Men, Money, Voyages, Ships, Cargazones, Bills of Exchanges, Wares,
or Commodities, etc. with Profit and Loss, are contracted into two kinds, viz.
Debtor and Creditor, and those contained in these Predicaments under 12
Species, whether proper for Company, Factorage, Domestic or Foreign, or mixed
with the other two.

How these are comprehended under the notion of Debitors or made so by Commerce
and Trade.
I. Lands, Rents, Revenues, Money, Wares, or Commodities, either in possession
or shipped away to foreign parts, with all those who are engaged to pay or
deliver, must be inscribed in the Merchants Books, Debitors to the Owners, to
their Cash or Stock.

II. Whosoever receives, or the Goods received, whether Money or Merchandises,
upon their own proper account, for Factorage or Company, w^ite them, o^ the
Wares Debitors.

III. If a man delivers Wares, or pays money, Bills or Exchanges upon the
account of another, that party (upon whose account it is paid) becomes Debtor.

IV. A man who delivers an Assignation in payment, whether his own or not, but
for the use of another, then the party (upon whose account 'twas delivered) is
made Debtor.

V. Money received that was taken up at Interest, then is Cash commonly written
for the Principal, Debtor; but the Lone, or Profit and Loss, for the Interest
money is made Debtor.

VI. An Adventurer or any other for him, that sends merchandises unto a
foreign place or Region, whether proper or for any Company, consigned to a
Factor or Resident there, the Voyage or Ship is written Debtor.

VII. A Merchant that insures any wares, and receives the money presently, then
is the Insurer or Cash written Debtor; but in case the Insurance be not
immediately paid, then is the party (for whom they were insured) Debtor for the
Insurance reckoning.

VIII. Upon advice that any Goods insured for Proper, or Company-account, and
those shipped to sea were cast away in part, or all, the Insurer or Insurance
reckoning is Debtor; but if otherwise, then Profit and Loss are subscribed
Debitors.

IX. Upon Returns or Advice from a Factor, that the shipped wares were received,
whether for Proper or Company-account, enter the Factor there resident Debtor.

X. A Factor that draws an Echange upon the Merchant, Company, himself, or
others; to the party or parties (upon who^e account it was drawn) inse t
Debtor, and the like upon Exchanges remitted, the acceptor (who must discharge
it) is Debtor.

XI. A Merchant or Company that loses by the sale of Wares, by Bank-routs,
Exchanges, Insurances, Interests, Gratuities, or whatsoever proves a detriment
in Commerce and Trade, to all or any of these subsc^ibe profit and loss --
Debtor.

XII. In balancing of Accounts, if there be money or wares in the house unsold,
or in the possession of their Partners and Correspondents, who have not rendered
satisfaction; then must People and Cash, b^th in the old and new books, be
written -- Debitors.

Creditors in Merchants Accounts are generally but reconversions from Debitors
discharged, or the Principal, included briefly in these 12 Species.
I. Stock or Cash for wares unsold, Creditor and the people, to whom any one is
indebted; whose names are distinctly to be specified under the notion, or by
the subscription of Creditor.

II. What things soever a Merchant delivers, or engages to be delivered,
whether for Proper, Factorage, or Company-account in money or wares, either the
goods delivered or the party promised is Creditor.

III. Any man that delivers money, Wares Exchanges or Assignations upon
another account, that party or parties (upon whose account it is received) mu^t
be subscribed C^editor.

IV. A Merchant borrowes money at interest, which being received, the party who
delivers it, or the lender, is Creditor for the Principal, and enter the Lone
reckoning or profit and loss for the interest money Creditor.

V. A man having a Principal of another in his possession, the time of
payment expired, and yet detained, the owner of the principal is for the
interest of that time only to be written Creditor.

VI. A Merchant receives advice from his Factor of the sent Goods received and
sold, or not, enter then Voyage to such a place, consigned to his correspondent
Creditor.

VII. Any Wares or Adventures safely arrived, the insurance not paid, but
customs and charges defraid, inscribe one of these, viz. Cash, Charges, the
Insurer, Insurance reckoning, or Profit and Loss, Creditors.

VIII. Goods or Commodities insured for Proper, or Company-account, shi^t to
sea, and by misfortunes cast away, as by letters from the Factor or Resident
appears; subscribe Voyage to the place consigned, to such a man for Proper or
Company account Creditor.

IX. A Me^chant from his Factor or Resident receives Returns in money or
merchan^izes, in lieu of the Wares received and sold, whether for Proper or
Company account, the Factor or Correspondent that caused these goods to be
delivered is Creditor.

X. An Exchange drawn by a Merchant upon his Factor for his Proper, Company, or
any others account, or remitted; then the party or parties for whose account it
is drawn, charged, sent or remitted, make Creditor the correspondent Debtor.

XI. A Merchant or Company that gains by Gratuities, the sale of Wares,
Exchanges, Insurances, Interests, or what things are beneficial in Commerce
and Trade, to all or any these subscribe Profit and Loss -- Creditor.

XII. In balancing of Books, Factors, Partners, and all others unsatisfied (if
Fortune has favored the Merchant) Stock and the People will be in the old and
new books Creditor.

To shun mistakes betwixt Debtor and Creditor, and not to be prolix, I
prescribe these rules and instructions, more compendiously then others have
delivered them; yet those I have seen in some copies epitomized (like the good
works of this Age) easily to be remembered, without over-fraighting the Readers
memory, which for the assistance of young men I will render in this breviat a
transcription of others presented to your view in two tables, one balancing the
other.

The Debitors or whatsoever owes are
1 What Goods we have 2 Who receives any thing 3 All Wares that we buy 4 The
men to whom we sell 5 Those for whom we buy 6 Those for whom we pay 7 The men
who are to pay 8 Goods that are insured 9 Those for whom we insure 10 Voyages
where we send 11 Goods on which is gained 12 Profit and Loss
The Creditors or what is to receive are
1 From whence it arises 2 Who delivers any thing 3 Those of whom we buy 4 The
Goods which are sold 5 The parties which sell 6 Goods wherewith we pay 7 Those
who are to receive 8 The party who insureth 9 The insurance reckoning 10 Goods
sent or shipped off 11 Goods on which is lost 12 Profit and Loss.
The Title of the Journall.
Anno first January 1658. In LONDON. The form of regulating a Journall page,
with the marginall quotations specified, as thus.
L S D Dr 1 The pages prepared according to the Diaries former description, yet
in multiplicity of affairs many do make two columns in the left margent, the
first for to insert Debtor or Creditor, the other with figures in reference
unto the Leagers page to show where each party or parties, parcel or parcels
stand charged or discharged.

And where any party or parcel is discharged, draw a line between the terms in
form of a fraction, placing Debtor ^bove the said line, and Credito^ beneath
it, with the figures or numbers of the Leagers page; one showing they are
discharged, and the other where.

But as for this, the figures only in most Jou^nals are conceived to b^
sufficient directions, as in the following Diary our Journall shall be made
conspicuous.

000 0 0 Cr 2 Dr 1 000 0 0 Cr 2 000 0 0

Here insert the year of our Lord. ^he journall page. The Title of the Leager,
Anno 1658. in LONDON. The form of ruling the Leager. Cash Debtor. Where
Creditor in the L^ager. L S D 1658 1 First Jan. Creditor to stock for several
Coyns of money. 1 800 00 00 Which signifies no more but the figure 1 in the
second column on the left hand points to you that Cash in the first page of
the Journall is made Debtor, and the figure 1 in the first column on the right
hand tells you that Cash has his Creditor entered in folio 1, viz. Stock is
Creditor as may appear by the said question in the said page of the Journall
and page of the Leager the like, mutatis mutandis is to be observed in the
Creditors side of the Leager, will be conspicuous in the Leager hereunto
annexed.

THE JOURNALL; Number A in LONDON. 1658.
Anno 1658. first Jan. in London.
L S D The form of inscribing Debitors and Creditors in the Inventory. Dr Gr
^/^ CAsh Debtor to Stock 800 l for several coyns of gold and silver remaining,
as by conclude of my former books appear, which amount to in Sterling money to
800 Goods or Merchandises in the warehouse, or otherwise in my possession, and,
are unsold. ^/1 Fustians Debtor to Stock 226 l 13 s 4 d. for 200 Pieces
resting unsold, which cost 22 s. 8 d. per piece 226 13 4 ^/1 Spanish Tobacco
Dr. to Stock 293 l 6 s 4 d. for ten Potacoo's remaining unso^d, weighing neat
880 poundat 6 s 8 d per pound, is 293 06 4 ^/1 Colchester Says Debtor to
stock 34 l 6 s 8 d. for 20 Pieces unsold, which cost 34 s per Piece 34 6 8 2/1
Couchaneal Debtor to Stock 230 l 11 s 3 d. for 14 C 3 qu. 14 po. neat at 15 l
10 s per C. 230 11 3 Ships, Parts, Houses, Land, etc. Inventored. ^/1 Ship the
Sampson of London Debtor to stock 200 l for my ^/8 part thereof, which cost me
200 ^/1 House the Nags head at Rumford Dr. to stock 350 l for the principal, it
cost me 350 Money due upon Bond, Bill, or other agreement, insert thus. 3/1
Abraham Bland debtor to stock 387 l 11 s. payable the last of this month, as
appears by his Obligation dated the 5. of December last 387 11 ^/1 Thomas
Goodman debtor to stock 82 l 3 s 4 d, as by his bill under his hand appears
payable on demand 82 3 4 3/1 William Lane of Ipswich debito to stock 36 l 11 s
4 d being the rest of an old account due on demand 36 11 4 Money due to others
from us by bond, bill, or agreement. Stock debtor to Barnaby Clemens 300 l
being so much due by my Obligation dated the 3. of November last, and payable
the 5. of March next 300 Stock debtor to Thomas Spilman 36 l 11 s 4 d. by my
bill payable on demand, for certain household stuff bought of him, the
particulars appears by his bill 36 11 4 Stock debtor to John Maz'oon 305 l
payable on demand 305 Here ends the Inventory.


Anno 1658. 3 Jan. in London.
L S D The form of inserting Debitors and Greditors in Traffiques continuace,
and first of goods sold for ready money, secondly for time. Cash debtor to
Fustians 24 l 14 s. for 13 pieces sold to John Deport at 38 ^ per Piece 24 14
4/2 John Thurrowgood of Chester debtor to Fustians 39 l 10 s for 20 Pieces
sold 39 s per Piece, payable within 30 days 39 10 Jan. 15. 1658. Goods sold
part for time, part for ready money. 4/2 John Benning debtor to Couchaneal 51 l
15 s for 3 C neat, at 17 l 5 s per cent. at 6 months rest instant 51 15 Cash
debtor to Dito John 25 l 17 s 6 d. received in part this day 25 17 6 Goods
bought, paying present money. 5/1 Lead debtor to Cash 204 l 11 s 3 d for 95
Pigs, weighing 13 tun 12 C 3 qu. at 15 s per C. 204 11 3 Wares bought not
paying present money. Claret Wines debtor to Jane de Clare for 5 tun at 12 l
per tun 60

Anno 1658. 15 Jan. in London.
L S D Commodities bought part for time, part to be paid ready money. 5/5
Sugars Debtor to James Wilson 54 l 7 s 4 d for 10 hh. wai. gro. 42 C 3 qu. 11
pound tare, of each hh. 22 po. neat, 30 C 0 qu. 23 po. at 30 s per cent. all
duties cleared, to pay money at a month 54 7 4 5/1 Dito James Debtor to Cash
18 l 2 s 5 d for paid in part 18 2 5 Jan. 19. 1658. Wares sold and delivered in
Barter. 5/5 Edward Price Debtor to Sugars 12 l 12 s fot 2 hh. wad. net. 6 C at
42 s per hh. to receive for the same Province oils in barter. 12 12 6/5
Province Oils Debtor to Dito Edward 9 l 3 s. for 1 Cask taken, content in
part in truck for Sugars 09 03 Cash Debit. to Dito Edward 3 l 9 s. received in
full satisfaction to clear the said Truck 3 9 Jan. 29. 1658. Moneys borrowed
at interest. Cash Debtor to John Malthorse 300 l received of him upon interest
300 6/6 Interest reckoning our Profit and Loss Debtor to Dito John 4 l 10 s,
for 3 months allowance for 300 l at 6 per cent. 4 10

Anno 1658. 30 Jan. in London.
L S D Moneys borrowed to be paid upon demand, or otherwise. Cash Debtor to
Simeon Peter's 50 l borrowed of him and payable on demand 50 Money let out at
Interest. 5/1 Edward Price Debtor to Cash 100 l. delivered him at Interest 100
Dito Edward Debtor to Interest reckoning or profit and loss 1 l 10 s for 3
months allowance for a 100 l at 6 per cent. per ann. 1 10 Housekeeping
charges entered. 6/1 Profit and Loss Debtor to Cash 50 l paid my servant for 3
months provision for housekeeping to end 25 March next 50 Febr. 2. 1658.
Moneys paid that are due, the time of payment being com^. 4/1 Jane de Clare
Debtor to Cash 60 l. paid him in full of all accounts 60 5/1 Jam. Wilson
Debtor to Cash 36 l 4 s 11 d. paid in full for his Sugars as by his
Acquittance appears 36 4 11 Febr. 9. 1658. Moneys received that are due, time
of payment b^ing come. Cash Debtor to John T^urrowgood 39 l 10 s. received in
full of all demands to this day 39 10 Moneys received (for goods sold at time
before due) upon rebate. Cash Debtor to John Benning 24 l. Received in full 24
6/4 Profit and Loss debtor to Dito John 1 l 17 s 6 d for payment before due 1
17 6

Anno 1658. 12 Febr. in London.
L S D Moneys gained by Exchange. Cash debtor to Profit and Loss 58 s 4 d for
advance of 100 Dollers exchanged for English money at 4 s 7 d per Piece, which
cost me but 4 s. the difference at 7 d per Piece is 2 18 -4 To discharge a debt
by Assignment. 4/3 Thomas Spilman debtor to William Lane for my Assignment,
poid him in full of his debt 36 11 -4 Debt sold to another from whom it was not
due. Cash debtor to Thomas Goodman 50 l, Received of William Short for Dito
Thomas his Bill of 82 l 3 s 4 d. which I have sold for 50 6/3 Profit and loss
debtor to Dito Thomas 32 l 3 s 4 d lost by the sale of his bill 32 -3 -4 Febr.
19. 1659. Part of a debt lost by a Bankrupt and the rest received. Cash debtor
to Abraham Bland 259 l 7 s 4 d being but Received in full of a debt of 387 l 11
s 258 -7 -8 6/3 Profit and Loss debtor to Dito Abraham 129 l 3 s 8 d. lost by
him when he failed -129 -3 Merchandises sent into another Country, consigned
to a Factor for my Account. 7/2 Voyage to Amsterdam consigned to Hans Butter
box debtor to Fustians 80 l for 40 pieces at 40 s per piece, shipped by James
Hope to Dito Hans to be sold for my account 80 7/2 Dito Voyage consigned to
Dito Hans debtor to Spanish Tobaco 440 l for so Pot^en's w^d net 880 l at 10 s
per pound, shipped by Dito James to the said Hans to be sold for my account - 440

Anno 1658. 19 Feb. in London.
L S D Charges for a voyage, or otherwise. 7/1 Dito voyage debtor to Cash 9 l
16 s for charges upon the Fustians and Tobaco, for Freight, Custom and Excise,
etc. 9 16 Goods ensured. 7/1 Dito voyage debtor to Cash 7 l 16 s for insurance
of Dito Fustians and Tobacco, paid John Mazoone at 30 s per cent. is 7 16 Feb.
22. 1658. Money received for freight of a ships part. Cash debtor to Ship the
Sampson of London, for freight received of John Wright Master thereof, for my
share 35 3 8 Money or goods given away to any person. 7/2 Profit and Loss
debtor to Fustians 1 l 2 s 8 d for one piece given to A.B. 6/1 Profit and
loss debtor to Cash 12 l given toward the relief of a fire at Enfield in the
County of Middlesex 1 2 8 Gratuities received. Cash debtor to Profit and Loss
for 200 l received for a Legacy given m^ by A. M. 12 Febr. 28. 1658.
Commodities formerly shipped to another Country, and advice of the sale thereof.
7/7 Hans Butterbox at Amsterdam, my account current, debtor to voyage to
Amsterdam 613 l 15 s 4 d. as appear^ by his account sent me, and dated at
Amsterdam, November. 25. instant, being the neat proceed of my goods sol^ there
613 15 4

Anno 1658. 28 Febr. in London.
L S D Commodities received to sell for another man's account in Commission. 7/1
Hans Butterbox at Amsterdam his account of Wheat debtor to Cash 18 l 5 s for
several charges paid at the receipt of 100 quarters (received out of the
Elephant of Amsterdam) as follows: L S D For Freight, at 1 s per qu. 05 00 00
For Custom, at 1 s 6 d per q. 07 10 00 For Excise, at 6 d per qu. 02 10 00 For
Porterage, Literage and Cartage, at 6 d per qu. 02 10 00 For Meaters allowance
00 15 00 18 05 00

18 5 Commission Goods sold. 1/7 Cash debtor to Hans Butterbox his account of
Wheat for 100 quarters so^d to John Sutton Junior at 58 s per qu. is 290
Provision for Commodities sold. 7/6 Hans Butterbox his account of Wheat debtor
to profit and loss for my provision for the said Wheat at 12 d per l. 14 10
March 3. 1658. The proceed of commodities paid by bill of Exchange. 8/^ Hans
Butterbox his account current debtor to Cash 257 l 5 s. remitted him for his
account in Bills of Stephen Swabbers payable at sight to dito Hans by Simon
Newman of Amsterdam, being the neat proceed of his wheat, all charges deducted
257 5

Anno 1658. 24. March in London.
L S D Commodities bought for Companies Accounts. 8/8 Tobacco in Company
between John Mazoon and my self debtor 210 l fo 30 hh of Vi^ginia each, the
whole a^ 7 l per hh is 210 Cash debtor to John Mazoon his account by me in
Company for his part received 105 Commodities sold for Company Account. Cash
debtor to Tobacco in Company between John Mazoon and my sel^ each for 30 hh
sold to Henry Beak at ^0 l per hh. 300 8/^ Tobacco in Company debi^or to John
Mazoon his account by me in company 45 l for advance 45 8/^ Tobacco in Company
debtor to profit and loss 45 l for my of advanc^ gain by the sale of the
Tobaccoes 45 8/4 John Mazoon his account by me in Company debtor to dito John
his account proper 150 l, v^z. for his principal brought in, and gains
thereof made good upon his particular account 150

Anno 1659. 25 March in London
L S D Order of Balancing. 2/9 Balance debtor to Hans Butterbox my account
current 613 l 15 s 4 d. due to me in ready money 613 15 4 4/9 John Mazoone
debtor to Balance 455 l. due to him by conclude 455 4/9 Barnaby Clemens
debtor to balance 300 due to him 5 March last, by my obligation 300 9/5
Balance debtor to Edw: Price 101 l 10 s due to me the 30 of April next 101 10
6/9 John Malthorse debtor to balance 304 l 10 s due the 29 of April next 430
10 7/6 Voyage to Amsterdam debtor to profit and loss 76 l 3 s 4 d. gained by
sale of goods there 76 3 4 Hans Butterbox his account of Wheat debtor to his
account current 256 l 5 s. being the neat proceed of his wheat 256 5 9/2
Balance debtor to Fustians 142 l 16 s for 126 pieces remaining unsold, at 22 s
8 d per piece 142 16 2/6 Fustians debtor to profit and loss 61 l 9 s 4 d
gained by the sale of 73 pieces 61 9 4 2/6 Spanish Tobacco debtor to profit
and loss 146 l 13 s 8 d gained by the sale of 10 Potacoes 146 13 4 9/2 Balance
debtor to Colchester Says 34 l 6 s 8 d for 20 pieces unsold, at 34 s per
piece 3 6 8 9/2 Balance debtor to Couchaneal 184 l 1 s 3 d for 11 C 3 qu. 74
pound, at 15 l 10 s per C. unsold -184 1 3 ^/6 Couchaneal debtor to profit and
loss 5 l 5 s gained by the sale of 3 C 5 5 9/5 Balance debtor to Lead 204 l 11
s 3 d for 95 Pigs wa. 13 tun 12 C 3 q. at 15 s per cent. resting unso'd 204 11
3 9/5 Balance debtor to Claret wine 60 l for 5 tuns, at 12 l per tun resting
unsold 60 9/5 Balance debtor to Sugars 43 l 11 s 4 d for 24 C o qu. 23 pound,
at 36 shillings per cent. being unsold 43 11 4 Sugars debtor to profit and
loss 1 l 16 s gained by the sale of 6 C. 1 16 9/6 Balance debtor to Province
Oils 9 l 3 s for 1 Cask taken content unsold 9 3 6/6 Profit and loss debtor
to Interest reckoning 3 l lost by giving of interest for money 3 9/3 Balance
debtor to Ship the Sampson of London 200 l for my part thereof 200 ^/6 Ship
Sampson debtor to profit and loss 35 l 3 s 8 d. gained by freight 35 3 8 9/3
Balance debtor to the Nags head at Rumford 350 l for the principal worth of it
350 9/1 Balance debtor to Cash 1561 l 4 s 1 d resting in hand 1561 4

THE LEAGER: NUMBER A. Anno Dom. 1659. in LONDON.
The form of the Calendar belonging to the Leager.
A Abrah: Bland. fol. 1
B John Benning. 4 Hans Butterbox my account current. 7 Dito Butterbox his
account of Wheat. 7 Dito Butterbox his account current. 8 Balance. 9
C Cash. fol. 1 Couchaneale. 2 Barnaby Clemens. 4 Jane de Clare. 4
D E F Fustians. fol. 2
G Tho: Goodman. fol. 3
H House Nags head. f. 3
I Interest reckoning. f. 6
K L William Lane. fol. 3 Lead 5
M John Mazoon. fol. 4 John Malthorse. 6 John Mazoon his account by me in
company. 7
N O Oils Province. fol. 6
P Edward Price. fol. 5 Simon Peter's. 6 Profit and Loss. 6
Q R S Stock. fol. 1 Says. 2 Ship Sampson. 3 Thomas Spilman. 4 Sugars. 5
T Tobacco. fol. 2 John Thurrowgood. 4 Tobacco in Company for John Mazoone and
my self each. 8
V Voyage to Amsterdam. fol. 7
W Wines Clarret. fol. 5 James Wilson. 5
X Y Z
L S D Cash Debtor. 1658 1 First Jan. to stock for several coins amounting to
Sterling money 1 - 800 3 3 Dito to Fustians for 13 pieces sold to John Deport
at 30 s per piece 2 24 14 15 Dito to John Benning, received in part 4 25 17 6 4
19 Dito to Edward Price received to clear a Truck 5 3 09 29 Dito to John
Malthorse received at interest at 6 per cent. per an. 6 -300 5 30 Dito to Simon
Peter's being so much borrowed of him 50 9 Feb. to John Thurrowgood received in
full demand 4 39 10 Dito to John Benning received in full upon rebate 24 6 12
Dito to profit and loss for gain in exchange of 100 Dollars 6 2 18 4 2 Dito to
Thomas Goodman, received of William Short in full 3 50 19 Dito to Abraham Bland
being 13 s 4 d per l for 387 l 11 s 3 -258 07 4 7 22 Dito to Ship Sampson for
my part for freight 35 03 8 Dito ^o profit and loss for a Legacy ^^^eiv'd,
given me by A. M. 6 -200 8 29 Dito to H. Butterb. his account of Wheat for 100
qu. sold at 58 s per qua^^e^ ^7 -290 9 24 Mar^^, to John Mazoon his account by
me in company for his part received 8 -105 - Dito to Tobacco in company for 30
^^^^at 10 l per hh -300 2508 19 10

Contra Creditor. L S D 1658 3 15 Jan. by Lead for 95 Pigs wa. 13 T. 12 C. 3
qui at 15 s per C. 5 204 ^1 3 5 - Dito by James Wilson for of his debt paid him
in part 5 18 2 5 30 Dito by Edw. Price delivered him upon interest at 6 per c.
3 mo. 5 100 - Dito by profit and loss for housekeeping for 3 months 6 50 5 2
Feb. by Jane de Clare, paid him in full of all demands 4 60 5 - Dito by James
Wilson paid him in full of all demands 5 36 4 11 7 19 Dito by Voyage to
Amsterd. paid charges of Fustians and Tobac. 7 9 16 7 - Dito by dito voyage for
Insurance at 30 s per cent. 7 7 16 7 22 Dito by profit and loss given in relief
for a fire 6 12 8 28 Dito by H. Butterb. his account of Wheat at the receipt for
charges 7 18 5 8 3 March, by H. Butterb. his account current remitted him by
bills 8 257 5 9 24 Dito by Tobac. in Company, paid in full for 30 hh at 7 l per
hh 8 210 11 1659 9 25 Dito by balance resting in Cash 9 1524 19 2 2508 19 10

Stock Debtor. 1658 2 1 Jan. to Barnaby Clemens by my Obligation due 15 March
4 300 6 2 Dito to Thomas Spilman due to him on demand 4 36 11 4 2 Dito to John
Mazoon payable on demand 4 305 1659 25 March, to balance for conclude carried
thither 9 2359 4 1 3000 15 5

Contra Creditor. 1658 1 1 Jan. by Cash for several Coins of money amounting
to Sterling money 1 800 - Dito by Fustians for 200 pieces cost 22 s 8 d per
piece 2 226 13 4 - Dito by Spanish Tobaco for 10 Potatoes wa. net. 880 pound,
at 6 s 8 d per pound 2 293 6 ^ - Dito by Colchester Says, for 20 pieces unsold
at 34 s per piece 2 34 6 8 - Dito by Couchancal for 14 C 3 qu. 14 po. at 15 l
10 s per C. 2 230 11 3 - Dito by Ship the Sampson of London, for my part 3 200
- Dito by house the Nags-head at Rumford, for what it cost 3 350 - Dito by
Abraham Bland, for his Obligation due the last instant 3 387 11 - Dito by
Thomas Goodman for his Bill 3 82 03 4 - Dito by William Lane being the rest of
an old account 3 36 11 4 1659 25 March, by profit and loss gained by this 3
months trading 6 359 12 2 3000 15 5

L S D Fustians Debtor. 1658 1 1 Jan. to stock for 200 pieces which cost 22 s
8 d per Piece 1 226 13 4 1659 25 March to profit and loss gained by the sale of
73 Pieces 6 61 09 4 288 2 8 Spanish Tobaco Debtor. 1658 1 1 Jan. to stock for
10 Potacoes wa. net. 880 pound, at 6 s 8 d per pound 1 293 6 4 1659 25 March to
profit and loss gained by the sale of dito Tobaco 6 146 13 8 440 Colchester
Says Debtor. 1658 1 1 Jan. to stock for 20 Pieces cost 34 s per piece 1 34 06
8 Couchaneale Debtor. 1658 1 1 Jan. to stock for 14 C. 3 qu. 14 pound, at 15 l
10 s per C. 1 230 11 3 1659 25 March to profit and loss gained by sale of 3 C.
6 5 05 235 16 3

L S D Contra Creditor. 1658 3 3 Jan. by Cash for 13 pieces sold to John Deport
at 38 s. pe^ piece 1 241 14 3 - Dito by John Thoroughgood of Chester for 20
pieces at 39 s per pi ce t 30 days 4 39 10 6 19 Feb. by voyage to Amsterdam to
be sold for my account, 40 pieces at 40 s. per piece 7 80 7 22 Dito by profit
and loss for one piece given away to A. B. 6 1 2 8 1659 25 March by balance for
126 pieces unsold at 22 s. 8 d. per piece 9 148 16 288 02 8 Contra Creditor.
1658 6 19 Feb. by voyage to Amsterd. consigned to Hans Butterbox to be sold for
my use 10 Potacoes of Spanish Tobaccoe wa. net. 880 pound, at 10 s. per po. 7
440 440 Contra Greditor. 1659 25 March by balance for 20 pieces resting
uns^^d, which cost 34 s. per piece 9 34 6 8 Contra Creditor. 1658 3 15 Jan. by
John Benning for 3 C. at 17 l. 5 s. per C. instant, rest at 6 months 4 51 15
1659 25 March by balance for 11 C. 3. qu. 14 pound unsold, cost 15 l. 10 s.
per C. 9 148 1 3 235 16 3

L S D Ship the Sampson Debtor. 1658 1 1 Jan. to stock for my part, which cost
me 1 200 1659 25 March, to Profit and Loss gained by freight 6 35 3 8 235 3 8
House the Nags head at Rumford Debtor. 1658 1 1 Jan. to stock for the
principle it cost me 1 350 Abraham Bland Debtor. 1658 2 1 Jan. to stock for
his bond dated 5 December. last, due the last of this month 1 387 11 Thomas
Goodman Debtor. 1658 2 1 Jan. to stock for his bill to be paid on demand 1 82
3 4 William Lane of Ipswich Debtor. 1658 2 1 Jan. to stock, being the rest of
an old Account 1 36 11 4

L S D Contra Creditor. 1658 7 22 Feb. by Cash received for my part for freight
1 35 3 8 1659 25 March, by Balance for my part thereof 9 200 235 3 8 Contra
Creditor. 1659 25 March by Balance for the principal it cost 9 350 Contra
Greditor. 1659 6 19 Feb. by Cash received at 13 s 4 d per l for 20 s 1 264 7 4
16 - Dito by Profit and Loss lost by him when he failed 6 123 3 8 387 11 Contra
Creditor. 1658 6 12 Febr. by Cash received of Will: Short in full of my said
debt 1 50 6 Dito by Profit and Loss lost by the sale of my said debt to dito
William 6 32 3 4 82 3 4 Contra Creditor. 1658 6 12 Feb. by Tho: Spilman ordered
to receive of dito William 4 36 11 4

L S D Barnaby Clemens Debtor. 1659 25 March to balance due to him by my
obligation the 5 of March last 9 300 Thomas Spilman Debtor. 1658 6 12 Feb. to
William Lane for my ^ssignment 3 36 11 4 John Mazoon Debtor. 1659 3 25 March
to balance due to him by conclude 9 455 John Thoroughgood Debtor. 1658 3 3
Jan. to Fustians for 20 pieces ^t 39 s. per piece, to be paid with^n 30 days 2
39 10 John Benning Debtor. 1658 3 15 Jan. to Couchaneal for 3 C. neat, at 17
l. 5 s. per C. instant rest at 6 months 2 51 15 Jane de Clare Debtor. 1658 5
2 Feb. to Cash paid in full of all demands 1 60

L S D Contra creditor. 1658 2 1 Januar. by stock payable 5 March next 1 300
Contra creditor. 1658 2 1 Jan. by stock payable on demand 1 36 11 4 Contra
credito. 1658 2 1 Jan. by stock payable on demand 1 305 8 24 March by his
account by me in company 8 150 455 Contra cred tor. 1658 5 9 Feb. by Cash
received in full of all demands 1 39 10 Contra creditor. 1658 3 15 Jan. by Cash
paid in part 1 25 17 6 5 9 Feb. by Cash received in full upon rebate 24 - Dito
by profit and loss allowed for payment before due 6 1 17 6 51 15 Contra
creditor. 1658 3 15 Jan. by Claret wines being 5 Tun, at 12 l. per Tun 5 60

L S D Lead Debtor. 1658 3 15 Jan. to Cash paid for 95 Pigs wa. 13 Tun 12 C. 3
qu. at 15 s per C. 1 204 1^ 3 Clarret Wines Debtor. 1658 3 15 Jan. to Jane de
Clare for 5 ^uns at 12 l per tun 4 60 Sugars Debtor. 1658 4 15 Jan. to James
Wilson for 30 C. 0 qu. 23 pound neat at 36 s per C. instant, rest at 9 months
5 54 7 4 1659 25 March to Profit and Loss gained by the sale of 6 C neat 6 1
16 56 3 4 James Wilson Debtor. 1658 4 15 Jan. to Cash for paid him in part. 1
18 2 5 5 2 Feb. to Cash paid in full of all demands 36 4 1 54 7 4 Edward Price
Debtor. 1658 4 19 Jan. to Sugars for 2 hh wa. neat 6 C. at 42 s per C. 5 12 12
5 30 Dito to Cash dd. him upon interest at 6 l per C. 1 100 - Dito to
Interest-reckoning for allowance of dito C l. for 6 months 6 1 12 1^4 2

L S D Contra Creditor. 1659 25 March by Balance for 95 Pigs resting unsold 9
204 11 3 Contra Creditor. 1659 25 March by Balance resting unsold, 5 tuns at
12 l per tun 9 60 Contra Creditor. 1658 4 19 Jan. by Edward Price for 6 C. at
42 s per C. in barter 5 12 12 1659 25 March by Balance for 24 C 0 qu. 23 l
resting unsold 9 4^ 11 4 56 3 4 Contra Creditor. 1658 4 15 January by Sugars
for 30 C. 0 qu. 23 l. neat at 36 s per C. instant, rest at 1 month 5 54 7 4
Contra Creditor. 1658 4 19 Januar. by Province Oils 1 Cask received content 6
9 3 Dito by Cash paid in full satisfaction of dito truck 1 3 9 1659 25 March by
Balance due to me 30 April next 9 10 10 114 2

L S D Province Oils debtor. 1658 4 To Edward Price for 1 Cask taken content
5 9 3 John Malthorse debtor. 1659 25 March to Balance due to him 29 April
next 9 304 10 Interest reckoning debtor. 1658 4 29 Jan. to John Malthorse for
3 months allowance of 300 l. at 6 per cent. for 3 months 6 4 10 Simon Peter's
debtor. 1659 25 March to Balance due upon demand 9 50 Profit and loss
debtor. 1658 5 30 Jan. to Cash paid A B. my servant for 3 months
housekeeping 1 50 9 Feb. to John Benning allowed for payment before due 4 1 17
6 6 12 Dito to Thomas Goodman lost by sale of his debt to Will: Short. 3 32 3 4
19 Dito to Abraham Bland lost by taking 13 s. 4 d. per l. when h^ failed 3 129
3 8 7 22 Dito to Fustians for 1 piece given to A.B. 2 1 2 8 - Dito to Cash
given toward the relief of a Fire at Enfield in ^he County of Middlesex 1 12
1659 25 March to Interest reckoning lost by the same 6 3 - Dito to Stock gained
by this 3 months trading 1 359 12 2 5^9 19 4

Contra Creditor. L S D 1659 25 March by Balance for one Cask unsold 9 9 3
Contra Creditor. 1658 4 29 Jan. by Cash received upon interest at 6 per cent.
for 3 months 1 300 - Dito by Interest reckoning for 3 months allowance for 300
l. at 6 per cent. 6 4 10 Contra Creditor. 304 10 1658 5 29 Jan. by Edward Price
for allowance of 100 l. for 3 months at 6 per cent 5 1 10 1659 25 March by
Profit and Loss lost per sum 6 3 Contra Creditor. 4 10 1658 5 30 Jan. by
Cash borrowed and payable on demand 1 50 Contra Creditor. 1658 6 12 Feb. by
Cash gained by exchange of 100 Dolars for Eng. mo. 1 2 18 4 7 22 Dito by dito
given as a Legacy by A. M. 200 8 28 Dito by Hans Butterbox hi^ account of Wheat
for my provision at 12 d. per l. 7 14 10 24 March by Tobaccoe in company for of
my advance 8 45 1659 25 Dito by voyage to Amsterd. gained by the sale of goods
there 7 76 3 4 - Dito by Fustians gained by the sale of 73 pieces 2 61 9 4 -
Dito by Spanish Tob. gained by the sale of 10 Potacoes 14^ 13 8 - Dito by
Couchaneale gained by the sale of 3 C. 5 5 - Dito by Sugars gained by the sale
of 6 C. 1 16 - Dito by Ship the Sampson gained by freight 3 35 3 8 588 19 4

L S D Voyage to Amsterdam configned to Hans Butterbox Deb. 1658 6 19 Feb. to
Fustians for 40 Pieces at 40 s per Piece 2 80 - Dito to Spanish Tobacco for 10
Potacoes neat 880 pound at 10 s per pound, to be sold for my account 440 7 -
Dito to Cash for charges upon the Fustians and Tobacco 1 9 16 - Dito to Cash
for Insurance John Mazoon at 30 s per cent. 7 16 1659 25 March to Profit and
Loss gained by sale of dito goods 6 76 3 4 613 15 4 Hans Butterbox at
Amsterdam my Account current debtor. 1658 7 2 Feb. to Voyage to Amsterdam for
the neat Proceed of my goods there 7 613 15 4 Hans Butterbox at Amsterdam his
account of Wheat Deb. 1658 8 28 Feb. to Cash for charges at the receipt of 100
quarters 1 18 5 - Dito to Profit and Loss for my provision at 12 d per l. 6 14
10 1659 25 March to dito Hans his account current for the neat proceed thereof
8 257 5 290

L S Contra creditor. 1658 7 28 Feb. by Hans Butterbox my account current 7 613
15 Contra creditor. 1659 25 March by Balance due to me in ready money 9 613 15
4 Contra creditor. 1658 8 29 Feb. by Cash for 100 quarters sold to John Sutton
at 58 s per qu. 1 290

L S D Hans Butterbox at Amsterdam his account current debtor. 1658 8 3 March
to Cash remitted him payable by Simon Newman of Amsterdam 1 257 5 Tobaccoe in
company for John Mazoon and my self debtor. 1658 9 24 March to Cash for 30 hh.
at 7 l. per hh. 8 210 - Dito to John Mazoon for his advance 45 - Dito to profit
and loss for my of advance 6 45 300 John Mazoon his account by me in company
debtor. 1658 9 24 March to dito John his account proper for principal and
gains 4 150

L S D Contra creditor. 1659 25 March by dito his account of wheat, being the
neat proceed the^eof 7 257 5 Contra creditor. 1658 9 24 March by Cash for 30
hh. sold to John Brown at 10 l per hh. 1 300 Contra creditor. 1658 8 24 March
by Cash received for his part 1 10^ 9 24 March by Tobaccoe in company his
advance 8 45 150

L S D Balance Debtor. 1659 5 25 March, to Hans Butterb. my account current
due in ready mon. 7 613 5 4 - Dito to Edward Price due to me 30 April next 5
101 10 - Dito to Fustians for 126 pieces resting unsold, at 22 s 8 d per piece
2 142 16 - Dito to Colchester Says for 20 pieces unsold 34 6 8 - Dito to
Couchaneal for 11 C. 3 q. 14 l at 15 l to s per C. unsold 2 184 1 3 - Dito to
Lead for 95 piggs remaining unsold 5 204 11 3 - Dito to Clarret Wines for 5
tuns, at 12 s per tun unsold 60 - Dito to Sugars for 24 C. 0 qu. 23 l unsold,
at 36 s per C. 43 11 4 - Dito to Province Oils for one Cask unsold 6 9 3 -
Dito to Ship Sampson for my part thereof 3 200 - Dito to House Nags head at
Rumford for the principal worth 350 - Dito to Cash resting in bank 1 1524 19 2
3468 14 1

Contra Creditor. 1659 25 March, by John Mazoon due to him by conclude 4 455 -
Dito by Barnaby Clemens for my obligation due 5 March last 300 - Dito by John
Malthorse due to him 29 April next 6 304 10 - Dito by Simon Peter's due on
demand 50 - Dito by Stock for difference, there being my present estate 1 2359
4 3468 14 1

FINIS.

