Vox Dei and hominis.

GOD'S CALL FROM HEAVEN ECCHOED By Man's answer from Earth.

Or A Survey of EFFECTUAL CALLING.

In the Explication of its nature. Distribution of it into its parts.
Illustration of it by its properties. Confirmation of it by reasons.
Application of it by Uses.


Being the substance of several Sermons delivered to the people of Heveningham,
in Suffolk.

By J. Votier, Minister of the Gospel.

[When thou said,] Seek yea my face, my heart said unto thee, thy face, Lord,
will I seek. Psalm. 27. 8. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Nathanael Webb, and
William Grantham at the Bear in Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door
of Paul's, 1658.

To his beloved people, the inhabitants of Heveningham, Suff.
Christian Friends,
THese Sermons coming abroad into the world, I thought meet to command them to
visit and salute you, where they first drew their breath.

They have formerly been preached to your ears, they are now presented to your
eyes; the Lord print them upon your hearts. I take it to be my duty, (though I
be the lowermost of the ushers in Christ's School, yet) according to the
measure of my talent, to try all conclusions for the weal of your souls; and
how would mine heart be enlarged with thanks to the Lord, if my poor endeavors
might be crowned with succes? and though these things have been communicated to
you formerly, yet (because we are slow to receive and retain divine truths) to
write the same things, that I have spoken, to me shall not be grievous; and to
you I hope the Lord will make it safe: Nay, though my service for your souls in
any kind were doubled, yea, treble, yet should I abundantly rejoice in the
labor of the hardest tasks, if thereby through the assistance of the Almighty,
I might see Satan's forts taken, and forces routed, and sin marching out of your
hearts and lives with bag and baggage, and the Lord Jesus with the blessed
train of his spirit's graces enthroned and set up in the midst of you. To which
end Iearnestly desire that the Lord would be pleased to bless this, and all my
other labors; and that you would be pleased to accept of my counsel, as in the
Book, so in this Epistle. And that

1. More generally. 2. More particularly, with respect to the ensuing Treatise.

1. More generally.

1. Take heed of error and heresy. They are reckoned in Scripture amongst the
works of the flesh. They are the secret underminers of that which is good,
notwithstanding their well-complexioned face.

2. Get knowledge. Ignorance is the root of iniquity. In times of light to live
in darkness is most sad.

3. Do not imprison, but improve your knowledge. To him that knows to do
good, and does it not, to him it is sin, [with a witness] Jam. 4. 17. Knowledge
without grace, is but like a jewel in a swines snout, or a pearl in a toads
head.

4. Keep close to the Ordinances. Keep up in your hearts a love to them. Come
once to slight and turn your back upon them, and you put the reins into the
Devils hands.

5. Love sound and soulsearching preaching; never distaste it, it is best for
your souls; it is wholesome though not toothsome.

6. Be much in examination of your selves; weigh your selves in God's scales:
will you know every thing, and be ignorant only of the state of your souls?

7. Content not your selves with a form, but look afte the power of godliness;
the name without the nature of a Christian will little avail you: forget not
what I have taught you from Matthew. 7. 21..

8. Take heed of the world, and the cares thereof. Do not so fasten your
thoughts to earth, as to be strangers to heaven. Be not so careful of your
bodies, as to be careless of your souls.

9. Look to your families: let Christ come in there. Train up your children and
servants religiously; let your houses be as so many Churches. Neglect here is
the corrupted spring that sends forth puddle-streams into Ecclesiastical and
Civil societies; without the service of God, your houses will be but the Devils
shops.

10. In your places discountenance sin and profaness; encourage goodness.
Improve your power, estate, age, etc. for Christ's glory.

11. Maintain love toward each other; follow peace and holiness; Love is an
excellent grace.

12. Be very careful to sanctify the Lord's Sabbaths publicly and privately:
They are God's dole* days; be not unwilling to wait at the posts of his gates
for his alms.

2. More particularly with respect to the ensuing Treatise.

1. Look upon this little piece as an help to bring to remembrance what has
formerly been taught you.

2. Take the counsel therein as from your Minister, Friend, and Lover, who
earnestly desires your eternal salvation.

3. Read it not out of novelty, but conscience.

4. Pray over it, and for me, that I may be the better enabled to discharge my
duty in watching over your souls.

5. Compare it with the Scriptures, and so far as it harmonizeth with them
embrace it. I shall here put a period, and conclude, not ceasing to be mindful
of you at the throne of grace, and to make mention of you in my prayers, who am

Yours in the service of your souls, J. V.

To his respected Friends, the inhabitants of Margarets of Ilkets-hal, in Suff.
My first Love,
LOve is strong. That providence which brought me amongst you makes me love
you; that love, time and absence have not obliterated; but still like the
Laurel it retains its greenness.

I served a full apprentiship with you in the Ministry of the Gospel, wherein
my design and desire was the conversion of your souls. These papers I send
after my former pains with you, to second what I then taught you. The Spirit as
principal bless both the one and the other to you. I called you often in the
name of Christ to come to Christ, and I hope it was not wholly without effect
on some. My love constrains me to call again in this ensuing Treatise, which
while you are reading, I hope I shall be praying that God would prosper it to
you.

Be convinced of the danger of a natural condition. I have often touched on
this string; if it have jarred to you, I wish the Lord would so temper your
spirits, that now it may be melodious. I pray that he that succenturiates, and
is come in my room, may reap the harvest of my seed-time; and if what was sown
and came up then but thin, may grow up now to full ears of corn; it shall
through grace be a cordial to my spirit: Love and cherish that light which
burns among you. Take heed of the infection of error. Be diligent hearers, and
not only so, but also dutiful practicers of the Word.

The Lord prevail with you, and effectually call you unto himself; that
predestination from eternity may be manifested by your timely acceptance of
Christ. This is and shall be the prayer of

Your unfeigned Lover, J. V.
From my house in Heveningham, Feb. 4. 1657/8.
To his dear Consort, and welbeloved Children.
Whose spititual welfare should I tender if not yours? I cannot but interest
you in this my public as well as private services.

FOr thee, Dear heart, as my love here greeteth thee, so thine to me, to thy
self, (I question not) will put thee on seriously to view and hearken to this
discourse, as well as my other and former advices. Here thou may try that
grace which the Lord has given thee to his glory, and thine and my comfort,
and may be helped to make sure thy calling and election. It is true, I am as
yet present with thee, through mercy, and thou with me, (but it is unknown
(unless in heaven) how soon we may be snatched each out of others bosom, for
the cloud of death many times overcasts a fair morning) and so have opportunity
for information, direction and counsel, according to my talent. But this may
live when I am dead, and by this means thou may have an admonishing husband
present even when absent. However, it may prove subservient to thy souls
advantage, whether our time be less or more in this world.

As for you, my dear Children, I judge it not unmeet to commend these
collections to you, and as a father to command you to study them, and to search
your selves by them.

I have formerly had in my thoughts to draw up some admonitions and cautions
for the good of your souls, which as a father careful of your eternal weal, I
might leave with you as a fathers blessing, as the best legacy I can bequeath
to you; but those being not hatched and these fledged and completed, I could
not but put them into your hands, not knowing (though my self wtth your loving
mother be in the prime of our years, having but newly past the noon of Moses
Psalm. 90.
his youngest old man) how short my time may be with you; as also because the
subject is of special concernment for you, being born and brought forth in sin.
For what doctrine could I better lay before you, than that of effectual
calling? showing you what is grace, and what not; and what duty could I better
lay upon you, than that of conversion and repentance. Young children, like
young plants, had need be shored and underpropped with good admonitions, I
endeavor it in this Treatise, as well as in my private teachings.

I have six of you in the land of the living, Oh that the Lord would make you
his! So far as I know mine own heart, (though the heart of man, and so mine is
very deceitful) I profess seriously, that how low soever your condition should
be for temporals, yet if the Lord would be pleased to bestow a new heart upon
you, I should abundantly rejoice, yea, more than to see you sit upon the
highest pinnacle of worldly advancement. I am full of fears and desires in
reference to your souls good; and though now you be tender and young, and so
little sensible, and not so fit for this or other books, yet if it please God
to lengthen out the thread of your lives, which I pray for, then take a word of
advice from your father: oh that God would bless it to you!

Study thoroughly the nature of original sin, and that pravity that is diffused
throughout your natures. Remember that you are born in sin, and so will live
and die if not changed by grace. The Lord change you for his Christ's sake. Let
the Scriptures be precious in your eyes; they are the book of books; read them
often, and heedfully. Make great conscience of obedience to your parents and
superiors. Remember your creator in the days of your youth; make good use of
your young time; flee youthful lusts; take heed of the beginnings of sin;
beware of pride, lying, vain company, etc. Be willing to learn and be taught
the things of God, and your souls good. I must contract, or mine Epistles will
swell too much. Jesus Christ wash you with his blood, cleanse you from the
filth and guilt of sin, make you the sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty.
The Lord make thee, my dear yoke fellow, a Mother of Saints, and more and more
an Eunice to the fruit of thy womb. So prays

An affectionate husband, and father, tender of your souls good, J. V.
Heveningham, Feb. 4. 1657/8.
To his near relations in the bonds of consanguinity and affinity; and to all
his loving friends and acquaintance in the City of London, County of Suffolk,
and elsewhere.
Respected Kinsfolk and Acquaintance,
RElations and friendship are the pillars of human society, great comforts of
our lives; love is the sinew of friendship, and religion is the life of this
love. What is love without religion, but a sensual affection? and acquaintance
without love, but flattery and dissimulation? so that religion is the center to
the lines of love and friendship, and that wherein they live and have their
being. Non nobis solum nati sumus, We were not born for our selves alone, said
the Heathen Orator. And if for others, for their good; and if for their good,
then their best good, or their good in the best respects thereof. God made and
knit us together in bonds, not to further or let each other alone in sin,
(which we are apt to do through the corruption of base flesh) but to admonish
and help each other on toward grace and glory. Though I must confess I fail
too much in the duty of every of my relations wherein I stand; yet I bless God
that he has helped and encouraged me in some measure to deal with diverse of
you in the way of private admonition, which I hope has not been altogether
fruitless. It is a precious duty, I wish it were more put in use and practice.

I have had sometimes wishes (though the thing can hardly be attained) that we
might all meet together at some times, (especially we that are more nearly
related to each other) not only for civil society, but also and principally for
spiritual advantage. In some measure I may have my desire, meeting with you all
by counsel and advice in this Book; and oh that God would so bless it (for
which I desire to bend my knees, and lift up mine heart every day) that we
might one day meet with each other in the presence of God in the highest
heavens. Come, let me beg your hearts for the Lord; let the words of a Brother,
Kinsman, Friend, in the name of Christ prevail with you. Who knows but God
allied me to, and gave me acquaintance with any of you for such an end and
purpose as this?

Some of you may be yet knee-deep and more in the clay of a natural condition,
standing at a great distance from the father of light. The Lord pull your feet
out, and set them on the rock Christ.

Others of you may be washed and whited over with civility and common
profession; but remember, that not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Pardon me that I hint you of sin, and the
danger of a natural condition; it was mine own condition once, and whether I
have yet fully passed it I have much cause to fear, I find my heart so carnal,
sold under sin.

Others of you may have some early glimmerings of the spirit dawning upon your
souls. The Lord cause the sun of righteousness to rise upon you with healing
under his wings, and bring your bloomings and buddings to ripeness and maturity.

Some others may have a through work of grace upon their hearts; the Lord make
such thankful, (for it is an inestimable mercy) and keep their feet that they
fall not.

Various are your conditions in regard of temporals and spirituals; various are
your relations to, and acquaintance with me: whatsoever the one or the other
be, let nothing be a bar to keep you from accepting the counsel of the holy
Ghost, which is sent in love, let it therefore be so taken. I would not these
things should be a witness against you or me another day; The Lord therefore
for his Christ's sake so sanctify these truths to us, and us by these truths,
that we may all attain to grace and increase thereof, to the comfort of our own
souls, to the praise and glory of God by Christ. So prays

Your daily Orator at the throne of grace, J. V.

The Epistle to the READER.
Christian Reader,
THou may wonder to see me add to the pile and heap of books. Not glory, nor
gain (unless of God, of souls) (though my heart be very evil, and have the
seeds of all sin in it) are the wheels on which I move in this labor. Not
affectation, but affection to my heavenly Father, to my earthly Friends, put me
on to this. Some years since in my public preaching. I went through the chief
heads in Divinity, and when I came to this of Effectual Calling, I insisted the
longer upon it, because it was very practical, and of great concernment. I
found it then making some impression, I hope it may do so now; if but one soul
be thereby turned in to the Lord, it is worth my pains, though a thousand times
more. I was desirous to communicate it to my friends, to whom I dedicated, for
their good if the Lord be pleased to bless it. It had been a weary task to have
transcribed many copies; I was resolved therefore to take the shortest cut. It
is a complaint that the Press is oppressed, and not without cause; yet much
Printing I think is no more to be indicted then much Preaching, if so be the
matter be sound and savoury. That feminine toleration that Midwives so many
spurious births into the world, and that licentious liberty whereby any one and
any thing may preach and be preached, are well worthy of censure and sharp
animadversions, it is hard to say which more. Much reading is a weariness to
the flesh, and so may much hearing, yet if either be rendered under God a means
of conviction and conversion to the spirit it is no matter. Daniel got
knowledge of things of concernment by books, Dan. 9. 2. I see the Lord owneth
and blesses reading as well as hearing, printing as well as preaching. (though
of all means of grace I take preaching* to be the King:) Mine own soul through
the mercy of God (for ever blessed be his name) has received some good (if it
be not presumption to say so) that way, as well as by the preaching of the
word; and though this be drawn up by a weak worthless creature, yet God I see
sometimes makes use of, and blesses a wooden as well as a golden instrument.
And though hereby I expose my self who am weak to the acute judgment of parted
and learned men, yet I weigh it not, if but one soul may be gained and brought
in to God by this service, as I hope there shall, and the Lord raises mine
heart to some comfortable expectation thereof. What a rejoicing would it be to
me, if my poor labors might tend to the enlargement of my sovereigns Kingdom?
Reader, I shall no further apologize for, or give an account of this
undertaking, though more might be said. I desire thine earnest prayers, that
while I give these counsels and cautions to others, my self may not be a
castaway, as thou have mine. If thou be a sinner, the Lord conform thee to his
will; if a Saint, the Lord confirm thee in his ways. The Lord be with thy
spirit, and his, who is

Thine as he hopes for thy souls good, J. V.

Imprimatur,

Edmund Calamy.

A SURVEY OF EFFECTUAL CALLING.
THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I
8. Romans 30. verse. the begin. Moreover, whom he did Predestinate, them he also
called.
IN the first part of this Chapter Paul endeavors to comfort the Roman Saints
against the Remainders of sin; yet with this proviso, and caution, that they
remain not in sin: In this Second Part, which begins at the seventeenth Verse,
he viz. that God like a skilful Chemist will extract good out of evil, and by
his wise disposing, cause advantage to grow upon the stalk of affliction; which
is proved in the two next Verses, because nothing can break that Golden Chain,
wherein foreknowledge, Predestination, Vocation, etc. are Cohaerence
linked together; so that the words which I have pitched upon, fall out to be
the middle link of this Chain, which reaches from Eternity to Eternity, viz.
from foreknowledge, and Predestination, to Glory.

For the opening of the words: Predestination Explication.
is a fore-ordaining, or appointing even from Eternity, in reference to the
reasonable Them has he called] We know what it is to call to, or upon another,
to do this, or that; so God calls them to Sanctity, obedience, conformity to
his will; yet so it is to be understood, that he opens their ear to hear, and
inclines their heart to submit to this call: He has called] The Preterperfect
tense used for the Future Bez. in loc.
tense, after the manner of the Hebrews, and to denote a continued Act: But I
should rather think, he so speaks in reference to those that are called
already, and so in them Personating all others that are the Children of
Predestination; or else to show, that those that are Predestined shall as
certainly be called, as if they were already called; for it is the manner of
Scripture, Sic narrare futura, tanquam praeterita, Haym.
to call the things that are not, as if they were.

In the words are two parts. Divis.


1. The Subject. 2. The Predicate.
Or,

1. The Appointment to the end. 2. The first step of the means to the end.
Viz.

1. Predestination. 2. Vocation.
The Doctrine which naturally arises from these words, and which I shall lay
and set, as the Foundation and Pillar of the ensuing discourse is this. Those
whom God has predestined Doc.
to Life and Glory, them he does call: Who are the called according to his
purpose. First he purposes concerning them, then he proposes to them, and
prevails with them: 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your calling, and
Election sure: There calling and Election like a loving pair go hand in hand;
and if calling make Election sure, then it is sure that the Elect shall be
called. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, or rather ad Sanctificationem: to Sanctification
of the Spirit: Est Bez. in loc.
enim hic Electionis finis: for this is the end of Election, though not all the
end; and if so, then the Elect and predestined shall be called; for Gods
Intention cannot be recalled: The Method I propose for prosecuting this point,
and the order I shall observe in Anatomizing this Doctrine, is this.

1. I shall show the kinds of calling. 2. The nature of it: or, what it is. 3.
The parts of it. 4. What is done in it. 5. What graces especially, first put
forth themselves. 6. The degrees, or steps, whereby it arises to perfection,
and is completed. 7. The concomitants effects, and consequents. 8. The parties
whom God does call. 9. The time when. 10. By what means. 11. A few objections
shall be answered. 12. A few plain and familiar reasons given in. 13. The use
and application of the whole.
CHAP. II. 1. Of the kinds of calling.
1. GOd is said to call men three ways.

1. By their particular names, as, Adam, where art thou? God called out of
Heaven, and said Abraham, Abraham. Genesis 22. 11.

2. To some special service and business, as when he called Abraham to go into
a strange Country.

3. To some general Estate and condition; and that is twofold.

1. Less general and common but to some, as Paul called to be an Apostle, and
others Ministers.

2. More general and common to all Christians. Romans 1. 7. called to be Saints.

And this also is twofold.

1. Uneffectual when they are not the better for their calling: Many are
called, but few are chosen. Matthew. 20.


2. Effectual, when the call of God takes effect upon their hearts, and they
obey it; so that God may say as the Centurion, Matthew. 8. 9. I say unto this
Soul, Come, and it comes: Now the calling that is meant here, is that which is
more general and effectual; which you may conceive Simil.
by this familiar resemblance. I see a Traveller out of his way, and in
Jeopardy thereby, I call to him; Friend, you are undone if you go on in that
way; and many dangers you will meet with all: Come this way, take my Counsel, I
will set you right: Now if this man only give the hearing, and go on; my
calling is uneffectual: But if he follow my directions, then it is effectual,
and to purpose; and the effect thereof is his going right, safeguard, and
peace; we are all like Sheep that Ps. 119. 76.
go a stray, and silly Travelers that have lost our way: God call's; oh poor
Soul, whither art thou wandering? Thou drawest back to perdition; thy feet go
down to death, thy steps take hold on Hell. Turn to the right hand; take my
Christ for thy Pilot; a new heart for thy biasse; hearken to me, and depart not
from the Words of my mouth; if the Soul go on, this call is uneffectual; if it
hearken and obey them, then it is effectual, and the Soul finds the effect
thereof to it is welfare.

CHAP. III. II. What this calling is.
IT is a Work, and the first special Work of Defin.
Gods Spirit by the Ministry of the Word, whereby a man, or woman is brought
out of an Estate of nature into an Estate of grace, out of self to Christ, and
of vassals of sin are made Vessels of the God of Sion; to walk strictly with
him in the course of their lives, to the peace of their Souls, to the praise
of the glory of his grace. Col. 1. 11, 12. Which has made us meet to be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light; who has delivered us from
the power of darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear
Son. Where I suppose darkness is not only meant of ignorance, which is one
part of a natural Estate, but also of sin in general, which is sometimes called
by the name of 1 John 1. 5, 6.
darkness; wherewith as with a thick Cloud the whole Man is envelopped and
wrapped. 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. To whom coming as unto a living Stone; ye also as
lively Stones are built up a Spiritual House, an Holy Priesthood to offer up
Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ: So likewise the 1. of
James, Verse 18. I shall a little unfold this rich hanging, that you may have a
more full view of it: It is a Work, not a Notion, chimera, fancy, or conceit:
but a real Work.

It is the first Work upon the Soul: Predestination Electio est amor
ordinativus, non collativus.
is without, this within: Predestination is in the heart of God, this is Gods
coming into the heart of Man; that did ordain, this does order.

Sanctification, (for some distinguish it from Assemb. Confess.
effectual calling, though others do not,) and perseverance, etc. are after,
this before; this marches in the Head of the Heavenly Troop, and blessed Train
of Gods Works upon the Soul.

It is a special Work, not a common, which the reprobate may have: it is a
distinguishing through Work; not such a work as a Man may have, and yet come
short of the glory, because short of the grace of God; and be left many miles
on this side the Region of happiness: it is not only a saving, but a truly
Sanctifying Work, as some distinguish; and so Sanctifying as indeed saving, not
only in that mean and potentially, but in the end and actually.

It is the Work of Gods Spirit, the posterity of the Holy Ghost. 3 John 6. 8.
It is the blowing, or breathing of the Spirit; the Child of Heaven: all the
means in the World cannot make a Saint without the influence of the Spirit;
yet that works by the Word, that is the Instrument in the hand of the Spirit,
for the new moulding of sinful hearts.

The Spirit and the Word go together: the Spirit primarily, the Word
secondarily, the one as Master, the other as Servant.

And these Work not upon a part, but the whole: This Work is diffusive, and
spread throughout the whole Man; Soul and Body; inwards and outward: It is the
bringing them out of nature; from a Dungeon to a Court; from Egypt to Canaan;
from sin to Sanctity; from gracelessenesse to graciousness; from the Suburbs of
Hell to the City of God: The Soul is now led by the Spirits hand from self,
from natural, sinful, moral, Religious self to Christ, who is all in all unto
it.

Now obeying the call of the Spirit, (who leads it in clean ways) it walks
strictly: before the Soul was in the Field of sin, now in the Garden of grace;
before in the common Road of ungodliness, now in the private walk of Piety;
before it was Lawless, now it walks by Rule and Line.

And what is the end of all this? Is it not Peace here, and Peace hereafter?
Blessedness Ps. 119. 1.
in possession, blessedness in reversion: Happiness and Holiness are
Confederates, are Twins: But more than this, it tends to Gods glory: Does not
Paul Doxologize, praise, give thanks for this? Col. 1. 12. Gods glory is the
great, Matthew. 5. 16.
high end of grace; and blessed God, who have happily Married these things, and
art pleased that thy glory should stand in conjunction with the good of
goodlesse Creatures.

Thus have I descanted upon this blessed Work, an Emblem whereof in a good
measure you have in the Parable of the prodigal Son.

CHAP. IV. III. The parts of this calling.
And they are two. 1. Tendering. Or 1. Reaching out. 2. Taking. Or 2. Receiving
in.


1. THere is a tender, or offer of Christ, and Ho every one that thirsts come
ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money come; come ye buy, and eat. Christ
comes and woos, and invite's to himself. John 1. 11. He came unto his own, and
his own received him not: When he was on Earth, he made as gracious Offers as
could be. John 7. 37. Jesus stood and cried, because he would have all hear;
and what was the matter? why, even this. If any man thirst, let him come unto
me and drink: Would it not melt a stony heart to take notice of such an
Invitation? Neither is Christ silent since he went to Heaven. Revel. 22. 17.
And let him, that is a thirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the Water
of life freely. These Words were spoken to John by Christ, since he left Earth?

Is not this able to dissolve a Rock? Does Pro v. 9. 3
not Wisdom daily send forth her Maidens to call in Souls? God comes to Souls
with Christ, grace, Holiness, a new heart; and says, what do want? what
would thou have? do blush at the thoughts of thy condition? I have that
will fit thee; there is nothing can help thee but Christ and grace; here they
are, I pray thee take them: Here is all in my Son, accept of him, and say not
nay; to embrace my Offer is my desire, your duty: it will much please me, and
pleasure you to take my tender; how many Motives in Scripture does God use to
force this his precious kindness upon us? Is not the Gospel for this very end
to invite, call, allure? yet the Preaching of the Law is Ames. 1. lib. Med. 26.
c. 12. 12. These. Romans 7. 7.
useful thereunto, and ordinarily precedes and goes before, that so people
seeing the worst of themselves, may the better apprehend the worth of Christ;
and knowing their own poverty, may the better know the price of Christ; that
understanding the nature of sin, they may be brought out of conceit with
themselves, and be willing to be made gracious; then does the white of grace
most appear, when the black of sin is set by it; and the excellency and need of
goodness, when we see the danger of our own badnesse: a sense of distress
put's on to fighing for deliverance; and what Saints experience almost tells
them not, that conviction is Midwife to conversion.

2. There is taking, or receiving: The former Conversio ad bonum non homini,
sed Deo adscribenda. Aust. Ep. Phil. 2. 13. Bov. 1. 24.
yet not so the Souls, but that it is beholding to God for it: It has not
such propriety in it, but that it depends upon Gods efficiency. It is he that
works in us both to will, and to do of his good pleasure.

God has reached out his hands in offering, and now the Soul reaches out it is
hands to accept. The Soul now gives consent, and no longer says nay: now
Christ and the Soul are made one, and of his fullness does it receive John 1.
16.
grace for grace: Now it drinks an hearty draught of the Waters of Life, now it
opens the door of it is heart, and let us in Christ and grace, who have stood
knocking there a great while, and bids them welcome with a kiss of hearty and
sincere Love. John 1. 12. As many as received him: Now the Soul receives
Christ; now the womb of it is heart is not capacious enough to receive; now it is
stomach is come down, and falls to feed heartily upon Spiritual viands, the
bread of life. John 6. 56. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him. Now it admires the gracious condescensions of the
Lord, and blames it self for being stubborn so long.

Now it is willing to open it is mouth wide, yea that it is heart be opened, that
it may be Psa. 81. 10.
filled with good things. It hearkeneth inwardly as well as outwardly: The Lord
has opened it is ear, and it is not rebellious, now it yields, stoopes, submits
to, and closes with God in his grace; it answers Gods call, and says, Lord
thy Face will I seek. Ps. 27. 8. and subscribes for God. Isai. 44. 5.

CHAP. V. IV. What is done in this effectual calling, or what parts are wrought
upon?
THe whole Man is altered, but principally these two Cardinal parts, or
faculties, which are as King and Queen to the rest. 1. The wit* Or 1. The Head.
2. The will. Or 2. The Heart.


1. The Head is changed: before it was an Revel. 2. 28.
of the Soul: The ruddy morning is come and the Sun puts forth his head.
Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness; but now are ye Light in the Lord. So
dark is the Soul while in the Womb of nature, that it is darkness it self in
the abstract; a greater darkness than that which God sent as a sore Judgment
upon the Egyptians, for that was felt: but sinful Souls Exodus 10. 21.
feel not, nor perceive this darkness. Ephesians. 4. 18. Their understanding is
darkened, and there is ignorance and blindness in them: but now God makes a
Window in the Soul, and let us in enlightening beams, that it sees into the
mysteries Vtraque cognitio, Dei scilicet and tui tibi est necessaria ad
salutem. Bern. Sup. Cantic.
of Iniquity and Godliness, whereof it had no knowledge before: Now it knows
something of it self of a Savior, which it understood not before; it is in a
new world, in a Region of Light even to admiration: the Scales are fallen from
it is eyes. Col. 3. 10. And have put on the new Man, which is renewed in
knowledge: In renovation there is illumination; now is the Soul a Spiritual
Scholar, whereas before it was a very ignoramus in the Spiritual understanding
of the things of God, though it might have parts and common knowledge enough.

2. The Will and Heart is changed; the former Ames calls the passive
reception of Christ. Med. 1. lib. 26. cap. 21. these.
Ephesians. 2. 5. Even when we were dead in Sins has he quickened us together with
Christ. The Will and Heart of man is a Rebellious Catiline, but now it is made
a loving Friend, and an obedient Subject: now it is endued with principles of
true Godliness, and has the image of God impressed upon it in the conformity
thereof to his mind: It is now a Paradise full of Trees of the Lords own
Planting: The Will now stands right for God, and looks Heavenward.

Now it has that new Heart which God promises to give. Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new
Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and will
take away the stony Heart out of your Flesh, etc. O precious Heart, worth more
than the Treasures of both the Indies: the comparison falls too short; the Lord
takes and gives, but does not give and take: For this Heart shall never be
lost: this new Heart is a stock of saving and Sanctifying grace; the Fountain,
Spring, Source, Habits, from whence come, and flow the Acts, and streams of
grace, and Piety: now does God lay the principle, bottom, and Foundation of the
after superstructure of Pious Actings: now does the Lord bring the Heart to his
own bent, and cause it to move toward himself, as the Center thereof; the Lord
has made the Heart a Treasure, or Warehouse, from whence good things Mat. 12.
35.
are brought forth.

CHAP. VI. V. What those graces are, which especially first put forth
themselves.
They are these: 1. Relying. Or 1. Faith. 2. Repenting. Or 2. Repentance.


THese two are Sisters; they are the Primerose graces, that first appear in the
Spring of conversion, or effectual calling: For this Work is called by several
names viz. effectual calling, as there is a closing with the call of God,
conversion, as there is a turning to God, and Regeneration, as there is a
Spiritual birth, and such workings of God to the Soul, and the Soul to God, as
bears Analogy and proportion with the natural Birth.

But first to speak of Faith, or relying: many Cantic. 8. 5.
and dearest Spouse is said to lean upon him: Spiritual life is from Christ in
the Habits, and to Christ in the Acts: by this Faith does the Judge. 3. 7* etc.
Soul as Ruth to Boaz, come softly, as conscious of it is own unworthiness, and
lays it self down at the feet of Christ, saying, I beseech thee, spread thy
skirt over thy poor Creature, for thou art a near Kinsman, Bone of my Bone, and
Flesh of my self: The Soul put's into the Haven of Christ's righteousness by
Faith: and there throws it self for life and Salvation. John 3. 15, 16. That
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Eternal life. Before the
Habit of Faith with other graces was planted in the Soul and Heart: Now the
Budd's and Acts of that do appear; as soon as there is Regeneration by an
Ingeneration of Divine principles, the Soul casts it self into the Lap of
Christ, the Arms of a Savior, and Bosom of a Redeemer; when Spiritual
strength is put into the Soul, the first step it takes is to Christ, and by
Christ to God.

The Soul now lays its self at Christ's Door, and gives up it self to the
Patronage of his Wing: It believes on, closes with, and fasteneth it self to
him by this Girdle, and this Doctor 1. Lib. Med. 26. c. 26. these.
Ames calls the active reception of Christ.

2. Relenting: The next grace that put's forth it is hand out of the Womb is
relenting, or Repent, and believe: Believe, Mark. 1. 15.
and repent: And sometimes the one without the other; and though one of them be
not expressed, yet it is employed: Now the Soul goes from, and goes to; from
Hell to Heaven, from Sin to Grace, from the left hand to the Right: It Is Back
is now where it is Face was, and it is Face where it is Back was: The Hebrews have
two words growing upon one Root fitly expressing this, and corresponding to the
Latin, aversion, and conversion: (...), a turning from, and (...), a turning
to: What says the Lord to his People? Isai. 1. 16, 17. Cease to do evil, learn
to do well: By Faith the Soul is willing to possess good, that is Christ; by
repentance to practice good, that is Grace and Piety: Now is the Soul troubled
for what is past, and disquieted for all it is Sins; it hates the evil, and
loves the good: How sweetly does Ephraim through the grace of God express
himself in the 31. of Jeremy, and the 19. Verse, Surely after that I was turned
I repented; and after that I was Instructed I smote upon my Thigh, I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth: And
how can it be otherwise, when the soul is turned to Christ? It cannot be for
Christ and Baal too, nor halt between two opinions. It cannot serve God and
Mammon: If it gives up it self to Christ, it must needs give away it self from
sin; and if by Faith it take Christ for it is Husband, it must forsake the Bed
of Adulterous Love: If Christ dwell in the heart by Faith, sin must out of the
House by force; for they cannot dwell both together with Love, and liking: It
now looks upon sin with coyness and detestation, and upon grace with a
pleasing smile: and says, away ye fawning Flatterers, and welcome Faithful
Friends, Christ, and grace: These, namely Faith and Repentance, are the Beams
and Rays of that Sun, which God set in the Firmament of the Soul, when first
he Created the new world, and implanted grace in the Heart: There is a sweet
Harmony, and loving accord between them though of late some have endeavored to
set them at variance, by buzzing causeless jealousies in their ears, whereas
God never set the one for the fall of the other.

CHAP. VII. VI. The Degrees, and Steps, whereby effectual calling arises to
perfection, and is completed.
NOw in the next place let us consider those degrees, whereby God carries on
this choice work: The rounds of that Ladder, whereby he raises the Soul from
Earth to Heaven, from its self to himself: Let us track the footing of the
Spirit in its ordinary goings. For be it from me to confine the Spirit; for as
it blows where it lists, so also how it lists: but this order seems to me
probable from the nature of effectual calling, and from the experience of
converts.

1. Cognition: Or a knowledge of the Law; I had not known sin, but by the Law:
And had he Lex est index peccati. Ambr.
been ignorant of the Law, he might have been ignorant of his sin too: It is
the hand that does indigitate and point at sin: The Law is a looking-glass,
but if we have not eyes to make use of this Glass, what will it avail us? Sin
is 1 John 3. 1, 4, 8.
the transgression of a Law; and where no Law is, there can be no
transgression: and if there Romans 4. 15.
be Law, and no knowledge of this Law, there can be no knowledge of sin: The
pages then of the Book of the moral Law (or of that we are speaking) must be
turned over; the Soul must meditate upon that: God opens the eye now to see his
mind in Precepts, and Prohibitions in his Law: Has not the darkness of
ignorance kept many an one a sleep still in the Devils Lap? Unseen danger
makes no Impression upon the Spirit; Does not the Law speak of guilt, danger,
etc.? It is true, a man may have knowledge of the Law, and yet (through
inconsiderateness, or the strong tide of corruption bearing down all before
it,) (till God stop and damme it up with the workings of his special grace) may
go on in sin, and pursue the foolish imaginations of his own Heart: but where
there is effectual calling, this was an Attendant to usher it in; in this new
Creation Light is one of the first things that is made: Gods gracious Works
upon the Soul begin with light, and his way is from the eye to the Heart. To
open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness Acts 26. 18.
to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God: And how can they know, that
they are under the power of Satan's Kingdom, if they know not the Laws of Gods
Monarchy? I mention not the Law to derogate from, or Eclipse the Splendor of
the Gospel.

2. Comparation: The next thing is the use, The Commandments are Holy, and
just, and good: Romans 7. 12. Rectum est regula sui, and obliqui.
And therefore fit to be a measure; for every straight thing does best discover
that which is crooked: There are the Balances of the Sanctuary, wherein the
Soul weighs it self: now it brings it is face to this Glass, and there tells
it is Spots not of Beauty, but Deformity: As 2 Kings 4. 34.
Elisha stretched himself upon the Child part to part; so does the Soul bring
the Law to it self, and it is self to the Law, in thought, word, and deed.

Does not the Apostle compare himself, and his ways with the Law: in Romans 7.
14. Where he says, we know that the Law is Spiritual; but I am Carnal, sold
under Sin: A Spiritual Law, but a Carnal Paul: This also was David's course. Ps.
119. 59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies: And
how could he think on his ways, if he knew not the Law, and compared them
together. The Soul now says to it is self, as Jehu 2 Kings 10. 15.
to Jehonadah, with a little alteration of the Words, Is my Heart Right as the
Law is? Before the Soul did compare it self with it self, with others, which
were false Rules; but now with the unerring word of God, which is the justest
measure: God hates false Balances, and measures in Spirituals, as well as
temporals.

1. Apprehension. Of the evil of it is ways. 2. Apprehension. Of it is lost
condition.
The next staire, or step that the Soul takes, is apprehension, or sense; and
that, 1. of sin and the evil of its ways; now it sees it self sick; and
having looked into the Law, it discernes the palenesse of it is countenance, the
Symptom of it is hearts distemper. It may say to the Law, as the 1 Kings 17. 18.
Widow to Elijah: O thou Law of God, thou art come to call my sin to
remembrance: Before all was well, now all is ill; all whole before, now all is
naught: Now it knows it self to be a sinner; to be black, defiled, and
polluted all over.

All the ways of a Man or Woman are clean in their own eyes before, but the
Lord weighs Prove. 16. 2.
the Spirits: He that is first in his own cause seems just; but his Neghbour
comes and searches Prove. 18. 17.
him: We are too ready to be partial in our own cause: but the Law as our
Neighbor, (for it is written in the Heart in some measure,) comes and
searches us: The Lord promises in his new Covenant, that people shall
remember their own evil ways, and their doings that were not good, and shall
loath themselves in their own sight, for their Iniquities, and for their
abominations. Ezekiel. 36. 31. Now does the Soul call to remembrance it is former
evil Practices; and says, I was in the dark before, and thought nothing; now I
am in the light, I perceive my self all stained, and mired.

2. Of it is lost condition: Now it sees the Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and
thou have afflicted me with all thy Waves.

Now it knows it can claim no other portion, and challenge no other
Inheritance, but that of woe and misery. As by the former it feels its sins, so
by this it fears Gods wrath. It knows that it deserves to be the everliving
object of never-dying displeasure.

It now sees that it has run into a Praemunire, and is entangled in the snare.
It hears nothing but a dreadful voice, and thundering comminations from Mount
Ebal. Cursed, cursed be thou that have done thus, and thus; because Deuteronomy. 27.
21.
thou have forsaken God, and followed thy lusts: This is called the Spirit of
bondage to fear, which the Apostle mentions. Romans 8. 15. Now the threatenings
of God in his Word, (to which before it turned the deaf ear) are heard. They
beset and hemme the Soul round about on every side, that it sees no way of
escape, no door of hope to run out at: Now sad thoughts, amazement of Spirit,
dolorous complaints; and nothing but Alarums of Gods anger: Now it is light sins
sit heavy upon its skirts: Though these could darken not every Face, and these
angry surges arise not to the same height in every Soul; for the Lord is
various in his dealings: In some more of this, in some less, but in all
usually some: It is said of good Master Bolton, that in his conversion the Lord
came upon him like an Armed Man, or Lion, as if he would have torn him in
pieces: but over some God does rather shake the Rod then Strike, and deal
blows. The alwise Jehovah is various in his dispensations; yet this is his
more ordinary path.

4. Lamentation: The fourth Step is sorrow sighs. As Jeremy said in the third
of the Lament. v. 51. so may the Soul now say; Mine eye affects mine heart,
because of all the Daughters of my City; because of all the transgressions and
Iniquities of my disobedient Heart: Formerly the poor Creature was all upon the
merry Pin; now it is as full of sorrow; seeing what it has done, and what it
has deserved; when sin, and wrath, and sense of both are in conjunction; they
melt and thaw the Heart, that before was frozen and hard: And this we may call
legal sorrow, Legal sorrow.
arising from sin, and wrath discovered, and denounced by the Law, without the
Ingredients of other considerations; it is said of Jacobs Children, that when
they came to the Genesis 50. 10.
threshing floor of Atad, which signifies a bramble, there they mourned with a
very great and sore Lamentation: So when the Soul has been threshed with the
apprehensions of Gods anger, and scratched with the brambles of dreadful
Gemitus, and geminatus luctus.
threatenings, then do the Waters of sorrow flow, and rise very high; and it is
mourning is great.

5. Persuasion: The next is a belief, or persuasion, Knowledge of the Gospel.
and the grace of God: It hears of a Brazen Serpent, that can heal those that
are stung; of a Physician, that can cure all Diseases; of Balm in Gilead good
for Every sore; it takes notice of a white flagge hung out: and therefore it
says with the Jaylour, Act. 16. 30. What must I do to be saved? It has heard
of a Savior, a Redeemer: There is hopes then, says it, that my captivity may
be turned into Liberty, my bondage into Freedom: Here is now a little crevice,
whereat light comes into the Soul, and the early dawning of the day appears;
it has some inklings and general Notions of Salvation.

It sees Christ as afar of; as the Eunuch said Acts 8. 36.
in the Acts; See here is Water, what does hinder me to be Baptized? So says
the Soul in this case; Lo the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
World: and I am a sinner of the World, and have a world of sins in me; what
hinders but that I may be saved? great, yea very great sins have been
pardoned, and why may not mine? It has heard of the promises, and heard of
abundance of grace, and perfect meritorious righteousness of Christ, and all
this in order to the taking away of sin; and hence it comes to conceive some
likelihood, some probability, or at least some possibility, that it is condition
may be mended, that it is Estate may be bettered: And thus far I conceive a Man
or Woman may go and proceed, and yet never be effectually called.

6. Anhelation: Hereupon the Soul in the Genesis 30. 1.
cares are now for Christ: The Soul with Rachel says, Give me Christ, or I
die: nothing in the world will satisfy me, but him: Gold, Silver, Friends,
Relations, Health, Prosperity; what are all these to me? None but Christ, none
but Christ for my poor Soul: He would be better to me than ten Sons, yea than
ten thousand worlds: How pathetically did David express his desire of temporal
Water? Oh that one would give me drink of the Water of the Well of Bethlehem,
which is by the Gate: So says the Soul, Oh that I had some of the Water of
Life; this healing Water, cooling Water, cleansing Water; as David again in
Psalm. 42. 1, 2. So says the Soul, I pant after God, thirst for God, for
Christ: Now the heart is sick of Love, of longings: And as before there have
been heart-breakings for sin, so now heart-breathings after a Savior: You that
have been, or are Childbearing Women, know the height of natural longings:
Alas this Spiritual longing after Christ is more strong, more fervent than
those by far; nothing will pacify, quiet, and still the Soul, but only this
breast; nothing can slake it is thirst, but only this Fountain water: Nothing
answers it is wish, but this; because nothing answers it is want, but this: A
poor Beggar, when he sees fair Houses, rich Clothes, dainty Fare, to which he
is a Stranger, is ready to wish, Oh that this House, this Food, these Clothes
were mine! So says the Soul, I am miserable, Oh that the mercy of God in
Christ were mine! I am naked, Oh that the Robes of his righteousness were mine
to hide my shame! I am an hungry, Oh that this bread of life were mine! How fit
were these things for me, and how suitable to my condition!

7. Application: The next Step that the Soul Job, Job 13. 15. Though he slay
me, yet will I trust in him: And with the Woman of Canaan will not be beaten
off from him. Now the Soul goes to the Horns of the Altar, and there will it
hold: It runs to Christ, makes him it is Asylum, it is strong Tower of safety;
and Christi vulnera civitates refugii.
takes Sanctuary in his Wounds, which are it is Cities of refuge, to keep it
from the fury of the Law. It has been hunted, and worried, and now runs to
this burrow for shelter. It says to Christ, as Ruth to her Mother in Law: Ruth
1. 16, 17.
Entreat me not to leave thee: for whither thou go, O Jesus, I will go;
where thou lodgest, I will lodge, thy God shall be my God; yea and nothing, no
not death it self shall part thee and me. Here it leans and stays it self,
even upon the merits, righteousness, perfect obedience, sufferings, death,
Resurrection of an Almighty, and most gracious Savior, and Redeemer. And this
is the first direct Act of Faith, and that which is true justifying and saving
Faith. And this proceeds from the Work of God upon the Soul, in the
Implantation of grace, whereof we spoke before.

8. Humiliation: The next degree I conceive The Spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets) I say, I conceive that this Gospel repentance has two
parts, or degrees: The first being the concomitant of the first, and direct Act
of Fath, viz. Faith of adherence, of which we spoke in the last head: and the
second of the second and reflex Act of Faith, viz. the Faith of evidence; Ames.
lib. 1. Med. 26. cap. 31. These.
before it mourned and repented from sense, and that did precede justifying
Faith; now from Faith, and this follows justifying Faith: Now the Soul
ingenuously comes to the knee of Christ, cries Peccavi, and makes it is moan;
and this repentance is very pleasing to the Lord. Ps. 51. 17. A broken Heart
thou will not despise. This is that Godly sorrow which the Apostle speaks of.
2 Cor. 7. 10. This sorrow divides between the Heart, and it is sin. That now a
Man or Woman give up themselves to God in Holy engagements, which though it go
along with repentance, and be part of it, yet for distinction sake we will look
upon it by it self, and it shall make the ninth Step.

9. Resolution: Now it gives up it self in David, Psalm. 119. 106. I have
sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. Friends
and dear Relations, if ever the Lord bring your Hearts to this which I
earnestly desire and long for, you will then enter into a solemn covenant with
the Lord against your sins and wickedness: you will lie low at the feet of
God, and say with Saul. Act. 9. 6. Lord, what 1 Kings 20. 7.
will thou have me to do? You will deny God nothing now, as he said in another
case; neither Wife, nor Husband, nor Children, nor gold, nor Silver; all that
is dear to you shall be parted with for his sake. You will now no longer make
provision for the Flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: Now Holy purposes and
resolutions do abound in the Soul, It says to the Lord, as Justine to
Tiberius, Si tu vis, ego volo; si non vis, nolo: So says the Soul, Lord, I am
thy Clay, and thy Wax: I have been hitherto stiff-necked, stubborn,
disobedient: but now do with me what thou will; I desire and purpose through
thy grace to be wholly at thy Command, and dispose. Now through the grace of
Jesus Christ, it shall not be with me as it has been, but I will set my self
against every known evil and way of sin; I will be most careful to please, and
most fearful to displease; for this sorrow works carfulness: Now I desire
to yield my members Servants to Righteousness 1 Cor. 7. 11. Romans 6. 19.
unto Holiness: Upon all the rooms, I mean Powers of the Soul, and upon all
the parts of the Body there is written, For God, for 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.
Christ, for Grace: I will not be mine own says the Soul, but God shall be
mine owner: O precious workings, O blessed resolutions! Say, and hold; the Lord
help thee to hold what thou say.

10. Manifestation: In the next place God Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people,
says your God; speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her
warfare is accomplished, that her Iniquity is pardoned: Now it hears a sweet,
warbling, melodious voice from Mount Gerizim, the Mount of blessing, saying,
Blessed are the Poor in Spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed
are they that mourn; for Mat. 5. 3, 4, 6.
they shall be comforted. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after
Righteousness; for they shall be filled: This gentle air sweetly fans, and
cooles the Soul: Now Christ has bidden the winds and waves be still, there is
a sweet calm: Now frowns are turned into smiles, a funeral day into a
festival: The Soul can with comfort say as Hezekiah did, Isai. 38. 17. For
Peace I had great bitterness: but thou have in Love to my Soul, delivered it
from the pit of corruption; for thou have cast all my sins behind thy Back:
It Is former fears are now set in Peace, it is objections silenced, it is doubts
answered: The Lord Jesus has kissed it with the Kisses of his mouth, and so
given it information of his good liking, intimation of his great love; that now
the Soul begins to hold up it is Head, and to walk with some Heart refreshing
confidence: It says now as the Philosopher; (...): I have found, I have found
Jesus Christ, the Pardon of my sins, that I have long sought, desired, Prayed,
and been careful for: O welcome day, and warming season, now the Sun of
Righteousness arises upon me with healing under his Wings; and this is the
second, or reflect Act of Faith, the Faith of evidence; which God usually
gives in the Work of Effectual Calling, and first conversion, to some more, to
some less; with some he wholly undraweth the Curtain, and lets in the light
fully upon them, and grants them such discoveries, that Acts 7. 56.
with Stephen they can say, They see the Heavens opened, and Jesus as
Intercessour standing on the Right hand of God; and with David; Ps. 30. 6.
In my Prosperity, I said, I shall never be moved: To others the Lord shows
but his Back parts, as it were in comparison of what some have; before the Soul
had Wormwood and Gall, mingled with it is Drink: But now it has Nectar and
Ambrosia; the sweet Hony-dewes of grace distilled to refresh it; and some but
sip, others have large draughts; some but kiss the Cup of consolation; others
are permitted to drink more freely of the River of Psa. 36. 8.
these pleasures; and are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Gods House:
Some have more, and some have less of these Apples, these Flagons; and with
some this Sun-shiny day is longer, with others shorter.

11. Contrition: Upon this there follows It is a lovely, sweet, precious,
gracious, redeeming, saving Christ, that I have sinned against. It is sorely
troubled to consider, and think that all it is sins have been against that God,
that Christ, whose rich grace it has so sweetly experienced in inviting,
drawing, prevailing with it, and forgiving it is sins: This is a sweet shower, a
kindly lamenting, an ingenuous mourning: And converted Souls can say that this
is as strong as any kind of mourning whatsoever; though not so desperate, yet
as affectionate: The Lord promises. Zech. 12. 10. That they shall look upon
him, whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him, and be in bitterness, as
for ones first Born: And there shall be a great mourning, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo. Alluding to the great mourning, that was
for the loss of good King Josiah; so when the Soul considers that it is
Christ that it has pierced by it is sins, it is vain thoughts, it is wretched
words, sinful communication and graceless conversation; then are the
Floudgates of sorrow set open; and it is heart-stings are turned to doleful
Lacrymae in the highest pitch; we have an instance of this nature, Luke 7. 38.
that poor Woman shed so many Tears that she washed Christ's Feet with them, and
it is said she was a sinner, and that in no mean degree. Now it is judged and
supposed that this Woman Burg. of justification. page 269. 270.
had already some sense of Pardon, and comes to Christ for the increase of it;
and out of that sense of Pardon, weeps, and laments thus at Christ's Feet for
her many sins; (for many they were, as Christ says. Verse. 47.) the goodness
of the Lord leading her to Repentance; so David in Psalm 51. sweetly expresses
his sorrow and repentance; and this was after the Prophet Nathan had told him
that his sins were Pardoned. This I conceive to be the second part of Gospel
repentance accompanying the Faith of evidence, of which we spoke before; this
sorrow is of great account with the Father, these Tears are precious in his
eyes, he put's them in his Bottel, or rather Cabinet, for Jewels.

12. Conversation: Lastly, the soul Acts for and has, is set on work for God:
Now that it is Heart is enlarged by the grace of God, it runs the way of his
Commandments: Now Ps. 119. 32.
it is love Acts toward God; The Virgins love thee. Cantic. 1. 3. It Is desire
is after him, it is memory conversant about him: The desire of our Soul is to
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee: With my Soul have I desired thee in
the night. Isai. 26. 8, 9. We will remember thy love more than wine. Cantic. 1.
4. It Is thoughts and Meditations are of the best things. The gracious Soul
delights, and Meditates in the Law Ps. 1. 2.
of the Lord day and night: It Is Tongue speaks for God: The mouth of the
Righteous speaks wisdom, and his Tongue talks of Judgment. Psalm. 37. 30.
It Is ears hearken to Gods counsels: Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, this is the way, walk ye in it. Isai. 30. 21. It Is eyes look off from
evil, and look on that which is good. Turn away mine eyes from beholding
Vanity. Psa. 119. 37. It Is hands Act for Gods glory. It stretches not out it is
hands to Ps. 44. 20.
a strange God: In a word as before, It yielded its members Servants to
uncleanness, and to Iniquity, unto Iniquity: even so now it yields its members
Romans 6. 19.
Servants to righteousness unto Holiness: These are the Fruits of the former
workings of God upon the Soul; the streams of that Fountain; the Branches
growing upon that Root; as soon as the Soul is changed, it changes it is ways,
it is works, it is courses: as soon as the Soul is thus hatched and fledged, it
gets upon the wing, and away it flies toward Heaven; so it was with Paul,
as soon as ever he was converted, and effectually called, he is up and doing; he
Prays, is Baptized, Preaches, and proves Christ. Act. 9. 11, 20. Act. 22.
16. A Man or Woman, when these workings have passed upon them, manifest a
change outwardly to Man as well as inwardly to God: Now are they running in the
heavenly race, laboring in the Spiritual Vineyard, fighting the Christians
fight; doing the will of God, keeping the sayings of Jesus Christ, working out
their Salvation with fear and trembling; many pretend to have a good Heart,
when they have a bad hand; a right inside, though a wrong outside; to be fair
within, though foul without; to have great Faith in the inward Man, though
gross faults in the outward Man: but grace cannot be hid, it will discover
it is self; if fire be within, heat will be without; if the Heart live, the
Pulse will beat: These are the Steps of the Jacobs Ladder, whereby God
descends into the Heart from the height of Predestination, and causes the
Heart to ascend to himself from the depth of a natural and sinful condition;
and most blessed are the Souls that by the hand of grace are led thus far
toward glory: But I would not Souls should be troubled, if their capacities
cannot apprehend these workings in themselves in this order, that is laid down:
but if they can find them in their own Hearts in truth, though they cannot
discern this order, let them bless God, who has thus blessed them with
Spiritual blessings. Nor do I lay down these things peremptorily, as if there
could not be a better and righter disposing them by transposition, addition, or
subtraction: but only I humbly conceive according to that measure of light,
the Lord has vouchsafed me, who am less than the least of all his mercies;
that the will of God in his word, the way of God in his works, I mean of
effectual calling and experience of precious Saints, and chosen Vessels will
own, and say Amen to these things; and now O blessed Spirit, come down into the
Hearts of the Readers of these lines, and work these things in the Hearts of
such of them, as are strangers from the Covenants of promise.

CHAP. VIII. VII. The Concomitants, Effects, Consequences of Effectual calling.
1. LIfe: The first thing that follows upon This my Luke 15. 24.
Son was dead, but is now alive, says the Father of the Prodigal; how
excellent and desirable is natural life to us, so that we are loath to part with
it; as one said when his Physician brought him the message of death; Oh let me
live, though it be but the life of a Toad under a Sill: If the life of nature
be so sweet, how much sweeter then is the life of grace; natural inspirations
have their expirations: but Spiritual breath can never be totally stopped; the
Earthly life may be terminated, but the Spiritual cannot; a life of vegetation,
which Plants have, is something; a life of sense, which Beasts have, is more; a
life of reason, which Men have, transcendeth the other; but a life of grace,
which Saints have, transcends them all: A living Dog Eccles 9. 4.
is better than a dead Lion: A Fly, because it has life, is more excellent
than the glorious and shining body of the Sun; when good old Jacob heard news
of his Joseph, it was a comforting cordial to him, and reviving of his Spirits:
It is enough, Joseph my Son is yet alive: So Genesis 45. 28.
says a gracious Heart, The Lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, I have
a goodly Heritage: I am alive through the quickening grace of Ephesians. 2. 1.
God, pleasures, sin, world, vanity, away, be gone; it is enough, I have
enough; Oh blessed be the Lord that has redeemed me from the grave; I was
alive once in thought, I am alive now in truth; I was alive to my own seeming,
I am alive to my Souls saving; sin lived, and I was dead; sin is dead, and I am
alive; there is joy at Man's coming into the world, sorrow at his going out; so
delightful is life, so dolorous are the thoughts of death; those that are
effectually called are born never to die; and how can they be but alive who
come to Christ, who is life it self, as he is the true light to enlighten, so
the true life to enliven the Soul; if the touch of dead Elisha's bones could
make 2 Kings 13. 21.
alive, how much more then the touch of a living Christ? All Saints are as the
Children of light, so of life. Christ said, Ye will not come unto me that ye
might have life. John 5. 40. Then those that come to him, have life from him:
He that believes on the Son has everlasting life. John 3. 36. He has that
life begun which shall be ever. God has breathed the breath of life into such;
they then must needs be living Souls. Such live a noble, Heavenly, complete
raised life; we may say of such as David, Lord thou have made them little lower
than the Angels, and have crowned them with glory and honor. Psalm. 8. 5.
Natures life is not Non est res magna vivere. Sen.
to be compared with this.

The voice of Christ is quickening; for he says, the hour is coming, and now
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear
shall live; Christ has called and caused thee to hear, and thou do live; to
be in the Land of the Spiritually living is no small matter.

2. Liberty: All that are effectually called, Conscientia libera inquantum
liberata a peccato.
such only have the true liberty of conscience, which many miss of while they
muse on it; to do what we would is not Freedom, but servitude; to do what God
would, is the Freedom that belongs to the Citizens of the Heavenly corporation,
the City of God, the Church of God; a natural Man is a Vassal, a Slave to the
tyranny of his lusts and sin: but a Saint is free from sin, from the penalty,
and from the power of it; from it is Domination, though not it is Inhabitation;
free from it in affection, Med. Ames. lib. 1. cap. 27. These. 21. v.
though not in Action; free from Hell also, though not from the desert, yet
from the death of Hell; free from the Law, in regard of justification, though
not in regard of sanctification; free from the condemnation, though not from
the commination of the Law; and can it be otherwise with them who are in
Christ? he makes all his, Freemen, Free-women: If the Son shall make you free,
ye shall be free indeed. John 8. 36. This Freedom is of an excellent nature;
one told a certain people once that if they knew what a Jewel liberty were,
they would not part with it for all the Riches of Persia; what a Pearl then is
this liberty? Now may a Man or Woman say, as they in Psalm. 124. 7. Our Soul is
escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowlers; the snare is broken and we
are escaped: How glad is a converted Man, or Woman, with Joseph, that they are
out of Prison, out of the stocks? that their shackles are undone, their
manacles filed off, the Chains of their captivity loosed, and their Souls set
in a large place; such may say with David in Psalm. 4. 1. Thou have enlarged me
when I was in distress: Thou did visit me when I was in Prison, and redeem
me when I was a Galley-Slave. Galat. 5. 13. Ye have been called unto liberty:
What contendings, what pleadings, what strivings in the world for liberty, till
people Liber est aestimandus, qui nulli turpitudini servit. Cic.
bring themselves into bondage again? It is in truth, and indeed; in Christ, in
grace. The Soul that knows what sin is cannot but exceedingly rejoice at its
redemption; and keep Holy Day in remembrance of its deliverance from Egypt, and
the House of bondage; and sing songs of praise to that God, that Christ, that
Spirit, whose hand brought it out of thrall; here is Freedom, yet service; but
the service is no diminution, or lessening of the Freedom; for it is such
service as is not in the world: It is liberty to the fall, to the height.

3. Fellowship with Christ: All that are called By whom ye are called unto 1
Cor. 1. 9.
the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ: What an high dignity is this that poor
Worms, dust, and ashes should be advanced to communion with Christ? How do Men
of parts, and greatness, who converse with the sages, and honorable ones of
the world think themselves to move in a higher sphere and orb than others;
How much then is that Man advanced to a condition above others, whose converse
is with Christ, who is full of wisdom and glory? converted ones have
Fellowship with Christ in a moral sense as one Friend converseth with another;
or with any delightful and suitable object; they speak to Christ by
supplication, Christ speaks to them by Predication, by Preaching inward and
outward; though Christ and they be as far distant from each others, as Heaven
is from Earth, yet is their conversation Phil. 3. 20.
in Heaven with him; as the Queen of Sheba 1 Kings 10.
had communion with Wise Solomon, by questions to him, and answers from him; so
has the Soul of a Saint with the true Solomon Jesus Christ, who is the wisdom
of the Father; Faith and desire are the feet of the Soul, which bring it from
far into the presence of Christ, and when there, it sits down at his feet, to
hear his wise sayings, and with humility and modesty to propound the cases of
its tender conscience, and with admiration says as she, Happy is my Soul,
happy are all thy Servants which stand Verse 8.
continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom; the Soul is carried up to
Heaven in the fiery chariot of zealous and fervent Meditation, and with Christ's
gracious leave sits down by his Right hand, and talks with him of all its
sins, and all his loves; of all its miscarriages, of his peerless mercy, of
its meaneness, and insufficiency; of his merit and all sufficiency; of its
desert of Hell, and his desire to save it; of its perverseness, of his
patience; of it is frowardness, of his forwardness; of its standing out
rebelliously against him, when time was of his coming into it powerfully, yet
sweetly in conversion; and thus goes on till silenced with wonderment; and
then Christ takes the Soul, and leading it by the hand, shows it all about
his banqueting house, and displayeth Cant. 2. 4, 5.
his banner of love over it; opens his flagons, gives his Apples to it;
smileth upon it, unbosomes himself; and tells the Soul of his Fathers, and his
compact from Eternity for its Salvation, and shows it its name written in
Golden Characters upon his never dying, ever yerning heart; shows it the glory
of its future mansion; and walks with it from one end to the other of the
streets of the New Jerusalem, upon the firm pavement of purest love; opens the
record and roules of Heaven, and shows it it is debts, and scores, crossed with
red Lines of his own heart blood; and tells it of his former suiting and wooing
it, and how he wan upon it is heart; and made it pant and long for him, till it
was sick of love; he tells it of the kindness of it is youth, and of the love,
of it is espousals, How it went after him in the wilderness, Jer. 2. 2, 3.
in a Land that was not sown; and left all for his sake, then it was Holiness
unto the Lord, and the first Fruits of his increase: And says, well done my
dearest spouse, that thou keep thy Garments clean, thine Heart entire for
me: And as for thy backslidings, under which thou labourest, over which thou
mournest, against which thou strivest, I have seen them, and will heal them.
Thus do Christ, and the Soul by the help of his Spirit maintain an Holy
Dialogue between them: Oh the sweet intercourse and discourse that is between
them; that the Soul says, let us build Tabernacles here; what gracious heart
does not dance within at the thoughts of this Fellowship? and may not say
truly my Fellowship is with the Father, and with 1 John 1. 3.
his Son Jesus Christ? whereas the converse of the wicked is with their sins,
and sinners like themselves; these are the subject of their thoughts, the
Center of their Meditations, and the object of their Souls delight; the
drunkard converseth, and has Fellowship with his Cups, the unclean person with
effeminate ones; the covetous Man with the World; and every sinner with his
Dalilah, but the Christian with his Christ: Then in the next place they have
communion with Christ, by way of Partnership; as the word signifies that which
is common; (...).
and this I think may be called a forensical, and civil Communion with Christ,
by way of Analogy and proportion; Christ is the Souls; his Divinity, his
humanity, his natures, person; are the Souls: All Christ, all of Christ, all
in Christ, are a believers, for by Faith are they united to him, and made one
with him; and so must partake of the fatness of the true Olive; when it goes
into Christ's Treasury, Christ's Warehouse, and sees his spotlesnesse, his
Righteousness, his sufferings, his death, his Resurrection, his ascension,
session at his Fathers Right hand, it may say these are mine, and common to me
with Christ: Christ is the subject of them, and I the object of them; the
virtue and benefit of them is for me: And of his fullness do, and shall I
receive grace for grace. John 1. 16. As Husband, and Wife may challenge an
Interest mutually in each others person and property; so may Christ and a
believing Soul: Oh the happiness, of a converted Soul; as Ahasuerus would Est.
6. 9.
have Haman proclaim before Mordecai; so may we say in this case, Thus shall it
be done to the Man, whom the Lord delights to honor with the grace of
effectual calling. This is the Company, these are the goods that Saints
converse with, that Saints communicate off.

4. Adhering to the truth: This is the fourth Because God has from the
beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the truth; whereunto he called you by our Gospel. 2 These. 2. 14.
Suppose this whereunto has reference unto the whole that went before, Vid.
Bez. in loc.
then belief of the truth is included: Many Books have it not (...) in the
neuter gender, but (...) in the Feminine, and many Latin Books follow this;
and so then whereunto may refer to truth, or belief: so that it is plain that
when they were called, and converted by the Gospel, they were called to the
belief of the truth as well as other things: It is a precious mercy, when
Souls can say with Paul, that through the grace of God, They can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth. 2 Cor. 13. 8. This is a great favor at
all times, but especially in this age, when there are so many backsliders, and
Revolters from the truths of God; when others fall, that some should stand;
when others like Weather-cocks turn every way, that some should stand as firm
Pillars in the house of their God; when others like Children are tossed to and
fro, and carried about Ephesians. 4. 14.
with every wind of Doctrine, that Gods people should speak, and keep to the
truth in love; when others are like wandering Planets, that they should be fixed
Stars in the Right hand Nimium altercando peritas amittitur. Sen.
of the Father, when others by vain janglings come to fall off from, and reject
the truth, they by humble and sober inquiries find out, and receive the truth:
Christ promised, that if any do his Fathers will, he shall know of the
Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether he speak of himself. John 7. 17. It
is true of all Doctrine; those that are Doers, are discerners; those that are
gracious, have that Spirit within them, whereby they know light from darkness,
truth from error, that which is sound from that which is rotten; and can judge
of that which is taught, whether it be Heaven or Earth-born; from God or from
Men; that which is chafe they refuse, the pure grain they embrace; the dross
they put away, the massy Gold they take to themselves.

Truth is most welcome, and sweet to them: They receive the truth in the love
thereof, affectionately, cordially; they lodge it in their bosoms, and lock it
in the Cabinet of their Psa. 119. 11.
heart: Verity is precious with them as well as Sanctity: They have a care to
look to the workings of their head as well as the walkings of their feet; a
sinful notion is displeasing to them as well as a sinful Action; a sound head
and a sound heart go together; false Doctrine and filthy deeds shake hands,
they can both lie in one Bed: no wonder that they walk loosely, who are not
girt about with truth; ungodly Ephesians. 6. 14. Non been cinctus, non been dictus.
conversation is usually supported by erroneous conceptions: but an heart
changed by grace does not allow it self in sin, and therefore needs not to
embrace false Doctrine for the maintenance thereof: It dares come to the light
and a bide the Trial: Truth is it is right hand, it is guide: It has bought the
truth, as Prove. 23. 23.
the Scripture phrase is, and will not sell it; It is dear to it, and as
Jonathan loved David, so it 1 Samuel 18. 1.
loves truth as it is own Soul; It bears witness, delights in, speaks,
and Prays for the truth; and with the Martyr can say, Though I have not a
reaching head to dispute, yet I have a resolved heart to die for the truth: It
will contend Jude 3.
might and main for the truth delivered to the Saints. Its heart rises within
it to see wanton error in these days take the Wall of truth: Its Spirit is
stirred within it to see false Doctrine ride on Horseback, and truth to go on
foot, a begging: Thus it is with those whom the Lord has wrought upon by
grace; they were born of truth, they are the Children, Friends of the truth.
And wisdom is, and will be justified of Matthew. 11. 19.
her Children: But as for you who are unconverted; a little matter will divide
between you and truth, seeing your heart is not set upon it.

5. Justification: In the next place all that are And whom (...).
he called, them he also justified: There is remission of their sins,
imputations of Christ's merits: The Lord takes their filthy Garments, and
causes their Iniquity to pass from them, Zech. 3. 4.
and clotheth them with change of Raiment. Their Rags are taken off, and Robes
are put on, and they are clad in the Garments of their elder Brother: It is a
sign of favor from the Knolls Hist.
Great Turk, when a rich Garment is cast upon any that come into his presence:
This is a special favor of God to cast by the hands of his grace, the rich
Scarlet Mantle of Christ's perfect obedience upon the backs of any; and this he
does only to his Jedidyah, his beloved one, his called ones: By him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which they could Acts 13. 39.
not be justified by the Law of Moses: Moses condemns, Christ condoneth;
Moses accuses, Christ acquitteth; Moses charge, Christ discharges all his
Saints, all his converts, all his changed chosen-ones: This Jewel is hung upon
the ear, this Chain about the neck only of the regenerate; Christ takes to
himself their Nostra delicta sua delicta fuit, ut suam justitiam nostram
justitiam faceret. Aug.
unrighteousness, gives to them his own Righteousness: but as for you that
are in the filth of your sins, you are yet under the guilt of them; they all
stand uncrossed, unpardoned; what a dreadful thing is this, when one, and that
the least of your sins is sufficient to plunge you into hopeless and
helpelesse depths of misery? You that are Saints therefore consider, what an
unspeakeable mercy and Privilege this is; to have all thy sins done away, and
cast behind Gods Back; that he should remember them no more: Your sins are
pardoned, though the Tears of repentance stand in your eyes, that you cannot
read your Pardon; thou art as perfectly pardoned as ever was Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, or the Saints of the highest form in Christ's School, though thou be but
an Abcdarian and mean Scholar, if thou be called indeed; all is wiped out
in Gods debt Book, that might be brought against thee; yea in Am. lib. 1. Med.
27. cap. 24. These. Job 13. 26.
some sense, sins to come; they are forgiven Virtually; a dreadful thing to see
the hand left of God writing bitter things against a Soul; Inprimis for this
transgression, Item for such a wickedness, and such a folly, and so on in
infinitum to a numberless multitude of Iniquities: but a delightful thing to
see the Right hand of God dashing and blotting out all, and sealing up the Book
of Accounts, and clasping it with love, that it shall never be opened to the
Souls condemnation: what a confounding thing is it to see a flying roll with
a Catalogue in it of sins committed, and curses deserved? what a comforting
thing is it to hear of, and see an Act of Oblivion and Indemnity, relating to
ones own particular: To consider how the Lord has laid the sins of a Soul
upon the true Scapegoate, the Lord Jesus, to be born away into a Land of
forgetfulness: This is a singular mercy of the Plural Number, for it contains
many mercies in it. It is more worth than all the Crowns and Scepters in the
world; and this great, rich, invaluable, pearleful, and peerless mercy goes
hand in hand with effectual calling, they are loving and inseparable
companions: Oh, who now would not prize effectual calling? who would not pray
for it for themselves and theirs? who would not praise God for it, who are
effectually called? since if purified, they are undoubtedly pardoned.

6. Adoption: Those that are effectually called, But as (...).
many as received him, to them gave he power, or Privilege, to become the Sons
of God; even to them that believe on his name: Only believers on Christ, and
receivers of Christ are Sons; and have we not the same sweetly expressed by the
Apostle? Come out from among them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch
not the unclean thing; there is Gods call, which he makes effectual, by causing
the Soul to close with it: Then, I will receive you; and will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my Sons, and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty: There is
the precious Privilege. 2 Corinthians. 6. 17, 18. And again, Ye are all the
Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3. 26. And that we might receive
the adoption of Sons. Galat. 4. 6. To have the Church our Mother is much, but
to have God our Father is more: How do many glory in Titles of dignity and
honor, and boast of their Relation and alliance to, or descent from persons of
eminency, and think themselves glorious, when dressed, and set out with these
fading spangles? what then is it to be descended from the Eternal and immortal
God, to be so nearly allied to the Sovereign of the world, the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords? when Saul offered to make David his Son in Law, by giving
Merab to him; he thought the preferment too high for one of his Extract to make
a Contract with a Kings Daughter, and therefore says, Who am I? and what is my
life, or my Fathers Family in Israel, that I should be Son in Law to the King.
1 Samuel 18. 18. And when Readiness servants suit him for their Masters Daughter, he
speaks again after the same manner. Verse 23. And it is said afterward, that
it pleased David well to be the Kings Son in Law. Verse 26. So says a gracious
heart with modesty and humility, sensible of it is own nothingnesse: Lord, what
am I but a Worm, a Wretch, a dead Dog? I am a Sinner, and so were my
Progenitors, there is nothing in them, or me, why thou should make choice
of me to be thy Son: The Soul admires this condescendency of the Lord; and
accounts this Sonship worth all; as it is said of Theodosius, that he more
gloried in being the Servant of Christ, than the Emperor of the East: You that
are Carnal, are Enemies and Strangers to God; you that are called, are his
Friends and acquaintance; the other are Servants in the lowest sense, you Sons
in a special sense: The spouse of Christ is called the Kings Daughter. Ps. 45.
13. Such honor, such dignity have all his Saints; what aspiring is there in
the world after greatness, renown, honor? insatiable thirsts, unwearied
laboring for these things, till Men loose their credit, reputation, honor,
lives, yea, and Souls too: but they are not to be compared with this; they are
but twinkling Stars to this shining Sun.

7. Sanctification: Those that are effectually God has not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto Holiness: These Heavenly Courtiers go all in the white
clothing of Sanctity; the Children of the great King are dressed in the soft
raiments of Piety and grace: they walk in clean paths, they follow Holiness;
not to persecute, but Heb. 12. 14.
to practice it; not to drive it from them, but to draw it to them; not with
loathing, but with love: They have given up their names to Christ, and they
would not defile their nature with sin; they have taken Christ's pay, and (...).
they would not do the Devil service; they study and care to walk with God like
Enoch; and are careful to look to the Garden of their hearts, (in which God
has set the Plants of grace,) that the Serpent get not in: It is their John 4.
34.
meat and drink to do the will of their Father with Christ; they have put on
Christ by Faith in effectual calling, and they would not make Provision for the
Flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans 13. 14. They have put off their coat
of sin, and they are loath to put it on again; they have washed their feet, and
they are unwilling to defile them; as the Spouse is brought in speaking, though
in another way. Cantic. 5. 3. I only allude; if you enquire, or look for a Man
or Woman that is effectually called; one may say he is not here in the way of
sin, but he is risen; you shall find them in the way of grace, the narrow
strait way; in the path of Piety: Thou that art yet unchanged, art still in the
dirty miry road of impiety; with the Dog and the Sow thou delightest in
filthiness; thou art swearing, blaspheming, drinking, gaming, cheating,
scoffing, lying, reviling. Prove. 5. 14. vide Jun. in ^^c. Pares cum ^^^itus.
Thou art not only almost, but altogether in all evil, in the midst of the
Congregation and assembly; that is, openly before all: Thou have thine haunt
with vain persons, and keep company with dissemblers: but the converted Soul
is praying, repenting, hearing, reading, believing, speaking good, doing good
to it self, to others, to body and soul; advising and Prove. 13. 20. 2 Pet. 1.
10. Phil. 2. 12.
counselling it is charge, it is Friends: It walks with the wise; is giving all
diligence to make its calling and Election sure, is working out its Salvation
with fear and trembling; is watching against evil, to good; and seeking
opportunities Phil. 1. 27.
of glorifying God: Laboring to have its conversation, as becomes the Gospel;
endeavoring to walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work; and having Col. 1. 10.
named the name of the Lord, striveth to depart from Iniquity. This is a most
choice Fruit of effectual calling, to be Holy and gracious in ones ways and
carriages: it is such a Privilege that but few in the world do attain unto:
viz. to have on the clean linen of the Saints, to have Holiness written even
upon the Horses 1 Pet. 1. 15.
Bridles, to be Holy in all manner of conversation, as he is, who has called
them: A converted Soul rejoices much at this, and is very glad of it; to find
a tincture of Holiness on all it is ways; that the clear waters of Sanctity
should run through the Channel of his thoughts, words, and deeds; and that all
his actions through the help of the Spirit are enamelled with Piety.

8. Afflictions, or Persecutions: And is it, and conversion to them, that they
spit out with detestation, though sometimes in their mouths by verbal
resolutions: but Saints have so great an esteem of suffering for Christ, that
they put it in their arms, yea glory to bear it, as their Crest. And they
departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for his name. Acts 5. 41. Is it not the great
Commendation of Moses, that he esteemed the reproach of Christ, greater riches
than the Treasures in Egypt. Heb. 11. 26. Till effectual calling none will
suffer rightly for Christ; after effectual calling some suffer more, some
less; and every Saint, though not drawn out, yet is habitually disposed to
sufferings: How did the Martyrs go to the flames, as to their Bed, and made
their torments matter of true Triumph, and the cross their Crown? The French
Martyr, when he saw the Rope about his Fellows neck, desires to be dubbed a
Knight of that Noble Order; and Babylas would be buried with his Chain,
accounting it most dear: and what says blessed Paul's; From henceforth let no
man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. It is true,
Thieves and vile Persons suffer, etc. But there is a great deal of difference
between the sufferings of the one and other. These are brands of impiety; those
are badges of honor; these are for unrighteousness, those for righteousness
sake; these make infamous, those famous; these are a curse, those but a cross,
and such as is a blessing, for so says wisdom it self: Blessed are they which
are persecuted for righteousness sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven:
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile and persecute you, and for my sake:
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad. Matthew. 5. 10, 11, 12. This is a Paradox, yet
Orthodox; the name of trouble scareth a great many: but there is no reason for
it; if you account it an happiness to do Christ's will, you must needs account
it an Addition of happiness to suffer for so doing; shall a Soldier glory in
his wounds received in a just War, and shall not a true Christian, glory in
what he undergoes for Christ? Wounds, Scarres, nicknames, spoilings for Christ
sake, are honorable, glorious, praiseworthy, matters of great dignity, and
renown.

9. Perseverance: Those that are effectually ex part sui, but not ex part
Dei; in regard of their own weakness, but not in regard of Gods power, because
they are kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1. 5.
They are espoused to perseverance, which is Perseverantia est filia summi Regis.
called the Daughter of the Great King; grace, and their hearts shall never be
divorced, the knot of love between them is tied so fast by the hand of Heaven.
The Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail against them; they are a Rock
in the midst of the Sea, which stands immovable, notwithstanding the rage of
winds and waves: They are Eternal like their Father; a part post: they have
begun, Incassum bonum agitur, si ante vitae terminum deseratur. Vid. Bez. in
loc.
and they shall hold out to the end of their race: I pray God (says the
Apostle) that your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, (that is, the powers of
your Soul, reason, and affection, and the parts of your body) be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These. 5. 23. They are
like the Laurel, or the Bays Tree, whose Leaves are always green; not only
in the Summer of youth, but also in the Winter of old age. They shall still
bring forth Fruit in old age, they shall be fat, and flourishing. Psalm. 92. 14.
And therefore they shall carry away the bays, and the Crown from others.

The Heavenly fire that is kindled in them, shall never go out; those Wells
that God has dug in them, shall never be stopped by the Philistines, those
flowers of grace he has planted in their hearts shall never be spoiled, or
rooted up by the subtle Fox of corruption within, nor the wild Boar of
temptation without. Their grace may be sick, but it shall never die; it may
lurk, but shall never be lost; it may fade, but shall never fall: They shall
never desert their colors, nor forsake the Captain of their Salvation; Dear
Friends, and Reader, who ever you are, you will never endure the shock of
assaults, if you have not a principle of true grace within: If you be not
rooted in Christ by Faith in effectual calling, every little puff will blow
you down: If you put the action of your hand, and not the affection and
resolution of your heart to the Plough, you will soon look back, and so become
unfit for the Kingdom of God; you may have a form of Godliness, and an outside
profession, and well complexioned face of Christianity, but the fire and heat
will soon take off all this Paint; your Blossoms and Buds will fall with an
easy gust; you will go back by as many degrees as ever you went forward, and
though a Saint to seeming in youth, yet in old age you may turn Devil, yea, and
sooner too; and so make good Sancti juvenes, Satanici senes.
the Devils Proverb; if you be only called, and are not also effectually
called; artificial Religion, and made Piety is never durable, or long-lived:
rootelesse flourishes will soon be saplesse, and hang their heads; if the
Garment of your Profession be not made of the Sempiterno, and Perpetuano of
true grace, it will soon wear out: If you put not the woofe of an inward work to
the warpe of an outward show, you will never make strong Cloth fit for a Saints
back: The power of Godliness will stand where the form dares not show it is
head: True Saints prove Standers, when others turn starters: This is your
happiness, ye Children, ye Sons, and Daughters of grace; ye shall hold out,
and continue: Let not this breed security, and sloth in you, but rather
confidence, and courage, and caution: Let 1 Cor. 10. 12.
him that stands take heed least he fall: If you would stand, take heed, you
do not fall; if you would not fall, take heed that you stand; if you would be
sure, you must not be secure.

10 Glorification: The last effect, or consequence Whom he called them he
justified, and whom he justified, them he glorified: They shall as certainly be
glorified, as it were done already; and this Peter also teaches, when he
says, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according
to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a living hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; to an Inheritance incorruptible,
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you. 1 Pet. 1.
3, 4. Here he speaks of being begotten again, which is all one with effectual
calling: and by that Inheritance incorruptible reserved in Heaven, is meant no
other than glory: It is undefiled, and therefore suitable to them; it is
incorruptible, and cannot perish: and therefore they need not fear it shall
decay, or be lost, during their stay on Earth, while they are at home in the
body, and absent from the Lord: gracious ones shall be glorious ones; Holy ones
shall be happy ones: The effectually called shall be Eternally crowned: Those
that have Sanctifying goodness in possession, have saving greatness in
reversion.

All the rest of the consequences of effectual calling before mentioned are not
enough, the Lord will also give Heaven, as the perfection and accomplishment of
them all. He has given grace, and he will give glory; and no good Ps. 84. 11,
12.
thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly: O Lord God of Hosts,
blessed is the man that trusts in thee, that is called by thee: The Lord
called them to make them fit for Heaven, (for by nature we are as contrary to
Heaven, as to the way thereunto, though we little think it) and therefore have
it they shall: Giving Col. 1. 11, 12.
thanks unto the Father, (you see neither Peter before, nor Paul now quoted can
mention it without Doxology, and we should imitate them) Which has made us
meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, (what is that
but Heaven?) and how did he make them meet? why, that follows, Who has
delivered us from the power of darkness and has translated us unto the
Kingdom of his dear Son. Colos. 1. 11, 12. What is delivering from the power of
darkness, but the bringing of a Soul out of an Estate of nature, which is done
in effectual calling: But as for you that are in your sins, for all your
challenge, Heaven, glory is none of yours: this Scepter shall never be put into
the sinful hands, the Crowns of this Kingdom shall never circle the heads, that
are void of the right knowledge of Jesus Christ: unrighteous ones shall not
enter in at the Gates of the new Jerusalem; living and dying in your sins, you
shall ever be excluded, and shut out: let the serious thoughts of it daunt thy
Spirit, and stop thy course: Heaven is not for all, Aula coelestis non suscipit
nisi Sanctos, and pios.
only for some; it is the City, House, Mansion only of the Saints, amongst
the Sons of men; only converted ones shall be Courtiers there.

CHAP. IX. VIII. The subject of effectual calling, or whom God does call.
IN the next place according to the method propounded, I am to show you who
they are, who the Lord does thus call; for they are not all, but some, not
many, but a few; and this I shall comprize under three heads.

1. His Elect: Those whom the Lord has Praedestinatio est causa gratiae, and
gloriae. Aqui.
therefore Vocation shall be: Vocation is, therefore Election has been: The
one goes before, the other certainly follows after; whom he had in his heart
by Eternal Predestination, those he brings to his hand by timely
regeneration: The Text speaks this plain; Whom he did predestinate, them he
also called: And v. 28. foregoing: To them that are the called according to his
purpose. God Elected but some, and therefore does effectually call but some; he
calls homeward many, he calls home but his chosen; he calls into the
bosom of the Church, even those that are rejected; into the bosom of Christ
only those that are elected: He calls not all in the world, but some out of
the world: Election and effectual calling though they keep not time, yet they
keep Company; what the number of the one is, that is the number of the other:
The calling of God has it is bounds, it is limits, out of which it does not
pass: The Lord says to it, as to the waves of the Sea; hitherto shall thou
go, and not further: It is not tied to place, Country, manners, parts, gifts,
or the like, but only to the Elect; whosoever are not Elect, shall not be
effectually called; whosoever are Elect, shall be effectually called: The Lord
knows who are his, and he will find them out: First their names are written
in God's Book, then God's grace is wrought in their hearts; God first marks
them, and then moulds them: First registreth them, and then renews them;
first takes their names, then turns their natures: multitudes there are, whose
names are not in Heaven; multitudes there are, who shall never attain to true
grace: we may suppose the Lord to say, not all men, but all mine shall be
called; and as Christ in another case, I speak John 13. 18.
not of you all, I know whom I have chosen. And yet we must not first seek for
Election, and by that think to make out calling: but must first look that
effectual calling be sure, and then there is no doubt to be made of Election:
If the former, viz. calling, like the premises be firm and good: the latter,
viz. Election, like the conclusion naturally follows: We must begin at that
link of the Chain, at that round of the Ladder, that is next to the Earth, and
so climb to Heaven: We can more distinctly see the Heaven, by looking downward
into a Well, than by looking upward into the Air: Election is to be seen in
the Copy rather than original.

2. Some of all sorts: Not all of every kind, Genera singulorum, non singula
generum.
or tied up to a particular Rank, and degree of people altogether: God has of
all sorts in the Nursery of his Church; all kinds of Trees in his Spiritual
Eden. He planteth the Cedar, the Shittah, the Myrtle, the Oyle-tree, the Pine,
and the Box-tree together: There were brought into the Arc all Creatures in
the general, though not in the particular; the kinds of them, though not the
individuums: It is, and may be a fit Emblem of the true Church of God: The
Lord calls some of every quality, and condition, and yet for all this but a
few chosen, and made gracious: he calls some of both sexes, some men, and
some women, as Luke 1. 5, 6.
Zechary and Elizabeth; some of great s^^^ure, as it is like the Fathers of the
first age of the world; some of little stature and body; 2 Cor. 10. 1, 10. Luke
19. 3. Josh. 2. Heb. 11. 31.
as Paul and Zacheus; some Freemen, and some bondmen. 1 Corinthians. 7. 22. Some
that live out of the pale of the Church, as Rahab; others that live in the
bosom of the Church, as the truly converted Jews; some Preachers, for all
Preachers are not converted; the Lord convert the unconverted among them, that
while they Preach to others, themselves may not be 1 Cor. 9. 27.
cast away: and some people; as those that were wrought upon. 2 Acts 37. 41.
Some great sinners, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13.
as Manasses; some less, as David's and others; of whose sins before
conversion, we find little upon record in Scripture.

Some Children of bad Parents, as Josiah the 2 Chronicles. 34. 1, 2.
Son of evil Amon: as well as Children of good Parents, as Manasses the Son of
Hezekiah: though this infringeth not that good observation, that God keeps up
his Church for the greater part of it in the Families, and posterities of his
Saints, and Servants: Some youths as Samuel began with God in his long Coats,
D. H.
as one says; some in their elder years, though the Examples of them be more
rare; some that lived in the former ages of the world, and some that live in
the latter age of the world: we find in Scripture David a King effectually
called Abijah a Prince, Obadiah a Courtier: 1 Kings 14. 13. 1. Kings 18. 3.
The Elect Lady, to whom St. John wrote his second Epistle, Theophilus a
Gentleman, Rich Abraham, Poor Lazarus: Lois the Grandmother, Eunice the
Mother, Timothy the Grandchild: Philemon the Master, Onesimus the Servant;
Luke the Physician, Zenas the Lawyer; Simon Tit. 3. 13. Acts 9. 43.
the Tanner, Joseph a Carpenter; Cornelius a Captain, Lydia a Purple seller;
Dorcas a Seamster, Jacob a Shepherd; Aquila and Priscilla Tent-makers; yea, and
the Jailer in the Acts of the Apostles. Acts 16. 30.


The Lord calls some of all sorts, and Sizes; of all parts, and Professions;
some of all times and tempers.

3. The inferior sort: Though the Lord the common and inferior sort of
people: Not the very rich and mighty ones of the world; nor the beggarly poor;
as the Apostle tells the Corinthians: For ye see your calling Brethren, how
that not many wise men after the flesh, nor many mighty, nor many Noble are
called: but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise: And so goes on. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. The seeds of grace most commonly (I
say most commonly, Perk. on Revel. c. 1. v. 6.
mistake me not) fall upon, and thrive in the middle sort of ground: the rich
and wise ones of the world are too lusty a soil, and Turn all to weeds; the
beggarly poor are too lean a soil, and bring forth nothing but Briars and
Thorns; they being individua vaga: a vagrant idle, wretched, loose kind of
people, incorporated into no Society, either civil or Ecclesiastical; as one
long since very well observed; Perkins Treat. of callings.
and present experience gainsayeth it not: height of wealth and potency; depth
of want, and poverty, are great obstacles to effectual calling and grace; these
do ponere obicem, Bar the door against a calling, and a knocking Christ;
which made Agur to desire the mean, between the Pinnacle of dalliancing
Prosperity, and the pit of desperate adversity; and to live in the middle
Region, where he might be nearest the Spirits breathings. Two things have I
required of thee, deny me them not before I die. Remove far from me Vanity and
lies: give me neither poverty, nor riches: feed me with food convenient for me;
lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and
steal, and take the name of my God in vain. Prove. 30. 7, 8, 9. Fullness usually
(...).
breeds forgetfulness; and therefore the Lord gives his people a caution
against it. Deuteronomy. 6. 11, 12. And what the Fruits are that grow upon the Root of
abundance, the Apostle shows plainly. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. (Though God can put
choice graffs into the stock of greatness) and therefore counsels Timothy
to give a charge, and lesson to rich men by themseves, Verse 17. And highly
commends the mean, Verses 6, 7, 8. How few Examples in the word, experiences in
the Christian world of very poor ones savingly wrought upon: a curse to be
Vagabonds and Beggars. Psalm. 109. 10. The blessing of the seed of the righteous
to be kept from it. Psalm. 37. 25. Not but that upon some extraordinary
emergencies, they may lie between the teeth of some biting hardship for a
season: and did not the Lord take care that there should be no beggarly poor
among the Israelites. Deuteronomy. 15. 4. Which is a Political Appendix to the eighth
Commandment: and is understood of extreme poverty. And wherefore Vid. Call. and
Ainsw. in loc.
were all the moral, ceremonial, and judicial Laws among them, but to be means
to Holiness, and props of Piety? Not but that the Lord can work where, and
upon whom he will, and can fit any ground to bring forth a good crop: not but
that the Lord can go against the stream, and throw down strong Towers, and
break through Walls of Steel and Brass. I go not about to weaken the hand, or
to shorten the Arm of the Lord: Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis
18. 14. But the Lord works by means of his own appointment; and has no other
bonds than what he has been pleased to put upon himself: I speak now not of
the skill, but of the will of God: not what he can do, but what he does do; not
of his extraordinary power, but his ordinary providence in Spirituals; not of
his special and unusual operations: but of his general and more common
dispensations: The Lord can do more than he will, or does do. Nor do I mean,
that all of the middle sort and rank are called: but amongst them does God
pitch his Tabernacle more than among others; nor by the middle sort do I mean
those that are next Neighbors to the wealthiest, but rather those that dwell
upon the Borders of meannesse, and so for wisdom and nobility: they think
themselves too high to put their shoulders to the work of the Lord; and would
be ready to think God were beholding to them for their service: Does not the
Scripture and experience manifest this all along? Does not Christ himself speak
the same: I thank thee, O Father; Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes.
Matthew. 11. 25. The Disciples of Christ were not rich, nor ragged: were not the
Wise ones of the world, nor the witless ones: This that I have now laid down
does not dash, nor jarre with what we spoke in the former Head: The temperate
Zone is most inhabited by converts, and changed ones. Grace loves to make it is
nest in this climate, to hatch and brood in this Region: Oh then that the rich
were less careful, the poor more cared for, and all more contented with
mediocrity.

CHAP. X. IX. The time of effectual calling; when God does call.
1. MOre generally: In the time of this I must work the works of him that sent
me, while it is day: the night comes when no man can work. John 9. 4. This
life is our Market, our fair day: when this life is ended, time is no more with
us, but has taken wing, and is fled away: This is Gods Preaching day; now he
speaks, pleads, calls, invites: when life is done, then is the glass out, the
time is spent, the Preacher cease: and never shall we hear him again in that
way: Therefore to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Heb.
3. 7, 8. Those that live not now, shall never live; those that die not now,
shall never die: I mean to grace, to sin: Those that are not effectually called
now, shall never be. Now is the day of grace, the season of Salvation, the
acceptable time; in this sense as well as otherwise. 2 Corinthians. 6. 2. And care
you not though you Quidam ante desierunt vivere, quam inciperen^.
die before you live? how shall you then live when you die? after this life
there is no Sacrifice for sin: no grace to be had, no calling voice to be
heard: Therefore whatsoever thine hand finds to do (for thy Soul) do it with
thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the
grave, whither thou go. Eccles. 9. 10. We may now, and we will not, we would
hereafter, and we shall not: when this life is ended, we may say, the Summer is
past, the Winter is come; the time of the singing of birds is gone, and the
voice of the Turtle is heard no more in our Land: the time of this life is the
time of our marring, or making for ever.

2. More especially: In the time of youth: One, that none might despair; but
one, that none might presume: The Lord is tender hearted, and ready to reach
out Conversio nostra semper inv niet Deum paratum. Aug. Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22.
Nunquam sera conversio vera. R. Jun.
his Arms of love to a returning, mourning, believing Soul, whenever. True
repentance is never too late, but late repentance is seldom true: but for any
upon this account to run on in excess of riot, and to resist the Holy Ghost,
is most desperate and sad: and yet many do thus, presuming upon the last: but
as one says wittily, this is as if a man should break his neck willingly, to
try the skill of the Bone-setter: The time of your youth is the choice time,
therefore says Solomon, Remember thy Creator now, (mark now) in the days of
thy youth, and illustrates it by the contrary. Eccles. 12. 1. etc. Some have
observed the time of effectual calling to be between the years of eighteen, and
thirty most commonly: Though but few can speak punctually as to the particular
time and means of their conversion, as a parted and pious man observes: yet I
do believe Master Baxter of Baptism. Jer. 2. 2.
that most Saints experience says, that the Lord wrought upon them in their
younger days; and therefore the Lord tells his people, he remembers the
kindness of their youth; though youth there may be otherwise understood: and
this early conversion is meant of those that sit under the dewes of grace, the
distillings and droppings of Heavenly Doctrine; as for Heathens, and such, who
never heard of Christ, and his Laws, and their sins; when they come under the
sound of the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel, though in old age; their conversion
may be more likely, because they never had the means before: I limit not the
Holy one of Israel; if he can convert at all times, yea even then when thou
have worn up thy body, and yet will not, and does not use it: What is that to
thee? Follow thou his present call; as Christ said to Peter in another case.
Prize John 21. 22.
then your youthful time; when those days are gone, you shall never see such
days again: You may be twice a Child, but you can never be twice a young man:
The morning Aurora Musis amica.
is observed by Scholars to be best for study: The morning of our age is the
best time for Spiritual study; for studying the condition and state of our
Souls: The spring of youth is the best time to take Physic, Heavenly
Purgations in, for the working out of sin, the cleansing of our Souls, the
making of our Spirits whole: It is the best time for the digging up the Garden
of our hearts: then does the Lord sow the seeds, plant the slips of grace.
There is a latter spring, but that is not so good: In youth are the white
hours, the Golden seasons: Marriages are most in younger time; so are
Spiritual Contracts with Jesus Christ. David was good when young; Daniel a
young 1 Samuel 17. 23. Dan. 1. 3. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 12. 1 Samuel 2. 18. 1 Kings 4. 3,
13. 2 Kings 22. 1, 2. Discipulum minimum Christus amavit psurimum. Eccles. 3.
begin. Psalm. 92. ^3. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi.
Prophet; Timothy a young Preacher; Samuel began with God betimes; Abijah good
when a Child; so was Jofiah; John the youngest of Christ's disciples, and most
beloved, for he leaned on Christ's bosom: There is a season for every thing
under the Sun, says Solomon: then certainly for grace and Soul-affaires: there
is a time to be Spiritually born, to be planted in the house of the Lord, to
kill the heart of sin, to heal the hurt of the Soul; to be built up a Spiritual
house; to lament for sin, to laugh in a sense of Gods love; to embrace Christ,
and refrain from embracing sin; to love virtue, to hate vice: It is true as no
place, so no time can prescribe against the King of Heaven and Earth: yet in
this season does the Spirit usually breed, and bring forth its young: This is
Gods more common order, which he can alter when he pleases; and this time he
seems to take for these reasons.

1. The excellency of firstlings. 2. The probability of a change. 3. The
necessity of service.
1. The excellence of firstlings: The Lord does he delights: First fruits are
savoury meat, such as the Soul of the Lord loves: the first of our Estate, our
health: the first of the day, the first of Prove. 3. 9.
the week, the first of our life: the first in regard of time, in regard of
dignity is to be the Lords. In the time of the Law the Lord challenged the
Exodus 34. 19, 20, 23.
first of men, of Beasts, of the Fruits of the Earth. How welcome is the
Primerose to us, because it comes forth early? ye creamy mornings, and not the
flotten afternoons are of great price: we are loath to take into our services
of those that have been worn up in others employments? and will the Lord think
we accept of our dry bones, when the Devil has sucked R. Jun.
out the Marrow? as one says wittily: and yet this is the way of the world,
the common course: The first, and best; not last, and worst is to be given to
God: The morning rather than the evening, the Spring rather than autumn;
Monday rather than Saturday; our flourishing rather than our fading days are
to be devoted to the Lord: and such Sacrifices smell sweet in his nostrils: The
Lord loves to be served in the first place; to have the chief of our strength,
the choice of our ability: The Lord 1 Cor. 7. 36.
looks upon it as uncomely behavior to himself, that we pass the flower of
our age, and never seek for Marriage with himself: It is dearly delightful, so
purely pleasing to begin with wisdom, when we begin with the world, that a
gracious promise is made to it: I love them that love me, and they that seek me
early shall find me. Prove. 8. 17. An early new heart is a rich Pearl; timely
grace finds great grace in the eyes of the Lord. God calls, and cares for
early Piety: the Blossoms, Buds, Fruit of Godliness in younger years is
grateful to him; a young man or woman green all over, and putting forth the
tender shoots of grace, is Jehovah's darling; a youth Saint, or a Saint youth
is the Benjamin, the Son of the right hand of the most high; his dearest
Joseph; as the apple of his eye; written in his heart, and wrought on the
palms of his hand by the engravings of love: such indeed are his chosen, his
choice ones; his loved, his loving, his lovely ones: Thus then you see God is
in love with early goodness: to give grace at all times lies in his hand; to
receive grace betimes lodges in his heart.

2. The probability of a change: This is the Quo semel est imbuta testa, etc. 2
Kings 22. 19.
to become ever goodness; the twigs of youth are more tender, when the grown
boughs of age are more tough; young ones are more plain and simple; when old
ones are more plicated and subtle: The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it. Jer. 17. 9. These words are a fit measure
for the hearts of all; for young hearts, and old hearts, are hard and naught:
but yet the older they grow the worse they grow, and the more unlikely to be
mended; as the expression of the Holy Ghost does warrant: Can the Ethiopian
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye also do good that are
accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13. 23. It is true, the spirit of God knows the
things of a man as well as his own spirit; yea, more of man than man does of
himself; and has line and lead, wherewith it can sound and reach the
profundity Jer. 17. 10.
of wickedness, and has a clue wherewith it can find a way into the midst of
the intricate labyrinth of man's deceitful heart, notwithstanding all the
windings and turnings that are in it: The Lord has a fountain wherein he can
wash Black-moors white; he has soap and nitre wherein he can take out spots of
the deepest stain: yet aged, inveterate, customary sinners, contract more rust,
more filth, which calls for more rubbing, more filing: A tree long rooted may
be pulled up, yet with more ado than a plant of a years growth: As Mr. Bridge.
a godly Man illustrates this, by Christ's raising to life several that were
temporally dead, as Jairus his daughter, to which sinners of the Matthew. 9. 25.
Luke 7. 14.
lower form may be resembled, and the widows son of Naim, who was carried
forth to be buried, to whom may be resembled such sinners as have broken out
into more notorious wickedness, and have stood in the way of the ungodly; and
Lazarus, who was laid John 11. 41, 42. 43.
in his grave, and nigh unto stinking, to whom may be resembled great sinners,
that have continued in their sins a great while; all these Christ raises up,
one as well as other, but with various dispensations: the first with a touch of
his hand; the second with a work and a word; a touch and a call; the third and
the last, in a more solemn manner, first speaking to his living father, then to
his livelesse friend, and that not with a low, but a loud voice. As our Savior
says in another case, this kind goes not out but by fasting and prayer,
Matthew. 17. 21. the like may we say of sins riveted by custom and time, they
may be loosed, but with much a do: the Ice of a months freezing may be broken
as well as the Ice of a nights freezing, though with more knocks. Many shifts
and evasions do people find for themselves by continuance of time, whereby they
keep sin in, and grace out; by use sin grows strong, sense of sin weak, and
their hearts little affected with the word; being like the people that dwell by
the water falls of Nilus, who regard not the great noise thereof, whereas it is
troublesome to strangers: so they being accustomed to the sound of the word,
little regard it.

3. Necessity of service: Therefore does glory, for the salvation of his own
and others Ars longa, vita brevis.
souls; and the time of people upon earth, at longest is but short; at most is
but little; and if they begin not betimes, what can they do? a long journey
from earth to heaven, we had need take the morning, and set out by Sun: a great
deal of business to do, and it must be done in the day of this life; we had
need then be stirring very early: the good householder (which may well be an
emblem of Gods calling sinners) is said to go out early in the morning to hire
laborers into his vineyard, Matthew. 20. 1. As the whole man, so the whole time
does the Lord require; as our spirits, soul, and body, so our youth, middle,
and old age; death often comes sooner than old age; and if nothing be done
before, nothing can be done after. Much work, and many works has a Christian
to do; There is the fostering of faith, the renewing repentance, subduing of
sin, conquering corruption, guarding his grace, fearing his falling, watching
his walking, studying the Scriptures, perusing the promises, conversing with
converts, admonishing acquaintance, defying the Devil, growing in grace, and in
all glorifying his God; and as the Apostle says in another case, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
Who is sufficient for these things? so may we in this, What time is sufficient
for these things? Besides, in youth there is bodily strength for the task of
duties; for the body as well as the soul is to be and do for God; and spiritual
services take a tincture from the bodies temper: Though the spirit be willing,
yet the less will be done if the flesh be weak; fervent prayer, frequent
meditation of God, his works, his word; of it self, its ways, its wants; solemn
fastings, whether public or private; much reading, often hearing, self
examining; for which and many more is requisite the vigor of the souls powers,
the vivasity Meus sanein corpore sano.
of the bodies parts; which in age do age; lurk and languish; grow feeble and
faint; the former whereof are evacuated in regard of spirits, the latter
enervated in regard of strength.

CHAP. XI. X. The means whereby the Lord does effectually call.
IN the next place we are to speak of those ways and means which the Lord
makes use of for the calling home wandering creatures, lost sheep to himself;
and they are either of a lower, or of an higher form:

Of the lower form, 1. Works.

Of the lower form, 2. Word.

Of the higher form, The Spirit.

1. By works: The Lord many times makes common works, and ordinary providence
dispose, that thereby they shall be suited for the attaining of highest ends:
Now those providence which the Lord has used this way, and countenanceth in
reference to this work, are these seven following, which carry Scripture
authority at their backs.

1. By providing yoke-fellows; the Lord Corinthians, not to leave, but to show
love to their unbelieving yoke-fellows: For what know thou, O wife, whether
thou shall save thy husband? or how know thou, O man, whether thou shall
save thy wife? 1 Cor. 7. 16. And does not Peter counsel wives to be in
subjection to their own husbands? (and to what end is it?) Why, That if any
obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation
of the wives, 1 Pet. 3. 1. Many an one may say to their yoke fellows in some
sort, as David 1 Samuel 25. 32, etc.
to Abigail: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which gave me such an Husband,
such a Wife; and blessed be thy advice my dear heart, and blessed be thou which
have told me of my sin, admonished me of my State, and so have kept me from
Iniquity; for in very deed, had it not been for thee (under the Lord) I had
perished in my transgressions; though there may be carnal love, and a peaceable
life between yoke-fellows, yet no well-bottomed affection, if there be not
mutual care for each others Eternal welfare: They should seek by exhortation,
and conversation, by counsels and commerce; by prayer, by pattern to bring each
other into the bosom of Christ, within the bounds of the Covenant.

The Apostle condemns and blames the weakness of the Galatians, That having
begun in the Spirit, sought to be made perfect by the Flesh: We may
congratulate and bless the Gal. 3. 3.
wisdom of God, that causes that which is begun in the Flesh, to end in the
Spirit: Sometime a good Husband makes a good Wife; and a good Wife makes a good
Husband; not but that suitable matches are best, (I think) as for parentage,
portion, proportion, so for piety; and that (as I conceive) the Apostle means
marrying not only with one that is a Christian, but also with one that is
Christ's; 1 Cor. 7. 39.
where he speaks of marrying in the Lord; yet when they are unequally yoked,
and pared; they are to pray and endeavor for an Extract of virtue, from a
Contract of necessity: some of you that read this unworthy piece may have found
providency improving your match to your Souls advantage; and you that are
married, and have a Godly yoke fellow, ear their precepts, eye their practice;
listen to their counsels, learn their good customs; mind their sayings, mark
their goings; observe their works, obey their words: Husbands and Wives do not
forward each other to Hell, but further each other to Heaven: Let not your
hands be imbrued in each others Souls blood, but let your hearts be set for
each others Eternal good; and strive by your prayers single and sociated, that
ye may be heirs together of the grace of life: Some out of fancy and vanity
have endeavored to maintain that a woman has no Soul; but both men and women
have immortal Souls; and that ye shall know to your cost, and woe, or cure,
and neal: The Lord grant the latter.

2. By granting good education: Grace in Train up a Child in the way he should
go, and when he is old he will not depart Prove. 22. 6.
from it: Good Parents, good Tutours, good Masters, good Guardians, good Hosts
with whom Children board, are a great mercy; and many thank God for the time
that ever they saw the faces of, and had to do with such: Did not Abraham Genesis
18. 19.
read Divinity Lectures to his Family? and did there not grow upon the stalk of
his Instructions, watered with the Dew of Heavenly grace, Fruits of as eminent
obedience to the Father of the Flesh, and the Father of Spirits, as ever was,
when Isaac was willing to offer his Genesis 22.
throat to the Sacrificing knife? Was not Isaac's Faith great as well as
Abraham's? the Sons as well as the Fathers? Was not Isaac's life as dear to
him, as Abraham's Son to him? and was he not coheir with his Father to the
promises? Was not Monica a fervent beads-woman, and humble suppliant at the
throne of grace for her Son Austin? and was not the success sweet? A woman
much in prayers, and much in tears she was for him; and without doubt
Motherly-preachings went along with her prayers, and teachings did accompany
her tears; and had she not the desire of her Soul? Seeds of Instruction, and
teaching cast upon the heads of young ones under our charge, may through the
mostnings, and irrigations of the Spirit sink into the heart, take root, and
bring forth a great crop, and large increase of saving knowledge, and grace, if
not for the present, yet for the future, if not in the time that now is, yet in
the time that is to come, even when Parents are dead and rotten; Children while
very young are to be learned the word of God, though they know not the work of
God; experience shows that it is not in vain, nor void. Did not Timothy's
being instructed in his Childhood (in all pobability by his Grandmother as
well as Mother) for Parents remote are many times as much conversant with, and
indulgent to their mediate Children as their immediate Parents, and her
indulgency was rectified by grace, to seek his good in the best things.) Help
to make him a Faithful man, and a fervent Preacher? 2 Timothy 1. 5. and 3. 15. Nay
were there not twins in the womb of Lois her care? And was not the effect of it
double: She taught her Daughter Eunice, and she learned of her Mother to teach
her Son Timothy: How careful were the Heathens, that Children might have
education morally good? and shall Christians sit in the same form with them?
Now how many Christians by name may sit at their feet, and be taught more of
their duty from them, than yet they have learned to practice? Plutarch wrote a
little (...).
treatise of this on purpose. Plato would have Nurses speak no foolish words to
their little ones, least such breath should infect them, and such bad air have
influence upon them; yet who regards this work? or considers that from the
neglect thereof, as from a root of bitterness, springs that general
Profaneness that is in the Christian world: Master Baxter Third part cap. 12.
S. 11. etc.
speaks very well of this in his Saints everlasting rest; which is a very
choice Book: The Gentry teach their Children to follow pleasure, and the
commonalty their Children to follow profit; and young ones are ready to follow
old ones: This their way is their folly, yet their posterity approve their
sayings, Selah: It is to be noted. Psalm. 49. 13. The very Heathens condemn
this, and yet Christians mend it not: Crates the Philosopher said; that if
possibly he might, he would willingly mount to the highest place of the City,
and there cry aloud in this manner: What mean you my Masters, and whither run
you headlong? carking, and caring all that ever you can to gather goods, and
rake riches together as you do? whiles in the mean time you make little or no
reckoning at all of your Plut.
Children; unto whom you are to leave all your riches; and do not most care
more for the wealth of their Childrens outward man, than for the health of
their inward man? such as one says, are like those that have great regard Ibid.
to their Shoo, but take no heed to their Face: Some are headless and cannot;
others are heartlesse and will not: By Generation men are temporal Fathers, by
education they come to be Spiritual Fathers; and though it In anima sit
extraduce?
be a question, whether the Soul and Body come both one way, or no; yet it is
out of doubt many times, that the grace of the Soul may come from the Parents:
I mean yet Parents counsel, teaching, and tutouring, may be Instrumental in the
hand of the supreme efficient thereunto: Did not Hannah get her Samuel by
praying? And may we think, that he that was brought in by earnest supplication,
was not brought up by early education? That he 1 Samuel 10. 27.
whom she took pains for before she had him, she did not takes pains with when
she had him? That for whom she petitioned, him she did not principle? If you
that read this, can say by experience it is so, bless God for your Friends, if
not, beg of God to make them your Friends. Oh that Parents would bring up
their Children in the nurture of the Lord; and Children obey them in the Lord.

3. By procuring services: By this means also Onesimus, who fled from the house
of his Master Philemon, and besides his Philem. 10: 16.
thoughts fell into the hands of his Master Christ. Onesimus was Philemon's
Servant: Philemon was Paul's Friend; and so by means of the Master, Onesimus
comes to knowledge of the Minister: and as the one was his Earthly Master, so
the other his Heavenly Father; for Paul begat him in his bonds; (one Prisoner
loosing another) and travailed of him in birth till Christ was formed in him,
and so the Servant became as good a man as his Master: O, Onesimus, little
did thou think what God intended to do with thee, when he brought thee Bonus
etiam si servit, liber est.
under Philemon's Government: Thou may, thou do bless God that ever thou
camst under his roof: so it has been no doubt with many others besides
Onesimus. Many may have cause to admire the goodness of the Lord in planting
them under a good Master and Mistress, or Dame; whose counsels have been
converting, whose words have been working, whose persuasions have been
prevailing, whose prayers have been powerful, whose admonitions have been
accepted, whose motives have been melting, whose reproofs have been reclaiming,
through the grace of God accompanying them: The Lord sees some young men or
maids that belong to his election of grace, and are Tit. 1. 16.
yet in the ways of the reprobate, being reprobate to every good work: and the
appointed time of their conversion draws near, and begins to dawn; well,
says the Lord, thou art mine, yet still thine own; mine by secret
predestination, thine own by open abomination; mine according to my bosom
will, thine according to thy basest ways; mine by choosing love, thine own by
sinful life: thou little think how I will make thee mine own every way: I
will incline thine, and thy parents heart to put thee forth, to pitch upon such
a sentence; I will displace another to place thee there; you look at the ease,
profit, convenience of the service: but though you purpose, give me leave to
dispose: I will so order it, that something read, heard, spoken, done: by some
means or other, there you shall be changed, and be made restless till you find
me without whom you are lost; that it shall be said, this Psalm. 81 4.
man, this maid was born there, in the house of one of my Saints, and holy
ones; O the sweet intendings and disposings of the Lord toward us; how the
Lord can turn things that seek man's way, to the accomplishing his own will.

4. By ordering their station: Sometimes the Valet interdum, pro animae salute
mutatio loci,
they shall have means: God will bring the means and the end together; when God
fireth his beacon, such as he intends shall have warning thereby, he brings
within ken of it; when he sounds the silver trumpet of the word, such as he
would have prepared thereby to battle with their sins, he brings within hearing
of it; when God sets up a light in any place, such as he intends shall
thereby see the worst of their misery, the way to mercy, he brings within the
beams and rays thereof: God is the great Landlord, all tenements are of his
letting; habitations of his appointing; dwellings of his disposing; he causes
some to wander from their native soil, that so they come to have their natures
changed; the Lord removes some from town to town, that he may translate them
from darkness to light: and this we may see in the 18th. of the Acts 9, 10. Be
not afraid, hut speak; and hold not thy peace: for I am with thee, no man shall
set on thee to hurt thee; for I have much people in this City. Observe here the
ways and goings of the Lord: He intended to bring Paul to Corinth, and to have
such and such of his elected ones to be converted there by him; whom he
therefore first places in Corinth, that they might be there during the time of
Paul's ministering: was not this a sweet providence, for the Lord to bring them
into Corinth for their conversion? some places are like Goshen, all light;
others like Egypt, all darkness: some places have the dew of heaven, and
spiritual showers plentifully falling down upon them; others like mount Gilboa,
upon which there comes 2 Samuel 1. 21.
neither rain nor dew; some places are as sheep without a shepherd; having
either no guides, or blind guides; others enjoy that gracious promise, I will
give you pastors according to Jer. 3. 15. Plerumque dum ^utatur locus mutatur
mentis affectus.
mine own heart: now for the Lord to bring a man into such a Town, and there
turn him: into such a Country, and there by the means convert him; to change
ones house, and thereby to change ones heart; to change ones mansion, and to
change ones manners; is a precious dispensation: for the Lord as he appointed
the time and hour; so the means and place of conversion; yet a fat soil, a
place of gain, a good pennyworth, are the things that commend habitations to
many: They love to sojourn in Mesech, and to dwell in the tents of Kedar, and
have long dwelt with those that Psalm. 120. 5, 6.
are haters of goodness. To live near the Altar, the Ark, the Temple, is a
mercy of God, and a means of good: To think our selves best, when we are
farthest from the Sanctuary, is a curse: to be a door keeper in the house of
God is the way to a cure.

5. By prolonging their days: many live to hour of the conversion of his elect;
he will keep off dangers, remove destruction, defer death; not terminate their
time, but continue their natural course, lengthen their life; till the hour of
their holiness, the time of their turning, the day of their deliverance be
come; for had they died before, they had died in wickedness; and had they died
in wickedness, they had been undone by wrath; they had died in present sin, and
could not have escaped eternal sorrow; as we may see the householders hiring of
laborers into his vineyard; some Matthew. 20.
were called at the ninth, others at the tenth, and eleventh; now had they died
in the fourth, fifth, sixth, etc. hour of the day, what had become of them
then? and so the thief Luke 23. 42, 43.
upon the cross, that was converted; had he suffered, or been cut off before,
where had been his repentance? it is true, Gods determination cannot be
frustrated; but his decree fixes as the end, so the means; and amongst means,
time, as well as other things, are the object of his purpose; many had they
died, had never lived to grace; many live, that they may not die for sin; many
get up from the bed of sickness, that they may attain the health of their
souls; many are delivered from the brinck of the grave, that they may be
brought into the bosom of God; many sicknesses would prove mortal to the body,
but that God intends to be merciful to the soul; the Lord delivers from going
downward to the earth, because he intends to draw them upwards to heaven; and
bids death to hold his hand, because he has purposed to have the heart: He
says, return ye children of men; that Psalm. 90. 3.
ye may be renewed as the children of God: He many times spares the life, that
he may save the soul; and gives more years, that he may give more grace; he
preserves from drowning by water, from burning by fire, from destruction by a
fall, from death by a blow, that he may principle them with piety, furnish them
with faith, restore them by repentance, grant them all grace, and crown them
with glory: Reader, if thou be a Saint, thy experience can bear witness to
these words; had not the Lord caused thy sun to stand still in the firmament,
and kept it from going down at noon, had not thou gone down unto the pit, and
been swallowed up of hell, and been as those that had been dead and damned long
ago? had thou died of thy dropsy, been consumed with thy cough, been fired
with thy fever, had thou been marred with thy maim, had thou sunk under thy
sickness, perished by the pox, and fallen under the fury of any of thy
distempers, and casualties which thou had, and did meet with before thy
conversion, what do thou think had been thy conclusion? If thy disease had
destroyed thee in thy natural condition, should ever have attained to a
spiritual constitution? had died a sinner on earth, thou could never have
been a Saint in heaven; but the time of thy change was not then, but since; and
God in mercy added to thy years, that he might add thee to his Church: Thou
may take up the Psalmists words with a Psalm. 124. 1, 2, 3.
little alteration; If it had not been the Lord, who was on my side when
sickness and dangers rose up against me, they had swallowed me up quick, and
left me as the object of deserved wrath: but blessed be the Lord, who has not
given me as a prey to their teeth; blessed be the Lord that has let me live to
the day of grace, the month of mercy, the year of Jubilee; that mine eyes might
see the salvation Luke 2. 30.
of the Lord. The Lord lengthned Simeon's time, that he might see Christ in the
flesh; and thine that thou might see him in the spirit. As for you that are
not Saints; who though you can say these things are so notionly, yet not
experimentally; I pray that your particular experience may plainly prove and
make it good; that your life may be prolonged, your days prorogued, and the
thread thereof be spun out: and that the event may declare the end, and the
issue demonstrate the intention of the Lord to be the changing of your heart,
the altering of your nature, and the sanctifying of you throughout in soul, and
body.

6. By giving good acquaintance: First, the Amicus animae custos dicitur.
who by their gracious words, cordial counsels, loving admonitions, gentle
reproofs win upon them, and allure their hearts to God: conversing Amicus vitae
medicamentum.
is sometimes a means of converting; He that walks with wise men shall be
wise, Prove. 13. 20. A friend for the body, may prove a favor to the soul;
civil acquaintance may be of spiritual advantage; and from communion with
Saints, some come to have communion with the sanctifier: How sweetly did the
Lord bring about the acquaintance of Ruth and Naomi, etc. first, the Lord sends
a famine among the people; (but it proved a feast of fat things to Ruth) then
by that means drives Elimelech, Naomi, and their two sons into the land of
Moab, of those that were strangers to God; these two sons marry there; the wife
of one of them is Ruth; thus she comes acquainted with that family; the men
die; only the mother and daughters in law survive, that still here is religious
acquaintance; which was blessed to her; Naomi was Naomi to her, Ruth 1.
that is, beautiful, comely, or greatly moving, as the word signifies; and so
far wrought with Ruth, that she would be of the religion of her mother in law;
and liked the God, and People of Israel, better than those of her own Ruth 1.
^6.
Country: Sometimes a chamber-fellow, an intimate, a neighbor, a companion,
one whom Bonus sic malo connectitur, ut aut pares redditur, aut cito ab invicem
separentur.
we journey, or work, or often have occasion to meet with, that is godly, may
be a means of our good; as bad companions are very pestiferous, so good ones
are very profitable; graceless acquaintance draw others with themselves to
hell, and gracious acquaintance help to draw others with themselves to heaven;
good company may be a means of life, and bad of death; a good man studieth for
the good of those he converseth with; he prays Psalm. 119. 36.
for their peace, sorrows for their sins, labors for their life, cares for
their cure, persuades them to piety, and seeks their eternal salvation: Had not
the Lord given thee such a friend, he had never given thee so much faith; had
he not brought thee into such a man's society, he had never brought thee into
his own Sanctuary: The goodness of thy company helped forward the goodness of
thy conscience; godly neighbors are accounted a grievous burden, when they
should rather be accepted as a great blessing; they are looked upon as foes for
speaking the truth, when they should be loved as friends for touching the
quick: They are the best and only company, what ever the world thinks of them,
who are unworthy of them; they are not the troublers of Israel, but seek peace,
as between man and man, so between God and man; yet how does the world slight
and scoff at them, vilify and revile them; contemn and condemn them? but as
they said to Pilate, so I to thee, altering the John 29. 12.
words, If thou do these things, thou art not thy souls friend.

7. By afflicting their persons: This is the Nocumenta documenta.
affliction does the Lord cut away the overspreading, and sarmenting boughs of
lust and corruption; trials are teaching; harms are healing; blows are made
blessings; corrasives turn cordials; maledictions benedictions; the Lord many
times lays on his rod, that he may not let out his wrath; he puts some into
the furnace of affliction, and there melts and works out their tin, and lead,
and dross. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and Isa. 87. 9.
this is all the fruit, to take away his sin. Many can say with David, It is
good for me that I Psalm. 199. 71.
have been afflicted; that I might learn thy statutes: And with him that said,
If I had not been undone, I had been undone. If I had Periissem, nisi periissem.
not lost my sins, I had lost my life; If I had not lost my goods, I had lost
my God; If my body had not been marred, my soul had never been made; If I had
not lost a child, I had never found a father; If I had not been friendlesse, I
had always been faithless; an ounce of adversity, is sometimes worth a pound
of prosperity; a little of sorrow may sometimes go further than a great deal of
joy. Manasses was more beholding to captivity, than his 2 Samuel 33. 11, 12, 13.
crown; to the thorns, than his throne; to his chains of iron, than his chains
of gold; his fetters, than his scepter; his prison, than his palace: he was
too high to be a Saint, till God unkinged him; too stiff to stoop, till God
threw him out of his regal chair, and forced him to fall upon his knees; his
loss more worth than his gain; little did he think that his parting with all,
should be a means to bring him to a part in Christ and grace; the crooked key
of troubles and miseries, many times opens the door, and lets a soul into the
chamber of presence; the tossing waves lift up the ark of the soul nearer
heaven; such kind of agues are many times wholesome; when affliction shows it
teeth and grins, poor creatures are perplexed; but be patient, for the fruit
may be very precious; the fear sometimes, through the blessing and wisdom of
God, is more than the harm: Afflictions are the shepherds dog, not to worry in
pieces, but to work to Gods part; not to tear, but to turn: The Lord is forced
(as I may say) sometimes to deal with sinners, as Absalom did with Joab, he
sent for him once, and again, by his servants, but he 2 Samuel 14. 29, 30.
came not; at last he fires his field of barley, and then he comes without
further sending: The Lord has some of his elect ones, whom he sees walking in
bypath, and crooked ways; the Lord gives a commission to his servants the
Ministers, and says, go invite and call you soul to come to me; and say,
Return, Return, O Shulamite: but the soul stirs not; the Lord sends and calls
again; yet with the deaf adder, he hearkneth not to the voice of the inchanter;
well, says the Lord, if you will Psalm. 58. 4, 5.
not come, I will fetch you; if fair means will not do, foul means must: Then
he hisseth for the fly and the be of affliction, and calls forth armies of
trouble, and gives them commission to sieze upon, and to lay siege to such a
man or woman, and says ply them with your cannon shot, till you make them
yield, give up the keys, and strike their sail; he sends sickness to their
bodies, a consumption to their estate, death to their friends, shame to their
reputation, a fire to their house, and the like; and bids them prey and spoil,
till they see and acknowledge the hand of the Lord lifted up; till they hear
Mic. 6. 9.
the voice of the rod, and who has appointed it: the Lord many times gives
strong physic Deus medicus tribulatio medicamentum.
before the peccant humor will away; and winnoweth them much to throw out the
chaff; thus he brings the buds of grace out of the seeds of affliction; and
ushereth in the Lady grace with salt preambles many times; a sorrowful evening
may have a joyful morning: There may be crying out in the evening for the pangs
of affliction, and crying out in the morning for the pains of conversion: The
evening red with the fiery trial, the morning gray with grief for sin, may
produce a fair day of holiness; cloudy and dolorous evenings, may have clear
and deliverance-mornings; the Lord sometimes bends a soul till he makes it meet
again, and breaks it till he makes it melt, that he may bow them to his
gracious will, and not burst them by his grievous wrath; rather then the Lord
will lose a soul that belongs to him, he will lash them till he force them into
his bosom: Thus I have discovered unto you the providence of God, whereby he
provides for his peoples good: Though there may be others, yet I think these
are the chief; may we not now say as David, Many, O Lord our God, are thy
wonderful works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to us ward,
Psalm. 40. 5. Have not his people cause to utter the memory of his great
goodness, and to sing of his righteousness, Psalm. 145. 7. Oh, oh, that we
would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works toward
our souls; Psalm. 107. 8. That the Lord should thus variously, unexpectedly, in
all these ways seek the conversion and changing of lost souls, may justly cause
us to say, All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, Psalm. 25. 10. and
with the same Psalmist in another place, Thou crownest my years with thy
goodness, and thy paths drop fatness, [into our souls] Psalm. 65. 11. I
conclude these things, admiring with Paul, Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: and doxologizing with him, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God,
be honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

2. By his Word: Now we come to the next Jam. 1. 18. Romans 10. 17 Nemini
blanditur veritas.
the instrument of regeneration: It is a word of truth, and therefore fit for
this work: It deals impartially, does not flatter: By his word did the Lord
work in the first creation, and by his word in the second; by his word he made
all of nothing, and by his word he makes new of old; [though that word and this
do differ] The truth shall make you free, John 8. 32. The light of knowledge,
life of grace, liberty from sin, come by the means of the word; a word of
grace, a means of the work of grace: The Word in all the parts of it, Law and
Gospel, threatenings and promises, the dark and light places; Old and New
Testament, the writings of the Prophets and Apostles too; every part of Gods
word is precious: The Scripture in the plain song of it, and in those descants
and divisions, that are run upon it, by the comments, expositions, and writings
of godly and learned men; wherewith we do abound, blessed be the Lord: The word
read, discoursed of; you may see the commendation Perk. Rev. 1. 11.
of the word of God in reference to this end, Psa. 19. 7, 8. But more
especially the delivering of the word viva voce, the public ministering and
preaching of it: This is the Lords darling, his great engine for the battering
down the strong holds of sin and Satan, whatever 1 Cor. 10. 4.
the wretched world thinks of it: It pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. They are Aaron's bells, that
through Gods blessing ring all in; the music of spiritual high sounding
cymbals, that charmeth souls, has not the seed of the word been first cast
into the furrows of the heart; and then the fruits of grace have shown
themselves; Matthew. 13. 18.
preaching is prevalent; the ministry of the word gets the mastery of our
wills: This proposition of Gods mind, helps forward the deposition of the old
man: The word in the Pulpit is a word for souls profit; as David said of
Goliah's sword, so may we say of the preaching of the word, there is none like
to it. It is Gods power to the salvation of the soul, 1 Samuel 21. 9. Romans 7 16.
his strong arm for the conquering of sin; his hammer for the breaking of an
hard heart in pieces: It is a fire to refine; soap to scour; a lamp to give
light: It has brought many stones to the building of Gods Temple: This pipe
has caused many to dance in the ring of piety. This music has made many
souls Matthew. 11. 17.
merry in the Lord; for the Kingdom of God consists, as in righteousness, so
in joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. who is there of the family of faith,
that must not confess that the word preached was the means of their grace? but
there are several sorts of Preachers, and peaching. It is not every kind of
preaching that God owns and crowns; I shall therefore show you what manner of
preaching that is which is a means of effectual calling.

It is and must be 1. Plain Preaching.

It is and must be 2. Piercing Preaching.

It is and must be 3. Powerful Preaching.

1. Plain preaching: The word must be delivered Non ad raptum sed captum.
not lofty, but lowly; not elegant, but easy words; for the work of a Minister
is not to confound the head, but convert the heart; not to rack ones sense, but
to rectify the soul; not to amaze the mind, but to mend the manners; not to
delight the fantasy, but to draw to faith; and the plainest expressions are
most like to make impression: Let Ministers speak as rationally as may be, so
intelligibly: let them speak wisely, so not too wittily: This Predicator
laboret, ut intelligenter audiatur.
plain preaching agrees best to the generality of people, whose understandings
are but ordinary, yea, very mean in spiritual things: alas, they are lost in
high expressions, and many times cannot see the wood for trees; they admire the
Minister it may be, but understand not; they wonder at him, and that is all the
work that passes upon them: They go away, and say he is a great Scholar, when
themselves have not learned so much as to make them disciples of the lower
form. It agrees best to the nature of the word of truth; the richest coats of
arms are plainest, they say: Truth loves a plain coat, and not a gaudy habit:
Truth cares not for spangled and glittering attire; it has native beauty
enough to commend it, it needs not artificial: Those that wear soft clothing
are in Kings houses; phalerated and embrodered words are for curious and
courtly ears: Flosculous Orations are for more common meetings, and do not do
well in the assembly of Christians: Many pepper their Sermons to make them
smack, but forget to salt them to make them smart. Paul was plain in his
preaching, and I think the best Ministers may be his Scholars. Seeing then
that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech, 2 Cor. 3. 12. And so
elsewhere, When I came to you, I came not to you in excellency of speech, or of
wisdom; and my speech and my preaching was not with entising words of man's
wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 4. The truths of God set out with human flourishes, are
like a linsey-woolsey garment, and the sowing of a field with mingled seed,
which were forbidden, Levit. 19. 12. Spiritual meat is sometimes spoiled with
too much sauce: All the Sermons that we find upon record in Scripture were
plain Sermons: Sermons, that smell too much of the candle, are more for the
ornament of the Speaker, than the document of the hearer* are rather to tickle
the ear, than to take the heart: Bombastick words, quaint terms, abstruse
sentences, strained expressions; much of Latin, and Greek quotations; (that a
Sermon speaks many times half in the Language of Ashdod, and half in the
Language of Canaan) are much below that gravity and seriousness, wherewith the
mind of Christ is to be propounded; not that I would have Ministers have no
regard to their expressions; nor that the word should be so dressed, as to
render it despised; some have their expressions too raw, and others too much
roast; the mean is to be In medio consistit virtus.
observed: I would not have Ministers like the slovenly Sons of Eli, who by
their homeliness made the Lords offerings to be abhorred. I would have them to
look to words as well as 1 Samuel 2. 17.
things, manner as well as matter, both in praying and Preaching; Scripture
expressions are the best: I wish we would all study to speak more in Scripture
Phrase and words; and these are excellent and right words; and as Job says,
How forcible are right words? Job 6. 25. Right plain words tread sure, and
leave usually the print of their foot behind them: Love plain Preaching, it is
best for your Soul, pray against an itching ear.

2. Piercing Preaching: It must be such Preaching, Cry aloud, spare not, lift
up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the
house of Jacob their sins. Isai. 58. 1. Some are so fine fingered they dare not
touch the sore, so mure hearted they dare not search the wound, so
mealy-mouthed, they cannot speak hard against sin; some so guilty they are
afraid to condemn themselves: A Minister must Preach not as acquitting, but
accusing; not as soothing, but as searching; not as discharging, but charging
the wicked and ungodly: not as flattering, but frowning upon sin, not as
pleasing man, but pleasing God: To Preach generally, and not particularly, to
Preach as a far off, and never come near, is not the way: To make all well,
for fear of ill will, is too low a frame for the Spirit of a Minister of Jesus
Christ to be in; and argues an heart seeking more it is own temporal comfort,
than Gods Eternal glory: I mean not that Ministers should particularize
publicly, persons or names; or that that their words should savor of Spleen
and Gall against ought, but sin: But this, that they should charge their
peoples sins upon them, as Nathan said to David, Thou art the man: So they, you
are the 2 Samuel 12. 7.
people that are thus and thus: Let them endeavor to cause them to know that
they are the people that have contemned Gods Commands, broken his bonds, worked
wickedness, practiced perverseness, refused repentance, and slighted their
own Souls; that they are in a lost and undone condition: after this manner did
John the Baptist Preach to the Scribes and Pharisees. Matthew. 3. 7, 8, 9. He
opens the Book and shows them their sins, he brings them to the brink of Hell,
and shows them their danger; and so does Peter: Him have ye taken, and by
wicked hands Crucified and slain. Acts 2. 23. And did not the Lord bless this
his Preaching: For they were pricked in their hearts, and said to Peter, and
the rest of the Apostles; Men and Brethren what shall we do? Verse 37. And so
again in Acts 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. Read them I pray. How terrible does Peter
thunder there against Simon Magus, and come home to him? My heart rises much
against flattery, especially in a Ministry; it is a most desperate thing, and
of cursed consequence: There is not a speedier way to damn Semper vitanda est
perniciosa dulcedo.
people, whereas a Ministers work is to Preach their Souls to Heaven: For
Ministers to hover, and keep at a distance in their Preaching, and never seek
to come home, nor get into the conscience, argues cowardice, or
unskilfulnesse: Such Preaching will bring little of comfort to the Pastor, or
conversion to the people: It is said of Bernard, that once he Preached a
curious, neat, flourishing Sermon, and every one was taken with it, though not
by it; but he was sad and heavy thereupon; soon after he Preached another
Sermon, not of kin to the former, but an home, searching, pressing Sermon it
was; no commendation of this as of the former: But he carried it very
lightsomely, and cheerfully to what he did before; the people asked him the
reason of his so various and diverse Heri Bernardum, hodie Christum.
deportment; he answers, yesterday I Preached Bernard, to day Christ; yesterday
my self, to day my Savior: Though people condemn such kind of Preaching, yet
God will crown it; though it be harsh to flesh and blood, yet it is health to
the Soul and Spirit; many look upon it as needless, when the Lord knows it is
very needful.

3. Powerful Preaching: Powerful, zealous Qui timide rogat, negare docet.
with a denial; if they be not more hot in their work, they can never win the
castle of the heart for Christ: Eli's vile Children feared not their 1 Samuel 2.
25.
Fathers faint chiding: The Lord did earnestly protest to his people by his
Ministers. Jer. 11. 7. I earnestly protested says the Lord; or as in the
original; protesting I protested: I delivered my mind to you over, and over;
which shows earnestness: Earnest Preaching many times brings early practice:
Ministers should first warm their hearts at the Spirits fire, and then warm
their Sermons at their hearts; they should so speak that their words may seem
not to fall from their heads, but to rise from the hearts; and what comes from
the heart is most like to go to the heart: To speak as if one were afraid to
wake the sleepers; to disquiet sin, as if one had no sense of grace, or sin; of
mercy, or misery; is like to prove fruitless, and without good issue: Sinners
are asleep, and they must be rouzed; they are secure, and they must be rounded;
and they are regardlesse, and must be ratled; as the Heb. 4. 2
word should be mixed with Faith in the hearer, so with fervency in the
Preacher.

It is said of that eminent Divine Master Perkins, that in his Preaching he
would pronounce the word [Damn] with such an Emphasis that Fuller. holy state.
he left a trembling impression upon the Spirits of his Auditors: Ministers
must be Boanerges, Sons of Thunder, as well as Barjonas, Sons of Consolation;
when they speak they should 1 Pet. 4. 11.
speak as the Oracles of God, powerfully, pressingly; vehemently, urgingly:
Reader, when the word has been powerfully Preached to thee, in a zealous,
stirring way; have thou not had some convictions, have not the secrets of thine
heart been made manifest, and thou been constrained to fall down, and worship
God, and report and say, the Lord is in this Minister 1 Cor. 14. 25.
of a truth? Have not been almost a Christian thereby? and thou that art Godly,
did not the Lord use the obstetrication of means of such kind of Preaching, for
bringing forth the Man-child of grace? The Lord give such Watchmen, such
Workmen, where they are wanted; the Lord bless them where they are seated:
Was not Christ's Preaching after this manner? How Pathetically does he express
himself? Luke 13. 34, 35. And can we learn of a greater Doctor than he? And
what else does Paul mean and intend, but earnest Preaching, (...). Pasor. Lex.
in his counsel to Timothy? Preach the word, be instant in season, out of
season. 2 Timothy 4. 2. that is, be earnest, pressing; be urgent, as some
translate the word.

2. Means of the higher form: Now we come to speak of means of a superior
order, and that is the Spirit of the Lord; the Spirit and the Word go together:
the one as the Servant, the other as the Master, the one as the Instrument,
Nisi Spiritus S. adsit cordi audientium, otiosus est sermo Doctoris.
the other as the Agent; the one as Organical, the other as Authentical; as
Christ said to his Disciples. John 15. 5. so may the Spirit say to providence
and the word, without me ye can do nothing: These wheels would never go, if
the Spirit did not drive them; these sails would never fill, if that did not
blow hard; these means would be but as dead carcasses, if that did not enliven
them: Words Frustra foris verba nostra streperent, si internum magisterium S.
S. deesset. Ephesians. 6. 17. Ps. ^27. 1.
would be but wind without the Spirits working: If the word be not in the
Spirits hand, it will never cut down the weeds of sin, nor slay the Goliath of
natural rebellion; therefore is it called the sword of the Spirit. If the
Spirit join not it self to the chariot, it will move heavily, as if the wheels
were taken off: Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build
it: Unless the Spirit move upon the face of the Soul, nothing will be brought
to ripeness and perfection: As an Heathen could say when he had done some
piece of eminent service; It was not I that did this exploit, but the Gods used
me as an Instrument: So may the forementioned means say, It is not we that
have converted, but the Spirit by us; and may answer as Peter, if we be
examined of the good Acts 4. 9, 10.
that sinful Souls have received, Be it known unto you all, that by the power
of the Spirit these Souls are alive this day: If the Spirit do not prosper
providence, and work with the word; the Soul can never be changed: It is his
proper work to give grace, to grant holiness; and therefore is he called the
Holy Ghost; as is his name, so is his nature; and as his condition is, so is
his operation: If the Spirit sit not at the stern, the Minister shall plie the
oar in vain: Ministers may Act secondarily, but the Spirit primarily; they as
choice subservients, but the Spirit as chief superintendent; they may carry on
their work artificially as Servants, but the Spirit architectonically as
Master; they may Preach out their hearts, and if the Spirit does not put out
his hand, Souls may go to Hell after all.

Now the Spirit helps, and carries on this work by these actings.

The Spirit: 1. Persuades. 2. Fasteneth. 3. Applies. 4. Examineth. 5.
Concludes. 6. Disquieteth.


1. The first work of the Spirit is to persuade The word Preached did not
profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. Heb. 4. 2. The
word was propounded to many, yet profited but some; taught to diverse, yet took
but a few; the word the same, but not the work: And the cause was as persuasion
in the one, so misperswasion, or non-perswasion in the other: If we be not
persuaded of the sweet of a promise, of the sour of a threatening, of the
reality of consolations pronounced, of the certainty of comminations denounced,
of the verity of Doctrine commended, and the necessity of duty commanded, they
may strike our ear, but they will never reach the heart: If one hear of a
receipt for the bodies good, and believe not the contents thereof, it will do
them no good; so it is in this case; the Scripture is an whole Book of receipts
for our restitution, of remedies for our maladies, which we shall never follow,
if we believe not the virtue and use of them: An unbelieving heart is like
sandy Infidelitas sicut terra arenosa.
barren ground: Now it is the work of the Spirit to persuade: The belief of the
misery of our Souls, the mercy of a Savior; of the willingness and
worthiness of Christ in reference to redemption; of the nature of sin, and the
need of Sanctity cannot be wrought in our Souls, without the power of the
Spirit: We cannot persuade our selves, the Minister cannot persuade us without
the influx of the Holy Ghost: We may go down into the Waters of the word, and
if the Spirit move not them and us, we may come up again as leprous as ever we
were: Let the Minister inform soundly, reprove sharply, examine searchingly,
and exhort sweetly, yet all is nothing, unless the Spirit do something: But
the Spirit deals and treats with the Soul; propounds, delivers the truth of
God; answers objections, silenceth queries; infallibly demonstrates, and by
such strong Mediums proves it is Divine conclusions, that the Soul is nonplus'd,
confuted, has nothing to say, and is now so clearly convinced, that (unless
it would deny principles, and shut it is eyes against the light of Argument) it
must needs come over to the Spirits part, and be of it is mind: You that are
effectually called, what say you? till the Spirit persuaded you, could man
prevail with you? till you believed indeed the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, and the sayings of Ministers from thence, did you getany good? till
then was not allspoken, as to the dead?

2. It fasteneth: In the next place the Spirit Mary to keep all these things,
and ponder them in their heart. Some Luke 2. 19.
general thoughts and sense of the word believed, of providence experimented,
do light upon the Spirit of a man or woman, but are soon scared away: Now the
Spirit comes and holds these things to the heart; the sound of the word
comes and goes; and the Lord in his providence passes by us, and we take
little notice of him: But the Spirit as the Master of the assemblies fasteneth
something like a nail in a sure place; and strikes the arrow into the side;
the Soul would put all away, and thrust all out of doors, by company, mirth, by
letting in thoughts of vanity: but the Spirit striveth against this stream; and
now the requiring repentance, pressing piety, reproving iniquity in general, or
such a sin in particular, the threatening of fury, promising favor, such a
passage, or such a phrase in the Ministry of the word; and for providence,
the visiting with sickness, the lessening the estate, the preserving from
danger, the saving from wrack, or the like; are so tied by the Spirit to the
Soul, that it cannot get loose from them; and come so freely into it is
thoughts, that it cannot avoid acquaintance with them; and now says, Oh such
an expression of the Minister, what means it? by this providence, what does the
Lord intend? and where ever it is going, whatever it is doing almost, these
things and thoughts do interveen; the Soul cannot but revolve and turn them up
and down in it is mind.

3. It applies: The Spirit helps the Soul that applies not the written word,
will never apply the substantial word; no hand, but the Holy Ghost can cause a
Soul to make application.

4. It examineth: In the next place the Spirit Solomon speaks of the Spirit
of a man, we may most truly affirm of the Holy Ghost, that it is the Candle
of Prove. 20. 27.
the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly. It is our duty, but we
are naturally unwilling Redi ad cor tuum, and subtiliter discute teipsum.
to Spiritual self scrutinies; the Spirit brings the Soul into it is study, and
makes it sit down in the chair of sober and serious meditations, and gather up
all those loose writings that lay scattered about in the deske of conscience,
and causes it to peruse, and read them over: It opens the Book, and causes
the Soul to look it over from one end to the other: We neither can, nor will of
our selves enquire into our own hearts, till the Spirit lay us upon the Bed of
contemplation, and cause us to commune with our own hearts, and be still. That
Psa. 4. 4.
lays the map before us, and opens our eyes to view the Character, and
lineaments of our selves. The Spirit also keeps the Soul close to this task,
whereas like a truantly Boy, it would fain break loose from it is Book: It
wayteth the Soul with the consideration of the advantageous issue, that it grow
not weary of it is employment.

5. It concludes: It helps the Soul to conclude Paul knew the Law, but could
not Romans 7.
find his sin and death there, till the Spirit showed it him. If the Spirit
help us not to judge aright, we are sure to be partial in our own case; which
is more desperate than the exactest impartiality. That helps us to see the
conclusion condemnation, the result wretchedness, the issue misery; till that
turn our note we shall cry peace, peace; though there be nothing but wrath and
war belonging to us?

6. It disquieteth: Sinners are ready to flatter themselves when there is cause
to fear; and Cantic. ^.
the spouse in the Canticles, seeking for Christ: It is restless till it
reveal; disconsolate till it discover; distressed till it divulge; without ease
in it is mind till it is case be made known: The Spirit makes it unfold it is
sin, uncase it is sorrow, unlap it is sore; and fills it with distraction, till
it find some satisfaction; so that it repairs to Ministers, runs to Sermons,
it turns every stone, searches every corner, tries all means, till it get
some hope, some help: Saul was troubled, questioneth, What Acts 9. 6.
will thou have me to do? till Christ answers and bids him go into the City:
And so the Jaylour was perplexed, and diseased in his Spirit, till he had some
solid direction given him. Acts 16. 30.
The Spirit fills the Soul full of queries, doubts, Solicitousnesse, and
makes it hunt up and down til at last it have that which it should have, viz.
Christ, grace, a new nature; thus have I in some measure showed you that the
Spirit has the chief hand in effectual calling; and that all were to no
purpose without it is presidency; and would have no effect without it is influx;
therefore O blessed Spirit, enliven, quicken, work with, and bless these
lines, and Nulla in discendo mora est, ubi Spir. S. Doctor adest.
all other means used for the conversion of sinners; and then the deed is done,
and the work dispatched.

CHAP. XII. XI. Objections answered.
IN the next place we shall endeavor to give answer to some few objections,
and queries that may be made: Many questions might be started; such as savor
of curiosity more than Christianity; of carnal wit than Spiritual wisdom; that
have more bone than meat (the Lord redress it, this age is too rife with them)
which I shall wave; and speak only to three, or four, which I judge
convenient, and pertinent.

1. Obj. The first is, whether God be the sole

Sol. God is the Sole Author, and we the subjects that are wrought upon: He the
Agent, and we the Patients; our hearts are not in our own hands; we are dead,
and cannot make our selves alive; we must erect an Altar with this Inscription:
To the God 1 Samuel 7. 12.
of grace: And set up a stone of remembrance, with this Motto, The Lord has
helped us: Grace can be of the offspring of none but the Eternal Father: It is
not in any, but by the gift and work of God; it is a Plant of Gods setting; so
the Saints may truly say; Thou, O Lord, have wrought all our works in us.
Isai. 26. 12. His people are the natural and Spiritual workmanship of his
hands. And of this does Paul inform his Corinthians, when he says, And such
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are Sanctified. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ye
did not sanctify your selves, but ye were sanctified; (...).
ye did not make your selves Saints, but ye were made Saints: and as it was
with the people, so with the Preacher; he could give grace neither to them, nor
himself; for their grace and his grace had both one Author, and were from God:
The Lord was active; and he and they were passive; for so he speaks of
himself: But I obtained mercy. 1 Timothy 1. 13. The translation runs in the
active, when the Greek word is of the passive voice; neither (...). Bez. in loc.
in Latin, nor English can one well express the original: It is as if one
should say, I was had mercy upon: So then it is clear that we have neither
hand, nor heart in the work of grace: But it must be set upon the account of
God, as the sole efficient: Yet thus we must understand it; for we are not
stocks, and stones in the work of conversion.

1. We being effectually called, can afterward work by the grace, which God
has wrought in us: If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body,
etc. Romans 8. 13. Here is an Act of mortification of sin, but from the might of
the Spirit; an Act of killing, but from enlivening grace; when principled, then
the Soul is to do it is part; when animated, then it is to Act: When it has
it is treasure, then it must trade; when stocked with life, then it must stand
out against it is lusts.

2. A Soul works in the very moment of Perk. Revel. 3. 9.
conversion; as it was with Paul; Lord what will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 6.
Paul was now infieri, in making; and lo the beatings of his Pulse: And so it
was with good Lydia: Whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended to the
things which were spoken of Paul. Acts 16. 14. There we see her in making, the
Lord opened her heart; that was Gods work; and she Acts: she attended, that
is her work, by virtue of the former, Babes of grace Act in the very birth; and
whilst the Lord is framing and fashioning them; they pant and breath; in their
new moulding they melt and mourn; in Gods striving with them, they strive for
him; in their making, they move: Yet we must be careful to understand this
rightly: viz. thus.

1. In the order of nature Gods working is Acti agimus.
before the Souls; and the Souls working depends upon it: that as the cause,
this as the caused; that as the efficient, this as the effected; that as the
spring, this as the stream; that as leader, this as led; that as the parent,
this as the posterity; that as the root, this as the fruit.

2. What the Soul does is not the cause, or means of conversion: Conversion is
without Nulla praecedit in nobis praeparatio. August.
the sphere of our activity.

2. Ob. In the next place it may be queried, what the difference is between
effectual vocation and sanctification; how near they live 2. Ob.
from the other; whether neighbors, or strangers; kindred, or aliens.

Sol. Effectual calling is meant of the first Sol. Assem. Ad. Baxter. Saints
rest. page 140.
work of God upon the soul, in implanting grace there, and changing the whole
man; and regeneration, and conversion are the same with it, as we have said
before.

Sanctification is meant of the increase of that first work; and of holiness
in the life, and conversation. 1 Thessal. 4. 3. The first as the rising of the
Sun, the latter as it is keeping it is course: The path of the just is as the
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Prove. 4. 18.
The one as the infancy and youth, the other as the growth and age of grace; the
one as the principle, the other as the practice; one as the morning, the other,
as the noon of grace.

3. Ob. It may be queried in the next place 3. Ob.
Faith before repentance, or repentance before faith; which of these two is the
first born, and elder Child.

Sol. This question has been much tossed Sol.
up and down; and many saplesse contentions have been about it; without solid
demonstration of the thing, and without spiritual edification of the soul.

If were better for people to enquire, whether they find these graces in
themselves, than which is first: the sincerity of them in reference to truth is
more to be sought after, than the priority of them in reference to time: it
were more profitable to question our participation, than their precedence, yet
people had rather deal with Metaphysics, than Morals; with notional rather
than necessary points: and love to rise to the clouds in their askings, when
they cannot reach the top of a low-built answer: However I will in some measure
satisfy this question.

1. We must know that all habits of grace are infused together; the habits are
put in to the soul at one time, though some may put out themselves by actings
before one another; A new heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put
within you. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. Here is a change mentioned, which could not be
without the infusion of all saving graces together, Simul and semel
and at once: They are like twins, they receive their being both together,
though one be brought forth before another: This similitude following may make
it a little plain; a man takes several sorts of seeds, and sowes them in his
Garden at one time, yet some come up, and show themselves before others; some
sooner, some latter: Our hearts are the Garden, the habits of grace, the seeds,
all which by the hand of the spirit are sown at one time, though in actings
some appear before others.

2. One things is said to be before another; two ways:

1. First, in time; as that which is to day, is before that which is not till
to morrow: and that which is this hour, is before that which is not till the
next.

2. Secondly, in nature: As the shooting of a Gun with a Bullet, and the
killing of any one thereby may be together in time at the same instant; yet the
shooting is before the slaughter, in nature as the cause thereof.

These things I lay down as preparatives, now briefly to the purpose.

The habits of faith and repentance are planted, and set in the heart at one
instant: there is no difference of time there.

2. Repentance from the tenor of the Law, Am. med. de vocat. These. 31, 32, 33,
34. Buc. lae. 30.
goes before justifying faith in time, and I think in nature too.

3. Gospel repentance follows justifying faith in the act, and depends upon
it.

4. Repentance, viz. Gospel, is usually first seen, because one cannot well
persuade himself, that he is reconciled to God in Christ, till he perceive he
has parted with his sins: nor conclude he is pardoned, till he says he is
purified; nor that Christ and they be united, till their souls and sins be
divided; nor that they have put on Christ, till they have put off their sins.

4. Ob. In the next place the question shall 4. Ob.
be, whether conversion, or effectual calling be

Sol. Master Burges shall answer this query, Sol. Vindiciae legis. Lect. 20.
and unty this knot. I shall give you the short notes of what he delivers
more largely.

1. The Law could not work to regeneration, were it not for the promises of the
Gospel: the question is not whether conversion be vi legis, by the power of the
law; but whether it may be cum lege, with the preaching of the Law.

2. Howsoever the Law may be blessed to conversion; yet the matter of it cannot
be the ground of our justification and adoption.

3. The Word of God, as it is read, or preached, works no further, than
objectively to the conversion of a man, if considered in it self.

4. Whatsoever good effects, or benefits are conveyed to the soul by the
preaching of the Law, or the Gospel, its efficiently from Gods Spirit: Thus
far, this worthy man.

It is unsafe to exclude the Law, though we Am. de voc. cap. 26. These. 12. v.
conclude the Gospel is the chief. Between the hammer of the Law, and the
cushion of the Gospel is a flinty heart, most like to be broken by the hand of
the Spirit: we may suppose the Lord speaking in this case, as in Zech. Not by
might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord: 4. Zech. 6. v. The
Spirit is the supreme, and chief: Though they be different in their
constitution, yet they agree in one, as to the work of conversion: They are all
good, though in several respects. We may well say, precious Law, more precious
Gospel, most precious Spirit: if the spirit did not move them, neither the
upper, nor nether millstone would turn: as neither must be taken for pledge, for
they cannot work alone: so jointly, and together they cannot act without the
spirits assistance: the Law shows the sore; the Gospel, the salve: the one
teaches of sin, the other of a Lex data est, it gratia quaereretur.
Savior: the one shows the harming curse, the other the healing cross: the
one man's misery, the other Gods mercy: but it is the spirit that sets home
these things, and opens the eyes to see them, anointing them with spiritual
eye salve: the Law may be a preparative, hut the Gospel is the power of God to
salvation: Romans 1. 16.
when the soul by the Law (set only the spirit, which is the master builder) is
driven to fear, it is the more likely by the Gospel to be drawn to faith; and
when it sees it is lost in it self, it is thereby provoked to long for Christ:
the Law treats of transgression, condemns our courses, reveals wrath,
thundreth threatenings: but the Gospel propounds promises, breaths
benedictions, holds out happiness, shows salvation, whereby the spirit
draws the heart to Christ.

CHAP. XIII. XII. A few plain, and familiar reasons are to be given in.
IN the next place according to the propounded method, I am to lay down some
demonstrations of the doctrine: and they are these ensuing, which are as four
pillars to support the point; and a quaternion of mediums for the lifeguard of
the position, formerly laid down, and hitherto treated of.

1. Conjunction of the means, and end. 2. Union to Christ. 3. Distinction,
present, and future. 4. Application of the means.
Conjunction of the means, and end: the viz. happiness; so also to the means,
In rebus, quas Deus vult, ordo quidam concipitur: prius vult finem, quam media.
Ames. Med. cap. 7. These. 40. 51. Ordinatio primum finis, deinde mediorum. Pol.
Synt. lib. 4. c. 6. Non causa regnandi, sed via ad regnum.
viz. holiness: the means, and the end lying in the same womb of
predestination; there is a concatenation of them in Gods counsel, a twisting of
them together in Gods thoughts: and when he decrees the one, he determines the
other: In the book of his eternal thoughts, with the pen of his certain decree,
the Lord first sets down the matter of his intention, then the means of the
execution. In the certain register of his thoughts in reference to his peculiar
people; he first enters his will, and then enrols his work: Their inheritance
shall be glory, and the way to it shall be grace; for though holiness be not
the cause, yet it is the cause-way to Heaven; who so looks into the way of
erfectual calling, shall find it a beaten road to Heaven, and may perceive in
it the prints of the feet of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Samuel, and the rest
of the spiritual travelers in their journey to the Holy Land; the^ Lord
intends to bring his people into Canaan, and with all has laid out the way,
and means; he intends to bring them into the Heavenly City, by the narrow gate
of converting grace: If it be a part of the wisdom of the children of this
generation, to think of the means together with the end; shall we dare to think
that the Father of Light, the Allwise God, has not his counsels richly
damasked with sapience, prudence, intelligence, beyond the rule of the actions,
the reach of the conceptions of man: I think we may safely say, that the Lord
has not determined, (for ought that we can find in his word) that any should
commence, and take the degree of a glorified Saint in Heaven, without
undergoing the task, and services, that belong to Christ's school on earth: The
Apostle tells the Ephesians, that God had before ordained the path of
holiness for them to walk in, 2 Ephesians. 10. v. God has but one way to Heaven,
wherein all must walk, that would come thither, supporting themselves upon the
staff of Christ's merits: If you look but in the index or table of the volumes
of eternity; you shall find, calling, as well, as crowning; holy, as well, as
happy; gracious manners, as well, as glorious manfions. It is the madness of
the world infatuated by the delusions of the devil, to conclude the
excusablenesse of their sinful neglect of good, their wilful departure from
God, from the premises of the infallibility of Gods purpose; or to build their
presumptions, or desperations upon the unseen foundation of the everlasting
decree, in the mean time crossing apparent commands, and manifest prohibitions;
whereas the decree of the means, and the end were born in one day, and printed
together in Heavens press bearing the date of the same year. To say one may
live, as they list, because Gods decree is certain, and more unalterable than
the Laws of the Medes, and Persians, is an inconsequence of a desperate
consequence. To think that we may be born into the sea of eternal joy, though
we swim with the tide of the sinful world, if we be elected; and that it is
impossible to avoid the gulf of perdition, though striving against the stream
of a natural condition, (bladdered, and supported by the spirits special grace)
if we be reprobated, is such logic, as the topics of divinity afford no
medium for; because we sinfully Male dividere been conjuncta.
divide, what God in his righteous, and wise ordination, has coupled together:
we find the end, and the means linked together in the text: It is a golden
chain and pity to break it; nay in our thoughts to separate them, or by our
actions to endeavor the violation of them, can be no less, than high treason
against Gods cabinet counsel: The Lord finisheth his intentions, by his own
fixed means; and therefore whom he has appointed to the weight of glory, he
will acquaint with the work of grace.

Union to Christ: They shall be effectually All my springs are in thee, Psalm.
87. 7. spiritual life, pardon of sin, acceptance with God, right to Heaven come
from the virtue, and merit of Christ, but they come from Christ not in the
common notion, but from Christ in special union to him; all Christ's favors run
to the soul in the channel of spiritual union: It is not Christ without us, but
Christ within us, that is the hope of glory; Col. 1. 27.
we must be Christ friends, before we can have his favors; we must be married
to him, before we can have much from him; he must be in our hearts, before we
can get to Heaven; we must be linked to him, before we can live with him. For
all the fullness of Christ, empty cisterns shall never be filled without union
to the fountain; for all his riches, they shall continue poor, that will not
come near him; now in effectual calling, as we have already showed, the soul is
united to Christ, and made one with him. That Christ is a redeemer, and thou a
wretch, is no great matter, unless the Savior and the sinner meet. That Christ
has purchased Heaven, and thou have deserved Hell, will be little matter of
comfort, unless thou can make out, that thou art Christ's, that Christ is
thine: All is in Christ, but that is nothing to thee, unless Christ be in thee:
If God give thee not his Son, he gives thee not Omnia habemus in Christo, and
omnia in nobis Christus.
his love; if thou have his Christ, thou have all. How shall he not with him
freely give us all things, Romans 8. 32. And excellently does Paul show the order
of interests, All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.
22, 23. without union no communion; without a part in Christ, no participation
of Christ's; without coming into his bosom, no carrying away of any of his
blessings: People do but cheat their own souls with a fallacy, when they think
to attain to the enjoynment of God in Heaven, and never have communion with
Christ on Earth; when they think to arrive at the haven of bliss, and never
embarque themselves in the vessel of Christ's merit: Christ has said, that he
is the way, the truth, and the John 14. 6.
life; and it is most certain, that he is the true way to life eternal: Souls
must be incorporated members of Christ's body, before they can be enfranchised
Citizens of the new Jerusalem: Christ is already lifted up into glory, and
draws none after him, but those that are tied to him, by the band of faith.

Distinction present, and future: The Lord Come, ye blessed; depart ye cursed:
Math. 25. 34. 41. The Lord intends that some shall shine, as the Sun
hereafter; Then shall the righteous shine forth, as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father, Math. 13. 43. he will therefore have you here to sparkle, as
stars: Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven, Math. 5. 16. Those whom the Lord
will distinguish from others by the life of glory in the world to come, he will
distinguish by the livery of grace in this world; if the end of people be
diverse, then sure their way must be different.

Alas all, both one and other, set out together, and run the same way, till God
turn them; and take the same course, till God do effectual call: All are hewn
out of the same rock, and out of the same quarry; no difference, till the
polishing, and refining hand of the spirit pass upon souls: Among whom we all
had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the children of
wrath, even as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. For Sola gratia discernit redemptos
a perditis.
we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, etc. Tit. 3. 3. We all
come out of one nest; It is conversion, and a change, that makes the
difference; what some have, that others have not, they are beholding to the
mint for it, and not the mine; to grace, and not to nature: It is the stamp of
the image of the King of Heaven, that makes any to pass for current coin
more, than others: those whom God intends to make Princes in his Kingdom
hereafter, he will educate, and tutour by his spirit accordingly. Those, that
run with the wicked unto all excess of riot here, shall in vain expect to be
parted from them at the day of the resurrection: Those that shall wear Kings
Robs in Heaven, must wear Saints Robs on Earth.

Many would fain differ from others at last, that delight with them in the self
same lusts; many long to dye the death of the righteous, but they are loath to
live the life of the righteous Numb. 23. 10.
: the heirs of glory, and of wrath are known, and distinguished by their
coats; though both come into the world clad with the same homespun cloth of
natural pollution; yet such as are Gods, he will change their habit, and make
them garments of the well-wrought Web of Grace, dipped in the blood of Jesus
Christ.

Application of the means: the Lord will Heb. 4. 11. there are many rounds, and
steps in the spiritual ladder, whereby souls must ascend to Heaven: There is
pious prayer, right repentance, hearty hearing, serious searching, much
meditation, filial fear, careful caution; none of which can be used, and
managed aright, without a principle of grace; no hand can well handle spiritual
weapons, but that of a Saint: Though but one way, yet many means to Heaven; the
working word, sealing Sacraments, feasting fasting, which none can use
spiritually, but Saints. No Heaven without faith; they could not enter in
because of their unbelief, etc. Heb. 3. 19. and to whom is it given to believe,
but to the effectually called? There must be enduring in holiness, or no
entering into happiness; he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be
saved, Math. 24. 13. and can they hold out in the ways of grace, that never
set foot in Regnum coelorum vim patitur. Luke 13. 29.
them? There must be a striving, and pressing to get into Heaven; and can they
strive, who have no life? and is there life till conversion?

There must be a running in the heavenly 1 Cor. 9. 24. Psalm. 119. 132.
Curramus, and sequamur Christum. 1 Timothy 6. 12. 1 Cor. 11. 1.
race; and can they run the way of Gods commandments, who never had enlarged
hearts?

There must be a spiritual fighting, which cannot be without a saving faith:
There must be a resisting of sin, which cannot be without relying on Christ:
There must be an exact imitation of Christ, which none can attain to, but those
that have effectual vocation from Christ.

Gods people cannot win Heaven, and wear Math. 20.
it, yet they must labor in the vineyard; and though they cannot work for it,
in the way of causality; yet they must work before they come to it in obedience
to Gods command: It is true, Heaven is not the ways of the best performances,
and duties, yet religious, and gracious actings are the way to Heaven: Though
means have not a dram of merit in them, yet the neglect of them bars, and
shuts up Heaven gate; what God has appointed, as precedents of glory, cannot
be slighted withsin, and danger; and can any do them to acceptance without the
spirit of sanctification; operations must have suitable essences; means must be
trodden, as the path to Heaven, and the soul must have life before it can foot
it in his way; as a late worthy divine, first treating of the new birth, in the
Mr. Ambrose his prima, media, etc.
next place lays down the means, duties, and ordinances, wherein a Christian
is to walk, as in the path that leads from his new birth to everlasting life.

The second Part.
CHAP. I. XIII. The use and application of the whole.
THus I have done with the doctrinal part, I come now to the applicatory part:
by have the faithful messengers of the Lord done from time to time, when Nathan
had first spoken to David parabolically, he then speaks to him particularly,
and says, Thou art the man; 2 Samuel 2. 7.
and so does Paul speak first generally, and then specially, Col. 1. 20, 21.
Ministers must rise in the practical, as well as the comtemplative part of
their discourses, or else they Dr. Stoughton.
fly, and fall with the lark; as one says.

If the bread, and loaf of life be set forth, and the Stewards of the household
give not every one their portion, shall they be advantaged? If the leather be
cut, and the salve spread, and not applied, and fastened to the sore, how shall
the cure be done? Now the sores, and thoubles of the soul are these.

1. The dullness of the understanding, to which we shall apply information. 2.
The deadness and searednesse of the conscience; to such we must administer the
bitter pills of terror, and reproof. 3. The disconsolatenesse of the spirit,
which must be remedied by the cordial of comfort. 4. The deceitfulness, and
unskilfulnesse of the heart; which must be rectified by notes, and marks of
trial. 5. The perverseness of the will, and affections, which must be healed by
the lenitive of persuasions.
Therefore the uses we shall make of this point, shall be these in order.

1. Didactical. or {for} Information. 2. Catacritical. or {for} Condemnation.
3. Elenctical. or {for} Reprehension. 4. Paracletical. or {for} Consolation. 5.
Diacritical. or {for} Examination. 6. Parenetical. or {for} Exhortation.


And the dear blessed spirit be assistant to me

CHAP. II. I. Use, for information.
IS it thus that the Lord does effectually call his predestined, by such
means, and at such times; and as we have hitherto showed; then from hence we
may learn these things: for we may gather instructions not only from the
substance, but also from the circumstance of the doctrine.

1. The paucity of the predestined. This Ad coeleste regnum pauci perducuntur.
doctrine. The number of the predestined, and purified are alike; the latter
is but small, therefore also the former; every one is ready to think, that
their names are written in the Register of Heaven; and that they are pricked
for happiness; when they hear of Eternal glory, and future greatness; of
sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, at the Banquet of endless joy, of
that true Golden never aging age; from self-love they conceit with Haman, that
there is none whom the King of Heaven Esth. 6. 6.
would delight to honor more than themselves: Most are excluded, and yet they
include themselves; the number of those that are appointed to life is great in
it self, yet but small comparatively: There are but a few that are chosen.
Matthew. 22. 14. They are like the gleaning Isai. 17. 6.
of Grapes, or as the shaking of an Olive tree; two, or three Berries in the
top of the uttermost bough, etc. as the Lord speaks in another case; one of a
City, and two of a Family. Jer. 3. 14.
The Scripture speaks this in many places. Many will seek to enter in, but
shall not be able. Luke 13. 24. They are called a little Flock, a remnant; and
is not this most plain, Luke 12. 32.
for how few are there that are truly called, and the Lord calls none, but
his predestined. All fancy, that they shall be saved, when but few can find
that they are sanctified: Many presume of glory, when but few partake of grace:
How few of true converts to be found in Families and Towns; yet many concluders
there are of Eternal felicity; when Christ said, one of you shall betray me, it
made all to question themselves: Though we hear that many perish, a few
predestined, as few called, yet every one is secure: This is self deceit; and
desperate folly.

2. The priority of a change: Then people Thessal. your work of Faith, and
labor of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ: knowing Brethren
beloved, your Election of God. 1 Thessal. 1. 3, 4. First their graces of Faith,
love, and hope with their Fruits are mentioned; and then Election: We can never
find our selves in Gods heart by Eternal appointment, till we find God in our
hearts by gracious actings: Friends, and Christian Reader, you do exceedingly
against your selves, when you think God has chosen you, and you have never
chosen him: Many have had their hearts hardened, and their destruction
hastened, by such erroneous conclusions.

3. The infelicity of natural people: In effectual Ephesians, that at that
time, (viz. while they dwellt in the Region of nature) they were without
Christ. Ephesians. 2. 12. What can be said more to the amplifying of misery? Such
have nothing to do with Christ's merit, nor with his Spirit; they have none of
his love, none of his life, none of his pardon, none of his promises: If
without Christ who is all in Merito a Christo auspicatur, tanquam omnium
promissionum Scopo. Bez. in loc.
all, then without all that is good; for he is the root, and foundation of all the rest, as the Apostle intimates by his order; without effectual calling a
manor, woman is none of Christ's spouse, nor Sister: None of his Friend, nor
favorite; whilst people are in their sins, they are like branches cut off
from the body of the Tree; and yet those that are wholly strangers to the work
of effectual calling, and have not a dram of true saving grace, will challenge
great acquaintance with, and Interest in Christ; and will claim kindred of
him, though they have not the least of his blood running in their veins; you
may persuade your selves, but you can never persuade God, that Christ is yours;
and for all your presumption, your end will be destruction; to be without
Christ is to be without communion with God, without the compass of the
promises, the Covenant of grace: And if you be without Christ, you Aut cum
Christo, aut cum Diabolo nos esse oportet, nec locus est medii.
must be with the Devil: Variously may the unhappiness of a natural condition
be delineated; but to be without Christ is the blackest and darkest Character
thereof that can be given: Till you come to be made partakers of his nature,
you can claim no privilege from his offices: To be garmentlesse, friendlesse,
fatherless, mony-lesse, houselesse, meatlesse; is nothing to being
Christlesse: Those may be repaired, and redeemed by something that is better,
but this want can be compensated, and made up by nothing: That is a pitiful,
but this a peerlesse condition: That is doleful, but this is dismal; that is a
low, but this a lost estate: It is true, Christ died for sinners, the righteous
Romans 5 8.
for the unrighteous; but when he unites them to himself, he makes them live as
Saints; for any to pretend they have the Royal Scarlet of imputed
righteousness, when they are not dressed with the Linen garments of inherent
righteousness, is presumption of an high nature; which will render them liars,
and leave them naked to their Eternal shame, without the intervention of
special grace, so long as you keep in the walk of sin, in the road of nature,
Christ and your Souls are far asunder: Oh, that the Lord would cause the scales
to fall from peoples eyes; that he would change their Note, and turn their
time, and make them say, Oh that Christ were mine; which may be; instead of
saying, Christ is mine, which is not.

4. The pedigree of grace: In the next place Gratia Dei, non nostra potestate
in melius mutamur.
the garden of the heart: It springs not from natural inclination, but from
the Almighty his operation: It does not rise like water fetched by pumping; but
falls like pearly, precious dew from Heaven: It owes his being not to humane
acquisition, but to divine infusion: The Lord has often told us thus much in
Scripture; and yet we are ready to sacrifice to our own nets: This is the
Covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says
the Lord, I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts,
Heb. 8. 10. This is but the copy of an old grant, which we have in the 31. of
Jeremy, and the 31, 32. verses, etc. and in the 36. of Ezekiel. 26, 27. verses;
where you have the word [I] five times in two verses; and who is it, that
speaks thus, but the Lord, mighty, and powerful? Who can do it, as well, as
say it; and who does do it wherever it is done.

This gift comes from the bonity, and bounty of the Lord: If any soul can make
out, the truth of grace within; let it say, It is not in Romans 9. 16.
him, that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God, that shows mercy; and
when it is prostrated on earth upon its knees, with humility; let its heart be
elevated to Heaven with gratitude. I think this might well be the Emblem of a
Christian; a large heart, wide open to Heaven, the deaf ears perforated,
breathing forth flames of zeal, written on both sides with Scripture truths, an
hand in the clouds, as from Heaven, hovering about it, with this Motto, which
was Paul's, By the grace of God, I am, what I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10. The store of
grace, that Saints have, comes out of Gods treasury, their rich clothing, from
his Wardrobe; their current coin from his Exchequer, their choice flowers,
from his Eden: The Apostle uses this as a means to fetch off the Corinthians
from glorying in men, and to fix their thoughts upon God, when he says, I have
planted, Apollo watered, (ministerially) but God gave the increase, (yea, and
the beginning too,) (magisterially,) 1 Cor. 3. 6. The will, and the work, are
both of Gods good Phil. 2. 13.
pleasure: for who is sufficient of themselves to think so much, as a good
thought? 2 Cor. 3. 5. Heb. 12. 2. Incassum laborat in acquisitione virtutum,
qui eas alibi quam in Christo quaerit.
It is the Lord, that is the a and the o, the author, and finisher of Faith.
The Lord Christ; not excluding his Father, but the Lord, and his Christ: They
are not to be regarded, that slight the means; and God may justly reject those
that eye the means only, and forget himself; which are nothing without his
acting: It is most true, that of him, and through him, and to him are all
things, Romans 11. 36.

5. The dependency of man's salvation: Causa causae est causa causati.
we are beholding to him also for all the rest; not only the foundation, but
the superstructure; not only the bottom, but also the topstone of spiritual
temples, are of the Lords laying: The whole of salvation is to be ascribed to
the Lord; By grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8. Conversion is the first
distinguishing, and changing work, that passes upon a man, or woman, without
which, they could not be fit, and meet for any after favor; now if that first
Col. 1. 12.
work, whereupon all after works do depend, have its dependence upon, and its
being from the Lord, and his grace; then certainly all the rest must depend
upon the Lord: All that souls have from the beginning to the end, from the
first to the last, comes from the womb of Gods grace; the upper rooms, as well
as the lower, are of his building: There is not the least ingredient, that
goes to the making up of a man's happiness, but is to be found in the Lords
Paradise; every stair from the cell of nature, to the chair of glory is of the
Lords own laying: There is not the least iota, or title in the Alphabet of
Salvation, but is written by the finger of God. We cannot say, that ought from
a change, to a crown is our creature, for all is framed and fashioned by the
hand of the Lord: So that it may be truly said to every Saint, What have thou,
that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7. Grace is by the Lords gift,
conversion by his call, pardon from his pity, sanctification from his Spirit,
perseverance by his power; glory of his own grant.

The whole fabric, and building leans upon the arms of the Almighty; that
the Lord may say, I bear up the Pillars thereof: The Fathers will, the Sons
worth, and the Spirits work, are the three supporters of salvation, and
founders of man's felicity; the one purposes, the other purchases, and the
last perfecteth. All must be set upon the Lords account: The Text speaks it
plain; It is he, that predestinateth, calls, justifies, and glorifieth: The
first, middle, and last things of a Christian, do live, move, and have their
being in the Lord; so that when we go to take our pen, and set down our
spiritual receipts; we may well say, Inprimis for Predestination, item, for
vocation, item, for justification, sonship, and glory, and all these received
of the Lord, the most higst possessour of Heaven and Earth, and my most
gracious Father; and may add, all our spirings are in thee. Let us not give
Gods glory Ps. 87. 7.
to another; let all go in his name, for all is from his grace, and power:
though some be first, and others after works, though some be more absolute,
others more conditional; some primary, others secondary; yet all are from God:
He is the Primum mobile, the first mover, as in nature, so in grace, as in
temporals, so in spirituals: He is the Creator of this new world in all it is
parts.

6. The quality of this calling: For if the understanding, Voluntas libera est,
si Spiritu ducitur, quia ubi Spiritus, ibi libertas. Voluntatis regula 2.
humana ratio, and lex Dei. Acts 26. 18.
body; the will being ruled by God, does now rule for God; the work of grace
and effectual calling does not quarter in any one part of the soul alone: but
will be billetted in every faculty; nor is it contented to challenge the heart
for it is throne; unless it have the whole man for it is Dominions: The eye of
the mind is the Gate whereat it enters, the heart, the will is the Chumber of
presence, but it will not be confined there, but sends forth it is influences
into all the adjacent rooms: Effectual calling is of a diffusive nature; every
power and part, every affection and action gives up it is name to God: Except a
man be born again, etc. Says truth it self. John 3. 3. In the natural birth
the whole man is born; and in the spiritual the whole man is born again: And so
the Apostle, if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. 2 Cor. 5. 17. And
adds, Old things are past away; behold (it is worth the Noting) all things
are become new: No part is excepted; as is the will, so is all the rest, for
that is chief: Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
Though the tongue be tipped, yet if the heart be not touched, it is not grace:
If the understanding be enlightened, and the soul not lightened of the burden
of sin; such an one is yet under the power of nature; the Lord breaks up this
spring in the heart, and from thence are the purling streams sent forth through
the channels of the faculties, and parts of the whole: Grace is within, and
grace is without; the internals and the externals too are changed: The Kings
Daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold. Psalm. 45. 13.
Grace Anima est tota in toti, and tota in qualibet part.
is in the head, in the feet: It is in the thoughts, in the eye, in the desire
of the heart, in the endeavor of the hand; in the memory, and meditation, and
manners: In the hope, joy, fear, love, hatred, affections of the soul; in the
reason, Tunc demum homo integer sanctificatus est, quum nihil cogitabit
Spiritus, nihil appetet anima, nihil exequetur corpus, quod cum Dei voluntate
non consentiat. Bez. in loc.
will, understanding, conscience; the faculties of the soul: In the ear, eye,
foot, hand, etc. part of the body: It is in the inclination inwardly, in the
conversation outwardly: It is like the Sun going through the twelve signs of
the Zodiac; so it moves throughout the whole man: And is in all at once, at
least in disposition, though not in action: It is like the reasonable soul, of
which Philosophers say, that it is entire in the whole, and in every part:
Grace is in all, and in every part; as the Apostle prays for his Thessal. The
very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God, your whole spirit, and
soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1. Their understanding, and affections, the inward part, and the body,
the outward part of man. There is sanctification perfect, in regard of parts;
when the meditations of the head, the motions of the heart, and the actions of
the hand are cast into the mould of Gods Law, and stand in a sweet and
harmonious conformity unto his will. The Devil cheateth people by a synecdoche,
putting a part for the whole: Partial grace was never true grace; true grace is
universal grace; and in this sense thou must be an universalist; a true
Christian like the Arc, is, Exodus 25. 11.
and must be overlaid with pure gold within and without: If you are effectually
called, you are not like Dagon the God of the Philistines, half a man, and half
a fish; nor like Nebuchadnezzar's Dan. 2. 31.
image; though thine head be gold, yet if thy feet be clay, thou art not of the
right make.

7. Difficulty of effectual calling: Are there in statu quo: in their old
condition: More Multos remissa conversio in pristinos errores reducit.
Steps then one or two must be taken to come into Christ's bosom; more words
than one to the making up of a spiritual bargain, or match with the Lord; many
ingredients must go to the making up of this soul saving composition: Every
grief for sin is not grace, every longing is not from life; every sigh is not
true sorrow: slighty convictions are not conversions: There may be some
loathing of sin, and yet no love to God. There may be a self-condemnation, and
yet there may follow no soul-salvation: All is not gold that glistereth, nor is
every shinning stone a Diamond. The Child of grace I mean effectual calling, is
born with all it is limbs; as all the powers and parts of a man are to be
wrought upon, (whereof we spoke in the last head) so calling, and grace is
wrought, and effected by the power of God in all it is own parts: The proud
Pharisee thought Luke 18.
he had the substance when he had nothing but the shadow; he thought he had the
body when he had nothing but the bark: Pharaoh and Judas had some regret of
spirit, repentings Exodus 9. 27, 28. Matthew 27. 3.
of soul, reformation of their actions, but it was not enough; faint wishings,
and lazy wouldings are not from the special grace of the spirit: There may be a
watery eye, a blushing face, a blubbered cheek; a suspicion of it self, a de
jection of spirit; and yet no true grace: Every slight trouble is like Saul's
armor that will not fit: Man indeed would think that so much were enough: but
Gods thoughts are not as man's thoughts. We read, that when the Lord sent Samuel
to Jesse his Family, to anoint one of 1 Samuel 16. 6, 7.
his sons, Jesse caused all his Sons to pass before Samuel, first Eliab, whom
Samuel took to be the chosen of the Lord, because he was well complexioned, and
tall statured: but the Lord tells him that was none of the man; and so the like
for Abinadab, and Shammah; till at last David comes, and he it is, that the
Lord intends to prefer to the Kingdom: So souls hear there is a work must
pass on them, or no glory; Now they bring out all before the Lord, sorrow for
sin, confession of sin, some endeavors, and partial amendment, and profession
for Christ; but it is none of all these; It is little David, said the Lord, a
through change, that I will own; true conversation, that I will crown; many
through ignorance take the Leah of superficial repentance, instead of the
beautiful Rachel, of solid, and serious returning: They are much mistaken, who
think the sandy foundation of every sorrow, able enough to bear the
superstructure of the new Jerusalem: They that look upon repentance only in
the community, as sorrow, and not in the special notion, as renovation, may run
wild, and miss their way at first setting out.

To sorrow for sin, and not separate from it; to mourn for it, and not to get
some good mastery over it, though the spirits help; to lament it, and not to
loath it; is not effectual calling: To have a sense of sin, and not a sight of
a Savior: To feel the curse, and have no faith in Christ; is not the change we
are speaking of: we must distinguish between a carnal rupture, a legal
despondency of spirit, and a true spiritual humiliation, and debasement of
spirit, which centers the soul upon a forsaken God; one may take many steps,
yet if they come not so near, as to touch the golden Scepter, all is nothing.

8. The benignity of God: If God be thus to them hereafter: If those that are
Predestined to life, be effectually called now they are on earth, what shall
be done to them, when they come to be possessed of Heaven? If he give them
effectual calling at this distance, cum omnibus pertinentiis: with all the
appendixes, and appurtenances thereof, what will he give them, when they come
into his immediate presence? Surely, if now they be, as walls and doors in his
spiritual building, then he will build upon them Palaces of silver, and Cantic.
8. 9.
enclose them with boards of Cedar.

Indeed the comparison is not to be made between here, and there; now, and
then: If Incomparabiliter superna civitas clara est.
such things in the way, what shall they have when they come to their heavenly
Country? If effectual calling, while they be sublunarians, then surely an
everlasting Crown, when they shall be suprasolists: If so much, while they are
in cottages of clay, then much more, when they come to the place of glory: If
the first fruits be an handful, headful, and heartful, what will the crop and
harvest be? If the earnest amount to thus much, what do you think the total sum
will be? Effectual calling is a glimmering of future glory, the dawning of the
eternal day; and what is the morning to the noon? the twilight to the midday
splendor? It is most true what the Scripture says, that the heart of man
cannot conceive, what the Lord has treasured, and laid up for his people; 1
Cor. 2. 9.
and to this purpose speaks St. John, Beloved, now we are the Sons of God,
and it does not yet appear, what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him, as he is, 1 John 3. 2.

Now there is near relation, then there shall be much assimilation; here is
mutual love, there shall be great likeness: If God here bring them into the
suburbs, then surely hereafter into the heart of the City: If so much now,
while they are in the valley of tears, then much more, when they come to the
mount of joy. If this be done for them, while they are in their nonage; what
then shall be done for them, when they come unto a perfect man, unto Ephesians. 4.
13.
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

9. The excellency of effectual calling: Is Paul to give thanks to God for it;
in Colos. 1. 12, 13, 14. Put the best of the things of the world into the
scales with it, and it will weigh them all down: Set them all by this, and this
will be higher than they by the head, and shoulders: It is good for the body,
advantageous to the soul, the blessing of both: It is good for this life, for
another life; never out of date, ever useful; Godliness Poenitentia est
medicamentum pulveris spes salutis.
is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. There is nothing in the world has so many
commodities, as it has: It is health from sickness, life from death; liberty,
pardon, sonship, fellowship, perseverance, Qui per poenitentiam peccata diluit,
angelicae felicitatis consors in aeternum erit.
glory are the virgin-companions that follow effectual calling: We may truly
say of it, that it is more precious than Rubies, and the merchandise thereof,
better than the merchandise of silver; and the gain thereof than fine gold,
Prove. 3. 14. 15. It makes a King of a beggar, a friend of a foe, a righteous
one of a rebellious one, a godly man, of a godless man, a saint of a sinner;
and those that are thus qualified, have an excellency above others: The
righteous is more excellent than his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. He, or she, that
has this, need not care, what else they want. It is the sottish ignorance,
that makes the world tread under feet this Jewel: There are but few Crowns
adorned with this Diamond: These waters of Jordan though contemned, yet are
better than Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus. 2 Kings 5. 12.
Think, and think as often as you will, yet you will find nothing to match, or
equal effectual calling; many think they have all, when their will is
fulfilled, but they have nothing, till their will be changed; many say, all is
well, if they have what they would; but all is ill, till they have what they
should: To say, one is wise, rich, strong, beautiful, parted, is much; but to
say one is gracious, holy; renewed in their affections, reformed in their
actions, is a great deal more. Nay, further; to say one is prudent, sober,
honest, moral, courteous, is something; but to say they are godly, far
surpasses: Nay to rise higher, to say, one makes a good show, is religious,
outvieth the rest; yet to say one is a new creature goes beyond it by many
degrees: That is good in the positive, and comparative, but this in the
superlative degree: The Lord open your eyes, that you may see the glory, and
beauty thereof: A most blessed condition, it must needs be that has so many
choice consequences, a most excellent endowment, that brings so great
enjoyments; no mean quality, that has so many immunities: It is a great King
that is attended by such a noble train, a Royal Queen, that is waited upon by
so many maids of honor: A whole Paradise of temporal felicity, falls short
of a part in spiritual sanctity.

10. The industry of youth: If the Lord do In juvenili aetate, vigent corporis
senjus, visus acutior, auditus, Promptior: qui in hac aetate se domant, and Deo
se sociant, praemium Joannis expectant.
blood runs fresh in their veins, they had need plie the work of salvation,
and apply the word of sanctification, let them strive for grace early, and they
are like to have grace in earnest: If they do not sedulously improve their
time, they will hardly savingly approve the truth. They should strive against
sin, oppose obstacles, be conquering corruption, defying the devil, tooth, and
nail, with might, and main; now, or never; now, if ever, as we use to say: It
is good policy to labor, while one is young, that they may get a stock against
they be old: If young men be sluggards, and loath to put their hand to the
plow, it is just with God, that they should beg in harvest, and have nothing;
Prove. 20. 4.
for though they call upon God afterward, yet it may be he will not hear them:
Now must they follow their pattern Jesus Prove. 1. 28.
Christ, and work the works of God, who has sent them into the world; the
night comes, when no man can work: So that we may say John 9. 4.
with the Psalmist, Both young men, and maidens, old men, and children; let
them praise the name of the Lord, Psalm. 148. 12, 13. Let them give glory to God
by taking true shame John 7. 19.
to themselves; As Joshua says to Achan; advance his worth, by the amendment
of their works; and raise his honor by the ruin of their sinful humors: To
see young people running, striving, laboring, in spiritual things, till they
sweat again; Oh what a precious sight is this; how does the Lord smile upon
such in love, and clap them on the back with encouraging promises, They that
seek me early, shall find me, Prove. 8. 17. and to him that asks, it shall be
given, and to those that knock, it shall be opened, Math. 7. 7. And to him that
overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of
the Paradise of God, Revel. 2. 7. One accounted the King of Persia happy,
because while he was young, he had attained to so great puissance: They are
really, and eminently happy, who attain to an estate of grace, while they are
young; to be made new, to have the strong holds of hell in the soul thrown
down, is a mercy, that but few attain unto; but to reach this under the conduct
of the spirit in youth, is an addition, and augmentation of the mercy; It is a
sweet thing, (says a precious man) when God satisfies young people with his
mercy, and that satisfaction abides, Master Buroughs Hos. 2. 15.
so as they rejoice all the days of their life. But careless youth is usually
more active for sin, than grace; and that strength which they have from God by
common bounty, give to the devil in special service; and sweat in gathering
fading May flowers, and adventure to the ditches brink to gather dasies, to
make a garland of vanity withal; in the mean time neglecting to dig for
Diamonds and Pearls, to set in the Crown of Eternity.

Young people are for the most part loytering, when they should be laboring,
playing when they should be praying, singing, when they should be sighing,
merry, when they should be mourning; youth must have its liberty, they say; and
the greenness of young years, is with most a sufficient warrant of any
exorbitancies; whereas in many regards it is an aggravation of them; But soul,
if thou improve Indigne transacta adolescentia odiosam efficit senectutem.
Fro^te capillata est, post est occasio calva.
not thy young years, thy golden age, thy white hours, thou may rue it to
all eternity in the blackness of darkness. If you strive not now to enter in
at the strait gate, it is to be feared you will never do it in old age. Time
has all forelocks, no hinderlocks; your time is hasting away, and if once its
back be turned, there is no calling, or returning it back again: It is better
to be Prometheus, than Epimetheus; after-wit is dearest, but fore-wit is best.

11. The misery of sinful age: If the Lord Prove. 16. 31. Canities tunc est
venerabilis, quando eagerit, quae canitiem decent.
state, to be lamented with tears of blood: The hoary head, I confess, is a
crown of glory, but then it must be found in the way of righteousness; sin
degrades them of their venerable dignity. Such souls have cause to get alone
into a corner, and put their finger in their eye, and lay their hand upon their
heart, and say, what shall I do, and what shall become of me? Caesar wept to
see Alexanders statue, who had done so much, and conquered the greatest part of
the world, and was but young, when himself had done so little, who was of more
years: Aged sinner, there are many at 30. years, have done much for God through
his grace, are thriven, and grown lusty in piety, and have run hard, that they
are almost at Heavens gate; when thou have done nothing, are like Pharaohs lean
kine, and did never take two paces in the way of godliness, who art 50, 60.
years of age, it may be more, and have enjoyed as good, nay it may be better
means, than they; there are many of half thy years, that grow rich with a
little, and thou growest poor with much: That have more in their little finger,
than thou have in thine whole body; you have cause to lay it to heart, that you
have laid out your heart no more for God: Have thou stood all this while a tree
in Gods Orchard, and art thou outstripped by a young Plant? Have thou been all
this while in Christ's School, ever 2 Timothy 3. 7.
learning, and not yet able to come to the knowledge of the truth? Art thou
still no further than a. b. c. Oh, consider this, thou that have forgotten God
so long, least he tear thee in Psalm. 50. 22.
pieces, and there be none to deliver. Yet I would not have thee to despair;
yet there may be some hope concerning thee; if thou turn truly, repent really,
pray perseveringly, seek seriously, and believe savingly: Thou had need
double thy diligence, and redeem the time: Thou must do two hours work in one:
Thou must ride all night as well as all day, or Plus omnibus religione operam
dare senibus convenit, quos praesentis seculi florida aetas transacta desemit.
thou will hardly get to they journey's end: Thou had need borrow time from
thy sleep, from thy meals, from thy recreation, and lay it out about thy soul;
because thou have neglected thy salvation so long; the smalnesse of your
remaining time, the decay of sense and reason, habit in sin, the wiles of the
Devil render your change doubtful and difficult: However give all diligence to
make thy calling, and Election sure: Be importunate with the Lord, and like
Jacob take no nay: The Sun is almost down, yet if thou put on hard, thou may
reach thy Fathers house, before daylight be quite done.

12. The utility of observation: Does the Psa. 28. 5.
works of the Lord, or minds the operation of his hands, in his actings,
toward them, or theirs, in their soul, or body, formerly, or lately, in
greater, or lesser affairs, in light, or dark, prosperous, or adverse
emergencies? much might be squeezed, and got out of them: It was the
commendation of one, that he could make something of nothing and great matters
of small; so the providence of God, which others make no account of, if
Husbanded and improved might amount to the salvation of the soul through God's
blessing: They are therefore to be recorded in our thoughts, and registered in
our understandings: In the Arc was kept the pot of Manna, which was a
remarkable, and extraordinary providence of Heb. 9. 4.
God toward the Israelites, in that they were fed, and preserved so long by it.

A Godly man of late has set before us a very commendable pattern of this
nature: I mean Master Ambrose, in whose middle things you have a Catalogue of
providence, etc. The footsteps and goings of the Lord are to be marked and
observed: It is not amiss to keep a Book, or List of them; let mercy be
remembered, Beneficia Dei omnibus horis consideranda sunt.
misery regarded; let trials be thought on, let afflictions affect us; let his
providence of all sorts, especially those of greatest stature live in our
memories, and not be buried in the grave of oblivion; shall the Lord pass
under our window in actings of various, and diverse kinds; and shall not we look
out to see what he does? when his hand is stretched out to strike, or reached
out to stroke, shall we regard neither? Contemplation of our maker is one great
Homo ad contemplandum creatoris suum conditus est.
end of our making; and to view not only the ways of the Lord in general
toward others, but also his goings in particular toward our selves: It were
but a practice of piety to have Chronicles of this nature; as none of the
words, so none of the works of the Lord should be suffered to fall to the
ground by us, but we should take them up at the first bound; we should show our
selves thrifty in this case, and gather up the fragments, that nothing be lost;
we are ready to murmr at God's dealings many times, when there is great
reason to marvail at them, when we see the issue of them: Providential actions
are the ripening of the Lords previous intentions; by providence do his
purposes come to the birth, and his promises receive accomplishment; let them
therefore be heedfully observed, and carefully preserved.

13. The dignity of the word: Is the word David: Thy word have I hid in mine
heart. Psalm. 119. 11. He had high thoughts, and singular conceit of it; with
such a deep stream did his affection run toward it, that himself could hardly
sound the bottom thereof, as appears by his pathetical expressions: O how love
I thy Law? It is my meditation all the day. Ps. 119. Scripturae divinae jugiter
mente voluantur. (...). 2 Timothy 3. 16. Si verbum Dei auferas, solemn e mundo
sustulisti.
97. The word is of exceeding great use and price; it is an universal remedy;
it is a means of enlightening the head, of enlivening the heart. It is as the
Sun in the Hemisphere of the soul; without which a man or woman is in the land
of darkness, such is the virtue, and value thereof, that Luther said, one leaf
of the Bible was worth the whole world; it is the honor of a Nation, the
happiness of a people to have it; it is a blessing that proceeds from signal
love, and distinguishing favor. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes,
and his judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation, and as
for his judgments they have not known them. Psalm. 147. 19, 20. The Bible is
the Book of Books, the Scripture is the King of writings; which made Charles
the great to crown it with his own Crown; it is of such worth, that it is a
shame for a Christian not to be well read in the writings, seen in the sayings,
versed in the verses, Catechized in the chapters, and perfect in the pages of
that Book: One asked a Schoolmaster, whether he had Homer's Iliads; and for his
negative answer took him a box on the ear, and went his way: Do not they then
deserve to be ratled with reproof, condemned by censures, that are weary of the
word, that slight the Scriptures, that trample the Testaments under their feet?
I am loath to leave it upon record that this age has produced such
Caterpillars: It is a sin I think not to be mentioned without mourning; such
consider not, that where there is no vision, the people must needs perish.
Prove. 29. 18. O let not the esteem of Gods word die, and wither in our hearts.
It is a golden treasure though it be but in earthen Vessels; it is most dainty
fare, though not sauced with the enticing words of man's wisdom; what though it
be not written, so as to please sinful fancy, let it suffice it is so written,
as to procure saving Faith: It is eminent for beauty, transcendent for
splendor to those that have their eyes opened. A word fitly spoken is like
Apples of Coecus no^ judicat de coloribus.
gold in Pictures of silver. Prove. 25. 11. All the words of God are fitly
spoken; and as they said truly, Never man spoke like this man. John 7. 46. So
may we both truly, and justly say in this ease: Never any spoke as God speaks
in his word; that must needs be excellent, which teaches of God, traineth the
soul, tutoreth the affections; that must needs shine with a peculiar luster,
which the spirit as superior Agent, makes use of as an inferior instrument,
to condemn vanity, convince of folly, to confound sin, and to convert the soul.

14. The necessity of hearing: Then carnal bona, good things, because they
cannot do them been, well: It is true, God loves adverbes better than verbes,
the manner of doing rather than the matter, yet the matter rather than nothing
at all; and though it be bad not to do, that we do well, yet it is worse to
leave our duty wholly undone.

It is but doleful doctrine to exclude people from the means of grace, because
they have not grace: The wicked are condemned in Scripture for not calling
upon, and worshipping Psa. 14. 4. Jer. 10. 25. Verbum Dei praedicandum est, ut
audiens credat. Romans 10. 17.
the Lord: If the word be the means of life, then the dead in sin must wait
upon it: If the Ministers be Christ's ushers, then those that would learn must
come, and sit at their feet; Faith comes by hearing, then they must come to
hear, that they may have faith: Peter preached to wicked ones, to the
crucifiers of Christ, Acts. 2. 22, 23. etc. if it were lawful for him to hold
out the word, it was lawful for them to hear it: If lawful for him to preach to
them, then lawful for them to be present: Let them then hear the word, and hear
it with fear, and trembling; however let them hear it: Though they come to
work, yet God may new mould them; though they come for custom, yet God may
convert them. Though their intentions be sinful, yet Gods execution may be
sanctifying; some ordinances are for all, others only for some: The Sacraments
are Gods visible, the Scriptures his audible word: Though the wicked are to be
debarred the one, yet not to be deprived of the other: Though they may not be
Communicants at the table, yet let them have communion with the Pulpit; though
they be shut out of the chancel, yet let them not be shut out of the Church:
Though the presence chamber be kept with lock, and key; yet let the Court gate
be set wide open: Though they may not handle the body of the Lord, yet let them
hear the word of the Lord.

CHAP. III. II. Use, for Terror.
THis doctrine in the next place speaks woe, 1 Kings 22. 8.
louringlie upon the ungodly: And as Ahab said of Micaiah touchilie, so may we
say of this doctrine truly, in reference to wicked men, that it does not
prophecy good concerning them, but evil. Does the Lord effectually call, whom
he did predestinate, then you who yet are not called, have cause to wax pale,
and to be filled with tremblings of spirit: It is like the hand writing upon
the wall, and may loose your joints, and cause your knees to smite one against
the other; and that upon these accounts, and the consideration of these ensuing
particulars.

1. Such cannot yet conclude, that they are predestinate; they have no ground,
nor foundation, whereupon such conclusions may stay themselves; where the
deluge of sin rests still upon the spirit, and ways of a man, or woman,
thoughts of predestination, can find no rest for the sole of their feet, but
must either return, and die in the rest of fond imagination, or else flutter up
and down, till for want of being feathered by grace, they fall, and perish in
the inundation of unrighteousness: Such deserve to be hist at in the Schools
of the Saints, who make a flourish with such conclusions, and are not able to
produce the premises. The Scripture gives no warrant thus to conclude; for
Peter joyneth election, and sanctification together; where he says, Elect,
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the
spirit unto obedience, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 2. or to sanctification rather: What Bez.
in loc.
though you have civilitie, and outward conformity, is that firm ground,
fitting for thee to anchor upon with determinations of thine election; you may
happily make shift to pass the corpse du guard, of man; and so to say the word,
that none can gain say you, yet God can perceive your lisping; and when you
come to the passages of Jordan, that lead into Judge. 12. 6.
the heavenly Canaan, and shall say, Lord let me go over, and open unto me.
The Lord will say, art thou not a sinner, a rebel, and an unbeliever; and
though thou say nay, yet the Lord will find thee out; and bid thee say
Shibboleh, which thou can not do; but instead thereof will say Sibboleh: Thou
can say outward calling, but not inward calling; thou can say common grace,
but not special grace; thou can say, I am a Christian, but thou can not
say, I am a Saint. There thou stammerest, and stutterest, and art not able to
speak right; Be not deceived, God will not be mocked: And is Gala. 6. 7.
it not a most doleful, and direful condition for a man to be in, wherein he
cannot say upon sufficient grounds, my name is written in Heaven, I am one in
the Catalogue, and list of the elected, and chosen of God.

Whom the Lord chooses, he chooses to holiness, to sonship, now if these
things be not in Homo praedestinatus est esse filius Dei. Aquin.
thee, what have thou to say for thy predestination? It is true, Gods people
are many times under dark dispensations, and their condition so clouded, that
with Paul and his company, neither Sun, nor Stars for many days do appear
Acts 26. 20.
to them; so that their hope of being saved is taken away; but yet their
condition is far distant from thine: For they have the root, though not the
branch, the habit, though not the act: Though they cannot through impediments,
yet they ought by Gods commandment to conclude his eternal loving thoughts
toward them; yet withal they have such a glimmering, and see so much of land,
and discover the coast, though but in a small measure, that if put to their
choice, they would not exchange conditions with thee: but as for thee, that art
in thy sins, thou have no right, neither ought thou to conclude any such
thing to thy self.

2. If such do conclude, they do but delude themselves; only Saints can make
right syllogismes in this matter, for mood, and figure; because themselves
through the grace of God are in a good mood, and they have the figure, and
image of Jesus Christ upon their hearts: others can make paralogismes, as the
Apostles Jam. 1. 22. (...).
word is; and are good, or rather bad at fallacies, which is the way of
disputing altogether in the devils Schools; and what a desparate thing is it
for a man to cheat, and bear false witness against himself in things of so
great moment, when he is forbidden such demeanor toward his neighbor in the
ninth commandment.

Friend, and Christian Reader, you are full of conclusions, and do abound with
determinations of his kind, yet wanting the inward and saving workings of the
spirit, you do but cozen, and deceive your selves: If you say, you are chosen,
and are not called; if you say, you are purposed to life, and are not prepared
for life, that your name is registered in Heaven, and not your nature
regenerated on Earth: If you think you are the object of predestination, and
not the subject of sanctification, you do err in your thoughts, and greatly
mistake: Has your hope for Heaven no other staff to lean on, but the broken
reed of Egypt? Will that building last, that has no other foundation than the
sand? Hear what Paul says, If a man think himself to be something, when he is
nothing, he deceives himself, Gal. 6. 3. It is universally true, in divine,
moral, civil, and natural things; and very applicable to our purpose: He that
thinks himself to be something in regard of predestination, and is nothing in
regard of effectual vocation, deceives himself; yet there is nothing more
common with people, than thus to do; and this is the misery, and the mischief
of all, that people will not be beaten out of these thoughts, and sayings,
though there be not the least of reason for them.

To run upon mistakes in temporals, may be great detriment, but to do it in
spirituals, is like to prove grievous damnation: Is thy condition ever the
better for such conceptions? Is it sufficient warrant for hopes, and
confidences, to have nothing but the hand and seal of Satan's delusions. There
is nothing will bring thee more woe, and speaks thy condition more sad, than
these delusions: It may be truly said of thee, a deceived heart has turned
thee aside, that thou can not deliver thy soul, nor say, Is Isa. 44. 20.
Adulatio fallax crudelis est.
there not a lie in my right hand. Deceitful flattery will prove destructive
cruelty; bottomless conclusions will prove bottomless confusion, if the spirit
prevent not by Scripture confutation; and in the end thou will find this course
but a counterfeit salve for thy sins, a skinning of the sore, and the devils
breath to carry thee down the more swiftly, and easily upon the tide, and
stream of temptation into the Vitiis semper serviunt blandimenta, lenocinantur
dulcia delictis.
gulf of perdition. The Lord uncase this deceit for thee, and show thee the
hellish and hideous face thereof: Rational men will have a reason for what they
think or do; and should not Christians make the divine reason, the basis of all
their inward, and outward motions: It is most unsafe for us to enter into the
labyrinth of predestination, to pace it with our own feet, to make particular
applications of it to our selves without the clue of Scripture-reason; and does
not that, even in the text, say? Whom he predestined, them he also called. If
effectual calling say not Amen, thy strong conceits have none of the spirit's
seal: If those that have true grace, may have doubting fears concerning their
predestination, then thy certain thoughts without grace are but a deluding
fancy; If they may yet suppose their condition sad, thou have no reason to
conclude thine safe. Christ says, Woe, when all men Luke 6. 26.
speak well of you; and does not a woe also belong to such, who think, and
speak well of themselves causelessly. Deceits of this nature will prove like
mountains of snow, which with the heat of Gods wrath will dissolve into floods
of sorrow.

3. In the next place consider, what contentment crudities, and distempers in
the spirit; without this Benjamin what are all the rest? who could smile at the
highest seize of nature, which would prove, but fawning flatteries,
without the presence of this: It was the counsel of Jesus Christ to his
inceptors, his young beginners; Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the
spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are
written in Heaven, Luke 10. 20. If we had the devil under our girdle, and our
selves were not in God's heart; if we had never so much power on Earth, and had
no place in Heaven, what would it advantage us? If the world were thrown into
your bosom, and your name not written in God's book, could you say, you had
enough? Heraclitus said, if the Sun were wanting, it would be night for all the
Stars: If the Sun of righteousness has not risen upon your heart with healing
under his wings, the glory of your accommodations lies buried in darkness, and
yields no pleasure to the eye; what satisfaction can there be in the world's
goods, if thy maker be not thy Husband? Which he is to none, but those that are
effectually Gaudium solummodo verum est, quod de creatore concipitur.
called: The blaze of temporal privileges will soon out, if the knowledge of
predestination do not maintain the flame: If you cannot upon good grounds, to
wit, the right application of Christ, which is done in effectual calling, make
out a real appointment to glory, may it not, is it not sufficient to mar
your mirth, to spoil your sport, to damp your delight, in things here below; if
seriously considered, and duly thought on? Can meat be savoury without this
sauce? Can drink be sweet without this sugar? Though a Sea of temporal
immunities should come flowing in, yet it is this fair fresh stream, that alone
can glad the soul. What contentment can there be in Remi, and Remaliahs son, if
the waters of Shiloah do not bubble softly by the door? Indeed, people like
swine, like beasts, do find, and take delight in these husks, and they are as
dear to them, as their heart; and do account their having of these things to be
their happiness: but it is, because they know not what their state and
condition is, that they are lost in sin, nor what it is to be without some
certainty of predestination, (they not being able to reach in their
contemplations, things of so high concernment) which did they know, it would
make their hearts to shrink for fear: but that is but adverse felicity, whose
foundation is nothing but brutish insensibility; and that is not to be
accounted the joy of a Christian, of a man, that has its rise from nothing
subjectively, but beastlike ignorance, and supinesse: Haman accounted all his
wealth, and greatness nothing, so long as he could not have his will Esth. 5.
13.
of Mordecai: so may thou say, and the Lord make thee to say so; I have
wealth, and wit; health, and honor; friends and favor; profit, and
preferment; peace, and plenty; goods, and gold; meat, and money; Lands, and
Lordships; life, and liberty: but what good do these do me, they avail me
nothing, so long as sin sits in the throne; so long as I am not called, not
converted; and know not that I am elect, and chosen: How can I look upon them
with delight, when I cannot perceive they are enamelled with eternal love: It
is most true, that Paul says; Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is
nothing pure, Tit. 1. 15.

4. The next sable consideration, that maintains In sacra Scriptura quicquid
promittitur felicitas est.
world: There are peace and pardon, grace and glory, love and liking, salvation
and sonship, Heaven and happiness promised; but only to those that are truly
called. The Scripture is a treasure of precious promises, a storehouse of
gracious engagements: They are spread thick upon the pages of holy writ; The
Manna of spiritual promises falls there together with the dew of Heavenly
doctrine: They both descend, and distill together. This laden tree is forbidden
fruit to thee; And as Peter said to Simon Magus, so I to thee in the name of
the Lord, who art in thy sins, Thou Acts 8. 21.
have neither part, nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the
sight of God. It may justly be said to thee, touch not, taste not, handle not,
for they belong not unto thee. It is for the Saints only to sit down at this
feast, you that are sinners must be excluded Procul hinc, procul este profani.
this Paradise: who do you think the Author to the Hebrews means by heirs of
promise, Heb. 6. 17. but gracious souls? and more plainly does he express
himself, when he says, that they which are called might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. May it not be just cause of sadness to thee,
to think, that thou may not warm thy self at this fire; to think, that thou
may not pluck one fair apple from the tree; that there should be so many
heaps of gold, and sums of treasure, and thou not able to say, one penny is
thine own: There is no saving good but by the promises, and yet such is thy
condition, that they belong not to thee. How can thou sleep without this
pillow under thine head? Does it content thee to have ordinary mercies by a
common providence without an interest in a special promise? Promises of mercy,
favor, love, good will are not general, but particular, not to all, but to
some; that is to say, to the Saints, the renewed, the effectually called: This
is one thing, whereby the Apostle aggravates the misery of the Ephesians former
natural condition, that they were strangers from the Covenants of promise,
Ephesians. 2. 12. and not without good Spem merito conconjungit promissionibus de
Christo: nam absque his quicquid sperant homines, frustra sperant. Bez.
reason adds, having no hope. Those that hope without book, hope in vain:
Souls, do not lay claim to the covenant, without you find the condition wrought
in you; do not challenge glory for your right, unless you can find grace in
your heart; do not say you are pardoned, unless you find your self purified;
verily, it must needs be very sad, if you but seriously consider it, that
there should be so much good promised, but none to you, because you are still
bad: He that carries a promise in his bosom, has an antidote against all
disasters; and he that wants it, lies exposed even to eternal destruction; you
had better want any thing, than this.

5. In the fifth place: Those that are not effectually I am thine, save me;
for Hic murus aheneus esto, etc.
I have sought thy precepts, Psalm. 119. 94. I am thine by predestination, I am
thine by effectual calling, for through grace I seek thy Laws and ways; were
not these things great stays to his spirit? Dionysius said, that this benefit
he had by the study of Philosophy, that he bore with patience his alterations
and changes; so this is the benefit that comes by grace, that such may bear
their sufferings not only with patience, but also with joy, yea and may sing
in the midst of a prison: The ship of the soul, being ballasted by grace, and
effectual calling, is preserved from being overturned by tempests of sorrow.
David was one of God's, and in an estate of grace, and this he had some
knowledge of, or else he could not have kept his ground, as he did against the
thundrings of 2 Samuel 16. 12.
Shimei's railing tongue; without these things you will be like a wild Bull in
a net, when you are caught in the toil; You will have no patience in, nor
hardly profit out of your troubles. Does not David once and again put the
bottle to his mouth, and suck in this cordial in the time of his spiritual
swoonings; that God Ps. 42. 11. Ps. 43. 5.
was his God. The want of these things must needs make the furnace of the fiery
trial more hot and burning; than otherwise it would be: It is doleful for a man
or woman to be in such a condition, that they may say, I want goods, and I want
grace too; I want peace, and I want piety; I want liberty, and I want life; I
want comfort, and I want conversion; I want Friends, and I want God's favor
too; when God shall strike you with his rod, and you cannot make out, but that
his blows are from loathing, and not from love; that they are from a foe, and
not from a Friend; it will be very dismal, if you cannot say, these wounds have
Mitigat vim doloris considerata aequitas ferientis.
I received in the house, and at the hand of my Friend, and these are the
chastisements of my Father in mercy, and not to misery, it will prove a sore
shaking to thy spirit, a sad aching to thy soul.

6. The last bitter Pill is this: Such have no non est inventus, We cannot find
him. And Vix been moritur, qui male vixit.
can you die comfortably, that have not lived graciously? Can you end with
safety, that have not begun with sanctity? can you have peace with the grave,
who have no peace with God? can you be willing to be called out of the world by
death, who were never called in, to God by grace? you may have strong fancies,
but you can have no sure Faith. If you be not effectually called, and have not
the true spectacles of faith and repentance, whereby you may be enabled to read
your own name, in Heaven's court-rolls; What will ye do in the day of
visitation, and in the desolation, which will come [from death?] to whom will
ye flee for help, and where will ye leave your glory? without Isai. 10. 3, 4.
me ye shall bow down as Prisoners [of the grave] and fall among the slain, [by
the stroke of death.] The sting of death is sin, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.
56. It is sin, that makes death to bite, and leave the venom of his teeth
behind him: you are yet in your sins, death therefore must needs be bitterer to
you than gall, and wormwood; you are yet without grace, and cannot make out
that you are one of Gods; you cannot therefore lay this snake in your bosom
with safety. Have not such thoughts sadned thy heart, when death's messengers
have knocked at the door? certainly they have, unless thou be given up to
fearednesse of conscience, and stupefaction of Spirit, which is worse than the
strongest sense of sin, and misery; without grace death must needs be the
(...).
King of terrors; what is your reason, why you are yet loath to die? Do you
not say, it is this? Oh, if I were fit, I should not fear: If I had that upon
me, and in me, that Ministers speak of, I should be willing to die; If I did
but know, that I did belong to the Lord, and that I were one of his chosen, it
would never trouble me; why, you can never make out the latter without the
former. You can have neither actual, nor habitual comfort in death without
these things; you had better never to have been born, than thus to die; better
never to have looked forth of your Mother's womb, than thus to look death in
the face: friends, relations, accommodations, helps, are all too weak twiggs
to lay hold on to keep from drowning in this Sea of fear, if there be not
grace: you may send to Ministers to come to you (I wish with all mine heart,
people would send to Ministers to come to them in the time of their health and
prosperity; and deal with them about the state of their souls) but they, if
they be faithful, dare not, cannot speak peace to you, while you are in your
sins; for what peace, so long as the vilenesses, and abominations of thine
heart are so many: There is no peace, says the Lord, to the Isai. 48. 22.
wicked. What comfort can they have in, or against death, who cannot rightly
particularize the promises of eternal life, which such Quis mortem temporalem
metuat, cui aeterna vita promittitur?
cannot do as we have showed in the former head: If spirituals be absent,
temporals will prove, but miserable comforters: Though now you hold up your
heads, and blank at nothing; and you laugh at the shaking of the spears, and
account darts as stubble; yet in your month, Job 41. 29.
when you come to be gravid, and go big with the sorrow of languishing
sicknesses, and fear of approaching death, you will change your tone, and sing
another song; if you be not as bad or worse than the Devil; for he has such a
sense of his condition, that it makes him to tremble: Thus you see what a
dreadful condition all are in, that are not effectually called; no comfort
present, or future; none in life, or in death; none in earthly and common; none
in Heavenly and spiritual good things: They may well have their name changed,
Jer. 20. 3.
and be called Magor-Missabib, fear round about; for there is just cause they
should be a terror to themselves.

CHAP. IV. III. Use: For reprehension.
IN the next place this Doctrine reads a Juniper Omnes sumus in minimis cauti,
in maximis negligentes.
about it: You have had no serious thoughts about it; nay, you have done what
in you lies to hinder this work in your selves and others: You have not
prayed, nor endeavored for it; the desire of your soul has not gone out with
earnest longings for this work; (nay, shut not up the Book, do not go your
ways; but stand still, till you have gone through this use, bear your chiding
patiently, and let your ear hearken to the reproof of life, Prove. 15. 31.
that you may abide among the wise. If you turn your back, and stop your ear,
there is no hope for you) nay, has not grace been a grievance, piety
needless preciseness, the new birth a burden, duty a disparagement in your
conceit and estimation? Have you spent all your days in Gospel places, and
under Gospel means, and yet are unchanged still? why do you resist the Holy
Ghost? Do you not know that in thus doing you forsake your own mercies, sin
against your soul? Do you think you were born a Saint, and need no
regeneration? alas you are mistaken, for with David you were shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did your Mother conceive you. You must be born Ps. 51. 5.
Nullus vitam, in qua natus est, been finiet, nisi renatus, antequam finiatur.
again, as well as born, or you will never do well. Or do you think it is
enough to be a Christian in the general? so are the Papists; or that it is
enough to be a Protestant? so are many that live in known and open sins; or
that it is enough to be civil, or outwardly religious? so are many who yet deny
the power. Truly the foulness of your ways declares the 2 Timothy 2. 5.
folly of your thoughts, and your conversations will show that there are such
cogitations within: what, have passed all this time in the world, and yet never
passed the streights of the new birth? Have so many years gone over your head,
and the work of grace never come upon your heart? Oh, that you would be
heartily ashamed of this. Are you not at one time or other convinced, that your
condition is not good toward God, and that you are not in an estate of grace?
Though you keep your head above water, and cherish some raw hopes of your good
plight, and that you shall be saved, arising either from love to your self, (as
if that must needs be which you could wish) or from presumption, that the
generality shall be saved and are in condition good enough; or from ignorance,
taking that to be grace which is not, and thinking that repentance may be had,
when you list, and think you have most need of it, at the last, when death
comes. Yet upon more serious thoughts, you have misgivings of spirit, that all
is not well, which makes such thoughts unwelcome guests to you; and for all
your bravadoes, yet, you never yet durst adventure upon the work of
examination, or view your self by Scripture light, for fear the issue and
result should not correspond to your present hopes, and thoughts: Is it nothing
to be in such a condition, wherein thou have no truth of grace, as thou art,
who never wast converted, and changed? Is it nothing to have the Lord bring his
action against thee for standing out against him, and to threaten to execute
the Law of retaliation upon thee, and to pay thee in thine own coin? as he
does, when he says, Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched
out my hand, and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and
would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock, when
your fear comes, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26. This is a dreadful hearing, every word
has its weight: what, shall the Lord call, and sinners not come? shall he
reprove, and they refuse? shall he offer, and they oppose? he counsel, and they
contemn? shall the great God be thus condescending, and will thou be no more
corresponding? It will be a vain plea, to say thou can not effectually call
thy self; such excuses and defenses Causa patrocinio non bona major erit.
will increase, and not decrease thy fault: For you can oppose, and with a
stiff-neck resist the grace of God: You have not heard, nor read, nor kept
Godly company, etc. as you might; besides, God has made a gracious promise of
giving his spirit, and this spirit has Prove. 1. 23.
come, and you have given it churlish use, and frowned it out of doors: Is it
nothing to hear the Lord thundering against thee, as he did against his old
people the Jews. And now because ye have done all these works, says the Lord,
and I spoke unto you, rising up early, and speaking, but ye heard not; and I
called you, but ye answered not: Therefore will I do unto this house, which is
called by my name, as I have done to Shiloh; and I will cast you out of my
sight. Jer. 7. 13, 14, 15. This reprehension and commination concerns thee as
well as them, because thou art in the same predicament, and condition with
them. You see the hardness of your heart, and the heaviness of Gods hand go
together; want of conversion brings woeful confusion; and such as continue
vassals of sin are like to prove vessels of sorrow. Is it a light matter in
your account not to Echo to the voice of God from Heaven? Is it nothing to
have the Lord of life and glory stand and knock at the door of your cottage,
and you not let him in? He has promised to open to you, if you knock, Matt. 7.
7.
and will not you open to him, when he knocks? Is it nothing to have God make
tenders from Heaven, and we be unwilling to accept of his terms? Is it nothing
for the Lord to complain, and say, All day long I have stretched forth my hands
unto a disobedient, and gainsaying people. Romans 10. 21. If you be not past
shame, you cannot but be ashamed of these things; let not the Lord have cause
to say, Were they ashamed of what they had done? nay they were not ashamed at
all, neither could they blush. Oh, that you Jer. 8. 12.
should make no more account of such a work as this is? That you should spend
your time, and never seek for this? Bear with my chiding and reproof; the Lord
set it home upon your hearts: It is out of love and desire of thy good; I must
not flatter thee. Open rebuke is better than secret love; faithful are the
wounds Prove. 27. 5, 6. Magis ama tobjurgator sanans, quam adulator dissimulans.
of a friend, but the kisses of an Enemy are deceitful: Such as you are must be
rebuked sharply: You are in much fault; your sin is great, your condition is
sad, and not to deal plainly, were to destroy thee, and my self too.

That this use may not fall off from your spirit, I shall fasten it with three
nails; and that I may make it more full and complete, give me leave to lay
before you a trinity of considerations; which are these:

1. Aggravating circumstances. 2. Administering causes. 3. Astonishing
consequences, or considerations.
1. Aggravating circumstances; In the first place, Tanto majus peccatum esse
cognoscitur, quanto major qui peccat, ^abetur.
one, as it were, which is a mountain in another; That may be less in one,
which is larger in another; The quantity of sin bears proportion with the
quality of the sinner. Not only the absolute constitution of sin, but the
relative dimensions thereof also are to be taken into our consideration. Now
these following circumstances do exceedingly greaten and enhance your neglect,
and slighting of effectual calling, and the work of grace.

1. The multitude of your calls; in regard of 1. The frequencie of the Act. 2.
The variety of the agent.
2. The altitude of your inexcusablenesse. 3. The magnitude of God's
providence. 4. The lenitude of the spirit. 5. The longitude of your life. 6.
The latitude of your comforts.
1. The multitude of your calls: You have had many calls many ways.

1. In regard of the frequency of the Act: Lord has multiplied his calls, and
you have not magnified his grace by your acceptance: The Lord has often called
from Heaven, and thou have not taken one step from Earth to meet with him: may
not Christ say to thee, as he said to the Jews; How often would I have gathered
you together, as an Hen does gather her Brood under her wings, and ye would
not? Luke 13. 34. That how often, implies often; (...).
the Lord Christ has many times stretched out his wing of love, and thou have
refused to come under his shelter. This is very sad, and should thou then
hear any other voice then that of Punitione gravi dignus est, qui saepius Dei
gratiam contempsit.
chiding and other language, then that of reproof. Thou art not able to reckon
up the many times that God has called thee. In the Canticles we find, Return,
return, O Shulamite, return, return. Cantic. 6. 13. Four times: but this is
nothing to the times that thou have been called. The Lord called to Samuel four
times, before he understood his voice, 1 Samuel c. 3. beginning of it: but thou
have been called not four, but four hundred, four thousand, yea innumerable
times, and thou know not his language; and have not yet made answer; speak
Lord, for thy servant hears.

Thou have been called in thy nonage, in thy middle age, yea in thine old age,
and yet thou art in thine old condition. Thou have been called long ago, and of
later time. Thou have been called in thy single, in thy sociated estate. Thou
wast called in the time that is past, and art called still in the time that is
present. God has, and does send many messengers, spokes-men, to woo thee for
himself, and thou have said nay, to all. The Cock has crowed not three, but
three hundred Matt. 26. 75.
times, and yet thou have not remembered the words of the Lord, nor wept
bitterly for thy sins: You have been called on the Lord's day, and yet not one
of your days have been spent for the Lord: You have been called on lecture
days, and yet you have never truly leaned on Christ: You have been called in
fasting seasons, and yet you have not fasted from sin: You have been called on
thanksgiving days, and yet you have not given in your name to Christ: You
have been called publicly, and privately, and yet will not be prevailed
withal: Your callings have been frequent, and yet your Zeal is not fervent:
Your calls have been many, but your graces not any: Your calls have been
several, but your faith not saving: You have had diverse invitations, but no
dutiful inclinations. The dew has fallen upon you every morning, and yet you
have not sprouted out. The showers have descended upon you continually, and yet
you have not ascended Heavenward; the Heavenly Elatum cor, durum, and expers
est pietatis, ignarum compunctionis.
drops have fallen upon you every day, and yet your heart more hard then stone,
has received no impressions. The Lord may complain, and say, I have showed
thee my ways, and taught thee my paths, but thou have refused to walk in
them: I have written to you the great things of my Law, but hitherto they have
been accounted Hos. 8. 12.
as a strange thing by you. The Lord has called you first in one place, and
then in another: First by one Minister, Friend, and Book, and then by another;
Has sent many Epistles, and Letters subscribed by his own hand, sealed with
his own Ring, by his appointed Posts and Messengers; and yet all will not do,
no answer is returned: my unworthy self have diverse years called you in the
name of the Lord; and this poor Book the meanest in the Library of Divine
writings, speaks to you to this purpose; let not all these bear witness
against thee, so shall thou not be judged with a witness. Has wisdom
prepared all things, and sent forth her Maidens several times to Prove. 9. 1, 2.
summon thee in, and yet wilt not thou come, but remain in the tent of thy
folly? Verily Friends, this is a Lamentation, and there is reason it should be
for a Lamentation. If you call your Child, or Servant often to come to you, and
they move not, how does it trouble you? How do you think the Lord will take it
at your hands, that come not after so many sendings for? You have often heard
of Christ and repentance, but yet you will not accept of the one, nor act the
other. You have often been entreated to close with Gods will, and you would
never yet enter upon his ways. You can deny none of this that I say: Your
conscience tells you the same; what, not changed after all this? what a
wretched creature art thou, that make not the Lord welcome after all his
journeies from Heaven to thee? Had you had but one call, it had been a great
evil to have slighted it, but when you have had so many, how great must your
contempt needs be? For the Lord to send Servant after Servant, to require
repentance, to call to conversion, and you to return no suitable Fruits, to give
no demonstratious of ought, but barrenesse is a sin of no inferior nature.
What is that whereby the Lord in Scripture does so aggravate the stubbornness
and sin of his people, and does leave, and give them up into the hands of
misery, and punishment, for? is it not this, because 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.
he has spoken so often, and they regarded not? The Lord has but whispered to
some, so that they have not understood his voice fully; to others he has
called, but has as soon turned his back upon them, as they upon him, and has
not returned to make any more offers; but with thee it is far otherwise, the
Lord has spoken to thee with a more clear and distinct voice, and though thou
have run from him, yet he has run after thee, and has not ceased to call upon
thee, and to bespeak thine heart for himself, but this has he done day after
day, week after week; and yet thou continuest in thy contradiction, and
perseverest in the perverseness of thy rebellious heart.

2. In regard of the variety of the agent: The Come unto me all ye that labor,
and are heavy laden. Matthew. 11. 21. He commands, This is his Commandment,
that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ. 1 John 3. 23. He
wooeth and entreats; We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. 2
Cor. 5. 20. He threatens: Every Tree, that brings not forth good fruit is
hewn down, and cast into the fire. Matthew. 3. 10. He wishes, O that there were
such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments
always. Deuteronomy. 5. 29. He chideth and expostulateth, Why will ye die, O house of
Israel? Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31, 32. He promises, Whosoever believes in Christ,
shall not perish, but have everlasting life. John 3. 19. The Lord does as I may
so say, turn every stone, and try conclusions, for the turning Quid est cor
durum? ipsum est, quod nec compunctione scinditur, nec pietate mollitur, nec
movetur precibus, minis non cedit, etc.
and conversion of thy stony heart, and varieth the manner of such
dispensations on purpose to accommodate himself to us, seeking our good; and
yet thy froward, waieward spirit does not regard. He has come, as I may say,
in a several dress and habit, and yet thou have not been taken with him. The
Lord has come with a loud, and with a low voice; with melting mildness, and
with terrifying threats; with pure Commands, and with a precious Covenant; with
cordial invitations, and with confounding comminations: But you have not been
allured by favors, nor scared by frowns: You have not been won by wooing,
nor converted by counselling. It is strange and sad, that you are so stubborn,
that you will not be drawn with the Silken cords, and Golden bands of promises;
so stout, that the discharge of God's Canon threatening does not make you stoop;
so rebellious, that the Authority of God's Command does not awe thee; so
stiff, that his angry chiding does not make thee bend. The Lord has hung out
his white Flag first, and then his black Flag; and yet thou do not resign,
nor give up the Castle of thine heart to him. He has piped unto thee, but thou
have not danced; he has mourned, but Matthew. 11. 17.
thou have not lamented. If his Messengers tell thee of thy lost condition, and
dreadful condemnation; then thou art ready to say, he has a Devil, and
Preaches nothing but Hell. If he tell thee of the grace of God in Christ, and
the freeness of salvation; then thou art ready to presume, and go on
securely in thy sins, saying, it shall be well with thee, though thou add
drunkenesse unto thirst. John Baptist and Christ both have come; The Deuteronomy. 29.
19.
Lord has thundered from Sinai, and breathed from mount Sion; and yet you
cavil, and Nunquam deest impiis, and reprobis, quod calumnientur.
have something to object against your own souls. The Lord has come to you
like a Lion, and like a Lamb; he has come to thee like a man of War, and like
a Friend in Peace; he has come with his drawn Sword in indignatition, and his
Royal Scepter of reconciliation; he has come with his rod of Iron, and that of
Gold too. He has called thee in a tempest, and in a calm; He has used fair
means and foul; what, are you so cross, that nothing shall please you? Is your
mouth so out of taste, that nothing can be well relished with thee? Are you so
averse, that you will shun God in all these ways and paths, wherein he
comes to meet with you? Shall neither sweet nor sour things have operation
upon you? Does not the blustering storm make you seek a Sanctuary? Do not the
warm Sunbeams melt, and dissolve you? It argues a very evil frame of heart to
oppose, or not to mind this work thoroughly. It argues desperate pride of
spirit to resist, to refuse the grace of God, the calls of Christ under such
various dispensations.

He has come to you with a rod in his hand, with chidings in his mouth: he
has come also in love, and in the spirit of meekness too. He has sent a
thundering Luther, and a mild Melanchthon to you; he has spoken big words;
his words and calls have been of all sorts and sizes. He has laid before you
the curse of the Law to deter you, he has set up the cross of Christ in the
Preaching of the Gospel to draw you; you have had sound reprehension, sweet
exhortation; and yet for all this you have not run to the bosom of Christ, but
remain in the borders of the Devil's Kingdom: Verily, this makes your sin to
swell and boln exceedingly.

2. The altitude of your inexcusablenesse: Vsitatum generis humani vitium est,
peccatum defendendo excusare.
too ready to acquit themselves; and though they are to be accused, yet they
would fain be excused; this practice we learned from our first Parents; and
though we offend, yet we would defend: but the Lord has stopped thy mouth,
that thou have nothing to say for thy self; and the Figg leaves of vain
pretenses will be but a weak Bulwark against the charge of the Almighty. If God
should ask you how it comes to pass, that you are still unchanged who have
sat under the means, you will be like that poor man, Matthew. 22. 12.
speechless; and it will be most dreadful for any man or woman, when they shall
be brought to their trial, and judgment at the last, to have no plea nor
allegation to put in for themselves. It is the way of the righteous God, (if
sinners will not be pliable) so to order his dispensations toward them, that
they shall be left without excuse, and shall be condemned by their own
Conscientia peccati formidinis matter.
conscience, which will be matter of greatest horror; consider these ensuing
particulars, and see what excuse will be found for you.

1. Sometimes people excuse themselves, because Via Domini ad cor dirigitur,
quum veritatis sermo humiliter auditur.
the channel whereby the word of life by the work of the Lord runs to the
heart; bless God, you that have the use of this sense, and use it to Gods
glory: yet the Lord many times shuts up the passages of the ear, by infirmities
and casualties, for reasons best known to himself; but though thou can not
hear, yet thou can read: Though thine ears be obstructed, yet thine eyes be
opened; though thine ears be deaf, yet thine eyes are not dim; though the Lord
has taken away thine ears, yet he has given thee eyes, and though he have
shut up one door, that leads to the head, yet he has opened another; and
has afforded thee such education, and bringing up, that thou have been taught
to read: and though grace usually come in by the ear, yet when the Lord bars up
that, he can let it in by the eye; but you have not improved your talent of
reading; you have been like the unprofitable servant, that hid his Lords Matt.
25. 25.
Talent in the earth. There has been a price put into thine hands, but thou
have been so foolish, thou have not had an heart to improve, Prove 17. 16.
and make use thereof. The Scripture and good books have been to you as a
garden enclosed, and as a fountain sealed; so little have you given your self
to reading: Paul's counsel to Timothy, give attendance to reading, is
calculated 1 Timothy 4. 13.
not only for the meridian of a Minister, but of every true Christian also:
what know you, but God might have set home the word read upon your heart, and
have sent Acts 7. 29, 30.
his spirit to help you, as he did Philip to the Eunuch in reading; will not
this enervate and ham-string the force of other pleas, that you had a could,
but not a would to read, a faculty, but not a fancy? a power, but no pleasure
to read? that you had skill, but no will at all?

2. Many say they cannot read, when yet is good; you have your senses and
memory vigorous enough for other things, and why not for this? There wants
only a will; I Sola voluntate quisque efficitur. Plut.
have read of one Eurydice a noble Lady, who being a Slavonian born, and most
barbarous, yet for the instruction of her own children, she took pains to learn
good letters, when she was well stepped in years. And ought not the life of our
souls to be as dear to us as the children of our body? And though your sight be
taken away from you now, yet time was when you had the use of it, and it may be
for not making use of it aright, God has deprived thee of it; therefore that
cloak of excuse is not long enough. And though you cannot read, yet it may be
some of yours can; though not the Parent, yet the posterity; though not the
Master, yet the man; and you may hear them. God has not denied you your sense;
or if none in the house can read, which sometimes falls out, (a woeful thing
it is,) yet you having a gift of hearing, must wait upon the public preaching
of the word the more. The Philosophers say, that nature is an indulgent mother,
and where she is defective in one kind, she is redundant in another, and what
she subtracts from one faculty, or sense, she gives to another, and so does
compensate, and make amends; as those to whom she denies sight, she gives the
bettet memory, etc. So we wanting one faculty, or sense, which might be very
subservient for our souls good, should labor to make double, and so much the
more improvement of that we have. But thou, though thou can hear, yet give
not thy self to it; Thou should hear more, and thou hear less than
others; thou should hear oftener, and thou hear seldomer. Oh it is a
blessed thing Auris bona est, quae libenter audit utilia.
to have the ability, and act of hearing that which is good; Blessed are your
eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear, Math. 13. 16. It is thy duty
to hear much, but not thy deed; thy part, but not thy practice; He that has
ears to hear, let him hear, what the spirit says to the Churches, Revel. 2. 7.
and blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy.
But you come not at the word; Verba Dei, quae aure percipitis, mente retinete.
or if you hear it outwardly, yet you care not for holding it inwardly; you had
need never be out of Christ's School, never make any play days; all days in
the week had need be hearing days with thee; you had need lay your ear close,
and catch all, and not let any fall besides you: but thou will purposly avoid
the Church, or meeting place, thou will not come nigh the door of that house:
for weekly lectures thou neglectest them, for Sabbath day Sermons thou art
hardly drawn to them; for good company thou carest not for coming amongst them,
and to hear their discourses of heavenly matters. Thou art willing thine ears
should be as wickets, to let in wicked talk, but art loath to open them as
gates to let in worthy truths: do you think you shall have any excuse, who have
been entrusted with such a talent, as this is? Shall you be allowed to plead
with your tongue, who have refused to hear with your ear? Have you forgotten
what the spirit says? He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even
his prayer shall be abomination, Pro. 28. 9.

3. Many will say they have no time, which Nemo vestrum parvi aestimet tempus,
quod in verbis consumitur otiosis.
have time for vain words, and have you none for virtuous works? God has given
you time for good duties, and if you give it away to the Devil and sin, will it
be a current excuse to say you had none? You have time to riot, but none to
read; you have time to hunt, but none to hear: say, you have much ado to
struggle with poverty, and your day labor drinks up your time, yet you find
some hours to wast, and spend impertinently: Oh, if you did but lay out that
time in spiritual industry, which you loyter away in sinful idleness, how much
might your soul be advantaged? yet say, you had no vacant time, a wise man or
woman Ephesians. 5. 16.
would redeem, and purchase some time out of the hand of bodily affairs, and
bestow it upon soul-concernments, and would provide for the life of his spirit,
though with some loss to his flesh, and yet be a gainer: but say, that in
ordinary days an hours absence from the world (which I will not, which must
not be granted) to be present with God, could not be dispensed with all, and
thy condition so hard-hearted, that thou could not borrow a few sands of it;
yet thou have the Sabbath Day free for this very end and purpose; which is to
be spent wholly for thine eternal good, wherein thou art wholly to mind, and
look after grace and Heaven; and if oni this day thou had but studied hard,
thou mghtest have been none of the meanest Scholars in the School of Christ.
Thou may not do the worlds works on this day, and yet rather than thou will
do ought for thy soul, thou will trifle, and truant away this golden season
most wretchedly. It is a great burden to thee to give a few hours attendance in
public assemblies. How many vain words, worldly, yea, wicked works pass from
thee on that day? The Sabbath is so irksome to thee, that thine heart many
times says as they, When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and
the Sabbath that we may set forth wheat? Amos 8. 5. You should have pleaded
hard with the Lord on these days for grace; and you have played it away: You
should have been searching the Scriptures, which testify of Christ, and so
might have attained John 5. 39.
eternal life: You should have been in your closet pouring out your soul before
the Lord: You should have been questioning your heart, and laying the line to
your life, when alas, many such days have passed over thine head, and if thou
cast up thine accounts, thou will find there has been nothing done for thy
poor soul. Thou know no more of Sabbath Sabbatum asinorum.
almost than the Ox and the Ass, that rests from his labor. Thou may
not work on this day, and yet thou will not mind thy soul. Thou may not
trade in the world, and yet thou will not traffic to Heaven. Oh, will it not
be terrible to think that thou have had so many Subbaths, and yet have no
sanctity; that thou have had so many hallowed days, and yet have no holiness;
That thou had rather sleep, and pass away these days with oscitancy, and
carelessenesse, than strive to enter in at the straight gate of grace. Thus
this opponent is answered, and this excuse, if weighed in the sanctuary
balances, will be found too light. Thou have had time more than thou have
known what to do withal.

4. Many would plead for themselves, that Pascimur apertis, exe^cemur obscuris.
questions in the word to pose the Scholars of the higher form; and there are
easy things for those of lower capacities: there are shallows, where the Lamb
may pass, and depths for the Elephant to swim in. The material fundamental
things, that are of absolute and indispensable necessity to salvation are
written in such legible characters as it were, that he that runs, may read
them: They are all plain to him that understands; to him that gives himself
Prove 8. ^.
to knowledge. They are printed with such a great letter that weak eyes may
read them; besides, the Ministers of the word are the Captains and chief of
your form, whom God has appointed to construe your part to you, and to Job
33. 23.
be interpreters to you of his mind and will: They speak plain to you, and
stand over you, and point you to every letter and word, as it were with a
fescue: For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line,
line upon line, here a little, and there a little. They Isai. 28. 10.
give you short and easy lessons, but a little at a time, that you may the
better get it by heart. They explicate and illustrate it by the help of the
spirit, for your better understanding. Though you have but weak conceptions,
yet they have plain expressions. Though you have but shallow parts, yet they
have significant phrases; Pro qualitate audientium formari debet sermo doctorum.
and such as are faithful, do study to have their words conformed to the model
of your apprehensions; and deliver themselves in a familiar way, that you may
know where to find them. They speak English, that thou may understand them.
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, or woman, whosoever thou art.

5. If thou be of a dull, heavy, sluggish, regardlesse the Ministers of the
Lord commanded to do, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet,
and show my people their transgression, etc. Isai. 58. 1. If thou be a
dead-hearted creature, they are to sound the Trumpet in thine ears. If thou be
spiritually deaf, they speak the louder, and more vehemently, in a more then
ordinary manner. How fervent has the Minister been many times, that he might
startle thee? How zealous, that he might be a means to enliven thee; he has
been more than usually earnest, and has been carried out with a more then
ordinary vehemence, and vigor, Supr a modum: quibus verbis melius significatur
tum servornm Dei audacia tum populi surditas obfirmata. Jun. in loc.
that he might make thee sensible of thy condition, and bring thee to a sight
of thy sins. He has wearied himself, that he might win thee; and spent his
lungs, that he might speed thy course. He has roared in reproof, been
exquisite in examination, pathetical in persuasion, that he might rouse thee
from thy secure rest, rectify thy mis-judging thoughts and raise thee from the
bed of sin. He has thrown Hellfire into thy face, has opened to thee the
posterne of Heaven, that thou might have a glimpse of glory; and all to make
thee nimble, and vigorous in seeking grace, in sueing for a pardon, in settling
upon Christ. He has been carried out beyond himself, has been enlarged above
measure, has outdone his standing abilities, that thou might be carried
into the bosom of a Redeemer, live no more with a straightened heart to God,
that thou might have ability to do for God.

6. Some say, they are forgetful, and have no memory: They are like a sive, and
cannot retain; but though it be thus with thee, yet repetitions are made use of
for thy good; which is a commendable thing, for as much as we find warrant for
it in Scripture; what else is the Book of Deuteronomy, but a repetition of of
what was formerly delivered? This was Paul's course, when he says, To write
the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe.
Phil. 3. 1. Has not the Minister spoken to thee the same things diverse times,
either in the same, or several words; he has inculcated and repeated, that
thou might the better remember somewhat. He has often harped, and struck
upon the same string, that thou might be enabled to retain the note. How
often has he repeated the doctrine of faith, the duty of repentance?
Directions, means, motives, have been gone over again, and again; so that if
thou remember not, it must needs be more through wilfulness than
forgetfulness; and more through the obstinacy of thy heart, than the oblivion
of thy head; you have had the same thing presented to you more than once, and
yet is the representation and Idaea thereof out of your mind? I might have
spoken to many other excuses that people have, but by these and their answers
may the rest be satisfied; when they have had time and opportunities, and means
of getting grace, and God has provided remedies against their weaknesses,
which might stand in the way to hinder them; when things have been propounded
pressingly, delivered lively, and yet have not been savingly closed withal;
when truths have been ingeminated, and not applicated; what excuse can they
have for themselves? Is it not plain that they wilfully neglect Conscientia
mill testes.
grace, and voluntarily slight the calls of God; and will not their own
conscience be the chief witness against them?

3. The magnitude of God's providence: In Nullum est momentum, quo homo non
utatur, vel fruatur dei bonitate, and misericordia.
remarkable providence the Lord has walked toward thee. He has clouded thy
condition sometimes, and again has caused the Sun of more comfortable
dispensations to break forth, and shine upon thee with its cheering beams. He
has broken thine estate, that it may be thou wast not worth a groate, and
again has increased thy substance unexpectedly, that thou art become great;
like a skilful Arithmetician he has lessened thy means by substraction, and
division, and has augmented it by multiplication; he has preserved thee from
destruction Jonah 1. 17. M. Bridge.
by drowning, when thou wast at the brink of danger; and has provided for thee
a chamber of preservation even in the belly of confusion, as he did for Jonas;
as a late Divine says well. Thou ladst a fall from a ladder, or pair of
stairs, and yet the Lord caught thee in his hands, that thou wast not broken
to pieces; and yet thou have not fallen down upon thy knees with humiliation
and sorrow for thy sins, nor given up thy self into the hands of the Lord, to
be fashioned, and framed to that temper, that likes him best. Thou wast at the
mouth of the grave by sickness, and yet the Lord returned thee to the Land of
the living: but for all this, thou have not been sensible of thy spiritual
death in sin, nor breathed after a recovery to grace; you were invaded by the
fury of fire, but the Lord came in to your rescue, as he did to the three
Children in the furnace, and yet you have not sought to escape the fire of
Hell. The Lord has brought you into such a Town, or Family, and there has
done you good, and yet you have not sought to be one of the Family, and
household of Faith. If thou do but set down and reckon, thou may recount many
dealings of the Lord to thee in a more than usual manner, and yet thou have not
set thy self to delight in him and his ways. Have none of his providence
prevailed with you? none of his mercies melted, and moved you? Innumerable have
been the Lord's gracious eminent dealings toward you, which are set off with
the greater glory and splendor, by the foil of some precedent, or intermixed
Psa. 51. 8. Quam dives es in mise^icordia, quam magnificus in justitia, quam
munificus in gratia, Domine Deus noster! non est, qui similis sit tibi.
adversity, or casualty; your desperate wound was cured, your broken bones God
has caused to rejoice: your poisoning has been prevented, the snare that was
laid for you the Lord has broken; the time would fail to enumerate all; so
that thou may say, How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God. Psalm. 36.
7. But, O the sadness, for all these thou have gone on in thy sins, and
rebellions against God, and have not cared for a change from sin to grace: thou
have slighted the Lord's sayings, notwithstanding these his doings, and have
contemned his calls, notwithstanding these his carriages toward thee. Ah soul,
is this 2 Samuel 16. 17.
thy kindness to thy Friend? What, do thou still stand out against the
Lord, and build Bulwarks against the most high? This was the great sin of the
Israelites anciently toward the Lord, that they came not into him who had done
so much for them; They soon forgot God Psalm. 106. 21.
their Savior. Does not a Parent take it sadly, when after all he sees no
amendment in the Child? The Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was
turned from the God of Israel, 1 Kings 11. 9.
who had appeared to him twice. How many times has the Lord appeared to you,
and yet you have never appeared for him? Have the paths of the Lord to thee
been mercy and truth, and yet have not cared for his Christ, his Covenant? The
Lord may say complainingly of thee, as David of Nabal: Surely, in vain I Matt.
25. 10. 1 Samuel 25. 21.
have kept all that this fellow has in the Wilderness, so that nothing was
missed of all that pertained to him; and he has requited me evil for good: I
have done thus and thus for this man, or woman, and yet I perceive nothing but
stubbornness and stoutnesse in them, toward me.

Have thou had so many word-calls, and so many work-calls, and yet has no
saving work passed upon thy soul? Have there been such goings of the Lord to
thee, and yet no goings of thy soul to the Lord by Christ? Do all these deeds
of God bring thee to no duty for God? Have they not made thee sit down, and
reflect upon thine own heart, and say, what? shall I go on in my opposition
against my portion and presevere against my rock and refuge; against my Friend
and Father? Do thou thus requite the Lord, O foolish soul, and unwise? Is
Dcut 32. 61.
not he thy Father that has bought thee? has he not made thee, and
established thee? This Quo liberalius nobiscum agit Deus, eo magis accendi
decet pietatis studium in cordibus nostris. Calv. in loc.
makes your condition sad, and aggravates your rejecting the offers of grace
more and more: for our hearts should be tinded and fired at the beams of God's
bounty; and the fannings of his favors should blow that fire up to a flame.
The Lord has sought by these to gain you, and yet you have refused to give him
your heart. If you search all your common places, I think you will not find an
Argument, whereby you may plead for your self.

4. The lenitude of the spirit: Add to these Ad faciendum bonum quid in nobis
bonus Spiritus operatur? monet movet, docet.
sweet gales, that that has breathed upon you, which would have carried you
into the haven of Christ's bosom, into the creek of an estate of grace! But
you with the perverseness of your will, have rowed hard against the wind, that
you might not be born down by the sweet impulses thereof. That has taken you
by the hand, and has said, Come, go along with me, and I will show you the
Father; it has in love laid hold upon thee, to lead thee to Christ, but thou
have pulled away the shoulder: It has got thee into the ship, and would have
launched forth into the deep, and have carried thee over to the other side, to
the land of promise, but thou have skipped out, and made away from it. O the
renitencies, and reluctancies of thy spirit, against the reducing and reverting
acts of the spirit. It has admonished, and advised; moved, and minded; taught,
and tutoured Monet memoriam, movet voluntatem, docet rationem. Isa. 30. 21
thee; but thou have not learned: when thou have been ready to turn aside to
the right hand, or to the left, thou have heard the spirit speaking a word
behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it: When thou have been ready to
stretch forth thine hand to unrighteousness, thou have heard that saying: Oh,
do not this abominable thing, that I hate: But thou have not Jer. 44. 4.
obeyed the voice thereof. Though the Lord says to thee as he said to Abraham,
in all that Sarah has said unto thee, hearken unto her Genesis 21. 12
voice; so in all that the spirit says unto thee, hearken unto its voice. The
Poets tell of one Orpheus, who was so cunning a player on the Harp, that by his
excellent Music he drew after him wild Beasts, Woods, and Mountains, and by
the same recovered his Wife out of Hell. The spirit has made to thee the
Music of the spheres, and played deliciously upon the strings of holy writings
to allure, but thou have been more wild than the Beasts of the Woods, more
immovable than the mountains, and have refused to follow its delightful
harmony; nay have been unwilling to come out of the fire of Hell, to be drawn
out of the Hell of thy natural condition by the allurement of its choicest
tunes, and raised strains. Sin has taken you by one hand, and the spirit by
the other to draw you from sin to it self, but you have scowled upon the
spirit, when you smiled upon sin. The spirit has showed thee, O man, what is
good, Mie. 6. 8.
and what the Lord does require of thee, even to do justly and love mercy, and
to walk humbly with thy God: But thy endeavors have not been suitable to the
spirit's discoveries.

The spirit has made to you revelations of God's will, and yet there has
followed thereupon no reformation of your ways. Nay, the spirit has gone so
far with you, that it has convinced you of thus much, that you should be
better than you are, and yet for all this you are the same man and woman: It
has convinced you of Christ's readiness to espouse you, and yet you have not
been willing to give your sins a Bill of divorcement, and to put them away; it
has made conscience its deputy, (your bosom Friend that knows you well, and
should have great interest in you,) Conscientia est cordis scientia.
and has set it on work to speak to, and to deal with you, but all will not
do. The spirit has visited you every day upon this account, and has spoken to
you enticing words, and entreated you not to be so unruly like an Heifer
unaccustomed to the yoke, and has said, come soul, hearken to the voice of
God, obey the call of Christ, you do not know how much it may be for your good;
why will you not be gracious, and holy? Do you not know, that to be Godly, is
to be Godlike? The great God that can grind you to powder, the good God that
can save your soul, calls upon you, invites you, and will you say nay? The
spirit has opened the Lord's love Letters, and read them to you, and descanted
upon them: but you regard not. To sin against such shinings of the spirit is no
small matter: affronts offered to the spirit will sit heavy upon the soul, when
time shall be. Has the Dove come, and have not you Spiritus Jesus, spiritus
bonus Sanctus rectus, etc. Isai. 63. 10.
opened the window to let it in? Has the holy, good, pure spirit of Jesus
Christ thus parlyed with you, and do you stand out against its sweet assaults?
This is to vex and rebel against the spirit, which is a great provocation to
the Lord, and aggravation of thy sin, whereby thou do incur his
displeasure, procure thy destruction.

5. The Longitude of your life: The thread clusters of Grapes, no ripe fruit. It
was the aggravation of Jezebel's sin, that the Lord gave her space to repent of
her fornication, and she repented not. Revel. 2. 21. It is sad that thy
Virtutes faciunt dies bones.
days have been great, but not good; that thy days have been many, and thy
grace but mean. Thou have through the Lord's clemency renewed thy youth as the
Eagle; but though the Lord has been calling, thy heart is not renewed. The
Lord has added years to thy days, as he did to Hezekiah; but thou have 2
Kings 20. 6.
not yet added sanctity to thy civility, nor piety in the power to thy
profession in the form. Thou art well stricken in years, but thou have never
yet fully stricken a Covenant with the Lord. Thou art entered a great way into
the scores, but would never yet enter cordially into the School of Christ.
The Lord has cut off many in their sins, while they have been acting
unrighteousness; as the drunkard that said, he should never die, yet fell down
a pair of stairs presently, and died: while you have escaped, and your life
has been given you for a prey; and yet all this while you have gotten no
grace. You have seen of the fruit of your body it may be to the third
generation, and yet the Lord has seen no fruits of grace from your soul: you
have been fruitful according to the flesh, but barren according to the spirit.
You have lived so long as to have an hoary head, but not so long as to have an
holy heart. Has the Lord lengthened out your days to a longer date, than the
days of many of your stock and Family, and yet are you without grace? Are you
ancient in years, and yet have not come in, to the ancient of days? Is
invaluable time of no value with you? Is it nothing, think you, to live thirty,
forty, fifty, Nihil pretiosius tempore, and heu, nil hodie eo: vilius
invenitur.
nay sixty, yea almost four-score years, without a change, without conversion
after so many callings? The Lord gives you time to turn in, and will not you
turn in time? The Lord deferres as doomes-day, so death's-day, out of long
suffering, because he is not willing that thou should perish, but that thou
should 2 Pet. 3. 9
come to repentance. Have thou stood all this while in the Lord's orchard, and
is not the time of Figs yet with thee? What will Christ say, when he comes and
finds nothing but leaves on thee at these years? Age and years aggravate Mark.
11. 13, 14.
failings of infirmity, because such should have more discretion, much more
then, the fault of impenitency, because they should have had true contrition.
It is not because others are worse then you, that while they after a little
time have withered in the grave, you for a long time have walked on the Earth,
but it is that you might be better then they. It is not because you shall not
die to nature, but it is because he would have you live to grace; and yet are
you dead while living? no life, nor love to this day?

Ah poor soul, is it not a very great evil that the Lord has been laying siege
to thine heart, these thirty, forty, fifty years, or more, and yet thou have
stood up, and stouted it out against him; that thou have so long been called by
him, and yet thy deaf vile heart has not hearkened to him, nor closed with him;
length of time overcomes many things, but thou have been little Nihil est, quod
longinquitas temporis efficere non possit.
the better for thy long time. There has been an extension of thy days, but
no intension of thy desires; a lengthening of thy season, but no loathing of
thy sins.

6. The latitude of your comforts: Your David, My life is spent with grief,
and my years with sighing. Psalm. 31. 10. Have lived all their days, and it may
be not seen the Sun, when it may be, it was never hid from thee. The Lord has
watered your Praesentis vitae prosperitas aliquando idcirco datur, ut ad
meliorem vitam provocet.
long life with the showers of comfort, that it has flourished; and yet for
all this you have not been found in his ways; others have been straightened by
poverty, when you have been enlarged by plenty; others have been overwhelmed
with misery, when you have been over-flowed with mercy; the condition of others
has been very sickly, while your constitution has been very healthy: You have
hardly had a day of sickness, while others have had days of nothing but
languishing sorrow; others have been made (with Job) To possess months of
vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to them, that when they lie down
they say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings
to and fro, until the dawning of the day: But thou have had Job 7. 3, 4.
months of liberty, and years of prosperity; and yet with the Halcyon, thou
have not bred in such calm weather; nor blossomed as the Rose in this warm
Sunshine. The Lord has hedged thee in with his favor, and compassed thee
about with fatness, and yet thou have not been his servant: You have not felt
of the calamities, nor hardly tasted of the inconveniences, that others have
drank bitter draughts of, and yet you are never the nearer compliance with the
Lord: Have you known of nothing but prosperity almost, and yet will you know
nothing of true piety. Has that driven you from God, that should have drawn
you to God? Has your habitation stood toward the Sun, and yet has not your
heart stood toward Zion? You have enjoyed a Paradise of contentment, (not but
that you have met with Deus felicitatibus terrenis amaritudines miscet.
some crosses, for that is a very clear day, wherein there comes no cloud
between the Sun and our sight:) But in comparison of others, you have lived as
it were in Eden; and yet have you not hearkened to the voice of the Lord
walking in the midst of the Garden in the cool of the day? Have you had such a
circumfluence of outward peace, and no circumcision of your inward parts?
Sickness is a burden you say, and that hinders, and makes you unfit for any
good; and it seems health does not further you in spiritual things. Want is a
woeful thing, you say, and distracts you that you cannot look after grace, and
it seems wealth does the same too, as you order the matter. Has not your
tranquillity, I say, your aged tranquillity invited you to hearken to the calls
of Heaven? Has the Lord cut the wings of prosperity, that it might not fly
from you all your days, and have you clipped, or clogged the wings of your
affections and desires, that you might not fly into the bosom of Christ? Has
the Lord caused peace, and privileges, comfort, and temporal contentments to
be your household guess, and to lodge with you all night, and yet will you
refuse to make the Lord Christ welcome to your heart? has the Lord enlarged
thy borders, and filled thee with the flower of wheat, and yet has not thine
ear been open to his call? Has the candle of the Lord shined upon thine head
all thy days? Have thou washed thy steps with butter, and has the Job 29. 3.
6.
rock powered thee out Rivers of Oil? And yet has not thy light shined before
men in good Matthew. 5. 16.
works? Have not thou been willing to be washed in the laver of regeneration?
Has not thy Tit. 3. 5.
rocky spirit powered out rivers of tears for thy sins? Thine head has been
crowned with Rose buds all thy days, but thou have not been willing that thy
heart should be crowned with grace. Upon all these considerations you cannot,
are not able to say, that you are not guilty, but must rather say, you are
notoriously guilty: after all these means not to be mended, after all these
allurements not to be altered; to make sturdy opposition, when thou have no
sufficient objections, makes your sin great, and grievous, and raises it
beyond the ordinary pitch.

To contemn grace after all God's countenancings, to continue in rebellion
after so many calls to repentance does exceedingly aggravate your fault.

2. Administering causes: In the next place Sublata causa tollitur effectus.
up by the roots; and if the foundation fall, the building cannot stand.

Now the causes, why people no more mind, and look after effectual calling then
they do, are these.

1. Not right apprehensions 1. Of the nature of calling. (calling. 2. Of the
need of 3. Of the number of the called.
2. False suppositions 1. Of their condition. 2. Of God's compassion.
3. Sinful procrastination. 4. Worldly prosecution. 5. Want of intention. 6.
Others conversation. 7. Wilful ignoration.
1. Not right apprehensions: People have should have. An error in Theory must
needs produce an error in practicks. An error in the head will soon bring an
error into the heart. Wrong apprehensions are not like to have right actions.
The understanding is the leading faculty, and if that be out of frame, no
wonder if the rest move not in their sphere. As our judgments are of things,
so are our endeavors about them more, or less: We shall begin with the first
thing where about their apprehensions are not right.

1. Of the nature of effectual calling: Here

They may happily understand it according to the Letter (though many come not
thus far) but not according to the spirit: they take it to be that, which it is
not; but they take it not to be that which it is. Nicodemus, though John 3. 4.
a chief man, yet was but a Child in this thing. That which was spoken
spiritually, he understood carnally. Christ laid before him that which was
right, and he looks upon it as a riddle, yea as ridiculous.

The most useful things are most unknown, Multa scienda nesciuntur
and the most needless most known; and if people have not right apprehensions
of effectual calling, how can they have zealous affections for it? unseen
things are unsought. In the confusion of Babel, they understood not one Ignoti
nulla cupido.
another; so by the fall of man came such confusion upon the understanding that
people know not the language of the Lord; and when he calls for repentance,
conversion, and bids them Ezekiel. 18. 31.
make them new hearts, they know not what these things mean.

They take this work to be a Star of the lesser magnitude, when it is a Star of
the greater magnitude. The Lord calls for the heart, My Son, give me thine
heart. Prove. 23. 26. And such are peoples misconceits, that they give him the
hand.

The Lord calls for the power, and they mistaking give him the form. The Lord
calls for sincerity in the inward parts, and they give him conformity in the
outward profession. The Lord calls for the conscience within, and they give him
nothing but compliance without. They know not the nature of it. They do not
rightly conceive the parts and properties, the dignity, and excellency thereof.
They think there is such a thing, but wherein the formality of it consists,
they do not apprehend, for they are carnal, and natural. Now the natural man as
he receives not, so neither does he perceive the things of God: for they are
spiritually 1 Cor. 2. 14.
discerned.

They are many strains above the reach of his capacity, above the touch of his
apprehension. Hence it is that they set not upon this work, when called to it;
and that they go away without practice, when such things are preached unto
them. Hence, when exhorted to it, they know not how to enter upon it; and when
advised, they know not how to address themselves to it; misunderstanding of
the object must needs mar the undertaking of the subject; nor will this be
any excusation, but rather an accusation of them, because this and Mala
voluntate unus quisque miser efficitur.
the rest of the evil crew that follow, spring chiefly, and principally from
the will: for people neither know, nor will know. They love to be Children in
such things, and care not for the estate of manhood, wherein childish things
should be put away. Turn them to the these things, and they have hardly a
Primmer knowledge of them. In other things, what a deal of capacity in the
conceiving of them? and therefore a deal of dexterity in the acting them: but
here how shallow, low, and mean are peoples thoughts? Their eyes are blinded,
their minds obscured; and yet it is strange that people should be in the dark,
when pregnant light shines upon them. Though people have these things opened,
and unfolded to them, yet that they should not see into the nature of them, is
very sad. That the Doctrine of effectual calling, or repentance from dead
works, (for they are all one) which is an element and principle of piety, and
therefore put into the Christians Catechism by the Author to the Hebrews,
should be so little known, though often Heb. 6. 1. 2.
conned; so little seated in the head, though so often said by heart, is matter
of admiration. This is the great Remora, and let in the way. Till they get over
this style, they cannot come into the field of grace. Till you know the meaning
of this work truly, you cannot expect to be mended thoroughly.

2. Of the need of calling: People have not

Great is the force of need, and the sense thereof, to set the heart on
desiring, and the hand on doing; and he that knows his need of any thing which
he conceives to be of weight and moment, will through fire and water for the
attainment thereof: necessity will take no denial, and knows how to object
against all excuses, and put-offs. But though a thing were of never so great
excellency and utility, that it were the marrow of their comforts, the life of
their souls, yea the key of Heaven, yet if their eye were not opened to see
this their desires and endeavors would keep their hands in their bosom, and
never put forth themselves to do ought. Now how needful is effectual calling,
and a sanctifying and saving change upon the whole man? If we look upon it as
the mind of God, as a mean to Heaven, we Necessitas praecepti, and medij. Luke
10 42
shall see it is needful: as Christ said to Martha, so may we of this, One
thing is needful, viz. to hearken to, and obey the call of Christ. It is
needful for people, if they would be saved, and who will not profess desires
that way? If they would have a throne in glory, it is needful. If they would
live for ever, if they would escape everlasting burnings, it is needful. But
people are as careless hereof, as if either there were no God, no Heaven, no
Hell, or as if they had found out some other passage to Heaven; so long as
people's need is unknown, so long their negligence will be uncured; so long as
people think they are safe without it, so long they will never be careful to be
saved with it; and so long as they think they are well without it, they will
not readily have a will unto it. It is strange that they should not know how
needful it is, which is superlatively needful. It is so needful poor soul, that
unless thou be effectually called, thou must be eternally cursed; so needful,
that if thou be not changed, thou can never possibly be crowned; that if thou
be not cleansed, thou shall never be glorified; that if thou be not sanctified,
thou can never be saved. By nature thou art an enemy to Col. 1. 21.
God in thy mind by wicked works, and therefore must be renewed, or thou can
never walk Amos 3, 3.
with God in the streets of the new Jerusalem. For can two walk together,
except they be agreed. Be thou what, or who thou will be, if thou be not drawn
to God by grace, thou will be damned in Hell. If thou were the Son of my
Mother, or the fruit of mine own body, I must tell thee, that if this work be
not done, and pass upon thee, thou must needs be undone, and perish for ever.

If thou were as potent as Alexander, as rich as Croesus, as subtle as
Achitophel, as beautiful as Absalom, as strong as Sampson, yet without this
passe-port thou can not be pardoned, nor partaker of glory; so indispensably,
and absolutely necessary is this work, that we may say Non aqua, non igni, non
aere pluribus locis utimur, quam amicitia.
of it more then the Heathen Orator said of friendship; water, fire, and air
are needful, but this more. Friendship and amity with God is most necessary;
yea, it is before meat and drink, for we may live here without them, as Christ
says, Man lives not by bread alone, Mat. 4. 4. Sensus est, homines non vivere
ex solis causis physicis, quum Deus non sit illis adstrictus, Bez. in loc.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: For God is not tied
up to natural causes: but we cannot live hereafter without this; for without
holiness no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12. 14. It is one of the first steps
of that Ladder, which reaches to Heaven, and unless here thou first set
footing, there is no climbing the tree of life. If you cannot produce new
hearts, my dear Friend, and Christian Reader, you shall never possess the new
Heavens. If you have not this work upon your souls, you can neither do, nor
have, that which a Saint should do, and have: You cannot live to God, nor upon
God, nor with God, unless you live from God; what though it do not purchase
Heaven? yet it prepares for it; what though Heaven be not the deserved wages of
grace, yet grace is the desirable way to Heaven. Oh, sad it is, that you
should not know the need of it. Tiberius Caesar said it was a shame that men of
sixty years of age should reach out their hand to the Physician to have their
pulse felt, because they should not be ignorant of the temper of their body
themselves; what a shame is it for men and women, to live many years in the
School of Christ, and to know so little of the need of grace, which is there
constantly preached, and pressed? what Ignorantia sui initium omnis peccati.
a shame for men and women of years to have so little cognizanee of their own
condition, so little acquaintance with their own estate, so little knowledge of
their souls concernments, as not rightly to apprehend the need of a change?
where almost is the man or woman, that is truly sensible of the need of a new
nature? How hard a work is it to convince them thereof? to work it into their
heads, to sink it into their hearts? Did any that were bodily sick look after
Christ, when he was on earth, for a cure, but those that perceived their need
thereof? and we are soon brought to a sense of temporal miseries, and by that
to a sight of the need of a medicine: but in spirituals (through stupefaction)
we feel no pains, and hence it is we care for no plaster; or if people have
some sense of the need of this work, yet it is so faint and slighty, that it
makes them not fervent in seeking after, and suing for it: They have
superficial thoughts that the thing may be good and commendable, and it is well
for them that are in such an estate; but as for permanent and powerful thoughts
thereof they have none: They have not such thoughts as the Apostle had in
another case of great moment; A necessity is laid upon me, yea, and woe be unto
me if I preach not the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9. 16.
So they cannot say, a necessity is laid upon my soul, yea, and woe be unto me
if I be not effectually called: Soul, thou do not consider, that without this
Benjamin, (this child of God's right hand) thou can never see his face; and
that unless thou be regenerated and born again, thou can not enter into the
Kingdom John 3. 3.
of God; that without the life of grace, you have none of the love of God; you
consider not that it had been good for you not to have been born, as Christ
said of Judas, if thou be not reborn to good; that without this evidence you
can have no inheritance; without this wedding garment no acceptance. If here
you have not the communication of the Spirit's grace, you cannot have hereafter
the participation of its glory; if the whole world should be laid down as a
pawn for you, it would not prevail: The Angels in Heaven, that are without
spot, cannot stead you without this. Ah, if you did but know how needful it
were, you would grieve in spirit, you would long and labor, you would sigh and
seek for it, and find no rest in your spirit neither day nor night, till God
had turned your night into day, you sin into sanctity; you would never be quiet
till you were spiritually quickened; and would find no true contentation
Corporis conversio, si sola fuerit, erit nulla.
in your mind, till you had a total renovation of the whole man; yea, you would
say, Lord, give me grace, a new nature, at what rate soever, though it cost me
all I have: Thou may buy gold too dear, but thou can not buy grace too
dear; you would give all that you might have this gift bestowed upon you; you
would be importunate with the Lord, and take no nay, till you were called home
into his bosom, if you did but know the necessity of this work.

3. Of the number of the called: This is the Rev. 3. 1.
too; not considering that the visible Church is less then Christendom, and
the invisible than the visible; like a less circle in a greater. Multi
dicuntur esse in domo, qui non sunt de domo.
There are many in the house of God, who yet are not of the house: It is day
with many, who yet did never see the sun up. There are many that hear the voice
of God, but there are but few that obey it; which made Isaiah to complain and
say, Who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
Isa. 53. 1. And S. John also says, The whole world lies in wickedness, 1
John 5. 19. There are but a few that are up and doing the work of the Lord, the
most lie still in the bed of sin; there are but a few that have got open their
eyes, and are awake, the most are fast asleep on the couch of security. There
are but a few that have cast off the works of darkness, and put on the armor
of light; the most are in the region of darkness and shadow of death; bordering
on the confines of that Country which is Terra del fogo, a land of nothing but
fire and smoke: There are but a few that have got up to the top of holiness;
the most are below in the valley of folly and vanity. There are many that are
the people of God, who yet have no part in God: Those that are effectually
called are but a few, as a remnant left of the whole piece; as a garden plot in
comparison of the whole world. In all ages they have been but few that have
received the spirit to the renewing of their hearts: The garland of grace is
not set upon the head of every one. It is a rare thing to be gracions, and they
are rare persons that are so. The heavenly seed, though it be sown thick, yet
it comes up but thin; we must beat many trees to gather a bushel of such fruit;
and search many Towns to find a little company that truly fear the name of the
Lord. Where we conceive things to be of a more common and universal nature, we
are easily induced to think we have, or soon may have a right and propriety in
them; but where we think they are singular and seldom, it is more difficult to
raise such conclusions, and renders us more diligent in the constant
prosecution of them. Did you know how few were called, you would fear that your
self were not one of that number: Did you know there were but a few that did
attain to grace, you would hardly contain your self, but would be jealous that
you were not within the ring: If you did but Perpauci perducuntur ad reg^um
coeleste.
know the paucity of the sanctified and saved, it would make you more look
after the purifying of yoursoul. If this truth were but fastened upon your
spirit, it would make you more to follow after this work: Did you know how few
are clad in white, and that none but such are clothed with scarlet, it would
make you willing to put off the black weeds of nature, and to put on the
shining raiment of grace: If you knew that but few were good, it would make you
more unwilling to be bad: If you knew that most were sinners, it would make you
more desirous to be a Saint: Til you know that most are excluded, you will
never be careful that your self be included: Till you thoroughly weigh that most
are graceless, you will never heartily wish that your self be made gracious;
the Scripture speaks of but a few, a remnant, a tithe, be you therefore
suspicious of your self.

2. False suppositions: This is a second cause

1. Of their condition: People suppose themselves Multi ad sapientiam
pervenissent, nisi se pervenisse putassent, Cic.
hence it is, they obey not God: it is because people have so strong fancies,
that they have so weak faith. Those that dream that all is well, will never
desire a remedy for all ill: They that think they are sufficient scholars in
Christ's school, will shut up their book, and away to play. High conceits of
present seize are great obstructers to future achievements. Those that
are whole, though but in their own thoughts, will never care for the Physicians
druggs: men think it lost labor to bestow so much as a wish upon that which
they think they have already. This has staved off many an one from Christ;
this snare has entangled many an one, that they could not go a step further:
yet this is the course of the world, and most are delighted to be carried with
this smooth stream: They love gilded shadows, better then they love golden
substances: There are too many that make themselves rich, when yet they have
nothing. Thus it was with the Laodiceans, Prove. 13. 7.
they fancied worth, but feared not want; they dreamt of plenty, but thought
not Revel. 3. 17, 18. Rev. 18. 7.
of their poverty. Many say with Babylon, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and
shall see no sorrow. Many think they are spiritual Queens, espoused to Christ,
the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and so shall never be invaded by sorrow,
when as they are desolate widows, and have the greatest cause of mourning that
may be. So the proud Pharisees could not endure to think that they were
otherwise then they should be, which made them say scornfully, Are we blind
also? If people be but turned Joh. 9. 40.
from profane courses to some more civil carriages, they think it is enough,
and are ready to christen it, and give it the name of true piety. With some
every spark is a Star, and every Goose a Swan; and if ever they mount from
the bottom to the middle, they presently take the middle for the top. This is
one of the devils masterpieces, to lull souls asleep, and then to work upon
their sancies, that they may dream of health, when there is nothing but
sickness; of a garden of flowers, when there is nothing but a wilderness of
weeds, and then he does not much fear parting with his prey. When the wine is
in, the wit is out, we say; and those that are conquered thereby, are ready to
have high conceits of themselves; (whence (...), wine;
some would have the words to be a kin:) so (...), ween.
when souls are intoxicated with the Wine of Satan's delusions, they are ready
to magnify themselves in their own conceptions; and such as are secure, are
seldom careful to provide for their safety: This sweet poison has been
swallowed down too hastily by many. These are the willing easy chains whereby
many are captives to sin and Satan. These are the lock and key of hell gate, of
the dungeon door. Oh! dear friends, if you think your condition good, when it
is not, you are in the high way to destruction; you have wind and tide, and
oar, to speed your voyage to the lake that burns with fire and brimstone.
You get up upon the devils back, and post it along through the valley of the
shadow of death: The Angel of the covenant come (though it be with a drawn
sword in his hand) and stay your course, stop you in your full career. Do not
blind your eyes with false conceits, because you would not see the worst of
your Non nocet sensus, ubi deest consensus.
self: A sense of sin will do you no hurt, if you do not consent: though it
be painful, yet it will be profitable: the other, though sweet for the
present, yet will be sour afterward; these honey conceits will leave you in
the gall of bitterness: whilst you think you are good, you will never, while
the world stands, seek to be made good. As ever you desire to be made a living
Saint, so see your self to be a lost sinner: but the wretched world love and
Joh. 3. 19.
live in darkness, and rather then they will have a true reflextion of their
condition, they either draw the curtain before the glass, or put their hand
before their eyes; and so far has the God of this world infatuated them,
that they will draw up such conclusions, to Conscientia est codex, in quo
quotidiana peccata conscribuntur.
which neither conscience (if suffered to speak) nor Scripture will give
consent. If you did but search consciences record, and Scriptures testimony,
sure you could not be of that persuasion, whereof you are.

2. Of Gods compassion: people think, that the Vltimum refugium. (...)
to be healed by. It is true, the mercy of God is the sovereign salve for the
sores of our souls, but it must be rightly spread, and applied; It is the only
balm of Gilead, but it must be rightly used.

Gods mercy is sanctifying as well as saving; renewing, as well as redeeming;
delivering from the power, as well as from the penalty of sin; from the way, as
well as from the wages of sin: and those that have not the first effect
thereof, cannot expect the latter. If it bring not to repentance for sin, it
will never bring to acceptance in a Savior. The Author Romans 2. 4.
to the Hebrews speaking of mercy of the highest strain, even that which comes
to souls in the blood of Christ, (which though it be the pillar and basis of
Gods kingdom) yet he does not infer, that therefore be we what we will, we shall
shall be saved, but this, that we must have grace, Heb. 12. 24. 28, 29.
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, or
otherwise he will be a consuming fire, notwithstanding this eminent
demonstration of his mercy. The Lord saves none in their sins; but saved from
your sins you may be. To fancy such mercy, is but In omni opere Dei est
misericordia et justitia.
to fall down to an Idol; for mercy and justice meet together: the rising of
one attribute is not built upon the ruin of another. God is full of pity thou
think, that he will spare thee though thou be never so full of impiety; and
therefore you send not forth so much as one thought to look after grace: He
that made you will not damn you, he that formed you, will not confound you for
your sins, you think: Do but consult that startling place in Esaias. It is a
people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have mercy on
them; and he that formed them, will show them no favor, Esa. 27. 11. Gods
mercy you see, will not advance you to happiness, if you live, and die
without holiness: By such thoughts you make mercy a means to sink you, which
otherwise might be a means to save you: what is this but to turn the grace of
God into wantonness? Be not deceived, God will not be mocked: the Lords mercy
glorifieth in heaven only those whom he sanctifies on earth.

Though God be merciful, yet you will be miserable without grace; presumption
of Gods favor, without a change on your heart, will prove the confusion of
your face: and if because of his compassion you disobey the call of his Spirit,
you are like to meet with nothing but condemnation: let mercy be a motive to
draw you to contrition, and not a means to drown you in perdition. Every one,
though their hearts be fraughted with nothing but sin, yet they would cast
anchor in the mercy of God, that they might be saved from tormenting tempests,
and so long as they think they shall have glory, let who so will look after
grace: if they may be saved through Gods mercy, what need they care for Christ's
Spirit? but soul, know thus much, that though Gods mercy have neither bottom
nor bank, yet it will not benefit you in reference to glory, if you come into,
and go out of the world a sinful wretch: Those that confide in Gods mercy
against Gods method, are like to have a sad come off, when it comes to the
upshot.

3. Sinful procrastinations: This is another cause of peoples being without,
and not looking they think will be time enough, though it be Qui non est,
hodie, cras minus aptus erit.
high time at present; not considering that duration in sin, brings obduration
of heart; in temporals people are altogether upon the speed, and in spirituals
altogether upon the slack. It is an usual thing for people at 20, to put off
repentance, and the serious minding of their souls to 30; and when they are
come to 30, to crave yet a further day, and that the business may lie still
till 40; and so putting off from one time to another, from the Spring to
Autumn, from the flower to the fall of our age, the work is undone; for gray
heads can find excuses as well as green heads: for when they grow old, then
their senses sink, their memories grow mean, their understandings decay, and
now it is no time for such things; even as Thales, who when his mother asked
Plutarch.
him in his younger years why he did not marry, answered, He was too young; and
after in his elder years, she putting the same question to him, answered, He
was too old. So the Lord by his Ministers and Spirit, asks people when they
will marry, and be espoused to Jesus Christ; they say, It is too soon; they
have good desires to Christ, but they would stay yet a while; the Lord in
patience waits and comes to them with the same query afterward, and then they
say, It is too late; nature is decayed, their spirits are spent; but they will
wish well, and they would have God accept of that: most put of all to the last,
and yet then they are as unfit and unwilling as ever; and God in justice
rejects them who injuriously refused him. People are like little children, who
loathe to have their play spoiled or hindered by wet weather, say, Rain, rain,
go away, come again another day. Sinners have sometimes convictions, that they
begin to melt and be sorrowful; and the heavenly doctrine falls upon them in
such drops, that it begins to wet them, to damp their sport, to dull their joy,
and they bid it go away, and if it come in old age it shall be welcome; and put
away the messages of God, the calls of the spirit, and say, as Felix to Paul,
When I have a convenient Acts 24. 25.
season I will call for thee: but know thou, that delays are destructive; as
one has said,

Who love delays, and their time for to slack,
Live by the loss, and shall no sorrows lack.
To defer in this case is to deny; to procrastinate, is but to prevaricate. He
that refuses to hearken now, it is to be feared he will hearken never. When
Saul would have asked counsel, by his prolonging he was prevented: 1 Samuel 14.
18, 19.
future intentions are great hindrances to present actions; and those that
account of doing much in the time that shall be, do nothing in the time that
is. You know the Proverb, which says, Make hay while the Sun shines, and
strike while the Iron is hot; and what Solomon says in his Proverbs, Boast not
thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day Prove. 27. ^.
may bring forth. The present time only is ours: It may be hereafter the Sun
may not shine, nor the Spirit blow the fire; to morrow may be worse then to
day: many have thought Deteriot posterior dies.
to get loose from sin in futurity, and so have lost their souls to eternity;
many there are who have sinfully deferred conversion, and thereby have been
sadly defeated of their expectation; many have thought to get goodness in their
age, and have been cut off for badnesse in their youth: God's calls are in the
present tense, and so should your conversion be; if you do not turn timely, you
will hardly turn truly. It is one of Satan's policies to make you drive off
this work, which in effect is no other then to drive away the worker, viz. the
Holy Ghost; and one of his fallacies to suggest to you, that so the work be
done, all is well; and that it may be as well done hereafter as for the
present; whereas the Scripture says the contrary, To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, Heb. 3. 7, 8.

4. Worldly prosecutions: They have so Discit^ in hoc mundo supra m^ndum esse.
upward with heavenly contemplations; these flowers they will have, though they
venture their souls in the gathering of them; the choice of their affections,
that chief of their time is so laid out this way, that there is nothing left to
be spent in industrious endeavors after conversion, and effectual calling. It
may be said of most, as Christ said to Martha, they Luke 11. 41, 42.
are careful and troubled about many things, that they forget that one thing
that is needful. They are like Duke D' Alva, who when the King his Master asked
him, if he had seen the Eclipse, answered, he had so much to do on earth, that
he had no leisure to look up to heaven; so much do they converse with the
creature, that they know not how to convert to the Creator: And so they can but
furnish the body, it matters not with them, though they forget their souls;
they stoop to take up these golden apples, and in the mean time lose the prize
of grace; they are loath to come out of the warm Sunshine into God's blessing;
there is such a crowd of worldly thoughts and intentions about the heart, that
grace cannot get near the door with its motions; they followthese things with
such speed, that when they should look after grace, alas! their spirits are
spent. It is just that they should go away without the pearl, who spend their
time in getting pebbles; and that they should be deprived of the directing
spirit, who devote themselves to the Fallax est hic mundus.
deceiving world; for when your outside thrives upon its treacherous bounty,
you will but starve at heart for want of grace: yet this is the course and
custom of people, to lose treasures for looking after trifles, and to put Luke
14. 18, 19.
off Christ's call with their oxen and their farms; Christ calls them in the
Ministry of the word to grace, to sanctity, to an upright walking, to the
renovation of their souls; they desire to be excused however a while, they
would fain have a little more delight, fain reach to such an estate, fain
dispatch such a business, they cannot yet tend to such things; people are so
buried in sensual things, that they know not how to look after a spiritual
life: These things so swallow up their affections, that better things can find
no acceptance with them: These do so monopolize and ingrosse their time and
thoughts, that the Spirit's motions can find no entertainment with them. Ah,
vain man, are pleasure and profit such darlings, that your soul and grace are
the less dear to you? Will not you repent it when it is too late? Lysimachus
yielded up his Army, and whole power into the enemies hands, for a little water
to quench his and their thirst; and when he had so done, then cried out, What
have I lost for a little drink? It will be sad, when thou shall be forced to
complain another day, and say, What have I lost, my God for gold? my soul for
sin? piety for profit? grace for gain? wisdom for wealth? goodness for
greatness? Do but remember what Christ says, What will it profit a man if
Mat. 16. 26
he gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Have not thou been so taken up
with hunting and hawking, so engaged to sports and recreations, In voluptatis
regno non potest virtus consistere.
so addicted to carnal delights, that thou have not been free to the Spirit's
tenders? Thou have followed after these things so far and so fast, that thou
art got out of the Spirit's call. It is strange that the world should be such a
Jewel in your eyes, that it must be had, though with the loss of a Jesus? It
is much that you should run an eternal adventure for a temporal advantage. God,
I am sure, made you not for this end, that you should be a servant and vassal
to these things; yet thou art all for treasuring up goods, but carest not for
treasuring up grace: such as resolve and endeavor to be rich in body, will
hardly be rich in soul; so long as thou art wedded to the world, thou will
hardly be willing to repent; We cannot serve two masters; we cannot Matthew. 6.
24.
serve God and Mammon. And if the love of the world be within, the love of God
and grace 1 John 2. 15.
must needs be without. If upon these things you bestow your time, you will
hardly to better bend your mind. Two works, especially of diverse and contrary
natures, cannot be followed to purpose; and if calling be not effectual, it is
not of proof.

5. Want of attention: People set not themselves Verba Dei quae aure
percipitis, mente retinete.
it enough to give it the hearing, though they refuse it entertainment: Hearing
without heeding, will bring little good to the soul. People many times give as
little regard to the truth as to a tale: The word is the means of effectual
calling, and if that be not minded, it is like to have little effect upon a man
or woman. The word is to be heard with both ears; when people hear, they do not
hear as if it were for their life; they consider not the reality of what is
spoken, nor the special reference it has to them. They are not careful that
nothing fall to the ground of that which falls from heaven. It is said of
Lydia, that she heard, Act. 16. 14.
and attended to the things which were spoken of Paul. The way to acquaintance
with the Spirit's work, is attendance to the Spirit's word. But people when
they hear things of concernment, look upon them as customary; many things of
weight and worth are propounded to them, which they slightly run over and do
not ruminate; this is the great cause of their spiritual uncleanness, because
they chew not the cud. There must be attention without avocation; conscionable,
careful hearers reach to something, when others, sive-like, let out as much,
and as often as let in. People are told of their condition, which did they
consider, they would look after a restitution: They hear the nature of sin, the
news of a Savior; of the quality of grace, the necessity of Christ; which were
they more often in their serious meditation, there were some more hopes of
their spiritual mutation. We see Christ so intent upon his work, that the had
not liberty to eat bread; and every Christian Mark 3. 20, 21.
should be a follower of Christ. I have read of one Nicias a Painter, who was
so earnest Plutarch.
in his work of painting, that he forgot his meals, and would ask his servants
whether he had dined or no. But alas! in things of an higher, yea, an
incomparable nature, people have only their bodies present, while their souls
are absent. They do not gather up, nor call in their spirits and affections,
and center Hoc age.
them upon the business in hand: and to this purpose does the Lord complain of
his people under Ezekiel's Ministry, that they did afford Ezekiel. 33. 31.
a personal appearance, but did not accord to a spiritual attendance; that they
did hear the word, but did not heart it; for their heart was truanting abroad
after their covetousness, while they tasked their bodies to an outward
correspondency. People give no diligent heed, and hence it is that they have no
dutiful hearts: Quid vobis plus esse videtur verbum Dei, aut corpus Christi?
Non minus est reus, qui verbu^ Dei negligenter audiverit, quam ille qui corpus
Christi, in terra^ negligentia sua cadere permisit.
They hear only for fashion, and not to be fashioned by the word; otherwise
they would hear, not only with their heads, but also with their hearts. The
words of the Lord are no common words, no ordinary sayings, that they should be
so much slighted: It is a great offense to God, and a great obstacle to our
souls good, not carefully to mind what is propounded; for it is delivered to us
and to our use, and by this means it becomes useless. This has been the
marring of many an ones soul, because they have minded the word no more,
hearing more for complement, than for conversion; for custom, than for
conscience: If thou go on in this negligent careless way of hearing wherein
thou art, thou art not like to be converted; without attention and intention of
mind, there is like to be no retention of memory, and without both no
likelihood of contrition for thy sins. The word not heeded will little help
thee; it argues a fatal darkness of peoples spirits, that they should fancy
health from the hearing of the word, when they are not watchful in waiting upon
it: It shows that delusions prevail far upon them, that they can think to be
saved by that which they do not savor; to be savingly converted by that which
they do not seriously consider. If ever you would have sin let out, you must
see that the word be let in.

6. Others conversation: This is a great Plus valent exempla, quam praecepta.
Perkins. Rev. 3. 4.
ready to follow the ways of man, than the word of God. It is a foul sin, says
one, that keeps many from Religion, and brings them to destruction, when they
will live after the manner of the world. They see their superiors confident
though they be not converted: They see them footing it in the fair way of
formal profession, and they judge it presumption for themselves, which are as
inferiors, to step before them, and get into the strict path of fervent piety.
It is judged of the world a piece of incivility and want of breeding, to desire
or endeavor to be better then our betters; our rich and wise neighbors, say
people, have not this work upon them which Ministers so speak of, and yet they
are men and women of some worth. They have understanding and know what they do,
and we hope we shall not do amiss if we tread in their steps: This is a great
block in the way, at which many so stumble, that they tumble into hell;
Children follow their Parents; Servants their Masters; the Cottager the
Courtier; the Tenant his Landlord; the Peasant the Prince; and most do write
after the Copies Vivitur exemplo.
that their superiors set them. Many are ready to say, as the Samaritan woman,
Art thou greater then our father Jacob? And did not Joh. 4. 12.
the Pharisees object this to the officers that seemed to have some good
inclination to Christ? Have any of the rulers, or the Pharisees Joh. 7. 48.
believed on him? But it is not safe to sail by their compass, which is not
right set, nor to follow them, who know not the way to heaven. If with your
will you be carried down the stream, against your will you shall at length fall
down into the bottomless lake; one precept from heaven should be of more force
with us than all the patterns we meet with on earth. If others damn themselves,
that is no sufficient warrant for us to do so too. Those that are most wise for
temporals, are many times most fools for spirituals; and though one would be
willing to take their counsel for the one, yet loath to follow their course for
the other. If we would set our watch, let us take the direction of a true
Sundial, and not of others ill-paced watches: If all the world should turn
their backs on God, yet it were thy duty, though thou had no partner, to set
thy face toward the new Jerusalem: It will be no diminution of sin, or
mitigation of sorrow, that we have partners and confederates; if you do as
others do, you must expect to fare as others fare; others Exempla bonae vitae a
Christo, and ab ejus actibus assumere debemus.
manners must not be our model, unless they follow Christ and Christ's rule;
our hearts and lives must be printed, not according to the copy of others
works, but according to the original of the word: we must draw the picture of
goodness, not according to the rough draught of other men's ways, but according
to the exact platform of God's will. Those that will swim with the world, must
accuse themselves if they sink with the world. To pin our faith upon other men's
sleeves, is to pinion our wings, and hinder us in our flight to heaven.
Whatever ye do, says Joshua, Josh. 24. 15.
Yet I and mine house will serve the Lord. Though others be loose in their
conversation, yet we should be fixed in our resolutions. Though others forsake
God, yet let not us forget our souls. Other men's practices are too weak a
bottom for us to venture our lives in, in our voyage through the sea of this
world to the holy land. It is ill following of others, unless we see they be in
the way to grace and glory: Though we see not others panting after the grace of
God in Christ, yet let us be pressing forward toward the mark, for the price of
the Phil. 3. 14.
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let their wisdom be what it will in
other things, yet here their policy usually fails. Though they be never so much
above us, yet let it be no motive to make us contented without grace: Though
they satisfy themselves with external, yet let us seek for effectual calling:
Though they fancy all will be well, yet dear friend, do thou fear all will be a
woe without a work of grace.

7. Wilful ignoration: This is the last cause Jonah 4. 11.
Ninevites, that cannot discern between their right hand and their left.
Catechistical principles are good helps to piety; they show the fall of man,
and the favor of God; the curse by the first Adam, the cure by the second; How
sin came in, and how it must be got out. They are maps of heaven, of earth;
they portray God and us; show what we are by nature, and what we must be by
grace, if ever we would come to glory; without the knowledge of our selves, as
well as of God, we shall never come to good; which made those that had no other
but the Moonlight of nature to direct them, (...).
to magnify that sentence, Know thy self. Ignorance of our lost state, makes
us proud in De ignorantia tui superbia venit.
spirit, and pride does barricado the soul against grace. Those that know not
the quality and penalty of sin, that know not how all came to be overwhelmed
with the deluge of sin, and to have the weeds of natural pollution wrapped about
their heads and hearts; that all are heirs to Adam's sin as well as sorrow;
those that know not the manner nor means of grace; that know not the nature of
faith and repentance, and their own need of them, all which are taught in
fundamental principles of Christianity, are not like to meet with a change.
Those that have not learned exactly these elements, will hardly be able to
spell out a work of saving grace. How many are there who have need to be taught
the first principles of the Oracles of God, and yet scorn so low a work as
this? but let them know, that if they be not well versed in their A, B, C, they
will Heb. 5. 12.
hardly prove good Scholars in Virtue's School; and if they be not well
suckled with pure milk at first, they are not like to prove thrifty babes of
grace. If the foundation be not laid, the building is like to prove but a sorry
one; it were well therefore if catechizing, private and public, were more in
use; little knowledge of God and our selves, unless we get this Horn-book by
heart, and into our hearts; without sound principles no saving proficiency; be
not too hasty to fly, before thou have got the use of thy feet; future works
have great dependency upon first works: Many soar to the clouds with notional
conceptions, who never yet cast off the clouts of their natural condition, and
all for want of being principled. But despise not thou the day of small things:
Grace is a practical knowledge of the nature of faith, and not speculative of
notions in the fancy. Were people better learned in these things, it would make
them more able to make a right construction of their own estate. They are as a
glass to show us our deformity, which if we did see, we would more long for
conformity to God. Pretenses to Christianity are little worth, where ignorance
of fundamentals bears the sway.

And thus I have laid before you several causes that keep people in their
natural condition, and keep them off from effectual calling; let us pray, Lord,
by the hand of thy powerful Spirit, roll these stones from the mouth of the
grave, that thy poor creatures may rise to grace. I come in the next place to
the third general propounded.

3. Astonishing consequences: There are

The 1. Hastiness of death. 2. Horror of forsaking. 3. Hardness of your
heart. 4. Hazard of your soul.


The Lord work these pills into form with his own hand, and bless them to a
powerful and profitable operation.

1. The hastiness of death: You know not Joshua, are you like to prevail that
your Sun may stand still in its firmament at your pleasure. If God with the
sword of his justice cut the thread of your life asunder, you fall so low that
no lift can help you; you are ruined beyond recovery. What if you had that
message which Hezekiah had, 2 Kings 20. beginning; such a message will come you
know Tuus ultimus dies abesse non potest long, adhuc te praepara: qualis enim
exieris de hac vita, talis redderis illi vitae.
not how soon; and your house is not set in order; your accounts not cast up;
you are not in an estate of grace; what then will become of you? When nature's
life is done, you can never have a spiritual life, if you had it not before;
what though you be well at present? yet you may soon be sick, nay, you may die
without sickness. Death may lay an ambushment, and surprise you before you are
aware: Though it be fair weather for the present, yet you know not how soon it
may overcast. Death is an eclipse that happens in a cloudy as well as in a
clear day; and when death has done his work, though you should seek your own
repentance with tears, as Esau did his fathers, yet it were in vain. It had
Heb. 12. 17.
been better you had never lived, than to die in a dead sinful condition: If
your grave-change come before your grace-change, woe be to thee, soul; what if
this night your soul should be required of you? what would be your doom, when
you had never thoroughly inquired after the Lord? If you die in your sins, you
are damned for your sins; if you lose your life, you lose your soul too: if
your soul and body part without a part in Christ and in grace, God and you must
part to all eternity: and many have died suddenly, and why not you? many
betimes, and why not you? some die young, and melt as snow before the
mid-day-Sun; and God has no where told you that you shall live till you are
old; when your time is once gone, it shall never return. Is there such
uncertainty of the time of death, and no certainty of the truth of grace? you
may die this week, this day, this hour, and if not effectually called, the
misery of your condition is inexpressible: The Lord pull your feet out of this
snare. Oh, my dear friends, if you die not effectually called, there is no help
nor hope for you: All the balm in Gilead will not cure your wound. It may be
death is at your door, ready to fieze on you; He has his commission and
warrant it may be, and is Cito pede praeterit aetas.
coming toward you as fast as he can; oh! if you be not changed. Have thou not
looked after this work? Have thou forgotten to seek for a new heart? then
destruction fiezeth upon you like an armed man. Death stays for none; when he
comes, you must away, though never such a sinner, though never so unfit.

2. The Horror of forsaking: Consider in Transivit dies salutis, and nemo
recogitat.
natural Sun be not set, yet if the Sun of righteousness be gone down in thine
Horizon, woe be unto thee: Though God in his common dealings be near thee, yet
if in his spiritual dispensations he be at a distance, I may say with the
Prophet, Woe unto thee when God shall thus depart from thee. Spiritual
derelictions Hos. 9. 12.
can have no other end then sore destruction; such as are left of the Lord,
must needs be lost in themselves; when the day of grace is at an end, a man or
woman is never like to see good day more; God's departures are doleful and
dreadful; our times, as in natural, so in spiritual things, are in the Lord's
hands. Divines say, there is a time set for the conversion of souls, which when
it is once gone and past, their condition is desperate: and such words have
their warrant from the Word; for the Spirit counsels to seek the Lord while
he may be found, and to call upon Isa. 55. 6.
him while he is near. There is a time of God's appropinquation, and after that
nothing but alienation; there is a time of God's presence, and after that he
absents himself: And to this purpose speaks truth it self, Jesus Christ to
Jerusalem, If thou had known, at lest in this thy day the things that belong
to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes: And they Luke 19. 42, 44.
shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knew not the
time of thy visitation. There was a nick of time, wherein all might have been
salved and made whole, but that being past there was no remedy. And thus did
the Lord threaten his people of old, Because I have purged thee, and thou wast
not Ezekiel. 24. 13.
purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee. I have purged thee, that is, I have called
upon thee to be purged, and have Verbo praecepi te mundari. Jun. in loc.
afforded means thereto, which you refused, and therefore are rejected. If your
day of grace be done, you are undone, though you should live never so many
years more in this world; for graces day and natures day, are not always of an
equal length. What if God should say of you as he did of the old world, my
spirit shall not always, nay, it shall no longer Genesis 6. 3.
strive with this man, this woman. When God gives his spirit a commission to
visit with its motions a man or woman, he limits a time, and says, if by such
a time they come not in, let them alone; if by such a time they come not over
to me, give them over to themselves: when the glass is out, and the last sands
are run, speak no more to them, strive no more with them. It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands, but much more fearful thus to fall out of the hands of
the living God. If God should pass that doom upon you which we find, Rev. 22.
11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him
be filthy still, it would be very sad. And if the glory of Ezekiel. 9. 3.
the Lord be gone to the threshold, ready to depart, there is like to be but a
solitary Temple left behind.

3. The hardness of your heart: Thine exhort one another daily, while it is
Heb. 3. 13.
called to day, left any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
You slight the work of grace for the present, in hope of reaching it for the
future; when, alas, thereby thou becomest more unfit every day than other. Have
thou Expertentia optima magistra.
not learned so much from experience yet, which is a good School-dame for fools
and sinners? Art thou not more averse to good this week than the last; this
month, this year than the last? They say, the Loadstone will not draw iron when
rubbed with garlic; when souls are much besmeared with sin, God many times
gives them over to themselves; and says, as of his people formerly, Ephraim
Hos. 4. 17.
is joined to Idols, let him alone. Every sinner has his back upon the Lord,
and the further he goes on in sin, the further he goes from God, and
therefore his return is rendered more difficult and doubtful. An hard heart Romans
2. 5.
and a penitent heart differ like fire and water, light and darkness; formerly
you melted when you sat under persuasions to piety, now you are not moved at
all; formerly a little blow would make your heart yield, a small prick would
make the blood come, now nothing affects, or takes effect with you; your heart
is now become like the nether mil-stone; formerly the warm Sunbeams would melt
you, and now an hot fire will not dissolve you: The longer you live in your
natural condition, the more stout and stubborn do you grow.

4. The hazard of your soul: While you For God is angry with the wicked every
day, Psalm. 7. 11. There is no running from God's anger, unless you flee Non
est quo fugias, a Deo irato, nisi ad Deum placatum.
into his bosom; to get into the arms of Christ's love by effectual calling,
is the only sanctuary of safety. Whilst you are in your sins, you are neither
sub coelo, under heaven by gracious protection, nor shall you be in coelo, in
heaven by glorious translation. The Heathens Divinity taught them thus much,
that only good men should be happy hereafter. Woe to thee that art filthy and
poliuted. Thou Zeph. 3. 1, 2.
have not obeyed the voice; thou have not received correction; thou have not
trusted in the Lord; nor drawn near to the great God. If thou look into the
divine Almanac, thou can find nothing but certain progostications of sad
things to thy soul. An Orion of misery is ready to fall down in overwhelming
showers upon thine head. Thy nakedness is discovered by reason of thy sins,
and thou art a fair mark for the arrows of vengeance to be levelled at. There
is but an hand, nay, but an hairs-bredth between thee and destruction; every
step thou take, thou art in danger to step into hell: Thou go every day
without thy guard, and being without grace have no mark, whereby thou may be
notified to the destroying Angel, to be an Israelite that is to be passed over;
your house is undoored, unroofed, and misery may come in and pluck out your
throat. Those that are not guided by God's Law, are not guarded by his love;
and where there is no faith of conversion, there can be no favor for tuition;
while you are unconverted, you lie under eminent, and imminent danger
continually; destruction stands by your side, ready to trip up your heels; and
ruin like a rock is ready to fall upon you, and grind you to powder. It is
most true that the wise man says in this case, In the transgression of an evil
man, there is a Prove. 29. 6
snare. There is no peace to you when you go out, or when you come in; when you
lie down or rise up; whilst you are unchanged, you are exposed to danger every
day, to misery every moment.

CHAP. V. 4. Use for comfort.
IN the next place this doctrine smiles upon those that are gracious, and
speaks comfortably Babylonian Date-tree, they say, bears above an hundred
several commodities; so does this doctrine hang full of choice fruit of comfort
for God's people. Sorrow many times does sit as Queen-regent in the hearts of
God's people, and they too much give way thereto, not considering those
arguments which might refresh their spirits, and are overcome thereby because
Dolorem vinces, si te contra dolorem intenderis.
they set not themselves against it. But take this cordial, thou that art a
Saint; and gather up these flowers which I shall cast before thee, and bind
them up into a sweet smelling and refreshing posey. These ensuing
considerations, if well thought on, may be means of thy great consolation.

1. The steadfastness of conclusion. 2. The surenesse of salvation. 3. The
safety of persuasion. 4. The certainty of conjunction. 5. A special
benediction. 6. The spring of action. 7. A sign of affection. 8. A singular
condition.
1. The steadfastness of conclusion: Such Omnis gratia gratis data est
manifestatio gratiae gratum facientis. Aquin.
thee from eternity, and the counter-pane of his everlasting thoughts: to them,
who are called according to his purpose, Romans 8. 28. It is the product of his
purpose, the execution of his intention. To have a certain token of
predestination, is a transcendent privilege. With such a consideration does
the Lord comfort Jeremiah, saying, Before I formed thee in the belly I knew
thee, etc. Jer. 1. 5. Would not the knowledge of predestination be such a fire
as would make thee through hot? would it not make thee to hold up thine head
with comfort and cheer, and revive thee though thou were ready to give up the
ghost? nay, there are no men and women in the world that can conclude they are
elected but you. If the divine nature be wrought in your heart, you may 2 Pet.
1. 4.
conclude that your name is written in heaven; and the conclusion will be so
strong, that you may lay your whole weight upon it, and it will not bend under
you. If you be made conformable to God's Law, you may affirm you are enrolled
in the heavenly list; which to know is the bond of spiritual peace, a bulwark
against adversity; so that you may from under the wing of such apprehensions
and conclusions, laugh to scorn approaching annoyances. Who in their right
minds but would account it a very cheap pennyworth, if they could purchase the
knowledge of election, though with the expense of the world? which none can
have but the holy, none can reach but the renewed. None can conclude they are
in God's roll, but those that walk according to God's rule. None can conclude
they are predestined, but they that are purified. What a staff to stay thee?
a cordial to comfort thee? a rock to rest on then have thou, who art in an
estate of grace? Thou art through grace partaker of saving conversion, thank
God for thy portion of stable conclusions: Thou can make such a Syllogism,
which will pose many good Scholars.

2. The surenesse of salvation: Thou who Beatitudo nostra futura, non praesens.
thou may be sure thou shall live gloriously; and though thou have not
eternal life in present possession, yet thou have it in future reversion. Thou
art a Saint on earth, thou may be sure thou shall be a Saint in heaven: Thou
art one of the Church militant in truth, there is no question but thou shall be
one of the Church triumphant in the end: Thou art pure wheat in God's field,
thou shall assuredly be gathered into his garner; being made a new creature,
thou have hope sure and steadfast, as an anchor of the soul, which Heb. 6. 19.
enters into that within the vail. The Apostle tells the Ephesians, that they
were called in one Ephesians. 4. 4.
hope of their calling. Effectual calling gives hope of eternal crowning. As
thou may look backward and see what thou wast from eternity, (as we have
showed) so thou may look forward, and see what thou shall be to eternity.
Thou art upon that stream which will undoubtedly carry thee down into the Ocean
of bliss. Thou art in that way which will assuredly (maugre the Devil and all
his devices) lead to the gates of the City of God. Heaven is entailed upon
holiness, and the crown is appointed for the converts head: what though doubts
beset thee in thy road, (like highway men) and thou art molested with the
invasion of fears? yet thou shall get home safe at last, and arrive at thy
desired haven. If while thou live thou be translated from darkness to light,
from death to life, surely when thou die thou shall be translated from earth
to heaven. If thou go not to heaven, none 1 Pet. 4. 18. Jus ad rem, non in re.
shall. It is true, the righteous shall scarcely be saved, and it is as true,
the righteous shall surely be saved. Though thou be not in heaven, yet thou
have a right to it. The conveyance is made and signed, and sealed; it is a deed
of gift to thee, to have and to hold for ever; and there is no variableness,
nor shadow of turning with the Lord; you that Jam. 1. 17.
are godly, take your bread and eat it with thanksgiving; you that are ungodly,
hands off. I speak not to you all, but only to the altered: This mess is only
for Benjamins; you have so much ground to be sure of eternal life, that you are
already upon the borders of the Land of Canaan; for grace is glory begun; and
this is life eternal, to know God and Christ whom he has sent. Though the Joh.
17. 3. Gratia nihil aliud est, quam quaedam inchoatio gloriae in nobis. Aquin.
Heb. 11. 1.
storms come, and the waves arise, yet you shall not be cast away; you may be
as sure of immortality, as of that whereof already you have the actual
enjoyment: For, faith is, and should be the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen, and should make that present which is absent; that
near which is far off. If word, promises, oath of God, are sufficient grounds
for any to lean on, then you may build upon it that you shall have Heb. 6. 17.
heaven no less then if you had it.

3. The safety of persuasion: When such Siren songs; and their persuasions are
no other than Satan's delusions, and their souls destruction. Full and complete
comfort thou can not expect, who art in an estate of grace; for while in this
valley, thou art never like to see the clear face of the Sun of comfort without
a shower, such happiness being reserved for the upper region of glory, which
is free from these changes. Here hope and despair keep vicissitudes, and
alternate course: But when this Sun shines upon thine head, thou may have
cause to think it is the Spirit's Romans 8. 14, 15, 16.
hand that removes the cloud. For the Apostle joins the Spirit's witness, and
the Spirit's works together. The Spirit's comfortable persuasions, and gracious
operations he links together: not but that God's people may conclude comfort
upon a false ground. However, the matter of the conclusion is firm, though the
manner be not in form; and when they have secret intimations, and special
apprehensions of the pardon of their sins, of their part in the. Covenant, it
is true as a proposition, though not as a conclusion; because such things do
belong only to such as are good. They may weakly conclude sometimes, but they
do not wickedly conclude: what an happiness now is that for a man or woman to
be in such a condition, wherein, if they have suppositions of divine
acceptance, they do not miss the mark, when others do no less than hazard
their souls by such thoughts. If thou say thy sins are pardoned, the Spirit
will own thee in it, and add the responsal, and say, thine iniquities shall be
remembered no more. To have right persuasions is a great mercy, to have wrong is
a great misery; if you think God's countenance is upon you, his covenant
toward you, your thoughts agree with the thing. Due persuasions of comfort are
the peculiar portion of the Saints.

4. Certainty of union: Such are indeed Prima unio hominis ad Deum est per
fidem. Aquin.
one with the Prince of peace? for poor glimmering stars to be united to the
Sun of righteousness is no small preferment; for empty cisterns to be partners
with the full fountain, is no mean advancement. Saints are one with Christ, not
by identification, but conjunction; not by commutation of substance, but by
application of faith; not by material commixion, but by mysterious copulation;
for dust and ashes to be united to an immortal Mediator is a great matter.
Believer, Christ has not only united thy person to himself hypostatically, but
thy nature also mystically. The nearest and strongest relations on earth are
made use of as emblems to shadow out the noble conjunction between a Christian
and his Christ in heaven. When you were effectually called, you were called
into the lap, bosom, and heart of Christ. You were called to be girt to him
with the girdle of faith, fastened with the knot of truest and indissoluble
love; Christ is in thee, and thou art in Christ. Christ and others are as far
asunder as East from West, and North from South, whereas thou and Christ art as
near as may be. Those must needs be safe, that are so near to Christ; and must
needs last as long as Christ. Thou art also partner with Christ; as himself, so
all that is his is thine: By whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son
1 Cor. 1. 9.
Jesus Christ. Those that are converted to Christ, are confederates with
Christ: those that are found in him, have fellowship with him; when Christ
joins souls to himself in a spiritual marriage, he makes them a fair jointure
of his whole estate. He gives for a dowry to his Spouse, no less than a part
in his whole possession. Where there is purification by Christ's spirit, there
is participation of Christ's merit; and can the world afford a portion
answerable to this? What would thou, what can thou have more than this?
Believing, beloved soul, know what thy state and thy privilege is, that thou
may rejoice in the Lord, and that the joy of the Lord may be thy strength.
Can you think of this and not triumph? can you have this in serious meditation,
and not be raised with joyful admiration? If joy and comfort belong to any, Est
gaudium, quod non datur impiis, sed eis, qui te gratis colunt.
then certainly to the Saints; and if upon any, then upon this account of their
union with and interest in Christ. Surely it cannot but make thee strain the
strings one note higher in thy spiritual music, to think of this. There is a
precious Pearl called an Union: This union with Christ is no doubt a Pearl of
great price; better than any that ever yet adorned the head of greatest
Princes. It is the choice flower in your spiritual garland; the gloriousest
feather in all your plume. It is such a dignity, that but a few attain unto.
The name of union is sweet, the nature of it is advantageous, of what nature
soever it be, whether natural, civil, etc. It is the supporter and the safety
of people and places: What then is union with Jesus Christ? fellowship with the
Son, and by him with the Father? Therefore comfort thy self with this
consideration, thou converted soul.

5. A special benediction: To be effectually

1. The matter of blessedness. 2. The means to blessedness.
1. The matter of blessedness: Conversion Si vis esse beatus, esto immaculatus.
made a new creature is the blessing of blessings. To be turned from ones sins
is a blessing in it self. So says the Apostle, Unto you first, God having
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of
you from his iniquities, Acts 3. 26. Some think blessedness is to be found in
mines of riches, in mountains of honor; others think to find it in the path of
pleasure, in the way of their own will. But it is the gracious person upon
whose head the Scripture sets the crown of blessedness: That says not, that
the parted, or potent, that the wise, or witty, that the rich, or riotous, but
that the pious are blessed: that which all seek for thou have found; that which
others would have but want, thou have and enjoyest in truth: would you have
more then blessedness, then real blessedness? Thou may joy thy self for thy
happiness. The Angels in Luke 15. 10
heaven clap their wings for gladness at the thoughts of thy blessedness in
conversion. If thy felicity glad their hearts, shall it not comfort thine own?
If no greater curse than to be the Devils slave, than sure no greater blessing
then to be God's servant. Theodosius accounted it his happiness that he was a
subject of Christ, rather than that he was Sovereign of the East. Let your
condition be what it will otherwise, the curse is gone, the blessing is come to
your door, to your bosom, if you be in an estate of grace. Account not thy
self unblessed because thou have not every thing that thou would have, since
thou have that one thing that thou should have. Thou may well say, The
lines are fallen to me in Psalm. 16. 6.
pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly heritage, seeing thou art translated
from the Land of the dead into the Land of the living. Though others have got
the venison, yet thou have got the benison. Though others have got the world,
yet thou have got the true wealth. Though others have got the blessing of
earth, yet thou have got the blessing of heaven. Though they have the nether,
yet thou have the upper springs.

2. It is the means to blessedness: Effectual Isaac to Esau concerning Jacob,
I have blessed thee, and thou Gen 27. 33.
shall be blessed. From this mount Nebo, from this top of Pisgah, may thou
view all the good land round about; without conversion no man or woman can be
blessed, for the promises, which are the seeds of blessings, are made to grace;
Knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing. No
inheritance 1 Pet. 3. 9.
without this evidence: If the forgiveness of thy sins, the favor of God to
thy soul be not a blessing, what is? now the work of grace upon the heart is
the stair, the ascent to this throne of happiness. Thou can not get up into
the tree of life, and shake soul-satisfying fruit into thy bosom without this
ladder. Thou can not attain to saving weal without this sanctifying work.
Thou can never get to the top of glory without the staff of grace viruled
with the righteousness of Jesus Christ. Thou can not be a loved Son, unless
thou be a living Saint; many fondly presume, and think to commence and take the
degree of glory per saltum, neglecting grace: but it is the path, the way
thereto; such as meet not with God in their heart, shall never meet with God in
heaven. Thou that have grace, have that thread which will undoubtedly lead thee
into the bower of bliss. This compass will not fail thee, but bring thee to
the port, where thou need fear neither billow nor blast. Thy patent is
signed and past, whereby heaps and numberless sums of felicity are freely
given thee out of the Exchequer of grace. This gale will bring thee to the Isle
of peace; upon Beatus vir, qui per poenitentiam ad meliora conversus est.
this silver stream thou shall with safety slide into the bosom of the quiet
Key. This is the way, the road to all the Scripture calls beatitude. The fee
simple of true blessedness is given to the godly, pious, truly penitent soul.

6. The spring of action: You are now in Ephesians that they would walk Ephesians.
4. 1.
worthy of the vocation wherewith they were called. Those that have life, can
do the works of living men and women for their living God. When we are sick,
then we think what we would do for God if we were well. Thou that have grace
art spiritually well, and have ability from God to work the works of God. The
wicked can neither think, speak, nor do for God; when thou can do all these
things, through that grace that God has bestowed upon thee. It is true
nobility, and the only Summa apud Deum nobilitas est, clarum esse virtutibus.
advancement of a man, or a woman, to be fruitful in good works and duties
toward God. Thou have cause to account it thy glory, and thy crown of
rejoicing, that thou have an heart or hand to move toward, or do ought for
God. Those that are in their sins are dead, and can do nothing. Thou that art a
Saint art alive, and can do something. Thou can be a means to promote the
glory, to predicate the greatness of the Lord. To be able to pray, read, hear,
speak, believe, oppose sin, stand up in the behalf of grace, is more by far
then to be endowed with talents and abilities for temporal and secular
undertakings. One action done for God from grace, is of more worth then all the
achievements of the most eminent without grace. When David and his people
offered freely to the building of the Temple, he was much affected and taken
with it, acknowledging that he and they were unworthy to be dignified with
ability of doing thus for God, 1 Chronicles. 29. 13, 14.

7. A sign of affection: To be delivered from the Law of sin, is a
demonstration of the love to the soul. We love him because he first Prior Deus
dilexit nos, ^^^us tantum, and gratis, tantillos, and tales.
loved us, 1 John 4. 19. Now those that are effectually called do love God, for
the Apostle joins them together. Those that love God, and that are the called
according to his purpose, Romans 8. 28. If the Lord's heart had not been toward
thee, he would never have drawn thy heart toward himself. Where the Lord has
been pleased to hang out this sign of grace and a change, thou may assure thy
self, there is store of love in his bosom toward thee. The work of spiritual
life in thee, is the fruit of God's working love to thee. Had not the Lord
loved thee, he would never have done thus for thee: what cause of comfort then
is there to thee, who have the love of God transcribed upon thy heart? gracious
dispositions flow from God's gracious affections; and those to whom the Lord
gives saving and sanctifying grace, are his Benjamins, his darlings. Those
that can make out that they are in a living condition, may conclude God's
loving inclination. If the Lord have changed thy nature, and renewed thy heart,
thou may look upon it as a love-token, with this posey, or inscription, I
love thee freely. In these clear waters of grace, thou may see the smiling
serene face of heaven. In this book thou may read whole Chapters of God's
good will. And is it not a comforting cordial to know that one is in God's
books, in his favor? Be glad and rejoice, for the Lord loves thee; one dram
of God's special love is such a pearl, that the whole world is not able to
weigh against. The Angel in his salutation to Mary Luke 1. 28, 30.
says, Hail thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee. So may it
be said to thee, If Christ and grace be conceived and formed in thy soul, it is
a sign thou have found favor with the Lord.

8. A singular condition: There is no estate the high calling of God in Jesus
Christ, Phil. 3. 14. The Angels in heaven have not an higher calling, says
one. Mr. Buroughs of contentment, page 177.
Thou art called to be a son, a daughter, a spouse to Jesus Christ, a Priest, a
King. Thou may well take the wall of all ranks and conditions in the world:
The Princes, Potentates, and great men of the world think they move in a lofty
sphere, but thou that have grace art in the highest Orb. Thy calling is to have
fellowship with Angels, communion with God, union to Christ. Thou art called to
be one of the heavenly Court, a child of salvation, and an heir of happiness.
There is no calling in the world comparable to thine; other are earthly
callings, but this is an heavenly; they are to temporal good, but this to
eternal grace; they to worldly accommodations, but this to worthy relations.
Since God has called thee to an estate of grace, he has called thee to a
better condition, than if he had set the best made transitory crown upon thine
head. As thou art a man thy condition may be low, but as thou art a Saint it is
lofty. Though there be rich Shopkeepers in chief Cities, yet thou art an
humble doorkeeper in the house of God; though others be outwardly called to
Nobility, yet thou art inwardly called to Piety. Set the flower of your comfort
in this pot of water, and it will not wither, but hold fresh a great while.
Thou may sing to think that the Lord has raised up thee a poor creature out
of the dust, and lifted thee a needy soul out of the dunghill of Psalm. 113. 7, 8.
a natural condition, that by grace he might set thee with Princes, even with
the Princes of his own people. The calling of a Saint in order and degree, is
the first and chief, and has the pre-eminence of all the callings of the world.

CHAP. VI. 5. Use for examination.
Is it thus that the Lord does effectually call or no; we are too too loath to
take a view of our selves. By serious examinations, we come to
self-representations; many an one take themselves to be converted when they are
not, and so go on in presumption; and many think they are not when they are,
and so go on in desperation, and all for want of spiritual scrutiny and
inquisition: we had need see that our apprehensions be right in business of so
great moment; mis-thoughts may make a soul miscarry to all eternity. Oh, dear
friends, be willing to lay your selves to the line, and to make use of these
ensuing marks, and do that which you do thoroughly in this work. Deceits in
spirituals are most dangerous, and therefore I am the more sollicitous
concerning you; lay all works aside, I beseech you, to know the state of your
poor Multo magis ad rem pertinet, qualis tibi, quam qualis aliis videaris. 2
Cor. 13. 5.
souls; content not your selves that others have good thoughts of you, but
labor to know the truth of your selves. Do as the Apostle counsels, Examine
your selves whether you be in the faith; prove your own selves, etc. Those that
prove not themselves, are not like to be approved of God. For the better
managing of this use, I shall speak

1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.
First, Show what effectual calling is not.

Secondly, Show what it is.

1. Negatively: If we see what effectual calling is not, we shall the better
see what it

1. Of those things that are more remote from, 2. Of those things which are
more nearly related to effectual calling.
1. Of those things that are more remote;

1. Gifts and parts are not effectual calling. Many shall say in that day,
Lord, Lord, have Matthew. 7. 22. Gratia elevat hominem ad vitam, quae est supra
conditionem omnis creatae naturae.
we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils? etc. but
Christ would not own them. Gifts carry no further then nature, but grace does;
you may have natural abilities without spiritual activity: many make bad use of
their good parts, like the green worm, which in Spring devours the leaves and
buds of flowers and fruits, and turns their sap to deadly poison. Parts and
gifts are an outward grace to those that have them, but they are not inward
grace; you may know much of the word of God in the Scripture, and yet know none
of the work of God in your heart.

2. Good education, good parents, and godly relations are not effectual
calling; many of pious parentage; and that spiritual life, as well as temporal
livings, are entailed upon them, and come by inheritance; a pious parent may
have impious posterity, and gracious fathers graceless children. Those that
have such thoughts, provide but a weak string for their bow. Godly parents may
say to their children, as the wise virgins to the foolish, Go and get grace for
your selves, for we have not Mat. 25. 9.
enough for our selves. The Pharisees thought their condition could not be bad,
who were descended from so good a stock; therefore John the Baptist bids them
bring forth fruits meet for repentance, and not think to say within themselves
that they had Abraham to their Mattb. 3. 8, 9.
father. If you be not like your good parents in faith as well as feature, it
is nothing. Bad Manasseh was the son of good Hezekiah; and 2 Chro. 32.
Hezekiah the good son of a bad father. Ishmael was Abraham's, Esau was Isaac's
son, and what of this? This made good Mr. Bolton, when he lay dying, to tell
his children that they would not dare to meet him at the tribunal of Christ in
an unregenerate condition. Holy parents bring forth unholy children: those that
are truly godly, are godly personally, not personately; for themselves, not for
others. It is true, children may fare the Alterius beatitudine nemo fit beatus.
better for their parents goodness; yet in the account of God, grace in the
parent will not stand for grace in the child. It is a mercy that any of us are
the offspring of godly parents, yet if we have not grace de proprio, of our
own, we are yet uncalled.

3. Living among religious people, either in Isa. 26. 10.
many dwell in the houses of the faithful, who yet are not of the household of
faith. A scabbed sheep is a scabbed sheep though it pasture with the sound
flock: one may live in the tents of Shem, and yet have Cham's temper; one may
live in a religious house, and yet have a Non Hierosolymis fuisse, sed
Hierosolymis been vixisse laudandum est.
wretched heart; one may live in a godly family, and yet be none of the family
of God; one may live with good company, and yet have a bad conversation; yet
many think this is enough: they think to fly to heaven with other men's wings.
People may live among godly neighbors, and yet have no godly nature; they may
have good acquaintance, and yet have no good acceptance with God for want of
grace. There may be co-habitation with those that are spiritual, and yet no
inhabitation of the spirit. The Jebusite may Cum Hierosolymitanis habitat
Jebusaeus.
dwell with the Jew in Jerusalem, and yet be a Jebusite. In Jacob's flock were
black as well as white cattle. In Peter's net bad as well as good fishes. In
Noah's Ark unclean, as well as clean creatures. There may be tares in the same
field as well as true corn, and tares still.

4. A civil, fair, moral life is not grace, nor and serious, but not
sanctified. One may have moral virtues without divine grace: Splendida peccata.
moral goodness is but splendid sinfulness: Paul was such before conversion.
Many are fair like the Moon, but without heat. Matthew. 19. 19, 20. There was a
fine young man to outward appearance; that had the letter, but not the life;
good manners, but wanted a gracious mind. It is good to be so qualified, but it
falls short of the thing in question. Many live justly, lovingly, prudently,
courteously, who yet have no grace. There may be a fair life without a life of
faith; civility without sanctity; one may live according to common equity, and
not be led by the rule of special piety; there may be moral virtue without, and
yet masterly vice within; there may be a commendable carriage, and yet no
converting calling: there are many gentle, sweet, tame natures, that never
learned lowness and humility in Christ's school. People are most apt to mistake
a Star for the Sun, a pebble for a precious stone. These things are something,
but they are not all; there must be further steps before the soul can come at
grace.

5. Not to be so great sinners as others is not grace. Many if they be not
thieves, drunkards, nor unclean persons, think they have grace enough; whereas
they sin not as others do, it is from the goodness of their constitution,
rather than from the graciousnesse of their conscience. But alas, it is not
privative, but positive holiness, not comparative, but absolute that God looks
for. People compare themselves with others, measure themselves by Non est bonit
as, pessimis esse meliorem.
a false rule, and hence they think they are ell-wide, when they are not
yard-wide: a man of an indifferent stature set by a lower man seems tall, but
set by a taller is a dwarf: because people are not so bad as they may be, it
does not follow that therefore they are so good as they should be. John Baptist
says in Matthew. 3. 10. not the tree that brings forth bad fruit, but that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down. The Pharisee was Luke 18. 11, 12.
not a profane sinner, and yet he was not a pious Saint. He is dead that dies
of his fair death, as well as he that is chopped and cut in pieces. One may be
dirty though they have not I^^scus inter caecos potest esse rex.
so great sprays upon them as others have. One that is but blear-eyed, is far
before those that are blind; yet he is in darkness in comparison of those that
have their perfect sight. When we compare our selves with the best, then we
best see our own defects; when we compare our selves with the worst, then we
think we have overplus. To have a less degree of badnesse, a greater degree of
goodness than others, falls much short of true grace; thou art not it may be
scandalously vicious, and yet thou may not be savingly virtuous. This is but
the least part of goodness, if thou have no better evidence, thou needst not
open this at all: If thou keep in this way, and go no further, thou will never
be acquainted with God's work. Oh, delude not your selves with such shadows, in
stead of solid substances.

6. To be a Christian outwardly is not effectual calling. There is a Christian
in name, and a Christian in nature; one may have the garb of a Christian, and
yet want the grace of a Christian; there may be the paint without the parts of
a Christian; the fashion without the frame. Many there are that are of a
Christian mind, and yet have no mind to Christ; that have a goodly profession,
but no godly conversation. More are Christ's followers then are his friends;
and more will wear his Christianus nemo dicitur recte, nisi qui Christo
moribus, prout valet, coaequatur.
coat and colors than care for his commands; they love his livery, but they
are loath to lead his life. Paul distinguishes of Jews into outward and inward,
Romans 2. 28, 29. and so may we of Christians. Paul was a professor before
conversion, but not a right practicer, Phil. 3. 5. Many Christians there are,
but, but a few that are Christ's; many Protestants, but a few Puritans; many
are Christians by calling, but few by changing; yet most think they are comely
enough if they have but this complexion; and if they have but the habit of
religion without, they care not for the heart of it within; they are all for
the gloss, not regarding the text; and so they have but the outward facing,
they feel no cold for want of the inward lining. Such are but the pictures of
Christians, and all that they have to commend them, is nothing but the gay
clothing of outward conformity.

7. To be of a Church is not effectual calling; community of the Church of God
think all is well, though they have no society with the God of the Church: you
may be an impure member of a pure Church. I would not have any mistake, and
think that I go about to throw dirt in the faces of any Congregations. One that
is Oxthodox and pious, may be a member, and yet never mended.
Church Fellowship, membership, and privileges are sweet, but they are not
grace; they are choice favors, but they are not saving faith; the Church door
may be open to us, and in the mean time our hearts be shut to God. I would have
none think privileges are sufficient without purity. Judas was one of Christ's
Church and company. Those that were of the Church of Laodicea were yet checked
and Rev. 3. 17.
chidden for their want of grace. It has been a proverbial speech, New England
for ordinances, Old England for graces. If you lived in a Church of the
strictest order, and highest seize, yet it will not pass for the gold of
grace. The Church is God's Seminary and University, and so are particular
Churches; but all that have their Decor ecclesiae principaliter consistit in
interioribus. Aquin.
names matriculated there, are not real Scholars: you may be true members of a
Church, and yet no true members of Christ; you may have external ordinances,
and no internal order in your heart. Salvation and grace is personal, not
congregational.

1. A confident presumption of ones good Luke 18. 11.
thoughts and the truth did not jump. One may strongly persuade themselves that
all is well, and yet stiffly persist in all that is ill; and for the most part,
the worst have the best thoughts; we may have heaven in our wish, and hell in
our will. Most men will proclaim Prove. 20. 6.
every one his own goodness: But a faithful man who shall find? says Solomon.
There may be great conceptions of good, and yet no conversion to good: Nay, one
may be so high in such thoughts, that they may have a kind of rejoicing in the
apprehension of election, adoption, etc. and yet no grace. Many Heb. 6. 4.
mount up to heaven almost upon the wings of their presumptuous apprehensions,
and yet will fall as low as hell for want of a powerful alteration. According
to our faith and not Nulla praesumptio perniciosior, quam de propria justitia
superbire. Jude 11.
according to our thoughts, so is it with us; there may be high hopes, where
there is but an hollow heart; you may ride upon the wings of the wind in your
own thoughts, and yet may run in the way of Balaam, and perish in the
gainsaying of Core.

9. To go according to conscience is not Paul was led by his conscience, when
he lashed out against the truth, Acts 26. 9. I thought I ought to do many
things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth; and yet then he was without
grace: conscience may be blind, and know what follows if the blind lead the
blind. The Scripture says not, they that are led by their own spirits, but
they that are led by the spirit of Romans 8. 14.
God, are the sons of God. You may follow the teaching of conscience, and yet
have no truth of conversion: This is a great starting hole in this age, and a
great cover-fault. Blasphemy and persecution were the ways that Paul's 1 Timothy
1. 13.
conscience walked him in; a wicked conscience cannot do well. If your
conscience be a rebel, it will not salve the matter, to say, you Quid acquiri
putatur, ubi bona conscientia perditur.
followed your captain's command. One may steer their course by this card, and
yet be no good Pilot; there may be a natural conscience, and yet no conversion
of your nature. This is too weak a ground-fill to set the fabric of grace on;
conscience without the culture of heaven, will bring forth nothing but weeds;
you may have confident persuasions of the rectitude of your ways, and yet
continue in the contumacious perverseness of your will.

10. To hold an opinion, or to adhere to this Paul chides his Corinthians for
their faction, that some would list themselves under Paul's colors, in
opposition to Apollo; and others under Apollo's colors, in opposition to
Cephas, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 12. Some made it the great part of their religion, so to
cry up works as to cry down faith; against whom Paul disputes in the Epistle
to the Romans; others so to lift up saving faith, as to let down sanctifying
works; against whom James disputes in his Epistle. Creeds do not make
Christians; one may be of the persuasion of this, and the other party, and yet
not be partakers of true piety; one may take up a new opinion, and yet not have
a new heart. The Spider may fasten upon rich hangings, and yet be full of
poison still. Yet this is the fairest copy, that many can produce to make out a
title to the work of grace, because they are in the same vessel, upon the same
stream with such and such a party: But I must tell thee, that though thou be a
retainer to the camp of true Christian soldiers, and hold with the soundest
side, yet that is not grace; godliness consists in powerful workings, not in
parts taking.

11. The doing of all outward things, that Vita hypocritae est quaedam visio
phantasmatis, quae hoc ostendit in imagine, quod non habet in veritate.
daughter has a glory within, as well as gay clothing without. When Christ
told his Disciples that one of them should betray him, there was none of them
suspected Judas, but said, Lord, Is it I? You may be partners in the same shop
of Christianity with one that truly fears God, and act together, and yet you
may be but a flash, a flourish; you may live a Saint, and die a sinner; you may
have the same external complexion, but not the same internal constitution; you
may say your part word for word as well as another, and yet be no true
proficient; you may have the same form, and yet not the same faith.

2. Now we come to speak of those things

1. There may be a feeling of sin, and yet Saul said, I have sinned: 1 Samuel 26.
21.
Behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly: and yet he had no
grace. One Nil prosunt lamenta, si replicentur peccata.
may sensibly, and yet not savingly say, they are sinners; recognition of sin
without reformation of life is nothing; many have stepped thus far, and yet are
not got in at the narrow door; many can say this lesson perfectly, but they
must turn over a new leaf before they can be sufficient Scholars. This has
too pale a look to have ought of life within.

2. One may have disquiet and terror of may great pangs of spirit, and yet no
parting with sin. There are those that have deep gashes in their consciences,
and yet do not bleed out their bad blood; there are that have been brought into
grievous straits, and yet were never brought into a gracious state: There may
be attrition where there is not Attritio nullo modo potest fieri contritio.
Aquin.
contrition; many have been sorely amazed in their consciences, who were never
savingly amended in their conversations; one may be plunged over head and ears
into the bottom of the sea of vexation, and yet never be bathed in the laver
of regeneration; one may be full of heart-paining dolor, and yet never attain
to God-pleasing duty. Even wicked men may have undergone wearisome days and
nights for their sins; your conscience has been all on fire, and in a passion
has flown in your face; your bones have been broken, and anguish and horror
has siezed upon you for your sins; you have roared through disquietnesse for
your transgressions, and have labored as in the very fire for your
abominations; your heart has been lanced it may be in every quarter; but put
all together, and it amounts not to effectual calling. Judas was tormented in
his mind, but never turned in his manners: It is said he repented himself,
Matthew. 27. 3. the word (...).
signifies the anxiety and disquiet that he found in his spirit upon the
perpetration of his sin. It is a gloomy dark winter with many spirits, who
never yet saw the spring of grace; the water-spouts of trouble for sin may
drop, and fall upon thine head, and yet thine heart be barren and unfruitful in
the grace and knowledge of Jesus Christ.

3. One may be afraid and troubled about Herod to think of beheading John the
Baptist; Mark. 6. 26. (...).
nay, he was very sorry; but his sorrow was not boiled to a right and due
consistency: he did fear, but yet did fasten on his sin. One may go with a
sorrowful countenance, and slow pace to the acting of some sins, and yet have
no grace. To make a sour face at the first taste, and yet afterward to
swallow down; to be squeamish stomached at first, and afterward, with the
Estrich, to digest iron sins, is not effectual calling. Some startle at sin for
present, but soon come to settle upon it with quiet security. This or that sin
may go against thy conscience, and yet thy conscience not be right: It may be
thou art afraid to touch the Snake, yet make a shift to lay it in thy bosom.
That conscience that never yet saw day, may oppose the commission of sin; and
he that has no grace may shrink at the thought of some impieties.

4. One may love the truth in some sort, Judas and Julian before his apostasy.
One may stand up for the cause and worship of God with a kind of zeal, and yet
have no true fire in their breasts. So did Jehu, when he said, Come with me, and
see my zeal for the 2 Kings 10. 16.
Lord. The stream may run swiftly, and not be fed with a spring; there may be
an heat for the true Religion, and yet no life within; one may plead for the
truth, and not practice the truth: those kiss truth many times, who are
unwilling truth should be King; those may countenance the ways of God, who
never come into the way of grace; one may be forward for God's cause, and yet
may lie Errat quisquis se veritatem cognoscere putat, qui adhuc nequiter vivit.
Job 15. 16.
under God's curse; one may side with the truth, and yet never be sanctified by
the truth. There may be a work of common vigor, and yet a want of choice
virtue; one may gallop with a natural zeal, and be a leader to others, and yet
gulp down sin as the Ox does water, till they be lost themselves; zeal for the
truth does not always grow upon the stalk of grace.

5. One may wish happiness, and yet never Balaam's wish, Let me die the death
of the righteous, and let my Numb. 23. 10. Jude 11.
last end be like his: upon whom the Scripture sets the brand of impiety. He
was willing to bed with the righteous, but not willing to board with them; he
would willingly have tasted of their second course, but had no desire to touch
their first course; he expressed his affection to their eternal gaudies, but had
not appetite to their daily fare; he loved the sauce, but loathed the meat. Who
is there that lives never so ill, but would be willing to die well? If this
were grace, we should have a great harvest of Saints. Heaven is the desire of
many, when hell is their desert; most desire the Saints paradise, when but few
care for the Saints piety; many who prosecute their sinful lusts, will yet
earnestly petition for eternal life; and would fain be triumphant, that care
not for being militant; he is no right soldier that would wear the crown, but
is loath to fight to win the field; desires of heaven are Non impetrat a deo
bonum quod poscit, qui ejus legi non obedit.
in vain, unless there be duty on earth. He that loatheth grace, may yet long
for glory; yet such desires pass for current coin with the unskilful multitude;
and having such desires, they think that all is well with them.

6. To take delight in, and to be taken with the Ezekiel. 33 32.
God, but care not for the work of grace; the word may please their fancy, and
yet not prevail with them for faith; they may delight to hear the sound, and
never desire to understand the sense; they may countenance the minister,
Quaerit anima verbum, eui consentiat ad correctionem. Mark 6. 20.
and not consent to his message. Such an one was Herod, who feared John
Baptist, and observed him, and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard
him gladly; and yet lived in his sins: He heard the word, but he did not hold
it. Many are taken with the parts and gifts of a Minister, and it is that
string that sounds sweetliest in their ear; they may hear to fill their
table-books, and never fill the tables of their heart; they may love to walk in
the dew and soft showers of heavenly doctrine, and yet provide that it shall
not wet them to the skin; one may delight to wait upon the best means, and yet
continue in their bad manners: to be taken with the word, and not taken by the
word, is not true conversion; the word may sound sweetly aloft in the ear, and
never settle savingly below in the heart; it may be music to your sense, and
not meat to your soul.

7. One may desire the prayers of God's Pharaoh desired righteous Moses to pray
for him: Entreat the Lord that there be no more mighty thundrings, etc. Exodus
9. 28. Moses was a great man in his books I Will warrant, and yet he was glad to
make use of Moses beads. Open enemies to godliness may yet be willing to have
the help of the godly; there needs no grace to make one desirous to have the
Saints pass. Thus it was with Simon Magus also, who desired Peter, etc. to pray
to the Lord for him, that none of those things which they had spoken might come
upon him, Acts 8. 24. Those may crave the prayers of others, that never had
grace to pray for themselves; others prayers, and to desire the benefit of them
is good, but it is not grace.

8. Nay, even a wicked man may so far Impunitum non debet esse peccatum.
and acknowledge its sufferings just, because it has been a sinner, and yet
never accept of the Spirit's motions and calls to grace. And thus did wicked
Pharaoh even acknowledge that punishment did not come till it was sent for; The
Lord is righteous, and I Exodus 9. 27.
and my people are wicked. Now does he as it were lie at God's foot, who yet
had an heart that would fly in God's face; one may say they have deserved all
that is come upon them, and yet never sincerely desire the spirit of grace to
come unto them; one may say they are wicked in their ways, worthy of wrath, and
yet never open to the Lord, nor obey his laws: many do thus stoop, when they
are in the snare and fetters, who never knew what it was to be swayed by the
sovereignty of grace.

9. Yet further may a wicked man go: There Ahab had not true grace, and yet 1
Kings 21. 29.
he could grant thus much; such was his humiliation that the eye of heaven took
notice of it; one may lie in sackcloth, and yet have sin lodge in the heart;
there may be a bowing down the head, and yet no breaking of the Quando sic
poenites, ut tibi amarum sapiat in anima, quod ante dulce fuit in vita, jam tum
been ingemiscis ad Deum.
heart; the outward man may be afflicted for sin, and yet the inward stand
affected to sin; there may be solemnity in mourning, and yet no sanctity in the
mind; one may spend themselves with fasting, praying, and weeping, and not
speed the work of grace in their souls; the body may be brought down by such
means, and the soul not benefited nor builded up; there may be an heavy
countenance, and yet no heavenly compliance.

10. In the next place, there may be a promising Pharaoh, and I will let you
Exodus 9. 28.
go, and ye shall stay no longer. Here were good words, but no good works;
saying and doing are two things. There is a fair tree that has Natural Histor.
L. Veruulam.
double blossoms, but brings forth no fruit; many are free to promise, but
fast when they come to pay; they are trees full of leaves, but no apples; they
will say what God would have, and yet do as themselves list: like the son in
the Gospel, that said, I go, Sir, but went Matthew. 21 31.
not. They are very forward for subscription, but as backward when it comes to
action; one may be a Christian in tongue, and not in truth.

11. There may be amendment in some Vitam uniuscujusque convers^ and inchoatio
blanda permulcet, and aspera medietas probat, and plena post perfectio roborat.
Matthew. 27. 3, 4, 5.
they were, and yet not so good as they should be; they have their conversation
something rectified, and yet their conversion is not right; they only are truly
holy, that are wholly turned; there may be a facing to the right, and not a
facing to the right about; there may be a vomiting up some filthiness, and yet
the stomach remain filthy still. Judas brought back the 30. pieces of silver,
and threw them down in the Temple of God, but brought not back his heart to lay
it down at the feet of the God of the Temple. So Pharaoh at last condescended
Exodus 8. 25, 28.
to let the people of Israel go sacrifice in the wilderness; nay further, he
gave them leave to take their little ones with them, which he denied before;
and yet we cannot make out that Pharaoh was truly changed; men may leave some
of their sins, and yet not Exodus 10. 8, 24.
love the God of Sion; they may stop some wide gaps, and yet their hearts not
be currently fenced with grace. Thus you see how much there is that is not pure
gold; how many there are, who if they be weighed in right balances, will be
found too light; many steps one may take, and never reach the mount of true
grace: All these will prove but like waxen wings, that will melt with the Sun's
heat; they look well, but they have no life in them: they bear a goodly port,
but they are not the power of godliness; those that have all these
qualifications, and no more, at the most are but almost Christians; how many
come short of these things, and yet these things come short of grace.

2. Affirmatively: Having showed what is

1. Relatively, by way of opposition. 2. Absolutely, by way of position.
1. Relatively; we shall show what it is in opposition to those things that are
not it.

1. And first, in opposition to those things 2. And secondly, in opposition to
those things that are of the second rank.
1. For things of the first rank; some of them,

1. Not gifts, but grace and sanctity in heart Bonum gratiae unius est majus
bono naturae totius universi. Aquin.
not common, but special and saving gifts; an ounce of true holiness, is worth
pounds of eminent gifts; not good gifts, but the gift of good: a little true
humility in the heart, is more worth than a great deal of knowledge in the Non
dona, sed bona.
head; a stammering prayer coming from grace in the heart, is more pleasing to
God than that which is more eloquent, and has no grace in it. Though a soul
cannot pray as it should do, though it cannot speak but sigh, yet if it proceed
from the spirit, it is acceptable to Romans 8. 26.
God. The widows two mites were more than the great offerings; the little grace
that the Luke 21. 4.
righteous have, is better than the rich gifts that the wicked may have; a drop
of true grace is better than an ocean of common talents; a lark is worth a kite.

2. Not confidences of any kind, but true joy discovers effectual calling.

1. Such joy as proceeds from sorrow: Assurances Fit plerumque ut in ipsis piis
fletibus gaudii claritas erumpat. John 16. 20. Mat. 5. 4.
in the depth of humiliation. Music yields the sweetest strains upon the
water: saving and sanctifying comforts have usually a sable usher. You shall be
sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted.

2. Such as is in the use of Sacraments, word, prayer, and the exercise of
graces, or else it is The triumphing of the wicked is short, Job 20. 5.
etc. The joy of many comes in at a wrong door: true spiritual mirth always
loves to make use of spiritual means; to contemn the ordinances, and yet have
strong confidences and presumptions, is sadly to be suspected. If the fire be
not fed by this fuel, it is a sign it was never fetched from heaven; the stream
of true joy runs always in the channel of duties and ordinances.

3. Not to go according to conscience simply, Jam. 4. 12.
that is God; the legislative power is not in conscience; if conscience receive
not its law Regula regulata priusquam regulans. Conscientia bona est aula Dei,
habitaculum spiritus S.
from God, it cannot rule thee rightly; conscience must be ruled before it can
rule; if the conscience be not good, God keeps not his court, nor has the
spirit its mansion in thy mind. Conscience in God's people, in the effectually
called, is not Lord paramount, but acknowledges it self to be under the power
of heaven.

4. Not to take up this or that opinion, etc. Let the same mind Phil. 2. 5.
be in you which was in Christ. Christians must 1 Cor. 11. 1.
be followers of Christ, but of others no further Ego sum via, veritas, and
vita, tanquam diceret, qua vis ire? ego sum via: quo vis ire? ego sum veritas:
ubi vis permanere? ego sum vita.
than they follow Christ; they are to wear the livery of Christ. He is a true
Saint that truly sides with Christ; it matters not who are file-leaders, and of
the foremost rank of this and that way, if Christ as Captain go not before.
Parts taking is but faction, Christ-owning is true faith. He is the way, the
truth, and the life, as he has said, John 14. 6. To imitate Christ in his
words and works is true grace. He is the great Apostle, and high Priest of our
profession, He.b 3. 1. As they said, We know no King but Caesar: so says a
gracious soul, I know no King but Christ: Him I desire to own for my Lord and
Master.

2. For those things that are of the second rank.

1. Not confession of sin with the tongue, but Confessio peccatorum in cord
ante quam os petat, exauditur. Psalm. 51. 17. Hos. 7. 14.
and never affect the mind; so it may be in this case; if the heart say not
Amen, it is nothing; the tongue is to be the hearts interpreter. It is a broken
and a contrite spirit that is a pleasing sacrifice to God. The Lord complains
of his people, that they cried not unto him with their heart, when they howled
upon their bed; if the heart and the tongue be not confederates, it is no right
confession.

2. Not a vexing for sin only, but a change (...).
the mind, which is not used for Judas his repentance, but another; Manasseh's
and Judas his repentance did differ very much: Judas was so far from being
changed from Judam proditorem non tam scelus quod commisit, quam indulgentiae
desperatio fecit penitus interire 1 Samuel 10. 6, 9.
bad to better, that he fell from bad to worse; from sinning against Christ's
humanity by treachery, to sin against his divinity by despair. It is with those
that are effectually called, as it was with Saul in another case, they are
turned into other men and women, and God has given them another heart, than
they were or had before. There must be in the soul a motion to good, as well as
a commotion because of evil; it is duty, not dolor only that makes and marks a
Saint.

3. A gracious heart is troubled at the commission How shall I do Genesis 39. 9.
this great wickedness, and sin against God? says Joseph. Herod was troubled
about putting Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae; oderunt peccare boni
virtutis amore.
John to death, only for fear of disgrace, etc. which might come upon him for
taking away the life of such an eminent Preacher as John Baptist was. Some are
afraid to sin for fear of the rod, others out of love to the rule; the wicked
dread the vengeance that follows sin, but not the venom that is in sin.

4. An heart effectually called, loves the Jehu's fire of zeal was to warm
himself by; it was for a crown, or he would never have skipped so high toward
heaven. But a godly soul is zealous, though to its disadvantage: I will speak
of thy testimonies also before Kings, and will not be ashamed, Psalm. 119. 46.
It is zealous out of the love it has to God and his ways; not out of sinful
passion, but sanctified affection.

5. An heart effectually called, desires the Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51. 10. It is for the white as
well as the red robe; and makes as many prayers for purity as for pardon;
against the power as against the penalty of sin; and when it desires heaven, it
is upon this account as much as any, because it hopes it Nunquam justus
arbitratur se comprehendisse, nunquam dicit satis est.
shall be freed from its sins, and shall not meet with the Cananite and Hittite
in that land; it has insatiable desires as it were after grace, and thirsts
exceedingly for these streams; it accounts holiness its great happiness, and
its glory in heaven to consist in conformity to God, as well as communion with
God.

6. A gracious heart delights in the preaching Herod, for then he would have
reformed his incest, Mark 6. 17, 18. A godly heart loves the word because it
is a corrasive, as well as because it is a cordial; the word is welcome to them
when it frowns upon them, as well as when it smiles upon them; in its
condemnations as well as its consolations.

7. When converted souls desire others to Jam. 5. 16. it is that sin, rather
than that sorrow be removed. Pharaoh and Simon Magus desired others to pray for
them, that judgments might be removed or prevented. A godly heart accounts
sin worse than evil, and the worst of evils; it desires an interest in the
Saints prayers to perfect conversion, and not only to prevent confusion; and
that the object of the Saints petitions for them may be spirituals rather than
temporals; special rather than common mercies; it looks at God's glory as well
as its own good in such requestings; and if you ask such an one for what shall
I speak unto the King of heaven for thee? It will answer, for the life of my
soul, for the slaying 2 Kings 4. 13.
of my sins, for the increasing of my grace; that I may walk worthy of the Lord
unto all pleasing.

8. A man or woman truly called, so justifies David, It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. It hearkeneth to the
voice of the rod; it is willing to receive instruction by the rod of
correction: It so justifies God, that it wholly (...). Lam 3. 22.
condemns it self, even to the pit of hell, acknowledging it to be the Lord's
mercies, that it is not consumed. It justifies the Lord when the stroke is off,
as well as when the stroke is on; it justifies the Lord from a sincerely
loathing apprehension of its own vileness and unworthiness.

9. Such mourn inwardly as well as outwardly; Joel 2. 13.
their garments; their heart runs as well as their eye; they mourn truly for
their offenses as done against Christ, and the grace of God Zech. 12. 10. Isa.
58.
by him; outward mourning only God condemns. Many weep with an Oynion, when
their rocky hearts do not melt; many mourn in habit for their dead friends, and
it may be Non discordet cor tuum a facie tua.
rejoice in heart: But it is not so with such a soul; but when it addresses it
self to the duties of mourning and sorrow, it acquaints the heart with it, and
invites it to this service, and will not be satisfied without its presence; the
fountains of the great deep of its spirit are broken up; its sorrow not only
descends from the eyes, but also ascends from the heart; so that it can say
with the Church of God, My bowels Lam. 3. 20.
are troubled, mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously rebelled.
And with Jeremiah, My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the Jer. 4. 19.
very heart; my heart makes a noise in me.

10. A godly heart promises amendment out Pacta semper, and promissa sunt,
quae vi non facta sunt.
its heart is toward them. I have sworn, and will perform it; that I will keep
thy righteous judgments, Psalm. 119. 106. They were righteous judgments, and
therefore David's affections did run out toward them; others promise amendment
for fear of judgment, as a maid may be forced to give her consent to marriage
for fear of being killed. Those that are effectually called, see the beauty of
God's ways, and so fall in love with them; their resolutions stand upon a right
foundation; they are not from fear, but favor; not from force, but faith.

11. One that is effectually called reformeth piety; the least as well as the
greatest commandment finds good entertainment with it. It is the commendation
of that pious pair, Zacharias and Elizabeth, that they were both righteous Luke
1. 6. Non attendit verus obediens quale si quod praecipitur, hoc solo
contentus, quia praecipitur.
before God, walking in all the commandments of the Lord. Mark, in all the
commandments: They did not pick and choose; every commandment was a sweet
smelling flower to them, and with delight worn in their bosom: a godly heart
does not harbor any sin, nor hide any lust in a secret corner of its soul; it
turns every evil thing out of doors, though it were its darling.

2. Absolutely, and by way of position. Now we shall show what effectual
calling is more Jerusalem, by our passing through the 12. gates, which we
mentioned in the beginning. If you have ascended by those 12. steps, you are in
the bosom of Christ; but because we have spoken to them already, I shall only
contract them into these 5. formal acts of effectual calling, or conversion,
lightly touch them, and so pass on to other demonstrations.

1. Sight. 2. Sense. 3. Seeking. 4. Settling. 5. Submitting.
1. Sight. Have thou ever seen thy sins? Have your ways upside down, to take
notice of all the faults in them? as the word in the original signifies, in
Psalm. 119. 59. Have thou spied the Errata's of the book of thine heart and life.

2. Sense. Have you had a sorrowful sense of

3. Seeking. Have thou sought for a place to

4. Settling. Have thou settled thy self upon the Si cibum quaeris, Christus
alimentum est.
Do feed upon this bread of life by true justifying faith? Do stay thy self
upon his satisfactory sufferings?

5. Submitting. Art willing to be ruled by Christ, to take him for thy Lord and
King as well as thy redeemer? Art willing to be guided and led by his Spirit?
Can thou say, other lords Isa. 26. 13.
besides thee have had dominion over me, but [for the time to come] by thee
only will I make mention of thy name? Art willing to leave all, and follow the
commands, and walk in the way of Christ? Art willing to take his yoke upon
thee, and learn the lessons of piety which he teaches Dignus plane est morte,
qui tibi, Christ, recusat vivere.
thee? Are his ways pleasing, and not irksome to thee? do covenant and engage
to be his servant for ever? art willing to be washed hands and feet all over?
Is thy course altered, and thy carriage changed? art become another man,
another woman? If these things, that 2 Pet. 1. 8.
I have mentioned, be in thee, and abound, thou art not barren, nor unfruitful
in the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ: but if these flowers come not up, the
seeds of grace are not yet sown in thine heart.

Now we come to make further trial of effectual calling, by the effects and
fruits thereof; and shall search for the beating of the pulse, that thereby we
may know the temper of the heart. Be very serious, friends and Christian
Reader, in the searching of thine own heart; no longer defer it, of all things
in the world, it most concerns us to know, whether we be effectually called, in
an estate of grace or no. One that is truly converted may be known by these
fruits.

By 1. Opposing sin; which is seen in these four things, 1. Spiritual
contention. 2. Impartial prosecution. 3. A tender conscience. 4. Timely caution.
2. Obeying the Spirit. 3. Submitting to trial. 4. Confiding with fear. 5.
Moving toward God. 6. Affecting 1. The word of God. 2. The Son of God. And
that 1. For his perfection. 2. His affection.

7. Improving assurances. 8. Hating hypocrisy. 9. Resisting custom. 10.
Prizing communion.


1. Opposing sin. An heart effectually called

1. Spiritual contention. There is a combat The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit lusts Gal. 5. 17.
against the flesh, and these contrary the one to the other: even as fire and
water, heat and cold. They swell at, and look big one upon another, there being
an irreconcilable antipathy between them. They are like enemies, keeping
garrison within a little one of another, who are continually alaruming and
beating up each others quarters. As it is said in 1 Samuel 14. 52. That there was
sore war against the Philistines all the days of Saul. So it may be said in this
case, there is sore war against sin all the days of grace, after that once
comes to king it in the soul. These will struggle in the womb. As she said, The
Philistines are upon thee Sampson; so may be it said here, sin is upon thee
grace, and grace is upon thee sin; grace is no coward, but will at sin again
and again, and hunt it out of every corner; for sin will lift up his hand, and
be treacherously acting, now grace cannot bear this.

1. Ob. But some may say, there is a combat and fight with sin, even in a
natural man, how then can this be a sign of effectual calling?

Sol. The conflict in such is between the will and understanding: The war is
between natural conscience commonly enlightened, and the affections and desires
of the soul: They would embrace this and the other object, which Video meliora
proboque, deteriora sequor.
the understanding judges not meet; and hence comes the broil; as she in the
Poet said, I see that which is good, yet settle upon that which is bad.

2. Ob. Yet further, some will say, how shall I know the one from the other?
namely, that combat which is in the godly, from that which is in the ungodly.
Quando timore poenae, non amore justitiae fit bonum, nondum been fit* bonum.


Sol. There are these marks whereby it may be known whether thou fight under
Christ's banner or no.

1. In the wicked this combat proceeds from servile fear; as an horse will
strive against his sluggishness, and mend his pace for fear of the spur or
whip, and not out of respect to his master; so do the wicked. So it was with
the Colonists that the King of Assyria sent to inhabit Samaria; the fear of
the Lions made 2 Kings 17. 25, 32.
them amend their manners; they were driven not drawn to their partial outward
reformation. In God's people this opposing sin is from a filial fear, and
springs from a child-like awe of, and respect to their father, though they see
no rod in his hand. They fear this glorious and fearful name, The Lord our God;
they fear Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
him because he is their God as well as because he is the Lord. The
constellations of God's attributes, viz. justice, power, infiniteness, wisdom,
patience, love, has an influence upon them, to work in them a well tempered
fear, which furnishes and fortifieth their spirits to the resisting their
spiritual enemies.

2. This strife in the wicked is usually against Judas repented him after a
sort, of his treachery; notorious sins make their consciences to startle, when
they will not so much as move a finger against lesser sins, and such as are of
common and daily infirmities: at the noise of foreign invasions, and strange
sins, it may be they will cry, Arm, arm; but for all domestic and homebred
divisions, they can sleep securely though the enemy beset their house round
about. It may be they bid some defiance to such sins as march in the head of
the troop, but as for meaner sins, that bring up the rear, they hold a
confederacy and league with them; but as for the godly soul, it fights
against a common soldier as well as a chief commander.

3. They go on in their practice of wickedness Qui pectus suum tundit, and se
non corrigit, peccata solidat, non tollit.
but soon cry quarter, and make peace; they make a flourishing offer, but no
furious onset: though their conscience may kick at sin, yet they will try to
swallow it; they do not overcome, but are overcome; they and their sins may
seemingly be foes, but they are suddenly friends again: but so it is not with
one that is effectually called; he dares not have any league with his enemy; he
and his sins have such a fewd, that they part: the doing or not doing a 1 John
3. 9, 10.
sin, is the badge whereby the one are known from the other; and though a godly
man may be foiled in his wrestling, yet he does not so fall as not to recover;
and though he may be cast by a sin, yet he does not continue in it.

4. The wicked seek the repression only, and to kill the heart of sin. Mortify
therefore your members that are on earth, is the Apostle's counsel, Col. 3. 5.
The wicked snuff the candle, the godly extinguish and put it out: a godly soul
vows the death and destruction of its sins, and would have the heart blood of
them, will give them no quarter.

2. Impartial prosecution. The soul that is Jephthah said in another case,
Whatsoever comes 1 Samuel 14. 39.
first out of mine house, I will offer it to the Lord. So says such a soul in
this case, whatsoever sin I find, have at it; I will spare neither one nor
other, little nor great. But this will not an ungodly man do; he may defy some
sins, and delight in others. Herod did spit out some evils, but his incest was
too sweet a morsel to be forced out of his mouth: a godly soul looks upon sin
as sin, and so comes to hate it with a perfect hatred. I hate every false way,
says Psalm. 119. 104.
David: Mark, every false way. Partiality toward sin argues an unsanctified
heart, that yet delights in sin.

3. A tender conscience. They that are effectually Semper conscientia servi Dei
humilis esse debet, and tristis.
relent and melt at the occasion of sin or judgment; their hearts are like the
thin ice of a small frost, which a small weight will break: over the heart of
an ungodly wretch you may drive cart-loads of sin, and never make him bend
under the burden: let whole volleys of comminations be discharged against him,
he startles no more than a man wholly deaf at the noise of thunder; common
ordinary sins they can swallow and make no bones of them; they laugh at the
rattling and shaking of the spear; and account denuntiations of woe things not
to be much feared. But it is far otherwise with a godly soul; it is all on a
sweat at the thoughts of putting forth its hand, though but to a small sin; and
is so strait-laced, that it cannot endure that sin should put its hand, or one
of its fingers between: It is afraid of those sins which like thorns rend the
skin of Christ, as well as those which like spears pierce his sides. I hate
vain thoughts, says David: though but thoughts, and Psalm. 119. 113.
those but vain; a very little matter will soon make such an ones conscience to
bleed; they are very scrupulous about sin; they are also afraid of God's
judgments: when the Lion of Psalm. 119. 120.
the tribe of Judah roars they tremble; nay, when they see their heavenly
father beating any of their brethren, it makes them stand quivering and shaking
all the while; if threatened, they weep like tender hearted children. A tender
conscience is a companion of true conversion; a mended heart is a melting
heart. It is like Josiah, whose heart and conscience the 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.
Lord commends for the tenderness and softness of it: relenting affections, and
renewed dispositions are pairs; search thine own heart concerning this temper;
neither great nor little sins it may be scare thee; thou can not melt for a
small miscarriage; if thou can mourn for mighty transgressions that is all:
Thou do not shake at the hearing of God's chiding; if so, thou art not
effectually called.

4. Timely caution. Such have an heart so set Dum parvus est hostis interfice,
ut nequitia elidatur in semine.
sinful occasions are the high way to sinful actions; they shun the scouts,
that they fall not into the hands of their spiritual enemies. The Israelites
might not marry with the sons and daughters of the Cananites, for fear of
drawing their hearts from God; if the soul of a Saint be subject to such and
such a sin in action, it shuns it in cogitation. Job made a covenant with his
Job 31. 1. Psalm. 39. 1.
eyes, and David with his tongue. Saints are careful to keep the powder and the
match asunder; and the spark from the tinder; if they be more prone to be proud
of any external accomodations, they labor to deaden their affections to all
temporal contentments; if passionate, they labor to avoid all occasions of
anger. As one Cotys an Heathen, of whom I Plut. Mor.
have read, when his friend gave him a present of earthen pots and vessels
curiously made, but very brittle, broke them all to pieces presently lest if
his servants should casually break any of them, he should be too angry, for he
was naturally choleric. Much more then should a Christian do so; he carefully
observes his natural inclination, that he may more vigorously oppose suitable
temptations. But thou thrustest thy self upon the mouth of the canon, and
come near to the snare; thou fliest too near the candle, that it is no wonder
if thou be caught, and thy wings burnt; this argues thou have not grace.

2. Obeying the Spirit. Where there is converting Sanctum semper opus in me
spira, ut cogitem, compelle, ut faciam. Cant. 1. 4.
willing to follow it as their commander: If the Spirit say the word, they
presently set upon the work. They say with the Spouse, Draw us, we will run
after thee. They are like the Centurion's servants, if the Spirit say, Go, they
go; if it say, Come, they come; if it say, Run, they run; if it say, Do this,
they do it: but as for thee it is far otherwise. The Spirit has called to
mortification of thy sin, opposition against thy lust, elevation of thine
heart; to renovation of repentance, to actions of faith, to resolution of thy
will; but alas, though the Spirit call, yet thou do not hear, or if hear, yet
not regard. Where there is grace, they obey the Spirit's calls, though contrary
to flesh and blood; but thou art as cross to the Spirit as may be; you can yet
remember the time when the Spirit spoke to you, persuaded and entreated you;
and yet you have snuffed at its motions: It has called you to diligence in
duty, perseverance in prayer, heart-workings in hearing the word; but you choose
to be ruled rather by the list of your own mind, than the law of the Spirit's
mouth; your cross spirit has countermanded God's holy spirit: It has diswaded
you from your sin, sought to wean you from your wickedness, but you have been
refractory: but a gracious heart listneth for the voice of the Spirit, and when
it calls, says, Here am I; like a diligent scholar, that willingly regards
his Master's word. The Spirit's words are welcome, its motions are music, its
commands contenting unto those that are effectually called. If the Spirit call
at high midnight, they are ready to rise to do its pleasure.

3. Submitting to trial. A changed heart is David says sweetly, Search me, O
God, and Psalm. 139. 23.
know mine heart; try me, and know my thoughts. It is a fine thing when one is
willing to be searched by God or man: Those that are in natural darkness care
not for coming in to spiritual light; bad wares and dark shops agree well
together; it is an argument they are too light, who are loath to be put into the
scale; where there is a work of sanctification, there is also a will to
examination; such are willing that their metal should be tried by a true
touchstone; they love to be dealt plainly withal by Christian friends, by
faithful Ministers. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let
him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil. But thou can not endure to be
Psalm. 141. 5. Vsitatum generis humani vitium est peccatum commissum negando
abscondere, and convictum defendendo excusare.
sifted and scanned; thou art for excusation and not for examination; thou
love to be tickled rather then to be tried; it is a sign they are spiritually
scabby, who love to be scratched. Thou have such a rotten skin, thou can not
endure to be rubbed with a course cloth; a searching Sermon is to thee like a
bitter potion. In your sickness you are angry with those that search you, or
question your estate and condition; though you have often been stirred up to
self examination, yet you would never buckle to the work: this shows you are
not in an estate of grace.

4. Confiding with fear. The spiritual confidences Be not high minded, but
fear. They know they Romans 11. 20.
stand in God's favor, yet they are afraid lest they fall; they know they have
grace, yet they are jealous lest they lose it. Thou that art all confidence and
no care, art more an hopeful than an holy Christian, and have cause to think
thy estate not good. Though they stand, yet they take heed that they do not
fall; the fear which 1 Cor. 10. 12.
they have is rather careful than despairing; other men's confidences may have
more of triumph, but these thus tempered have more of truth; those are not the
confidences of converts that cause them to pluck up the hedge, to leave open
the doors; yet such confidences must be the only symptoms of grace with many.

5. Its moving toward God. Such an heart is always in motion toward God; as
it has its being from the Lord, so its acting to the Lord. Its emblem may
well be an heart with spread and extended wings, flying toward heaven, and
this its Motto, Sursum corda: heavenward hearts: It is continually rising and
soaring toward heaven in its thoughts and meditations. Through grace it can
say, as the Church of God, The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the
remembrance of thee: with my Isa. 26. 8, 9. Quocunque tempore non cogita veris
Deum puta te tempus illud amisisse.
soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me will I
seek thee early. Thales defined the soul to be a nature moving always; it is
most true of the soul that is in an estate of grace; such an heart longs for
God, and lives with God; that time it accounts lost in which its thoughts are
not lift upwards; heavenly concernments are the subject of its thoughts; it is
always stirring for God and his glory; thinking, desiring, wishing,
contemplating, contriving, resolving about heavenly matters: but as for thee,
thine heart is like a piece of lead, it stirs not to that which is good, but
lively enough in its motions toward evil and sin as its center; the thoughts
thereof are like the eyes Prove. 17. 24.
of the fool, which are in the ends of the earth. It is a strange thing with
thine heart to look upward, or to take a few steps up the hill of holiness
toward the Lord; thou sit upon the roost of thy carnal contentments all
the week long, and never offerest once to get upon the wing to the region of
glory, to the presence of God.

6. Its affecting. There is never an one that truly 1. The Word of God. 2. The
Son of God.


1. The Word of God. Such have an entire As new born babes desire the sincere
milk of the word. And to the Ministers 1 Pet. 2. 2.
thereof, I say not, how thou owe unto me even thine own self. Dolphins, they
say, love music: Phil. 19.
so do these the music of the word; they pant and breath after these fresh
streams; the word is the joy of their hearts, the delight of their souls;
nothing is more pleasing to them then the hearing, reading, or meditating
thereon: Psalm. 1. 2. Dulcis est pluvia illa, dulce est verbum Dei.
but thou that find little savor in the word, may fear thou never had a
saving work. They account the word worth a world, but thou hardly worth the
waiting on; it is their pleasure, but thy pain to be much conversant about it.
Thou loathest this choice manna, but they love it as a chief mercy.

2. The Son of God. Sons of God love the He shall lie all night betwixt Cant.
1. 13. Felix conscientia illa, in cujus cord praeter amorem Christi, nullus
alius versatur amor. Col. 3. 1.
my breasts. Christ has the throne in their hearts; and though they love other
things in subordination to him, yet nothing in co-ordination with him: The
flames of their affections ascend toward heaven, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God. They bear such love to him, that they could willingly part
with their lives for him; and their love is upon this twofold account, and
leans upon these two pillars.

1. His perfection in himself. 2. His affection to them.
1. The perfection in himself. There is an He is the Cant. 5. 10.
chiefest among ten thousand. There is not the least blemish or defect in him;
he is above, beyond men and Angels; he is like the Sovereign among his
subjects, the Sun among the Planets; there is nothing in him but is a strong
motive to love, and a powerful invitation to affection.

2. His affection to them. They consider how fire in their hearts, that they
cannot but love him again; they have received love from him, and this makes
them render love to him: He descended to earth out of love to the sons of Ama
amorem illius, qui amore tui descendit in uterum virginis. 1 Samuel 14. 45.
men, and they cannot but ascend to heaven out of love to the Son of God. The
people expressed their love to Jonathan in standing between him and death,
because he wrought great salvation in Israel: Upon the same account do Saints
express love to their spiritual Savior; they say and think it is pity but love
should have love; he has laid down his life for them, and they think they can
give no less then their heart-love to him: but thou have no love to Christ,
thou will not part with ought for his sake; thou see no such greatness in him
that he should be liked, no such goodness that he should be loved; if thou have
any love toward him, it is but from the teeth, and not in truth; but common
and complemental, not cordial.

7. Improving assurance. The incomes of assurance such have from the Spirit,
make Neh. 8. 10.
their souls; intimations of God's love they use as invitations to a good life;
when the Lord speaks peace to their hearts, they think they are bound to act
piety with their hands; if God speak peace to them, they dare not Psalm. 85. 8.
turn to folly; peace of conscience with such, is mother to piety in
conversation; if they have a sense of acceptance with God, it makes them seek
for more acquaintance with his ways; when they have but a sip of this cordial,
how it fills them with activity for the Lord; they desire not this Sunshine to
play in, but to work in: but as for thee, thy confidences putrify and breed
corruption, and thy security sin. Thou think thou art one Non sperare potest
coeleste regnum, cui super propria regnare membra adhuc non donatur.
of God's, and shall be saved, and therefore take liberty to thy self, to
fulfill the lusts of thine own heart; thou have then no grace; yet this is the
way of many wretched creatures, if they can but fancy the sureness of their
condition, they fear not the sinfulness of their courses. But this warm weather
is not the prognostication of the divine Almanac; it is one of the Divel's
Errata's.

8. Hating hypocrisy. Such are sincere, Paul's prayer for the Philippians,
when he says, that Phil. 1. 10.
ye may be sincere. They have their inside and their outside all of one piece;
of all things hypocrisy goes most against their stomachs; they are what they
would seem to be, and they seem as they are. As the Heathen said, so is it
here, there must be nothing fained In amicitia nihil fictum aut simulatum, Tull.
and counterfeit in the friendship between God and a Saint. Painters call the
mixture of colors (...), corruption, because whatsoever is mixed will more
easily corrupt, says Plutarch. If you be mixed, you are naught; if you be a
linsey-woolsey Christian, you are not of the right make; God's people are not
open Saints and secret sinners; they are not all show, they have substance too;
if they were anatomized, their insides would be found as white as their
outsides; their hearts as well as their hands are washed; their spirit bears
a part in all they do; the glory of God, the salvation of their souls are the
compasses they steer their course by; glory, credit, reputation, gain, etc. are
not the white that they shoot the arrows of Religion at: but it is far
otherwise with thee, as thou may easily perceive if thou take but a
transitory view of thy self.

9. Resisting custom. Like living fish, they Elops swimmeth against wind and
water, so do these. They are Antipodes to the world in their carriages. And be
not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your Romans
12. 2.
mind, says the Apostle. What others are they are not; what others are not
they are; they Contraria juxta se posita megis elucescunt.
follow not a multitude to do evil; they choose the strait way, though they find
no company; their minds are contrary to the manners, their courses to the
customs, their ways to the works, their garb to the guise of the generality of
the world. Saints are singular; other men's practices are no rule for their
performances. What Christ said of his Disciples then, is true of them in all
ages, ye are not of this world; Joh. 15. 19.
the world goes westward, these eastward; the world lies in wickedness, these
are up and doing the work of the Lord; the world is sinfully secure, these are
seriously seeking; the world lazy, these laboring; the world pursuing their
gain, these pleasing their God; it matters not what crowds there are in the way
of vanity, these are content to go single in the way of virtue; they go cross
to the world, not from passionate perverseness, but from pious principles; not
from an humorous contrariety, but from an heavenly conversion.

10. Prizing communion. Lastly, they summum bonum, their chief good, and prize
communion with the divine being above all things. The Lord is the portion of
mine inheritance, and of my cup; thou maintainest my lot. Psalm. 16. 5. Psalm.
73. 25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee. How did David's desires reach to heaven? The participation of God
and Christ is the ultimate end of a gracious souls pantings and pains; its
thoughts, endeavors, contrivances have a tendency thereunto; it makes this the
end of its life and liberty, the end of its desires and duties, the end of its
prayers and performances, to enjoy its God and Savior here and hereafter;
other men's thoughts, affections, labors are about transitory things; and that
whereabout men lay out the choice of their intentions and endeavors, they make
their chief good. Thus have I finished this use of examination, whereon I have
insisted the longer, and which I have diversified the largelier, because it is
of very great concernment, to know whether or no we be truly converted. I
request you, my dear friends, to set upon this work speedily and seriously,
delay it not a moment; pray to God to teach you spiritual Arithmetic, that you
may know how rightly to cast up your souls account; and if upon due search you
find your selves effectually called, then listen especially to the first part
of the ensuing and last use; and if you find your selves uncalled, lend an ear
and an eye heedfully to the latter part of it.

CHAP. VII. 6. Use for exhortation.
THere remains yet a further improvement

1. Gracious ones. Or, 1. The godly. 2. Graceless ones. Or, 2. The ungodly.


1. To gracious ones, and such as are effectually 1. Thankfulness to their
heavenly Father. 2. Faithfulness to their earthly Friends.


1. To thankfulness to their heavenly Father. If God do effectually call his
predestinate, Gratias agere Deo possumus, refer non possumus.
forget not the great duty of gratitude that lies upon you: Though you be
unable to pay God for what he has done, yet be not unmindful to praise him for
it. Let him have the songs of Zion, who has saved you from your sins; God has
brought you into an estate of holiness, be much therefore in the returns of
Hallelujahs. Say as David, My soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is
within Psalm. 103. 1.
me praise his holy name. Be much in Psalming his praise. Learn of Paul, to
give thanks Col. 1. 12, 13.
unto the father, who has delivered thee from the power of darkness, and has
translated thee into the Kingdom of his dear Son. There is great reason there
should be glory to God on high, because of his good will to thee a sinful
creature; you cannot give too great thanks, for whom God has done so great
things; and that the music may be the more melodious, let the consort be
maintained upon these three strings, viz.

1. Thoughts. 2. Words. 3. Works.
1. Let your thoughts be grateful; let Luke 1. 43. Psa. 48. 9. Optima
beneficiorum custos, est ipsa memoria beneficiorum.
And as she wondered that the Mother of her Lord should come to her; so do
thou, that the Lord himself vouchsafes thus to visit thee. Christians should
think of Christ's loving kindness in the midst of his Temple; spiritual
renovation should be followed by serious recordation; carnal men's thoughts are
taken up in contemplating their external accomodations; why should not a
Christians heart be taken up in considering their internal advantages? Tho.
Anello, that made an insurrection in Naples, some 8. years since, could hardly
sleep for thinking of his greatness; how much more should thou be
transported with thoughts of God's graciousness? Wonder at his work, admire him
for admitting thee into his bosom, adore him for adoption. Thou may well be
at a loss in thy cogitations, who had been lost in thy transgressions, if he
had not caused thee to live by conversion.

2. Let your words be the trumpet of his In his Temple does every one speak of
his glory. Tell how he taught thee the truth; Psalm. 29. 9.
speak how he saved thee from thy sins; declare how he delivered thee from
spiritual death. Come and hear all ye that fear the Lord, and Psalm. 66. 16.
Quid melius and animo geramus, and ore promamus, and calamo explanemus, quam
Deo gratis? Psalm. 149. 6, 6.
I will declare what he has done for my soul. Let others know what God has
done for thee; let it not be confined within the narrow compass of thine own
breast, but let thy mouth be a means to convey it from thy heart to others
heads; especially communicate it to the Saints, to those that are in the same
predicament of grace with thy self. Sing aloud upon thy bed, and let the high
praises of God be in thy mouth. The Lord has turned thee from sin to grace,
there is reason therefore thy tongue should be tuned to his glory: say, truly I
was a vile sinner, but the Lord through his grace has planted in me the seeds
of virtue; I was nigh to perishing and destruction, but the Lord prevented me
with pity and deliverance; let the glory of the Lord due to him for the
conquering of your sins be born in triumph in the open chariot of sincere and
serious expression.

3. Let your works also be the Heralds of

1. An humble abasement. 2. An heavenly improvement. 3. An holy deportment.
1. An humble abasement. Walk self denyingly Nihil excelsius humilitate.
them next to Christ's righteousness, and speaks much the glory of their God:
what have they that they have not received? therefore they should lie low in
their own eyes: self-denegation is their Savior's exaltation; humble souls are
an ornament to their Father's house.

2. An heavenly improvement. Improve Peter's counsel, Grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Now you have 2 Pet. 3. 18.
a principle do not let it lie dead; manage it to the main end; draw it out
into act; receive not the grace of God in vain: you know the doom of the idle
servant, that did not trade with his talent.

3. An holy deportment. Live like a Saint; Paul, to walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith ye Ephesians 4. 1. Matthew. 21. 30.
are called. Be not like that son in Matthew, that said, I go, Sir; but went
not. Fight in the field against sin, as those that have taken the Lord's
press-money; stand fast in the faith, against winds and storms, as those that
are rooted in Christ; if you profess your self to be a Saint by calling, and
not by carriage, if you profess to be converted by the work of God, and be not
conformed to the word of God, what is it? In all carry your self as one that is
born of God, as one that is governed by the Spirit.

2. Faithfulness to their earthly friends. You that have grace, and are
effectually called, look after your relations and friends, families, by a
spiritual care; you that are alive by grace, O put on bowels of compassion
toward your friends and acquaintance that are dead in sin. Do these three
things for them,

1. Pity them. 2. Pray for them. 3. Preach to them.
1. Pity them. Bemoan and bewail their Canticles, We have a little sister, and
she has no breasts; Cant. 8. 8.
what shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for? Say,
I have a father, brother, sister, mother, husband, wife, cosen, etc. that are
dear to me, but I cannot perceive they are dear to God; my loving friends, but
they have no living faith. It is reported Plut. Mor.
of the Egyptians, Lybians, etc. that when their friends die, they go down into
the caves of the earth, and deprive themselves of the light of the Sun, because
their dead friends enjoy Nihil ad misericordiam sic inclinat, atque proprii
periculi cogitatio.
it not. So do thou pity the condition of any belonging to thee, that are in
spiritual darkness; it is a condition to be condoled, a misery to be mourned
over; none can tell the greatness of the misery, but those that have tasted the
goodness of mercy.

2. Pray for them. Be often at the throne Xenophon, in Plutarch, said, He never
prayed that his son Gryllus might be long lived, but that he might be a good
man. How much more should Saints thus pray for their relations and friends, of
one kind or other. There are many that owe much to the prayers of their pious
parents and friends; say, Lord, make all mine to be thine; let winged prayers
make haste to heaven gates on the errand of your dear friends souls: Real
petitions may Oration pura vacua non redibit.
be means to bring your friends to religious profession.

3. Preach to them. I mean private teaching Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
admonish your friends, exhort your acquaintance. God makes counsel sometimes a
means of conversion; and savoury admonition a means of the souls alteration; do
not spare right words, it may please God to enliven them with force and virtue.

2. To graceless ones, and such as are not

Ob. But thou will say, There are so many sides and Sects, I know not what to
do.

Sol. Many indeed will be of one religion, because there are so many. I shall
here give two answers

1. Answ. Thou may be of every part in a good sense.

1. Thou may be a royalist for the King Christ, and yet a Saint, Psalm. 24. 7,
8, 9, 10.

2. Episcopal: the word signifies to oversee: thou must oversee and watch thine
heart with all diligence.

3. Parliamentarian; Thou may be one of, and for the assembly of the first
born, Heb. 12. 23.

4. Presbyterian; the word signifies elder: so be thou an elder in regard of
grace, a grown man, Ephesians. 4. 13.

5. Independent; viz. upon all sublunary things, and depend only upon God,
Psalm. 73. 25.

6. Anabaptist; labor for a rebaptization for thy self and thine with the holy
Ghost.

7. Antinomian; by the works of the Law shall none be justified.

8. You may be of the family of love; be much in love, Romans 13. 8.

9. A Libertine; Romans 6. 18. the Lord in mercy make thee such.

10. A Perfectionist; 2 Cor. 7. 1.

11. A Pointer; Let all thine actions aim at Christ; point at thy sins, let thy
finger be upon the sore; keep to sound points and doctrines; let them be
founded upon Scripture; for if the points you hold be not tagged with Scripture
authority, they will ravel out.

12. An Antitrinitarian; adore not the worlds trinity of profit, pleasure, and
preferment.

13. A Separatist; viz. from sin, 2 Cor. 6. 17.

14. A Seeker; Isa. 55. 6.

15. A Shaker, or Quaker; Hab. 3. 16. Psalm. 119. 120. Tremble at the thought of
God's justice and power.

16. An high Attainer; Phil. 3. 12, 14. labor after great things.

17. A Ranter; have a mind to curse and swear? do it spiritually. Neh. 10. 29.
Psalm. 119. 106. or to be drunk, be so spiritually. Psalm. 36. 8. the word
signifies they shall be drunk with the fatness, etc. Ephesians. 5. 18.

2. Answ. The more and the greater diversity of opinions and ways there are,
the more cautelous and careful thou ought to be to look after the right
establishment of thy soul with grace.

Therefore notwithstanding look after effectual calling: and as, John 7. 37. on
the last day of the feast, our Savior cried more earnestly, so do I the more
press this upon you, this being the last day of speaking to this subject. One
of the Chamberlains of the King of Persia used to say to him every morning, as
he entered into his chamber, Arise, my Lord, and have regard to those affairs
for which the great God would have you to provide. So say I to you, Bestir you
for the work of effectual calling, for this is the will of God, even your
sanctification. Oh, let me prevail with you in the name of Christ, it may be
the last that I shall propound, and the last that you shall hear. What should
you look after if not spiritual life? what should you seek if not sanctity?
care for if not calling? I shall back this use, and so conclude all with these
three things,

1. Means. 2. Manner. 3. Motive.
Means. The means I propound shall be by way of

1. Counsel. 2. Caution.
1. Counsel. Make constant and conscionable of my captivity. Take words with
you, as Hos. 14. 2. Quamdiu quis permistus est turbis, non vacat soli Deo.
Hosea directs; meditate duly on spiritual concernments on thy souls condition.
Be therefore retired sometimes, for solitariness is the nurse of contemplation.

Ob. 1. But thou will say, I can do nothing.

Sol. Be not like the Poeonians, that would Darius his passage, though they
were his vassals. It is true, thou can not make thy self whole, yet thou
may do as the impotent man did, lay thy self at the pool; thou may be in
God's way; thou may read, hear, etc. The Mariner can make neither wind nor
tide, yet he goes down and waits for both. Though thou can not turn thy
self, yet thou may desire Christ to tough thee at his royal stern.

That thou may be launched and thrust forth into this sea of ordinances,
duties, and endeavors, consider

1. The sayings of God. 2. The success of the godly.
1. The sayings of God by way of

1. Precept. 2. Promise.
1. Precept. It is the command of God to give all diligence to make thy calling
sure, as Jussa sine culpa non negliguntur.
objections of improbability, or impossibility: Do as he requires, thou may
catch something.

2. Promise. As his command is upon thee to compel thee, so his promise is
before thee to countenance thee: he has said, Seek, and Mat. 6. 7.
ye shall find, etc. and God's promises should be seeds of obedience to his
commands.

2. The success of the godly. Others have Samuel, while in God's courts, had
God's call 1 Samuel 3.
to his confirmation. Simeon, while in the Temple, met with Christ in his
consolation. So the Disciples, after Christ's ascension, while Acts 2. begin.
they were waiting, found the Spirit working.

Ob. But thou will say, What can ordinances do? can they give grace?

Sol. No; yet they are helps; though they be not masters of grace, yet they are
means to it: they are like oils, which having no smell of their own, perfumers
use in the making of Plutarch.
their odours and precious ointments. They are like the Ark, which though it
were not the Numb. 10. 33.
resting place, yet went before the people to seek it out for them. They are
like John Baptist, who was not Christ himself, but his 1 John 20. 23.
harbinger.

2. Caution. And here take heed of two things,

1. Satanical delusions. 2. Sinful communion.
1. Satanical delusions. The Devil, like Antiochus, destroys many by false
peace. Dan. 8. 25.
When we have more than ordinary tempests, we are ready to think the Devil has
an hand in them; but undoubtedly he has an hand in the calms that are in the
breasts of natural people: despair may have slainits thousands, but presumption
has slain its ten thousands. More birds are caught with lime-twigs, they say,
than are killed by the fowlers piece. It will never be well so long as you
think all is well.

2. Sinful communion. Avoid evil society; Sampson's mother was forbidden to
Judge. 13. 4, 5.
drink wine or strong drink, while she carried him in her womb. Some think the
reason of that to be, because much strong drink withers the child in the
mothers womb. So will it do by all good motions, if thou be immoderate that
way. It will be like the Dodonean well, that will Elristus est demon sponte in
animum admissus.
quench a burning torch: Thereby you make the devil an inmate, and so keep out
grace. Take heed of bad companions, of what strain soever they be.

2. Manner. And that is three fold,

1. Seriousness. 2. Soundness. 3. Speediness
1. Seriousness. Be serious in this work; be not like the Athenians, at whom
one laughed because

2. Soundness. See that your work be perfect, be Spain, Rev. 3. 2.
when it was coming out of its mothers womb returned thither again. Let it not
be so with thee; when thou have put thine hand to the plough, do not look back
again for all the world: see that your calling be indeed effectual and to the
purpose.

3. Speediness. Set about this work betimes; many think of it, when it is too
late; many are destroyed through delays. Those that Eccles. 12. 1.
would be good truly must be good timely.

3. Motive. And that shall be but one, viz.

Necessity. Consider how necessary it is to be made new; without regeneration
to solid Ab omni nequitia mundum necesse est esse, qui cupit regnare cum
Christo.
piety, there can be no restoration to spiritual peace: as the Oracle told a
people once, so tell I you, if you would have peace for the future, you must
for the present have war with your sins by conversion-conflicts. No true
security without through sanctity; no heaven without holiness; no salvation
without sanctification. Phocas, thinking to secure himself with his high built
walls, after he had killed Mauritius, heard a voice saying, that sin within
would undermine all: So, though thou be compassed about with natural and
temporal good things, they are but weak rampires; sin in thine heart will be
thy mine; if thou have not grace, thou can not possibly have glory.

I conclude all I have spoken in Moses his Set your hearts unto all the words
which I testify among you this day, for it is not a vain Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47.
thing for you; because it is your life. Oh that the Lord would write them on
your minds, and work them into your hearts; that through his mercy and might,
his goodness and greatness, they may be means of affecting your souls, of
effecting this work of effectual calling upon your whole man; which shall be a
crown of rejoicing to me, of true comfort to you; and that which is above,
over, and the end of all, of eternal glory to the Lord, Amen.

FINIS.
The Contents of this Book.
The first Part.
CHap. 1. The Proeme or Entrance page 1 Sect. 1. The dependence and coherence
of the words p. 1, 2 Sect. 2. The explication and division of the words p. 2, 3
Sect. 3. The Doctrine raised from the words p. ibid.
Chap. 2. 1 Of the kinds of Calling p. 4 Chap. 3. 2 What this Calling is p. 6
Chap. 4. 3 The parts of this Calling; and they are p. 9 Sect. 1. Tending or
reaching out Sect. 2. Taking or receiving in p. 10
Chap. 5. 4 What is done in this effectual calling; or what parts are wrought
upon p. 12 Sect. 1. The wit or the head p. ibid. Sect. 2. The will or the heart
p. 13
Chap. 6. 5 What graces first put forth themselves p. 14 Sect. 1. Relying, or
faith p. 15 Sect. 2. Relenting, or repentance p. 16
Chap. 7. 6 The degrees and steps whereby this work is carried on p. 17 Sect.
1. Cognition or knowledge of the Law p. 18 Sect. 2. Comparation, or the souls
comparing it self with the Law p. 19 Sect. 3. Apprehension 1 of the evil of its
ways p. 20 Sect. 4. 2 Apprehension of its lost condition p. 21 Sect. 5. 4
Lamentation, or legal sorrow for sin p. 22 Sect. 6. 5 Persuasion that its sins
are pardonable p. 23 Sect. 7. 6 Anhelation, or panting after Christ p. 24.
Sect. 8. 7 Application of Christ by the spirit p. 26 Sect. 9. 8 Humiliation the
first part of Gospel-repentance, following the first and direct act of faith p.
27 Sect. 10. 9 Resolution, giving up it self wholly to the Lord p. 28 Sect. 11.
10 Manifestation, or a sense of pardoning love p. 29 Sect. 12. 11 Contrition,
the second part of Gospel-sorrow, following the second and reflex act of Faith
p. 31 Sect. 13. 12 Conversation, the soul acts for God, walking in the ways of
holiness p. 32
Chap. 8. Sect. 1. The concomitants and consequences of effectual calling is 1
spiritual life p. 35 Sect. 2. Liberty p. 37. Sect. 3. Fellowship with Christ p.
39 Sect. 4. Adhering to the truth p. 42 Sect. 5. Justification p. 45 Sect. 6.
Adoption p. 47 Sect. 7. Sanctification p. 49 Sect. 8. Afflictions p. 51 Sect.
9. Perseverance p. 53 Sect. 10. Glorification p. 56
Chap. 9. 8 The subject of effectual calling, or whom God does call p. 58 Sect.
1. His Elect p. ibid. Sect. 2. Some of all sorts p. 60 Sect. 3. Mostly and
usually the inferior sort p. 61
Chap. 10. 9 The time of effectual calling; when God does call Sect. 1. More
generally in the time of this life p. 65 Sect. 2. More especially in the time
of youth p. 66 3 Reasons thereof Sect. 3. 1 The excellency of firstlings p. 68
Sect. 4. 2 The probability of a change p. 70 Sect. 5. 3 The necessity of
service p. 72

Chap. 11. 10 The means whereby the Lord does call p. 74 Sect. 1. By his works
and providence p. ibid. Sect. 2. 1 By providing yoak-fellows p. 75 Sect. 3. 2
By granting good education p. 77 Sect. 4. 3 By procuring services p. 81 Sect.
5. 4 By ordering their station p. 83 Sect. 6. 5 By prolonging their days p. 84
Sect. 7. 6 By giving good acquaintance p. 87 Sect. 8. 7 By afflicting their
persons p. 89 Sect. 9. 2 By his word, more especially the Preaching of it p. 93
Sect. 10. 1 It is and must be by plain preaching p. 95 Sect. 11. 2 By piercing
Preaching p. 97 Sect. 12. 3 By powerful Preaching p. 100 Sect. 13. 3 By his
spirit p. 102 The Acts whereof are these, Sect. 14. 1 It persuades p. 103
Sect. 15. 2 It fasteneth p. 105 Sect. 16. 3 It applies p. 106 Sect. 17. 4 It
examineth p. 107 Sect 18. 5 It concludes p. 108 Sect. 19. 6 It disquieteth p.
109

Chap. 12. 11 Objections and Queries made and answered p. 110 Sect. 1. Obj. 1.
Whether God be the sole Author of Effectual Calling p. ibid. Sect. 2. Obj. 2.
What the difference is between Effectual Calling and Sanctification p. 113
Sect. 3. Obj. 3. Which grace is first, Faith or Repentance p. ibid. Sect. 4.
Obj. 5. Whether Effectual Calling be by the preaching of the Law or Gospel p.
115
Chap. 13. 12. The Reasons of the doctrine drawn p. 117 Sect. 1. From the
conjunction of the means and end p. 118 Sect. 2. From union to Christ p. 120
Sect. 3. From distinction present and future p. 122 Sect. 4. From Application
of the means p. 124



The Contents of this Book. The second Part.
Containing the Use and Application of the Doctrine.
CHap. 1. Sect. 1. And second a preparation to the Uses p. 126 Chap. 2. 1 Use
for information, showing several things p. 128 Sect. 1. The paucity of the
Predestined p. ibid. Sect. 2. The Priority of a change p. 130 Sect. 3. The
Infelicity of being in a Natural Condition p. 131 Sect. 4. The Pedigree of
Grace p. 133 Sect. 5. The dependency of Man's Salvation p. 135 Sect. 6. The
quality of this Calling p. 137 Sect. 7. The dfficulty of Effectual Calling p.
139 Sect. 8. The benignity of God p. 141 Sect. 9. The excellency of Effectual
Calling p. 143 Sect. 10. The industry of youth p. 145 Sect. 11. The misery of
sinful age p. 148 Sect. 12. The utility of observation p. 150 Sect. 13. The
dignity of the word p. 152 Sect. 14. The necessity of hearing p. 154
Chap. 3. Sect. 1. 2 Use for terror to those that are yet uncalled, in these
respects p. 156 Sect. 2. 1 They cannot yet conclude that they are predestined
p. ibid. Sect. 3. 2 If they do conclude, they do but delude themselves p. 158
Sect. 4. 3 They can take no true contentment, in any temporal enjoyment p. 161
Sect. 5. 4 They can have no comfort in the promises p. 164 Sect. 6. 5 They have
nothing really to bear them up in affliction p. 166 Sect. 7. 6 They have no
support in death p. 168
Chap. 4. Sect. 1. The third Use of reprehension to those that neglect this
work and look not after it p. 171. Sect. 2. 1 Aggravating circumstances 1 The
Multitude of your calls p. 176 Sect. 3. 1 In regard of the frequency of the act
p. ibid. Sect. 4. 2 In regard of the variety of the agent p. 180 Sect. 5. 2 The
Altitude of your inexcusableness p. 183 Wherein 6 usual pleas of people are
foiled. Sect. 6. 1 The warrant of their hearing p. 184 Sect. 7. 2 They cannot
read p. 185 Sect. 8. 3 They have no time p. 188 Sect. 9. 4 They are weak in
understanding p. 190 Sect. 10. 5 They are sluggish, and of a regardless temper
p. 191 Sect. 11. 6 They are forgetful p. 192
Sect. 12. 3 The Magnitude of God's providence p. 194 Sect. 13. 4 The Lenitude
of spirit p. 197 Sect. 14. 5 The Longitude of their life p. 200 Sect. 15. 6 The
Latitude of their comforts p. 203 Sect. 16. 2 Administering causes of this
neglect p. 206 Sect. 17. 1 Not right apprehensions p. ibid. Sect. 18. 1 Of the
nature of Effectual Calling p. 207 Sect. 19. 2 Of the need of calling p. 210
Sect. 20. 3 Of the number of the called p. 215 Sect. 21. 2 False suppositions
p. 217 Sect. 22. 1 Of their condition p. ibid. Sect. 23. 2 Of God's compassion
p. 220 Sect. 24. 3 Sinful procrastinations p. 222 Sect. 25. 4 Worldly
persecutions p. 225 Sect. 26. 5 Want of Attention p. 228 Sect. 27. 6 Others
conversation p. 231 Sect. 28. 7 Wilful Ignoration p 234 Sect. 29. 3 Astonishing
consequences p. 236 Sect. 30. 1 Hastiness of death p. 237 Sect. 31. 2 The
horror of forsaking p. 239 Sect. 32. 3 The hardness of the heart p. 241 Sect.
33. 4 The hazard of the soul p. 242
Chap. 5. Sect. 1. The fourth Use for comfort to the effectually called. 8
grounds of comfort p. 244 Sect. 2. 1 The stedfastness of conclusion p. 245
Sect. 3. 2 The sureness of salvation p. 246 Sect. 4. 3 The safety of persuasion
p. 248 Sect. 5. 4 The certainty of Union p. 250 Sect. 6. 5 A special
benediction p. 252 Sect. 7. 1 The matter of blessedness p. ibid. Sect. 8. 2 The
means to blessedness p. 254 Sect. 9. 6 The spring of action p. 255 Sect. 10. 7
A sign of affection p. 256 Sect. 11. 8 A singular condition p. 258
Chap. 6. Sect. 1. The fifth Use for examination p. 259 Sect. 2. 1 Negatively,
what is not Effectual Calling p. 260 Sect. 3. 1 Of those things that are more
remote from Effectual Calling p. 261 Sect. 4. 1 Gifts and parts p. ibid Sect.
5. 2 Good Education, good Parents, and godly Relations p. ibid. Sect. 6. 3
Living among religious people p. 263 Sect. 7. 4 A civil fair moral life p.
ibid. Sect. 8. 5 Not to be so great sinners as others p. 264 Sect. 9. 6 To be a
Christian outwardly p. 265 Sect. 10. 7 To be of a Church p. 266 Sect. 11. 8 A
confident presumption of ones good estate and condition p. 267 Sect. 12. 9 To
go according to conscience p. 268 Sect. 13. 10. To hold an opinion, or to
adhere to this or that party p. 269 Sect. 14. 11 The doing of all outward
things that a true child of God may do p. 270 Sect. 15. Things more nearly
related to, and more like Effectual Calling p. 271 Sect. 16. 1 There may be a
feeling of sin and confession of it p. ibid. Sect. 17. 2 Disquiet and terror of
conscience p. ibid. Sect. 18. 3 Fear and trouble about sin before the
committing of it p. 273 Sect. 19. 4 One may love the truth, and in some sort
defend it p. ibid. Sect. 20. 5 One may wish happiness, and yet never will
holiness p. 274 Sect. 21. 6 To Take delight in, and to be taken with the
preaching of the word p. 275 Sect. 22. 7 One may desire the prayers of God's
people, and yet not be a Saint p. 276 Sect. 23. 8 Justifying God in his
punishing dispensations p. 277 Sect. 24. 9 there may be an outward solemn
mourning p. 278 Sect. 25. 10 There may be promising of amendment p. ibid. Sect.
26. 11 There may be a partial but no perfect reformation p. 279 Sect. 27.
Affirmatively what is effectual calling p. 280 Sect. 28. 1 Relatively in
opposition p. ibid. Sect. 29. 1 In opposition to those things of the first rank
p. ibid. Sect. 30. 1 Not gifts. 2 Not confidences of any kind, but true joy p.
ibid. Sect. 31. 1 Such joy as proceeds from sorrow p. 281 Sect. 32. 2 Such as
is in the Use of Word, Sacraments, and prayer p. ibid. Sect. 33. 3 Not to go
according to conscience simply, but as guided and enlightened by the Word and
Spirit p. 282 Sect. 34. 4 Not to take up this or that opinion, but adhere to
Christ p. ibid. 2 For those of the second rank, Sect. 35. 1 Not confession of
sin with the tongue but in truth p. 283 Sect. 36. 2 Not a vexing for sin only,
but a change from it p. ibid. Sect. 37. 3 Trouble at the commission of sin,
because it is sin, and against God p. 284 Sect. 38. 4 Love to the truth for it
self, and because it is like God p. ibid. Sect. 39. 5 A desire of boliness as
well as of happiness p. ibid. Sect. 40. 6 A delight in the preaching of the
word from good received p. 285 Sect. 41. 7 A desire of others prayers for
grace, etc. p. ibid. Sect. 42. 8 Justifying God in his dealings, by improving
afflictions p. 286 Sect. 43. 9 Inwardly mourning and rending the heart p. ibid.
Sect. 44. 10 A promise of Amendment out of hatred to sin p. 287 Sect. 45. 11
Universal reformation p. ibid. Sect. 46. 2 Absolutely and by way of position p.
288 Sect. 47. 1 Sight p. ibid. Sect. 48. 2 Sense p. 289 Sect. 49. 3 Seeking p.
ibid. Sect. 50. 4 Settling p. ibid. Sect. 51. 5 Submitting p. 290 Sect. 52. A
further trial of Effectual Calling, by the effects and fruits of it p. ibid.
Sect. 53. 1 Opposing sin, known by four things p. 291 Sect. 54. 1 A spiritual
contention p. ibid. Sect. 55. Ob. 1. That there is a contention with sin even
in natural men p. 292 Sect. 56. Ob. 2. How shall these two contentions be known
and distinguished p. ibid. Sect. 57. 1 In the wicked it proceeds from servile
fear p. ibid. Sect. 58. 2 Its usually against gross sins p. 293 Sect. 59: 3
They go on in the practice of wickedness p. 294 Sect. 60. 4 They seek only the
repression, and not the confusion of sin p. ibid. Sect. 61. 2 Impartial
prosecution of sin p. 295 Sect. 62. 3 A tender conscience p. 296 Sect. 63. 4
Timely caution p. 297 Sect. 64. 2 Obeying the spirit p. 298 Sect. 65. 3
Submitting to trial p. 299 Sect. 66. 4 Confiding with fear p. 300 Sect. 67. 5
Always moving toward God p. 301 Sect. 68. 6 Affecting p. 302 Sect. 69. 1 The
word of God p. ibid. Sect. 70. 2 The Son of God p. 303 Sect. 71. 1 His
perfection in himself p. ibid. Sect. 72. 2 His affection to them p. ibid. Sect.
73. 7 Improving assurance p. 304 Sect. 74. 8 Hating hypocrisy p. 305 Sect. 75.
9 Resisting custom p. 306 Sect. 76. 10 Prizing communion p. 307
Chap. 7. Sect. 1. The sixth Use for exhortation p. 308 Sect. 2. 1 To gracious
ones p. ibid. Sect. 3. 1 To thankefulness p. ibid. Sect. 4. 1 In your thoughts
p. 309 Sect. 5. 2 In your words p. 310 Sect. 6. 3 In your works p. 311 Sect. 7.
1 In an humble abasement p. ibid. Sect. 8. 2 In an heavenly improvement p. 312
Sect. 9. 3 In a holy deportment p. ibid. Sect. 10. To faithfulness to their
friends p. ibid. Sect. 11. 1 Pity them p. 313 Sect. 12. 2 Pray for them p.
ibid. Sect. 13. 3 Preach to them p. 314 Sect. 14. 2 To Graceless ones to look
out for effectual calling. Sect. 15. An Objection answered p. ibid. Sect. 16.
Means propounded, 1 Counsel to make use of Ordinances p. 316 Sect. 17. Another
Objection answered p. 317 Sect. 18. 1 Consider it is God's precept p. ibid.
Sect. 19. 2 It Is his promise p. 318 Sect. 20. 2 Consider the success of the
godly p. ibid. Sect. 21. Another Objection answered Sect. 22. 2 Caution: 1 Of
Satanical delusions p. ibid. Sect. 23. 2 Of sinful communion p. 319 Sect. 24. 2
Consider the manner, 1 With seriousness p. ibid. Sect. 25. 2 With soundness p.
ibid. Sect. 26. 3 With Speediness p. ibid. Sect. 27. 3 One motive, viz. The
necessity thereof p. 320 Sect. 28. The conclusion of the whole p. ibid.



Errata.
PAge 7. Line 21. for that read the p. 14. l. 6. for repenting r. relenting. p,
18. l. 26. for or r. for. p. 22. l. 13. for could r. clouds. p. 39. l. 8. for
fall r. full. p. 46. l. 30. for hand left r. left hand. p. 64. l. 30. for dash
r. clash. p. 68. l. 33. for excellence r. excellency. p. 69. l. 9. for ye r.
the. p. 77. l. 4. for providency r. providence l. 21. for neale r. weal. p.
80. l. 12. for face r. foot. l. 29. for yet r. that p. 81. l. 4. for awake r.
make, l. 13. for sealed r. seated. p. 82. l. 26. for sentence r. service. p.
83. l. 4. for seek r. look. p. 87. l. 15. for notionly r. notionally. p. 88. l.
27. for intimate r. inmate. p. 90. l. 14. for sins r. limbs. p 92. l. 11. for
salt r. sable. p. 94. l. 14. for ministering r. ministry. p. 99. l. 8. for
terrible r. terribly, l. 11. for Ministry r. Minister. p. 101. l. 20. for of
r. or p. 108. l. 4. for wayteth r. wagereth. p. 115. l. 15. for tenor r.
terror. p. 117. l. 9. for only r. on by. p. 125. l. 28. for ways r. wages. p.
132. l. 2. for time r. tune, l. 18. for his r. its. p. 138. l. 21. for part r.
parts. p. 141. l. 6. for said r. says, l. 7. for conversation r. conversion.
p. 142. l. 31. for place r. palace. p. 139. l. 1. for there r. then, l. 12. for
there r. then. p. 152. l. 9: for bound r. rebound. p. 155. l. 23. for work r.
mock. p. 157. l. 7. for rest r. nest. p. 163. l. 6. for Remi r. Rezin p. 186.
l. 19. for your r. that.

Books Printed, and are now to be sold by Nathanael Web, and William Grantham,
at the black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door, 1658.
Books in Quarto.
MAster Isaac Ambrose, Prima, media and ultima, [First, Middle, and Last
things] in three Treatises, of Regeneration, Sanctification, and with
Meditations on Life, Death, Hell, and Judgment, newly published, with large
additions, in 4.

-- Looking unto Jesus: A view of the everlasting Gospel of Jesus, or the souls
eying of Jesus, as carrying on the great work of Man's Salvation from first to
last, in 4.

-- Redeeming the time. A Sermon preached in Preston, on Jan. 4. at the Funeral
of the Lady Margaret Houghton, in 4.

Mr. Richard Vines, A Treatise of the Institution, Right Administration and
Receiving of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; delivered in twenty Sermons,
at St. Laurence Jury, in 4. Newly published.

Mr. Nathanael Hardy, Several Sermons preached upon solemn occasions, collected
into one Volume, in 4.

-- [The first Ep. General of St. John, unfolded and applied, in 22 Sermons, 4.

[History surveyed in a brief Epitome: or, a Nursery for Gentry] comprised in
an intermixed discourse upon Historical and Poetical Relations, in 4.

Mr. William Nicolson's full and plain Exposition of the Church Catechism,
newly published, in 4.

Dr. Stoughton's 13. Sermons, being an introduction to the Body of Divinity, in
4.

Dr. John Preston, A position delivered in Cambridge, concerning the
irresistibleness of converting grace, in 4.

Mr. Walter Cradock, [Gospel Liberty] in the Extention and Limitation of it, in
4.

Mr. John Browning, [concerning public Prayer, and the Fasts of the Church]
six Sermons, or Tracts, in 4.

Mr. Thomas Parker, [The Visions and Prophesies of Daniel expounded] wherein
the Mistakes of former Interpreters are modestly discovered, in 4.

Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum ex Authoritate primum Regis Henrici 8.
inchoata, in 4.

Mr. George Strode [The Anatomy of Mortality, divided into eight Heads, (viz.)
1 The certainty of Death. 2 Meditations on Death. 3 Preparations for Death,
etc.] in 4.

Dr. Daniel Featly, [The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away
the Sacred Cup from the Laity at the Lord's Table] in 4.

Mr. Ric. Lewthwait, [Vindiciae Christi and obex errori Arminiano; A Plea for
Christ] in three Sermons, in 4.

Welsh Common Prayer, with the Singing-Psalms, in 4.

John Ley, Entitled A Discourse of Disputation, chiefly concerning matters of
Religion, newly published, in 4.

Mr. John Lawson's [Gleanings and Expositions of some of the more difficult
places of holy Scripture] in 4.

Mr. John Cotton [The way of the Churches of Christ in N. England] in 4.

Mr. Edward Thorp, [The New Birth, or Birth from Above] in 4.

Mr. John Vicars, [The Schismatic sifted, etc.] in 4.

-- [Coleman-street Conclave visited, and that Grand Impostor, the Schismatics
Cheater in chief, truly and duly discovered] in 4.

Roberti Heggi Dunelmensis aliquot Sacrae Paginae Loca, Lectiones, in 4.

Mr. John Lewis, [Contemplations upon these times, or the Parliament explained
at Wales] in 4.

[The Beacon flaming, with a non obstante against those that plead for Liberty
of Printing and publishing Popish Books] in 4.

[The Ranters Reasons resolved to nothing, or the Fustification, instead of the
Justification of the mad Crew, etc.] in 4.

Mr. Nath. Stephens [A precept for the Baptism of Infants out of the New
Testament] in 4.

Mr. Josiah Ricraft [A Nosegay of Rank-smelling Flowers, such as grow in John
Goodwin's Garden, etc.] in 4.

Sermons lately published.
Dr. Sam. Annesly [The first dish at the Wiltshire Feast] A Sermon preached
before many worthy Citizens of London, born in that County, in 4.

-- (Communion with God) in two Sermons, preached at Paul's before the Lord
Major of London, lately published, in 4.

Mr. Edmund Calamy (The Monster of sinful Self-seeking Anatomized) A Sermon
preached at Paul's before the Lord Major of London, lately published, in 4.

Mr. John Warren of Hatfield-Regis in Essex (The Potent Potter) A Sermon
preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4.

-- (The unprofitable Servant) A Sermon preached at the Assize at Clemsford in
Essex, lately published, in 4.

-- (Man's Fury subservient to God's Glory) A Sermon preached before the
Parliament at a public Thanksgiving, newly published.

Dr. Robert Gell, A Sermon, touching God's Government of the World by Angels,
preached before the Astrologers, in 4.

-- Noah's Flood Returning, A Sermon preached before the Right Worshipful
Company of Drapers, in London, in 4.

Dr. John Whincop (God's Call to Weeping and Mourning) A Sermon preached at a
Fast before the Parliament, in 4.

Mr. George Walker, A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4.

Richard Meggot (The Rib Restored) or the Honor of Marriage: A Sermon preached
in Dionis Back Church; occasioned by a Wedding, newly published.

Mr. Valentine, A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4.

Mr. William God (Jacob Raised) A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Lords in
Parliament, in 4.

Mr. Thomas Goodwin (The great Interest of States and Kingdoms) A Sermon
preached before the Parliament, in 4.

Mr. Samuel Kem (The King of Kings) His privy marks for the Kingdoms choice of
new Members: A Sermon preached upon the choice of Burgesses for the City of
Bristol, in 4.

Mr. Ben. Hubbard (Sermo Secularis) Or, A Sermon to bring to remembrance the
dealings of Jehovah with this Kingdom of England, in 4.

Mr. J. P. A Sermon preached upon Matthew. 22. 21. Wherein is set forth the
King's due in part, and peoples duty, in 4.

Mr. Ambr. Stavely (Judex Expurgatorius: Or, A short Examination of the
doctrine of Purgatory) A Sermon lately published, in 4.

Mr. Peter Sterry (The Clouds in which Christ comes) A Sermon preached before
the Parliament, in 4.

-- (The teaching of Christ in the Soul) A Sermon preached before the
Parliament, in 4.

Mr. Robert Wild (The arraignment of a Sinner at the Bar of Divine Justice) A
Sermon preached in St. Maryes in Oxon, at an Assize there, newly published, in
4.

Mr. Giles Firmin, Stablishing against shaking, or a discovery of the Prince of
Darkness (Scarcely) transformed into an Angel of light, powerfully now working
in the deluded people called Quakers, in 4.

Mr. Stephen Marshal, The Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion
vindicated. A Sermon preached before the first Parliament on a Monthly Fast
day, newly published.

Mr. Simeon Ash, Good courage discovered and encouraged. A Sermon preached
before the Commanders of the Military Forces of the City of London, in 4.

George Swinnock, The Gods are Men, or the Mortality of Persons in places of
Magistracy. A Sermon preached at an Assize at Harford, in 4. newly published.

In Octavo large.
Mr. Giles Firmin, An examination of Dr. Oowen's Nature of Schism; with a
Discourse concerning Parochial Congregations in Englad; Also a Plea for
Ordination by Imposition of hands, etc. newly published, in 8.

J. Votier, Entitled Vox Dei and Hominis: God's call from Heaven ecchoed by
Man's answer from Earth, etc. in 8. newly published.

Mr. Robert Young (A Sovereign Antidote against all Grief, with the Victory of
Patience) in 8.

Mr. Ben. Needler (Expository Notes, with Practical Observations upon Genesis)
lately published, in 8.

Octavo small.
Mr. George Hopkins (Salvation from sin by Jesus Christ) or the Doctrine of
Sanctification, which is the greater part of our Salvation, founded upon
Christ, who is both the Meritorious and Efficient cause of Sanctifying Grace,
purchasing it for working and perfecting it in his people, etc. newly
published, in 8.

Mr. John Trap, Theologia Theologiae, the true Treasure, or a Treasury of holy
Truths, touching God's Word, and God the Word, in 8.

Bp. Davenant (An Exhortation to Brotherly Communion betwixt the Protestant
Churches) in 8.

Bp. Cooper (The Triumph of a Christian) in three excellent Treatises, 1.
Jacob's wrestling with God, etc. in 8.

(The Bee-Hive of the Romish Church) A work of all good Catholics to be read,
and most necessary to be understood, in 8.

Mr. John Simpson (The Perfection of Justification against the Pharisees, the
Purity of Sanctification against the Stainers of it, the Unquestionableness of
Glorification against the Sadduces) in 8.

Mr. Hall (The loathsomness of long Hair) A Treatise wherein the question is
stated, many arguments against it produced; with an Appendix against Painting,
Spots, Naked Breasts, etc. lately published, in 8.

-- (Vindiciae Literarum, The Schools guarded) or the excellency and usefulness
of Arts, Sciences, Languages, History, and all sorts of Human Learning, in
subordination to Divinity, with an Appendix in Answer to Mr. Webster, lately
published, in 8.

Mr. John Warren of Hatfield in Essex (Principles of Christian Practice)
Illustrated with Questions and Scripture-Answers, lately published, in 8.

Mr. Daniel Evans (A Baptismal Catechism) showing unto what persons, whether of
riper years, or as yet Infants, the Sacrament of Baptism ought to be
administered according to the Scriptures, lately published, in 8.

Twelves large.
Mr. Thomas Gery, The Fort Royal of Christianity Defended: Or a demonstration
of the Divinity of the sacred Scriptures, with a discussion of the great
controversies in Religion, about universal redemption, free will, original sin,
etc. in 12. newly published.

(The Practice of Christianity) or the Epitome of Mr. Rogers seven Treatises,
in 12.

Mr. Thomas Jackson (The true Evangelical Temper) wherein Divinity and
Ecclesiastical History are interwoven and mixed, etc. in three Sermons, in 12.

Twelves small.
Hen. Carpenter, The Deputy Divinity or Inferior Deity and Subordinate God in
the World, A Discourse of Conscience, in 12.

Rich. Sibbs, Antidotum Contra Naufragium fidei and Bonae Conscientiae, in 12.

Mr. Mullard (Celestial Soliloquies) composed of several Divine Meditations and
Prayers, drawn from the holy Scripture, in 12.

Francis Thin, Esquire (The perfect Ambassador) treating of the Antiquity,
Priveledges, and Behavior of men belonging to that Function, in 12.

FINIS.

