THE Truest Intelligence from the Province of Munster, in the Kingdom of
IRELAND. EXTRACTED Out of several Letters of very serious importance lately
sent from Mr. Tristram Whitcombe Sovereign of Kinsale, and diverse other worthy
Gentlemen of good repute, rank and quality. NEWLY Written, published and
really averred by one Mr. I. P. who was sometime a Minister amongst them, having
lately escaped from thence, and sustained great losses by the insolency of
those bold, bloody and barbarous Rebels. Wherein is contained The miraculous
mercies of Almighty GOD toward the Protestants of that Kingdom in general,
and to that Province in special; manifested by the cutting off of above 2000.
of the Rebels by 900. of our Forces, and the late surprisall of many more of
them by Policy at Sea.

LONDON, Printed by John Hammond, and Math: Rhodes. 1642.

The truest INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND:
IRELAND, for this present last Year, has been the bloody Stage whereon the
horrid and never the like heard of Tragedies have been really to the life (or
rather to the death) acted.

The Romish Rebels have been so impious in their cruelty, and so cruel in
their immanitie, that they have not spared Men, Women nor Children: the very
Turks and Mahumetans were never so sanguinean as those Tigers have been. They
have ravished Matrons, vitiated Wives, destoured Virgins, fired Cities, and
(which was the ground of all their insolences) they are damnablly perjured; as
having falsified their Oaths both to God and man. Their Attempts, Plots, and
Conspiracies have been so heinous and facinorous, that my tongue is not able
to relate them, much less my Pen to express them; (yet I hope by Gods
assistance they will be ere long written in their own blood.)

Quis talia fande
Temperet a lachrimis?
Who now sorbeares
Relating such things to shed brinish tears.
What hideous and most barbarous Massacres, they have perpetrated and committed
contrary to the Rules of Religion to God, loyalty to the King, and charity to
their neighbors, the History of these times does sufficiently testify.

Audax omnia perpeti
Geas, Hyberne, ruit per vetitum nefas.
Bold Ireland rushes on
To act all mischief she leaves none undone.
But to come to the Subject matter of this ensuing It pleased Almighty God on
the 10th. day of July last month that the Forees lately sent out of England
under the Command of the Lord Forbes were safely arrived at the Town of
Kinsale; in the County of Cork, and Province of Munster; seven hundred of
them, and a hundred Seamen forthwith marched with some Conducters of the said,
Town toward the famous Town of Bandonbridge, with a relief sent by the
Honorable Houses of Parliament of Arms for 500. Men, 50. Bartels of Powder
for Bandon, and hundred and fifty pounds in money for the poor of the said
Town, which the aforesaid Forces did faithfully and happily deliver, according
to the Order of the Honorable Court of Parliament: and having further
instructions for the relieving of Raphbarry Castle near Resse in the said
County, about ten miles from the aforesaid Town, they marched from Bandon
with near about a hundred horse and foot of the Town Soldiers, together with
their own eight hundred; in which march, they met with a booty of 500. Cowes
and abundance of Sheep; for the guarding of which, they left behind them 300.
Men, who upon the departure of the major part of the said men, advaincing
toward Raph-barry Castle for the relief thereof; were set upon by Mecharty
Reach, Tiego O downy and other Arch-Rebels of those parts of Munster, who were
in number about 5000. lying close in by-nookes and corners, until the greater
part of our Forces were cut of fight and hearing of playing off the Enemies
Muskets) who tell so hot upon our 300. Men, having the advantage of above ten
to one against them, that they much endangered the lives of the 300. Men.

But that GOD that shows himself most gracious when his Servants are most
necessitated, was pleased to put such courage and Power into the hearts and
hands of our English, that they held our so stoutly, that with the loss of
Captain Weld^n and hi^ Company, (save only the Leivten^^t, and thirty men of
Bandon-bridge soldiers, they cut off the Enemy above five hundred, and
continued the fight ^^^ill the remainder of the forces which went up to relieve
Raph-barry Castle were returned unto them. Then recovering new spirits, the
surviving Soldiers fell on the Enemy so eagerly and und^tin^edly with the
assistance of their fellow-forces, that they slow at the least twelve hundred:
For having surrounded and encompas^ them the Enemies could hardly betake
themselves to their heels, as they usually do and have formerly done, after
the first or second shot (unless they should expose themselves to the mercy of
the water somewhat near the place of their sight as they intended for the
recovering of a certain Island to av^yd the ^ury of our Forces) Many of the
Rebels were constrained after the violent and revengfull pursuit of our Army to
trust to the courtesy of the meecilesse waters wherein there could not be
less then five hundred swallowed and overwhelmed (like proud Pharaoh and his
hoasts) in an ingurgitative neck of that none sparing Ocean.

Thus by this true Relation you may evidently perceive Gods great mercy to his
servants, and his just lugment toward his, and their Enemies; of which we
ought all to take special notice, and to render him due thanks, to whom the
honor belongs; saying as that renowned and victorious King Henry the fist
sometimes said at his triumph after his Battle at Agincourt over the French,
who were more then ten to one against him, commanding all his Soldirs to
acknowledge upon their knees those words of the Psalmist, Non no^is Domine non
uobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam; Not unto us Lord, not unto us; but unto thy
Name give the glory.

Another remarkable Passage concerning the happy Proceedings of our last Forces
by SEA, as follows.
ONe of our Ships lately sent forth to the Coasts of Ireland, ventured upon
this ensuing Stratagem into the harbor of Baltemore. They put up the
Dunkirkers Colors, as if they had come with Ammunition and Arms for the
Rebels; which the Rebels being very proud of and confident that they were (as
our men pretended to be) both by their Colors, and the Irish-language which
some of them spoke, were drawn on Shipboard, in particular Durmod Glack,
Florence Macharty, Arch-Rebels with diverse other the principal of which they
saved alive, the other they hanged up presently.

Thus we see that by the divine providence, our policy and weak means do
prosper to the astonishment and destruction of our Enemies, and to the
perpetual exultation and obligation of all true Protestants; who ought not for
all this to tempt GOD by neglecting means in due time of sending over
sufficient Ammunition, money and men to sucour our distressed friends in
Ireland, and suppress their Enemies who (with GODS blessing on these meane^)
may be quickly extirpated, or reduced to their obedience to the Crown of
England.

The Authors Animadversion and Conclusion.
MY humble A^^^ce is, Sa^v^ melior^ jud^cto; That ^^ there must needs be
fighting at home (which God in his infinite merey^^vert) that we would shot the
Door, which is the Kingdom of Ireland instanced after the old Prover^.

He that will for England (...),
Must^in Jreland first ground hope.
Lest fighting amongst our selves the Door being open, the J^ish or some
foreign Enemy, or both invade and subvert us. For the preventing whereof, it
is necessary to send with all expedition (for, I^^^te (...) post^est occasio
calva.
Occasions lock is just before,
Which being past gives no hold more)
^^on^derible Army of faithful resolute Soldiers, very well accoutred and
^ovided and no loss experienced in those parts whither they are sent to
recover the Corn and Cattle into our Forces hands for their Winter support,
and to make impregnable Fortifications upon the several harbors of that
Kingdom where there are none, before the raging (...) and tempestuous storms
of that frigid Santon appear, when Ships cannot play upon that dangerous
Coast, to prevent a future supply from these Rebels Adherents, and then (by the
help of the Lord of Hosts whose Spirit will set up his Standard against his
and their Enemies (...) the malice and might of the Devil the Pope and all
their cursed accomplices, and maintain this own cause) We need not doubt of
a speedy and happy Conquest of that rebellious and Unfortunate Kingdom. But
happly it will be objected that Englands necessity calls for charity first at
home. To this I answer, First by the Rule of Piety the way to gain a
pacification with God and then with the King and so peace among our selves, is
by Repentance, Fasting, Prayer, and the practice of Mercy in releasing the
oppressed in re^^eving the distressed, Jsay 58. from the 6th. verse to to the
end. Secondly by the Rule of Policy, trading now being de^^, and the (...)
part of this Kingdom living upon manual labor, it is more then probable that
(wanting employment here to maintain themselves and their great charge, as
many of them undergo, they will take unlawful ways of subsisting, and so
endanger the Kingdom; and therefore may well be spared hence, and be better
maintained in the opportune regaining of Ireland, which is the preserving of
England, then suffered to be their own carvers here it distractions continue,
(which God forbid) to the hazard of this Kingdom, Thirdly, the Men that are or
shall be sent over with expedition into Jreland (the now miserable seat of
war) they being a considerable strength, will be able to effect the Conquest
sooner and at much less charge to to this Kingdom then otherwise; and upon
occasion of foriaigne Invasion which we may justly scare, the ^urke, having got
all that he has in Europe by Civil Dissentions and differences between the
Christian Princes, the men sent over into Jreland (being trained up in the
School of war, and flesht with the blood of their enemies) shall by their
skill, courage and experience do twice so much beneficial Service as raw
unexperienced and fresh water Soldiers: so that the present rending over of a
considerable number of men well appointed for Jreland, can be no prejudice, but
rather an extraord (...) advantage to this Kingdom.

Ordered, that this be printed and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl. D. Covs.

FINIS.

