A brief and plain EXPOSITION of the CREED, commonly called The Apostles Creed.

By Christopher Cartwright Minister in York.

2 John 10. 11. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed. For he that bids
him God speed, is partaker of his evil Deeds.

Printed at York by T. Broad. 1649.

To the Reader.
IT is required of Christians, that (according to their places and Callings)
they contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Iud. v. 3.
and surely there is great need to contend for it now, when so many do contend
against it; when scarce any thing in religion is so fundamental, but some
impugn and oppose it. But how shall they contend for the faith, and not rather
be drawn away from it, who are either quite ignorant of it, or not well and
thoroughly grounded in it? Such as are children [ in understanding, 1 Cor. 14.
20.] are apt to be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14. They are easily led captive, who are ever
learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.
Therefore, as in the exercise of my Ministry, to prevent (as much as in me
lay) the spreading of error, I have handled the first principles of the
Oracles of God, as they are called, Hebr. 5. 12. so in reference to that end, I
think this compendious Exposition of the Creed, (wherein those first Principles
are comprised) may be useful and profitable unto many. It is called Creed of
the first word wherewith it begins in the Latin, viz. Credo, which is in
English I believe; or because those things which every one ought credere, that
it to believe, are contained in it. It is likewise called The Apostles Creed,
Ruffinus in Symb.
and some conceive that it was framed by the Apostles, each of them (before
they departed one from another to preach in several places of the world)
contributing something toward the composing and perfecting of it. But though
this be an ancient, yet (so far as I can see) it is an uncertain Tradition.
It suffices us, that (as is evident by comparing it and the Writings of the
Apostles together) it contains in it summarily the Faith, which was once
delivered by the Apostles. In the explicating of it I have studied to be brief,
yet so as not to be obscure, but to join together perspicuity and brevity, as
much as might be, that by the shortness of the Exposition all might be
encouraged to peruse it; and by the plainness of it all might enjoy so much
benefit as in a competent measure to understand what they profess, and ought
to believe. I will use no further preamble, but praying that thou may by it,
and all other good means attain to a more clear apprehension of, and a more
firm establishment in the truth, I rest,

Thine in the Lord, Chapter Cartwright.
Febr. 28. 1648.
A brief and plain Exposition of the Creed, commonly called the Apostles Creed.
I believe in God, etc.


Why it is said, I believe, rather then We believe.
I Beleeve] Faith which is believed, that is the doctrine of faith, (which is
sometimes called faith) is the same in all that believe aright. There is one
faith, says S. Paul, Ephesians. 4. 5. And of this faith speaks S. Jude when he
exhorts to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude
v. 3. But faith whereby we believe, (which is faith properly so called) that
is, the grace of faith, is distinct in each Believer. All true Believers
believe the same things, yet each one with a distinct faith, wherewith himself
is endued. The just shall live by his faith, Heb. 2. 4. that is, by his own
faith, not by the faith of another; therefore is it here said, I believe, and
not We believe.

What it is to believe in God.
In God] There are three acts of faith, as it is conversant about God, as the
object of it. 1. To believe that there is a God; He that comes to God, must
believe that God is, Heb. 11. 6. 2. To believe God, that is, to assent unto
that which God does say, and to be persuaded of the truth of it; I believe God,
that it shall be even as it was told me, said Paul, Acts 27. 25. 3. To believe
in God, that is, to trust in him, and to rely on him as our God. O my God, I
trust in thee, Psalm. 25. 2. Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God, Isa. 50. 10. The two former acts of faith may be exercised about
men, but not this last act. We may believe that such or such a man is, and that
what he says is true; but we may not believe, that is, trust in him. Put not
your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, etc. that is, in no mere man
whatsoever, Psalm. 146. 3. Cursed is he that puts his trust in man, etc. Jer.
17. 5. The two first acts of faith, as exercised about God, are common to the
wicked, and to the very devils; but this last act is peculiar to the godly. The
Devils believe that God is, and that his Word is true. The Devils also believe
and tremble, says S. James, Jam. 2. 19. But only the righteous do believe in
God, only they trust in him, and rely on him, as their God; this neither the
Devils, nor wicked men can do.

They tremble to think of God, and with Adam and Eve, Genesis 3. would run away,
and hide themselves from God, if they could. Indeed for a while hypocrites and
ungodly persons may profess faith and affiance in God, they may seem to trust
in him, and to rely on him; as it is said of such, Mic. 3. 11. Yet will they
lean upon the Lord. But when their Consciences are thoroughly awakened, and they
are made sensible of the condition they are in, then is that fulfilled, Isai.
33. 14.
The sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulnes has surprised the hypocrites; Who
among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings?

That there is a God, and but one God.
In God] As there is a God, which the very light of nature does show; The
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handie work,
Psalm. 19. 1. The invisible things of God from the Creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead, Romans 1. 20. so there is but one God. Idols are called gods,
because of that opinion which Idolaters have of them. Thus Jacob called Labans
Idols his gods, Genesis 31. 32. Judges and Magistrates are called gods, because in
respect of that Power and Authority that they are in, they in a special manner
resemble God, and are as his Deputies and Vicegerents. I have said, ye are
gods, Psa. 82. 6. Thou shall not revile the gods, Exodus 22. 28. But truly and
properly so called there is but one God. I am God, and there is none else, Isa.
45. 22. Thou shall have none other gods before me, Exodus 20. 3. We know that an
Idol is nothing in the world, (that is, no such thing as an Idolater takes it
to be) and that there is none other God but one. For though there be that are
called gods, etc. yet unto us there is but one God, etc. 1 Cor. 8. 4, 5, 6.
That God is a Spirit, infinite and eternal.
God truly and properly so called, is a Spirit, John 4. 24. And not only a
Spirit, (for so the souls of men, and Angels also are spirits, Hebr. 12. 23.
and 1. 14.) but he is an immense and infinite Spirit, which none else is. Do
not I the Lord fill heaven and earth, Ier. 23. 24. Yea, the heaven, even the
heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 1 King. 8. 27. God also is an eternal
Spirit, which neither the soul of man, nor an Angel is. He is the high and
lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, Isa. 57. 15.

The name of Father how attributed unto God.
The Father] Sometimes the name of Father being attributed unto God, is taken
essentially, and is common to the whole Trinity. Have we not all one Father?
has not one God created us, Mal. 2. 10. I will be a Father unto you, and you
shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 18.
Sometimes it is taken personally, and belongs only to the first Person of the
Trinity, who is called the Father in respect of the second Person called the
Son: Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1
John 1. 3. Thus is the word Father here taken, as appears by that which
follows, And in Jesus Christ his only Son, etc. The whole Trinity is our
Father, but only the first person of the Trinity is Christ's Father.

When it is here said, I believe in God the Father, it is not meant that the
first Person only, the Father, is God, as if the Son were not God, and the
Holy Ghost God also; The Father how the first Person of the Trinity
but only the Father is first mentioned, as being the first Person of the
three; the first Person, I say, not in time, nor in dignity (for they are all
co-eternall and co-equall) but in order and proceeding. For the Father is of
himself, not proceeding from any other; but the Son proceeds from the
Father, and the Holy Ghost both from the Father and from the Son. I proceeded
forth and came from God, says Christ, John 8. 42. The Spirit of truth which
proceeds from the Father, John 15. 26. And so the Spirit also proceeds from
the Son, and is therefore called the Spirit of the Son, Galath. 4. 6. and
is said to be sent by the Son; Whom I will send, says Christ, speaking of
the Spirit, or, Holy Ghost, John 15. 26. which argues that the Holy Ghost does
proceed from the Son, has the Divine Nature communicated unto him by the
Son, as well as by the Father, even as the Son is said to be sent by the
Father, John 3. 16. and in other places, because he does proceed from the
Father, and has the Divine Nature communicated to him by the Father. But the
Father is never said to be sent either by the Son, or by the Holy Ghost, as
not proceeding either from the one, or from the other. Thus then the Father is
God, and so is the Son, and so the Holy Ghost, all one and the same God, though
several and distinct Persons. These three are one, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. They are
three, and yet one; three Persons, yet one God. As Persons they differ each
from other, as God they are the same one with another. This is a great
Mystery, which though we cannot comprehend, as being above reason, yet we must
believe, as being revealed in the Scripture.

As the Father is Almighty, so is the Son and the Holy Ghost also.
Almighty] This attribute Almighty, is not peculiar to the first Person the
Father, but is common to all the three Persons. As the Father is Almighty, so
is the Son, and so the Holy Ghost also. For God as God, is Almighty, and
therefore each Person of the Trinity being God, is Almighty: Yet (as
Athanasius says) there are not three Almighties, but one Almighty. For the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost are one and the same God, and so one and
the same Almighty.

That God is Almighty, and how he is Almighty.
Now that God is Almighty is clear by Scripture. I am God Almighty, says he,
Genesis 17. 1. God Almighty bless thee, said Isaac to Jacob, Genesis 28. 3. God is
styled The Almighty. Ruth 1. 20. 21. The Almighty has dealt very bitterly with
me, said Naomi: And again, The Almighty has testified against me. God is
Almighty, in that he can do all things whatsoever he pleases. With God nothing
shall be unpossible, Luke 1. 37. True it is, God cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. He
cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. But this does not derogate from his
Almightinesse, because these things, to lie, to deny himself, and the like,
note imperfection; and to do them argues weakness, and not Power. How weak is
thine heart, says the Lord, seeing thou do all these things? Ezekiel. 16. 30.
God being Almighty, 1, Let us fear to offend him. Do we provoke the Lord to
jealousy? are we stronger then he? 1 Corinthians. 10. 22. Who ever hardened
himself against him, and prospered? Job 9. 4. 2. Let us with boldness fly
unto him, and trust in him. O Lord God of our Fathers (said Iehoshaphat) Art
not thou God in heaven, and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the
heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able
to withstand thee? 2 Chronicles. 20. 6. And verse 12. O our God, will thou not judge
them? for we have no might against this great Company that comes against us;
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. So Paul, I know (said
he) whom I have believed, and that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day, 2 Timothy 1. 12.

How God made heaven earth
Maker of heaven and earth] Creator of heaven and earth. In the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth, Genesis 1. 1. To create is as much as to make of
nothing, and so God made heaven and earth. By faith we understand that the
world was framed by the Word of God, (the Word of his power, his most powerful
Will and Pleasure) so that things which are seen, were not made of things which
do appear, Heb. 11. 3.

What is meant by heaven and earth.
Heaven and Earth] These two being the principal parts of the world, are put
for the whole world, and all things in it. Sometimes the Sea (being a vast
body) is also expressed. The God of heaven, which has made the Sea, and the
dry Land, Jonah 1. 9. Sometimes heaven, earth and Sea, and all that is in
them; as Nehemiah 9. 6. Exodus 20. 12.

Heaven how taken.
By Heaven is meant, first, The Air, which in Scripture is called Heaven. The
fowls of heaven, that is, of the Air, Psalm. 79. 2. and so in other places.
Secondly, that higher Heaven, wherein are the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which
are therefore called The host of heaven, Deuteron. 4. 19. And thirdly, above
these Heavens there is a third Heaven, as it is called 2 Corinthians. 12. 2. which
is the place of Bliss and happiness, and therefore is called Paradise, 2 Cor.
12. 4. This seems to be it also which is called The Heaven of Heavens, 1 King.
8. 27. Nehemiah 9. 6. That is, the highest and most excellent heaven; as Song
of Songs, that is, a most rare and excellent Song.

To be the Maker of Heaven and Earth belongs, as to the Father, so also to the
Son, and to the H. Ghost.
Now as the Attribute Almighty belongs to all the three Persons, so also does
this, Maker of Heaven and Earth. It belongs to the Father; There is but one
God, the Father, of whom are all things, 1 Corinthians. 8. 6. yet not to the Father
only, but to the Son also. One Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, 1 Corinthians. 8. 6. All things were made by him, and without him was nothing made
that was made, John 1. 2. So Col. 1. 16. And so likewise to the holy Ghost; The
Spirit of God has made me, said Elihu, Job 33. 4. And he that made him, made
all. As God made all things, so in and for all things is he to be glorified.
The Lord has made all things for himself, says Solomon, that is, for his own
glory, Prove. 16. 4. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things; to
him be glory for ever, Amen. Romans 11. 36. See Nehem. 9. 5, 6. Rev. 4 10, 11.

As God made all, so he preserves and governs all
Furthermore, as God is the Maker, so he is also the Preserver, and Governor
of all things. In this respect Christ said, My Father works hitherto, and I
work, John 5. 17. On the seventh day he ceased from working, so as not to
Create any more kinds of Creatures, but in respect of Preserving and Governing
his Creatures he ceased not, neither does cease. Thou preservest them all,
Nehem. 9. 6. His Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103. 19. In this respect also
is God to be glorified. O bless our God people, and make the voice of his
praise to be heard; which holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet
to be moved, Psalm. 66. 8, 9.

Necessary to believe in Jesus Christ.
And in Jesus Christ] As it is necessary to believe in God, so is it to believe
in Jesus Christ. Ye believe in God, believe also in me, says Christ, John 14.
1. Christ is the only Mediator betwixt God and us, 1 Timothy 2. 5. We cannot have
access to God, but by Christ, John 14. 6.

What the name Jesus does import.
Iesus] This name Jesus comes of a word in the Hebrew that signifies to save,
and it imports as much as a Savior. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he
shall save his people from their sins, said the Angel to Joseph, Mat. 1. 21.
where the reason of the name is rendered. And the Angel Gabriel had said before
unto Mary, Thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall
call his Name Jesus, Luke 1. 31. To which words (not to the other related by S.
Matthew, though that place be noted in the Margent of our Bibles) S. Luke has
reference afterward, when he says, And when eight days were accomplished for
the circumcising of the Child, his name was called Jesus, which was so named
of the Angel before he was conceived in the Womb, Luke 2. 21. Christ was
conceived in the Womb before the Angel spoke to Joseph about naming him Jesus,
but not when he spoke to Mary about it. By Joshua, Iesua, and Jesus, are all one
name. Compare Ios. 1. 1. and other places, with Neh. 8. 17. and Heb. 4. 8
the Name Jesus is sometimes meant Joshua, who after Moses was Captain and
Commander over the Israelites, and brought them into Canaan. See Acts 7. 45.
and Hebr. 4. 8. Joshua in those places is the Jesus that is spoken of; he had
the same name with our Savior, and was a Type and Figure of him. So also we
read of others who were likewise called Jesus, but all Iesusses besides the
Lord Jesus Christ, were either only Saviors in name, not in deed; or but
temporal and Typical Saviors; only our Lord Jesus is the true and
everlasting Savior. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever,
Hebr. 13. 8. He is the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him,
Hebr. 5. 9. Neither is there salvation in any other, etc. Acts 4. 12. See Luke
2. 11.

What the name Christ signifies.
Christ] Our Savior in the Old Testament is called Messiah, Dan. 9. 25, 26. In
the New Testament he is called Christ. The words Messiah and Christ signify
both one thing, only the one is Hebrew, the other Greek. See John 1. 41. and
4. 25. They signify as much as Anointed. Compare Acts 4. 25, 26. with Psalm. 2.
1, 2. The reason of the Name appears, Psalm. 45. 7. God has anointed thee with
the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

Christ's threefold Office.
This name Christ imports the Office to which our Savior was anointed, which
Office was threefold, viz. the Office of a Priest, the Office of a Prophet, and
the Office of a King. Kings were anointed, 1 Samuel 10. 1. and so other places
show the same. Priests also were anointed, Exo. 29, 7 And Eliah is commanded of
God, 1 King. 19. 16. to anoint Elisha to be Prophet in his room; which seems
to be meant of outward anointing, as Kings and Priests were anointed. But that
outward and visible anointing with oil did signify inward and invisible
anointing with the Spirit, and so only was our Savior anointed; not any
material Oil, but the Spirit was powered upon him. See Ioh. 3. 34. and Isa. 61.
1. with Luke 4. 18. and 21. Christ was anointed to be a Priest; Thou art a
Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec, Ps. 110. 4 ^t was spoken to our
Savior, as is showed, Hebr. 5. 6, 10. and 6. 20. and 7. 15, 17, 21. Christ was
a Priest to offer himself a Sacrifice unto God for our sins, and to make
atonement for us. He appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself,
Hebr 9. 26. Therefore he is called The Lamb of God that takes away the sin
of the world, John 1. 29. And as a Priest Christ does still make intercession
unto God for us, Hebr. 7. 25. Romans 8. 34. Christ was anointed to be a Prophet.
See Deuter. 18. 15. with Acts 3. 22. and 7. 37. Christ came as a Prophet to
make known the Will of his Father unto us. No man has seen God at any time;
the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him, John 1. 18. God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times
past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us
by his Son, etc. Heb. 1. 1, 2. I know that Messiah comes, which is called
Christ; when he is come, he will teac^ us all things, John 4. 25. And as
Christ, when he was upon earth, did teach in his own person, so does he
still by his Ministers; Teaching them to observe all things that I have
commanded you; and lo I am with you always to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20.
He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me, Luke
10. 16.

Christ was anointed to be a King. Zach. 9. 9. with Matthew. 21. 5. Christ as a
King does reign in the hearts of Believers, so that sin does not reign in
them, nor have dominion over them. Romans 6. 12, 13, 14. and see 2 Cor. 12. 9.
and Philip. 4. 13. As a King Christ does protect and defend those that belong
unto him. See Act. 18. 9, 10. Romans 8. 35, 36, 37. And as a King he does destroy
his enemies that stand out against him, and will not submit unto him. Those
mine enemies that would not suffer me to reign over them, bring hither, and
slay them before me, Luke 19. 17. He must reign until his enemies be made his
footstool, 1 Corinthians. 15. 25. This shall be fully accomplished at Christ's
coming to judgment, which belongs to his Kingly Office: He shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1.

How Christ is the Son, the only Son of God
His only Sonne] Every true believer is the Child of God. To as many as
received him, to them he gave power to be the Sons of God, even to them that
believed in his name, John 1. 12. You are all the Children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, Galath. 3. 26. But none are so the sons of God as Christ is.
Others are the sons of God only by adoption. A son by adoption is one that
is freely, and of mere grace, and favor made choice of, and taken to be as a
son, when as otherwise by nature he is not a son; Heb. 11. 24
see Exo. 2. 10. Act. 2. 21 God has predestined us to the adoption of sons
through Jesus Christ, etc. Ephesians 1. 5. God sent his Son, etc. that we
might receive the adoption of sonns, Gal. 4. 6. But Christ is the Son of God
by Generation, he is Gods begotten Son; Thou art my Son, this day ^ave I
begotten thee, Psalm. 2. 7. Thus none but Christ is the Son of God, this
dignity is peculiar unto him, neither man nor Angel is capable of it. To which
of the Angels said God at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee, Heb. 1. 5. Thus then Christ is the only Son of God, that is, the only
begotten Son, as he is called John 3. 16. and in other places. Believers are
in some sense begotten of God; Of his own will begat he us, etc. James 1. 18.
but they are only in a Metaphorical sense begotten of God, in respect of that
renovation, which God by his Spirit does work in them; in which respect they
are said also to be Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereas Christ
is otherwise begotten of God, having the same substance with God, and being one
and the same God with the Father: I and my Father are one, says he, John 10.
30. Christ one and the same God with the Father.
that is, one God, though two Persons. So John 1. 1. In the beginning was the
Word, (that is, Christ, the second Person of the Trinity, the Son; see 1 John
5. 7. and Revel. 19. 13.) and the Word was with God, (to wit the Father) and
the Word was God. And Romans 9. 5. Christ is called God blessed for ever. And 1 John 5. 20. it is said of him, This is the true God.

How Christ is Lord, our Lord.
Our Lord] David was the Lords Anointed, 2 Samuel 19. 21. and so was Saul, 1 Samuel
24. 6. and Cyrus, Esaias 45. 1. But Jesus Christ is not only the Lords Christ,
that is, the Lords anointed, as he is called Luke 2. 26. But he is also the
Lord Christ; To you is born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord, Luke 2. 11. Christ is the Lord of glory, that is, a most
glorious Lord, as the Apostle styles him, 1 Cor. 2. 8. He is the only Lord; To
us there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, 1 Cor. 8. 6.

Christ is our Lord, first, as he is God; For God is the Lord, Psalm. 118. 27.
As God he made all, and so is Lord over all. Secondly, he is our Lord as he is
Mediator betwixt God and man. Thus all Power both in heaven and in earth is
given unto him, Matthew. 28. 18. To this end Christ both dyed and rose, and
revived, that be might be Lord both of the dead and living, Romans 14. 9. Christ
has redeemed and purchased us with his blood, and in that respect is Lord over
us; He dyed for us, that we should not live unto our selves, but unto him, etc.
2 Cor. 5. 15. Let none therefore think to be saved by Christ, except they be
obedient unto Christ; they that will not have him for a Lord and Sovereign,
must not think to have him for a Jesus and Savior. Commonly in the Scripture
these two are joynned together, Lord Jesus, or Lord and Savior; if he be not
our Lord, he will no be our Jesus, our Savior. He is the Author of eternal
salvation to all that obey him, Heb. 5. 9.

Of Christ's incarnation, and his assumption of our humane nature.
Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary] In the foregoing
words is showed Christ's Divinity and Godhead, in these and the rest that
follow is showed his humanity and Manhood: Yea these words show the manner of
Christ's Incarnation, and how he assumed our nature. The Word was made flesh,
John 1. 14. that is, the second Person of the Trinity, the Son, assumed
humane nature, and was made man. Christ being in the form of God, thought it
not robbery to be equal with God; But made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: Philip.
2. 6, 7. He was made man, true man, like unto other men, yet without sin,
Hebr. 4. 15. So that one and the same Person Jesus Christ, is both God and man;
being God from all eternity, in due time, he also was made man. When the
fullness of time was come, God sent his Son, made of a woman, Galath. 4 4. This
woman was called Mary, which is the same name with Miriam, as it is written in
the Old Testament. When she conceived and bare Christ, she was a pure Virgin;
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name
Immanuel, that is, being interpreted, God with us: Isai. 7. 14. It was
prophesied of Christ, who was conceived and Born of a Virgin, Matthew. 1. 22, 23.
It was not by the concurrence of man, but by the Power of the Holy Ghost that
Christ was conceived in the Womb of his Mother: That which is conceived in her
is of the Holy Ghost, said the Angel to Joseph, Mat. 1. 20. And so the Angel
told the blessed Virgin, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of
the most High shall overshadow thee, etc. Luke 1. 35. Therefore Christ was holy
from his very Birth and Conception, altogether, free from that original
pollution, which others, being conceived and borne after the ordinary course of
Nature, draw from Adam, and bring into the world with them; as David confessed
of himself, Psalm. 51. 5. That therefore Job 254. How can man be clean that is
born of a woman? that, I say, is meant of such as are borne after the usual
manner, by natural generation; it extends not unto Christ, whose birth was
extraordinary, and above nature. As the Virgin did corporally conceive and bear
Christ in her womb, so must we spiritually conceive and bear him in our hearts.
My little Children, of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed
in you, said Paul to the Galatians, Gal. 4. 19. And Christ pointing at his
Disciples, said, Behold my mother and my brethren. For whosoever shall do the
will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and
mother, Matthew. 12. 49, 50.

Of Christ's Passion or suffering.
Suffered under Pontius Pilate] Christ's whole life was a continual suffering;
his very Incarnation was a Passion. For him who was God blessed for ever, to
take upon him the nature of man; for him who was Lord of all, to take upon him
the form of a servant, this was a great and wonderful suffering. So whiles
he lived he was never free from suffering. Being newly born he was laid in a
Manger, there being no room for him in the Inn where he was, Luke 2. 7. Eight
days after his Birth he was circumcised, Luke 2. 21. Soon after he was
persecuted by Herod, and was fain to be carried into Egypt to escape the danger
he was in, Matthew. 2. 13, 14, 15. Of the rest of Christ's life until he was
about thirty years old, Luke 3. 23. the Scripture speaks but little, it being
not so necessary for us to know. Yet thus much it tells us plainly of him, that
he was subject to Joseph and Mary, Luke 2. 51. And it intimates unto us, that
Christ did exercise the Trade that Joseph his Mothers husband was of. For
whereas it is said Matthew. 13. 55. that some did say of him, Is not this the
Carpenters son? S. Mark relates it, Is not this the Carpenter? Mark 6. 3. Which
implies, that as Joseph his supposed Father, was a Carpenter, so he also (for a
while) did follow the same Trade. After that he came abroad to show himself to
the world, and to execute the Office for which he was sent, how was he opposed
by the Scribes, and Pharisees, and such as could not endure the holiness of
his Life and Doctrine? Besides he still lived a mean and despicable kind of
life; Though he were rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, 2 Cor. 8. 9. Even
so poor, that others did minister to him of their substance, Luke 8. 3. And
whereas the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, he had not
where to lay his head, Luke 9. 58. Thus was Christ continually suffering all
his life long; but the things that he suffered at the last, at, and immediately
before his death, were such, and so great, that they peculiarly are called his
Passion, or Suffering. And this is that which is here said, Suffered under
Pontius Pilate. This Pontius Pilate was Governor of Judea under Tiberius the
Roman Emperor, to whom the Jews were then subject. See Luke 3. 1. Pilate was
the Judge that gave sentence upon Christ, and condemned him, as all the
Evangelists record. And even foreign Writers, as namely Josephus a Jew, and
Tacitus a heathen, testify that Christ was put to death by Pontius Pilate. But
the Scripture relates as more fully what Christ suffered; to wit, how he was
buffetted, spit upon, reviled, scourged, crowned with Thorns, etc. so also why
he suffered, to wit, not for any offense that he had done; no, Pilate himself
(as the Evangelists show) did diverse times declare him to be innocent; but for
our sins, which he was to bear, and to satisfy for. He bare our sins in his
body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Him that knew no sin, God made sin for us,
2 Corinthians. 5. 21. Surely he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised
for our iniquities, the chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. All we like sheep went astray, turning every one to his
own course, and the Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us all, Isai. 53. 5,
6.

Of Christ's crucifying.
Was crucified] Here follows now more particularly after what manner Christ
suffered. He was Crucified, that is, nailed alive to the Cross, and so did
hang until he were dead. So the History of the Gospel shows, and hence the
Cross of Christ is so much spoken of in the Scripture. This kind of
punishment was not in use among the Jews, until they came under the power of
the Romans, with whom it was frequent. It was a punishment both full of pain,
and also full of ignominy; only such as were of meanest rank, and vilest
Malefactors were wont to have this punishment inflicted on them: why Christ
suffered on the Cross.
yet as painful and ignominious as it was, Christ was content to suffer it for
our sakes. Yea, it was a cursed kind of punishment, and therefore Christ
submitted unto it, to free us from the curse, which by reason of our sins was
due unto us. Christ (says S. Paul) has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a Curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on a tree, Gal: 3. 13. And Phil. 2. 8, he exaggerates Christ's humiliation by
this; that he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death
of the Cross.

Of Christ's Death.
Dead] The Wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23 Not only the first death, the
separation of the soul from the body, but also the second death, the damnation
both of soul and body; as appears by the opposition in the words there
immediately following, But the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord. why Christ suffered death.
Christ therefore suffered death, to free us from death, from the second death
altogether; Verily, verily, (says Christ) if a man keep my saying, he shall
never see death; he means, eternal death, John 8. 51. So John 11. 26. He that
believes in me shall never die, to wit, eternally. And so also Christ by his
death has freed all that believe in him from the first death, as it is a
curse, so that the nature of it is changed, it is now to them as no death, but
an entrance into life, even life eternal. The sting of death is sin, (says
the Apostle) and the strength of sin is the law; But thanks be unto God, who
gives us victory through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 56, 57. To live to
me is Christ, (says he) and to die is gain, Phil. 1. 21. And he adds Verse. 23.
that he desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which was far better
for him.

How the death and passion of Christ is so efficacious.
The death and passion of Christ is of such virtue and efficacy, as to
satisfy for our sins, and to deliver us from that wrath, which by reason of
our sins is due to us, because his death is not the death of a mere man, but
of God himself, that Person that dyed for us, being not only man, but God
also. God as God is immortal, and cannot die, but God assuming the nature of
man, in that nature, as man, did die for us. God with his own blood has
purchased his Church, Acts 20. 28. The blood of Christ is the blood of God, and
therefore it is indeed precious blood, as it is called 1 Peter 1. 19. It is a
price sufficient to ransom and redeem all: Therefore what ever thy sins be,
yet, as Paul said to the Jayler, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou
shall be saved, Act. 16, 31.

Of Christ's burial.
And buryed] Christ being dead, was buried, as the Evangelists testify. And he
was buried for these reasons. Reasons why Christ was buried
First, to show that he was truly dead, and not in appearance only. For men
use not to be buried till they be dead indeed. And the Scripture notes unto us,
that Pilate did first diligently enquire, whether Christ was already dead, and
was certified of that before he would give leave that he should be buried,
Mark 15. 44, 45.

Secondly, that so Christ's rising from the dead might be the more conspicuous
and manifest. Therefore he was not only buried, but buried in a Sepulcher
hewne out of a Rock, and in a new Sepulcher, wherein none before had been
buried, Matthew. 27. 60. John 19. 41. So that it could not be said either that
Christ's Disciples did undermine the Sepulcher, and so get him away; or that it
was not he but some other that did arise. Neither yet could it be pretended,
that Christ rose not by his own power, but by the touch of some other that had
been buried there before; as we read of one who being laid in the grave of the
Prophet Elisha, as soon as he touched the dead bones of the Prophet, revived, 2
Kings 13. 21.

Thirdly, Christ's buryall was a further degree of his humiliation, in that he
condescended and stooped so low, as to be laid in the Grave, the common
receptacle of the dead. Job speaking of a man that is most potent while he
lives, shows how low he shall be brought when he dies; Who shall declare his
way to his face? and who shall repay him what he has done? Yet shall he be
brought to the grave, and shall remain in the Tomb. The clods of the valley
shall be sweet unto him, Job 21. 31, 32, 33.

Fourthly, this makes Christ's victory over death the more glorious, that he not
only dyed, but was also buried; death seemed to have full conquest over
Christ, having got him into its Den; yet even there did Christ vanquish and
subdue it; O death I will be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction,
says he, Hosea 13. 14. Now, through Christ's victory over death and the grave
we may be assured that death shall be no plague, the grave no destruction to
us. We may say, O death, where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory? 1
Cor. 15. 55. As Christ was crucified, dead and buried, so also must we in a
Metaphorical and mystical sense be crucified, dead and buried; that is, our
old man, our carnal corrupt nature must be crucified, dead, and buried. They
that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, Gal.
5. 24. Knowing this, that our old man is crueified with Christ, that the body
of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin, Romans 6.
6. And v. 3. and 4. Know ye not that so many of us as are baptized into Christ,
are baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
death, etc. So Col. 2. 12. Buried with him by Baptism.

Of Christ's descending into Hell, and what is meant by it.
He descended into Hell] As all the other Articles of the Creed are grounded
upon, and clear by Scripture, so is this also: For those words Psalm. 16. 10.
Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, suppose that his soul should be in Hell;
otherwise it were absurd to say, that it should not be left there, if it should
never be there: Now that was spoken by David not of himself, but of Christ. For
David speaks concerning him, etc. says Peter, Act 2. 25 -- But what is here
meant by Hell? Surely not that which we commonly understand by the word Hell,
to wit, the place where after this life the damned are in torment; Christ never
came there for any thing that we can find in Scripture, and therefore we have
no reason to make that any part of our Belief. The four Evangelists, Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, write of Christ from his Incarnation to his Ascension, yet
mention no such thing, as that Christ went to Hell in that sense. Neither was
it any part of the Gospel that Paul preached, as appears 1 Corinthians. 15. 1, 2,
3, 4. There rehearsing some of the Heads of the Gospel which he had preached,
he mentions Christ's death, and his burial, and his resurrection; but for his
going to Hell (the Hell of the Damned) he neither expressly, nor implicitly
makes any mention of it. Again, David was left in that Hell, in which Christ
was not left; This appears by Peter's argument; which he uses to prove that
David in those words, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, spoke in the person
of Christ, and not in his own person; He proves it by this, that the words
were not true, if meant of David, but most true as meant of Christ: Men and
Brethren, (says he) let me freely speak unto you of the Patriarch David, that
he is both dead and buried, and his Sepulcher remains with us unto this day,
Acts 2. 29. By David's sepulcher remaining with them unto that day, he means
that David was left in Hell, and therefore when he said, Thou will not leave my
soul in Hell, did not speak of himself, but of Christ, and of his
resurrection. Therefore being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an
oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would
raise up Christ to sit on his Throne; he seeing this before, spoke of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in Hell, nor his flesh did
see corruption, Verse 30. and 31. Now if such a Hell be meant, as in which
David was left (and such a Hell we must understand, if we will make S. Peter's
argument good) then can it not be the Hell of the Damned, the place of torment;
for David was not left in that Hell, he never was in it, being none of the
Reprobate, to whom alone that Hell appertains. Further, it appears rather by
Scripture, that when Christ dyed, as his body went to the earth, so his soul
went to Heaven; and therefore not to Hell, as it signifies the place of the
Damned. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, said Christ to the
believing Thief that was crucified with him, Luke 23. 43. now by Paradise is
meant the third Heaven, the place of Bliss and Happiness, as appears 2 Cor.
12. 2. compared with 4. These reasons are sufficient to evince that by Hell
here in the Creed, and so in those places of Scripture upon which this Article
is grounded, is not meant the Hell of the Damned. But, may some say, what is
then meant by it? I answer, the estate of the dead, or the power of death is
meant by Hell; and the meaning of the Article is, that Christ so humbled
himself, as that for a while he was in the estate of the dead, and under the
power of death, though (as David prophesied of him) he did not long continue in
that estate, but was soon delivered out of it. Christ being risen from the
dead, (says the Apostle) dies no more, death has no more dominion over him,
Romans 6. 9. That intimates, that for some time, though but a short time, Christ
was under the power of death, and it had dominion over him. This power and
dominion of death, whereby it having separated the soul from the body, keeps
it still in that state of separation, until the body be raised up, and the
soul and it reunited together; this (I say) is that which is meant by Hell,
when Christ's descending into Hell, or his not being left in Hell is spoken of.
The words in the Original which are translated Hell, Sheol. Hades.
do not properly and directly signify Hell, as taken for the place of Torment,
but they signify either the grave, or the power of death, and the estate of
the dead in general, whether their souls be in the place of torment, or in the
place of comfort. And thus our English word Hell is sometimes used As Psa. 89.
48. in the old vulgar Translation, which is in the Book of Common Prayer, What
man is he that lives, and shall not see death? and shall he deliver his soul
from the hand of Hell? The Interrogation has the force of a strong Negation,
and the meaning is, that certainly there is no man living that shall not see
death; none that shall deliver his soul from the hand of Hell, that is, either
of the grave, as our last translation has it, or of the power of death. For it
were absurd there to understand the Hell of the Damned, many through Christ
being delivered from that Hell. And so Revel. 20. 14. where it is said, Death
and Hell were cast into the Lake of fire, by Hell cannot be meant the Hell of
the Damned, for that is meant by the Lake of fire; but the Power and Dominion
of death is meant, which after the resurrection there spoken of, shall have no
place any where but in that Lake of fire, which is there called The second
death.

Of Christ's rising from the dead.
The third day he rose again from the dead] After Christ's humiliation followed
his exaltation, the first step and degree whereof was his Resurrection or
rising from the dead. That Christ rose from the dead, all the Evangelists have
diligently recorded, and the Apostles diligently preached. See Acts 1. 22. and
4, 33. and 1 Cor. 15. 4, 15. This Article of Christ's rising from the dead, is
of such concernment, that S. Paul says, If Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain, and your faith is also vain, 1 Cor. 15 14. And again, verse.
17. If Christ be not risen, your faith is in vain, you are yet in your sins.

Reasons why Christ rose from the dead.
It was necessary that Christ, though he dyed, and was buried, and remained a
while under the power of death, yet should rise again. 1. For the fulfilling of
the Scriptures. For it was written of him, that his soul should not be left in
Hell, nor his flesh see corruption, Psalm. 16. 10. Therefore there was a
necessity of his rising from the dead, as S. Peter shows, Acts 2. 24. 25,
etc. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was
not possible that he should be holden of it. For David speaks concerning him,
etc. So elsewhere in the Old Testament Christ is spoken of as abiding for ever,
Psalm. 110. 4. Dan. 7. 13, 14. Which did not import (as some erroniously
conceived, John 12. 32, 33, 34.) that Christ should not die, but that he
should not remain dead, but be raised up, and live for ever. O fools, and slow
of heart to believe all that the Prophets have written! Ought not Christ to
suffer these things, and to enter into his glory? Luke 24. 25, 26. So spoke
Christ to some, who startled at his death, and when they were told of his
resurrection, were slow to believe it. And in that same Chapter, verse 45, 46.
it is said, that coming to his Apostles, He opened their understanding, that
they might understand the Scriptures. And said unto them, Thus it is written,
and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day.

2. To make it appear, that by his death he had fully satisfied for our sins,
and wrought out our redemption for us. Who was delivered for our offenses. and
was raised again for our justification, Romans 4. 25. We trusted that it had been
he that should have redeemed Israel, Luke 24. 21. So they spoke who knew Christ
to have been dead, but doubted of his rising again; They did before expect
redemption by him, but now they had small hope of it. And indeed if Christ had
only dyed, and not risen from the dead, all hope in him might well have dyed
with him. But Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope
through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, unto an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
us, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

3. To assure us of our resurrection. For the resurrection of the Members
depends upon the resurrection of the Head; the resurrection of Christians
depends upon Christ's Resurrection. See after upon those words, The resurrection
of the body.

Quest. But if Christ rose the third day, to wit, after that he dyed, how is it
said, that he should be three days, and three nights in the heart of the
earth? that is, in the grave, Matthew. 12. 40.

Answ. That is not so to be understood, as if Christ were three days and three
nights complete in the grave, but only some part of three days, and three
nights. He dyed (as the Evangelists show) the day before the Jewish Sabbath,
that is, on Friday (as we call it) in the afternoon, and was buried the same
day. That part of the day stands for the whole day, and also the night going
before, which (the Jews beginning their natural day, that consists of 24
hours, at Evening, Levit. 23. 32.) did belong unto it. Then he rested in the
grave all the night following, and the next day, which we call Saturday. And
the night after he also remained in the grave, rising early in the Morning on
Sunday, as we call it. Now together with that night is rekoned the day
following, to which it belonged, and so taking the part for the whole (as
sometimes it is taken) Christ was three days and three nights in the grave,
though otherwise he was little above two nights and one day in it. After this
manner is it said, that Esther and the Jews did fast three days and three
nights, Esth. 4. 16. for the Fast was ended on the third day, as is clear by
Esthers putting on her royal apparel, and addressing her self to the King on
that day; Esther 5. 1.

As Christ rose from the dead corporally, so must we spiritually; we must rise
from the death of sin, to the life of grace. Awake thou that sleep, and
stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5. 14. We are
buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans 6.
4. And Verse. 11. Likewise reckon ye your selves dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto* God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And Col. 2. 12. Buried with him
by Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him, etc. And Col. 3. 1. If ye
then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Jesus
Christ sits at the right hand of God.

He ascended into heaven] This is the second step of Christ's exaltation. That
Christ ascended into heaven, the Scripture testifies, Mark 16. 19. Luke 24. 51.
Acts 1. 9.

Of Christ's Ascension into Heaven.
It was requisite that Christ should ascend into heaven. Reasons why Christ
ascended into Heaven.
First, because he came down from heaven, not that he brought his body from
heaven, (as some Heretics imagined) but in that by his Incarnation he made
himself manifest upon earth, whereas before he only kept residence (as it
were) in heaven. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, etc. John 1. 14. In
this respect Christ is called The Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 47. And its
said, that he came down from Heaven, John 1. 13. Now as Christ thus came down
from heaven, so having finished the work for which he came, it was meet he
should return to heaven. I came forth (says Christ) from the Father, and am
come into the world; again, I leave the world, and go to the Father, John 16.
28. And speaking to his Father, I have glorified thee on earth, (said he) I
have finished the work which thou gave me to do. And now, O Father, glorify
me with thine ownself, with the glory which I had with thee before the World
was, John. 17. 4, 5.

Secondly, that it might appear, that his Kingdom is not of this world, as he
said John 18. 36.

Thirdly, that he might show himself to triumph over sin, death, and him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil. Thou have ascended on high, thou
have led captivity captive, Psalm. 68. 18. That was spoken of Christ, as the
Apostle shows, Ephesians. 4. 8. To lead captivity captive, is as much as to lead
a multitude of Captives, as appears by Judges 5. 12.

Fourthly, that he might send down the Spirit, and enrich his Church with the
gifts and graces of the Spirit. Thou have ascended on high, etc. thou have
received gifts for men, Psalm. 68. 18. When he ascended up on high, etc. he
gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4. 8. The holy Ghost was not yet given, (to wit in
such measure as afterward) because that Jesus was not yet glorified, John 7.
39. It is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you,
said Christ to his Disciples, John 16. 7.

Fifthly, that having offered himself a Sacrifice for us on the Cross, he might
present himself likewise unto God in heaven, and make intercession for us. For
Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the
figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of
God for us, Hebr. 9. 24.

6. That he might make way for us to ascend into heaven also. I go to prepare a
place for you, said he to his Disciples, John 14. 2. Whither the forerunner is
for us entered, even Jesus, etc. Heb. 6. 20. He is called the forerunner,
because he going before, and preparing the way, we also in due time shall
follow after. But in the mean time in our hearts and affections we must ascend
into heaven, whiles in respect of our bodies we are here upon earth. Set your
affections on things above, not on things on the ^arth, Col. 3. 2. For our
c^nve^s^tion is in heaven, Phil. 3. 20.

Of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God.
And sits on the right hand of God] This is the highest step of Christ's
exaltation. It is expressly mentioned Mark 16. 19. Hebr. 1. 3. and in other
places. But how is Christ said to sit? And how on the right hand of God? First,
for sitting, it is not here taken properly, as it imports such a distinct kind
of bodily posture. What is meant by sitting.
It is not the intent of the Holy Ghost in the Scripture to show what bodily
posture now in heaven Christ uses; to what purpose were it for us to know
that? But to sit (we know) is a posture of State, and of Authority. Judges and
Magistrates use to sit, and others in token of reverence and subjection, to
stand before them. Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood by
Moses, etc. Exodus 18. 14. Therefore to show Christ's honor and dignity, his
power and authority, he is usually in Scripture said to sit at the right hand
of God. Only when he appeared to Stephen, it is said that be stood at the
right hand of God, Act. 7. 55, 56. He then appeared as ready to aid Stephen in
the great conflict that he endured for his sake. In this sense God is said to
sit, God sits upon the Throne of his holiness, Psalm. 47. 8. It notes Gods
Majesty and Power; for otherwise properly God can neither sit nor stand.

What is meant by the right hand of God.
So for the right hand of God, it is taken metaphorically, and not properly.
For God is a Spirit, John 4. 24. and therefore properly he has no hand, either
right or left. When eyes, ears, hands, and the like are attributed unto God, it
is figuratively, the Scripture condescending to the weakness of our capacity,
and speaking of God after the manner of men. Thus here, because amongst men it
is an honor to be set at ones right hand, ( Solomon sitting himself in his
Throne, caused his mother to sit at his right hand, 1 Kings 2. 19.) Therefore
Christ is said to fit at Gods right hand, to show the high honor to which he
is exalted. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool. So David spoke of Christ, Psalm. 110. 1. The
Apostle expresses it thus, He must reign until his enemies be made his
footstool, 1 Cor. 15. 25. So that Christ's sitting at the right hand of God,
imports his Kingly Power, his reigning over all. It imports that which Christ
said after his Resurrection, All power both in heaven and earth is given unto
me, Matthew. 28. 18. S. Paul speaking of Christ, says, God set him at his own
right hand, Far above all Principality and Power, and Might, and Dominion,
and every Name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which
is to come, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21. So S. Peter says, that Christ is gone into
heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels, Authorities and Powers being
made subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

Christ as man sits at the right hand of God.
Now this most high and glorious exaltation of Christ, belongs unto him, as
man. As in respect of his Manhood he suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried,
and descended into Hell; so in respect of that nature also he rose again from
the dead, ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God. So that
this sitting at the right hand of God, does not import equality with God, for
that honor the humane nature is not capable of; but it imports honor next
unto God, above all Creatures whatsoever; even as S^l^m^ns Mother being set at
his right hand, and he in his Throne, had honor next to him, above others, yet
beneath him.

This makes wonderfully for the comfort and encouragement of such as trust in
Christ, that he is thus exalted. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that
dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who
also makes intercession for us, Romans 8. 34.

Of Christ's coming to judge both the quick and the dead.
From thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead] From whence
shall he come? Not from the right hand of God, which was immediately before
mentioned; no, for then especially shall Christ appear to sit at the right hand
of God, when he comes to judgment; Hereafter ye shall see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of Power (that is, of God, to whom belongs Power
Psalm. 62. 11.) and coming in the Clouds of Heaven, to wit, to judgment,
Matthew. 26. 64. From whence Christ shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
Therefore these words from thence, have reference to Heaven. He ascended into
Heaven, and (there) sits on the right hand of God. And from thence (that is,
from heaven) He shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. The Scripture
is clear and express for this: Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come
in like manner, as ye have seen him go into heaven. So spoke an Angel unto
those who were with Christ at his Ascension, Acts 1. 11. So S. Paul speaking of
Christ's coming to judgment, says, He shall descend from heaven, 1 These. 4.
16. And 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. He shall be revealed from Heaven.

To judge both the quick and the dead] So likewise the Scripture expresses it,
Acts 10. 42. and 2 Timothy 4. 1. and 1 Pet. 4. 5. Who are meant by the quick and
the dead.
Now by quick and dead are meant, first, in general all, whosoever they be. We
must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14. 10. and 2 Corinthians. 5. 10. But more particularly and distinctly by quick are meant all
that shall be found alive at Christ's coming, and by dead are meant all that
were dead before that time, who then shall be raised up, and so come to
judgment. Behold (says the Apostle) I show you a Mystery, we shall not all
sleep, (that is, die,) but we shall all be changed; In a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last Trumpe, (for the Trumpet shall sound, and the
dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we (he means all such as are then found
alive) shall be changed, 1 Cor. 5. 51, 52. So 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15, 16, 17. For this
we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain
unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which which are asleep,
(that is, which are dead) For the Lord himself shall descend from ^eaven with a
shout, with a voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God; and the dead
in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be
caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, etc.
These places show who are meant by quick, who by dead, when it is said that
Christ shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.

That Christ shall be the Judge of all, besides the places before alleged,
the Scripture plainly testifies, Act. 17. 31. and Romans 2. 16. which places
show, that God will judge all, but by Christ, whom he has exalted, and set at
his own right hand, to rule and govern all, and to execute judgment upon all.
Thus is that meant John 5. 22. The father judges no man, but has committed
all judgment to the Son. That is, The Father judges not immediately by
himself, but mediately by the Son, by Christ. And the reason there follows
Verse 27. And has given ^im, (that is, The Father has given the Son)
Authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. That is,
because he is man, and so fit to execute judgment in an outward and visible
manner. For being man he shall be seen of men when he comes to judgment.
Behold he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, even they that
pierced him, Revel. 1. 7. Wherefore (beloved) seeing you look for such things,
be diligent that you may be found of him in peace, without spot, and
blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 14.

Of the Holy Ghost.
I believe in the Holy Ghost] After the Articles concerning the two other
Persons of the Trinity, the Father and the Son, follows this Article
concerning the third Person, the Holy Ghost. This Person in Scripture is called
The Spirit, 1 John 5. 6. Ephesians. 5. 18. The Spirit of God; and The Spirit of
Christ, Romans 8. 9. The Holy Spirit, or, The The word Ghost imports as much as
Spirit. Ghostly Father, and ghostly Counsel, is as much as spiritual Father,
and spiritual Counsel.
Holy Ghost, Luke 11. 13. Romans 5. 5. and 1 John 5. 7. God as God is a Spirit,
John 4. 24. And so also holy, Isai 6. 3. And therefore God the Father is a Holy
Spirit, and so God the Son; yet the name is appropriated to the third Person,
that Person is peculiarly called The Spirit, and The Holy Spirit, or The Holy
Ghost.

Why the third Person of the Trinity is peculiarly called the Spirit, and the
Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost.
The third Person of the Trinity is peculiarly called The Spirit, either as
being after an ineffable manner breathed forth (as it were) from the Father and
the Son; or as inspiring the Prophets and Apostles, Those holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. And this Person also
is peculiarly called Holy, as working sanctification, and making holy. The
Father does sanctify, and so the Son, but by the Holy Ghost. I will put my
Spirit within you, etc. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Whence sanctification is called
sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13,
because it is wrought by the Spirit. And they that are regenerated, or borne
again, are said to be born of the Spirit, John 3. 5, 6, 8.

That the Ghost is God.
The Holy Ghost is God, one and the same God with the Father and the Son; and
therefore as we believe in the Father, and in the Son, so also in the Holy
Ghost. These three are one, 1 John 5. 7. They are three, that is, three
Persons, yet one, that is one God. And that the Holy Ghost is God, is evident
by that Act. 5. 3, 4. Peter said to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thy heart to
lie unto the Holy Ghost? -- Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. And that
we are baptized in the name of the holy Ghost, as well as in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, according to Christ's injunction, Matthew. 28. 19. This
unanswerably proves, that as the Father is God, and the Son God, so is the
Holy Ghost God also. For we may not be Baptized in the name of any mere
Creature. Were ye baptized in the Name of Paul? said Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 13.

That the holy Ghost is a Person
Again, the Holy Ghost is a Person, not an Attribute, as Wisdom, Mercy, Power,
and the like; but as the Father is a Person, has proper and peculiar
subsistence, and as the Son is a Person, so is the Holy Ghost a Person
likewise. This is clear, as by other places of Scripture, so by that Matthew. 3.
16. where it is said that the Holy Ghost came down in the likeness of a Dove.
For no mere Attribute, nothing but a Person can assume a bodily shape, wherein
to appear and show it self. Sometimes indeed the Holy Ghost is put for the
gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost. As Act. 19. 2. when Paul asked some, if
they had received the Holy Ghost, they answered, We have not so much as heard
whether there be any holy Ghost, that is, any such extraordinary gifts of the
Holy Ghost, which in those Primitive times were bestowed upon Believers. But
the Holy Ghost properly taken is a Person.

That the holy Ghost is a Person distinct from the Father and the Son, and
proceeds from them both
Again, the Holy Ghost is a Person distinct from the Father and the Son. They
are three, 1 John 5. 7. The Holy Ghost is called another, to wit, besides the
Father and the Son, John 14. 16, 17.

Lastly, the Holy Ghost is a Person proceeding from the Father and from the
Son. This is proved before page 14 Our care must be that we have the communion
of the Holy Ghost, 2 Corinthians. 13. 14. That the Holy Ghost be shed abroad in our
hearts, Romans 5. 5. That we be filled with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18. that is,
with the sanctifying graces of the Spirit. Grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18.

Of the holy Catholic Church
The Holy Catholic Church] That is, I believe the holy Catholic Church, not
in the Holy Catholic Church, as in the Holy Ghost; we must believe only in
God, that is, trust only in him, as before noted, But we must believe that
there is a Holy Catholic Church. And what is that? What is meant by the holy
Catholic Church? What is meant by Church.
First, by Church here in the Creed, and so in the Scripture is not meant that
which we commonly call the Church, to wit, the place where the people of God
assemble and meet together to worship God; but the people of God themselves are
meant by the Church. Great fear came upon all the Church, Act. 5. 11. There was
a great persecution against the Church, Act. 8. 1.

The Church is the company of such as God does call out of the estate of sin
and misery, into the estate of grace and salvation. The Lord added to the
Church daily such as should be saved, Acts 2. 47.

The Church militant, and the Church triumphant
The Church is partly upon earth, and partly in heaven: That part of the Church
which is upon earth, is called The Church militant, that is, in warfare,
warring against the world, the flesh and the Devil. Fight the good fight of
Faith, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 12. It concerns every member of the Church
here upon earth. That part of the Church which is in Heaven, is called the
Church triumphant, because it consists of those who have overcome their
spiritual adversaries, which here they had to encounter, and now triumph over
them. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righteousness, etc. said the
Apostle when his departure out of this world was at hand, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8.

The Church visible, and the Church invisible.
Again, the Church as here upon earth, is either visible or invisible. The
visible Church consists of all such as are outwardly called, and make an
outward profession of the Gospel. Many are called, (with an outward calling)
but few are chosen, Mat. 22. 14. So that in the visible Church are as well
wicked as righteous, as well Hypocrites as sincere Professors. The visible
Church is compared to a Net, wherein are both good fishes and bad, Matthew. 13.
47, 48, 49. But the invisible Church consists only of such as are that indeed
which they profess themselves to be, true Believers, being chosen of God, and
called not only outwardly, but also inwardly and effectually, called of God
according to his purpose, Romans 8. 28. The Church as it consists of these, is
called invisible, because it appears not unto men, who can only see the
outward profession that is made, but the sincerity of the heart they cannot
see, that is known only unto God. 1 Kings 8. 39. And therefore the Lord
(only) knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

The Church particular, and the Church universal or Catholic.
Again, the Church is either particular or universal. A particular Church is a
company of such as profess the Gospel in one particular place. Thus we read
of the Church at Jerusalem, Acts 8. 1. The Church at Antioch, Act. 13. 1. the
Church at Cenchre^, Romans 16. 1. the Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 2. the Church
in the house of Aquila, and P^is^illa, Romans 16. 3, 5. The Church in the house
of Nymphas, Col. 4. 15. the Church in the house of Philemon, Philem. v. 2. 1
Cor 16. 19. Gal. 1. 2 Rev. 1. 11.
Thus there are many particular Churches, The Universal Church is the whole
company of Believers thorowout the world. Unto the Church which is at Corinth,
to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, (there is a
particular Church) with all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus
Christ, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 2.
there is the universal Church. So that there is but one universal Church, which
comprehends all particular Churches in it. And this is that which is called the
Catholic Church. What the word Catholic does import.
For Catholic is a word derived from the Greek, and signifies as much as
universal, or general. The Epistle of James is called the gerall Epistle; so
both the Epistles of Peter, and the first Epistle of John, and the Epistle of
Jude. In the Greek it is the word from which is derived this word Catholic.
Those Epistles are called Catholic, or General Epistles, because they were
written to all in general, and not either to particular persons, as to
Timothy, Titus, etc. or to particular Churches, as to the Romans, Corinthians,
etc.

How the Church is called holy
Now the Church is called Holy, First, because all that are outwardly and
visibly of the Church, are called to be holy, 1 Cor. 1. 2. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7.
And do profess holiness, 1 Timothy 2. 10. And secondly, because all that are
indeed of the Church, are holy. They that are of the Church triumphant, are
perfectly holy, they are made perfect, Hebr. 12. 23. And they that are of the
Church militant, are also holy in some measure, though not in full measure. You
are washed, you are sanctified, etc. 1 Corinthians. 6. 11. As for such as are
altogether unsanctified, they are rather in the Church, then of the Church,
like a wooden Leg, that is outwardly joined unto the body, but is indeed no
part of it. They went out from us, but they were not of us, etc. says S. John
of some, 1 Ioh. 2. 19
who for a while were outwardly joined to the Church, but afterward fell off,
and so showed that they were not then indeed of it, when they were in it. So S.
Paul says, All are not Israel that are of Israel, Romans 9. 6. that is, all are
not the people of God indeed, who are such by outward Profession, and so seem
to be of them. Therefore all must take heed of resting in a bare profession of
faith, and be sure that they have faith indeed, and so be joined unto Christ,
Who is the Head of the Body, the Church, Coloss. 1. 18. And our union with
Christ must appear by our conformity unto Christ. He that says he abides in
him, ought himself to walk even as he walked, 1 John 2. 6.

Of the communion of Saints.
The communion of Saints] By Saints are meant holy ones; of such only does the
Church indeed consist, as is before showed. Some think that there are no Saints
but in Heaven, which is a gross conceit; for though all that are in Heaven are
Saints, yet all that are Saints are not in Heaven: there are Saints also on
earth as well as in heaven, although not such complete and perfect Saints;
Heaven being a place that admits of no sin, whereas there is not a just man
upon earth, that does good, and sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. But holiness may
be true holiness, as it is called Ephesians. 4. 24. although it be imperfect.
David speaks expressly of the saints that are upon the earth, Psalm. 16. 3. Paul
says that he went to Jerusalem to administer to the saints, Romans 15. 25. And
he told the Philippians, that all the Saints did salute them, especially they
of Caesar's household, Philip. 4. 22. And indeed the Saints are seldom mentioned
in Scripture, but the Saints on earth are meant. Now that there is a communion,
or (which is all one) a The same word that is rendered communion 1 Cor. 10. 16.
and 2 Cor. 13. 14. is rendered fellowship Phil. 2. 1. and 1 Ioh. 1. 3.
fellowship of Saints, we may see by that of S. John, That which we have seen
and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and
truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1
John 1. 3. Which words also show, that the Saints have communion or fellowship
with God, with Christ, and with one another.

The saints have communion with God.
1. The Saints have communion with God, he being peculiarly their God, and
they peculiarly his people; he their Father, and they his Children. Come out
from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you, And will be a Father unto you, and you shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. The wicked
may have an outward formal Communion with God, by partaking of his Ordinances,
but the Saints only have inward and spiritual communion with him. They
Worship God in Spirit, Phil. 3. 3. Their prayer goes not out of fained lips,
Psalm. 17. 1. And as they draw nigh unto God, so does God draw nigh unto them,
Ian 4. 8. He is nigh unto them in all that they call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
For he is nigh unto all that call upon him, even to all that call upon him in
truth, Psa. 145. 18.

The Saints have communion with Christ
2. The Saints have communion with Christ, he being their Head, and they his
Members: Christ is the Head of the Church, Ephe. 5. 23. We are members of his
body, etc. Ephesians. 5. 30. They have the communion of his body, and of his
blood, 1 Corinthians. 10. 16. not only a Sacramental communion, which the wicked
may have by receiving the outward Sacrament, but a real, although a spiritual
communion by faith: For Christ does dwell in their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.
17. By faith they eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, John 6. 53, 54.
with 57. By Christ, through faith in him, they have access unto God, and
acceptance with God, Romans 5. 1, 2. By him they have confidence to make known
their requests unto God, and assurance to obtain of God whatsoever is requisite
and needful for them, Ephesians. 3. 12. John 16. 23. The Saints in heaven have
more immediate and full communion with God, and with Christ, being more
immediately and fully joined unto them, 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7. Phil. 1. 23.

The Saints have communion one with another.
3. The Saints have communion one with another, as having near relation one to
another, being Children of one and the same Father, and Members of one and the
same Body; and having near conjunction one with another, as being endued with
one and the same Spirit, Gal. 3. 26. and 1 Cor. 12. 27. Ephesians. 4. 4. and 1 Corinthians. 12. 13. The Saints have the communion of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13.
14. the fellowship of the Spirit, Phil. 2. 1. they must needs therefore have
communion and fellowship one with another.

As for the Saints in heaven, what communion they have one with another, the
Scripture speaking sparingly, we must not be overbold to enquire; only thus
much is unquestionable, that they have some communion in that kind; rejoicing
one in another happiness, and glorifying God one for another. For Charity
never fails, 1 Cor. 13. 8. yea in the Saints in heaven it is made perfect.
And it rejoices not in iniquity, but in the truth, 1 Cor. 13 6. There being
such a distance betwixt the Saints in heaven, and the Saints on earth, there
can be no such communion betwixt them, as they of the Church of Rome pretend,
to wit, that the Saints in heaven should pray particularly for the Saints on
earth, and procure those good things for them, that they stand in need of: and
that the saints on earth should pray unto the Saints in heaven, and make them
Advocates and Mediators whereby to prevail with God. For besides that this is
most injurious (as they practice it) unto God, and unto Christ, we being only
to pray unto God in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 50. 15.
Matthew. 6. 9. John 16. 23. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Besides this, I say, the Saints in
heaven are not acquainted with the particular estate of the Saints on earth,
Job 14. 21. And therefore there can be no such communion betwixt them, although
in respect of that which was said before of charity, we cannot but conceive,
that the Saints in heaven do in general think on the Saints on earth, and wish
them the same happiness which they have obtained: And so the Saints on earth
bless God for the Saints in Heaven, think and speak honorably of them, and
imitate the virtues that were in them: Prove. 10. 7. Luke 1. 48. Heb. 6. 12. and
13. 7. As for the Saints on earth, they have communion among themselves, so as
to consider one another, and to provoke unto love and good works, Hebr. 10. 24.
to teach and admonish one another, Col. 3. 16. to comfort one another, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 18. to pray one for another, James 5. 15. to succor and releeve one
another, as every one has received the gift, so to minister the same one to
another, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 10.

of forgiveness of sins.
The forgiveness of sinnes] This benefit is peculiar to the Church; The
Prophet speaking of Sion, says, The people that dwell therein shall have their
sins forgiven, Isai. 32. 24. It is a part of the Covenant that God has made
with his people, that he will forgive their iniquity, etc. Ier. 31. 33. The
Saints themselves, even the best upon earth have need of it. If thou Lord
should mark iniquities, Lord, who should stand? But there is forgiveness
with thee, etc Psalm. 130. 34. See Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

What sin is, and the several kinds of it
Sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. It is either original, or
actual. Original sin is that which every one brings with him into the world,
Adam by his fall losing that righteousness in which he was created, and
conveyng sin and corruption into all that by natural generation proceed from
him. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one, Job 14. 4. Behold,
I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, Ps. 51. 5. By
one man (to wit, Adam) sin entered into the World, (that is, into all
mankind) Romans 5. 12. Actual sin is that which every one makes himself
guilty of in his life and conversation. All like sheep have gone astray, Isa.
53 6. Actual sin is either a sin of commission, or of omission: A sin of
commission is, when that which is forbidden, is committed; a sin of omission
is, when that which is commanded, is omitted. There are many other distinctions
of sin, which it were too tedious and not necessary to rehearse.

What forgiveness of sin is, how expressed in Scripture.
Forgiveness of sin is a not imputing of it. God was in Christriconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
It is called a covering of sin. Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven,
and whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32. 1. And a blotting out of sin. According
to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions, Psalm. 51. 1.
Other such like expressions also there are, whereby forgiveness of sins is
set forth in the Scripture.

To forgive sin belongs only unto God.
Only God can forgive sin. As sin is committed against man, as it is an
injury done unto him, so he may and ought to forgive it. Luke 17. 3, 4. If thy
brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. And
if be trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. Ministers also
may forgive sins declaratively, so as to preach and publish forgiveness of
sins to such as repent and believe. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted, etc. John 20. 23. Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren,
that through this man (Christ) is preached unto you forgiveness of sins,
Act. 13. 38. But as sin is committed against God, as it is a transgression of
his Law, so authoritatively only God can forgive sin: I, even I am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions, etc Isai. 43. 25. Who can forgive sins but
God only? Mark 2. 7. The Scribes that spoke those words, were right in the
doctrine, only they were wrong in the application of it. Their position was
good, that only God can forgive sin, but their supposition was naught, that
Christ was but a mere man; and so their inference was false, that Christ did
blaspheme in taking upon him so to forgive sins as he did.

Sin is forgiven only through Christ.
As it is God only who does forgive sin, so it is only Christ, both God and
man, the Mediator betwixt God and man, for whose sake sin is forgiven.
Christ told his Apostles, That repentance and remission of sins should he
preached in his Name, etc. Luke 24. 42. Peter told the Jews, that him (to wit,
Christ) has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Act. 5. 31. Be it knewn unto you
therefore, men and Brethren, (said Paul) that through this man is preached unto
you forgiveness of sins, And by him all that believe are justified from all
things, from which you could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13 38,
39. Christ by his Blood has satisfied for our sins, so that through him only
we must expect forgiveness of them. Behold the Lamb of God (said John Baptist
pointing at Christ) which takes away the sins of the world, John 1. 29. He
is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 2. Your sins are forgiven you
for his Names sake, 1 John 2. 12.

What is required of those who would have forgiveness of sins.
Now if we would have the forgiveness of our sins, there is required of us,

1. Repentance. Christ ordained that repentance and remission of sins should
be preached in his Name, Luke. 24. 47. First repentance, and then remission of
sins; No remission of sins without repentance. So Acts 5. 31. Christ is a
Savior to give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins. When they that
were pricked in the heart with Peter's Sermon, said, What shall we do to be
saved? Peter answered, Repent, etc. Acts 2. 37. 38. So Acts 3. 13. Repent and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Now repentance imports
sorrow for sin: I will acknowledge mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin,
Psalm. 38. 18. And forsaking of sin: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn unto the Lord, and he will have mercy
upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon Isai. 55. 7.

2. Faith. Through this man (viz. Christ) is preached unto you forgiveness of
sins. And by him all that believe are justified, etc. Acts 13, 38, 39. This
faith, or believing, is a laying hold on Christ, an adhering unto him, and a
relying on him for the obtaining of mercy and forgiveness. To as many as
received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to them that
believed on his Name, John 1. 12. There to believe in Christ, is to receive
Christ. So Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephesians 3. 17.

3. To forgive others: Thus Christ has taught us to pray unto God to forgive
us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, Matthew. 6. 12.
And he adds, For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father
will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men there trespasses, neither will
your Father forgive your trepasses, Matthew. 6. 14, 15. and see Mat. 18 from the
21. Verse to the end of the Chapter.

Of the resurrection of the body
The resurrection of the body] There is a spiritual resurrection, the rising
again of the soul from the death of sin to the life of grace, of which
resurrection something was spoken before; but this is not all the resurrection
that is to be expected, as (it seems) some affirmed, saying, that the
resurrection is past already, 2 Timothy 2. 18. But there shall be also a corporal
resurrection, a rising again of the Body; though the soul be separated from it,
and it be laid in the dust, and turned to dust, yet the soul shall be reunited
to it, and it shall be raised up. This seems incredible to a mere natural man;
the Philosophers at Athens marvelled when they heard Paul speak of it; Thou
seem (said they unto him) to be a setter forth of strange gods; because he
preached unto them Jesus and the resurrection, Asts 17. 18. And Verse 32. When
they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked, and others said, we
will hear thee again of this matter. But they that believe Gods Word, believe
this, that the dead shall rise again; I have hope toward God, (said Paul)
which they themselves (meaning the Jews his adversaries) also allow, that there
shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust, Acts 24. 15.
I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day, said
Martha of Lazarus being dead, John 11. 24. The Sadduces (a sect among the Jews)
denied the resurrection, as we read Mat. 22. 23. and Acts 23. 8. But as Christ
said unto them, they erred, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God,
Matthew. 22. 29. The Power of God shows, that he can raise the dead, and the
Scriptures show that he will do it. Why should it seem a t^ing incredible unto
you, that God should raise the dead? Asts 26. 8. He that could make all things
of nothing, can certainly raise up the body, although it have passed through
never so many transmutations. And that God will do this, the Scriptures clearly
testify unto us. See Dan. 12. 2. Joh. 5. 28, 29. and 1 Cor. 15. the whole
Chapter.

Reason also grounded upon Scripture does evince as much. For

1. The body having been partner with the soul either in righteousness or in
sin, it is meet that the body should also be partner with the soul either in
the reward, or in the punishment. We must all receive the things done in the
body, according to that which we have done, whether it be good or evil, 2 Corinthians. 5. 10. As the things were done in the body, so the reward must
likewise be received in the body.

2. For the Saints, their resurrection is particularly proved by the
resurrection of Christ, he being the Head, and they his Members: For as the
Head rose again, so must the Members; as Christ rose again, so must they that
belong unto Christ, and are his. The Scriptures often infer the resurrection
of Christians from Christ's resurrection. See 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13, 16, 20, 21, 22,
23. and 2 Cor. 4. 14. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.

What a change there shall be of the body at the resurrection, Christ shows,
saying, In the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but
are as the Angels of God in heaven, Mat. 22. 30. And the Apostle sets it forth
more at large, 1 Corinthians. 15. 42, 43, 44. where, speaking of the body, and
showing how much it shall differ in the resurrection from what now it is, he
says, It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption. It is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in glory; It is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. Such as are
found alive at Christ's coming, and shall not die, and therefore not properly
rise again, shall yet have this change, as the Apostle there shows, verse
51, 52, 53. But this blessed and glorious change of the body, belongs only to
the godly; as for the wicked, they shall indeed rise again, and be changed, but
their resurrection shall be unto condemnation, John 5. 29. And their change
shall be to perpetual shame and contempt, Dan. 12. 2. Only they that are the
living members of Christ, and have their conversation in Heaven, can expect
that Christ will change their vile bodies, and make them like unto his most
glorious body, as the Apostle teaches, Philip. 3. 20, 21.

Of life everlasting
And life everlasting] This is the end of our faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9. and therefore
fitly put in the end of the Creed.

That after this life, which is but temporal, there shall be another life
which is eternal, the Scripture is plain and express, Dan. 12. 2. Ioh. 3. 16.
and in many other places.

Everlasting life begun here.
Everlasting life is begun here, and so it is called the life of grace. He that
believes on the Son, has everlasting life, John 3. 36. He says not, shall
have, but has. So John 5. 24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears
my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life. So 1 John 3.
14. We know that we are passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren. He means from the death of sin to the life of grace; and that this
life of grace is a beginning of eternal life, he shows in the Verse following,
Whosoever hates his brother, is a Murderer, and no murderer has eternal
life abiding in him.

Everlasting life perfected hereafter.
Everlasting life is perfected hereafter, and so its called the life of glory.
In the world to come everlasting life, Mark 10. 30. to wit, in the fullness and
perfection of it. In respect of the soul this life is perfected immediately
after its separation from the the body, Heb. 12. 23. In respect of the body
it is perfected at the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 52, 53, 54. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16,
17.

What a life this life of glory is, only they fully know who do enjoy it: It
is a glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. It does not yet appear what we
shall be, I John 3. 2. But thus much by the Scripture we may know, that it
consists in a clear vision of God, and a full fruition of him. See 1 Cor. 13.
12. and 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8. and 1 John 3. 3.

Such is the happiness of this life, that it is free from all evil, and full
of all good. 1. It is free from all evil, both all evil of sin, and also
all evil of affliction. Whiles we are here in this mortal body, all we can
do is to keep sin under, that it do not reign in us, Romans 6. 12. 1 John 1.
8. But in the life to come sin shall not so much as be in us. They that enjoy
that life, are just men made perfect, Heb 12. 23. Here man is born to trouble,
even as the sparks fly upward, Job 5. 7. But in the life to come, there shall
be a perfect freedom from all molestation, All tears shall be wiped away,
Revel. 7. 17.

2. It is full of all good. For in that life God is enjoyed, and that most
fully and perfectly; and so far forth as any enjoy God, they are sure to enjoy
all good. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart, Psalm. 37. 4. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none
upon earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73. 25. As for me I will behold
thy face in righteousness; I shdll be satisfied when I awake with thy
likeness, Psalm. 17. 15. Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence is
fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for ever more, Psalm.
16. 11. What is this life in comparison of that which is to come? yet while
this life lasts, that life which is to come must be acquired. For after death
comes judgment, Heb. 9. 27. As a man sows (here,) so shall he reap
(hereafter,) Gal. 6. 7. Therefore fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold
on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. Sow to the Spirit, that so you may of the
Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6. 8.

What the word Amen does signify, and how it is used.
Amen.] This word Amen is an Hebrew word, but most common in all languages. It
signifies as much as truth. Isai. 65. 16. The God of truth; the word in the
Original there rendered truth, is Amen. So Revel. 3. 14. Christ is styled the
Amen, that is, the Truth, as he styles himself, Ioh. 14. 6. And so in that
place of the Revelation it follows immediately, The faithful and true
Witness; by which words is declared what is meant by the Amen. Sometimes the
word Amen is used adverbially, and imports as much as verily or truly. I tell
you of a truth, there be some standing here, which shall not taste of death,
till they see the Kingdom of God, Luke 9. 27. In Mat. 16. 28. it is, Verily I
say unto you, there be some standing here, etc. In the Original the word there
rendered Verily, is Amen, and so it is rendered also in other places. Sometimes
this word Amen is used only by way of wishing, to express a desire that a
thing migbt be, though there be no persuasion that it shall be. When the false
Prophet had said, that God would shortly bring back the persons and the things
that were carried into Babylon, Jeremiah said, Amen, Ier. 28. 6. Not that he
assented to what the other said, but only he wished that it might be. But for
most part the word Amen is used for confirmation of that which is spoken, and
to show the truth and certainty of the thing as also ones assent unto it, and
assurance of it. And sometimes it is used in the beginning of a sentence; thus
our Savior often used it; Amen, or doubling the word, Amen, Amen, Isay, etc.
Joh. 3. 3, 5. where our Translators render it Verily, verily. Sometimes it is
used in the end of a sentence, or of many sentences; as Romans 9. 5. Who is God
blessed for ever, Amen. And Romans 11. 26. To him be glory for ever. Amen. So in
the end of the Lords Prayer, Mat. 6. 13. And in the end of the Gospel written
by S. Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. John. So also in the end of all Paul's
Epistles, of both Peter's, of the first and second of John, of Jude, and of the
Revelation. The word therefore (Amen) does teach us to be fully persuaded and
assured of the truth of the Articles before rehearsed. Let us draw near with a
true heart in a full assurance of faith, Heb. 10. 22. Stand fast in the faith,
1 Cor. 16. 13. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering,
Heb. 10. 23.

FINIS.

