Numb. 2.

A CONTINUATION OF THE DIURNALL PASSAGES IN IRELAND DECLARED IN TWO LETTERS.

THE ONE Being sent from the Lord Antrim in Jreland, to the right honorable
the Earl of Rutland, dated February 25. 1641.

THE OTHER Was sent to Sir Robert King Knight, bearing date the 27 of February,
1641.

LONDON, Printed for F. Coules and T. Banks, 1641.

A Copy of a Letter from the Lord Antrim in Jreland, sent to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Rutland, dated the 25. of February 1641.
My Honorable Lord,
HAving nothing of that weight and consequence, that befits me to accommodate
your Honor withal, worthy of your Lordships acceptance, I am enforced to
present your Honor with what I can, as a small sign of the great observance
in many respects I owe to your Lordship, for the noble favor I have had, the
honor formerly to receive from your Lordship, and the mutual correspondencie
that have bin between your Honor and my self, which when opportunity may
permit, I shall with humble thankfulness acknowledge.

My Lord, It is a great sorrow to me, my name and Honor should be so much
defamed and scandalized by false and scandalous reports; nay, permitted to be
published in Print, that I have revolted from my King, and turned Rebel, the
very name wounds me sore, which never had the left thought of Treason against
my Sovereign, or disloyalty to my Country. I am so far from such
imagination, that I will rather perish at his Majesty's feet, and suffer any
punishment whatever shall be thought requisite to bring a period to my self,
my life and fortunes, then live stained with a horrid denomination as Traitor,
and am so far incensed against these reports, that I vow to God I will to the
utmost of my power maintain the rightful power and prerogatives of his sacred
Majesty, to whom I approve my self an obedient subject and servant, and his
Government, as the undoubted and lawful King over his Majesty's Kingdoms of
England, Scotland and Jreland: I desire not to be disobedient to any the Laws
and Ordinances of his Majesty's Parliament, for the good government of his
Kingdoms; that may not abridge or restrain the free exercise of the Roman
Religion which I am devoted to, and am engaged to maintain in duty to God, and
respect of my future happiness and salvation: Her Majesty my gracious Queen I
will to my power endeavor to obey, and her rightful Reign in his Majesty's
Dominions, under his government, endeavor to uphold and maintain to the
utmost of my life and fortune: and such respect and honor I owe to my Lady,
whom my prayers are daily for, and to whom I recommend my dearest affections,
that she may be confident I will intermeddle with any affairs that may I hope
not prove destructive to my self or Family, or in defamation of mine or her
honor, which I humbly desire your honor to certify Her, and to present his
Majesty with my unchangeable and dutiful intentions.

My LORD, Jreland, I thought good to present you withal, which is necessary to
be taken notice of. There was a great Battle fought before the City of
Lemster, where there was slain 4000 English and Scots, and Sir Edward Denny
one of our Captains, with his Forces of 400 Soldiers has slain Thomas Bland
Esquire, with 500 more of his Soldiers, and put all the rest, besides some
Prisoners taken to flight, that is the greatest overthrow to the English that
has yet bin. And Sir Edward Denny having the victory, on the next morning
being by his Soldiers saluted in a most noble manner, for their beter
encouragement, gave to every Soldier 5 li. and in vindication of his
reputation made a royal Feast to entertain his Soldiers in a deriding and
scoffing manner to the English.

There was also another Skirmish on Saturday last which continued some 8 hours
between the Forces under command of the Lord Osmond Netterfield and others, and
the Forces under command of Sir Simond Harcourt, Sir William Cootes, Mr. Moore
of the English, the Lord Douglas, Sir Charles Bland, Mr. Henry Steward, and
oters of the Scots, where was sl^ine 2000 Irish, and about 100 of the Scots and
English, the rest of the Irish forced to retire, and great spoils were left by
them as a prey for the English of Ammunition and provision of victuals,
sufficient to maintain 500 men for 6 months, which was a great weakening to
the Catholic party. And thus having no more news at this present, I will not
be troublesome to your Honor, but humbly take my leave.

Your Honors in all due observance Antrime.

Joyful News from IRELAND, Or a true Relation of the great overthrow which
the English gave the Rebels before Drogheda, etc.
Noble Sir,
IN my last to you I signified to you, the difficulties which were like to
befall us by the relieving of Drogheda, but God by his infinite mercy has
freed us (I may say miraculously) from that hazard: for when our men there were
driven to that extremity to eat Horseflesh, Sir Henry Tichbourne sallied out
of the Town with only forty Musketeers, and forty Horse, and beat off four
hundred of the Enemies, killed above threescore of them; recovered fourscore
Cowes and Oxen, and two hundred Sheep; burned four Towns, and brought home
two of their Colors; Besides, I must relate unto you Gods abundant goodness
unto us, in that the night before the relief and succors which we sent by Sea
from Dublin to them, should have entered into the Harbor of Drogheda, (which
was strongly fenced over with a Chair and several Boats) there happened a
storm which broke their chainer, and gave our men so free a passage, as with
little difficulty they came safely to the Town. The Rebels were gathered at
Kilshalgham, within seven miles of Dublin, above two thousand men, where they
were settled in a very strong wood. My Lord of Ormond carried out part of our
Army, and beat them out of that great strength (for they would not come into
the Champaine) and killed above a hundred of them, without any considerable
loss of our side, only Captain James Rochfort, a most gallant and courageous
Gentleman. This was an act of great bravery, wherein Sir Charles Coote did, (as
he does always) beyond expectation, exposing his person to as much danger as
any man living could; and in truth he is a gallant man, full of courage and
good affections, and deserves great encouragement from that side. Our Soldiers
are in great want of Money, which causes a general want of all other
necessaries; yet notwithstanding God has infused such courage into them (for
undoubtedly it is his work) that they think there is no danger so great, but
they may attempt it.

Colonel Munke is arrived here with my Lord Lievtenants Regiment of fifteen
hundred foot, and Sir Richard Greevill, with near four hundred Horse, which
puts much heart into us, and makes us look big upon our neighbors, yet we
grieve we cannot be able to relieve our friends in other parts; but I hope when
our full succors shall come; we shall not only defend this place, but add
comfort to our poor distressed friends abroad.

The enemy, though their numbers be very great, even beyond belief; yet their
hearts begin to faint, and I believe they repent their furious madness.

If my Brother be in London, I pray you impart this Letter to him, I would have
written to him, but that I thought he was at Chester, or on his way thither. By
the next he shall hear from me at large, and I shall likewise trouble you.

I must now only tell you, that I thank you for your care of those things
which concern me, and that I am, Sir,

Feb. 27. 1641. your most affectionate Servant, ED. LOFTUS,

Martii 7mo.
It Is this day Ordered forthwith that this Letter be put in Print.

H. Elsing Cler. P. D. Com.

FINIS.

