ENGLAND'S WARNING-PIECE.

OR, The most strange and wonderful Predictions of Cleombrotus a heathen Jew,
prophesied in the Year 1272. upon the Reigns of 29. Kings of England; from
EDWARD the I. to CHARLES the Fifth, 1799.

Together with the Prophecy of another Heathen named Aldura Manasoch, and
lately found amongst ancient Records in the College of Wittenburg in Germany.

Interpreted by Doctor Delanorosus of the same College, out of the Arabian,
Arminian, and Saxon Languages, newly translated into English; Now published and
made obvious to the English Nation, by a Person of quality.

Very remarkable to be observed in this present Age, and by future Generations.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Coals, dwelling at the sign of the Lamb in the
Old Bailey, 1661.

To the Reader.
READER,
WHat is here set down within this Map of Prophesies, and made obvious to the
English Nation, was found by an English Gentleman amongst some ancient Records
in a College of Wittenburg in Germany, 'twas written most in Italian, the rest
in Arminian and Arabian languages, strange and almost unknown Letters; some
was in the Saxon language, and by the description of the Date it is found to be
Three hundred and Eighteen years since it was written, and in the reign of
EDWARD the first; the Authors name was there, but could not be read, nor
interpreted plainly; yet as near as some could define it, they red it
Cleombrotus a Heathen, others were of the mind it was the wandering Jew, and
gave many sound and pregnant Reasons; For said they, here have been not long
ago a strange Travailer, who could give more account of the antientry of the
Empire then any Rolls or Description ever did. Moreover he discovered these
Prophesies, and said they lay amongst the Records, which was known not to be
removed nor touched in many Ages before; besides, many learned Scholars and
Masters of Sciences, did aver that if any wandering Jew was it must be he, a
Man never known to be of any residence.

But as for his strange and wonderful Predictions they are here set down,
and many are come to pass in our days already, and 182. years are yet to
come of his Prophesies.

WHen first this Heathen, all these things foresaw,
It was Three hundred eighteen years ago;
Which in our time, great part has happened true,
That was Predicted by this heathen Jew;
Five hundred years, his Prophecy should last,
Three hundred eighteen of it now is past;
Great part found true, what he said should be done,
One hundred Eighty two is still to come.
Strange wonders of the world he does describe,
And in his Prophecy he does Confide,
That in the Sixteen hundredth sixtieth year
Strange wonders unto England shall appear:
Which will out last this Prophecy with fame,
And spring seven Kings, in lineage of one Name.
The first Prophecy in the year, 1272.
ENgland will be governed three Reigns together upon these three Letters, E.
E. E: and in the Reign of the later, it will be a bloody Conflict between the
three Lions and the Flower-Deluce, and the Lion will make a prey of it, and
after that shall the F. be subject to the E.

The Moral.
It signifies that when Edward the third Reigned in England, there should
wars happen between him and France, and the Lion making a prey upon the
Flower-Deluce; was that he should quarter their Arms and bring them to his,
after which France should be subject to England.

The second Prophecy.
BUt in the Year, 1377. The letter E. shall be extinguish^^ and in the year
1387. will great discentions arise in England, and the blood of many Nobles
will be spilt, great struggling will be for the regal Diadem, and at that time
will York* be removed, and Lancaster will carry the voice for the Court.

Then will the Kingdom make great moan,
To day we have a King, to morrow we have none:
But when this tribulation's done,
From Lancaster the King will come.
The Moral.
This was Richard the second of the house of York, deposed of his Crown by
Henry the 4.th of the house of Lancaster, who fighting so many several Battles
defeating one another, that the Subjects did not know when they had a King nor
when they had none, but Lancaster carrying the voice for the Court was Henry of
Lancaster; deposed Richard and took the Crown.

After this for many years will great wars continue, but toward the time of
1483. will a wild Bore appear out of York and will encounter two Lions
whelps, and after a small reposing will destroy them, He will crush many
Peers unexpectedly, many Treasonss and horrid Murders that time will be
committed, and Noble men's blood will be as plenty as Commons.

Then may England pray that none,
Canary Wines that year come home:
For if it does, it is certainly
The Letter G. by it will dye.
The Moral.
This was Richard the 3.d of the house of York, who gave the wild Bore in his
Arms; The Lions Whelps were his two Nephews he destroyed, and Headed
several Noble Men: The Letter G. was his Brother George Duke of Clarence, whom
he caused to be st^fled in a But of Malmsey Wine. All which came to pass
according to the Prophecy.

The second Prophecy on Richard the 3.d.
THen after two years you will find,
Great alterations by a mind,
The R. will be extinguished quite;
Then Richmond he comes in by right,
And fights a Combat with the Bore,
That never shall be Richard more:
Then shall York and Lancaster
Be excluded from a War;
And ever after both shall be,
Conjoined in Peace and Unity.
This was performed by a Marriage, between Henry the seventh and a Maiden
Duchess of York, being Heiresse.

A Prophecy upon Henry the seventh.
TWenty three years then will England be governed, both in peace and plenty;
And after that will arise a Prince figured Mars upon his Breast, at that time
will Christendom receive a mighty Shacke; That the Foundations of Rome will
seem to startle, great hurly burlies will be between Foreign Princes: And
so at that time will some Neighboring Nation be Englands chief Object.

That great Variance will ensue, much blood will be spilt; Many Noble men's
lives will be lost; So that such discensions will arise from that time, that
never will be heartily reconciled again; Not long after that will be such a
Change of Government, that England will have four within the space of twelve
years: Then shall the Female Sex rule the Male for Forty years together, so
exstinguish.

A Prophecy, 1602.
AFter that shall arise the Letter J^ out of the North, and will ride in upon a
Stags back, and reign Dominicall many years.

The Dragon then shall down be put;
The Lion Rampant shall come up.
Assisted by the Unicorn,
And make two Kingdoms all as one.
That year the Leopard from his Love,
Shall constant to the Lion prove;
Beware a Seamoote do not strive,
With Craft the Dragon to revive,
But if he do the Eagle rhen
Will court the Lion to his Den:
Whose fancy to the Stagge shall aim,
For hunting likely is his Game:
In Sixteen hundred years and ten,
The Stewart shall be Master then;
No Wars within his Reign shall be,
But what is between the Stagge and He.
A Prophecy for the year, 1625.
WHen Sixteen hundred year is come,
And Twenty five the J. is done;
The Letter C. shall take the Crown,
And reign Nine years in high Renown
But then beware of Lebone Rex,
Least that the P. the Lion vix,
For then sad Fates and destiny,
By Wars throughout his Reign shall be:
Then with a blow the times will turn,
And thousands for one Man shall mourn:
The C. shall stoop unto the C,
But pray the first it be not he.
But before this day comes there will reign a mighty War, many Towns will
be brought low, stately Ceaders will bow their heads, and mighty Castles stoop
to Cotages, then will England be furfeited with the blood of Innocents, and
remain a while without King, Lords, or Commons, then will Churches be made
Stables and Palaces become Prisons; the People at that time shall stand amazed
thus bewailing. --

O happy certainly are they,
That never did l^ve to see this day;
Our wealth is all unto confusion brought
By those who have not left us worth a groat;
Our stately Livings to the ground is come,
But dare not speak of it, we must be dumb,
Once had we Justice and a glorious King,
Now thousand Tyrants in the room of Him:
Which like to Tigers did his Life betray,
Since we like Sheep must unto Wolves obey:
We know not where to go nor where to fly,
But like poor Job sit down in misery.
Great Chops and Changes at that time will happen, and the Death of some great
man will then hasten: But when you remember the fall of Charing. Cross, and
see a new one built in Pault Church, then will Captivity bee^led captive, and
Redemption out of bondage will draw near, at which time the Sea will say to the
Land, I have brought home the Treasure of many years Voyage. And the Land
shall then answer, it is so rich and precious I am not worthy to receive it,
which time described is, 1660.

In the Sixteen hundredth sixtieth year,
Strange Wonders unto England shall appear;
Providence by Conjunction joyneth close,
The exiled Thistle to the Southern Rose:
For Neptune of the Ocean home shall bring
A second C, but what a precious thing
Will this same Letter be, and high will stand,
Lord of the Eleaventh house by Sea and Land;
Describe but Mars and Venus to commune,
He comes in May or else the first of June;
Pray that the Seas may calm and quiet be,
Twice most he dangers, now again at Sea:
Yet will be quit from troubles, Neptunes Rore,
And when he is arrived on the shore,
Observe this Prophecy, 'twill make appear,
His Reign consists on Five and fifty year.
But yet before the Eighty first you will see,
A mighty Monarch in the World He Will be;
Some great and ^^gy War may then ensue;
If that by chance the Eagle proves not true,
The Lion Rampant may in fury grow,
Though it is suspected whether he will or no:
For if the Eagle he should fly too fast
It Is thought his Talons will be clipped at last;
For then in this Description you will find,
All Europe will be subject to one m^ld,
Which is the Letter C. predicted true,
That will some great and Neighboring Prince subdue:
And then before the Lion provoth kind,
He Will have an hear^ according to his mind,
Sprung from a house that is of a pretty N^^^,
An Onridge foundeth something near the same.
Then Spain in fame shall lust,
France by chance may fall:
Germany will stand fast,
but England all in all.
Now mark that toward the year 1662. will great Contest be in England about
Religion, at which time will then reign Twenty eight Sects of several
Opinions in which time will ^^y many sparks of Discentions, but of small
continuance, like the snuff of a Candle quickly wast out and spone extinguish;
For then will the Crows head and the Mag^pres ^res^ be a stumbling block to
erroneous Errors, more Disputants will be in anguing then Paris^^ Pastors in
reconciling, many at that time will be confuted and range abroad like seemed
mad men, but after a while they will soon be quieted; So that by the year
1665. will all become one peculiar Government, and then 'twill be as hard to
hear the name of a Soldier in open hostility, as to see a white Raven on the
top of a Pinnacle, a white Harvest will follow, and Peace and plenty will
continue, few Murders will be committed, no Treasons will be thought of; But
in the year 1669. or thereabouts, will a ship sail up the River of Th^nes,
and a Merchant will ask the Mariner what News he brings, the Mariner shall
answer, that Austria is removed to England, and the Gates of Rome does seem to
tremble: That year will some great Foreign, Prince have a fall, but England
shall reign Dominicall and provide a great Voyage for Sea, but beware a
Swallow do not sir in the S^earne of the Admiral, for if it do 'twill in
danger the Fleet for that bout. --

This was interpreted in the Saxon Language, that the Vice Admiral that year
his name will be Swallo^ and will endeavor to break his Allegiance and betray
the Fleet.

And in the year 1680, great Tu^naments will be exercised, Tilting and Lances
will be high ^o request and that year will a Talbot jump to a Duke of Norfolk^
But i^ will be better for him to absent that day, then repent of his Title all
the year after, for if ^^e horse throw him in the morning, let him ab^aine his
Honor that days otherwise he will cake a Fall at. Court and pitch his head
again a Barkley Castle, for the Eagle and the Leonard shall spur^^ him in the
dark; for the Moon that time will be Eclipsed, but if his House does not
stumble as he mounteth let him proceed; For then he shall dis^^ver by the
light of the Moon, the Craftiness of the Eagle in all her darkness. The day
is described thus. --

THe Sixteen hundred eightieth year will bring
Great, days of Honor by a mighty King;
For Nobles in the month of July, they
Shall t^y great actions on the Twentieth day*
By which you I find in this same Prophecy
A Talbot shall the Dinks of Norfolk he;
An Aegle thou, begins at this to spurn,
Till, she have made the Talbots title turn.
Unhappy then will be the Twentieth day,
Unhappy Talbot, this Prediction say;
If that his Horse does stumble when he Mons,
This is a perfect and a true account:
In his behalf the Moon will loose his light,
And he are sted at the Court for spite;
For Treason and Contentions they have bred,
He shall at Barkley Castle loose his head.
But if he miss that Twentieth day alore,
He Will live a Duke for thirty year and more.
Another Prophecy predicted, not by the first Author but by another, whose
name was found to be in that Language,

ADVRA MANASSOCH.

It was written in the Arabian Tongue as Doctor Delanorefus of Wettenburg
College did define, but very dull and hard to be discovered though with much
labor and great diligence he searched, and to his Judgment he understood it,
to have been predicted near upon the account of the year, 1700. which is
remarkable and most wonderful to be thought of: For said he, would Providence
admit me to live until the time and operation of this Prophecy, I then could
tell you, the most strange and not able Changes of great Princes unto the end
of the World but when this was predicted he described himself thus, -- ADVRA
MANASSOCH, whi^^ged, 134.

The Prophecy.
Near upon the Year, 1700. will happen to rise a great Rebelli^n in the
Northern parts, and if you chance to see a green Winter then surely 'twill
follow a bleeding Summer: Then beware a Combat with a Dane, great Contest will
be amongst themselves, but of a short Continuance; small prejudice to the
English Nation, and so extinguish.

The second Prophecy of Aldura Manasoch 1700.
THis will be a year of great Change and alteration throughout the whole
Realm, but no Wars heard or thought of and a glorious Flower of long
continuance that year will fall his Color. For the Letter C will lie down in
his Dormitory and a fresh Rose will arise from the same Root: Observe a little
before, and you shall see an Eagle a light upon the Tower of Canterbury, and
two white Doves shall come and oppose him, but after a small repose the Eagle
will return to the Wood, and the two Doves retire to the Fop of the Church, and
after a short space they shall take their flight toward some great City; Then
shall a Man in a long Gown say, This is a great and notable Sign, what means
it? Then shall a man of a strange Nation answer, shaking his head and say, some
mighty Monarch is desperate ill, but if he passes the 9.th day, the 19.th and
29.th, it will be added to his Reign 15. years: It is observed that this
Prediction comes nea^e of that Prophecy o^ the year 1660. which was foresaw
by the heathen Jew that the second of this same Letter C. should reign
Dominicall Fifty five years. Prophecy CLEOMBROTVS.

The third Prophecy on the year, 1700.
TImes when the second Letter C.
Begins to reign will prosperous be,
Whose great abilities have been fore told,
And pattern to the universal World;
All malice ^^vy, hate discord and spite,
For length of days will vanish from his sight*
He will exceed all Reigns of Kings before,
He Will reign till Forty seven if not more,
And if in forty eight he ^^sse a drift.
He Will reign (...) fifty, no^ t^ll Fif^y sist
With (...) and godly same*
Both Peace and Plenty then shall end his Reign.
The fourth Prophecy.
THen shall you see the time, that presently after you will see a third Letter
of the C. take the Royal Diadem, no strifes nor combustions will be at that
time little diff^rence will be known between the third and the second (...)
will stand quiet for great while, and the Land will make no noise: But observe
when you see the time that when Canterbury shall remove to London, some
Northern Castle will be brought to Yorks; And that year shall the Eagle
desert the Lion but will be taken by a Moo^e upon (...) ^e heath, and shall be
brought to London, but be ware his Talons be not clipped, for if it be he shall
be distinguished from his perch for ever after: But if he do but shift his
feathers before the Moon do overshadow him, his Neast will be built higher
then ever it was. Described thus --

It was by another Writing adjoined to this Prophecy, interpreted,

The meaning of it.

That in the 17.th of the Reign of Charles the third, there should be an Earl
of Derby that should conspire against the King, and being discovered should
desert the Court intending to fly to West-Chester, and that there will be a
great Reere whose name will be Sea^oore High Chancellor at that time, which
shall apprehend him on Dunsmoor-heath and bring him to London; Meaning that if
his Talons should be clipped he should be secuted in Prison and soon cut off;
But if he did shift his Feather, before the Moon overshadowed him was paying
many great Fines and quit himself by the help of friends, before the Earl of
Northumberland should prosecute against him: His Neast to be built higher was
meant, that if be escaped his power and dignity should be higher advanced then
ever it was.

A Prophecy upon Charles the third, and two Kings after him by the heathen Jew.
WHen that the third of this same Letter C. do reign,
Then will be cheap all kind of Grain,
The space of Twenty two years 'twill consist,
Which this Prediction here does manifest:
No wars nor ^^mours in his Reign shall be,
Except in thirty or in Thirty three.
And then some foreign Prince will with him far,
Which in the Thirty fourth (...) a War,
In June it falls (...) mark^ in July after,
'Twixt Deep and Calis is a mighty slaughter;
The first will dye, the third will have Renown,
And with two Royal Standards and a Crown,
Which end the grudge long time had been before,
But after this will never be Battle ^^re,
The F. shall subject be unto the E.
And sail subjective (...) them as (...).
To Charles the third will Nations intercesse,
He Will live in Peace and dye in qute^nesse.
After this you shall observe, that another great Prince of the Blood will
ar^ie from the former Root, and his Name will begin with the same Letter which
is set down, and come in according to the Prophecy 1602. (J.) he will bear a
red Lion on the le^e side, and reign Dominicall seven years without W^r or
Descention.

But then beware O Germany!
For the Letter J. will Emperor be.
The second L^tt^r of this name will be a mighty Warrior abroad (...) other
Nations, great Conquests will be gotten, but in the last Battle he will
intend to sight in the Eastern parts of the World; Let him beware the Moon he
do not change for if he do the day will be lost in the forenoone and a great
Prince of the blood will be slain, but in the afternoon he shall recover it
most part by the assistance of a Mon^ke; Three Kings will be in the field that
day, but the Victory will go to the West, and suddenly after will a Northern
Prince send an Embassage to this great Conqueror; But, let him beware he gives
not Audi^n^e, for it he do the Letter J. will be in danger of a flab, and if
he escape that he will be delivered from a great many more that year
following; But in the Month of December let him sit up late, and have trusty
friends to be Esquire of his body for under die Mat of his Bed Chamber will a
hor^ed ^^^tructive Bear be lodged, yet will be discovered ^y the Sent of a
Ta^bot, whereby ^he Moon will be grea^ly ecli^sed, and endanger the loss of
his light: After this the Letter J. will return home and carry the house of
Austria upon his book great Lands will be subj^ctive, and never after will
Wars or Rebellion be heard o^ in his days, in Canterbury he^^ end his Reign
in quiet.

But before this will the Prince of the blood b^ borne in Cornwall, and the
fourth of the name which begin^ with the ^^tt^^ (...) but then shall London be
removed to Canterbury, and remain the space of sixteen years, at which (...)
will England be troubled (...) Roman Senators; For then shall two sh^^s sail
(...) the River of Th^m^s, and a Merchant on the bridge shall ask them what
M^r^handize they have, and the other shall answer two white Ravens and black
Swan; The Merchant on the bridge shall ask* what they will have in exchange
for them, they will answer the Cathedral of Paul's and the Relics thereunto
belonging: Then the Merchants will say their Merchandise are but Counterfets,
and Paul's is too heavy for the strength of Rome to remove, at which the Tower
will seem to thunder, and Dover Castle to give an Echo. It is interpreted by
Doctor Delanorosus thus, --

That when Charles the fourth should take the Royal Diadem London will be
removed to Canterbury, that is, he will remove his Cour^ to Canterbury for
sixteen years, in which later time England will b^ troubled with two Rom^n
Senators, that is the Pope shall send to the Bishops of England and endeavou^
to sed^ce them for to acknowledge the Supremacy of Rome; The Merchants on the
Bridge signifies, the Bishops disputing upon the grounds of Religion; The two
white Ravens are the Popes Indulgences, and the black Swan his Tyranicall
penance; Had he but obtained his errand the Saying of the Bishops their
Merchandise; were Counterfets was the Invalidity of their Proffers; And that
Paul^ was too heavy for Rome to carry away signifies, they will keep up the
Church Government and r^nounce his Idolatry, after this Church Government of
England shall never be attempted, neither by Pope nor Sect^r^ ^any more: Now
the thundering of the Tower and the Echo of Dover Castle. is the Roaring of
some great Guns in scorn to the Popes Supremacy.

The Description of Charles the fourth.
WHen Charles the fourth reigns Englands King,
Some great repulse to Ro^e that year will bring;
The time Religion he^l maintain as far,
As Charles the second his Progenitor,
Or Charles the third of everlasting fame,
Or Jan^e his father second of that name,
Who was ^ict or to us both by Land and Sea;
But Charles his Reig^rn^ war^ in it shall be,
Both peace and plenty all his days shall spring,
That Is one and twenty years be'l be a King;
So long continuance he shall rule in sway,
Then like a Rose he will depart away,
With grief of thousands he will and his Reign.
Then seventh Edward will come in again:
From James the second know it certainly
These Kings will rule Jmperiall Majesty;
Till Charles the fifth both King and Emperor then,
Shall keep his Court in Germany again.
On Edward the seventh.
OBserve, that near the year 1799. there will a Prince of the blood be b^^^e
in Canterbury, and at two years of age he ^^^per all Crown will be put on his
head, and he shall remain under the Tu^^ion of a Monck three years: But York
will have the pre-eminence.

The Description.
WHen that the Month of July does begin,
In Canterbury will be born a King;
Edward the seventh he is cared by name,
But in the lineage of the former name,
Till that the time of Sixteen years does come,
A M^^^k^ will be his ^u^or all along.
But near the ^^ghte^^th Cleombrotus say,
This seventh Edward will depart away,
And then will York rule Lord Protector he,
Till Charles the fifth comes to Maturity,
Which when the Royal Diedem shall take,
And make the Crowns of other Princes shake;
But when that Twenty years is gone and ^ast,
To his Native Country he comes home at last,
And leaves his Crown and to the Grave does go,
He Will dye in Love both peace and plenty too:
All was fore s^w what ^^re is told to you,
And was predicted by a heathen Jew.
FINIS.

