HERBERT'S Remains.

Or, SUNDRY PIECES Of that sweet SINGER of the TEMPLE, Mr George Herbert,
Sometime Orator of the University of CAMBRIDG.

Now exposed to public light.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, at the little North door of Saint
Paul's. 1652.

A PRIEST To the TEMPLE,

OR, The Country PARSON HIS CHARACTER, AND Rule of Holy Life.

The AUTHOR, Mr G.H.

LONDON, Printed by T. Maxey for T. Garthwait, at the little North door of St
Paul's. 1652.

A Table of Contents to the COUNTRY PARSON.
CHAP. 1. OF a Pastor. p. 1 CHAP. 2. Their Diversities. p. 2 CHAP. 3. The
Parsons life. p. 6 CHAP. 4. Knowledges. p. 10 CHAP. 5. Accessory Knowledges. p.
14. CHAP. 6. The Parson Praying. p. 17 CHAP. 7 Preaching. p. 21 CHAP. 8 On
Sundays. p. 28 CHAP. 9. His State of life. p. 32 CHAP. 10. In his house. p. 38
CHAP. 11. The Parson's Courtesy. p. 49 CHAP. 12. Charity. p. 52 CHAP. 13.
Church. p. 57 CHAP. 14. The Parson in Circuit. p. 60 CHAP. 15. Comforting. p.
66 CHAP. 16. A father. p. 68 CHAP. 17. In Journey. p. 70 CHAP. 18. In
Sentinel. p. 73 CHAP. 19. In Reference. p. 75 CHAP. 20. In Gods stead. p. 79
CHAP. 21. Catechizing. p. 81 CHAP. 22. In Sacraments. p. 88 CHAP. 23. The
Parson's Compleatnesse. p. 94. CHAP. 24. The Parson Arguing, p. 101. CHAP. 25.
Punishing. p. 104 CHAP. 26. The Parson's Eye. page 105. CHAP. 27. The Parson in
mirth. p. 115. CHAP. 28. In contempt. p. 116 CHAP. 29. with his Churchwardens.
p. 120 CHAP. 30. The Parson's Consideration of Providence. p. 122 CHAP. 31. The
Parson in Libetry. p. 127 CHAP. 32. His Surveys. p. 131 CHAP. 33. His Library.
p. 142 CHAP. 34. His Dexterity in applying Remedies. p. 147 CHAP. 35.
Condescending. p. 157 CHAP. 36. Blessing. p. 160 CHAP. 37. Concerning
detraction. p. 165.
ERRATA in the Country Parson.
Page 14. l. 9. compiled. 57 l. 12. Desk. 110. l. 2. judgment Country 122. l.
12. dele right Page 50. l 3. dele and. 75. l 4. and 111. 10. much, they 131. l.
19. Survey.
A PREFATORY VIEW OF THE LIFE OF Mr Geo. Herbert, etc.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
BEing desirous (through the Mercy of GOD) to please Him, for whom I am, and
live, and who gives me my Desires and Performances; and considering with my
self, That the way to please him, is to feed my Flock diligently and
faithfully, since our Savior has made that the argument of a Pastour's love,
I have resolved to set down the Form and Character of a true Pastor, that I
may have a Mark to aim at: which also I will set as high as I can, since he
shoots higher that threatens the Moon, then he that aims at a Tree. Not that I
think, if a man do not all which is here expressed, he presently sins, and
displeases God, but that it is a good strife to go as far as we can in
pleasing of him, who has done so much for us. The Lord prosper the intention
to my self, and others, who may not despise my poor labors, but add to those
points, which I have observed, until the Book grow to a complete Pastoral.

1632. GEO. HERBERT.

A Prefatory View of the LIFE and VIRTUES of the AUTHOR, AND Excellencies of
This BOOK.
To the Christian, more designedly, to the Clergy-Reader of the same Time, and
Rank, and Mind, and in like Condition with the Epistler. Grace, etc. and
Recovery, and Profit by the ensuing Tract.
My poor and deer Brother,
DO not expect (I humbly beseech thee) the High and Glorious Titles of
Companion in tribulation, and in the patience of JESUS, etc. I could most
willingly (if I thought that I could truly) give thee them; knowing, that what
luster I cast upon thee, would by rebound lite upon my self. But my mouth is
stopped: Let God be true, and the Justice of God be Justified.

1. The reading of those piercing Scriptures 1 Samuel 2. and 3. chap. Jer. 23.
Exek. 3. and 33. Hos. 4. Mal. 2. 2 The view of this ensuing Tract; which (me
thinks) is not a Book of 37 Chapters, but a Bill of seven times 37 Indictments
against thee and me: a strange Speculum Sacerdotale; in its discovery (me
thinks) something resembling the secret of the holy Urim: As if this good
Bezaleel had invented a living, pure Looking-glass, in most exact proportions
of Beauty, that should both present it self as a Body of unblemished
perfections, and show all the beholders deformities at once: that should show
thee both Aaron in the Holy of Holyes, before the Mercy-Seat, in all his pure
Ornaments: and Hophni or Phineas, ravening for their Fees of Flesh, and
wallowing in their lust at the door of the Tabernacle. 3 The reflecting on
common Conversation in the day of our prosperity, and the paralelling the Book
of mine own Conscience with the Authors Book (in both which I find my self
(not to say Thee) written highly defective in every duty the good man commends,
and not a little peccant in every particular taxed by him.) These three have
convinced, and even enforced me to confess, that I am sure mine (and I fear,
thy) sufferings are not the mere sufferings of pure and perfect Martyrs, but of
Grievous Transgressors. Not only under the rods of Gods just judgment, but the
scorpions of his heavy displeasure, fierce wrath, and sore Indignation. Not
only from the smoking of Gods jealousy, or the sparks of his Anger, but the
flames of his furnace, (heat seven times more then ever,) yea, even from the
Furiousness of the wrath of God. Psalm. 78.50.

Gods sinking the Gates, his destroying the walls, his slighting the strong
holds of Zion; his polluting the Kingdom, his swallowing the Palaces, his
cutting off the Horn of Israel: Gods hating our Feasts, his abominating our
Sabboths, his loathing our solemnities, Esa. 1. Gods forgetting his Footstool,
his abhorring his Sanctuary, his casting off his Altar, are (to me) signs that
the glory of God is departed to the Mountain, Ezekiel. 11.23. That God has in the
indignation of his anger despised the King and the Priest, Lam. 2. It must be
acknowledged sure! that the hand of God has gone out against us, more then
against others of our Rank at other times; at least, that God has not
restrained violence against us, so as he did that against those of our
Profession in the days of old: The portion of the Egyptian Priests (that
served the Ox, the Ape, and the Onion,) escaped sale in time of the Famine.
Learned Junius (in his Academia, Chap. 4.) says, that the Philistines spared
the Schools of the Prophets in their Wars with Israel: and that the
Phoenicians, Caldeans, and Indians were tender over such places: Thus then did
God restrain the spirits of Princes: yet that God (who in his own Law, Lev.
25.32. gave the Levits a special privilege of redeeming Lands (sold by
themselves) at any time, when other Tribes were limited to a set Time) has not
stayed the madness of the people against us, but that our portions are sold
unto others without Redemption.

We must acknowledge, that Gods word has taken hold of us, Zec. 1.5. That the
Lord has devised a device against us, has watched upon the evil, and brought
it upon us; For, under the whole heaven has not been done, as has been done
upon Jerusalem, Dan. 9.14.

Let us not flatter our selves presumptuously! The punishment answers the sin,
as the wax the seal, and as the Mould owns the Figure: And let us own both. It
is very dangerous to bless our selves too boldly; God has cursed our
Blessings, Mal. 2.2. And that he may bless to us our very Curses; Let us take
with us words and say, To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses,
and multiplied pardons; to us shame and confusion, as at this day. The most
compendious way to get what belongs to God, is, to take to our selves what
belongs to us. If we would Judge your selves, and every man, knowing the plague
of his own heart, lay Gods Dealing to heart; and accepting of our punishment,
give glory to God, and humble our selves under his mighty hand; then shall God
exalt us, and accept us and take away our Reproach.

If we shall confess our sins, that like Simeon and Levi, we have been
Brethren in evil, have broken the Covenant of Levi, have done violence to, and
been partial in the law, have made our selves vile, and therefore are justly,
by God, made contemptible and base before the people, Mal. 2. If we shall
confess, that we neither understood nor valued our High and Holy Calling as
Christians, much less as Ministers of Christ; That we did not thrive kindly,
when Providence had planted and watered us in those Horns of Oil, the two
Universities; or removed us into Country Cures, we did not fructify (as this
Book will show) in any proportion to his encouragements, and therefore are
justly cashiered out of his service, and stripped of his Rewards: God is
faithful and just to forgive us: For, Job 33.27. He looks upon men; if any
say, I have sinned, I have perverted that which was right, and it profited me
not; he will deliver his soul from the pit, his life shall see the light.

And now, let none think, that this Confession will give advantage to the
Adversary; They may take, where none is given: They may say, Let the Lord be
glorified: By their own confession, we offend not, though we devour them,
because they have sinned against the Lord, the habitation of Justice, Jer.
50.7. But they will find at last, That to forsake the Levite is a sin; That it
is a bitter thing to Help forward affliction, when God is but a little
displeased: That Jerusalem will be a cup of trembling, and a burdensome stone
to every one that cries but Down with it. Woe to thee, O Assure, the Rod of
Gods anger; The staff in thine hand is Gods Indignation. Thou, Lord, have
ordained him for judgment, and established him for correction; Even for Our
correction, to purify Us sons of Levi from our dross; (Howbeit, he means
not so) and by his hand, who punishes us not only for that which is sin, to
put on us Martyrs Robes; by that contrivance both Chastning and Covering our
sins; As the Persians use their Nobles, beating their Clothes, and saving their
Persons.

There can be no credit lost by giving glory to God: Did Achan lose any thing
by confessing that God had found him out, and his Garment, and his Wedg? Has
not Adonibezek got a Fame of Ingenuity, for acknowledging Gods Art of
Justicing, in that most exact way of Counter passion or Retaliation? which is
so frequent in these times, though it is not considerd. What lost Luther by
confessing his personal defects as to God, (Though he yielded not a jot in his
Cause, as to men?) What Enemy ever upbraided that to him? or this to the
ingenuous learned Cajetan? his humble and seasonable Confession upon lasting
record in his Coments on the 13. ver. of the 5. chapter of Saint Matthews
Gospel: Ye are the salt -- if the salt have lost, etc. The French Army had
taken Rome, when he was about that Text, and offered great abuse to the Clergy
there. Which he Christianly Resenting, inserts this passage, We Prelates of
the Church of Rome, do at this time find this truth verified on us, in a
special Measure; Being by the just judgment of God become a spoil, and a
Prey, and Captives; not to Infidells, but to Christians; because we, who were
chosen to be the Salt of the earth, Evanuimus, were become light persons, and
unsavory, good for nothing but outward Ceremonies, and Externa Bona, the
Revenues Temporal. Hence it is, that both We, and this City be trodden under
foot this sixth of May, 1527. And that Excellent CHARLES the Fifth is Honorable
for no one thing more, then for acknowleding the Hand of God upon him, both at
that pinch which made him pant out, Jam me ab omnibus desertum video: And upon
a lesser occasion then that, namely, when his Domestics had left him all alone
late at night, and he would needs hold the Candle to SELDIUS, showing him the
way down the stairs, and up to God, he said; Thine eyes have seen me environed
with great Armies; now thou see me abandoned of mine ordinary Servants. I
acknowledge this change to come from him with whom is no shadow of change, From
the mighty hand of God, and I will by no means withstand it. And it is
reported, That the Scottish Presbyters, sensible of God's hand upon them, are at
this time making their Addresses to God, by Confession of their sins
respectively; God grant that (both we and) they may do it right. Though I shall
still strive with them about the justice of the First Cause; yet about the
justness of our persons will I not strive with them, nor about any other
matter, save only who shall confess themselves greater sinners to God. I have
silenced David, Psalm. 51. and Ezra, and Nehemiah and Daniel in their 9. Chapt.
and cited only these to confirm my self (and thee, Brother) in this duty of
giving Glory to God in this manner, Et confiteantur Tibi omnes populi: Even so,
True and righteous are thy judgments in all the world, O Lord God Almighty;
yea, merciful are they, and far below our deservings.

I hope no man will think, though I speak thus, that I give him leave to
construe my words Mathematically, as if there was not an atome, or hair of a
good man, or man of God in our Church. There were diverse primitive (and are at
this day, Blessed be God, The Lord make them 1000 times more then they are,)
holy and heavenly souls, vessels chosen and fitted for the service of the
Sanctuary. I shall be bold to instance in Three, who died in peace; few
considering (some did) that they were taken away from the evil to come, lest
their eyes should see (what their spirits foresaw) what is come on us, on whom
the days, not of visitation only, but of vengeance, even the ends of the world
are come.

The first of these was Thomas Jackson D. D. late President of Corpus Christi
College in Oxford, and sometimes Vicar of St. Nicholas Church in Newcastle
upon Tyne; two places that must give account to God for the good they had, or
might have had by that Man; as all Scholars must for his neglected Works.

The second was Mr. Nicholas Ferrer of little Gidding in Huntington Shire,
sometimes fellow-Commoner and Fellow of Clare-hall in Cambridg.

The third was the Author of this book, Master GEORGE HERBERT, Fellow of
Trinity College, Orator of the University of Cambridge, and Rector of
Bemmorton in Wiltshire. All three Holy in their lives, eminent in their gifts,
signal Protestants for their Religion, painful in their several stations,
precious in their deaths, and sweet in their memories.

First, I will give thee a brief of some confrontments common to them all, and
then some of their, at least this Authors proper excellencies apart.

1. They all had that inseparable Lot and sign of Christ and Christians, Isa.
8.18. Heb. 2.13. Luke 2.34. To be signs of Contradiction (or spoken Against)
men wondered at, and rated at by the world. Doctor Jackson in two particulars
suffered much. 1. He had like to have been sore shent by the Parliament in the
year, 1628. for Tenets in Divinity, I cannot say, so far driven by him, as by
some men now they are with great Applause. His approach to Unity was very near.
Grant me, says he, but these two things, That God has a true freedom in doing
good, and man a true freedom in doing evil; there needs be no other
controversy betwixt the Opposites in point of Providence and Predestination.
Attrib. Ep. Ded. 2. He had an Adversary in England who writ a book against him,
with a Title not so kindly as might have been devised. It was this; A Discovery
of Dr. Jacksons follies: which he bound as an ornament upon him, (as Job says)
that is, never answered but in the language of the Lamb dumb before the
shearer, silence and sufferance. And he had one in Scotland who also girded at
him, without cause or answer.

And for M. Ferrar, he was so exercised with contradictions, as no man that
lived so private as he desired to do, could possibly be more. I have heard
him say, valuing (not resenting his own) sufferings in this kind, That to fry
a Faggot, was not more martyrdom then continual obloquy. He was torn asunder
as with mad horses, or crushed betwixt the upper and under millstone of contrary
reports; that he was a Papist, and that he was a Puritan. What is, if this be
not, to be sawn asunder as Esaias, stoned as Jeremy, made a Drum, or Tympanised,
as other Saints of God were? and after his death when by Injunction (which he
laid upon his friends when he lay on his deathbed) A great company of
Comedies, Tragedies, Love Hymns, Heroical poems, etc. were burnt upon his
grave, as utter Enemies to Christian Principles and practices, (that was his
brand) some poor people said, He was a Conjurer.

And for our Author (The sweet singer of the Temple) though he was one of the
most prudent and accomplished men of his time, I have heard sober men censure
him as a man that did not manage his brave parts to his best advantage and
preferment, but lost himself in an humble way; That was the phrase, I well
remember it.

The second thing wherein all Three agreed, was a singular sincerity in
Embracing, and transcendent Dexterity in Defending the Protestant Religion
established in the Church of England. I speak it in the presence of God, I have
not read so hearty, vigorous a Champion against Rome (amongst our Writers of
his Rank) so convincing and demonstrative as D Jackson is. I bless God for the
confirmation which he has given me in the Christian Religion against the
Atheist, Jew, and Socinian, and in the Protestant, against Rome. As also, by
what I have seen in Manuscript of Mr. Ferrar's, and heard by relation of his
Travels over the Western parts of Christendom; in which, his exquisite
carriage, his rare parts and abilities of understanding and Languages, his
Moralls more perfect then the best, did tempt the Adversaries to tempt him, and
mark him for a prize, if they could compass him. And opportunity they had to
do this, in a sickness that seized on him at Padua, where mighty care was had
by Physicians and others to recover his bodily health, with design to infect
his soul. But neither did their physic nor poison work any change in his
Religion, but rather inflamed him with an holy zeal, to revenge their charity,
by transplanting their waste and misplaced zeal, (as they were all three
admirable in separating from the vile, what was precious in every sect or
person under heaven) to adorn our Protestant Religion, by a right renouncing
the world with all it is profits and honors, in a true crucifying the flesh,
with all it is pleasures, by continued Temperance, Fasting, and Watching unto
Prayers. In all which exercises, as he far out-went the choicest of their
retired men, so did he far under value these deeds, rating them much below such
prices as they set upon them. Upon this design he helped to put out Lessius,
and to stir up us Ministers to be painful in that excellent labor of the
Lord, Catechizing, feeding the Lambs of Christ: He translated a piece of Lud.
Carbo; wherein Carbo confesses, that the Heretics ( i. e. Protestants) had
got much advantage by Catechizing: But the Authority at Cambridge suffered not
that Egyptian Jewel to be published.

And he that reads Mr HERBERT'S Poems attendingly, shall find not only the
excellencies of Scripture Divinity, and choice passages of the Fathers bound
up in Meetre; but the Doctrine of Rome also finely and strongly confuted; as in
the Poems, To Saints and Angels page 69. The British Church page 102. Church
Militant, etc.

Thus stood they in aspect to Rome and her children on the left hand. As for
our Brethren that erred on the right hand, ( Doctor Jackson speaks for himself)
and Mr. F. though he ever honored their persons (that were pious and learned)
and always spoke of them with much Christian respect, yet would he bewail
their mistakes, which (like mists) led them in some points back again to those
errors of Rome which they had forsaken. To instance in one: He that says,
preaching in the pulpit is absolutely necessary to salvation; falls into two
Romish errors. 1. That the Scripture is too dark. 2. That it is unsufficient
to save a man. And perhaps a third, advancing the man of Rome, more then they
intend him, I am sure. But the chief aim of Master F. and this Author, was
to win those that disliked our Liturgy, Catechism, etc: by the constant,
reverent, and holy use of them: Which, surely had we all imitated, having first
imprinted the virtue of these prayers in our own hearts, and then studied with
passionate and affectionate celebration, (for voice, gesture, etc:) as in God's
presence, to imprint them in the minds of the people, (as this Book teaches,)
our prayers had been generally as well beloved as they were scorned. And for my
part, I am apt to think, That our prayers stood so long, was a favor by God
granted us at the prayers of these men, (who prayed for these prayers as well
as in them:) and that they fell so soon, was a punishment of our negligence,
(and other sins) who had not taught even those that liked them well, to use
them aright; but that the good old woman would absolve, though not so loud, yet
as confidently as the Minister himself.

Lastly, The blessed Three in One did make these three men agree in one point
more. That one spirit, which divides to every man gifts as he pleases, seems to
me to have dropped upon these three Elect vessels all of them some unction or
tincture of the Spirit of prophecy. Shall I say, I hope, or Fear Mr. Herberts
lines page 190. should be verified?

Religion stands one Tipto in our Land,
Ready to pass to the American strand.
When height of malice and prodigious lusts,
Impudent sinnings, Witchcrafts and distrusts
(The marks of Future Bane) shall fill our cup
Unto the brim, and make our measure up:
When Sein shall swallow Tyber, and the Thames
By letting in them both, pollutes her streams:
When Italy of us shall have her will,
And all her Calendar of sins fulfill;
Whereby one may foretell, what sins, next year,
Shall both in France and England Domineer;
Then shall Religion to America flee:
They have their times of Gospel, even as we.
My God, thou do prepare for them a way;
By carrying first their Gold from them away;
For Gold and Grace did never yet agree,
Religion always sides with poverty.
We think we rob them, but we think amiss;
We are more poor, and they more rich by this.
Thou will revenge their quarrel, making Grace
To pay our debts, and leave our Ancient place
To go to them; while that which now their Nation
But lends to us, shall be our disolation.
I pray God he may prove a true prophet for poor America, not against poor
England. Ride on Most Mighty Jesu, because of the word of truth. Thy Gospel is
a light big enough for them and us: But leave us not. The people of thine
holiness have possessed it but a little while, Isaiah. 63.15. etc.

When some Farmers near the place where Master Ferrer lived, somewhat before
these times, desired longer leases to be made them, he intimated, that seven
years would be long enough, troublous times were coming, they might thank God
if they enjoyed them so long in peace.

But considering the accustomed modesty of Dr. Jackson in speaking of things
not certain, I much admire that strange Appendix to his Sermons, (partly
delivered before the King) about the Signs of the Times, printed in the year
1637. touching the great Tempest of wind which fell out upon the Eve of the
fifth of November, 1636. He was much astonished at it, and what apprehension he
had of it, appears by these words of his: This mighty wind was more then a
sign of the Time, Tempus ipsum admonebat, The very time it self was a Sign,
and interprets this Messenger's voice better then a Linguist, as well as the
Prophets (were any now) could do. Both wind and time teach us that truth often
mentioned in these Meditations. Thus much the Reader may understand, that
though we of this Kingdom were in firm League with all the Nations of the
earth, yet it is still in God's power, we may fear in his purpose, to plague
this Kingdom by his own immediate hand, by this Messenger, or by like
Tempests, more grievously then he has don at any time, by the Famine, Sword,
or Pestilence, to bury many living souls as well of superior as inferior
Rank, in the ruins of their stately Houses or meaner Cottages, etc.

And what shall be thought of that which fell from his Pen in his Epistle
Dedicatory of his Attributes, written November 20, 1627, and Printed 1628, in
these words, or more? If any maintain, That all things were so decreed by God
before the Creation, that nothing since could have fallen out otherwise then it
has done; That nothing can be amended that is amiss: I desire leave to
oppugn his opinion, not only as an error, but as an Ignorance, involving
enmity to the sweet Providence of God; as a forerunner of ruin to flourishing
States and Kingdoms, where it grows common, or comes to full height.

Was this a conjecture of Prudence? or a censure of the physical influence, or
of the meritorious effect of these Tenets? Or rather, a Prediction of an Event?
Let the Reader judge.

In these they did agree: The sequel will show wherein they differed.

This Author, Mr. G. HERBERT, was extracted out of a Generous, Noble, and
Ancient Family: His Father was RICHARD HERBERT of Blache-hall, in Mountgomery,
Esquire descended from the Great Sir RICHARD HERBERT in Edward the Fourth's time;
and so his Relation to the Noble Family of that Name, well known. His Mother
was Daughter of Sir Richard Newport of Arcoll, who doubtless was a pious
daughter, she was so good and godly a mother; She had ten children, Job's
number, and Job's distinction, seven sons; for whose education she went and
dwelt in the University, to recompense the loss of their Father, Dr Do^n
in giving them two Mothers.

And this great care of hers, this good son of hers studied to improve and
requite, as is seen in those many Latin and Greek Verses, the Obsequious
Parentalia, he made and printed in her memory: which though they be good, very
good, yet (to speak freely even of this man I so much honor) they be dull or
dead in comparison of his Temple Poems. And no marvel; To write those, he made
his ink with water of Helicon, but these Inspirations prophetical were
distilled from above: In those are weak motions of Nature, in these Raptures
of Grace. In those he writ Flesh and Blood: A frail earthly Woman, though a
MOTHER, but in these he praised his Heavenly FATHER, the God of Men and Angels,
and the Lord Jesus Christ His Master; For so (to quicken himself in Duties, and
to cut off all depending on man, whose breath is in his nosthrils) he used
ordinarily to call our Savior.

I forget not where I left him: He did thrive so well there, that he was first
chosen fellow of the College, and afterward Orator of the Universitie. The
Memorials of him left in the Orators Book, show how he discharged the Place:
and himself intimates, Church, page 39. That whereas his Birth and Spirit
prompted him to Martial Achievements, The way that takes the Town; and not to
sit simpering over a Book; God did often melt his spirit, and entice him with
Academick Honor, to be content to wear, and wrap up himself in a gown, so
long, till he durst not put it off, nor retire to any other calling. However,
propably he might, I have heard (as other Orators) have had a Secretary of
States place.

But the good man like a genuine son of Levi (I had like to have said
Melchisedeck) balked all secular ways, saw neither father, nor mother, child
nor Brother, birth nor friends (save in Christ Jesus) chose the Lord for his
portion, and his service for employment. And he knew full well what he did when
he received Holy orders, as appears by every page in this Book, and by the
Poems called Priesthood, and Aaron: And by this unparalleled vigilance which he
used over his Parish, which made him (says that modest Author of the Epistle
before his Poems, N. F. who knew him well) A Peer to the primitive Saints, and
more then a pattern to his own age.

Besides his Parsonage, he had also a Prebend in the Church of Lincoln; which I
think (because he lived far from, and so could not attend the duty of that
place,) he would feign have resigned to Master Ferrer, and often earnestly sued
to him to discharge him of it; but Master F. wholly refused, and diverted or
directed his charity (as I take it) to the re-edifying of the ruined Church of
Leighton, where the corpse of the Prebend lay. So that the Church of England
owes to him (besides what good may come by this Book, toward the repair of us
Churchmen in point of morals,) the reparation of a Church-materiall, and
erection of that costly piece (of Mosaic or Solomonick work,) the Temple;
which flourishes and stands inviolate, when our other Magnificences are
desolate, and despised.

These things I have said are high; but yet there is one thing which I admire
above all the rest: The right managing of the Fraternall duty of reproof is (me
thinks) one of the most difficult offices of Christian Prudence. O Lord! what
is then the Ministerial? To do it as we should, is likely to anger a whole
world of waspes, to set fire on the earth. This, I have conjectured, was that
which made many holy men leave the world, and live in wildernesses; which, by
the way, was not counted by Ancients, an act of Perfection, but of Cowardice
and poor spiritednesse: of Flight to shade and shelter, not of Fight in dust
and blood, and heat of the day. This Author had not only got the courage to do
this, but the Art of doing this aright.

There was not a man in his way (be he of what Rank he would) that spoke awry
(in order to God) but he wiped his mouth with a modest, grave and Christian
reproof: This was Heroical; Adequate to that Royal Law, Thou shall in any
case reprove thy Brother, and not suffer sin upon him. And that he did this, I
have heard from true Reporters, and thou may see he had learned it himself,
else he never had taught it us, as he does in diverse passages of this Book.

His singular Dexterity in sweetning this Art, thou may see in the Garb and
phrase of his writing. Like a wise Master Builder, he has fet about a form of
Speech, transferred it in a Figure, as if he was all the while learning from
another man's mouth or pen, and not teaching any. And whereas we all of us
deserved the sharpness of Reproof, (...), He says, He does this, and he does
that; whereas, poor men, we did no such thing. This dart of his, thus dipped,
pierces the soul.

There is another thing (some will call it a Paradox) which I learned from Him
(and Mr. Ferrer) in the Managery of their most cordial and Christian
Friendship. That this may be maintained in vigor and height without the
Ceremonies of Visits and Complements; yea, without any Trade of secular
courtesies, merely in order to spiritual Edification of one another in love. I
know they loved each other most entirely, and their very souls cleaved together
most intimately, and drove a large stock of Christian Intelligence together
long before their deaths: yet saw they not each other in many years, I think,
scarce ever, but as Members of one Universitie, in their whole lives.

There is one thing more may be learned from these Two (I may say, these Three)
also: Namely, That Christian Charity will keep Unity of souls, amidst great
differences of Gifts and Opinions. There was variation considerable in their
Indowments: Doctor Jackson had in his youth (as if he then had understood Gods
calling) laid his grounds carefully in Arithmetic, Grammar, Philology,
Geometry, Rhetoric, Logic, Philosophy, Oriental Languages, Histories, etc.
(yea, he had Insight in Heraldry and Hieroglyphics,) he made all these serve
either as Rubbish under the Foundation, or as drudges and day laborers to
Theology. He was copious and definitive in Controversies of all sorts. Master
Ferrar was Master of the Western Tongues; yet cared not for Criticismes and
curiosities. He was also very modest in points of controversy, and would
scarce venture to Opine, even in the points wherein the world censured him
possessed. Our Author was of a middle Temper betwixt, or a Compound of both
these; yet having rather more of Master Ferrer in him: And to what he had of
him, he added the Art of Divine Poesy, and other polite learning, which so
commended him to persons most Eminent in their time, that Doctor Done
inscribed to him a paper of Latin verses in print; and the Lord Bacon having
translated some Psalms into English meetre, sent them with a Dedication
prefixed, To his very Good friend, Master GEORGE HERBERT, thinking that he had
kept a true decorum in choosing one so fit for the Argument, in respect of
Divinity and Poesy (the one as the Matter, the other as the Style) that a
better choice he could not make.

In sum, To distinguish them by better Resemblances out of the Old and New
Testament, and antiquity: Me thinks, Doctor J. has somewhat like the spirit of
Jeremy, Saint James, and Salvian. Master Herbert, like David, and other
Psalm-men, Saint John, and Prudentius. Master F. like Esaias, Saint Luke, and
Saint Chrysostom; yet in this diversity, had they such an Harmony of souls as
was admirable. For instance, In one who differed in some points from them all,
yet in him they so agreed all, as that Master F. out of a great liking of the
Man, translated him into English, Master Herbert commented on him, and
commended him to use; And Doctor J. allowed him for the Press, It was
Valdesso's no Considerations.

It would swell this Preface too much to set down the several excellencies of
our Author: His conscientious expense of Time, which he even measured by the
pulse, that native watch God has set in every of us. His eminent Temperance,
and Frugality, (the two best Purveiors for his Liberality and Beneficence,) his
private Fastings, his mortification of the body, his extemporary exercises
thereof, at the sight or visit of a Charnell House, where every Bone, before
the day, rises up in judgment against fleshly lust and pride: at the stroke of
a passing bell, when ancient charity used (said he) to run to Church, and
assist the dying Christian with prayers and tears (for sure that was the ground
of that custom;) and at all occasions he could lay hold of possibly, which he
sought with the diligence that others shun and shift them. Besides his
careful, (not scrupulous) observation of appointed Fasts, Lents, and Embers:
The neglect and defect of this last, he said, had such influx on the children
which the Fathers of the Church did beget at such times, as malignant Stars are
said to have over natural Productions; Children of such Parents, as be Fasting
and Prayers, being like Isaak, and Jacob, and Samuel; most likely to become
Children of the Promise, Wrastlers with God, and fittest to wear a linen
Ephod. And with this Fasting he imp'd his prayers both private and public: His
private must be left to God, who saw them in secret; his public were the
Morning and Evening Sacrifice of the Church Liturgy, which he used with
conscientious devotion, not of Custom, but serious Judgment; Knowing, 1. That
the Sophism used to make people hate them, was a solid reason to make men of
understanding love them; Namely, because taken out of the Mass Book: Taken
out, but as gold from dross, the precious from the vile. The wise Reformers
knew Rome would cry Shism, schism, and therefore they kept all they could
lawfully keep, being loath to give offense; as our blessed Savior, being loath
to offend the Jews at the great Reformation, kept diverse old Elements, and made
them new Sacraments and Services, as their frequent Washings he turned into one
Baptism; some service of the Passover into the Lord's Supper. 2. That the
homeliness and coursenesse, which also was objected, was a great commendation.
The Lambs poor of the Flock are forty, for one grounded christian:
proportionable must be the care of the Church to provide milk; that is, plain
and easy nourishment for them: and so had our Church done, hoping that
stronger Christians, as they abounded in Gifts, so they had such a store of the
Grace of Charity, as for their weak Brethren's sakes to be content therewith.

He thought also that a set Liturgy was of great use in respect of those
without, whether erring Christians, or unbelieving men. That when we had used
our best arguments against their errors or unbelief, we might show them a
Form wherein we did, and desired they would serve Almighty God with us: That we
might be able to say, This is our Church, Here would we land you. Thus we
believe, see the Creed. Thus we pray, baptize, catechize, celebrate the
Eucharist, Marry, Bury, Entreat the sick, etc.

These, besides Unity, and other accessory benefits, he thought grounds
sufficient to bear him out in this practice: wherein he ended his life, calling
for the Church Prayers a while before his death, saying, None to them, none to
them at once both commending them, and his soul to God in them, immediately
before his dissolution, as some Martyrs did, Mr. Hullier by name, Vicar of
Babram, burnt to death in Cambridge; who having the Common Prayer Book in his
hand, in stead of a Censor, and using the prayers as incense, offered up
himself as a whole Burnt Sacrifice to God; with whom the very Book it self
suffered Martyrdom, when fallen out of his consumed hands, it was by the
Executioners thrown into the fire and burnt as an Heretical Book.

He was moreover so great a Lover of Church-Musick, That he usually called it
Heaven upon earth, and attended it a few days before his death. But above all,
his chief delight was in the Holy Scripture, One leaf whereof he professed he
would not part with, though he might have the whole world in Exchange. That was
his wisdom, his comfort, his joy, out of that he took his Motto; LESS THEN
THE LEAST OF ALL GOD'S MERCIES. In that he found the substance, Christ, and in
Christ Remission of sins, yea, in his blood he placed the goodness of his good
works. It is a good Work, (said he of Building a Church,) if it be sprinkled
with the Blood of Christ.

This high esteem of the Word of life, as it wrought in himself a wondrous
expression of high Reverence, when ever he either read it himself, or heard
others read it, so it made him equally wonder, that those which pretended such
extraordinary love to Christ Jesus, as many did, could possibly give such leave
and liberty to themselves as to hear that word that shall judge us at the last
day, without any the least expression of that holy fear and trembling, which
they ought to charge upon their souls in private, and in public, to imprint
upon others.

Thus have I with my foul hands soiled this (and the other) fair piece, and
worn out thy patience: yet have I not so much as with one dash of a pensill,
offered to describe that person of his, which afforded so unusual a
Contesseration of Elegancies, and set of Rarities to the Beholder; nor said I
any thing of his Personal Relation, as an Husband, to a loving and virtuous
Lady; as a Kinsman, Master, etc. yet will I not silence his spiritual love and
care of Servants: Teaching Masters this duty, To allow their Servants daily
time, wherein to pray privately, and to enjoyne them to do it: holding this for
true generally, That public prayer alone to such persons, is no prayer at all.

I have given thee only these lineaments of his mind, and thou may fully
serve thy self of this Book, in what virtue of his thy soul longs after. His
practice it was, and His Character it is, His as Author, and His as Object:
yet, Lo, the humility of this gracious man! He had small esteem of this Book,
and but very little of his Poems. Though God had magnified him with
extraordinary Gifts, yet said he, God has broken into my Study, and taken off
my Chariot wheels, I have nothing worthy of God. And even this lowliness in
his own eyes, does more advance their worth, and his virtues.

I have done, when I have besought the R. Fathers, some Cathedral,
Ecclesiastical, and Academicall men, (which Ranks the modest Author meddles
not with,) to draw Idaea's for their several Orders respectively. (Why should
Papists (as Timpius) be more careful or painful in this kind then we?) If it
do no other good, yet will it help on in the the way of Repentance, by
discovery of former mistakes or neglects; which is the greatest, if not the
only Good that can probably be hoped for, out of this Tract: which being writ
nigh twenty years since, will be less subject to misconstruction. The Good
Lord prosper it according to the pious intent of the Author, and hearty wishes
of the Prefacer; who confesses himself unworthy to carry out the Dung of Gods
Sacrifices.

A Priest to the Temple: OR, The Country PARSON his CHARACTER, etc.
CHAP. I. Of a PASTOR.
A PASTOR is the Deputy of Christ for the reducing of Man to the Obedience of
God. This definition is evident, and contains the direct steps of Pastoral
Duty and Auctority. For first, Man fell from God by disobedience. Secondly,
Christ is the glorious instrument of God for the revoking of Man. Thirdly,
Christ being not to continue on earth, but after he had fulfilled the work of
Reconciliation, to be received up into heaven, he constituted Deputies in his
place, and these are Priests. And therefore St. Paul in the beginning of his
Epistles, professes this: and in the first to the Colossians plainly
avoucheth, that he fills up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ
in his flesh, for his Body's sake, which is the Church. Wherein is contained
the complete definition of a Minister. Out of this Chartre of the Priesthood
may be plainly gathered both the Dignity thereof, and the Duty: The Dignity, in
that a Priest may do that which Christ did, and by his auctority, and as his
Vicegerent. The Duty, in that a Priest is to do that which Christ did, and
after his manner, both for Doctrine and Life.

CHAP. II. Their Diversities.
OF Pastors (intending mine own Nation only, and also therein setting aside the
Reverend Prelates of the Church, to whom this discourse arises not) some live
in the Universities, some in Noble houses, some in Parishes residing on their
Cures. Of those that live in the Universities, some live there in office, whose
rule is that of the Apostle; Romans 12.6. Having gifts differing, according to
the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to
the proportion of faith; or ministry, let us wait on our ministering; or he that
teaches, on teaching, etc. he that rules, let him do it with diligence, etc.
Some in a preparatory way, whose aim and labor must be not only to get
knowledge, but to subdue and mortify all lusts and affections: and not to
think, that when they have read the Fathers, or Schoolmen, a Minister is made,
and the thing done. The greatest and hardest preparation is within: For, Unto
the ungodly, says God, Why do thou preach my Laws, and take my Covenant in
thy mouth? Psalm. 50.16. Those that live in Noble Houses are called Chaplains,
whose duty and obligation being the same to the Houses they live in, as a
Parsons to his Parish, in describing the one (which is indeed the bent of my
Discourse) the other will be manifest. Let not Chaplains think themselves so
free, as many of them do, and because they have different Names, think their
Office different. Doubtless they are Parsons of the families they live in, and
are entertained to that end, either by an open, or implicit Covenant. Before
they are in Orders, they may be received for Companions, or discoursers; but
after a man is once Minister, he cannot agree to come into any house, where he
shall not exercise what he is, unless he forsake his plough, and look back.
Wherefore they are not to be over-submissive, and base, but to keep up with the
Lord and Lady of the house, and to preserve a boldness with them and all, even
so far as reproof to their very face, when occasion calls, but seasonably and
discreetly. They who do not thus, while they remember their earthly Lord, do
much forget their heavenly; they wrong the Priesthood, neglect their duty, and
shall be so far from that which they seek with their over-submissivenesse,
and cringings, that they shall ever be despised. They who for the hope of
promotion neglect any necessary admonition, or reproof, sell (with Judas)
their Lord and Master.

CHAP. III. The Parsons Life.
THe Country Parson is exceeding exact in his Life, being holy, just, prudent,
temperate, bold, grave in all his ways. And because the two highest points of
Life, wherein a Christian is most seen, are Patience, and Mortification;
Patience in regard of afflictions, Mortification in regard of lusts and
affections, and the stupifying and deading of all the clamarous powers of the
foul, therefore he has thoroughly studied these, that he may be an absolute
Master and commander of himself, for all the purposes which God has ordained
him. Yet in these points he labors most in those things which are most apt to
scandalize his Parish. And first, because Country people live hardly, and
therefore as feeling their own sweat, and consequently knowing the price of
money, are offended much with any, who by hard usage increase their travel, the
Country Parson is very circumspect in avoiding all coveteousnesse, neither
being greedy to get, nor nigardly to keep, nor troubled to lose any worldly
wealth; but in all his words and actions slighting, and disesteeming it, even
to a wondering, that the world should so much value wealth, which in the day of
wrath has not one dram of comfort for us. Secondly because Luxury is a very
visible sin, the Parson is very careful to avoid all the kinds thereof, but
especially that of drinking, because it is the most popular vice; into which if
he come, he prostitutes himself both to shame, and sin, and by having
fellowship, with the unfruitful works of darkness, he disableth himself of
authority to reprove them: For sins make all equal, whom they find together;
and then they are worst, who ought to be best. Neither is it for the servant of
Christ to haunt Innes, or Tavernes, or Alehouses, to the dishonor of his
person and office. The Parson does not so, but orders his Life in such a
fashion, that when death takes him, as the Jews and Judas did Christ, he may
say as He did, I sat daily with you teaching in the Temple. Thirdly, because
Country people (as indeed all honest men) do much esteem their word, it being
the Life of buying, and selling, and dealing in the world; therefore the Parson
is very strict in keeping his word, though it be to his own hinderance, as
knowing, that if he be not so, he will quickly be discovered, and disregarded:
neither will they believe him in the pulpit, whom they cannot trust in his
Conversation. As for oaths, and apparel the disorders thereof are also very
manifest. The Parsons yea is yea, and nay nay; and his apparel plain, but
reverend, and clean, without spots, or dust, or smell; the purity of his mind
breaking out, and dilating it self even to his body, clothes, and habitation.

CHAP. IIII. The Parsons Knowledge.
THe Country Parson is full of all knowledge. They say, it is an ill Mason that
refuses any stone: and there is no knowledge, but, in a skillful hand, serves
either positively as it is, or else to illustrate some other knowledge. He
condescends even to the knowledge of tillage, and pastorage, and makes great
use of them in teaching, because people by what they understand, are best led
to what they understand not. But the chief and top of his knowledge consists in
the book of books, the storehouse and magazene of life and comfort, the holy
Scriptures. There he sucks, and lives. In the Scriptures he finds four
things; Precepts for life, Doctrines for knowledge, Examples for illustration,
and Promises for comfort: These he has digested severally. But for the
understanding of these; the means he uses are first, a holy Life, remembering
what his Master says, that if any do Gods will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
John 7. and assuring himself, that wicked men, however learned, do not know the
Scriptures, because they feel them not, and because they are not understood but
with the same Spirit that writ them. The second means is prayer, which if it be
necessary even in temporal things, how much more in things of another world,
where the well is deep, and we have nothing of our selves to draw with?
Wherefore he ever begins the reading of the Scripture with some short inward
ejaculation, as, Lord, open mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of
thy Law. etc. The third means is a diligent Collation of Scripture with
Scripture. For all Truth being consonant to it self, and all being penned by
one and the self-same Spirit, it cannot be, but that an industrious, and
judicious comparing of place with place must be a singular help for the right
understanding of the Scriptures. To this may be added the consideration of any
text with the coherence thereof, touching what goes before, and what follows
after, as also the scope of the Holy Ghost. When the Apostles would have called
down fire from Heaven, they were reproved, as ignorant of what spirit they
were. For the Law required one thing, and the Gospel another: yet as diverse,
not as repugnant: therefore the spirit of both is to be considered, and
weighed. The fourth means are Commenters and fathers, who have handled the
places controverted, which the Parson by no means refuses. As he does not so
study others, as to neglect the grace of God in himself, and what the Holy
Spirit teaches him; so does he assure himself, that God in all ages has had
his servants, to whom he has revealed his Truth, as well as to him; and that
as one Country does not bear all things, that there may be a Commerce; so
neither has God opened, or will open all to one, that there may be a traffic
in knowledge between the servants of God, for the planting both of love, and
humility. Wherefore he has one Comment at least upon every book of Scripture,
and ploughing with this, and his own meditations, he enters into the secrets of
God treasured in the holy Scripture.

CHAP. V. The Parsons Accessory Knowledges.
THe Country Parson has read the Fathers also, and the Schoolmen, and the
later Writers, or a good proportion of all, out of all which he has complied a
book, and body of Divinity, which is the storehouse of his Sermons, and which
he preaches all his Life; but diversely clothed, illustrated, and enlarged. For
though the world is full of such composures, yet every man's own is fittest,
readyest, and most savory to him. Besides, this being to be done in his younger
and preparatory times, it is an honest joy ever after to look upon his well
spent hours. This Body he made by way of expounding the Church Catechism, to
which all divinity may easily be reduced. For it being indifferent in it self
to choose any Method, that is best to be chosen, of which there is likelyest to
be most use. Now Catechizing being a work of singular, and admirable benefit to
the Church of God, and a thing required under Canonical obedience, the
expounding of our Catechism must needs be the most useful form. Yet has the
Parson, besides this laborious work, a slighter form of Catechizing, fitter
for country people; according as his audience is, so he uses one, or other; or
sometimes both, if his audience be intermixed. He greatly esteems also of cases
of conscience, wherein he is much versed. And indeed, herein is the greatest
ability of a Parson to lead his people exactly in the ways of Truth, so that
they neither decline to the right hand, nor to the left. Neither let any think
this a slight thing. For every one has not digested, when it is a sin to take
something for money lent, or when not; when it is a fault to discover another
fault, or when not; when the affections of the soul in desiring and procuring
increase of means, or honor, be a sin of covetousnes or ambition, and when
not; when the appetites of the body in eating, drinking, sleep, and the
pleasure that comes with sleep, be sins of gluttony, drunkenness, sloth, lust,
and when not, and so in many circumstances of actions. Now if a shepherd know
not which grass will bane, or which not, how is he fit to be a shepherd?
Wherefore the Parson has thoroughly canvassed all the particulars of humane
actions, at least all those which he observes are most incident to his Parish.

CHAP. VI. The Parson praying.
THe Country Parson, when he is to read divine services, composeth himself to
all possible reverence; lifting up his heart and hands, and eyes, and using all
other gestures which may express a hearty, and unfeyned devotion. This he
does, first, as being truly touched and amazed with the Majesty of God, before
whom he then presents himself; yet not as himself alone, but as presenting with
himself the whole Congregation, whose sins he then bears, and brings with his
own to the heavenly altar to be bathed, and washed in the sacred Laver of
Christ's blood. Secondly, as this is the true reason of his inward fear, so he
is content to express this outwardly to the utmost of his power; that being
first affected himself, he may affect also his people, knowing that no Sermon
moves them so much to a reverence, which they forget again, when they come to
pray, as a devout behavior in the very act of praying. Accordingly his voice
is humble, his words treatable, and flow; yet not so slow neither, as to let
the fervency of the supplicant hang and die between speaking, but with a grave
liveliness, between fear and zeal, pausing yet pressing, he performs his
duty. Besides his example, he having often instructed his people how to carry
themselves in divine service, exacts of them all possible reverence, by no
means enduring either talking, or sleeping, or gazing, or leaning, or
halfe-kneeling, or any undutifull behavior in them, but causing them, when
they sit, or stand, or kneel, to do all in a strait, and steady posture, as
attending to what is done in the Church, and every one, man, and child,
answering aloud both Amen, and all other answers, which are on the Clerks and
peoples part to answer; which answers also are to be done not in a hudling, or
slubbe ring fashion, gaping, or scratching the head, or spitting even in the
midst of their answer, but gently and pausably, thinking what they say; so that
while they answer, As it was in the beginning, etc. they meditate as they
speak, that God has ever had his people, that have glorified him as well as
now, and that he shall have so for ever. And the like in other answers. This is
that which the Apostle calls a reasonable service, Rom, 12. when we speak not as
Parrats, without reason, or offer up such sacrifices as they did of old, which
was of beasts devoyd of reason; but when we use our reason, and apply our
powers to the service of him, that gives them. If there be any of the gentry or
nobility of the Parish, who sometimes make it a piece of state not to come at
the beginning of service with their poor neighbors, but at mid-prayers, both
to their own loss, and of theirs also who gaze upon them when they come in, and
neglect the present service of God, he by no means suffers it, but after diverse
gentle admonitions, if they persevere, he causes them to be presented: or if
the poor Churchwardens be affrighted with their greatness, notwithstanding his
instruction that they ought not to be so, but even to let the world sink, so
they do their duty; he presents them himself, only protesting to them, that not
any ill will draws him to it, but the debt and obligation of his calling, being
to obey God rather then men.

CHAP. VII. The Parson preaching.
THe Country Parson preaches constantly, the pulpit is his joy and his
throne: if he at any time intermit, it is either for want of health, or against
some great Festival, that he may the better celebrate it, or for the variety
of the hearers, that he may be heard at his return more attentively. When he
intermits, he is ever very well supplied by some able man who treads in his
steps, and will not throw down what he has built; whom also he entreats to
press some point, that he himself has often urged with no great success, that
so in the mouth of two or three witnesses the truth may be more established.
When he preaches, he procures attention by all possible art, both by
earnestness of speech, it being natural to men to think, that where is much
earnestness, there is somewhat worth hearing; and by a diligent, and busy cast
of his eye on his auditors, with letting them know, that he observes who marks,
and who not; and with particularizing of his speech now to the younger sort,
then to the elder, now to the poor, and now to the rich. This is for you, and
This is for you; for particulars ever touch, and awake more then generals.
Herein also he serves himself of the judgments of God, as of those of ancient
times, so especially of the late ones; and those most, which are nearest to his
Parish; for people are very attentive at such discourses, and think it behooves
them to be so, when God is so near them, and even over their heads. Sometimes
he tells them stories, and sayings of others, according as his text invites
him; for them also men heed, and remember better then exhortations; which
though earnest, yet often die with the Sermon, especially with Country people;
which are thick, and heavy, and hard to raise to a point of Zeal, and fervency,
and need a mountain of fire to kindle them; but stories and sayings they will
well remember. He often tells them, that Sermons are dangerous things, that none
goes out of Church as he came in, but either better, or worse; that none is
careless before his Judge, and that the word of God shall Judge us. By these and
other means the Parson procures attention; but the character of his Sermon is
Holiness; he is not witty, or learned, or eloquent, but Holy. A Character, that
Hermogenes never dreamed of, and therefore he could give no precepts thereof.
But it is gained first, by choosing texts of Devotion, not Controversy, moving
and ravishing texts, whereof the Scriptures are full. Secondly, by dipping, and
seasoning all our words and sentences in our hearts, before they come into our
mouths, truly affecting, and cordially expressing all that we say; so that the
auditors may plainly perceive that every word is hart-deep. Thridly, by turning
often, and making many Apostrophes to God, as, Oh Lord bless my people, and
teach them this point; or, Oh my Master, on whose errand I come, let me hold my
peace, and do thou speak thy self; for thou art Love, and when thou teach,
all are Scholars. Some such irradiations scatteringly in the Sermon, carry
great holiness in them. The Prophets are admirable in this. So Isa. 64. Oh that
thou would rent the Heavens, that thou would come down, etc. And Jeremy,
Chapt. 10. after he had complained of the desolation of Israel, turns to God
suddenly, Oh Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, etc. Fourthly,
by frequent wishes of the peoples good, and joying therein, though he himself
were with Saint Paul even sacrificed upon the service of their faith. For there
is no greater sign of holiness, then the procuring, and rejoicing in another
good. And herein St Paul excelled in all his Epistles. How did he put the
Romans in all his prayers? Romans 1.9. And ceased not to give thanks for the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.16. And for the Corinthians, chap. 1.4. And for the
Philippians made request with joy chapter 1.4. And is in contention for them
whither to live, or die; be with them, or Christ, verse 23. which, setting aside
his care of his Flock, were a madness to doubt of. What an admirable Epistle
is the second to the Corinthians? how full of affections? he joys, and he is
sorry, he grieves, and he gloryes, never was there such care of a flock
expressed, save in the great shepherd of the fold, who first shed tears over
Jerusalem, and afterward blood. Therefore this care may be learned there, and
then woven into Sermons, which will make them appear exceeding reverend, and
holy. Lastly, by an often urging of the presence, and majesty of God, by these,
or such like speeches. Oh let us all take heed what we do, God sees us, he sees
whether I speak as I ought, or you hear as you ought, he sees hearts, as we see
faces: he is among us; for if we be here, he must be here, since we are here
by him, and without him could not be here. Then turning the discourse to his
Majesty, And he is a great God, and terrible, as great in mercy, so great in
judgment: There are but two devouring elements, fire, and water, he has both
in him; His voice is as the sound of many waters, Revelations 1. And he
himself is a consuming fire, Hebrews 12. Such discourses show very Holy. The
Parsons Method in handling of a text consists of two parts; first, a plain and
evident declaration of the meaning of the text; and secondly, some choice
Observations drawn out of the whole text, as it lies entire, and unbroken in
the Scripture it self. This he thinks natural, and sweet, and grave. Whereas
the other way of crumbling a text into small parts, as, the Person speaking, or
spoken to, the subject, and object, and the like, has neither in it
sweetness, nor gravity, nor variety, since the words apart are not Scripture,
but a dictionary, and may be considered alike in all the Scripture. The Parson
exceeds not an hour in preaching, because all ages have thought that a
competency, and he that profits not in that time, will less afterward, the
same affection which made him not profit before, making him then weary, and so
he grows from not relishing, to loathing.

CHAP. VIII. The Parson on Sundays.
THe Country Parson, as soon as he awakes on Sunday morning, presently falls to
work, and seems to himself so as a Market-man is, when the Market day comes,
or a shopkeeper, when customers use to come in. His thoughts are full of making
the best of the day, and contriving it to his best gains. To this end, besides
his ordinary prayers, he makes a peculiar one for a blessing on the exercises
of the day, That nothing befall him unworthy of that Majesty before which he is
to present himself, but that all may be done with reverence to his glory, and
with edification to his flock, humbly beseeching his Master, that how or
whenever he punish him, it be not in his Ministry: then he turns to request
for his people, that the Lord would be pleased to sanctify them all, that they
may come with holy hearts, and awful minds into the Congregation, and that
the good God would pardon all those, who come with less prepared hearts then
they ought. This done, he sets himself to the Consideration of the duties of
the day, and if there be any extraordinary addition to the customary exercises,
either from the time of the year, or from the State, or from God by a child
born, or dead, or any other accident, he contrives how and in what manner to
induce it to the best advantage. Afterward when the hour calls, with his
family attending him, he goes to Church, at his first entrance humbly adoring,
and worshipping the invisible majesty, and presence of Almighty God, and
blessing the people either openly, or to himself. Then having read divine
Service twice fully, and preached in the morning, and catechized in the
afternoon, he thinks he has in some measure, according to poor, and frail
man, discharged the public duties of the Congregation. The rest of the day he
spends either in reconciling neighbors that are at variance, or in visiting
the sick, or in exhortations to some of his flock by themselves, whom his
Sermons cannot, or do not reach. And every one is more awaked, when we come,
and say, Thou art the man. This way he finds exceeding useful, and winning;
and these exhortations he calls his privy purse, even as Princes have theirs,
besides there public disbursments. At night he thinks it a very fit time, both
suitable to the joy of the day, and without hinderance to public duties, either
to entertain some of his neighbors, or to be entertained of them, where he
takes occasion to discourse of such things as are both profitable, and
pleasant, and to raise up their minds to apprehend Gods good blessing to our
Church, and State; that order is kept in the one, and peace in the other,
without disturbance, or interruption of public dvinie offices. As he opened
the day with prayer, so he closes it, humbly beseeching the Almighty to pardon
and accept our poor services, and to improve them, that we may grow therein,
and that our feet may be like hindes feet ever climbing up higher, and higher
unto him.

CHAP. IX. The Parson's state of Life.
THe Country Parson considering that virginity is a higher state then
Matrimony, and that the Ministry requires the best and highest things, is
rather unmarryed, then married. But yet as the temper of his body may be, or as
the temper of his Parish may be, where he may have occasion to converse with
women, and that among suspicious men, and other like circumstances considered,
he is rather married then unmarried. Let him communicate the thing often by
prayer unto God, and as his grace shall direct him, so let him proceed. If he
be unmarried, and keep house, he has not a woman in his house, but finds
opportunities of having his meat dressed and other services done by
menservants at home, and his linen washed abroad. If he be unmarryed, and
sojourne, he never talks with any woman alone, but in the audience of others,
and that seldom, and then also in a serious manner, never jestingly or
sportfully. He is very circumspect in all companyes, both of his behavior,
speech, and very looks, knowing himself to be both suspected, and envyed. If he
stand steadfast in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own
will, and has so decreed in his heart, that he will keep himself a virgin, he
spends his days in fasting and prayer, and blesses God for the gift of
continency, knowing that it can no way be preserved, but only by those means,
by which at first it was obtained. He therefore thinks it not enough for him
to observe the fasting days of the Church, and the daily prayers enjoined him
by auctority, which he observes out of humble conformity, and obedience; but
adds to them, out of choice and devotion; some other days for fasting, and
hours for prayers; and by these he keeps his body tame, serviceable, and
healthful; and his soul fervent, active, young, and lusty as an eagle. He
often reads the Lives of the Primi; tive Monks, Hermits, and virgins, and
wondreth not so much at their patient suffering, and cheerful dying under
persecuting Emperors, (though that indeed be very admirable) as at their daily
temperance, abstinence, watchings, and constant prayers, and mortifications in
the times of peace and prosperity. To put on the profound humility, and the
exact temperance of our Lord Jesus, with other exemplary virtues of that sort,
and to keep them on in the sunshine, and noone of prosperity, he finds to be
as necessary, and as difficult at least, as to be clothed with perfect
patience, and Christian fortitude in the cold midnight storms of persecution
and adversity. He keeps his watch and ward, night and day against the proper
and peculiar temptations of his state of Life, which are principally these two,
Spiritual pride, and Impurity of heart: against these ghostly enemies he
girdeth up his loins, keeps the imagination from roving, puts on the whole
Armor of God, and by the virtue of the shield of faith, he is not afraid of
the pestilence that walks in darkness, [carnall impurity,] nor of the
sickness that destroys at noone day, [Ghostly pride and self-conceite.]
Other temptations he has, which, like mortal enemies, may sometimes disquiet
him likewise; for the humane soul being bounded, and kept in in her sensitive
faculty, will run out more or less in her intellectual. Original
concupisence is such an active thing, by reason of continual inward, or
outward temptations, that it is ever attempting, or doing one mischief or
other. Ambition, or untimely desire of promotion to an higher state, or place,
under color of accommodation, or necessary provision, is a common temptation
to men of any eminency, especially being single men. Curiosity in prying into
high speculative and unprofitable questions, is another great stumbling block
to the holiness of Scholars. These and many other spiritual wickednesses in
high places does the Parson fear, or experiment, or both; and that much more
being single, then if he were married; for then commonly the stream of
temptations is turned another way, into Covetousness, Love of pleasure, or
ease, or the like. If the Parson be unmarryed, and means to continue so, he
does at least, as much as has been said. If he be married, the choice of his
wife was made rather by his ear, then by his eye; his judgment, not his
affection found out a fit wife for him, whose humble, and liberal disposition
he preferred before beauty, riches, or honor. He knew that (the good
instrument of God to bring women to heaven) a wise and loving husband could out
of humility, produce any special grace of faith, patience, meekness, love,
obedience, etc. and out of liberality, make her fruitful in all good works. As
he is just in all things, so is he to his wife also, counting nothing so much
his own, as that he may be unjust unto it. Therefore he gives her respect both
before her sevants, and others, and half at least of the government of the
house, reserving so much of the affairs, as serve for a diversion for him; yet
never so giving over the raines, but that he sometimes looks how things go,
demanding an account, but not by the way of an account. And this must be done
the oftener, or the seldomer, according as he is satisfied of his Wifes
discretion.

CHAP. X. The Parson in his house.
THe Parson is very exact in the governing of his house, making it a copy and
model for his Parish. He knows the temper, and pulse of every person in his
house, and accordingly either meets with their vices, or advances their
virtues. His wife is either religious, or night and day he is winning her to
it. In stead of the qualities of the world, he requires only three of her;
first, a trayning up of her children and mayds in the fear of God, with
prayers, and catechizing, and all religious duties. Secondly, a curing, and
healing of all wounds and sores with her own hands; which skill either she
brought with her, or he takes care she shall learn it of some religious
neighbor. Thirdly, a providing for her family in such sort, as that neither
they want a competent sustentation, nor her husband be brought in debt. His
children he first makes Christians, and then Common-wealths-men; the one he
owes to his heavenly Country, the other to his earthly, having no title to
either, except he do good to both. Therefore having seasoned them with all
Piety, not only of words in praying, and reading; but in actions, in visiting
other sick children, and tending their wounds, and sending his charity by them
to the poor, and sometimes giving them a little money to do it of themselves,
that they get a delight in it, and enter favor with God, who weighs even
childrens actions. 1 King. 14.12, 13. He afterward turns his care to fit all
their dispositions with some calling, not sparing the eldest, but giving him
the prerogative of his Fathers profession, which happily for his other children
he is not able to do. Yet in binding them prentices (in case he think fit to do
so) he takes care not to put them into vain trades, and unbefitting the
reverence of their Fathers calling, such as are tavernes for men, and
lace-making for women; because those trades, for the most part, serve but the
vices and vanities of the world, which he is to deny, and not augment. However,
he resolves with himself never to omit any present good deed of charity, in
consideration of providing a stock for his children; but assures himself, that
money thus lent to God, is placed surer for his childrens advantage, then if it
were given to the Chamber of London. Good deeds, and good breeding, are his two
great stocks for his children; if God give any thing above those, and not spent
in them, he blesses God, and lays it out as he sees cause. His servants are
all religious, and were it not his duty to have them so, it were his profit,
for none are so well served, as by religious servants, both because they do
best, and because what they do, is blessed, and prospers. After religion, he
teaches them, that three things make a complete servant, Truth, and
Diligence, and Neatness, or Cleanliness. Those that can read, are allowed
times for it, and those that cannot, are taught; for all in his house are
either teachers or learners, or both, so that his family is a School of
Religion, and they all account, that to teach the ignorant is the greatest
alms. Even the walls are not idle, but something is written, or painted there,
which may excite the reader to a thought of piety; especially the 101 Psalm,
which is expressed in a fair table, as being the rule of a family. And when
they go abroad, his wife among her neighbors is the beginner of good
discourses, his children among children, his servants among other servants; so
that as in the house of those that are skilled in Music, all are Musicians; so
in the house of a Preacher, all are preachers. He suffers not a ly or
equivocation by any means in his house, but counts it the art, and secret of
governing to preserve a directinesse, and open plainness in all things; so
that all his house knows, that there is no help for a fault done, but
confession. He himself, or his Wife, takes account of Sermons, and how every
one profits, comparing this year with the last: and besides the common prayers
of the family, he straightly requires of all to pray by themselves before they
sleep at night, and stir out in the morning, and knows what prayers they say,
and till they have learned them, makes them kneel by him; esteeming that this
private praying is a more voluntary act in them, then when they are called to
others prayers, and that, which when they leave the family, they carry with
them. He keeps his servants between love, and fear, according as he finds
them; but generally he distributes it thus, To his Children he shows more love
then terror, to his servants more terror then love; but an old good servant
boards a child. The furniture of his house is very plain, but clean, whole, and
sweet, as sweet as his garden can make; for he has no money for such things,
charity being his only perfume, which deserves cost when he can spare it. His
fare is plain, and common, but wholesome, what he has, is little, but very
good; it consists most of mutton, beef, and veal, if he adds any thing for
a great day, or a stranger, his garden or orchard supplies it, or his barn,
and backside: he goes no further for any entertainment, lest he go into the
world, esteeming it absurd, that he should exceed, who teaches others
temperance. But those which his home produces, he refuses not, as coming
cheap, and easy, and arising from the improvement of things, which otherwise
would be lost. Wherein he admires and imitates the wonderful providence and
thrift of the great householder of the world: for there being two things, which
as they are, are unuseful to man, the one for smalnesse, as crumbs, and
scattered corn, and the like; the other for the foulness, as wash, and dirt,
and things thereinto fallen; God has provided Creatures for both; for the
first, Poultry; for the second, swine. These save man the labor, and doing
that which either he could not do, or was not fit for him to do, by taking both
sorts of food into them, do as it were dress and prepare both for man in
themselves, by growing them selves fit for his table. The Parson in his house
observes fasting days; and particularly, as Sunday is his day of joy, so
Friday his day of Humiliation, which he celebrates not only with abstinence of
diet, but also of company, recreation, and all outward contentments; and
besides, with confession of sins, and all acts of Mortification. Now fasting
days contain a treble obligation; first, of eating less that day, then on
other days; secondly, of eating no pleasing, or over-nourishing things, as the
Israelites did eat sour herbs: Thirdly, of eating no flesh, which is but the
determination of the second rule by Authority to this particular. The two
former obligations are much more essential to a true fast, then the third and
last; and fasting days were fully performed by keeping of the two former, had
not Authority interposed: so that to eat little, and that unpleasant, is the
natural rule of fasting, although it be flesh. For since fasting in Scripture
language is an afflicting of our souls, if a piece of dry flesh at my table be
more unpleasant to me, then some fish there, certainly to eat the flesh, and
not the fish, is to keep the fasting day naturally. And it is observable, that
the prohibiting of flesh came from hot Countries, where both flesh alone, and
much more with wine, is apt to nourish more then in cold regions, and where
flesh may be much better spared, and with more safety then elsewhere, where
both the people and the drink being cold and phlegmatic, the eating of flesh is
an antidote to both. For it is certain, that a weak stomach being prepossessed
with flesh, shall much better brook and bear a daught of beer, then if it had
taken before either fish, or roots, or such things; which will discover it
self by spitting, and rheum, or phlegm. To conclude, the Parson, if he be in
full health, keeps the three obligations, eating fish, or roots, and that for
quantity little, for quality unpleasant. If his body be weak and obstructed, as
most Students are, he cannot keep the last obligation, nor suffer others in his
house that are so, to keep it; but only the two former, which also in diseases
of exinanition (as consumptions) must be broken: For meat was made for man, not
man for meat. To all this may be added, not for emboldening the unruly, but for
the comfort of the weak, that not only sickness breaks these obligations of
fasting, but sickliness also. For it is as unnatural to do any thing, that
leads me to a sickness, to which I am inclined, as not to get out of that
sickness, when I am in it, by any diet. One thing is evident, that an English
body, and a Students body, are two great obstructed vessels, and there is
nothing that is food, and not physic, which does less obstruct, then flesh
moderately taken; as being immoderately taken, it is exceeding obstructive. And
obstructions are the cause of most diseases.

CHAP. XI. The Parson's Courtesy.
THe Country Parson owing a debt of Charity to the poor, and of Courtesy to
his other parishioners, he so distinguishes, that he keeps his money for the
poor, and his table for those that are above Alms. Not but that the poor are
welcome also to his table, whom he sometimes purposely takes home with him,
setting them close by him, and carving for them, both for his own humility, and
their comfort, who are much cheered with such friendlineses. But since both is
to be done, the better sort invited, and meaner relieved, he chooses rather to
give the poor money, which they can better employ to their own advantage, and
sutably to their needs, and then so much given in meat at dinner. Having then
invited some of his Parish, he takes his times to do the like to the rest; so
that in the compass of the year, he has them all with him, because country
people are very observant of such things, and will not be persuaded, but being
not invited, they are hated. Which persuasion the Parson by all means avoyds,
knowing that where there are such conceits, there is no room for his doctrine
to enter. Yet does he oftenest invite those, whom he sees take best courses,
that so both they may be encouraged to persevere, and others spurred to do
well, that they may enjoy the like courtesy. For though he desire, that all
should live well, and virtuously, not for any reward of his, but for virtues
sake; yet that will not be so: and therefore as God, although we should love
him only for his own sake, yet out of his infinite pity has set forth heaven
for a reward to draw men to Piety, and is content, if at least so, they will
become good. So the Country Parson, who is a diligent observer, and tracker of
Gods ways, sets up as many encouragements to goodness as he can, both in
honor, and profit, and fame; that he may, if not the best way, yet any way,
make his Parish good.

CHAP. XII. The Parson's Charity.
THe Country Parson is full of Charity; it is his predominant element. For
many and wonderful things are spoken of thee, thou great Virtue. To Charity is
given the covering of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8. and the forgiveness of sins, Matthew
6.14. Luke 7.47. the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. The life of faith,
James 2.26. The blessings of this life, Proverbs 22.9. Psalm 41.2. And the
reward of the next, Matthew. 25.35. In brief, it is the body of Religion, John
13.35. And the top of Christian virtues, 1 Corin. 13. Wherefore all his works
relish of Charity. When he rises in the morning, he bethinketh himself what
good deeds he can do that day, and presently does them; counting that day lost,
wherein he has not exercised his Charity. He first considers his own Parish,
and takes care, that there be not a beggar, or idle person in his Parish, but
that all be in a competent way of getting their living. This he affects either
by bounty, or persuasion, or by authority, making use of that excellent
statute, which binds all Parishes to maintain their own. If his Parish be
rich, he exacts this of them; if poor, and he able, he eases them therein. But
he gives no set pension to any; for this in time will lose the name and effect
of Charity with the poor people, though not with God: for then they will reckon
upon it, as on a debt; and if it be taken away, though justly, they will
murmur, and repine as much, as he that is disseized of his own inheritance. But
the Parson having a double aim, and making a hook of his Charity, causes them
still to depend on him; and so by continual, and fresh bounties, unexpected to
them, but resolved to himself, he wins them to praise God more, to live more
religiously, and to take more pains in their vocation, as not knowing when
they shall be relieved; which otherwise they would reckon upon, and turn to
idleness. Besides this general provision, he has other times of opening his
hand; as at great Festivals, and Communions; not suffering any that day that
he receives, to want a good meal suting to the joy of the occasion. But
specially, at hard times, and dearths, he even parts his Living, and life among
them, giving some corn outright, and selling other at under rates; and when his
own stock serves not, working those that are able to the same charity, still
pressing it in the pulpit, and out of the pulpit, and never leaving them, till
he obtain his desire. Yet in all his Charity, he distinguishes, giving them
most, who live best, and take most pains, and are most charged: So is his
charity in effect a Sermon. After the consideration of his own Parish, he
inlargeth himself, if he be able, to the neighborhood; for that also is some
kind of obligation; so does he also to those at his door, whom God puts in his
way, and makes his neighbors. But these he helps not without some testimony,
except the evidence of the misery bring testimony with it. For though these
testimonies also may be falsified, yet considering that the Law allows these in
case they be true, but allows by no means to give without testimony, as he
obeys Authority in the one, so that being once satisfied, he allows his Charity
some blindness in the other; especially, since of the two commands, we are
more enjoined to be charitable, then wise. But evident miseries have a natural
privilege, and exemption from all law. Whenever he gives any thing, and sees
them labor in thanking of him, he exacts of them to let him alone, and say
rather, God be praised, God be glorified; that so the thanks may go the right
way, and thither only, where they are only due. So does he also before
giving make them say their Prayers first, or the Creed, and ten Commandments,
and as he finds them perfect, rewards them the more. For other givings are lay,
and secular, but this is to give like a Priest.

CHAP. XIII. The Parson's Church.
THe Country Parson has a special care of his Church, that all things there
be decent, and befitting his Name by which it is called. Therefore first he
takes order, that all things be in good repair; as walls plaistered, windows
glazed, floor paved, seats whole, firm, and uniform, especially that the
Pulpit, and Deck, and Communion Table, and Font be as they ought, for those
great duties that are performed in them. Secondly, that the Church be swept,
and kept clean without dust, or Cobwebs, and at great festivalls strawed, and
stuck with boughs, and persumed with incense. Thirdly, That there be fit, and
proper texts of Scripture every where painted, and that all the painting be
grave, and reverend, not with light colors, or foolish anticks. Fourthly, That
all the books appointed by Authority be there, and those not torn, or fouled,
but whole; and clean, and well bound; and that there be a fitting, and sightly
Communion Cloth of fine linen, with an handsome, and seemly Carpet of good and
costly Stuff, or Cloth, and all kept sweet and clean, in a strong and decent
chest, with a Chalice, and Cover, and a Stoop, or Flagon; and a Basin for Alms
and offerings; besides which, he has a Poor-mans Box conveniently seated, to
receive the charity of well minded people, and to lay up treasure for the sick
and needy. And all this he does, not as out of necessity, or as putting a
holiness in the things, but as desiring to keep the middle way between
superstition, and slovenlinesse, and as following the Apostles two great and
admirable Rules in things of this nature: The first whereof is, Let all things
be done decently, and in order: The second, Let all things be done to
edification, 1 Cor. 14. For these two rules comprize and include the double
object of our duty, God, and our neighbor; the first being for the honor of
God; the second for the benefit of our neighbor. So that they excellently score
out the way, and fully, and exactly contain, even in external and indifferent
things, what course is to be taken; and put them to great shame, who deny the
Scripture to be perfect.

CHAP. XIV. The Parson in Circuit.
THe Country Parson upon the afternoons in the weekdays, takes occasion
sometimes to visit in person, now one quarter of his Parish, now another. For
there he shall find his flock most naturally as they are, wallowing in the
midst of their affairs: whereas on Sundays it is easy for them to compose
themselves to order, which they put on as their holy day clothes, and come to
Church in frame, but commonly the next day put off both. When he comes to any
house, first he blesses it, and then as he finds the persons of the house
employed, so he forms his discourse. Those that he finds religiously
employed, he both commends them much, and furthers them when he is gone, in
their employment; as if he finds them reading, he furnishes them with good
books; if curing poor people, he supplies them with Receipts, and instructs
them further in that skill, showing them how acceptable such works are to God,
and wishing them ever to do the Cures with their own hands, and not to put them
over to servants. Those that he finds busy in the works of their calling, he
commends them also: for it is a good and just thing for every one to do their
own business. But then he admonishes them of two things; first, that they dive
not too deep into worldly affairs, plunging themselves over head and ears into
carking, and caring; but that they so labor, as neither to labor anxiously,
nor distrustfully, nor profanely. Then they labor anxiously, when they overdo
it, to the loss of their quiet, and health: then distrustfully, when they doubt
Gods providence, thinking that their own labor is the cause of their thriving,
as if it were in their own hands to thrive, or not to thrixe. Then they labor
profanely, when they set themselves to work like brute beasts, never raising
their thoughts to God, nor sanctifying their labor with daily prayer; when on
the Lords day they do unnecessary servile work, or in time of divine service on
other holy days, except in the cases of extreme poverty, and in the seasons of
Seed-time, and Harvest. Secondly, he advises them so to labor for wealth and
maintenance, as that they make not that the end of their labor, but that they
may have wherewithal to serve God the better, and to do good deeds. After
these discourses, if they be poor and needy, whom he thus finds laboring, he
gives them somewhat; and opens not only his mouth, but his purse to their
relief, that so they go on more cheerfully in their vocation, and himself be
ever the more welcome to them. Those that the Parson finds idle, or ill
employed, he chides not at first, for that were neither civil, nor profitable;
but always in the close, before he departs from them: yet in this he
distinguishes; for if he be a plain countryman, he reproves him plainly; for
they are not sensible of finenesse: if they be of higher quality, they commonly
are quick, and sensible, and very tender of reproof: and therefore he lays his
discourse so, that he comes to the point very leasurely, and oftentimes, as
Nathan did, in the person of another, making them to reprove themselves.
However, one way or other, he ever reproves them, that he may keep himself
pure, and not be entangled in others sins. Neither in this does he forbear,
though there be company by: for as when the offense is particular, and against
me, I am to follow our Saviors rule, and to take my brother aside, and
reprove him; so when the offense is public, and against God, I am then to
follow the Apostles rule, 1 Timothy 5.20. and to rebuke openly that which is
done openly. Besides these occasional discourses, the Parson questions what
order is kept in the house, as about prayers morning, and evening on their
knees, reading of Scripture, catechizing, singing of Psalms at their work, and
on holy days; who can read, who not; and sometimes he hears the children read
himself, and blesses, encouraging also the servants to learn to read, and
offering to have them taught on holidays by his servants. If the Parson were
ashamed of particularizing in these things, he were not fit to be a Parson:
but he holds the Rule, that Nothing is little in Gods service: If it once have
the honor of that Name, it grows great instantly. Wherefore neither disdaineth
he to enter into the poorest Cottage, though he even creep into it, and though
it smell never so lothsomly. For both God is there also, and those for whom God
dyed: and so much the rather does he so, as his access to the poor is more
comfortable, then to the rich; and in regard of himself, it is more
humiliation. These are the Parsons general aims in his Circuit; but with these
he mingles other discourses for conversation sake, and to make his higher
purposes slip the more easily.

CHAP. XV. The Parson Comforting.
THe Country Parson, when any of his cure is sick, or afflicted with loss of
friend, or estate, or any ways distressed, fails not to afford his best
comforts, and rather goes to them, then sends for the afflicted, though they
can, and otherwise ought to come to him. To this end he has thoroughly digested
all the points of consolation, as having continual use of them, such as are
from Gods general providence extended even to lillyes; from his particular, to
his Church; from his promises, from the examples of all Saints, that ever were;
from Christ himself, perfecting our Redemption no other way, then by sorrow;
from the Benefit of affliction, which softens, and works the stubborn heart of
man; from the certainty both of deliverance, and reward, if we faint not; from
the miserable comparison of the moment of griefs here with the weight of joys
hereafter. Besides this, in his visiting the sick, or otherwise afflicted, he
follows the Churches counsel, namely, in persuading them to particular
confession, laboring to make them understand the great good use of this
ancient and pious ordinance, and how necessary it is in some cases: he also
urges them to do some pious charitable works, as a necessary evidence and
fruit of their faith, at that time especially: the participation of the holy
Sacrament, how comfortable, and Sovereign a Medicine it is to all sinsick
souls, what strength, and joy, and peace it administers against all
temptations, even to death it self, he plainly, and generally intimates to
the disaffected, or sick person, that so the hunger and thirst after it may
come rather from themselves, then from his persuasion.

CHAP. XVI. The Parson a Father.
THe Country Parson is not only a father to his flock, but also professes
himself thoroughly of the opinion, carrying it about with him as fully, as if
he had begot his whole Parish. And of this he makes great use. For by this
means, when any sins, he hates him not as an officer, but pityes him as a
Father: and even in those wrongs which either in tithing, or otherwise are done
to his own person, he considers the offender as a child, and forgives, so he
may have any sign of amendment; so also when after many admonitions, any
continue to be refractory, yet he gives him not over, but is long before he
proceed to disinheriting, or perhaps never goes so far; knowing, that some are
called at the eleventh hour, and therefore he still expects, and waits, least
he should determine Gods hour of coming; which as he cannot, touching the
last day, so neither touching the intermediate days of Conversion.

CHAP. XVII. The Parson in Journey.
THe country Parson, when a just occasion calls him out of his Parish (which
he diligently, and strictly weighs, his Parish being all his joy, and
thought) leaves not his Ministry behind him; but is himself where ever he is.
Therefore those he meets on the way he blesses audibly, and with those he
overtakes or that overtake him, he begins good discourses, such as may edify,
interposing sometimes some short, and honest refreshments, which may make his
other discourses more welcome, and less tedious. And when he comes to his Inn,
he refuses not to join, that he may enlarge the glory of God to the company
he is in, by a due blessing of God for their safe arrival, and saying grace at
meat, and at going to bed by giving the Host notice, that he will have prayers
in the hall, wishing him to inform his guests thereof, that if any be willing
to partake, they may resort thither. The like he does in the morning, using
pleasantly the outlandish proverb, that Prayers and Provender never hinder
journey. When he comes to any other house, where his kindred, or other
relations give him any authority over the Family, if he be to stay for a time,
he considers diligently the state thereof to Godward, and that in two points:
First, what disorders there are either in Apparel, or Diet, or too open a
Buttery, or reading vain books, or swearing, or breeding up children to no
Calling, but in idleness, or the like. Secondly, what means of Piety, whether
daily prayers be used, Grace, reading of Scriptures, and other good books, how
Sundays, holy days, and fasting days are kept. And accordingly, as he finds
any defect in these, he first considers with himself, what kind of remedy
fits the temper of the house best, and then he faithfully, and boldly applies
it; yet seasonably, and discreetly, by taking aside the Lord, or Lady; or
Master and Mistres of the house, and showing them clearly, that they respect
them most, who wish them best, and that not a desire to meddle with others
affairs, but the earnestness to do all the good he can, moves him to say thus
and thus.

CHAP. XVIII. The Parson in Sentinel.
THe Country Parson, where ever he is, keeps Gods watch; that is, there is
nothing spoken, or done in the Company where he is, but comes under his Test
and censure: If it be well spoken, or done, he takes occasion to commend, and
enlarge it; if ill, he presently lays hold of it, least the poison steal into
some young and unwary spirits, and possess them even before they themselves
heed it. But this he does discretely, with mollifying, and suppling words; This
was not so well said, as it might have been forborne; We cannot allow this: or
else if the thing will admit interpretation; Your meaning is not thus, but
thus; or, So far indeed what you say is true, and well said; but this will not
stand. This is called keeping Gods watch, when the baits which the enemy lays
in company, are discovered and avoided: This is to be on Gods side, and be true
to his party. Besides, if he perceive in company any discourse tending to ill,
either by the wickedness or quarrelsomnesse thereof, he either prevents it
judiciously, or breaks it off seasonably by some diversion. Wherein a
pleasantness of disposition is of great use, men being willing to sell the
interest, and engagement of their discourses for no price sooner, then that of
mirth; whither the nature of man, loving refreshment, gladly betakes it self,
even to the loss of honor.

CHAP. XIX. The Parson in reference.
THe Country Parson is sincere nnd upright in all his relations. And first, he
is just to his Country; as when he is set at an armor, or horse, he borrowes
them not to serve the turn, nor provides slight, and unusefull, but such as
are every way fitting to do his Country true and laudable service, when
occasion requires. To do otherwise, is deceit; and therefore not for him, who
is hearty, and true in all his ways, as being the servant of him, in whom
there was no guile. Likewise in any other Countrey-duty, he considers what is
the end of any Command, and then he suits things faithfully according to that
end. Secondly, he carries himself very respectively, as to all the Fathers of
the Church, so especially to his Diocesan, honoring him both in word, and
behavior, and resorting unto him in any difficulty, either in his studies or
in his Parish. He observes Visitations, and being there, makes due use of them,
as of Clergy councels, for the benefit of the Diocese. And therefore before he
comes, having observed some defects in the Ministry, he then either in Sermon,
if he preach, or at some other time of the day, propounds among his Brethren
what were fitting to be done. Thirdly, he keeps good Correspondence with all
the neighboring Pastors round about him, performing for them any Ministerial
office, which is not to the prejudice of his own Parish. Likewise he welcomes
to his house any Minister, how poor or mean soever, with as joyful a
countenance, as if he were to entertain some great Lord. Fourthly, he fulfills
the duty, and debt of neighborhood to all the Parishes which are near him. For
the Apostles rule Philip. 4. being admirable, and large, that we should do
whatsoever things are honest, or just, or pure, or lovely, or of good report,
if there be any virtue, or any praise. And Neighborhood being ever reputed,
even among the Heathen, as an obligation to do good, rather then to those that
are further, where things are otherwise equal, therefore he satisfies this
duty also. Especially, if God have sent any calamity either by fire, or famine,
to any neighboring Parish, then he expects no Brief; but taking his Parish
together the next Sunday, or holy day, and exposing to them the uncertainty of
humane affairs, none knowing whose turn may be next, and then when he has
affrighted them with this, exposing the obligation of Charity, and
Neighborhood, he first gives himself liberally, and then incites them to
give; making together a sum either to be sent, or, which were more
comfortable, all together choosing some fit day to carry it themselves, and
cheer the Afflicted. So, if any neighboring village be overburdened with
poor, and his own less charged, he finds some way of releeving it, and
reducing the Manna, and bread of Charity to some equality, representing to his
people, that the Blessing of God to them ought to make them the more
charitable, and not the less, lest he cast their neighbors poverty on them
also.

CHAP. XX. The Parson in Gods stead.
THe Country Parson is in Gods stead to his Parish, and discharges God what
he can of his promises. Wherefore there is nothing done either well or ill,
whereof he is not the rewarder, or punisher. If he chance to find any reading
in another Bible, he provides him one of his own. If he find another giving a
poor man a penny, he gives him a tester for it, if the giver be fit to receive
it; or if he be of a condition above such gifts, he sends him a good book, or
eases him in his Tithes, telling him when he has forgotten it, this I do,
because at such, and such a time you were charitable. This is in some sort a
discharging of God; as concerning this life, who has promised, that Godliness
shall be gainful: but in the other God is his own immediate paymaster,
rewarding all good deeds to their full proportion. The Parsons punishing of sin
and vice, is rather by withdrawing his bounty and courtesy from the parties
offending, or by private, or public reproof, as the case requires, then by
causing them to be presented, or otherwise complained of. And yet as the malice
of the person, or hainousness of the crime may be, he is careful to see
condign punishment inflicted, and with truly godly zeal, without hatred to the
person, hungreth and thirsts after righteous punishment of unrighteousness.
Thus both in rewarding virtue, and in punishing vice, the Parson endeavors
to be in Gods stead, knowing that Country people are drawn, or led by sense,
more then by faith, by present rewards, or punishments, more then by future.

CHAP. XXI. The Parson Catechizing.
THe Country Parson values Catechizing highly: for there being three points of
his duty, the one, to infuse a competent knowledge of salvation in every one of
his Flock; the other, to multiply, and build up this knowledge to a spiritual
Temple; the third, to inflame this knowledge, to press, and drive it to
practice, turning it to reformation of life, by pithy and lively exhortations;
Catechizing is the first point, and but by Catechizing, the other cannot be
attained. Besides, whereas in Sermons there is a kind of state, in Catechizing
there is an humbleness very suitable to Christian regeneration, which
exceedingly delights him as by way of exercise upon himself, and by way of
preaching to himself, for the advancing of his own mortification, For in
preaching to others, he forgets not himself, but is first a Sermon to himself,
and then to others; growing with the growth of his Parish. He uses, and
prefers the ordinary Church-Catechism, partly for obedience to Authority,
partly for uniformity sake, that the same common truths may be every where
professed, especially since many remove from Parish to Parish, who like
Christian Soldiers are to give the word, and to satisfy the Congregation by
their Catholic answers. He exacts of all the Doctrine of the Catechism; of
the younger sort, the very words; of the elder, the substance. Those he
Catechizeth publicly, these privately, giving age honor, according to the
Apostles rule, 1 Timothy 5.1. He requires all to be present at Catechizing: first,
for the authority of the work; Secondly, that Parents, and Masters, as they
hear the answers prove, may when they come home, either commend or reprove,
either reward or punish. Thirdly, that those of the elder sort, who are not
well grounded, may then by an honorable way take occasion to be better
instructed. Fourthly, that those who are well grown in the knowledge of
Religion, may examine their grounds, renew their vows, and by occasion of
both, enlarge their meditations. When once all have learned the words of the
Catechism, he thinks it the most useful way that a Pastor can take, to go
over the same, but in other words: for many say the Catechism by rote, as
parrats, without ever piercing into the sense, of it. In this course the order
of the Catechism would be kept, but the rest varyed: as thus, in the Creed:
How came this world to be as it is? Was it made, or came it by chance? Who made
it? Did you see God make it? Then are there some things to be believed that are
not seen? Is this the nature of belief? Is not Christianity full of such
things, as are not to be seen, but believed? You said, God made the world; Who
is God? And so forward, requiring answers to all these, and helping and
cherishing the Answerer, by making the Question very plain with comparisons,
and making much even of a word of truth from him. This order being used to one,
would be a little varyed to another. And this is an admirable way of teaching,
wherein the Catechized will at length find delight, and by which the
Catechizer, if he once get the skill of it, will draw out of ignorant and silly
souls, even the dark and deep points of Religion, Socrates did thus in
Philosophy, who held that the seeds of all truths lay in every body, and
accordingly by questions well ordered he found Philosophy in silly Tradesmen.
That position will not hold in Christianity, because it contains things above
nature: but after that the Catechism is once learned, that which nature is
toward Philosophy, the Catechism is toward Divinity. To this purpose, some
dialogues in Plato were worth the reading, where the singular dexterity of
Socrates in this kind may be observed, and imitated. Yet the skill consists but
in these three points: First, an aim and mark of the whole discourse, whither
to drive the Answerer, which the Questionist must have in his mind before any
question be propounded, upon which and to which the questions are to be
chained. Secondly, a most plain and easy framing the question, even containing
in virtue the answer also, especially to the more ignorant. Thirdly, when the
answerer sticks, an illustrating the thing by something else, which he knows,
making what he knows to serve him in that which he knows not: As, when the
Parson once demanded after other questions about man's misery; since man is so
miserable, what is to be done? And the answerer could not tell; He asked him
again, what he would do, if he were in a ditch? This familiar illustration made
the answer so plain, that he was even ashamed of his ignorance; for he could
not but say, he would have out of it as fast he could. Then he proceeded to
ask, whether he could get out of the ditch alone, or whether he needed a
helper, and who was that helper. This is the skill, and doubtless the Holy
Scripture intends thus much, when it condescends to the naming of a plough, a
hatchet, a bushel, leaven, boys piping and dancing; showing that things of
ordinary use are not only to serve in the way of drudgery, but to be washed,
and cleansed, and serve for lights even of Heavenly Truths. This is the
Practice which the Parson so much commends to all his fellow laborers; the
secret of whose good consists in this, that at Sermons, and Prayers, men may
sleep or wander; but when one is asked a question, he must discover what he is.
This practice exceeds even Sermons in teaching: but there being two things in
Sermons, the one Informing, the other Inflaming; as Sermons come short of
questions in the one, so they far exceed them in the other. For questions
cannot inflame or ravish, that must be done by a set, and labored, and
continued speech.

CHAP XXII. The Parson in Sacraments.
THe Country Parson being to administer the Sacraments, is at a stand with
himself, how or what behavior to assume for so holy things. Especially at
Communion times he is in a great confusion, as being not only to receive God,
but to break, and administer him. Neither finds he any issue in this, but to
throw himself down at the throne of grace, saying, Lord, thou know what thou
did, when thou appointedst it to be done thus; therefore do thou fulfill
what thou did appoint; for thou art not only the feast, but the way to it. At
Baptism, being himself in white, he requires the presence of all, and
Baptizeth not willingly, but on Sundays, or great days. He admits no vain
or idle names, but such as are usual and accustomed. He says that prayer with
great devotion, where God is thanked for calling us to the knowledge of his
grace, Baptism being a blessing, that the world has not the like. He
willingly and cheerfully crosses the child, and thinks the Ceremony not
only innocent, but reverend. He instructs the Godfathers, and Godmothers,
that it is no complementall or light thing to sustain that place, but a great
honor, and no less burden, as being done both in the presence of God, and his
Saints, and by way of undertaking for a Christian soul. He advises all to call
to mind their Baptism often; for if wise men have thought it the best way of
preserving a state to reduce it to its principles by which it grew great;
certainly, it is the safest course for Christians also to meditate on their
Baptism often (being the first step into their great and glorious calling) and
upon what terms, and with what vows they were Baptized. At the times of the
Holy Communion, he first takes order with the Churchwardens, that the elements
be of the best, not cheap, or course, much less ill-tasted, or unwholesome.
Secondly, he considers and looks into the ignorance, or carlesness of his
flock, and accordingly applies himself with Catechizings, and lively
exhortations, not on the Sunday of the Communion only (for then it is too
late;) but the Sunday, or Sundays before the Communion, or on the Eves of all
those days. If there be any, who having not received yet, is to enter into
this great work, he takes the more pains with them, that he may lay the
foundation of future Blessings. The time of every ones first receiving is not
so much by years, as by understanding: particularly, the rule may be this: When
any one can distinguish the Sacramental from common bread, knowing the
Institution, and the difference, he ought to receive, of what age soever.
Children and youths are usually deferred too long, under pretense of devotion
to the Sacrament, but it is for want of Instruction; their understandings being
ripe enough for ill things, and why not then for better? But Parents, and
Masters should make have in this, as to a great purchase for their children,
and servants; which while they deferr, both sides suffer; the one, in wanting
many excitings of grace; the other, in being worse served and obeyed. The
saying of the Catechism is necessary, but not enough; because to answer in form
may still admit ignorance: but the Questions must be propounded loosely and
wildely, and then the Answerer will discover what he is. Thirdly, For the
manner of receiving, as the Parson uses all reverence himself, so he
administers to none but to the reverent. The Feast indeed requires sitting,
because it is a Feast; but man's unpreparednesse asks kneeling. He that comes
to the Sacrament, has the confidence of a Guest, and he that kneels,
confesses himself an unworthy one, and therefore differs from other Feasters:
but he that sits, or lies, puts up to an Apostle: Contentiousnesse in a feast
of Charity is more scandal then any posture. Fourthly, touching the frequency
of the Communion, the Parson celebrates it, if not duly once a month, yet at
least five or six times in the year; as, at Easter, Christmasse, Whitsuntide,
before and after Harvest, and the beginning of Lent. And this he does, not
only for the benefit of the work, but also for the discharge of the
Churchwardens, who being to present all that receive not thrice a year; if
there be but three Communions, neither can all the people so order their
affairs as to receive just at those times, nor the Churchwardens so well take
notice who receive thrice, and who not.

CHAP. XXIII. The Parson's Completenesse.
THe Country Parson desires to be all to his Parish, and not only a Pastor,
but a Lawyer also, and a Phisician. Therefore he endures not that any of his
Flock should go to Law; but in any Controversy, that they should resort to him
as their Judge. To this end, he has gotten to himself some insight in things
ordinarily incident and controverted, by experience, and by reading some
initiatory treatises in the Law, with Daltons Justice of Peace, and the
Abridgements of the Statutes, as also by discourse with men of that profession,
whom he has ever some cases to ask, when he meets with them; holding that
rule, that to put men to discourse of that, wherein they are most eminent, is
the most gainful way of Conversation. Yet when ever any controversy is
brought to him, he never decides it alone, but sends for three or four of the
ablest of the Parish to hear the cause with him, whom he makes to deliver their
opinion first; out of which he gathers, in case he be ignorant himself, what to
hold; and so the thing passes with more authority, and less envy, In Judging,
he follows that, which is altogether right; so that if the poorest man of the
Parish detain but a pin unjustly from the richest, he absolutely restores it as
a Judge; but when he has so done, then he assumes the Parson, and exhorts to
Charity. Nevertheless, there may happen sometimes some cases, wherein he
chooses to permit his Parishioners rather to make use of the Law, then
himself: As in cases of an obscure and dark nature, not easily determinable by
Lawyers themselves; or in cases of high consequence, as establtshing of
inheritances: or Lastly, when the persons in difference are of a contentious
disposition, and cannot be gained, but that they still fall from all
compromises that have been made. But then he shows them how to go to Law, even
as Brethren, and not as enemies, neither avoiding therefore one another
company, much less defaming one another. Now as the Parson is in Law, so is he
in sickness also: if there be any of his flock sick, he is their Physician,
or at least his Wife, of whom in stead of the qualities of the world, he asks
no other, but to have the skill of healing a wound, or helping the sick. But if
neither himself, nor his wife have the skill, and his means serve, he keeps
some young practicioner in his house for the benefit of his Parish, whom yet he
ever exhorts not to exceed his bounds, but in tickle cases to call in help. If
all fail, then he keeps good correspondence with some neighbor Phisician, and
entertaines him for the Cure of his Parish. Yet is it easy for any Scholar to
attain to such a measure of Physic, as may be of much use to him both for
himself, and others. This is done by seeing one Anatomy, reading one Book of
Physic, having one Herball by him. And let Fernelius be the Physic Author,
for he writes briefly, neatly, and judiciously; especially let his Method of
Physic be diligently perused, as being the practical part, and of most use.
Now both the reading of him, and the knowing of herbs may be done at such
times, as they may be an help, and a recreation to more divine studies, Nature
serving Grace both incomfort of diversion, and the benefit of application when
need requires; as also by way of illustration, even as our Savior made plants
and seeds to teach the people: for he was the true householder, who brings
out of his treasure things new and old; the old things of Philosophy, and the
new of Grace; and makes the one serve the other. And I conceive, our Savior
did this for three reasons: first, that by familiar things he might make his
Doctrine slip the more easily into the hearts even of the meanest. Secondly,
that laboring people (whom he chiefly considered) might have every where
monuments of of his Doctrine, remembering in gardens, his mustard seed, and
lillyes; in the field, his seed-corn, and tares; and so not be drowned
altogether in the works of their vocation, but sometimes lift up their minds to
better things, even in the midst of their pains. Thirdly, that he might set a
Copy for Parsons. In the knowledge of simples, wherein the manifold wisdom of
God is wonderfully to be seen, one thing would be carefully observed; which is,
to know what herbs may be used in stead of drugs of the same nature, and to
make the garden the shop: For homebred medicines are both more easy for the
Parsons purse, and more familiar for all men's bodies. So, where the Apothecary
uses either for loosing, Rubarb, or for binding, Bolearmena, the Parson uses
damask or white Roses for the one, and plantaine, shepherds purse, knot-grasse
for the other, and that with better success. As for spices, he does not only
prefer homebred things before them, but condemns them for vanities, and so
shuts them out of his family, esteeming that there is no spice comparable, for
herbs, to rosemary, time, savoury, mints; and for seeds, to Fennel, and
Carroway seeds. Accordingly, for salves, his wife seeks not the city, but
preferrs her garden and fields before all outlandish gums. And surely hyssope,
valerian, mercury, adders tongue, yerrow, melilot, and Saint John's wort made
into a salve; And Elder, camomill, mallows, comphrey and smallage made into a
Poultis, have done great and rare cures. In curing of any, the Parson and his
Family use to premise prayers, for this is to cure like a Parson, and this
raises the action from the Shop, to the Church. But though the Parson sets
forward all Charitable deeds, yet he looks not in this point of Curing beyond
his own Parish, except the person be so poor, that he is not able to reward
the Phisician: for as he is Charitable, so he is just also. Now it is a
justice and debt to the Gommon-wealth he lives in, not to incroach on others
Professions, but to live on his own. And justice is the ground of Charity.

CHAP. XXIV. The Parson arguing.
THe Country Parson, if there be any of his parish that hold strange Doctrins,
uses all possible diligence to reduce them to the common Faith. The first
means he uses is Prayer, beseeching the Father of lights to open their eyes,
and to give him power so to fit his discourse to them (...) that it may
effectually pierce their hearts, and convert them. The second means is a very
loving, and sweet usage of them, both in going to, and sending for them often,
and in finding out Courtesies to place on them; as in their tithes, or
otherwise. The third means is the observation what is the main foundation, and
pillar of their cause, wherein they rely; as if he be a Papist, the Church is
the hinge he turns on; if a Scismatick, scandal. Wherefore the Parson has
diligently examined these two with himself, as what the Church is, how it
began, how it proceeded, whether it be a rule to it self, whether it has a
rule, whether having a rule, it ought not to be guided by it; whether any rule
in the world be obscure, and how then should the best be so, at least in
fundamental things, the obscurity in some points being the exercise of the
Church, the light in the foundations being the guide; The Church needing both
an evidence, and an exercise. So for Scandal: what scandal is, when given or
taken; whether, there being two precepts, one of obeying Authority, the other
of not giving scandal, that ought not to be preferred, especially since in
disobeying there is scandal also: whether things once indifferent, being made
by the precept of Authority more then indifferent, it be in our power to omit
or refuse them. These and the like points he has accurately digested, having
ever besides two great helps and powerful perswaders on his side; the one, a
strict religious life; the other an humble, and ingenuous search of truth;
being unmoved in arguing, and void of all contentiousnesse: which are two great
lights able to dazzle the eyes of the misled, while they consider, that God
cannot be wanting to them in Doctrine, to whom he is so gracious in Life.

CHAP. XXV. The Parson punishing.
Whenever the Country Parson proceeds so far as to call in Authority, and
to do such things of legal opposition either in the presenting, or punishing
of any, as the vulgar ever consters for signs of ill will; he forbears not in
any wise to use the delinquent as before, in his behavior and carriage toward
him, not avoiding his company, or doing any thing of averseness, save in the
very act of punishment: neither does he esteem him for an enemy, but as a
brother still, except some small and temporary estranging may corroborate the
punishment to a better subduing, and humbling of the delinquent; which if it
happily take effect, he then comes on the faster, and makes so much the more of
him, as before he alienated himself; doubling his regards, and showing by all
means, that the delinquents return is to his advantage.

CHAP. XXVI. The Parson's eye.
THe Country Parson at spare times from action, standing on a hill, and
considering his Flock, discovers two sorts of vices, and two sorts of vicious
persons. There are some vices, whose natures are always clear, and evident, as
Adultery, Murder, Hatred, Lying, etc. There are other vices, whose natures, at
least in the beginning, are dark and obscure: as Covetousness, and Gluttony.
So likewise there are some persons, who abstain not even from known sins; there
are others, who when they know a sin evidently, they commit it not. It is true
indeed, they are long a knowing it, being partial to themselves, and witty to
others who shall reprove them from it. A man may be both Covetous, and
Intemperate, and yet hear Sermons against both, and himself condemn both in
good earnest: and the reason hereof is, because the natures of these vices
being not evidently discussed, or known commonly, the beginnings of them are
not easily observabled: and the beginnings of them are not observed, because of
the sudden passing from that which was just now lawful, to that which is
presently unlawful, even in one continued action. So a man dining, eats at
first lawfully; but proceeding on, comes to do unlawfully, even before he is
aware; not knowing the bounds of the action, nor when his eating begins to be
unlawful. So a man storing up money for his necessary provisions, both in
present for his family, and in future for his children, hardly perceives when
his storing becomes unlawful: yet is there a period for his storing, and a
point, or center, when his storing, which was even now good, passes from good
to bad. Wherefore the Parson being true to his business, has exactly sifted
the definitions of all virtues, and vices; especially canvasing those, whose
natures are most stealing, and beginnings uncertain. Particularly, concerning
these two vices, not because they are all that are of this dark, and creeping
disposition, but for example sake, and because they are most common, he thus
thinks: first, for covetousnes, he lays this ground, Whosoever when a just
occasion calls, either spends not at all, or not in some proportion to Gods
blessing upon him, is covetous. The reason of the ground is manifest, because
wealth is given to that end to supply our occasions. Now, if I do not give
every thing its end, I abuse the Creature, I am false to my reason which should
guide me, I offend the supreme Judge, in perverting that order which he has set
both to things, and to reason. The application, of the ground would be
infinite; but in brief, a poor man is an occasion, my country is an occasion
my friend is an occasion, my Table is an occasion, my apparel is an occasion:
if in all these, and those more which concern me, I either do nothing, or
pinch, and scrape, and squeeze blood undecently to the station wherein God has
placed me, I am Covetous. More particularly, and to give one instance for all,
if God have given me servants, and I either provide too little for them, or
that which is unwholesome, being sometimes baned meat, sometimes too salt, and
so not competent nourishment, I am Covetous. I bring this example, because men
usually think, that servants for their money are as other things that they buy,
even as a piece of wood, which they may cut, or hack, or throw into the fire,
and so they pay them their wages, all is well. Nay, to descend yet more
particularly, if a man has wherewithal to buy a spade, and yet he chooses
rather to use his neighbors, and wear out that, he is covetous. Nevertheless,
few bring covetousness thus low, or consider it so narrowly, which yet ought to
be done, since there is a Justice in the least things, and for the least there
shall be a judgment Country. people are full of these petty injustices, being
cunning to make use of another, and spare themselves: And Scholars ought to be
diligent in the observation of these, and driving of their general School
rules ever to the smallest actions of Life; which while they dwell in their
books, they will never find; but being seated in the Country, and doing
their duty faithfully, they will soon discover: especially if they carry their
eyes ever open, and fix them on their charge, and not on their preferment.
Secondly, for Gluttony, The Parson lays this ground, He that either for
quantity eats more then his health or employments will bear, or for quality is
licorous after danties, is a glutton; as he that eats more then his estate will
bear, is a Prodigal; and he that eats offensively to the Company, either in
his order, or length of eating, is scandalous and uncharitable. These three
rules generally comprehend the faults of eating, and the truth of them needs no
proof: so that men must eat neither to the disturbance of their health, nor of
their affairs, (which being overburdened, or studying dainties too mucht; hey
cannot well dispatch) nor of their estate, nor of their brethren. One act in
these things is bad, but it is the custom and habit that names a glutton. Many
think they are at more liberty then they are, as if they were Masters of their
health, and so they will stand to the pain, all is well. But to eat to ones
hurt, comprehends, besides the hurt, an act against reason, because it is
unnatural to hurt ones self; and this they are not masters of. Yet of hurtful
things, I am more bound to abstain from those, which by mine own experience I
have found hurtful, then from those which by a Common tradition, and vulgar
knowledge are reputed to be so. That which is said of hurtful meats, extends
to hurtful drinks also. As for the quantity, touching our employments, none
must eat so as to disable themselves from a fit discharging either of Divine
duties, or duties of their calling. So that if after dinner they are not fit
(or un-weeldy) either to pray, or work, they are gluttons. Not that all must
presently work after dinner; (For they rather must not work, especially
Students, and those that are weakly,) but that they must rise so, as that it is
not meat or drink that hinders them from working. To guide them in this,
there are three rules: first, the custom, and knowledge of their own body, and
what it can well digest: The second, the feeling of themselves in time of
eating, which because it is deceitful; (for one thinks in eating, that he can
eat more, then afterward he finds true:) The third is the observation with
what appetite they sit down. This last rule joined with the first, never fails.
For knowing what one usually can well digest, and feeling when I go to meat in
what disposition I am, either hungry or not, according as I feel my self,
either I take my wonted proportion, or diminish of it. Yet Phisicians bid those
that would live in health, not keep an uniform diet, but to feed variously, now
more, now less: And Gerson, a spiritual man, wishes all to incline rather to
too much, then to too little; his reason is, because diseases of exinanition
are more dangerous, then diseases of repletion. But the Parson distinguishes
according to his double aim, either of Abstinence a moral virtue, or
Mortification a divine. When he deals with any that is heavy, and carnal; he
gives him those freer rules: but when he meets with a refined, and heavenly
disposition, he carries them higher, even sometimes to a forgetting of
themselves, knowing that there is one, who when they forget, remembers for
them; As when the people hungered and thirsted after our Saviors Doctrine, and
tarryed so long at it, that they would have fainted, had they returned empty,
He suffered it not; but rather made food miraculously, then suffered so good
desires to miscarry.

CHAP. XXVII. The Parson in mirth.
THe Country Parson is generally sad, because he knows nothing but the Cross
of Christ, his mind being defixed on, and with those nails wherewith his
Master was: or if he have any leisure to look off from thence, he meets
continually with two most sad spectacles, Sin, and Misery; God dishonored
every day, and man afflicted. Nevertheless, he sometimes refreshes himself,
as knowing that nature will not bear everlasting droopings, and that
pleasantness of disposition is a great key to do good; not only because all
men shun the company of perpetual severity, but also for that when they are in
company, instructions seasoned with pleasantness, both enter sooner, and root
deeper. Wherefore he condescends to humane frailties both in himself and
others; and intermingles some mirth in his discourses occasionally, according
to the pulse of the hearer.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Parson in Contempt.
THe Country Parson knows well, that both for the general ignominy which is
cast upon the profession, and much more for those rules, which out of his
choysest judgment he has resolved to observe, and which are described in this
Book, he must be despised; because this has been the portion of God his
Master, and of Gods Saints his Brethren, and this is foretold, that it shall be
so still, until things be no more. Nevertheless, according to the Apostles
rule, he endeavors that none shall despise him; especially in his own Parish
he suffers it not to his utmost power; for that, where contempt is, there is no
room for instruction. This he procures, first by his holy and unblameable life;
which carries a reverence with it, even above contempt. Secondly, by a
courteous carriage, and winning behavior: he that will be respected, must
respect; doing kindnesses, but receiving none; at least of those, who are apt
to despise: for this argues a height and eminency of mind, which is not easily
despised, except it degenerate to pride. Thirdly, by a bold and impartial
reproof, even of the best in the Parish, when occasion requires: for this may
produce hatred in those that are reproved, but never contempt either in them,
or others. Lastly, if the contempt shall proceed so far as to do any thing
punishable by law, as contempt is apt to do, if it be not thwarted, the Parson
having a due respect both to the person, and to the cause, refers the whole
matter to the examination, and punishment of those which are in Authority; that
so the sentence lighting upon one, the example may reach to all. But if the
Contempt be not punishable by Law, or being so, the Parson think it in his
descretion either unfit, or bootelesse to contend, then when any despises him,
he takes it either in an humble way, saying nothing at all; or else in a
slighting way, showing that reproaches touch him no more, then a stone thrown
against heaven, where he is, and lives; or in a sad way, greived at his own,
and others sins, which continually break Gods Laws, and dishonor him with
those mouths, which he continually fills, and feeds: or else in a doctrinall
way, saying to the contemner, Alas, why do you thus? you hurt your self, not
me; he that throws a stone at another, hits himself; and so between gentle
reasoning, and pitying, he overcomes the evil: or lastly, in a Triumphant way,
being glad, and joyful, that he is made conformable to his Master; and being
in the world as he was, has this undoubted pledge of his salvation. These are
the five shields, wherewith the Godly receive the darts of the wicked; leaving
anger, and retorting, and revenge to the children of the world, whom another
ill mastereth, and leads captive without any resistance, even in resistance,
to the same destruction. For while they resist the person that reviles, they
resist not the evil which takes hold of them, and is far the worse enemy.

CHAP. XXIX. The Parson with his Churchwardens.
THe Country Parson does often, both publicly, and privately instruct his
Churchwardens, what a great Charge lies upon them, and that indeed the whole
order and discipline of the Parish is put into their hands. If himself reform
any thing, it is out of the overflowing of his Conscienee, whereas they are to
do it by Command, and by Oath. Neither has the place its dignity from the
Ecclesiastical Laws only, since even by the Common Statute Law they are taken
for a kind of Corporation, as being persons enabled by that Name to take
moveable goods, or chattels, and to sue, and to be sued at the Law concerning
such goods for the use and profit of their Parish: and by the same Law they are
to levy penalties for negligence in resorting to church, or for disorderly
carriage in time of divine service. Wherefore the Parson suffers not the place
to be vilified or debased, by being cast on the lower rank of people; but
invites and urges the best unto it, showing that they do not loose, or go
less, but gain by it; it being the greatest honor of this world, to do God
and his chosen service; or as David says, to be even a doorkeeper in the house
of God. Now the Canons being the Churchwardens rule, the Parson advises them
to read, or hear them read often, as also the visitation Articles, which are
grounded upon the Canons, that so they may know their duty, and keep their oath
the better; in which regard, considering the great Consequence of their place,
and more of their oath, he wishes them by no means to spare any, though never
so great; but if after gentle, and neighbourly admonitions they still persist
in ill, to present them; yea though they be tenants, or otherwise engaged to
the delinquent: for their obligation to God, and their own soul, is above any
temporal tie. Do well, right, and right, and let the world sink.

CHAP. XXX. The Parson's Consideration of Providence.
THe Country Parson considering the great aptness Country people have to
think that all things come by a kind of natural course; and that if they sow
and soil their grounds, they must have corn; if they keep and fodder well
their cattle, they must have milk, and Calves; labors to reduce them to see
Gods hand in all things, and to believe, that things are not set in such an
inevitable order, but that God often changes it according as he sees fit,
either for reward or punishment. To this end he represents to his flock, that
God has and exercises a threefold power in every thing which concerns man.
The first is a sustaining power; the second a governing power; the third a
spiritual power. By his sustaining power he preserves and actuates every thing
in his being; so that corn does not grow by any other virtue, then by that
which he continually supplies, as the corn needs it; without which supply the
corn would instantly dry up, as a river would if the fountain were stopped.
And it is observable, that if anything could presume of an inevitable course,
and constancy in their operations, certainly it should be either the sun in
heaven, or the fire on earth, by reason of their fierce, stong, and violent
natures: yet when God pleased, the sun stood still, the fire burned not. By Gods
governing power he preserves and orders the references of things one to the
other, so that though the corn do grow, and be preserved in that act by his
sustaining power, yet if he suite not other things to the growth, as seasons,
and weather, and other accidents by his governing power, the fairest harvests
come to nothing. And it is observeable, that God delights to have men feel, and
acknowledge, and reverence his power, and therefore he often overturnes things,
when they are thought past danger; that is his time of interposing: As when a
Merchant has a ship come home after many a storm, which it has escaped, he
destroys it sometimes in the very Haven; or if the goods be housed, a fire
has broken forth, and suddenly consumed them. Now this he does, that men
should perpetuate, and not break off their acts of dependence, how fair soever
the opportunities present themselves. So that if a farmer should depend upon
God all the year, and being ready to put hand to sickle, shall then secure
himself, and think all cock-sure; then God sends such weather, as lays the
corn, and destroys it: or if he depend on God further, even till he imbarn his
corn, and then think all sure; God sends a fire, and consumes all that he has:
For that he ought not to break off, but to continue his dependence on God, not
only before the corn is inned, but after also; and indeed, to depend, and
fear continually. The third power is spiritual, by which God turns all
outward blessings to inward advantages. So that if a Farmer has both a fair
harvest, and that also well inned, and imbarned, and continuing safe there; yet
if God give him not the Grace to use, and utter this well, all his advantages
are to his loss. Better were his corn burnt, then not spiritually improved.
And it is observable in this, how Gods goodness strives with man's
refractorinesse; Man would sit down at this world, God bids him sell it, and
purchase a better: Just as a Father, who has in his hand an apple, and a piece
of Gold under it; the Child comes, and with pulling, gets the apple out of his
Fathers hand: his Father bids him throw it away, and he will give him the gold
for it, which the Child utterly refusing, eats it, and is troubled with worms:
So is the carnal and wilful man with the worm of the grave in this world, and
the worm of Conscience in the next.

CHAP. XXXI. The Parson in Liberty.
THe Country Parson observing the manifold wiles of Satan (who plays his part
sometimes in drawing Gods Servants from him, sometimes in perplexing them in
the service of God) stands fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free. This Liberty he compasses by one distinction, and that is, of what is
Necessary, and what is Additionary. As for example: It is necessary, that all
Christians should pray twice a day, every day of the week, and four times on
Sunday, if they be well. This is so necessary, and essential to a Christian,
that he cannot without this maintain himself in a Christian state. Besides
this, the Godly have ever added some hours of prayer, as at nine, or at three,
or at midnight, or as they think fit, and see cause, or rather as Gods spirit
leads them. But these prayers are not necessary, but additionary. Now it so
happens, that the godly petitioner upon some emergent interruption in the day,
or by oversleeping himself at night, omits his additionary prayer. Upon this
his mind begins to be perplexed, and troubled, and Satan, who knows the
exigent, blows the fire, endeavoring to disorder the Christian, and put him
out of his station, and to enlarge the perplexity, until it spread, and taint
his other duties of piety, which none can perform so well in trouble, as in
calmness. Here the Parson interposeth with his distinction, and shows the
perplexed Christian, that this prayer being additionary, not necessary; taken
in, not commanded, the omission thereof upon just occasion ought by no means
trouble him. God knows the occasion as well as he, and He is as a gracious
Father, who more accepts a common course of devotion, then dislikes an
occasional interruption. And of this he is so to assure himself, as to admit
no scruple, but to go on as cheerfully, as if he had not been interrupted. By
this it is evident, that the distinction is of singular use and comfort,
especially to pious minds, which are ever tender, and delicate. But here there
are two Cautions to be added. First, that this interruption proceed not out of
slacknes, or coldness, which will appear if the Pious soul foresee and prevent
such interruptions, what he may, before they come, and when for all that they
do come, he be a little affected therewith, but not afflicted, or trouled; if
he resent it to a mislike, but not a grief. Secondly, that this interruption
proceed not out of shame. As for example: A godly man, not out of
superstition, but of reverence to Gods house, resolves whenever he enters into
a Church, to kneel down, and pray, either blessing God, that he will be pleased
to dwell among men; or beseeching him, that whenever he repaires to his house,
he may behave himself so as befits so great a presence; and this briefly. But
it happens, that near the place where he is to pray, he spies some scoffing
ruffian, who is likely to deride him for his pains: if he now, shall either
for fear or shame, break his custom, he shall do passing ill: so much the
rather ought he to proceed, as that by this he may take into his Prayer
humiliation also. On the other side, if I am to visit the sick in haste, and my
nearest way ly through the Church, I will not doubt to go without staying to
pray there (but only, as I pass, in my heart) because this kind of Prayer is
additionary, not necessary, and the other duty overweighs it: So that if any
scruple arise, I will throw it away, and be most confident, that God is not
displeased. This distinction may run through all Christian duties, and it is
a great stay and settling to religious souls.

CHAP. XXXII. The Parson's Surveys.
THe Country Parson has not only taken a particular Servey of the faults of
his own Parish, but a general also of the diseases of the time, that so when
his occasions carry him abroad, or bring strangers to him, he may be the better
armed to encounter them. The great and national sin of this Land he esteems to
be Idleness; great in it self, and great in Consequence: For when men have
nothing to do, then they fall to drink, to steal, to whore, to scoff, to
revile, to all sorts of gamings. Come, say they, we have nothing to do, lets go
to the Tavern, or to the stews, or what not. Wherefore the Parson strongly
opposes this sin, whersoever he goes. And because Idleness is twofold, the one
in having no calling, the other in walking carelessly in our calling, he first
represents to every body the necessity of a vocation. The reason of this
assertion is taken from the nature of man, wherein God has placed two great
Instruments, Reason in the soul, and a hand in the Body, as engagements of
working: So that even in Paradise man had a calling, and how much more out of
Paradise, when the evils which he is now subject unto, may be prevented, or
diverted by reasonable employment. Besides, every gift or ability is a talent
to be accounted for, and to be improved to our Masters Advantage. Yet is it
also a debt to our Country to have a Calling, and it concerns the
Commonwealth, that none should be idle, but all busied. Lastly, riches are the
blessing of God, and the great Instrument of doing admirable good; therefore all
are to procure them honestly, and seasonably, when they are not better
employed. Now this reason crosses not our Saviors precept of selling what we
have, because when we have sold all, and given it to the poor, we must not be
idle, but labor to get more, that we may give more, according to St Paul's
rule, Ephesians. 4.28. 1 These. 4.11, 12. so that our Saviors selling is so far
from crossing Saint Paul's working, that it rather establishes it, since they
that have nothing, are fittest to work. Now because the only opposer to this
Doctrine is the Gallant, who is witty enough to abuse both others, and himself,
and who is ready to ask, if he shall mend shoos, or what he shall do? Therefore
the Parson unmoved, shows, that ingenuous and fit employment is never wanting
to those that seek it. But if it should be, the Assertion stands thus: All are
eitheir to have a Calling, or prepare for it: He that has or can have yet no
employment, if he truly, and seriously prepare for it, he is safe and within
bounds. Wherefore all are either presently to enter into a Calling, if they be
fit for it, and it for them; or else to examine with care, and advice, what
they are fittest for, and to prepare for that with all diligence. But it will
not be amiss in this exceeding useful point to descend to particulars: for
exactness lies in particulars. Men are either single, or married: The married
and housekeeper has his hands full, if he do what he ought to do. For there
are two branches of his affairs; first, the improvement of his family, by
bringing them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord; and secondly, the
improvement of his grounds, by drowning, or draining, stocking, or fencing, and
ordering his land to the best advantage both of himself, and his neighbors.
The Italian says, None fouls his hands in his own business: and it is an
honest, and just care, so it exceed not bounds, for every one to employ
himself to the advancement of his affairs, that he may have wherewithal to
do good. But his family is his best care, to labor Christian souls, and raise
them to their height, even to heaven; to dress and prune them, and take as
much joy in a straight-growing child, or servant, as a Gardener does in a
choice tree. Could men find out this delight, they would seldom be from home;
whereas now, of any place, they are least there. But if after all this care
well dispatched, the housekeepers Family be so small, and his dexterity so
great, that he have leisure to look out, the Village or Parish which either he
lives in, or is near unto it, is his employment. He considers every one there,
and either helps them in particular, or has general Propositions to the whole
Town or Hamlet, of advancing the public Stock, and managing Commons, or
Woods, according as the place suggests. But ^hee may be of the Commission of
Peace, there is nothing to the No Commonwealth in the wor^ has a braver
Institution then that of Justices of the Peace: For it is both a security to
the King, who has so many dispersed Officers at his beck throughout the
Kingdom, accountable for the public good; and also an honorable Employment
of a Gentle, or Nobleman in the Country he lives in, inabling him with power
to do good, and to restrain all those, who else might both trouble him and the
whole State. Wherefore it behooves all, who are come to the gravitie, and
ripeness of judgment for so excellent a Place, not to refuse, but rather to
procure it. And whereas there are usually three Objections made against the
Place; the one, the abuse of it, by taking petty-Countrey-bribes; the other,
the casting of it on mean persons, especially in some Shires: and lastly, the
trouble of it; These are so far from deterring any good man from the place,
that they kindle them rather to redeem the Dignity either from true faults, or
unjust aspersions. Now, for single men, they are either Heirs, or younger
Brothers: The Heirs are to prepare in all the forementioned points against the
time of their practice. Therefore they are to mark their Fathers discretion in
ordering his House and Affairs; and also elsewhere, when they see any
remarkable point of Education or good husbandry, and to transplant it in time
to his own home, with the same care as others, when they meet with good fruit,
get a graffe of the tree, enriching their Orchard, and neglecting their House.
Besides, they are to read Books of Law, and Justice; especially, the Statutes
at large. As for better Books of Divinity, they are not in this Consideration,
because we are about a Calling, and a preparation thereunto. But chiefly, and
above all things, they are to frequent Sessions and Sizes; for it is both an
honor which they owe to the Reverend Judges and Magistrates, to attend them, at
least in their Shire; and it is a great advantage to know the practice of the
Land; for our Law is Practice. Sometimes he may go to Court, as the eminent
place both of good and ill. At other times he is to travel over the King's
Dominions, cutting out the Kingdom into Portions, which every year he surveys
peece-meal. When there is a Parliament, he is to endeavor by all means to be a
Knight or Burgess there; for there is no School to a Parliament. And when he is
there, he must not only be a morning man, but at Committees also; for there the
particulars are exactly discussed, which are brought from thence to the House
but in general. When none of these occasions call him abroad, every morning
that he is at home he must either ride the Great Horse, or exercise some of
his Military gestures. For all Gentlemen, that are not weakened, and disarmed
with sedentary lives, are to know the use of their Arms: and as the Husbandman
labors for them, so must they fight for, and defend them, when occasion calls.
This is the duty of each to other, which they ought to fulfill: And the Parson
is a lover and exciter to justice in all things, even as John the Baptist
squared out to every one (even to Soldiers) what to do. As for younger
Brothers, those whom the Parson finds loose, and not engaged into some
Profession by their Parents, whose neglect in this point is intolerable, and a
shameful wrong both to the Commonwealth, and their own House: To them, after
he has showed the unlawfulness of spending the day in dressing, Complementing,
visiting, and sporting, he first commends the study of the Civil Law, as a
brave, and wise knowledge, the Professors whereof were much employed by Queen
Elizabeth, because it is the key of Commerce, and discovers the Rules of
foreign Nations. Secondly, he commends the Mathematics, as the only wonder
working knowledge, and therefore requiring the best spirits. After the several
knowledge of these, he advises to insist and dwell chiefly on the two noble
branches thereof, of Fortification, and Navigation; The one being useful to all
Countries, and the other especially to Islands. But if the young Gallant think
these Courses dull, and phlegmatic, where can he busy himself better, then in
those new Plantations, and discoveryes, which are not only a noble, but also as
they may be handled, a religious employment? Or let him travel into Germany,
and France, and observing the Artifices, and Manufactures there, transplant
them hither, as diverse have done lately, to our Countrey's advantage.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Parson's Library.
THe Country Parson's Library is a holy Life: for besides the blessing that
that brings upon it, there being a promise, that if the Kingdom of God be
first sought, all other things shall be added, even it self is a Sermon. For
the temptations with which a good man is beset, and the ways which he used to
overcome them, being told to another, whether in private conference, or in the
Church, are a Sermon. He that has considered how to carry himself at table
about his appetite, if he tell this to another, preaches; and much more
feelingly, and judiciously, then he writes his rules of temperance out of
books. So that the Parson having studied, and mastered all his lusts and
affections within, and the whole Army of Temptations without, has ever so many
sermons ready penned, as he has victories. And it fares in this as it does in
Physic: He that has been sick of a Consumption, and knows what recovered him,
is a Physician so far as he meets with the same disease, and temper; and can
much better, and particularly do it, then he that is generally learned, and was
never sick. And if the same person had been sick of all diseases, and were
recovered of all by things that he knew; there were no such Physician as he,
both for skill and tenderness. Just so it is in Divinity, and that not without
manifest reason: for though the temptations may be diverse in diverse
Christians, yet the victory is alike in all, being by the self-same Spirit.
Neither is this true only in the military state of a Christian life, but even
in the peaceable also; when the servant of God, freed for a while from
temptation, in a quiet sweetness seeks how to please his God. Thus the Parson
considering that repentance is the great virtue of the Gospel, and one of the
first steps of pleasing God, having for his own use examined the nature of it,
is able to explain it after to others. And particularly, having doubted
sometimes, whether his repentance were true, or at least in that degree it
ought to be, since he found himself sometimes to weep more for the loss of
some temporal things, then for offending God, he came at length to this
resolution, that repentance is an act of the mind, not of the Body, even as the
Original signifies; and that the chief thing, which God in Scriptures
requires, is the heart, and the spirit, and to worship him in truth, and
spirit* Wherefore in case a Christian endeavor to weep, and cannot, since we
are not Masters of our bodies, this suffices. And consequently he found, that
the essence of repentance, that it may be alike in all Gods children (which as
concerning weeping it cannot be, some being of a more melting temper then
others) consists in a true detestation of the soul, abhorring, and renouncing
sin, and turning unto God in truth of heart, and newness of life: Which acts
of repentance are and must be found in all Gods servants: Not that weeping is
not useful, where it can be, that so the body may join in the grief, as it did
in the sin; but that, so the other acts be, that is not necessary: so that he
as truly repents, who performs the other acts of repentance, when he cannot
more, as he that weeps a flood of tears. This Instruction and comfort the
Parson getting for himself, when he tells it to others, becomes a Sermon. The
like he does in other Christian virtues, as of faith, and Love, and the Cases
of Conscience belonging thereto, wherein (as Saint Paul implies that he ought,
Romans 2.) he first preaches to himself, and then to others.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Parson's Dexterity in applying of Remedies.
THe Country Parson knows, that there is a double state of a Christian even in
this Life, the one military, the other peaceable. The military is, when we are
assaulted with temptations either from within or from without. The Peaceable
is, when the Devil for a time leaves us, as he did our Savior, and the Angels
minister to us their own food, even joy, and peace; and comfort in the holy
Ghost. These two states were in our Savior, not only in the beginning of his
preaching, but afterward also, as Mat. 22.35. He was tempted: And Luke 10.21.
He rejoiced in Spirit: And they must be likewise in all that are his. Now the
Parson having a Spiritual Judgment, according as he discovers any of his
Flock to be in one or the other state, so he applies himself to them. Those
that he finds in the peaceable state, he advises to be very vigilant, and not
to let go the raines as soon as the horse goes easy. Particularly, he
counsels them to two things: First, to take heed, lest their quiet betray
them (as it is apt to do) to a coldness, and carelessness in their devotions,
but to labor still to be as fervent in Christian Duties, as they remember
themselves were, when affliction did blow the Coals. Secondly, not to take the
full compass, and liberty of their Peace: not to eat of all those dishes at
table, which even their present health otherwise admits; nor to store their
house with all those furnitures which even their present plenty of wealth
otherwise admits; nor when they are among them that are merry, to extend
themselves to all that mirth, which the present occasion of wit, and company
otherwise admits; but to put bounds, and hoopes to their joys: so will they
last the longer, and when they depart, return the sooner. If we would judge
ourselves, we should not be judged; and if we would bound our selves, we should
not be bounded. But if they shall fear, that at such, or such a time their
peace and mirth have carried them further then this moderation, then to take
Jobs admirable Course, who sacrificed lest his Children should have
transgressed in their mirth: So let them go, and find some poor afflicted
soul, and there be bountiful, and liberal; for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased. Those that the Parson finds in the military state, he fortifyes,
and strengthens with his utmost skill. Now in those that are tempted,
whatsoever is unruly, falls upon two heads; either they think, that there is
none that can or will look after things, but all goes by chance, or wit: Or
else, though there be a great Governor of all things, yet to them he is lost,
as if they said, God does forsake and persecute them, and there is none to
deliver them. If the Parson suspect the first, and find sparks of such
thoughts now and then to break forth, then without opposing directly (for
disputation is no Cure for Atheism) he scatters in his discourse three sorts
of arguments; the first taken from Nature, the second from the Law, the third
from Grace. For Nature, he sees not how a house could be either built without a
builder, or kept in repair without a housekeeper. He conceives not possibly,
how the winds should blow so much as they can, and the sea rage as much as it
can, and all things do what they can, and all, not only without dissolution of
the whole, but also of any part, by taking away so much as the usual seasons
of summer and winter, earing and harvest. Let the weather be what it will,
still we have bread, though sometimes more, sometimes less; wherewith also a
careful Joseph might meet. He conceives not possibly, how he that would
believe a Divinity, if he had been at the Creation of all things, should less
believe it, seeing the Preservation of all things; For Preservation is a
Creation; and more, it is a continued Creation, and a creation every moment.
Secondly, for the Law, there may be so evident, though unused a proof of
Divinity taken from thence, that the Atheist, or Epicurian can have nothing to
contradict. The Jews yet live, and are known: they have their Law and Language
bearing witness to them, and they to it: they are Circumcised to this day, and
expect the promises of the Scripture; their Country also is known, the places,
and rivers traveled unto, and frequented by others, but to them an
unpenetrable rock, an unaccessible desert. Wherefore if the Jews live, all the
great wonders of old live in them, and then who can deny the stretched out arm
of a mighty God? especially since it may be a just doubt, whether, considering
the stubbornness of the Nation, their living then in their Country under so
many miracles were a stranger thing, then their present exile, and disability
to live in their Country. And it is observable, that this very thing was
intended by God, that the Jews should be his proof, and witnesses, as he calls
them, Isaiah 43.12. And their very dispersion in all Lands, was intended not
only for a punishment to them; but for an exciting of others by their sight, to
the acknowledging of God, and his power, Psalm 59.11. And therefore this kind
of Punishment was chosen rather then any other. Thirdly, for Grace. Besides the
continual succession (since the Gospel) of holy men, who have born witness to
the truth, (there being no reason, why any should distrust Saint Luke, or
Tertullian, or Chrysostom, more then Tully, Virgill, or Livy;) There are two
Prophesies in the Gospel, which evidently argue Christ's Divinity by their
success: the one concerning the woman that spent the ointment on our Savior,
for which he told, that it should never be forgotten, but with the Gospel it
self be preached to all ages, Matthew. 26.13. The other concerning the
destruction of Jerusalem; of which our Savior said, that that generation
should not pass, till all were fulfilled, Luke 21.32. Which Josephus his story
confirms, and the continuance of which verdict is yet evident. To these might
be added the Preaching of the Gospel in all Nations, Matthew 24.14. which we
see even miraculously effected in these new discoveryes, God turning men's
Covetousness, and Ambitions to the effecting of his word. Now a prophecy is a
wonder sent to Posterity, least they complain of want of wonders. It is a
letter sealed, and sent, which to the bearer is but paper, but to the receiver,
and opener, is full of power. He that saw Christ open a blind man's eyes, saw
not more Divinity, then he that reads the woman's ointment in the Gospel, or
sees Jerusalem destroyed. With some of these heads enlarged, and woven into his
discourse, at several times and occasions, the Parson setleth wavering minds.
But if he sees them nearer desperation, then Atheism, not so much doubting a
God, as that he is theirs; then he dives unto the boundless Ocean of Gods
Love, and the unspeakeable riches of his loving kindness. He has one argument
unanswerable. If God hate them, either he does it as they are Creatures, dust
and ashes; or as they are sinful. As Creatures, he must needs love them; for
no perfect Artist ever yet hated his own work. As sinful, he must much more
love them; because notwithstanding his infinite hate of sin, his Love
overcame that hate; and with an exceeding great victory; which in the Creation
needed not, gave them love for love, even the son of his love out of his bosom
of love. So that man, which way soever he turns, has two pledges of Gods
Love, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established; the one in his being, the other in his sinful being: and this as
the more faulty in him, so the more glorious in God. And all may certainly
conclude, that God loves them, till either they despise that Love, or despair
of his Mercy: not any sin else, but is within his Love; but the despising of
Love must needs be without it. The thrusting away of his arm makes us only
not embraced.

CHAP. XXXV. The Parson's Condescending.
THe Country Parson is a Lover of old Customs, if they be good, and
harmless; and the rather, because Country people are much addicted to them,
so that to favor them therein is to win their hearts, and to oppose them
therein is to deject them. If there be any ill in the custom, that may be
severed from the good, he pares the apple, and gives them the clean to feed on.
Particularly, he loves Procession, and maintains it, because there are
contained therein 4 manifest advantages. First, a blessing of God for the
fruits of the field: Secondly, justice in the Preservation of bounds: Thirdly,
Charity in loving walking, and neighbourly accompanying one another, with
reconciling of differences at that time, if there be any: Fourthly, Mercy in
releeving the poor by a liberal distribution and largess, which at that time
is, or ought to be used. Wherefore he exacts of all to be present at the
perambulation, and those that withdraw, and sever themselves from it, he
mislikes, and reproves as uncharitable, and unneighbourly; and if they will not
reform, presents them. Nay, he is so far from condemning such assemblies,
that he rather procures them to be often, as knowing that absence breeds
strangeness, but presence love. Now Love is his business, and aim; wherefore
he likes well, that his Parish at good times invite one another to their
houses, and he urges them to it: and sometimes, where he knows there has been
or is a little difference, he takes one of the parties, and goes with him to
the other, and all dine or sup together. There is much preaching in this
friendliness. Another old Custom there is of saying, when light is brought in,
God send us the light of heaven; And the Parson likes this very well; neither
is he afraid of praising, or praying to God at all times, but is rather glad
of catching opportunities to do them. Light is a great Blessing, and as great
as food, for which we give thanks: and those that think this superstitious,
neither know superstition, nor themselves. As for those that are ashamed to use
this form, as being old, and obsolete, and not the fashion, he reformes, and
teaches them, that at Baptism they professed not to be ashamed of Christ's
Cross, or for any shame to leave that which is good. He that is ashamed in
small things, will extend his pusillanimity to greater. Rather should a
Christian Soldier take such occasions to harden himself, and to further his
exercises of Mortification.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Parson Blessing.
THe Country Parson wonders, that Blessing the people is in so little use with
his brethren: whereas he thinks it not only a grave, and reverend thing, but a
beneficial also. Those who use it not, do so either out of niceness, because
they like the salutations, and complements, and forms of worldly language
better; which conformity and fashionableness is so exceeding unbefitting a
Minister, that it deserves reproof, not refutation: Or else, because they think
it empty and superfluous. But that which the Apostles used so diligently in
their writings, nay, which our Savior himself used, Mark 10.16, cannot be
vain and superfluous. But this was not proper to Christ, or the Apostles only,
no more then to be a spiritual Father was appropriated to them. And if
temporal Fathers bless their children, how much more may, and ought
Spiritual Fathers? Besides, the Priests of the old Testament were commanded to
Bless the people, and the form thereof is prescribed, Numb. 6. Now as the
Apostle argues in another case; if the Ministration of condemnation did bless,
how shall not the ministration of the spirit exceed in blessing? The fruit of
this blessing good Hannah found, and received with great joy, 1 Samuel 1.18.
though it came from a man disallowed by God: for it was not the person, but
Priesthood, that blessed; so that even ill Priests may bless. Neither have the
Ministers power of Blessing only, but also of cursing. So in the old Testament
Elisha cursed the children, 2 Kin. 2.24. which though our Savior reproved as
unfitting for his particular, who was to show all humility before his Passion,
yet he allows in his Apostles. And therefore St Peter used that fearful
imprecation to Simon Magus, Act. 8. Thy money perish with thee: and the event
confirmed it. So did St Paul, 2 Timothy 4.14. and 1 Timothy 1.20. Speaking of
Alexander the Coppersmith, who had withstood his preaching, The Lord (faith he)
reward him according to his works. And again, of Hymeneus and Alexander, he
says, he had delivered them to Satan, that they might learn not to Blaspheme.
The forms both of Blessing, and cursing are expounded in the
Common Prayer Book: the one in* The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. and:
The Peace of God, etc. The other in general, in the Commination. Now blessing
differs from prayer, in assurance, because it is not performed by way of
request, but of confidence, and power, effectually applying Gods favor to the
blessed, by the interesting of that dignity wherewith God has invested the
Priest, and engaging of Gods own power and institution for a blessing. The
neglect of this duty in Ministers themselves, has made the people also neglect
it; so that they are so far from craving this benefit from their ghostly
Father, that they oftentimes go out of church, before he has blessed them. In
the time of Popery, the Priests Benedicite, and his holy water were over highly
valued; and now we are fallen to the clean contrary, even from superstition to
coldness, and Atheism. But the Parson first values the gift in himself, and then
teaches his parish to value it. And it is observable, that if a Minister talk
with a great man in the ordinary course of complementing language, he shall be
esteemed as ordinary complementers; but if he often interpose a Blessing, when
the other gives him just opportunity, by speaking any good, this unusual form
begets a reverence, and makes him esteemed according to his Profession. The
same is to be observed in writing Letters also. To conclude, if all men are to
bless upon occasion, as appears Romans 12.14. how much more those, who are
spiritual Fathers?

CHAP. XXXVII. Concerning detraction.
THe Country Parson perceiving, that most, when they are at leisure, make
others faults their entertainment and discourse, and that even some good men
think, so they speak truth, they may disclose another fault, finds it somewhat
difficult how to proceed in this point. For if he absolutely shut up men's
mouths, and forbid all disclosing of faults, many an evil may not only be, but
also spread in his Parish, without any remedy (which cannot be applied without
notice) to the dishonor of God, and the infection of his flock, and the
discomfort, dicredit, and hinderance of the Pastor. On the other side, if it be
unlawful to open faults, no benefit or advantage can make it lawful: for we
must not do evil, that good may come of it. Now the Parson taking this point
to task, which is so exceeding useful, and has taken so deep root, that it
seems the very life and substance of Conversation, has proceeded thus far in
the discussing of it. Faults are either notorious, or private. Again notorious
faults are either such as are made known by common fame (and of these, those
that know them, may talk, so they do it not with sport, but commiseration;) or
else such as have passed judgment, and been corrected either by whipping, or
imprisoning, or the like. Of these also men may talk, and more, they may
discover them to those that know them not: because infamy is a part of the
sentence against malefactors, which the Law intends, as is evident by those,
which are branded for rogues, that they may be known; or put into the stocks,
that they may be looked upon. But some may say, though the Law allow this, the
Gospel does not, which has so much advanced Charity, and ranked backbiters
among the generation of the wicked, Romans 1.30. But this is easily answered: As
the executioner is not uncharitable, that takes away the life of the condemned,
except besides his office, he add a tincture of private malice in the joy, and
have of acting his part; so neither is he that defames him, whom the Law would
have defamed, except he also do it out of rancour. For in infamy, all are
executioners, and the Law gives a malefactor to all to be defamed. And as
malefactors may lose and forfeit their goods, or life; so may they their good
name, and the possession thereof, which before therr offense, and Judgment they
had in all men's breasts: for all are honest, till the contrary be proved.
Besides, it concerns the Commonwealth, that Rogues should be known and Charity
to the public has the precedence of private charity. So that it is so far
from being a fault to discover such offenders, that it is a duty rather, which
may do much good, and save much harm. Nevertheless, if the punished
delinquent shall be much troubled for his sins, and turn quite another man,
doubtless then also men's affections and words must turn, and forbear to speak
of that, which even God himself has forgotten.

FINIS.
JACULA PRUDENTUM.

OR Outlandish PROVERBS, SENTENCES, etc.

SELECTED By Mr George Herbert, Late Orator of the Universitie of CAMBRIDG.

LONDON, Printed by T. Maxcy for T. Garthwait, at the little North door of St
Paul's. 1651.

Jacula Prudentum.
OLD men go to Death, Death comes to Young men.

Man proposes, God disposes.

He begins to die, that quits his desires.

A handful of good life, is better then a bushel of Learning.

He that studies his content, wants it.

Every day brings his bread with it.

Humble Hearts, have humble desires.

He that stumbles and falls not, mends his pace.

The house shows the owner.

He that gets out of debt, grows rich.

All is well with him who is beloved of his neighbors.

Building and marrying of Children are great wasters.

A good bargain is a pick-purse.

The scalded head fears cold water.

Pleasing ware is half sold.

Light burdens, long born, grow heavy.

The Wolf knows what the ill beast thinks.

Who has none to still him, may weep out his eyes.

When all sins grow old, covetousness is young.

If ye would know a knave, give him a staff.

You cannot know wine by the barrel.

A cool mouth, and warm feet, live long.

A horse made, and a man to make

Look not for musk in a dogs kennel.

Not a long day, but a good heart rids work.

He pulls with a long rope, that waits for another death.

Great strokes make not sweet music.

A cask and an il custom must be broken.

A fat housekeeper makes lean Executors.

Empty chambers make foolish maids.

The gentle Hawk half man's her self.

The Devil is not always at one door.

When a friend asks, there is no to morrow

God sends cold according to clothes.

One sound blow will serve to undo us all.

He loses nothing, that loses not God

The Germans wit is in his fingers.

At dinner my man appears.

Who gives to all, denies all.

Quick believers need broad shoulders.

Who remove stones, bruise their fingers

Benefits please like flowers while they are fresh.

Between the business of life and the day of death, a space ought to be
interposed

All came from, and will go to others.

He that will take the bird, must not scare it

He lives unsafely, that looks too near on things

A gentle houswife marrs the household.

A crooked log makes a strait fire

He has great need of a fool, that plays the fool himself

A Merchant that gains not, loses.

Let not him that fears feathers, come among wild-foul.

Love, and a Cough, cannot be hid.

A Dwarf on a Giants shoulder, sees further of the two.

He that sends a fool, means to follow him.

Brabling Curres never want sore ears.

Better the feet slip then the tongue.

For washing his hands, none sels his lands.

A Lions skin is never cheap.

The goat must browse where she is tied.

Nothing is to be presumed on, or despaired of.

Who has a Wolf for his mate, needs a Dog for his man.

In a good house all is quickly ready.

A bad dog never sees the Wolf.

God often has a great share in a little house.

Ill ware is never cheap.

A cheerful look, makes a dish a feast.

If all fools had bables, we should want fuel.

Virtue never grows old.

Evening words are not like to morning.

Were there no fools, bad ware would not pass.

Never had il workman good tools.

He stands not surely that never slips.

Were there no hearers, there would be no backbiters.

Every thing is of use to a house keeper.

When prayers are done, my Lady is ready.

Cities seldom change Religion only.

At length the Fox turns Monk.

Flies are busiest about lean horses.

Hearken to reason, or she will be heard.

The bird loves her nest.

Every thing new, is fine.

When a dog is a drowning, every one offers him drink.

Better a bare foot then none.

Who is so deaf, as he that will not hear?

He that is warm, thinks all so.

At length the Fox is brought to the Furrier.

He that goes barefoot, must not plant thorns.

They that are booted, are not always ready.

He that will learn to pray, let him go to Sea.

In spending lies the advantage.

He that lives well, is learned enough.

Ill vessels seldom miscarry.

A full belly neither fights nor flies well.

All truths are not to be told.

An old wise man's shadow, is better then a young buzzards sword.

Noble houskeepers need no doors.

Every ill man has his ill day.

Sleep without supping, and wake without owing.

I gave the mouse a hole, and she is become my heir.

Assail who will, the valiant attends.

Whether go grief? where I am wont.

Praise day at night, and life at the end.

Whether shall the Ox go where he shall not labor?

Where you think there is bacon, there is no chimney.

Mend your clothes, and you may hold out this year.

Press a stick, and it seems a youth.

The tongue walks, where the teeth speed not.

A fair wife and a frontier Castle breed quarrels.

Leave jesting whiles it pleases, lest it turn to earnest.

Deceive not thy Physician, Confessor, nor Lawyer.

Ill natures, the more you ask them, the more they stick.

Virtue and a Trade are the best portion for Children.

The Chicken is the Countries, but the City eats it.

He that gives thee a Capon, give him the leg and the wing,

He that lives ill, fear follows him.

Give a clown your finger, and he will take your hand.

Good is to be sought out, and evil attended.

A good paymaster starts not at assurances.

No Alchymy to saving.

To a grateful man give money when he asks.

Who would do ill never wants occasion.

To fine folks a little ill finely wrapped.

A child correct behind, and not before.

To a fair day, open the window, but make you ready as to a foul.

Keep good men company, and you shall be of the number.

No love to a Fathers.

The Mill gets by going.

To a boiling pot flies comes not.

Make haste to an ill way, that you may get out of it.

A snow year, a rich year.

Better to be blind, then to see ill.

Learn weeping, and thou shall laugh gaining.

Who has no more bread then need, must not keep a dog.

A garden must be looked unto and dressed as the body.

The Fox, when he cannot reach the grapes, says, they are not ripe.

Water trotted is as good as oats.

Though the Mastiffe be gentile, yet bite him not by the lip.

Though a lie be well dressed, it is ever overcome.

Though old and wise, yet still advise.

Three helping one another, bear the burden of six.

Slander is a shipwreck by a dry Tempest.

Old wine, and an old friend are good provisions.

Happy is he that chastens himself.

Well may he smell fire, whose gown burns.

The wrongs of a Husband or Master are not reproached.

Welcome evil, if thou come alone.

Love your neighbor, yet pull not down your hedge.

The bit that one eats, no friend makes.

A drunkards purse is a bottle.

She spins well that breeds her children.

Good is the mora that makes all sure.

Play with a fool at home, and he will play with you in the market.

Every one stretches his legs according to his coverlet.

Autumnall Agues are long, or mortal.

Marry your son when you will; your daughter when you can.

Dally not with money or women.

Men speak of the Fair, as things went with them there,

The best remedy against an ill man, is much ground between both.

The mill cannot grind with water that is past.

Corn is cleaned with wind, and the soul with chastnings.

Good words are worth much, and cost little.

To buy dear is not bounty.

Jest not with the eye, or with Religion.

The eye and Religion can bear no jesting.

Without favor none will know you, and with it you will not know your self.

Buy at a fair, but sell at home.

Cover your self with your shield, and care not for cries.

A wicked man's gift has a touch of his master.

None is a fool always, every one sometimes.

From a chollerick man withdraw a little; from him that says nothing, for ever.

Debtors are liars.

Of all smells, bread: of all tastes, salt.

In a great River great fish are found; but take heed lest you be drowned.

Ever since we wear clothes, we know not one another.

God heals, and the Physician has the thanks.

Hell is full of good meanings and wishings.

Take heed of still waters, the quick pass away.

After the house is finished, leave it.

Our own actions are our security, not others judgments.

Think of ease, but work on.

He that lies long a bed, his estate feels it.

Whether you boil snow or pound it, you can have but water of it.

One stroke fels not an oak.

God complains not, but does what is fitting.

A diligent Scholar, and the Master's paid.

Milk says to wine, Welcome friend.

They that know one another, salute afar off.

Where there is no honor, there is no grief.

Where the drink goes in, there the wit goes out.

He that stays, does the business.

Alms never make poor. Or thus,

Great almsgiving lessens no man's living.

Giving much to the poor, does enrich a man's store.

It takes much from the account, to which his sin does amount.

It adds to the glory both of soul and body.

Ill comes in by else, and goes out by inches.

The Smith and his penny both are black.

Whose house is of glass, must not throw stones at another.

If the old dog bark, he gives counsel.

The tree that grows slowly, keeps it self for another.

I wept when I was born, and every day shows why.

He that looks not before, finds himself behind.

He that plays his money, ought not to value it.

He that rises first, is first dressed.

Diseases of the eye are to be cured with the elbow.

The hole calls the thief.

A Gentleman's grayhound and a salt-box, seek them at the fire.

A childs service is little, yet he is no little fool that despises it.

The river past, and God forgotten.

Evils have their comfort; good none can support (to wit) with a moderate and
contented heart.

Who must account for himself and others, must know both.

He that eats the hard, shall eat the ripe.

The miserable man makes a penny of a farthing, and the liberal of a farthing
six pence.

The honey is sweet, but the Be stings.

Weight and measure take away strife.

The son full and tattered, the daughter empty and fine.

Every path has a puddle.

In good years corn is hay, in ill years straw is corn.

Send a wise man on an errand, and say nothing unto him.

In life you loved me not, in death you bewail me.

Into a mouth shut, flies fly not.

The hearts letter is read in the eyes.

The ill that comes out of our mouth falls into our bosom.

In great pedigrees there are Governors and Chandlers.

In the house of a Fiddler, all fiddle.

Sometimes the best gain is to lose.

Working and making a fire does discretion require.

One grain fills not a sack, but helps his fellows.

It is a great victory that comes without blood.

In war, hunting, and love, men for one pleasure a thousand griefs prove.

Reckon right, and February has one and thirty days.

Honor without profit is a ring on the finger.

Estate in two Parishes is bread in two wallets,

Honor and profit ly not in one sack.

A naughty child is better sick, then whole.

Truth and oil are ever above.

He that rises betimes, has something in his head.

Advise none to Marry, or go to war.

To steal the Hog, and give the feet for alms.

The thorn comes forth with the point forwards.

One hand washes another, and both the face.

The fault of the horse is put on the saddle.

The corn hides it self in the snow as an old man in furrs.

The Jews spend at Easter, the Moors at marriages, the Christians in suits.

Fine dressing is a foul house swept before the doors.

A woman and a glass are ever in danger.

An ill wound is cured, not an ill name.

The wise hand does not all that the foolish mouth speaks.

On painting and fighting look aloof.

Knowledge is folly, except grace guide it.

Punishment is lame, but it comes.

The more women look in their glass, the less they look to their house.

A long tongue is a sign of a short hand.

Marry a widow before she leave mourning.

The worst of law is, that one suit breeds twenty.

Providence is better then a rent.

What your glass tells you, will not be told by Council.

There are more men threatened then stricken.

A fool knows more in his house, then a wise man in another.

I had rather ride on an ass that carries me, then a horse that throws me.

The hard gives more then he that has nothing.

The beast that goes always never wants blows.

Good cheap is dear.

It costs more to do ill, then to do well.

Good words quench more then a bucket of water.

An ill agreement is better then a good judgment.

There is more talk then trouble.

Better spare to have of thine own, then ask of other men.

Better good afar off, then evil at hand.

Fear keeps the garden better then the gardener.

I had rather ask of my sire brown bread, then borrow of my neighbor white.

Your pot broken seems better then my whole one.

Let an ill man lie in thy straw, and he looks to be thy heir.

By suppers more have been killed then Gallen ever cured.

While the discreet advise, the fool does his business.

A mountain and a river are good neighbors.

Gossips are frogs, they drink and talk.

Much spends the traveller, more then the abider.

Prayers and provender hinder no journey.

A well-bred youth neither speaks of himself, nor being spoken to, is silent.

A journying woman speaks much of all, and all of her.

The Fox knows much, but more he that catches him.

Many friends in general, one in special.

The fool asks much, but he is more fool that grants it.

Many kiss the hand, they wish cut off.

Neither bribe, nor lose thy right.

In the world who knows not to swim, goes to the bottom.

Choose not an house near an Inn (viz. for noise;) or in a corner (for filth.)

He is a fool that thinks not, that another thinks.

Neither eyes on letters, nor hands in coffers.

The Lion is not so fierce as they paint him.

Go not for every grief to the Physician, nor for every quarrel to the Lawyer,
nor for every thirst to the pot.

Good service is a great enchantment.

There would be no great ones, if there were no little ones.

It Is no sure rule to fish with a crosbow.

There were no ill language, if it were not ill taken.

The groundsell speaks not, save what it heard at the hinges.

The best mirror is an old friend.

Say no ill of the year, till it be past.

A man's discontent is his worst evil.

Fear nothing but sin.

The child says nothing, but what it heard by the sire.

Call me not an olive, till thou see me gathered.

That is not good language which all understand not.

He that burns his house, warms himself for once.

He will burn his house, to warm his hands.

He will spend a whole years rent, at one meals meat.

All is not gold that glisters.

A blustering night, a fair day.

Be not idle, and you shall not be longing

He is not poor that has little, but he that desires much.

Let none say, I will not drink water.

He wrongs not an old man, that steals his supper from him.

The tongue talks at the heads cost.

He that strikes with his tongue, must ward with his head.

Keep not ill men company, lest you increase the number.

God strikes not with both hands, for to the sea he made heavens, and to rivers
foords.

A rugged stone grows smooth from hand to hand.

No lock will hold against the power of gold.

The absent party is still faulty.

Peace and patience, and death with repentance.

If you lose your time, you cannot get money nor gain,

Be not a Baker, if your head be of butter.

Ask much to have a little.

Little sticks kindle the fire; great ones put it out.

Another bread costs dear.

Although it rain, throw not away thy watering pot.

Although the sun shine, leave not thy cloak at home.

A little with quiet is the only diet.

In vain is the mill-clack, if the Miller his hearing lack.

By the needle you shall draw the thread, and by that which is past, see how
that which is to come will be drawn on.

Stay a little, and news will find you.

Stay till the lame messenger come, if you will know the truth of the thing.

When God will, no wind but brings rain.

Though you rise early, yet the day comes at his time, and not till then.

Pull down your hatt on the winds side.

As the year is, your pot must sees.

Since you know all, and I nothing, tell me what I dreamed last night.

When the Fox preaches, beware geese.

When you are an Anvill, hold you still; when you are a hammer strike your fill.

Poor and liberal, rich and covetous.

He that makes his bed ill, lies there.

He that labors and thrives, spins gold.

He that sows, trusts in God.

He that lies with the dogs, rises with fleas.

He that repairs not a part, builds all.

A discontented man knows not where to sit easy.

Who spits against heaven, it falls in his face.

He that dines and leaves, lays the cloth twice.

Who eats his cock alone, must saddle his horse alone.

He that is not handsome at 20, nor strong at 30, nor rich at 40, nor wise at
50 will never be handsome, strong, rich, or wise.

He that does what he will, does not what he ought.

He that will deceive the fox, must rise betimes.

He that lives well, sees afar off.

He that has a mouth of his own, must not say to another, Blow.

He that will be served, must be patient.

He that gives thee a bone, would not have thee die.

He that chastens one, chastens twenty.

He that has lost his credit, is dead to the world.

He that has no ill fortune, is troubled with good.

He that demands, misseth not, unless his demands be foolish.

He that has no honey in his pot, let him have it in his mouth.

He that takes not up a pin, slights his wife.

He that owes nothing, if he makes not mouths at us, is courteous.

He that loses his due, gets not thanks.

He that believes all, misseth; he that believes nothing, hits not.

Pardons and pleasantness are great revenges of slanders.

A married man turns his staff into a stake.

If you would know secrets, look them in grief or pleasure.

Serve a noble disposition, though poor, the time comes that he will repay thee.

The fault is as great as he that is faulty.

If folly were grief, every house would weep.

He that would be well old, must be old betimes.

Sit in your place, and none can make you rise.

If you could run, as you drink, you might catch a hare.

Would you know what money is, Go borrow some.

The morning Sun never lasts a day.

Thou have death in thy house, and do bewail another

All griefs with bread are less.

All things require skill, but an appetite.

All things have their place, knew we how to place them

Little pitchers have wide ears.

We are fools one to another.

This world is nothing except it tend to another

There are three ways, the Universities, the Sea, the Court.

God comes to see without a bell.

Life without a friend, is death without a witness

Cloth thee in war, arm thee in peace

The horse thinks one thing, and he that saddles him another

Mils and wives ever want.

The dog that licks ashes, trust not with meal

The buyer needs a hundred eyes, the seller not one.

He carries well, to whom it weighs not

The comforters head never aches.

Step after step the ladder is ascended.

Who likes not the drink, God deprives him of bread

To a crazy ship all winds are contrary

Justice pleases few in their own house

In time comes he, whom God sends

Water a far off quenches not fire.

In sports and journeys men are known

An old friend is a new house.

Love is not found in the market.

Dry feet, warm head, bring safe to bed

He is rich enough that wants nothing.

One father is enough to govern one hundred sons, but not a hundred sons one
father.

Far shooting never killed bird.

An upbraided morsel never choked any.

Dearths foreseen come not.

An ill labourer quarrels with his tools.

He that falls into the dirt, the longer he stays there, the souler he is.

He that blames, would buy.

He that sings on friday, will weep on Sunday.

The charges of building, and making of gardens are unknown.

My house, my house, though thou art small, thou art to me the Escuriall.

A hundred load of thought will not pay one of debts.

He that comes of a henn must scrape.

He that seeks trouble, never misses.

He that once deceives, is ever suspected.

Being on sea, sail; being on land, settle.

Who does his own business fouls not his hands.

He that makes a good war, makes a good peace.

He that works after his own manner, his head aches not at the matter.

Who has bitter in his mouth, spits not all sweet.

He that has children, all his morsels are not his own.

He that has the spice; may season as he list.

He that has a head of wax must not walk in the sun.

He that has love in his breast, has spurs in his sides.

He that respects not, is not respected.

He that has a fox for his mate, has need of a net at his girdle.

He that has right, fears; he that has wrong, hopes.

He that has patience, has fat thrushes for a farthing.

Never was strumpet fair.

He that measures not himself, is measured.

He that has one hog, makes him fat; and he that has one son, makes him a
fool.

Who lets his Wife go to every feast, and his horse drink at every water;
shall neither have good wife nor good horse.

He that speaks sowes, and he that holds his peace, gathers.

He that has little is the less durty.

He that lives most, dies most.

He that has one foot in the straw, has another in the spittle.

He that is fed at another hand, may stay long ere he be full

He that makes a thing too fine, breaks it.

He that bewails himself, has the cure in his hands

He that would be well, needs not go from his own house.

Counsel breaks not the head.

Fly the pleasure that bites to morrow.

He that knows what may be gained in a day, never steals

Money refused, loses its brightness

Health and money go far.

Where your will is ready, your feet are light

A great ship asks deep waters.

Woe to the house where there is no chiding

Take heed of the vinegar of sweet wine

Fools bite one another, but wise men agree together

Trust not one nights ice.

Good is good, but better carries it.

To gain teaches how to spend.

Good finds good.

The dog gnawes the bone because he cannot swallow it.

The crow bewails the sheep, and then eats it.

Building is a sweet impoverishing.

The first degree of folly is to hold ones self wise, the second to profess
it, the third to despise counsel.

The greatest step is that out of doors.

To weep for joy is a kind of Manna.

The first service a child does his father is to make him foolish.

The resolved mind has no cares.

In the kingdom of a cheater, the wallet is carried before.

The eye will have his part.

The good mother says not, Will you? but gives.

A house and a woman suit excellently.

In the kingdom of blind men, the one eyed is king.

A little Kitchen makes a large house.

War makes thieves, and peace hangs them.

Poverty is the mother of health.

In the morning mountains, in the evening fountains.

The backdoor robs the house.

Wealth is like rheum, it falls on the weakest parts.

The gown is his that wears it, and the world his that enjoys it.

Hope is the poor man's bread.

Virtue now is in herbs, and stones, and words only.

Fine words dress ill deeds.

Labor as long lived, pray as even dying.

A poor beauty finds more lovers then husbands.

Descreet women have neither eyes nor ears.

Things well fitted abide.

Prettiness dies first.

Talking pays no toll.

The masters eye fattens the horse, and his foot the ground.

Disgraces are like cherries, one draws another.

Praise a hill, but keep below.

Praise the Sea, but keep on land.

In choosing a wife, and buying a sword, we ought not to trust another.

The wearer knows where the shoo wrings.

Fair is not fair, but that which pleases.

There is no jollity but has a smack of folly.

He that is long a giving, knows not how to give

The filth under the white snow, the sun discovers

Every one fastens where there is gain.

All feet tread not in one shoo.

Patience, time, and money accomodate all things.

For want of a nail the shoo is lost, for want of a shoo the horse is lost,
for want of a horse the rider is lost.

Weight justly and sell dearly.

Little wealth little care.

Little journeys and good cost, bring safe home.

Gluttony kills more then the sword.

When children stand quiet, they have done some ill.

A little and good fills the trencher.

A penny spared is twice got.

When a knave is in a plumtree, he has neither friend nor kin.

Short boughs, long vintage.

Health without money, is half an ague.

If the wise erred not, it would go hard with fools.

Bear with evil, and expect good.

He that tells a secret, is another servant.

If all fools wore white Caps, we should seem a flock of geese.

Water, fire, and soldiers quickly make room.

Pension never enriched young man.

Under water, famine; under snow, bread.

The Lame goes as far as your staggerer.

He that loses is Merchant, as well as he that gains.

A jade eats as much as a good horse.

All things in their being are good for something.

One flower makes no garland.

A fair death honors the whole life.

One enemy is too much.

Living well is the best revenge.

One fool makes a hundred.

One pair of ears draws dry an hundred tongues.

A fool may throw a stone into a well, which a bundred wise men cannot pull out.

One slumber finds another.

On a good bargain think twice.

To a good spender God is the Treasurer.

A cursed Cow has short horns.

Music helps not the toothache.

We cannot come to Honor under Coverlet.

Great pains quickly find ease.

To the counsel of fools a wodden bell.

The choleric man, never wants woe.

Help thy self, and God will help thee.

At the games end we shall see who gains.

There are many ways to fame.

Love is the true price of love.

Love rules his kingdom without a sword.

Love makes all hard hearts gentle.

Love makes a good eye squint.

Love asks faith, and faith firmness.

A scepter is one thing, and a ladle another.

Great trees are good for nothing but shade.

He commands enough, that obeyes a wise man.

Fair words makes me look to my purse.

Though the fox run, the chicken has wings.

He plays well that wins.

You must strike in measure, when there are many to strike on one anvill.

The shortest answer is doing.

It Is a poor stake that cannot stand one year in the ground.

He that commits a fault, thinks every one speaks of it.

He that is foolish in the fault, let him be wise in the punishment.

The blind eats many a fly.

He that can make a fire well, can end a quarrel.

The toothache is more ease, then to deal with ill people.

He that would have what he has not, should do what he does not.

He that has no good trade, it is to his loss.

The offender never pardons.

He that lives not well one year, sorrows seven after.

He that hopes not for good, fears not evil.

He that is angry at a feast, is rude.

He that mocks a criple, ought to be whole.

When the tree is fallen, all go with their hatchet.

He that has horns in his bosom, let him not put them on his head.

He that burns most, shines most.

He that trusts in a lie, shall perish in truth.

He that blows in the dust, fills his eyes with it.

Bells call others, but themselves enter not into the Church.

Of fair things, the Autumn is fair.

Giving is dead, restoring very sick.

A gift much expected is paid, not given.

Two ill meals make the third a glutton.

The Royal Crown cures not the headache.

It Is hard to be wretched, but worse to be known so.

A feather in hand is better then a bird in the air.

It Is better to be head of a Lizard, then the tail of a Lion.

Good and quickly seldom meet.

Folly grows without watering.

Happier are the hands compassed with iron, then a heart with thoughts.

If the staff be crooked, the shadow cannot be straight.

To take the nuts from the fire with the dogs foot.

He is a fool that makes a wedg of his fist.

Valor that parlies, is near yielding.

Thursday come, and the week's gone.

A flatterers throat is an open sepulcher.

There is great force hidden in a sweet command.

The command of custom is great.

To have money is a fear, not to have it a grief.

The Cat sees not the mouse ever.

Little dogs start the hare, the great get her.

Willows are weak, yet they bind other wood.

A good prayer is master of another purse.

The thread breaks, where it is weakest.

Old men, when they scorn young, make much of death.

God is at the end, when we think he is furthest off it.

A good Judge conceives quickly, judges flowly.

Rivers need a spring.

He that contemplates, has a day without night.

Give losers leave to talk.

Loss imbraceth shame.

Gaming, Women, and Wine, while they laugh, they make men pine.

The fat man knows not what the lean thinks.

Wood half burnt is easily kindled.

The fish adores the bait.

He that goes far has many encounters.

Every bees honey is sweet.

The slothful is the servant of the counters

Wisdom has one foot on land, and another on Sea

The thought has good legs, and the quill a good tongue.

A wise man needs not blush for changing his purpose.

The March sun raises, but dissolves not.

Time is the Rider that breaks youth.

The wine in the bottel does not quench thirst.

The sight of a man has the force of a Lion.

An examined enterprise, goes on boldly.

In every art it is good to have a master.

In every Country dogs bite.

In every country the sun rises in the morning.

A noble plant suites not with a stubborn ground.

You may bring a horse to the river, but he will drink when and what he pleases.

Before you make a friend, eat a bushel of salt with him.

Speak fitly, or be silent wisely.

Skill and confidence are an unconquered army.

I was taken by a morsel, says the fish.

A disarmed peace is weak.

The balance distinguishes not between gold and lead.

The persuasion of the fortunate swaies the deubtfull.

To be beloved is above all bargains.

To deceive ones self is very easy.

The reasons of the poor weigh not.

Perverseness makes one squint eyed.

The evening praises the day, and the morning a frost.

The table robbes more then a thief.

When age is jocond, it makes sport for death.

True praise roots and spreeds.

Fears ar divided in the midst.

The soul needs few things, the body many.

Astrology is true, but the Astrologers cannot find it.

Ty it well, and let it go.

Empty vessels sound most.

Send not a Cat for Lard.

Foolish tongues talk by the dozen.

Love makes one fit for any work.

A pitiful mother makes a scald head.

An old Physician, and a young Lawyer.

Talk much, and err much, says the Spanyard.

Some make a conscience of spitting in the Church, yet rob the Altar.

An idle head is a box for the wind.

Show me a liar, and I Will show thee a thief.

A bean in liberty is better then a comfit in prison.

None is born Master.

Show a good man his error, and he turns it to a virtue; but an ill, it
doubles his fault.

None is offended but by himself.

None says his Garner is full.

In the husband wisdom, in the wife gentleness.

Nothing dries sooner then a tear.

In a Leopard the spots are not observed.

Nothing lasts but the Church.

A wise man cares not for what he cannot have.

It Is not good fishing before the net.

He cannot be virtuous that is not rigorous

That which will not be spun, let it not come between the spindle and the
distaffe.

When my house burns, it is not good playing at Chesse.

No barber shaves so close, but another finds work.

There Is no great banquet, but some fares ill.

A holy habit cleanses not a foul soul.

Forbear not sowing, because of birds.

Mention not a halter in the house of him that was hanged.

Speak not of a dead man at the table.

A hat is not made for one shower.

No sooner is a Temple built to God, but the Devil builds a Chapel hard by.

Every one puts his fault on the Times.

You cannot make a windmill go with a pair of bellows.

Pardon all but thy self.

Every one is weary, the poor in seeking, the rich in keeping, the good in
learning.

The escaped mouse ever feels the taste of the bait.

A little wind kindles; much puts out the fire.

Dry bread at home is better then rost-meat abroad.

More have repented speech then silence

The covetous spends more then the liberal.

Divine ashes are better then earthly meal.

Beauty draws more then oxen.

One father is more then a hundred Schoolmasters.

One eye of the masters sees more then ten of the servants.

When God will punish, he will first take away the understanding.

A little labor, much health.

When it thunders, the thief becomes honest.

The tree that God plants, no wind hurts it.

Knowledge is no burden.

It Is a bold mouse that nestles in the cats ear.

Long jesting was never good.

If a good man thrive, all thrive with him.

If the mother had not been in the oven, she had never sought her daughter
there.

If great men would have care of little ones, both would last long.

Though you see a Churchman ill, yet continue in the Church still.

Old praise dies, unless you feed it.

If things were to be done twice, all would be wise.

Had you the world on your Chessebord, you could not fill all to your mind.

Suffer and expect.

If fools should not fool it, they shall lose their season.

Love and business teach eloquence.

That which two will, takes effect.

He complains wrongfully on the sea, that twice suffers shipwreck.

He is only bright that shines by himself.

A valiant man's look is more then a cowards sword.

The effect speaks, the tongue needs not.

Divine grace was never slow.

Reason lies between the spur and the bridle.

Its a proud horse that will not carry his own provender.

Three women make a market.

Three can hold their peace, if two be away.

It Is an ill counsel that has no escape.

All our pomp the earth covers.

To whirle the eyes too much, shows a kites brain.

Comparisons are odious.

All keys hang not on one girdle.

Great businesses turn on a little pin.

The wind in ones face makes one wise.

All the arms of England will not arm fear.

One sword keeps another in the sheath.

Be what thou would seem to be.

Let all live as they would die.

A gentle heart is tied with an easy thread.

Sweet discourse makes short days and nights.

God provides for him that trusts.

He that will not have peace, God gives him war.

To him that will, ways are not wanting.

To a great night, a great Lanthorn.

To a child all weather is cold.

Where there is peace, God is.

None is so wise, but the fool overtakes him.

Fools give to please all but their own.

Prosperity lets go the bridle.

The Friar preached against stealing, and had a goose in his sleeve.

Te be too busy gets contempt.

February makes a bridge, and March breaks it.

A horse stumbles that has four legs.

The best smell is bread, the best savor salt, the best love that of children.

That Is the best gown that goes up and down the house.

The Market is the best Garden.

The first dish pleases all.

The higher the Ape goes, the more he shows his tail.

Night is the mother of Councels.

Gods Mil grinds slow, but sure.

Every one thinks his sack heaviest.

Drought never brought dearth.

All complain.

Gamesters and race-horses never last long.

Its a poor sport that is not worth the candle.

He that is fallen cannot help him that is down.

Every one is witty for his own purpose.

A little let lets an ill workman.

Good workmen are seldom rich.

By doing nothing we learn to do ill.

A great dowry is a bed full of brables.

No profit to honor, no honor to Religion.

Every sin brings its punishment with it.

Of him that speaks ill, consider the life more then the word.

You cannot hide an eele in a sack.

Give not Saint Peter so much, to leave Saint Paul nothing.

You cannot flea a stone.

The chief disease that reigns this year is folly.

A sleepy master makes his servant a Lowt.

Better speak truth rudely, then lie covertly.

He that fears leaves, let him not go into the wood.

One foot is better then two crutches.

Better suffer ill, then do ill.

Neither praise, nor dispraise thy self, thy actions serve the turn.

Soft and fair goes far.

The constancy of the benefit of the year in their seasons, argues a Deity.

Praise none too much, for all are fickle.

It Is absurd to warm one in his armor.

Law suites consume time, and money, and rest, and friends.

Nature draws more then ten teems.

He that has a wife and children, wants not business.

A ship and a woman are ever repairing.

He that fears death, lives not.

He that pities another, remembers himself.

He that does what he should not, shall feel what he would not.

He that marries for wealth, sels his liberty.

He that once hits, is ever bending.

He that serves, must serve.

He that lends, gives.

He that preaches, gives alms.

He that cockers his child, provides for his enemy.

A pitiful look asks enough.

Who will sell the cow, must say the word.

Service is no inheritance.

The faulty stands on his guard.

A kinsman, a friend, or whom you entreat, take not to serve you, if you will be
served neatly.

At Court, every one for himself.

To a crafty man, a crafty and an half.

He that is thrown, would ever wrestle.

He that serves well, needs not ask his wages.

Fair language grates not the tongue.

A good heart cannot lie.

Good swimmers at length are drowned.

Good land, evil way.

In doing we learn.

It Is good walking with a horse in ones hand.

God, and Parents, and our Master, can never be requited.

An ill deed cannot bring honor.

A small heart has small desires.

All are not merry that dance lightly.

Courtesy on one side only, lasts not long.

Wine-Counsels seldom prosper.

Weening is not measure.

The best of the sport is to do the deed, and say nothing.

If thou thy self can do it, attend no others help or hand.

Of a little thing, a little displeases.

He warms too near that burns.

God keep me from four houses, an Usurers, a Tavern, a Spittle, and a Prison.

In an hundred else of contention, there is not an inch of love.

Do what thou ought, and come what come can.

Hunger makes dinners, pastime suppers.

In a long journey straw weighs.

Women laugh when they can, and weep when they will.

War is death's feast.

Set good against evil.

He that brings good news knocks hard.

Beat the Dog before the Lion.

Have comes not alone.

You must lose a fly to catch a trout.

Better a snotty child, then his nose wiped off.

He is not free that draws his chain.

He goes not out of his way that goes to a good Inn.

There come naught out of the sack, but what was there.

A little given seasonably, excuses a great gift.

He looks not well to himself that looks not ever.

He thinks not well, that thinks not again.

Religion, Credit, and the Eye are not to be touched.

The tongue is not steel, yet it cuts.

A white wall is the paper of a fool.

They talk of Christmas so long, that it comes.

That is gold which is worth gold.

It Is good tying the sack before it be full.

Words are women, deeds are men.

Poverty is no sin

A stone in a well is not lost.

He can give little to his servant, that licks his knife.

Promising is the eve of giving.

He that keeps his own, makes war.

The wolf must die in his own skin.

Goods are theirs that enjoy them.

He that sends a fool, expects one.

He that can stay, obtains.

He that gains well and spends well, needs no count book.

He that endures, is not overcome.

He that gives all before he dies, provides to suffer.

He that talks much of his happiness, summons grief.

He that loves the tree, loves the branch.

Who hastens a glutton, choaks him.

Who praises Saint Peter, does not blame Saint Paul.

He that has not the craft, let him shut up shop.

He that knows nothing, doubts nothing.

Green wood makes a hot fire.

He that marries late, marries ill.

He that passes a winter's day, escapes an enemy.

The rich knows not who is his friend.

A morning sun, and a Wine-bred child, and a Latine-bred woman, seldom end well.

To a close shorn sheep, God gives wind by measure.

A pleasure long expected, is dear enough sold.

A poor man's cow dies a rich man's child.

The cow knows not what her tail is worth, till she have lost it.

Choose a horse made, and a wife to make.

It Is an ill air where we gain nothing.

He has not lived, that lives not after death.

So many men in court and so many strangers.

He quits his place well, that leaves his friend there.

That which suffices is not little.

Good news may be told at any time, but ill in the morning.

He that would be a Gentleman, let him go to an assault.

Who pays the Physician, does the cure.

None knows the weight of another burden.

Every one has a fool in his sleeve

One hours sleep before midnight, is worth three after.

In a retreat the lame are foremost.

It Is more pain to do nothing, then something.

Amongst good men two men suffice.

There needs a long time to know the worlds pulse.

The offspring of those that are very young, or very old, lasts not.

A tyrant is most tyrant to himself.

Too much taking heed is loss.

Craft against craft, makes no living.

The Reverend are ever before.

France is a meadow that cuts thrice a year.

It Is easier to build two chimneys, then to maintain one.

The Court has no Almanac.

He that will enter into Paradise, must have a good key.

When you enter into a house, leave the anger ever at the door.

He has no leisure who uses it not.

It Is a wicked thing to make a dearth ones garner.

He that deals in the world needs four sieves.

Take heed of an ox before, of an horse behind, of a monk on all sides.

The year does nothing else but open and shut.

The ignorant has an Eagles wings, and an Owls eyes.

There are more Physicians in health, then drunkards.

The wife is the key of the house.

The Law is not the same at morning and at night.

War and Physic are governed by the eye.

Half the world knows not how the other half lies.

Death keeps no Calender.

Ships fear fire more then water.

The least foolish is wise.

The chief box of health is time.

Silks and Satins put out the fire in the chimney.

The first blow is as much as two.

The life of man is a winter way.

The way is an ill neighbor.

An old man's staff is the rapper of deaths door.

Life is half spent, before we know what it is.

The singing man keeps his shop in his throat.

The body is more dressed then the soul.

The body is sooner dressed then the soul.

The Physician owes all to the patient, but the patient owes nothing to him but
a little money.

The little cannot be great, unless he devour many.

Time undermines us.

The Choleric drinks, the Melancholic eats, the Phlegmatic sleeps.

The Apothecarie's mortar spoils the Luters music.

Conversation makes one what he is.

The deaf gains the injury.

Years know more then books.

Wine is a turn-coat, (first a friend, then an enemy.)

Wine ever pays for his lodging.

Wine makes all sorts of creatures at table.

Wine that cost nothing is digested before it be drunk.

Trees eat but once.

Armor is light at table.

Good horses make short miles.

Castles are Forests of stones.

The dainties of the great, are the tears of the poor.

Parsons are souls waggoners.

Children when they are little make parents fools, when they are great they
make them mad.

The Mr absent, and the house dead.

Dogs are fine in the field.

Sins are not known till they be acted.

Thorns whiten, yet do nothing.

All are presumed good, till they are found in a fault.

The great put the little on the hook.

The great would have none great, and the little all little.

The Italians are wise before the deed, the Germans in the deed, the French
after the deed.

Every mile is two in winter.

Spectacles are death's Harquebuze.

Lawyers houses are built on the heads of fools.

The house is a fine house when good folks are within.

The best bred have the best portion.

The first and last frosts are the worst

Gifts enter every where without a wimble.

Princes have no way.

Knowledge makes one laugh, but wealth makes one dance.

The Citizen is at his business before he rise.

The eyes have one language every where.

It is better to have wings then horns.

Better be a fool then a knave.

Count not four, except you have them in a wallet.

To live peaceably with all, breeds good blood.

You may be on land, yet not in a garden.

You cannot make the fire so low, but it will get out.

We know not who lives or dies.

An ox is taken by the horns, and a man by the tongue.

Many things are lost for want of asking.

No Churchyard is so handsome, that a man would desire straight to be buried
there.

Cities are taken by the ears.

Once a year a man may say, On his conscience.

We leave more to do when we die, then we have done.

With customs we live well, but laws undo us.

To speak of an Usurer at the table, marrs the wine.

Pains to get, care to keep, fear to lose.

For a morning rain leave not your journey.

One fair day in winter makes not birds merry.

He that learns a trade, has a purchase made.

When all men have what belongs to them, it cannot be much.

Though God take the sun out of the Heaven, yet we must have patience.

When a man sleeps, his head is in his stomach.

When one is on horseback, he knows all things.

When God is made the master of a family, he disorders the disorderly.

When a Lackey comes to hels door, the Devils lock the gates.

He that is at ease, seeks dainties.

He that has charge of souls, transports them not in bundles.

He that tells his wife news, is but newly married.

He that is in a town in May, loses his Spring.

He that is in a Tavern, thinks he is in a vine-garden.

He that praises himself, spattereth himself.

He that is a master, must serve (another)

He that is surprised with the first frost, feels it all the winter after.

He a beast does die, that has done no good to his country.

He that follows the Lord, hopes to go before.

He that dies without the company of good men, puts not himself into a good way.

Who has no head, needs no heart.

Who has no have in his business, mountains to him seem valleys.

Speak not of my debts, unless you mean to pay them.

He that is not in the wars, is not out of danger

He that gives me small gifts, would have me live.

He that is his own Counselor, knows nothing sure but what he has laid out.

He that has lands, has quarrels.

He that goes to bed thirsty, rises healthy.

Who will make a door of gold, must knock a nail every day.

A trade is better then service.

He that lives in hope, danceth without music.

To review ones store is to mow twice.

Saint Luke was a Saint and a Physician, yet is dead.

Without business, debauchery.

Without danger we cannot get beyond danger.

Health and sickness surely are men's double enemies.

If gold knew what gold is, gold would get gold I wis.

Little losses amaze, great, tame.

Choose none for thy servant, who have served thy betters.

Service without reward is punishment.

If the husband be not at home, there is no body.

An oath that is not to be made, is not to be kept.

The eye is bigger then the belly.

If you would be at ease, all the world is not.

Were it not for the bone in the leg, all the world would turn Carpenters (to
make them crutches.)

If you must fly, fly well.

All that shakes falls not.

All beasts of prey are strong, or treacherous.

If the brain sows not corn, it plants thistles.

A man well mounted, is ever Choleric.

Every one is a master and servant.

A piece of a Churchyard fits every body.

One mouth does nothing without another.

A master of straw eats a servant of steel.

An old cat sports not with her prey.

A woman conceals what she knows not.

He that wipes the childs nose, kisseth the mothers cheek.

Gentility is nothing but Ancient Riches.

To go where the King goes a foot; i.e. to the stool.

To go upon the Franciscans Hackney, i. e, on foot.

Amiens was taken by the Fox, and retaken by the Lion.

After Death the Doctor.

Ready money is a ready Medicine.

It is the Philosophy of the Distaffe.

It is a sheep of Beery, it is marked on the nose: applied to those that have a
blow.

To build castles in Spain.

An Idle youth, a needy Age

Silk does quench the fire in the Kitchen.

The words ending in Ique, do mock the Physician; as Hectique Paralitique,
Apoplectique, Lethargique.

He that trusts much Obliges much, says the Spaniard.

He that thinks amiss, concludes worse.

A man would live in Italy (a place of pleasure) but he would choose to die in
Spain, where they say the Catholic Religion is professed with greatest
strictness.

Whatsoever was the father of a disease, an ill diet was the mother.

Frenzy, Heresy, and Jealovsie, seldom cured.

There is no heat of affection but is joined with some idleness of brain, says
the Spaniard.

The War is not don so long as my Enemy lives.

Some evils are cured by contempt.

Power seldom grows old at Court.

Danger it self the best remedy for danger.

Favor will as surely perish as life.

Fear the Bedle of the Law.

Heresy is the school of pride.

For the same man to be an heretic and a good subject, is incompossible.

Heresy may be easier kept out, then shook off.

Infants manners are molded more by the example of Parents, then by stars at
their nativities.

They favor learning whose actions are worthy of a learned pen.

Modesty sets off one newly come to honor.

No naked man is sought after to be rifled.

There Is no such conquering weapon as the necessity of conquering.

Nothing secure unless suspected.

No tie can oblige the perfidious.

Spies are the ears and eyes of Princes.

The life of spies is to know, not be known.

Religion a stalking horse to shoot other foul.

It Is a dangerous fire begins in the bed-straw.

Covetousness breaks the bag.

Fear keeps and looks to the vineyard, and not the owner.

The noise is greater then the nuts.

Two sparrows on one Ear of Corn make an ill agreement.

The world is now adays, God save the Conqueror.

Unsound minds like unsound Bodies, if you feed, you poison.

Not only ought fortune to be pictured on a wheel, but every thing else in this
world.

All covet, all lose.

Better is one Accipe, then twice to say, Dabo tibi

An Ass endures his burden, but not more then his burden

Threatened men eat bread, says the Spaniard

The beads in the Hand, and the Devil in Capuch; or cape of the cloak.

He that will do thee a good turn, either he will be gone or dye.

I escaped the Thunder, and fell into the Lightning

A man of a great memory without learning, has a rock and a spindle, and no
staff to spin

The death of wolves is the safety of the sheep

He that is once borne, once must die.

He that has but one eye, must be afraid to lose it

He that makes himself a sheep, shall be eat by the wolf

He that steals an egg, will steal an ox

He that will be surety, shall pay.

He that is afraid of leaves, goes not to the wood

In the mouth of a bad dog falls often a good bone

Those that God loves, do not live long

Still fisheth he that catches one.

All flesh is not venison

A City that parlies is half gotten.

A dead Be makes no Honey.

An old dog barks not in vain

They that hold the greatest farms, pay the least rent: applied to rich men
that are unthankful to God.

Old Camels carry young Camels skins to the Market

He that has time and looks for better time, time comes that he repents
himself of time.

Words and feathers the wind carries away

Of a pigs tail you can never make a good shaft

The Bathe of the Blackamoor has sworn not to whiten.

To a greedy eating horse a short halter.

The Devil divides the world between Atheism and Superstition.

Such a Saint, such an offering.

We do it soon enough, if that we do, be well.

Cruelty is more cruel, if we defer the pain.

What one day gives us, another takes away from us.

To seek in a Sheep five feet when there is but four.

A scab'd horse cannot abide the comb.

God strikes with his finger, and not with all his arm.

God gives his wrath by weight, and without weight his mercy.

Of a new Prince, new bondage.

New things are fair.

Fortune to one is Mother, to another is Stepmother.

There is no man, though never so little, but sometimes he can hurt.

The horse that draws after him his halter, is not altogether escaped.

We must recoile a little, to the end we may leap the better.

No love is foul, nor prison fair.

No day so clear but has dark clouds.

No hair so small, but has his shadow.

A wolf will never make war against another wolf.

We must love, as looking one day to hate.

It is good to have some friends both in heaven and hell.

It is very hard to shave an egg.

It is good to hold the ass by the bridle.

The healthful man can give counsel to the sick.

The death of a young wolf does never come too soon.

The rage of a wild boar is able to spoil more then one wood.

Virtue flies from the heart of a Mercenary man.

The wolf eats often of the sheep that have been warned.

The mouse that has but one hole is quickly taken.

To play at Chesse when the house is on fire.

The itch of disputing, is the scab of the Church.

Follow not truth too near the heels, lest it dash out thy teeth.

Either wealth is much increased, or moderation is much decayed.

Say to pleasure, Gentle Eve, I will none of your apple.

When war begins, then hell opens.

There is a remedy for every thing, could men find it.

There is an hour wherein a man might be happy all his life, could he find it.

Great Fortune brings with it Great misfortune.

A fair day in winter is the mother of a storm

Woe be to him that reads but one book

Tithe, and be rich Take heed of
The wrath of a mighty man, and the tumult of the people Mad folks in a narrow
place Credit decaid, and people that have nothing. A young wench a prophetess,
and a Lattin bred woman A person marked, and a Widow thrice married Foul dirty
ways, and long sickness. Wind that comes in at a hole, and a reconciled
Enemy. A stepmother; the very name of her suffices.


Princes are venison in Heaven.

Critics are like brushers of Noblemens clothes.

He is a great Necromancer, for he asks counsel of the Dead: i.e. books.

A man is known to be mortal by two things, Sleep and Lust.

Love without end, has no end, says the Spaniard: meaning, if it were not
begun on particular ends, it would last.

Stay a while, that we may make an end the sooner.

Presents of love fear not to be ill taken of strangers.

To seek these things is lost labor; Geese in an oil pot, fat Hogs among
Jews, and Wine in a fishing net.

Some men plant an opinion they seem to erradicate.

The Philosophy of Princes is to dive into the Secrets of men, leaving the
secrets of nature to those that have spare time

States have their conversions and periods as well as natural bodies.

Great deservers grow Intolerable presumers.

The love of money and the love of learning rarely meet.

Trust no friend with that you need fear him if he were your enemy.

Some had rather lose their friend, then their Jest

Marry your daughters betimes, lest they marry themselves.

Soldiers in peace, are like chimneys in summer.

Here is a talk of the Turk and the Pope, but my next neighbor does me more
harm then either of them both.

Civil Wars of France made a million of Atheists, and 30000 Witches.

We Batchelors laugh and show our teeth, but you married men laugh till your
hearts ache.

The Devil never assailes a man, except he find him either void of knowledge,
or of the fear of God.

There is no body will go to hell for company.

Much money makes a Country poor, for it sets a dearer price on every thing.

The virtue of a coward is suspicion.

A man's destiny is always dark.

Every man's censure is first molded in his own nature.

Money wants no followers.

Your thoughts close, and your countenance loose.

Whatever is made by the hand of man, by the hand of man may be overturned.

FINIS.
The Author's PRAYER before SERMON.
O Almighty and ever-living Lord God! Majesty, and Power, and Brightness, and
Glory! How shall we dare to appear before thy face, who are contrary to thee,
in all we call thee? for we are darkness, and weakness, and filthiness, and
shame. Misery and sin fill our days: yet art thou our Creator, and we thy
work: Thy hands both made us, and also made us Lords of all thy creatures;
giving us one world in our selves, and another to serve us: then did thou
place us in Paradise, and were proceeding still on in thy Favors, until we
interrupted thy Counsels, disappointed thy Purposes, and sold our God, our
glorious, our gracious God for an apple. O write it! O brand it in our
foreheads for ever: for an apple once we lost our God, and still lose him for
no more; for money, for meat, for diet: But thou Lord, art patience, and pity,
and sweetness, and love; therefore we sons of men are not consumed. Thou have
exalted thy mercy above all things; and have made our salvation, not our
punishment, thy glory: so that then where sin abounded, not death, but grace
super abounded; accordingly, when we had sinned beyond any help in heaven or
earth, then thou saidest; Lo, I come! then did the Lord of life, unable of
himself to die, contrive to do it. He took flesh, he wept, he died; for his
enemies he died; even for those that derided him then, and still despise him.
Blessed Savior! many waters could not quench thy love! nor no pit overwhelme
it. But though the streams of thy blood were current through darkness, grave,
and hell; yet by these thy conflicts, and seemingly hazards, did thou arise
triumphant, and therein made us victorious.

Neither does thy love yet stay here! for; this word of thy rich peace, and
reconciliation, thou have committed, not to Thunder, or Angels, but to silly
and sinful men: even to me, pardoning my sins, and bidding me go feed the
people of thy love.

Blessed be the God of Heaven and Earth! who only does wondrous things. Awake
therefore, my Lute, and my Viol! awake all my powers to glorify thee! We
praise thee! we bless thee! we magnify thee for ever! And now, O Lord! in the
power of thy Victories, and in the ways of thy Ordinances, and in the truth of
thy Love, Lo, we stand here, beseeching thee to bless thy word, wher-ever
spoken this day throughout the universal Church. O make it a word of power and
peace, to convert those who are not yet thine, and to confirm those that are:
particularly, bless it in this thy own Kingdom, which thou have made a Land of
light, a storehouse of thy treasures and mercies: O let not our foolish and
unworthy hearts rob us of the continuance of this thy sweet love: but pardon
our sins, and perfect what thou have begun. Ride on Lord, because of the word
of truth, and meekness, and righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach
thee terrible things. Especially, bless this portion here assembled together,
with thy unworthy Servant speaking unto them: Lord Jesu! teach thou me, that I
may teach them: Sanctify, and enable all my powers, that in their full
strength they may deliver thy message reverently, readily, faithfully, and
fruitfully. O make thy word a swift word, passing from the ear to the heart,
from the heart to the life and conversation: that as the rain returns not
empty, so neither may thy word, but accomplish that for which it is given. O
Lord hear, O Lord forgive! O Lord, hearken, and do so for thy blessed Son's
sake, in whose sweet and pleasing words, we say, Our Father, etc.

BLessed be God! and the Father of all mercy! who continues to pour his
benefits upon us. Thou have elected us, thou have called us, thou have
justified us, sanctified, and glorified us: Thou wast born for us, and thou
livedst and diedst for us: Thou have given us the blessings of this life, and
of a better. O Lord! thy blessings hang in clusters, they come trooping upon
us! they break forth like mighty waters on every side. And now Lord, thou have
fed us with the bread of life: so man did eat Angel's food: O Lord, besse it: O
Lord, make it health and strength unto us: still striving and prospering so
long within us, until our obedience reach thy measure of thy love, who have
done for us as much as may be. Grant this dear Father, for thy Son's sake, our
only Savior: To whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, but one
most glorious, incomprehensible God, be ascribed all Honor, and Glory, and
Praise, ever. Amen.

Mr G. HERBERT, To Master N.F. upon the Translation of VALDESSO.
MY dear and deserving Brother, your Valdesso I now return with many thanks,
and some notes; in which perhaps you will disover some care, which I forbear
not in the midst of my griefs; first, for your sake, because I would do
nothing negligently that you commit unto me: secondly, for the Author's sake,
whom I conceive to have been a true servant of God; and to such, and all that
is theirs, I owe diligence: Thirdly, for the Churches sake, to whom by printing
it, I would have you consecrate it. You owe the Church a debt, and God has put
this into your hands, (as he sent the fish with money to Saint Peter,) to
discharge it: happily also with this, (as his thoughts are fruitful,)
intending the honor of his servant the Author, who being obscured in his own
Country, he would have to flourish in this Land of light, and Region of the
Gospel, among his chosen. It is true, there are some things which I like not in
him, as my fragments will express, when you read them; nevertheless, I wish
you by all means to publish it, for these three eminent things observable
therein: First, that God in the midst of Popery should open the eyes of one to
understand and express so clearly and excellently the intent of the Gospel, in
the acceptance of Christ's righteousness, (as he shows through all his
considerations,) a thing strangely buried and darkened by the Adversaries, and
their great stumbling block. Secondly, the great honor and reverence, which he
every where bears toward our great Master, and Lord, concluding every
consideration almost with his holy Name, and setting his merit forth so
piously; for which I do so love him, that were there nothing else, I would
print it, that with it the honor of my Lord might be published. Thirdly, the
many pious rules of ordering our life, about mortification, and observation of
God's Kingdom within us, and the working thereof, of which he was a very
diligent observer. These three things are very eminent in the Author, and
over-weigh the defects, as I conceive, toward the publishing thereof.

From BEMMERTON near SALISBURY, September. 29. 1632.
In Honorem Illustrissimi Domini FRANCISCI de VERULAMIO Vice-comitis Sti
Albani, Post Editam ab eo Instaur. Mag.
QUis iste tandem? non enim vultu ambulat
Quotidiano. Nescis ignare? audies,
Dux Nationum; voritatis Pontifex;
Inductionis Dominus; and Verulamii;
Rerum Magister unicus, at non Artium:
Profunditatis Pinus, atque Elegantiae:
Naturae Aruspex intimus: Philosophiae
Aerarium. Sequester Experientiae,
Speculationisque: Aequitatis Signifer:
Scientiarum sub pupillari statu
Degentium olim Emancipator: luminis
Promus: Fugator Idolum, atque Nubium:
Collega Solis: Quadra Certitudinis:
Sophismatum Mastix: Brutus Literarius,
Authoritatis exuens Tyrannidem:
Rationis and Sensus stupendus Arbiter;
Repumicator mentis: Atlas Physicus,
Alcide succumbente STAGIRITICO:
Columba Noae, quae in vetustate Artibus
Nullum locum, requiemve cernens, praestitit
Ad se suamque Matris Arcam regredi.
Subtilitatis terebra; Temporis nepos
Ex veritate Matre: Mellis Alveus:
Mundique and Animarum, Sacerdos unicus:
Securique Errorum: inque Natalibus
Granum Sinapis, acre aliis, crescens sibi.
O me prope Lassum; Juv^te Posteri.
GEOR. HERBERT Orat. Pub. in Academ. Cantab. In Obitum Incomparabilis
Vice-Comitis Sti Albani, Baronis VERULAMII.
DUm longi lentique gemis sub pondere morbi,
Atque haeret dubio tabida vita pede
Quid voluit prudens fatum, jam sentio tandem:
Constat, Aptile uno te potuisse mori:
Ut Flos hinc lacrymis, illinc Philomela querelis
Deducant Linguae funera sola tuae.
G. HERBERT. To Doctor Done upon one of his Seals: The Anchor, and Christ.
In Sacram Anchoram Piscatoris.
QUod Crux nequibat fixa, clavique additi
(Tenere Christum scilicei, ne ascenderet)
Tuive Christum devocans facundia
Vltra loquendi Tempus; addit Anchora:
Nec hoc abunde est tibi, nisi certae Anchorae
Addas Sygillum: nempe Symbolum suae
Tibi dedit Unda and Terra certitudinis
Quondam fossus Amor loquens Amato
Tot and tanta loquens Amica; scripsit
Tandem and fessa manus, dedit Sigillum.
Suavis erat, qui scripta, dolens, lacerando recludi
Sanctius in Regno magni credebat Amoris
(In quo fas u hill est rumpi) donare Sigillum.
Munde fluas fugi^sque licet, nos nostraque fixi;
Deridet motus sancta Catena tuos.
G. HERBERT. An Addition of APOTHEGMES by Several Authors.
LEWIS the 9th of France, being asked by what style he would be called, said,
Lewis of Poyssy. Reply was made, There were other places of greater renown, and
where he had obtained famous Victories. No, said he, I desire to be called
Lewis of Poyssy, because there I got the most glorious victory that ever I had;
For there I overcame the Devil: meaning that he was christened there.

Byas was in a great Tempest, and with him there were dissolute fellows,
calling upon their Gods; but Byas said, Peace, peace, let them not know you are
here.

When Craesus for his glory showed Solon great treasure of gold* Solon said
unto him, If another come that has better iron then you, he will be Master of
all this gold.

Gerson brings in a French man asking another man, Quot annos habes, an usual
Latin phrase when we ask after ones age. The man replies, I am of no years at
all, but death has forborne me this fifty.

An holy man in the primitive times being asked how long he had lived,
answered, A few years to God, but forty or fifty among gnats and flies.

Hanno the Carthaginian was sent Commissioner by the State after the second
Carthaginian War, to Rome, to supplicate for peace, and in the end obtained it:
yet one of the sharper Senators said, You have often broke with us the peaces
whereunto you have been sworn; I pray by what gods will you swear? Hanno
answered, By the same Gods that have punished the former perjury so severely.

Sir Thomas Moor had only daughters at first, and his wife did ever pray for a
boy; at last he had a boy, which after at man's years proved simple. Sir Thomas
said to his wife, Thou prayedst so long for a boy, that he will be a boy as
long as he lives.

When Queen Elizabeth had advanced Raleigh, she was one day playing on the
Virginals, and my Lord of Oxford, and another Nobleman stood by: It fell out
so, that the ledge before the Jacks was taken away, so as the Jacks were seen.
My Lord of Oxford, and the other Nobleman smiled, and a little whispered; the
Queen marked it, and would needs know what the matter was: My Lord of Oxford
answered; that they smiled to see that when Jacks went up, heads went down.

When the English were beaten out of France, and the Town of Callice was lost,
an English Captain being jear'd by a French man, and asked, When will you come
again? answered, O Sir, when the Sins of France are greater then the Sins of
England, then we come again.

The Spanish Friar used to say there were but few Princes in hell: His reason
was, because there were but few.

Ignatius Loyola used to say, when he heard a clock strike, There Is one hour
more that I have to answer to God for.

It was a Speech of Sir Thomas Moor, He would not pin his faith on another
man's sleeve, because he did not know whither he might carry it.

Bishop Latimer said in a Sermon at Court, that he had heard great speech that
the King was poor, and many ways were propounded to make him rich: for his
part, he had thought of one, which was, that they should help the King to some
good Office, for all his Officers grew rich.

Sir Amias Paulet when he saw too much have in any matter, was wont to say,
Stay a while, that we may make an end the sooner.

Queen Isabel of Spain would say, Whosoever has a good presence, and a good
fashion, carries Letters of Recommendation.

Upon Alienation of Church Lands, (at the Reformation in Geneva) Calvin used to
say, I see we have taken the purse from Judas, and given it to the Devil.

The Lord Burleigh was used to say, It was in the choice of a wife, as in a
project of war, wherein to err but once, was to be undon for ever. And he
advised his son not to take a wife without a portion, because a man can buy
nothing in the Market without money.

Sir Walter Raleigh was wont to say of the Ladies of Queen Elizabeth's
Privy-Chamber, and Bedchamber, They were like witches, They could do hurt, but
they could do no good.

Master Marbury the Preacher would say, That God was feign to deal with wicked
men, as men do with frisking Jades in a pasture, that cannot take them up till
they get them to a gate; so wicked men will not be taken up till the hour of
death.

No Country can be called rich, wherein there is war; as in the
Low Countries: there is much money, but the Soldiers have it in pay from the
Governors: the Boores have it for victuals of the Soldiers: the Governors
have it from them again in taxes: so there is no center, no honor.

K. James's Apotheg.

A certain Priest having to do with a great man that was resolute in sin, yet
desirous of absolution, and perceiving that he did not understand the Latin
tongue; in stead of absolving him, said as follows, Dominus noster Jesus
Christus te absolvat, si vult; and remittat tibi peccata tua, quod ego non
credo; and perducat te ad vitam aeternam, quod est impossible.

There was one that died greatly in debt: when it was reported in some company
where diverse of his Creditors were, that he was dead, one began to say, In good
faith, then he has carried 500 Ducats of mine with him: and another of them
said, and 200 of mine: and some others spoke of several sums of theirs:
whereupon, one that was amongst them said, Well, I see now, that though a man
cannot carry any of his own with him into the other world, yet he may carry
other men's.

Some say, that Bellarmine's works are so constant to themselves, as if he had
written them in two hours.

A Spaniard was censuring to a French Gentleman the want of devotion amongst
the French: in that whereas in Spain, when the Sacrament goes to the sick, any
that meets with it turns back, and waits upon it to the house whether it goes:
But in France they only do reverence, and pass by. But the French Gentleman
answered him, There is reason for it, for here with us, Christ is secure
amongst his friends; but in Spain there be so many Jews and Marano's, that it
is not amiss for him to have a convoy.

There was a Gentleman that came to the Tilt all in Orange Tawney, and ran very
ill, the next day he came all in green, and ran worse; one of the lookers on
asked the other, What Is the reason this Gentleman changes his colors? The
other answered, Sure, because it may be reported, that the Gentleman in the
green, ran worse than the Gentleman in the Orange Tawney.

Sir Thomas Moor, the day before he was beheaded, had a Barber sent to him,
because his hair was long, which would make him more commiserable with the
people: The Barber came to him, and asked him, Whether he would be pleased to
be trimmed? In good faith, honest Fellow, said Sir Thomas, The King and I have
a suit for my head, and till the Title be cleared, I will do no cost on it.

Cosmus D. of Florence, was wont to say of perfidious friends, That we read,
that we ought to forgive our enemies; but we do not read, that we ought to
forgive our friends.

Bishop Laud said, that some hypocrites, and seeming mortified men that held
down their heads, were like little Images that they place in the very bowing of
the Vaults of Churches, that look as if they held up the Church, and yet are
but puppets.

Casaubon would say, A day, an hour, a moment, is enough to overturn that which
was thought to be founded and rooted in Adamant.

The Italians saying may well be applied to poor England, I was well, I would
be better; I took physic, and I died.

Sir Francis Bacon being asked by King James, his opinion of the French
Ambassador, (at that time come over) said, He was a proper Gentleman: yea,
said the King, but what do you think of his headpiece. Sir, said Bacon, It is
many times with tall men, as with tall houses, where the uppermost room is
worst furnished.

Sir Francis Bacon was used to say, when he heard of a Scholars death, he was
sorry, because it was long before they were made Scholars, and there were so
many marred in the making.

It was Sir Henry Wotton's saying, Pruritus disputandi fit Ecclesiarum scabies.

And at another time, thus,

Henricus Wottonius Anglo-Cantianus, Thomae Optimi Viri Filius, natu minimus, a
Serenissimo Jacobo 1, Magnae Brittanniae, etc. Rege, in Equestrem Titulum
ascitus; ejusdemque ter ad Rempub. Venetam Legatus Ordinarius; semel ad
confaederatarum Provinciarum Ordines in Juliacensi Negotio; bis ad Carolum
Emmanuelem Subaudiae Ducem; semel ad unitos Superioris Germaniae Principes in
Conventu Heilbrunnensi; postremo ad Archiducem Leopoldum Ducem Wirtenbergensem,
Civitates Imperiales, Argentinam Ulmamque, and ipsum Romanorum Imperatorem
Ferdinandum II. Legatus extraordinarius; Tandem hoc didicit, ANIMAS
SAPIENTIORES FIERI QUIESCENDO.

One said of the Sectaries that pretend much to Scripture, They were like
Posts, that bring truth in their letters, and lies in their mouths.

It was said by one, That Atheists in affliction, like blind beggars, are
forced to ask, though they know not of whom.

After a great fight, there came to the Camp of Gonsalvo, the great Captain, a
Gentleman, proudly horsed and armed; Diego de Mendoza asked the great Captain,
Who Is this? who answered, It Is St Ermyn, that never appears but after a storm.

FINIS.

