THE CONFUSION OF MUHAMED'S SECT, OR A Confutation of the Turkish ALCORAN.
Being a Discovery of many secret Policies and practices in that Religion, not
till now Revealed.

Written Originally in Spanish, by Johannes Andreas, Maurus, who was one of
their Bishops and afterward turned Christian.

Translated into English, by I. N.

LONDON, Printed for H. Blunden, at the Castle in Cornhill. 1652.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE OLIVER St. JOHN LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE COURT OF
COMMON PLEAS.
JOSHUA NOTSTOCK Dedicateth these, With himself and service.

Material Errata's.
PAge 5. line 18. for God read that Idol, p. 7.l.21. for elsewhere r.
hereunder, p. 8. l. 6. for and r. as, p. 11. last l. r. took thence, p. 17. l.
10. expunge and, p. 25. l. 12. for 583. r. 683. p. 28. l. 17. for Idiot an r.
an Idiot. p. 40. first line, r. which are p. 68. last line, for ripe fruits, r.
fruits ripe, p. 69. l. 11. r. And who conceived, p. 75. l. 18. for said r.
says, p. 151. l. 13. for Sune r. Sun, p. 196. l. 23. for Mcores r. Moses.

The Contents.
THe Preface to the Translation, wherein something is said of Muhamed according
to Baudier, a little differing from our Author. The Authors Preface.
CHAP. I. page 1. OF Muhamed's life, the place of his birth, his Parents and
Ancestors, when he began and finished his Sect, and dyed. CHAP. II. Page 36. Of
the Alcoran, what it signifies, of the matters therein contained, and of how
many Songs it is composed; who collected it, and reduced it into four Books, in
the order it is now in; how many years Muhamed was Composing it, how it begins
and ends, and which are the first and last Chapters. CHAP. III. Page 54. Of
Muhameds Sune, what it signifies, of the six Books thereof, and what they
contain; their names, and the reason of the Collecting of them; who collected
them, and when they were collected, corrected, and reduced into the order they
are now in. CHAP. IV. Page 62. Several Arguments which may be framed and
brought against the Alcoran, proving that it is false of it self, and is not
the word of God; And also against the Sune, proving that it is of it self a
ridiculous thing, and fit for men of little knowledge and judgment. CHAP. V.
Page 88. Of diverse fooleries and untruths which are in the Alcoran, from whence
we may conclude that the Alcoran is not the word of God. CHAP. VI. Page 103. Of
diverse offenses which the Moors took whilst Muhamed was instituting his Law
and Sect, by reason of which offenses diverse Moors became more careful and
wise, revolted from Muhamed, and returned to their former Sects and ways of
Worship. CHAP. VII. P. 117. Of Muhamed's Wives and Virgins, and how many
proffered themselves to him without Contract of marriage, by a special Law
which he made for himself; and of the jars, differences, dissensions and
offenses which happened betwixt Muhamed and his Wives and Slaves. CHAP. VIII. P.
130. Of Muhamed's Dream, and the Vision which he says he had when he ascended
to heaven by a Ladder, and rode upon Alborac; And of the things which he says
he saw that night in Heaven, Paradise and Hell. CHAP. IX. P. 154. Of the
Paradise and glory which Muhamed and the Alcoran promise unto the Moors in the
world to come; how many Paradises there are how they are called, and how many
kinds of glory the Moors shall have in Paradise. Chap. X. Page 167. How the
Alcoran contradicts it self in diverse places, of diverse things in the Alcoran
which are unseemly and superfluous; Likewise, of some Miracles which Muhamed
says he wrought, though they rather resemble gulls than Miracles. CHAP. XI.
Page 194. How the Christian Faith is approved for good, holy, and true, by the
Alcoran it self, and the Sune. CHAP. XII. P. 208. That Christians should not
wonder why Muhamed's Sect has so increased, and that the Moors should not be
so presumptuous, and say (as they usually do) that if their Religion were not
good, it had never propagated so much. Likewise, how Muhamed's Disciples
carried themselves after his death, and what discords, contests, and murders
were practiced amongst them for Dominion, and the Vanities of this world.
The Preface to the translation.
IT pleased the great God, who has in himself the fullness of all goodness and
happiness, and to whom nothing can contribute the least advantage: though he
could not receive, yet he may communicate; and thereupon he created The World,
as the shadow of his own Substance, and the footsteps of himself. But the
Creation abode not in that estate in which he made it (the Angels only
excepted) but through the Sin and fall of a part of the Angels, and of Man,
brought it self to a far greater distance from God: from the state of a Shadow,
it ingulphed it self into perfect Darkness, and set it self at a more
remoteness from him who is the father of Light; and thereupon was devolved into
a Night of Sin, Ignorance, Sorrow, and what not Mischief; which is but the
natural consequence of the absence of God, who is Light, Life, Love, and
Being, and all things which import Goodness.

The Creature being in this evil state, God (through his just, and
infinitly-wise ordination) gave it an Head (an usurper, sc. the Devil) suitable
to it is deplorable and dark condition. Hence since Man's sin, Satan Kings it
over them, who is the Abaddon, and the Apollyon Apoc. 9.11. And hence he is
called The God of this World, in 2. Cor. 4. 4. And the world lying in darkness,
he is made The Lord and Ruler thereof, Ephesians. 6. 12. Yea the Apostle John
carries it higher; for in 1. Joh. 5.19. He says, The whole world lies in the
Devil: that as Believers are in the Son Jesus Christ, in ver. 20. So (in a
sense) Unbelievers are in the Devil; who is the father and first author of all
the darkness in this visible creation.

From which time forward, the devil has, and still does King it in the world.
To which the Prophet Daniel does witness in chap. 7. where he describing the
Monarchies that were, and should be, he saw them represented under the type of
Beasts, devouring, cruel, and savage Beasts: which representation fully
answers the depraved nature of Satan, who inspired those Beasts, and acted in
them to the fulfilling of his beastly will. And not only has he seized on this
Government, but he pleads a Right thereto: as does appear in his dialogue with
our Savior in Luke. 4.6. for when he had showed him all the Kingdoms of the
world, he says, All this power will I give thee, and all the glory of them,
for that is delivered to me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. And ^bserve,
that our Lord in his answer to ^he Devil, does not deny what he had said, or
prove him a Liar; but waving ^he antecedent, he only denies the consequent;
that from such premises, it will ^ot follow, that therefore he should be
wor^hipped; for no temporal reward can ab^^lve us from our obedience to God,

And of all the great Governments of ^he World, there is none in which the
De^ill more vigorously appears, than in the ^urkish; it being an Empire fitted
for a ^ensuall, Ignorant, and Fabulous Religi^n; and a Religion likewise fitted
for a ^yrannicall, Oppressing, and Predatory Empire. So that what was said of
the State, and Religion of the Mamaluks i^ Egypt, may truly be applied to the
Turkish* That the first step to the Throne, is Slavery; and the first Article
of their Creed, is Apostasy.

In this Preface I shall speak something of this Empire; but more largely of it^
Religion, because that the opening of the falsehood thereof, it is carnality, and
sed^ctions, is the intent of this Moor, the author of the ensuing Discourse;
whom Go^ was graciously pleased to pull out of thos^ dregs of a divelish
imposture, who being converted, desired the same mercy for his brethren.

Concerning this Empire, you find foretold, as also described in Scripture and
a just doom threatened to be brougt upon it, by him, to whom of right all
Kingdoms belong, and who (though for while, and for certain ends, he suffers
the great Usurper, and many smaller ones under him, yet) he does now preside,
and Lord paramount; he bounds the rage a^^ malice of all Enemies, both earthly
an^ heavenly; and in his time (which is the best) will dash them to pieces, and
raise himself upon their ruins.

It is observed of this Empire, that it has a Watery constitution, for, A
Crescent (the mistress of moist bodies) is it is badge, or coat armor. Also the
Prophet Jsajah in chapter 27.1. calls it The Dragon in the Sea (of which Egypt was
a type, which is situate among many waters). And Ranzovius observes, that a
watery trigon has favored Mahomets Law, and kingdom; for at his arise, when
he invented his Alchoran, and began his Sarracen Empire, a watery trigon had
dominion; About the year 1385 the Turks much prevailed in Christendom under
the return of the same trigon; and it still rules. But ere long (says he) a
fiery trigon shall reign, which will bring a total ruin to that Government.

The Scriptures foretell of this Empire too and that under several Names; as
also of it is fall. I say calls it in chapter 27.1. Liviathan, and The Dragon; and
it is to be punished with Gods great, sore, and strong sword; and this is to be
done when his people The Jew's do own the Lord Jesus, who then shall be put
into a state of rejoicing, or singing, as in Jsay. chapter 25. and chapter 26. In
Ezech. chapter 38. and chapter 39. it is called Gog, and Magog: for in the Prophets
time, that was the name of those people, of whom the nation of the Turks are
since descended. And Gog and Magog is to fall upon the mountains of Jsrael,
where he is to receive his fatal blow. In Dan. 7.8. he is called The little
Horn, before whom three of the first horns were plucked up by the roots; and
which had a mouth speaking great things: but this Horn, with all his strength,
shall be broken, by the coming of The Ancient of Days. In Apoc. 9.14. it is
expressed by The four Angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates. And
in v. 16. it is called An Army of Horsemen. And in Apoc. 16.13. it is expressed
by The Dragon: which in apocalypticall notion imports An open enemy against
Christ, and his Saints: now this Dragon shall be bound, and cast into the
bottomless pit.

Concerning The Time when this shall be, diverse are the opinions. For a
general compute, I think it may strongly be proved, That the second Wo-Trumpet
(which conteins the Turks duration, as the first does the Sarracen Kingdom)
does contemporize with the first 6 vials; so that while those are pouring
forth, this Empire has it is dominion; and shall expire with them which will
be, when the 42 months shall be ended. And for a more particular account, most
follow that of expounding the 1290 days, in Dan. 12.11. and the 1335. in verse.
12. to be meant of the Jews deliverance by the ruin of the Turks; and that the
first number (making the epoch to be in an. 360.) comes out in an. 1650. when
it shall begin; and the foundation be laid of the Jews conversion, and of the
Turks destruction. And the last to to come out in an. 1695. when both the
forenamed particulars shall be completed. And to the same sense is that
fitted of an Hour, a Day a Month, and a year, in Apoc* 9.15. making it about
395 years, and to import the duration of the Turkish Empire, which (they say)
began in an. 1300. Now that this interpretation in a strict sense, is not true,
time has proved; for the 1650th year is gone, and yet neither of these two,
(so far as we know) is so much as begun; though perhaps we are nearer to it
then we think for, The Jews say, God keeps three keys in his own hand, sc. that
Of the Womb, Of the Clouds, and of the Grave: I may add a 4th, sc. that Of the
Revelation, of which we understand so little certainly. But we humbly wait,
when the father of Lights shall break forth upon us with the spirit of
Illumination.

For the Persons by whom this shall be effected. Most think it shall be by the
Jews, those Kings of the East, whom ere long God will gather from their great
dispersion, and call out of their holes; who when so miraculously called, and
gathered of God, he will dry up the waters of Euphrates before them, and also
destroy the Turkish power by them, making them a terror to his enemies, and a
blessing to all his people; suitable to this, the Turks themselves (as Purchase
says) have this Tradition, That they shall last of all be subdued by the
children of Jsaac, Which if so, then look not for the setting of the Half Moon,
till the rising of the Sun; not for the fall of the Turks, till the Jews shall
arise, and shine in glory, by the appearance of Jesus Christ to them, and with
them.

As for it is Religion, it is calculated for an ignorant, slavish, theevish, and
sensual people; such as the Arabians formerly were, and the Turks now are.
Whereas the Gospel of Jesus Christ has it is arise from the spirit of Freedom,
and Liberty; it comes from the free spirit, it takes place chiefly in a free
people, and makes them more free who embrace it in power, as in Joh. 8.36.
Which may be one accidental cause of the Gospels prevailing in England more
than in any other part of the world, because we are the freest of Nations. But
this, I think, I am sure of, That the doctrine of Christ shall not subdue the
world to it self, till the time comes, when Tyranny and Slavery shall be hushed
out of the world, and Liberty shall be given universally to mankind.

Before I speak of Mahomets Alchoran, I must speak somewhat of Mahomet himself
(though the less, because so many have writ so largely of him.) He was born in
Arabia, in an. 620. in a small village named Jesrab, but now Medinah Alnabi.
His father was Abdalla the son of Abdalmutalib, a worshipper of Idols. His
mother was Emina, a Jewess, and of ill repute. His father dying, and his mother
being left very poor, she not able to keep him, committed him to an uncle; but
he casting him off, the young Mahomet was a prey to Thieves, who (as Baudier
relates) put him into chains, among other Slaves; and in that quality being set
to sale, a rich Merchant Abdemonople bought him. He trading for his master, got
his good will; and his master dying, he married his rich widow; by which mean
he grew rich, and more ambitious. His ambition prompted him to be some great
man, and by the help of Sergius a Nestorian Monk, he would be thought to be a
Prophet; to gain the esteem of which, he gave out That he did many Miracles,
That he had conference with the angel Gabriell; That God gave him the
Alchoran; and That the holy Spirit came to him in the shape of a Pigeon. But
not to spend time in a particular confuting these forgeries; a short
description of his life will do it sufficiently; which I shall borrow out of
Baudier, his Histoire de la-Religion des Turcs. Mahomet was a famous highway
thief, robbing the Caravans of Merchants as they traveled from one Country to
another; by whom he was sometimes wounded; sometimes some of his companions
were slain, and sometimes he succeeded too well for so bad a cause: To this he
added Cruelty, massacring those who opposed his thieving, when it lay in his
power. He is truly infamous for his unbridled Lust, having fifteen Wives, and
two Slaves that were his Concubines. Now by this short Narrative let any man
judge, who has any seed of God in him, yea who has not defaced the light of
nature common to Mankind, whether this man be like to be a Prophet of God.

His Law he calls Alchoran, which in the Arabic imports, A gathering together
of Precepts: or Alfurkan, which signifies Redemption. It is divided into
Azoara, or chapters; which word signifies Faces, because as by the face you
know the man: so by these, as by titles, you know the contents of that
division. These Azoara are made fewer, or more, according to several editions;
and hence it is that the quotations out of the Alchoran, mentioned in this
following discourse, do not answer the Azoara of the Alchoran as we have it in
English. Which the Reader must observe, least he think that the Author was
mistaken in what he cites. The Turks say that their Alchoran was writ upon
parchment, made of the skin of the Ram, sacrificed by Abraham to God in stead
of Isaac: so Baudier. This Alchoran cal's itself, in several places, by
specious Names, sc. The confirmation of the Gospel: The approbation and
explication of the old testament: The book of Truth: The book of the conversion
of men: The messenger of eternal joy: The guide to man's salvation: The mother
of books: That which leads men from darkness to light. I shall not undertake to
confute this Alchoran, it being so well performed by many, who have made it
their Proper work; and also by the labor of this Convert Moor in this
following discourse. I shall only say this of it in general, That it is
composed of a strange miscellany, sc. of Rabbinicall fables; of histories
corruptly recited out of the Old Testament; and as fasly quoted out of the New.
So that what was justly said of the Popish Legend of their Saints: That he that
made it, was a man Plumbei cordis, et Aeneae frontis, of a leaden heart, and of
a brazen forehead: may most properly be applied to this Book.

It may justly be wondered at, that so great, and so wise a people as the Greeks
bave been, should be given over to such strong delusions. But beside the wise,
and holy council of God, which must silence all: this is to be said, That God
brought this damnable doctrine upon them for that they had accounted Christ
crucified to be but foolishnes, as Paul says. And also because that in the
times immediately foregoing the spreading of Mohammedan doctrine, that part of
the world had given heed to many false doctrines, which had much alienated them
from the simplicity of the truth in Christ. And lastly because the Greek Empire
had made it self very guilty before God, and men, by their crying abominations
of Murder, uncleanness, Oppression, Saint worship, Sensuality and the like; and
through the just judgment of God it came to pass, that they who had defiled
themselves so grossly, should be given up to a reprobate sense to embrace this
fardell of lies, and sink of abominations.

Notwithstanding the general apostasy of all that part of the world to
Mohammedan forgeries, yet in Histories I find two men, who being convinced,
publicly declared the imposture of that Religion. One is out of Baudier, in
lib. 3. cap. 5. who says, That one of their religious men, a Talisman, came to
Constantinople in the reign of Bajazet the second, and officiated in their
great Mosque called St Sophy, in the presence of their Emperor: Who in the
midst of his exercise, threw the Alchoran which he had in his hand, down at his
feet, before all the people; and turning himself to the Emperor, he preached
to him of The falsness of their Law: The Impostures of Mahomet: and the
excellency of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. But the time was not come for their
Conversion. The Emperor commanded the Talisman to be brought out of the
Mosque, and to be presently massacred. The other is out of the Turkish History;
where it is said, That in an. 1620. at Medina there was an Apparition, which
continued for three weeks; and one night there was an horrible tempest with
thunder and lightning; which being ended, there was seen these words in the
firmament, writ in Arabian characters, O why will ye believe in Lies! Then
there was seen a woman compassed about with the Sun, holding a Book in her hand
etc. All being amazed at these things, at last a Dervice (which is a strict
religions Order among the Turks) spoke, and declared to the people, How God had
spoke to the Jews by Moses; to the Christians, by Jesus Christ; and to
themselves Arabians, by Mahomet: (after that he said) But I fear, our Religion
will be proved corrupt, and our Prophet an Impostor, whose prefixed time of
coming to his people, is now past 40 years agone, by our account; and then
this Christ (whom they talk of) shall shine forth as the Sun, and set up his
name everlastingly. At this the hearers were startled; and they took this
Dervice, condemned him, and tortured him to Death.

This ensuing book is a Translation of the work of Johannes Andreas Maurus, or
in English, John-Andrew a Moor; He wrote in Spanish; it was after translated
into Italian, Latin, and French; and this in English presented to thee, is out
of the French; a work desired by many godly and learned men, And though there
is no fear that the Alchoran in English should do hurt to any of our Nation,
carrying with it its own confutation, in regard of it is vanity and falsehood:
Yet it is not amiss, that that being put into our tongue, this discourse should
follow it, which is a Strong, Rational, and clear Eviction of its wickedness.
By the reading of which, you will see what mercy God gives to this Nation, in
freeing us from those seductions; and revealing to us the Gospel of hi^ ^onn,
which leads us in the ways of ^^^eth, and Salvation.

The authors Preface.
THe singular goodness of God does not only communicate it self within it is
own Infinite and Eternal Essence by interior qualityes, but also being willing
to dilate and manifest it self by exterior works, did by an Act of Creation
produce diverse creatures after the likeness and unlikenesse of his own divine
excellencyes. After it is likeness it has created reasonable Creatures, as are
Angels and humane souls, After it is unlikenesse it has created Corporeal
things, such as are Jmaginative, Sensitive, Vegetative and Elementary, and All
for the adorning and beautyfying of the great Fabric of the world, which it
has appointed for man, and men and Angels for it self, as their End, that
from thence they might seek the being of the Creatures, and there by might
understand, that God is eternally Intelligible, amiable, and worthy to be
allwaies praised, and accordingly should love him and render him praises
without end; So that it evidently appears that God is the beginning and end of
all things, as also himself affirms, in the book of the Revelation of St.
John, where he says, I am Alpha and Omega, (i.e.) I am the beginning and the
end: Beginning, because all things which have being, have had their beginning
from him; End, because he is the Center and bounded end of all Beings, Created
for the benefit of others, or their own; their own, as Angels and men; for
others, viz. for the benefit of man, who is the End of all other things, they
being Created for his use and service. And as in the order and sequel of
Causes the final by it is Excellency and dignity, moves and draws the other
to it is self, so, and far better without comparison, God who is the eternal,
unchangeable, and ever-unvariable Center, is (as we said above) the bounded
end of man, and by the Influence of himself without ceasing, by the beams of
his divine Clemency, moves and draws Man to himself, which is the end and
purpose wherefore he made him; Provided, that man of his own choice and free
will, wherewith be was Created, do not by his own fault runn astray; for who
can truly say that there is any hour or moment of time in which God will not
be obeyed and worshipped by his people, seeing he Created them for this purpose.
Man therefore, who has his beginning, and comes from God, and by the means or
help of his works goes through the Conditions and Virtues of his End, which
is God himself, continually desires to attayn the accomplishment and
Execellency of his perfection; By which marveilous revolution and order, the
truth of the universal resurrection and of the other life which we wait for,
is manifested; Which End, Bound, and Rule of all Created things at the
beginning of the world was God, hidden, and only intelligible and
Comprehensible by faith, and for this reason, from thence until the sixth age
of the world, but few men knew him as did the first holy fathers, Patriarks and
the Prophets of the old testament, and an Infinite number of souls who lost the
light and knowledge of him, thereby lost themselves also: Wherefore when the
time of his sacred appearance more openly was Come, he showed and manifested
himself to the world, not only by the understanding, but also by sense,
becoming a sensible man, and choosing unto him self Apostles, for witnesses and
preachers of his truth, he raised himself on high in the midst of the world on
the tree of the holy and true Cross, for a signal mark whereby all men might
see him, and that no man might say, Thou condemnest and destroyest me because I
could not know thee; And from that time forward (O thou supreme Goodness and
wisdom of God) from this thy high throne of the holy and true Cross, where
the divine and Humane natures hung for to be known, how many Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and how great a multitude of Believers have thou
moved of thy self, and have called and drawn them to thee who art the Bound and
true End of all believers and saved ones. Until that in the year 620. in the
city of Mecca, Abdalla Matalib and Jmina his wife, Idolaters, descended from
the Bastard lineage of Ismael the son of Hagar did beget the son of
Contradiction and discord, the false prophet Muhamed, who when he was come to
years of discretion; with his wicked Companions Vbequar, Homar, Hozmen and his
other seven sectarian Captains, began to make the people go astray and
wander from the simple End and certain way of Salvation, and to open the ways
of error by a false worship, whereby he has drawn an Infinite of souls to the
everlasting pains of Hell. Unto which Worship, because it was altogether
sensual and given to pleasures and delights, presently the three Arabia's and
all Egypt turned aside, and their Caliphs and succescors have passed through
and Converted all Africa, and from thence the Kingdoms of Spayn, almost all
which they possessed, with the City of Sciatinia in the Kingdom of Valentia,
where many years after I was borne, and was instructed in the sect of Muhamed
by Abdalla my natural father, who was Alfaqui of that City, upon whose
decease I succeeded in his office of Alfaqui, wherein a long time I was lost
and went astray from the truth, until that in the year 1487. (the most
reverend and no less learned Marquess Adesora preaching in the great Church
or Cathedral of Valentia, where I chanced to be present, on the feast day of
our Lady in August) the resplendent Beams of Divine light, and the influence
of the End (whereof I spoke above) expelled and illuminated the darkness of my
Understanding, and on a sudden opened the eyes of my Soul; so that by the
knowledge which I had of the Sect or Religion of Muhamed, I under stood that
we could not attayn and come to the End of Salvation for which men were
created, by that Sect or way of worship being so perverse and wicked, but by
the holy Law of Jesus Christ; and remembering the call and vocation which I had
heard say was done by Jesus Christ at the sea of Galilee unto St. John and St.
Andrew, I obtained that I should be called John Andrew, and having taken holy
Orders, and of the Alfaqui and Slave of Lucifer being made a Priest and
Minister of Jesus Christ, I began like St. Paul to preach and publish the
Contrary to what I had formerly falsely believed and affirmed; and by the
Assistance of Almighty God, first in this Kingdom of Valentia I converted and
guyded to the way of Salvation many souls of Infidel Moors, which were in
danger to be lost in hell, and were under the power of the devil, from thence
I was called by the most Catholic Princes, the King Don Ferdinand and the
Queen Donna Isabella, to go preach in Granada unto the Moors of that
Kingdom, whom their Highnesses had Conquered; where by the will of God (who
would so have it) and my preaching, an infinite number of Moors denying
Muhamed, were Converted to Christ; And a little while after I was by their
favor created a Canon, and was again called by the said Christian Queen Donna
Isabella, to come to Arragon, for to emplay my self in the Conversion of the
Moors of that Kingdom, who to the great despite and dishonor of our
Crucified Savior, and to the damage and peril of Christian Princes, still to
this day perish in their error; But this her Highnesses most holy intent could
not take effect by reason of death surprising her; And I, that I might not
remain idle set my self to translate all the Law of the Moors, that is to say,
The Alchoran and the glosses thereon, and the 6 books of the sune out of
Arabic into the Arragonian tongue, moved thereunto by the command of the right
Reverend father Martyn Garcia Lord Bishop of Barcelona, and Inquisitor of
Arragon, my much honored Lord, to the end that in the Charge which I had from
his Grace to preach to the Moors, I might Confute and vanquish them by the
authority of their own Law, which I Could not easily have done without
translating it.

Finally, when that was done, that I might not hyde the desire which God had
given me for their Conversion, I determined to compose this present treatise,
(which shall be divided into twelve Chapters) and herein briefly to collect the
fabulous fictions, ridiculous discourses, Impostures, bestialities, fooleries,
Vilanies, inconveniences, impossibilities, and Contradictions, which that
wicked Muhamed has sown and dispersed in the books of his Sect; thereby to
deceive ignorant people, especially in the Alcoran, which he says was revealed
to him in one night by an angel in the City of Meka, notwithstanding
elsewhere contradicting himself, he affirms that he was 20 years Composing
it. I have entitled this Work the Confusion of Muhamed's Sect, and my intent
in publishing it, was that even the weakest Judgments may perceive that in
Muhamed's Law there is not any groend or reason how it can be true, and that
the ignorant Moors being vanquished by the testimonies of their own nation,
might know the Error wherein they are, and whereunto their false Prophet has
led them. I say the ignorant, because no men of knowledge amongst them do
believe in Muhamed, but on the Contrary do esteem their Sect to be false and
very bestiall; and finally to the end that they might all come in to the holy
Law and true End for which they were Created; And likewise to the end that not
only wise Christians, but also the weakest, knowing the various faith of the
Moors, on the one hand might laugh at their insolencyes and beastlines, and on
the other hand might lament and bewayl their blindness and perdition.

Wherefore after this said Treatise had been viewed and Corrected by the
Reverend Doctors Mr: Soler Official of Valentia, Canon and Dean of Letida, and
Mr: Jasper Pertusa Canon of the Sea of Valentia, and Mr: Jerosme Fuster and Mr:
John Sola masters in sacred Divinity, whereunto ex abundante was added the
authority of the Right Reverand and noble Lord Don Mercader Bishop of Tortosa
and grand Inquisitor of this Kingdom, I endeavored to have it printed and sent
into the World for public good, entreating the Courteous Readers, if they find
any thing in this Treatise well spoken, that they would attribute it to God,
from Whom it proceeds, and what may be evil that they impute it to my small
knowledge and insufficiency in the examining and persuing the whole Treatise;
which with my self, I Submit to their benign correction, and to the holy Roman
Church, as a Catholic, and a faithful Christian.

The Confusion of Mahomet's Sect, etc.
CHAPTER I.
The first chapter treats of Muhamed's life; the place of his birth; his
parents and ancestors; when he began and finished his Sect; and his death.

MUhamed was born in the city of Mecca in Arabia the happy, and was the son of
an eminent Citizen of that place Called Abdalla Motalib. This Abdalla Motalib
had eleaven brethren, the eldest whereof was Buggelino, 2 Bulehebin, 3 Hessin,
4 Butelib, the 5 Corasi, the 6 Tanin, the 7 Hanza, the 8 Alabez, etc. These two
Hanza and Alabez dyed Moors, but the other nine Uncles and Muhamed's father
dyed Idolaters, and were all opposers and mortal enemies of Muhamed, and
fought many battles against him and his Moors in defense of their Idolatry,
Judging it better to dye Idolaters, than to follow his Sect; though both their
ways were evil and erroneons,

Muhamed's parents, his Uncles, the people of Meka, and the Countries adjacent,
worshipped an Idol by them called Aliethe Aluza, which Idol was erected in a
tower in the midst of the Temple of Meka, This tower was then, and is yet
called Elcaba and Alkible, of which Idol and Tower we shall speak hereafter.
Muhamed's father dyed, and lest him Posthumus, his mothers name was Imina the
daughter of Guabbin, she dyed 2 years after his birth, and so he became an
Orphant, and a Nurse called Lina or Alima fosterd him until he was sixteen
years old.

The descent of Muhamed according to a certain book called Azar, (which
contains a History of his life, and death, and is as authenlick, and of as
great authority amongst the Moors, as the life of Jesus Christ our Lord is
amongst us Christians) is thus, viz. That Muhamed descended of Ismael the son
of Abraham and Hagar, Sarah's handmaid; from which Hagar the Moors are called
Hagarens, and ought not to be called Saracens, because they do not descend from
Sarah the lawful wife of Abraham, but from Hagar, who was Sarah's handmaid, as
we see in the 16 and. 17 Chapters of Genesis.

The said book Azar says, that Abraham had two sons, Isaac the son of Sarah,
and Ismael the son of Hagar, and that Ismael the son of Hagar founded and built
the temple of Meka, and it was called Beitalla, (i. e.) the house of God, it is
likewise called Beithalla Alharan (i. e.) the house of God, prohibition, or
excommunication; and the reason why it is called prohibition, is because that
Abraham (as that book says) four months in the year forbad and prohibited
hunting in the territories of Mecca; which the Idolaters afterward observed
and kept in reverence to the Idol which they erected in the said Tower
Elaabba; And the Moors retain and observe the same Law to this day. The second
chapter of the first book of the Alcoran says, that the temple of Mecca was
the first temple that was ever built in the world, the words in Arabic are
thus, Oinne agnele beytin, etc. And the book Azar further says, that after the
said temple of Mecca was built, Abraham divided the land of Canaan, and Ismael
dwelt in the City of Mecca, and married an Egyptian woman an Idolatress, by whom
he had twelve Children, which also appears by the. 17 Chapter of Genesis, the
eldest of which was called Nabayoth, 2 Caydar or Kedar, 3 Abdael, 4 Nabsam, 5
Masna, 6 Douma, 7 Massa, 8 Haded, 9 Thema, 10 Iackour, 11 Naphis, 12 Kedma; All
these 12 sons of Ismael were Idolaters, and spread 12 sorts of Idolatry in the
greater Arabia, Arabia the Happy, Armenia and Persia; some of them worshipped
the Sun, others the Moon, others the Angels, others Fire, others an Idol
called Bohinun, and others a tree called Detulamar, and they of Mecca and the
Country adjacent worshipped an Idol called Alliethe and Aluza abovementioned,
which was erected in the said Tower Alkibla, toward which Tower all Moors
turn their faces when they make their Zala (i.e.) prayer, and swear by it. The
said book Azar further says, that Caydar the second son of Ismael erected the
said Idol in the said tower, because Abraham and Ismael had assisted at the
building of the said temple, and that Caydar commanded that a feast or Easter
should annually be celebrated in honor to God, and in memory of his grandsires
sacrifice, when he was commanded to sacrifice his son Isaac, in whose stead
God commanded him to sacrifice a sheep; and hereupon they of Mecca and the
Country adjacent did annually sacrifice sheep and several other beasts in
honor to that Idol, and from all the Country about Meka, they came to visit
this Idol, and the temple of Meka, and to celebrate the said Passover, which
feast and Pilgrimage is the same which the Moors now use, and have used ever
since Muhamed's time, and the Pilgrimage or visitation called Alhage which the
Moors now use, is the same which the Idolaters used, and all the ceremonies
which the Idolaters used in the times of Idolatry, the Moors at this day
annually use the very same when they go to Meka, and that by an express
command in their Law and sect; and even as the Idolaters did forbear the
killing any wild beast or bird by hunting in the Country of Meka four months
of the year, which are 2 before their Passover and 2 after, out of the
reverence they bear to the said Idol, (yea so strickly, that they would not
kill a lowse or a flea, and hence the Moors call these months prohibited and
forbidden) the Moors do at this present use and observe the same and diverse
other Ceremonies which the Idolaters used in the said Passover, and Pilgrimage
or Alhage, as we said above, and shall declare further here-under.

The said book Azar assirmes, that the said Caydar the second son of Ismael,
was, the man that instituted those Ceremonies, from which Caydar Muhamed
descended, and hence this Caydar is in Arabic called Gead dealharab (i. e.)
grandfather of the Arabians; That book likewise says, that the said Caydar
erected a black stone in the said Tower, right against the said Idol, that
those who went into the temple might know that the Idol stood in the Tower
right against that stone, and that in stead of the Idol they should kiss that
stone, which was then, and is at this present called The blessed stone.

I shall elsewhere tell you that Muhamed worshipped this stone, and magnified
it in the temple of the Idol, and used much reverence to it, and in his Law
and sect commands that this stone be worshipped and kissed, and that the
kissing and adoring of this stone is an Article of his Law, and that it is at
present in the same place where it was at that time when the Idol was in
being; and I shall prove as well by the Alcoran, and by Muhamed's sune, That
Muhamed was an Idolater.

It appears plainly that the descent of Muhamed, from Caydar the second son of
Ismael, unto his parents, was from Idolaters to Idolaters, for the space of
2800 years or there abouts, Now observe and tell me O Moore, how that saying
of Muhamed in the book Kised Alanuar (i. e.) the book of Flowers, can be
understood, where Muhamed says that he proceeds of a most perfect
generation, and that God sent him in the best times of the world; know thou
not, O Moore, that during all the aforesaid time of 2800 years, viz. from
Caydar unto Muhamed, that they were all Idolaters; a rude, beastly and very
ignorant people, as the Alcoran testifies, where he calls the people of Mecca
Zufehe (i. e.) Blockheads and Asses, and know thou not that from Caydar unto
Muhamed there can be no other descent, than that Caydar begat an Idolatrous
son, and that son begat another Idolater, and that Idolater begat another, and
such a succession ye find until Muhamed's grandfather, for it says thus,
Motalib an Idolater begat Abdalla Muhamed's father, who was also an Idolater,
and this Abdalla begat Muhamed an Idolater; Now observe, O Moore, and consider
the generation of Jesus Christ the son of Mary, and thou shall find that he
descended from Abraham the father of Isaac, and from Jsaack the father of
Jacob, and from Jacob the father of Judah, and from Juda the father of, etc.
and from one to another until our Lady the Virgin Mary; and thou shall see
that they were all Patriarks, prophets, Heroes, perfect men and Saints, and
wilt acknowledge that this generation of Jesus Christ is better than the
generation of Muhamed; and observe likewise the time of Christ, how it was
adorned with Prophets, prophecies, Saints and Priests who worshipped in the
temple of God the sacred house of Jerusalem, which the Alcoran calls the
blessed house of God, and compare Muhamed's Temple, wherein Idolatry then
reigned more than at any time before or since, with the temple which Jes^^
Christ and this Virgin his mother frequented, which was the Temple of God
sanctified, served, and honored by Prophets and holy Priests; and Compare the
father and mother of Muhamed, and thou will see the difference between the
father and mother of Jesus Christ, and the father and mother of Muhamed; and if
thou say that Jesus Christ had no father, I answer, that the Alcoran says
that he was Conceived of the holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and as
ye take the Virgin Mary for the mother of Jesus Christ, so you must take the
holy Ghost for his father, who is true God, and if all that proceeds from God
is God, seeing the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father to the Son, you must
believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God; and thus you see the difference
between the father and mother of Muhamed, and the glorious father and mother of
Jesus Christ; and Contemplating upon all this aforesaid, and considering of it
well according to reason and truth, thou will find that Muhamed does not come
from a high and excellent generation, nor in the best times of the world, but
in a vile time, and of a vilde generation, notwithstanding that his originalls
which were Abraham and Ismael were holy and good.

But let us return to Muhamed under the tuition of his nurse Alima. The book
Azar says, that when Muhamed was 4 years old, he went forth on a certain day
with the Nurses son to bring home the Cattle, and he being in a field alone the
Angel Gabriel came to him in the appearance of a man, clothed with a garment
as white as snow, and taking him by the hand led him behind a little hill, and
there with a razor lanced his breast and cut out his heart, and took a drop of
black matter, which the Moors say is in every man in the world, and that the
devil tempts men by it; which the Angel took from him that he might not be
tempted of the devil at any time, and after it was taken out, the Angel put
his heart into his breast again, and it became whole as it was before; and this
the book Azar says was the first miracle that Muhamed wrought, Concerning
which I shall make an argument in due place in the Chapter of offenses, which
shall be the sixth Chapter, and so Muhamed remained with his nurse till he was
16. years old.

The said book Azar says, that when Muhamed was 25 years old he took to wife a
certain rich Cosen german of his called Gadisa, which was his first wife; This
woman's former husband was a rich merchant, and kept many Camells and slaves,
and traded as a Carryer from Mecca into Syria, Persia, and Cayre, with whom
Muhamed made several journies until he dyed; Muhamed and Gadisa lived
together in wedlock till he was 38 years old; and Muhamed had 3 daughters and 1
son by her, the eldest daughter was called Fatima, the second Zeyneb, the third
Umicultum, and his son was called Cazin, and dyed at 22 years of age.

The same year that Muhamed took the said gentlewoman to wife, he did an act
of Idolatry, whereby I will prove to the Moors that he was an Idolater; and it
was thus; Ye must understand that it chanced that year that the people of
Mecca repaired a breach which was in the Tower where the said Idol stood, and
were constrained to take the Stone from it is place, having repaired the Tower
they agreed to put the Stone again in it is place, and to avoid all strife and
offense which might arise about which of them should set the Stone again in
it is place, all the gentry of Mecca cast lots, and the lot fell upon Muhamed
and a cosen of his, Whereupon Muhamed and his cosen came to the Temple to set
the Stone again it it is place, and Muhamed took off his Turbane from his head
and he and his cosen laid the Stone upon the Turbane to honor it the more, so
he on one side, and his cosen on the other, took up the Turbane, and with
great reverence set the stone in it is place and kissed it with an immense
devotion, and in honor to the said Idol, whence it plainly appears, that
Muhamed was an Idolater, and did honor and worship the Idol, and kissed,
magnified and exalted the stone, which only thing is of it self great Idolatry.

And Muhamed not only kissed and adored this Stone before he was a professed
Propher, but also kissed and adored it after he was a public Prophet, and he
commannds and lays down the adoring and kissing of this Stone for an Article
of his Law and faith, which I prove by the books of the Sune, and by a book
entitled Aericele in the Chapter of the Ceremonies of the Alhage or
Pilgrimage, where he says and Commands all the Moors which go a Pilgrimage
to Mecca, when they go into the Cathedral of Mecca the first thing they must
do, is to go to the said Stone, adore it, and kiss it on the right side. The
words in Arabic are these Oquahale qulli, etc. (i. e.) That every Moore that
goes into the Minster of Mecca must first salute and kiss the blessed Stone on
the right side, which Ceremony the Idolaters observed in the times when the
Idol was in that Tower Elcabba, and to this day the Moors observe diverse
other Ceremonies which those Idolaters observed in reverence to the Idol, as
namely the Behiram of the Aladees which is after their Passover when they kill
the sheep, the which the said Caydar, the Arabians grandsire Ismael's son,
ordained and instituted in honor of the Idol, and in memorial of the ram
which Abraham Sacrificed in stead of his son Isaac, nothwithstanding many
Moors, yea, the most part, say that it was Ismael and not Isaac; but their
greatest Doctors say it was Isaac. Likewise the Moors keep the Ceremony of
the Alhage (i. e.) Pilgrimage, which they do once in their lives, And once a
year in the three days of the Passover they kill sheep and diverse other
beasts as the Idolaters did, likewise the Moors forbear hunting or killing so
much as a lowse or a flee in all the Country of Mecca during the aforesaid 4
prohibited months, and ye must understand that the Moors make their account
and Calculation of time according to the Lunar year, and not the Solar, and
call the twelve Moons of the year each by a particular name, whereof 4 are
called Prohibited months because of the said hunting forbidden them in the
Country of Mecca, which prohibition they retain from Caydar and his successors
in honor to the said Idol, one of these months or Moons is called Rajab, the
next Quedda, the third Hegia, the last Moharram, from which Moharram they begin
their annual account; likewise the Moors observe the fast of the tenth day of
the said fourth month which begins the year, on which day the Idolaters fasted
in reverence to the said Idol, the which I prove by a saying of Muhamed in the
sixth book of the Sune, where he says, That the Coraxistes and the people of
Mecca fasted this tenth day; when they were Idolaters, and the words in Arabic
are these Oqua quenet, etc. Likewise the Moors observe the going about the
Tower called Elcabba; and going seven times about a pit called Birsemsem,
which Ceremony the Idolaters observed in memorial of Hagar, and saying that
when Hagar was delivered of her son Ismael, she brought him to this pit and
laid him by it, and went to the Temple of Mecca, and prayed God to cause water
to come forth of the said pit; And the Book Azar says that Hagar went about
the Tower, praying to the God of Abraham, and went back again to the well, and
did thus seven times, and that hereupon God heard her prayers, and caused
water to issue out of the pit, and for this reason, and in memorial hereof,
the Idolaters went about the Tower, and walked seven times to the well; which
Ceremonies the Moors observe, and they are Commanded so to do, and these
ceremonies are in Arabic called Menecique Alhage.

They retayn likewise another Ceremony, viz. when the Pilgrims go to Mecca and
are passed a river called in Arabic Batni Muhacil, he commands them to cast
Stones on the right hand at the top of a little hill, which Ceremony the
Idolaters observed, saying, that when Abraham led his son to be Sacrificed, the
devil came to this place and told Ismael that his father led him away to be
Sacrificed, and the book Azar reports that Ismael took up Stones and flung them
at the devil; and in memorial hereof the Idolatrous Pilgrims used to cast
Stones.

Concerning which ceremonies I will tell the O Moore, that although the
Idolaters by command from Caydar and his Successors, and in reverence of the
said Idol Allethe Aluza, did observe them, (in honor and memorial whereof
Muhamed would have them kept, and commands all Moors to observe them) yet he
having made a new Religion or Worship ought to have instituted new Ceremonies
and not old Ceremonies, yea such as were grounded upon Idolatry, and not upon
reason, so that it does evidently appear that Muhamed did not wholly draw the
Moors from Idolatry, seeing he commands the observation of so many Ceremonies
which are the relics of Idolatry.

Now, lest we deviate too far from the discourse begun, where I said that
Muhamed transported merchandises until he was 38 years old, I will proceed to
show that he then lest off trading, and began to lead a hermeticall and
solitary life, and daily frequented a cave near unto Mecca, called in Arabic
Garhera (i. e.) the cave of Hera, where he daily continued until evening, but
the Moors know nothing of what he there did or Spoke, only the book Azar
says, that he worshipped the God of heaven, and forbear worshipping the
aforesaid Idol.

The said book Azar further relates that Muhamed used so great abstinence in
this cave, that his bodily strength failed and head aked, insomuch that his
discourse faltered, and he talked Idely, and at last lost his sense and
understanding. The said book Azar and another book entitled Azifa say further,
that when Muhamed was in the said grot, he had many visions, and heard others
speaking of him, and discerned the voice but not the person, and continued so a
long time plainly hearing a voice behind him, but when he turned his face that
way he could hear nothing. All which Muhamed every night told his wife Gadisa,
but she told him it was nothing but diabolical delusions, and hereby he
became distracted and lost his sense, and this fury and revishment of mind
followed him so long that one day (the said book says) he resolved to go to
the precipice of a mountain and desperately to cast himself headlong, saying
that it was better to dye than to be reputed a fool; And Muhamed says that
when he was in this resolution the Angel Gabriel came into the said cave in
his own form, with white wings, and said to him, Rejoice O Muhamed, for God
sends thee much greeting, and lets thee know that thou shall be his Prophet
and messenger, and the most perfect of all his Creatures, which words in
Arabic are thus, Oya Muhamed allah, etc. (i. e.) O Muhamed, God greeteth thee,
etc. Moreover the Angel said to him, O Muhamed, Read, and he answered and
said, What shall I read? I cannot read; and the Angel replied to him thus as
the Arabic runns, Oya Muhemed acra bizmi, etc. (i. e.) O Muhamed read in the
name of thy Creator, who created the worm man, read in the name of thy most
honored Creator, who with a pen shows man what he never knew before; and this
was the first Chapter of the Alcoran, and so the Angel vanished away; And
Muhamed in the sixth book of the Sune, and namely in the book of flowers, said
the words following in Arabic, Ofara aytu alme, etc. (i. e.) That the Angel
Gabriel came sitting in a golden throne between heaven and earth, and told him
the prophecy and embassage; And the book Azar says, that when the Angel was
gone, Muhamed returned home very joyful, and that the beasts and the trees
greeted him, saying Absir ya Muhamed ineque etc. (i. e.) Rejoice O Muhamed for
thou shall be the messenger of God, and most dear unto him. It was night before
he got home, and calling his wife Gadisa, he told her all the Mystery revealed
by the Angel, and that he was a Prophet and the messenger of God, whereupon
his wife answered him, Alas Muhamed I fear it is nothing but the delusions of
Satan, which answer much grieved and displeased Muhamed, so that he was very
pensive for a great while, doubting whether it were a thing from God or a
temptation of the Devil, and a great chilness and cold seized on him,
wherefore casting himself on a bed he commanded his servants to cover him well,
as they did, and laid diverse coverlids upon him; and the said book Azar relates
that as Muhamed lay thus, the Angel Gabriel came to him with the second
Chapter of the Alcoran which is in Arabic thus Oya aynhe at, etc. (i. e.)
Arise O thou that art covered, exalt and magnify thy Creator, and cleanse thy
garments and clothes, and abhor Idols; After the Angel had given him this
Chapter he vanished, and Muhamed calling his wife Gadisa read the Chapter to
her, nevertheless she told him, that she did not believe it to be any thing but
a fantasm, and a temptation or delusion, which was formerly wont to come upon
him; this displeased Muhamed very much, and at midnight his wife told him
further, that if the Angel of God were his friend he would have come again ere
this, but because it was not from him, therefore he came not neither would come
again. And hereupon Muhamed lay all night much troubled at the Angell's
absence, Then (says Azar) at the dawning of the day the Angel came with the
third Chapter, saying in Arabic, O guadoha gualleyli, etc. (i.e.) God swears
to Muhamed by the dawning which brings the day, and by the night which gives
darkness, that his Creator has not forgot him, neither will he forget what he
has promised him; with which Chapter Muhamed recovered his strength, and
calling his wife read this Chapter to her, but she told him again, that she
would believe nothing till she saw the Angel with her own eyes, and Muhamed
told her she could not see the Angel. Afterward Muhamed called one of his
youths whom he had brought up from a child, whose name was Zeydin, and told
him, That if he would believe that he was a Prophet and a messenger of God, and
would become a Moore, he would release him and make him a freeman; and revealed
all the secret of the Angel Gabriel to him; hereupon the youth was content to
believe Muhamed, and become Moore, and was the first Moore that believed in
Muhamed. Then Muhamed made a Law and Sune, that whatsoever Christian or Jew
that was a slave, and would become Moore, should be set free whether his Patron
(i. e.) Master would yield to it or no. This Zeydin was a slave, and bred up by
Muhamed from his infancy, yea he loved him so well, that the people of Mecca
said he was his son, and he was called so by them all. I will relate the great
offense which Muhamed did unto this Zeydin and his wife in the Chapter of wives.

All this aforesaid was done when Muhamed was 40 years old, so that he then
began his Sect, and called himself a Prophet in the 40. year of his age, which
was the year of our Lord D C and L X, and he was born in the year D C and X X,
and dyed in the year 583 so that he was 23 years composing his sect or
Religion, and lived 63 years.

After that Zeydin his foster-child was become Moore, Gadisa his wife became
Moore also, and certain slaves and others did secretly become Moors; unto
whom Muhamed preached privately in his house, and made them believe that the
aforesaid Idol was not God but a devil, and a thing made with men's hands, and
that there was no other God but the God of heaven, who created heaven and
earth, and who caused rain, and made the earth bring forth all manner of
fruits and food for man and beast, and made all other Creatures. Also he gave
them to understand that men must die, and afterward rise again at the day of
judgment, and give an account to God of all that they have done in this world,
and that to the good he would give the glory of Paradise, (though the glory
which Muhamed promises be carnal and full of Vanity, as I shall show in this
book in a Chapter which handles this point particularly) and to the wicked he
would give the pains of hell to eternity; which the Idolaters of Mecca denied,
affirming that after death there was no resurrection, and that there was no
Paradise, nor Hell. And ye must understand that upon this occation of what
Muhamed affirmed concerning the day of Judgment, Paradise, and Hell, and the
men of Mecca denying the same, Muhamed composed and made certain Chapters of
the Alcoran, persuading them that God sent them to him by the Angel Gabriel,
and he caused those Chapters to be written in scrowles of paper and notes, and
gave them to the Moors to ruminate them; and afterward he had them restored
again to, him and put them in a box called the box of the Embassage and
Legateship, and he kept a Secretary for this purpose, of whom we shall speak
hereafter, and after this manner he perverted several Moors, who prayed with
him, and read the Alcoran the most secretly they could, until that one of the
principal men of Mecca called Homar Alhatas who was afterward Muhamed his
father in Law, became Moore or Musselman, as also his aforesaid two Uncles,
Hanza and Alabez, and a near kinsman of his called Alibutalib, Muhamed's
son-in-Law having married his daughter Fatima; and another eminent man of Mecca
called Vbechar, (afterward also Muhamed's father-in-Law) All these became
Moors and Musselmen on one day, and being men of rank and power, consulted to
manifest and publish what Muhamed kept secret, and to pray, and read the
Alcoran openly; Whereat Muhamed's nine Uncles and all the people of Mecca were
extremely enraged, and said that he blasphemed their Idol and their God, and
the God of their forefathers, and had made Chapters and verses in contempt of
him, and that it was a great shame to them to suffer it; wherefore they
consulted together and concluded to kill him, but being men that regarded their
honor, and considering that in killing him they should be blamed and
disgraced, (because he was taken for a fool by all the people of Mecca, and for
one Possessed) therefore they did bear with his folly; For that he was reputed
Idiot an is evident, through the whole Alcoran, where he says that his Uncles
and all others took him for an Idiot and a Demoniake person, and said, in
Arabic thus, Oagehele Latihete, etc. (i. e.) That Muhamed Commanded that they
should worship one God only, and that he was no other than a Sorcerer or Liar,
and in other Chapters he is called Meginan, (i. e.) Possessed of the devil, and
there are very few Chapters but do mention that he said himself, that he was a
liar and a demoniack rymer, and when he went in the streets all the people of
Mecca jeered him and mocked him, saying one to another, Behold the prophet,
Look, there is he that will destroy our God; and after this manner Muhamed
dwelt at Mecca ten years. Diverse men of Mecca went a nights to hear the Moors
read the Alcoran, and made it their Common table talk and laughter, saying,
that it was old stories turned into verse, as appears in several Chapters of
the Alcoran which say in Arabic, O in he de ille azatiro alegualin (i. e.)
This is nothing but old tales. Moreover those of Mecca said that Muhamed had
certain Christians, who taught him to make the Alcoran, as we may see in the
seventh Chapter of the third book, which in Arabic says thus. Oguacalei,
etc. (i. e.) This is not the Alcoran but a libell which Muhamed has composed,
and has had some persons which helped him. The glossers on the Alcoran and the
said book Azar does say, that thosewhich helped him were two swordcutlers,
(Christian slaves unto one of Mecca) who knew much of the new testament; with
these Muhamed conversed, and questioned them about many things of the Bible, of
which they resolved him, and upon this surmise they reported that he asked
these two Cutlers concerning those things which he did not certainly know, and
as they answered so he set it down in Arabic in the scrowles, and persuaded
the Moors that God sent them to him by the Angel Gabriel; and indeed there is
great reason to believe this, because in the Alcoran there are so many
contrarieties, unnecessary stories, and fables, all which happened through those
Cutlers, who told him what themselves did not certainly know, and as they said,
so he wrote in his tablebooks and papers, and that hence it is that he does so
vary and change verses, and sets down such contrareities in the Alcoran and
things which agree not together. And indeed the Alcoran does err in
Philosophy, Logic and Astrology, because the Cutlers spoke not truth, neither
were Logicians, Astrologers, nor Philosophers. Likewise those of Mecca said
that he kept a Christian who taught him to make the Alcoran, and others said it
was a Jewe, so that the people of Mecca had all these Suspicions of him, during
the ten years that he dwelt at Mecca.

Afterward when Muhamed's Uncles, and the chiefest of the gentry of Mecca
(which were the Corexirtes, Haximistes and Benitamins, three very potent and
rich families) saw that he perverted many, and that the sect increased and grew
to a head, they assembled one night in the house of one of the most eminent
amongst them, and held counsel about Muhamed, and they all concluded to kill
him, emprison him, or at least to banish him; and that this was so consulted
of, we may read in the second Chapter of the second book, which in Arabic
says thus Ognaid pamcoro, etc. (i. e.) That they of Mecca took Counsel to
kill him, or to send him into banishment, or to imprison him. And being so in
consultation, certain men who were secretly become Moors, did the same night
give Muhamed notice of it, and he presently fled, and all the Moors with him,
and went to Medina, a City ten days journey from Mecca. He had also notice of
the preparations of the Citizens of Mecca who had set guards in the ways,
perceiving that he and his Moors would flee away that night; whereupon Muhamed
bid all the Moors, that every one should lay a handful of embers on the heads
of his horse, and cast another handful into the air, and tie the raynes of
their horses, reading a verse which is in the 18th. Chapter of the third book
of the Alcoran, and is thus Oguaihalme minbeym, etc. (i. e.) That they took a
vayl or skreen in their hands and about them, so that they blinded them and
they saw nothing; And the book Azar says that by the Embers which were laid
over the horses heads and by repeating the said verse, the Moors and he,
passed through their enemies, and were not perceived, and so they went to
Medina, otherwise called Tribik, where he was received for a Prophet, and there
dwelt thirteen years, there finished his sect or religion and dyed there. At
Medina he found five families of Jews, dwelling there and in the parts
adjacent, who began to dispute and question those things which he had then
inserted in the Alcoran, and required him to do some miracles as Moses and the
Prophets deceased had done; to whom he answered, That God was his witness, and
that his testimony ought to suffice, and that he came not to work miracles but
to reduce those which wandered and went astray, unto the Law of God and of
Abraham; of which questions and answers the Chapters of the Alcoran are full,
and in many Chapters he excuses himself of doing miracles, alleging unto the
Jews that diverse messengers, and Prophets wrought miracles and yet were not
believed, yea that those Prophets suffered persecution, and with this excuse he
quotes in the Alcoran the names of diverse men which were never heard of, nor
are named any where else* There he relates the history of a Prophet called Hadin
alias Had, and of another called Zamud alias Hud, and of a third called Zaleh,
and of their nation called the people of Hud, and of a camel who with her
foale was a League in length, which two beasts one day drank up the water of
the City where that people dwelt, and the next day swallowed up men; whereupon
one day they of the City slew them, and because of the sin in killing them,
there fell a great tempest upon that people.

Thus Muhamed had great disputing and debating with the Jews, and himself
extolled their Law, that so they might be silent, nevertheless they still
disputed against him, and laughed at the Moors and Mussellmen, and set strife
betwixt him and his Moors, as shall appear in due place, which jarring
continued until he got power, and then he began to suppress the Jews, and
fought eleven battles with them, overcame them, and slew most part of them,
and the survivors had their lives given them by the Moors, and became their
subjects and tributaries; and from thence forward he began to combat against
the people of Mecca, and they of Mecca opposed him as shall be shown
hereafter; But that I may not be tedious I will conclude this Chapter, and
running through the eleven following Chapters I shall finish this treatise, and
the life of Muhamed, and of all that he did whilst he was at Almedina.

CHAP II.
The second chapter treats of the Alcoran, what it signifies, of the matters
therein contained, and of how many songs it is composed; who collected it, and
reduced it into four books, in the order it is now in, and how many years
Muhamed was making it, how it begins and ends, and which are the first and last
chapters

ALcoran signifies a lesson or Collection of Chapters or songs, though it be
also called by another name Alforzan (i. e.) scattered verses and Chapters,
because he was so long in making it, and the Chapters thereof are called suar,
and one alone is called in Arabic Surah.

The Alcoran treats of diverse things, and especially of the Sect or Law of
Muhamed, and of what the Moors should believe and do, of the hope of reward
in the world to come for the Good, and of torment for the Wicked, It also
treats of things permitted and forbidden to the Moors, as well of food and
drink, as of women with whom they may or may not marry; also it speaks of the
Creation of the world, how God Created Adam and Eve, how they sinned and were
cast out of Paradise and came to the earth; how the evil Angels sinned, and
what was the cause of their sin, and how they lost the Caelestiall glory; It
also speaks how God sent Moses to bring the people of Israel out of the
Captivity and power of Pharaoh; how the Jews received the Law; what befell
them at their going out of Egypt, how they had Manna, sinned, and worshipped the
calf, and how they passed the red sea, wherein Pharaoh was drowned; It also
treats of diverse other histories; (although he has put them confusedly and
out of order, as the Cutlers related them.) It also speaks of the prophets of
the old Testament, (although he mentions diverse which are not named in any
author;) It likewise contains the admonitions which Muhamed used to the
people of Mecca, and his threats to induce them to believe his Sect. It also
speaks of glory, and discourses of the glory which the Moors shall have in
Paradise, as also of Hell, and of the pains and torments which are there. It
speaks of the wonders which God daily does and of the mysteries and divine
works which we daily see in the heaven, earth and sea. It also speaks of the
Virgin Mary, of Jesus Christ our Lord, of the mysteries of his nativity and
life, and of the miracles that he wrought, and of the Evangelists, and of the
true Law which Jesus Christ has given us, as it shall fully appear in the
eleventh Chapter of this Treatise. Furthermore the Alcoran mentions diverse
frauds and much filthiness used by Muhamed, and diverse contrarieties and
repugnancies which have no reason in them, and diverse excuses which God
accepted from Muhamed, and made for him upon several dishonest and immodest
cases which Muhamed committed in his life, as we shall show in the Chapter of
Offenses and Wives. Finally in the Alcoran are many examples of Judgments,
wherewith God chastised men in old time, because of their sins. Of every thing
in order.

This Alcoran was begun in Mecca in the year of our Lord, 630. which was the
fortieth year of the said Muhamed's age; the first Chapter thereof was that
which the Angel Gabriel gave him in the cave, when he said, read, O Muhamed,
which Chapter is called The Chapter of the pen, and the last Chapter was made
at Medina, and is called The Chapter of fate (i. e.) the Conquest, and the last
verse was that which says; O college, etc. (i e) O Muhamed tell the Moors
that nothing is forbidden them to be eaten or drunk, except murrain, blood, and
swynes flesh, upon which verse I shall make an argument hereafter in the tenth
Chapter of this treatise. This said verse is now written in the fourth Chapter
of the first book, called the Chapter of beasts. During the ten years at Mecca
he made certain Chapters or Sore, which called Asoar Mikia (i. e.) Chapters or
songs made at Mecca; and during the eleaven years that he dwelt at Almedina he
made the other Chapters called Soar Medina (i. e.) songs made in Medina and not
at Mecca, so that those which were made at Mecca were not made at Medina. And
he does not make this distinction without cause, whereof I shall speak ere long
in dew place. Now forasmuch as he could not write, he kept a Clark or Secretary
who wrote the scrowls of the Alcoran for him, and Muhamed gave out that the
Angel Gabriel came to him from time to time with the verses of the Alcoran,
which God sent him as occasion required, and as soon as the Angel had
privately told him the verses, he presently commanded his clark to write them
in a Scrowl or note, and to give them unto the Moors to learn them by heart,
and afterward he took them again, and put them into the said shrine or box of
the Mensegina; afterward he took a Secretary called Abdalla Celen, who before
was a Jewe, and this man was his Secretary ten years, and forasmuch as he had
formerly been a Jew, and well read and instructed in the Law of the Hebrews, he
at last perceived and took notice that all that Muhamed dictated to him was
forged, and not given by God; yet notwithstanding, he would and did make trial
of it for his satisfaction; and it was thus, whenever he was commanded to
write such and such verses, he would turn the end of the verse to another
meaning, changing the words and order, but not the rhyme, nor consonance; (For,
ye must understand that the Alcoran is all in rhyme and consonance of meeter,)
so that when he was commanded to write at the end of a verse alla hazizum
haquimun, he wrote alla cemilum halimum; that is, when Muhamed commanded him to
write, God is gracious and wise the said secretary wrote God is a hearer and
Judge; And when he bad him write that God was Almighty and most high he would
set down that God was merciful and gracious; and thus the said secretary
continued seven years changing the end of the verses; and when they were
changed Muhamed did not perceive it, whereupon the Secretary concluded, that if
it were a thing from God, so much time would not have passed but Muhamed would
have had knowledge of it, either from God or from his friend the Angel, All
which I prove from the book called Azzifa, and by the book Azear; so the
secretary seeing this, renounced his office, and turned Jew again as he was at
first; and the said books say, that Muhamed had another secretary who also
renounced his office upon the same reason.

Now speak O Moore, and consider, what a Law ye have in the Alcoran, and how
do ye observe it? yea if a Moore change a letter, or corrupt a clause, or
correct one accent of it, he must presently be stoned by the Law and Sune; How
came it to pass that Muhamed suffered so many verses to be changed, and in so
many years could not perceive that the Jew abused him; but gave out himself to
be the greatest Prophet that ever came into the world? and so thou will come
to know that if the Alcoran had been sent from God to Muhamed by an Angel, he
would have been informed and have had notice of this aforesaid, and the Alcoran
would have been corrected, and the Jew punished and chastised; But in regard he
was neither Prophet, nor the Alcoran the word of God, therefore the Jew
proceeded, altering the verses at his pleasure, and Muhamed knew not of it;

Diverse Moors took offense, when he caused the Alcoran to be written, because,
that one day he would cause verses to be set down commanding some and
forbidding other things, and another day he would dictate and cause other
verses to be written, forbidding what he had before allowed and permitted them,
and making that Lawful which he had before forbidden; and thus ye shall find
in the Alcoran, above one hundred and fifty verses of those contrarieties and
repugnancies, which are called revoked verses, because they are revoked and
annulled by other verses, called revocatory verses, which they express in
Arabic by Hacen, and Mausoh, Moreover Muhamed enjoined the Moors to read
certain verses, and this rumination of verses continued a year or two, and
afterward they forgot them, and when they told Muhamed that they had forgot
their verses, and desired him to repeat them again to them, it seems he could
not remember them himself, and he would answer them that God made him forget
them; but the Moors reproved him and told him that if they were verses from
God, he ought not to forget them, and if he could not remember them, why did he
not get them to be inspired into him again, seeing his friend the Angel
Gabriel conversed with him; but he on the contrary instituted a verse to
reprove them, in the first Chapter of the first book, which says in Arabic:
Omenen Zehamin, etc. (i. e.) That God does not suffer any verse to be revoaked
or forgotten, but for to send another like it, or a better, as if he would say,
that the verses lately forgotten could not be called to remembrance again,
because God had already in exchange given the like and better verses; So that
by his great subtilty and cunning he had as many excuses as faylers, and a
salve for every sore.

What will thou say (O Moore) unto those verses in the Alcoran in the first
book and Chapter, viz: Oya aynhe alledine, etc. which in Prose signifies, That
God had expressly commanded, on penalty, that whosoever does the contrary,
incurs great transgression and sin, and what was it? to wit, when a Morish man
or woman are like to dye, they have power to make a Will, and thereby to
bequeath a third part of their goods to their parents, brethren, and next
kindred, and in the verses aforesaid, he says that this commandment must be
permanent and just amongst the righteous, and whosoever shall change it, let
God's curse light on him: And according to this commandment the Moors
disposed of their Estates for one while during Muhamed's life, and if any one
bequeathed a third part of his goods to his parents or brethren, the Will was
firm by force of that commandment and verse; But afterward there came a
crochet into Muhamed's head, and without any verse of the Alcoran, he gave a
verbal command clean contrary, viz. he Commanded that they should in no case
leave a third part of their goods to father mother, sister, nor brother, and
according to this last saying of Muhamed, the Moors afterward gave Judgment,
and do judge to this day, and leave the commandment of God and the verses, as
a thing cancelled and annulled; Now tell me, O Moore. Which are those like or
better verses which revoke the verses aforesaid? because the Alcoran in a
Chapter of the first book says, that God does not revoke any verse but to give
another like it, or a better, But seeing thou have no answer but Silence, thou
must know that it is a great transgression to leave the commandment of God for
the command of Muhamed; It were no great wonder if one of God's commands did
revoke another of his commands; and one of God's verses revoke another of his
verses, because he that makes a Law, may and has authority to annull it, as
we find in the holy scripture, that God commands and afterward forbideth,
as when he commanded Abraham to Sacrifice his son Isaac and afterward would
that he should not Sacrifice him, but a Ram, and thelike of the Prophet Jonas,
Therefore it is a marvelous thing and without reason and justice that the
commandment of God should be revoked and abolished by a sinful man, and that
they should observe what a man says, and leave what God says as void and of
no force; From whence thou may know O Moore, that the Alcoran is not the
word of God, because that the word of God is as God himself, and none can
nullifye God or his word. Now then, in regard the Alcoran is not the word of
God, Muhamed has annulled it and rejected it, for that which God has laid
down for a command of Law, Muhamed commands that they do the contrary, not
showing any authority from God as he used to do for diverse matters and for
several acts which he did, as a little hereafter shall appear; And how can it
be authentic, seeing Muhamed during all the time of the twenty three years (in
which he was giving the Law and making the Alcoran) always altered the verses,
and commanded them to do many things by authority of the verses of the Alcoran
and afterward commanded the clean contrary, and to that purpose gave authority
by other verses which revoked the former verses, as appears in the changing of
the Alkibla, where by the authority of the Alcoran he urges that they should
not pray but in the said house of Jerusalem or in the house or Mosque of Mecca,
right against the tower called Elcabba, and for this cause it is now called
Alkibla, (of which Alkibla and alteration I shall say something in the Chapter
of offenses) and thus I say that for these reasons Muhamed never commanded that
his Alcoran should be collected or reduced into books and Chapters, as now it
is, but kept it in the said scrowles or papers in the aforesaid ark or shrine,
and many of them were lost and could never be found; so that if he had lived a
hundred years, he would still have altered his Law, and the Alcoran would never
have been finished, and therefore he did not reduce it into the form which it
now has; But it was done after he was dead, when Hozman his son-in-Law was
King and Caliph, who was the third King after Muhamed, for after Muhamed's
death the aforesaid Vbequar succeeded as King and Caliph, after Vbequar, Homar
Alhatab was King and Caliph, which two were Muhamed's fathers in Law, and after
Homar this Hozman succeeded in the throne and he was the man who took the
scrowles and papers out of the box or Shrine, and put them into order and
entitled the Chapters, and made four books of them, and in the first book put
five Chapters; the first whereof is called the Chapter of the Cow; the second,
the Chapter of the Lineage of Joachim the father of our Lady; the third, the
Chapter of woman; the fourth, the Chapter of the table; and the fifth, the
Chapter of beasts.

In the second book he put 12. Chapters 1. The Chapter of the wall 2. Of
Spoils, 3. Of the sword. 4. Of the Prophet Jonas. 5. Of Hud, a new Prophet
named by Muhamed. 6. Of Joseph the son of Jacob. 7. Of Thrones. 8. Of Abraham.
9. Of the Ahigere. 10. Of flies. 11. Of the Voyage of Muhamed. 12. Of the Cave
and the 7. Sleepers.


In the third book he put 19 Chapters. 1. The Chapter of the Virgin Mary. 2. Of
Taha. 3. Of the Prophets. 4. Of the Earthquaks. 5. Of Believers. 6. Of the
Light. 7. Of the Gibbet. 8. Of the Executioners. 9. Of the Pismire. 10. Of
Cahaz. 11. Of Spyders. 12. Of Lucumen, a saint and David's Friend. 13. Of
Bowing or inclination. 14. Of the Romans. 15. Of the Creator. 16. Of the
Saboath. 17. Of additions. 18. of Man. 19. Of Angels.


In the fourth book he has put 175. Chapters; and to each a particular name;
so that the Alcoran has 211. Chapters, and as much is written in the first
book as in the second, and as much in the third as in the fourth.

This said Hozman who collected the Alcoran, does not in those 4. books and
211. Chapters, set down all the Alcoran which the Moors in Muhamed's time read
in the scrowles or papers which the said Secretaries wrote; the which I prove
by the book Azar, and by the book of Azzifa which say, that in Muhamed's time,
the 17th. Chapter of additions, in the third book, was as big as the Chapter of
the Cow, which is the first Chapter of the first book, but now it is not above
half as big as the Chapter of the Cow, so that there wants half the Chapter;
And I prove it further, because that when the aforesaid Hozman collected the
Alcoran, he found several papers of the Alcoran in the house of Axa Muhamed's
wife, eaten by mice, out of which he could gather nothing, they having lain
behind a chest, and being spoiled with damp and mice. I also further prove it
by the aforesaid books, which say, that when the said Hozman collected the
Alcoran he went about asking every one what he remembered of the Alcoran, some
told him that they had forgotten much of it, Others told him that in such a
wall he should find such and such verses in writing, And so amongst the walls
and the Moors he got part of it, yet nevertheless he never found the verse
which in Muhamed's time commanded that married persons taken in Adultery should
be stoned, which verse was called Ayate ragime, (i. e.) the verse of Lapidation
which was in the sixth Chapter of the Light, in the third book, so that the
Alcoran was larger and had more verses in the days of Muhamed, than it now
has.

Now tell me, O Moore, who never knew or heardest such things, what
think thou of the Scripture which you so much reverence, that when ye take
it in your hands ye kiss it, and swear by it, and keep it like a God, and call
it Alkitib Alhazim, (i. e.) a glorious book and Alcoran alhadin, (i. e.) the
Mighty Alcoran, so that indeed ye hold it for a God; I tell thee, O Moore that
if it were from God and the word of God, that of it which is lost had not been
lost, and the Mice had not eaten those notes in Axa's house, and that verse of
Lapidations had not been lost; Observe then, O Moore, and consider this, and
thou will know thy error, and be converted to God, and God will have mercy on
thee, if thou love thy self, and if thy soul be dear to thee, and so I will
conclude, this second Chapter.

CHAP. III.
The third Chapter of this Treatise discourses of Muhamed's Sune, what the
word signifies, of the six books thereof, and what they contain; their names,
and the reason of the Collecting of them, who collected them, and when they
were collected, corrected, and reduced into the order they are now in:

SUne Signifies a Way, or Law, or the following of the sayings, actions, and
counsels of Muhamed, which his disciples wrote after his death, and after his
Disciples the Moors transcribed and copied the disciples books, and augmented
and abridged them, and wholly altered Muhamed's deeds and words, whence
proceeded so great a confusion in all the books, that what he in his life time
commanded negatively, they laid the same down affirmatively, and what Muhamed
had commanded and set down in his Law affirmatively, they set the same down
negatively, insomuch that this Law was like to be destroyed and never used
more, Upon which ground, and because of the great damage and difference which
happened in the Muhametan Sect, and to prevent the utter loss of the same, an
Alkalife or King of the Moors, caused public Proclamation to be made through
all his dominions, that all the Learned men, Alfaquies, and Docters, should
repair to him to the City of Damascus, and should bring with them all the
books that could be found written of the Sune, and of Muhamed's words and
works; Whereupon all the Learned men then lieving amongst the Moors came
thither, and brought all the books of the Sune. Then the said Caliph or King of
the Moors commanded that six Alfaquies and learned men who were best
instructed and read in the Sune should be chosen from amongst them; whereupon
out of two hundred learned men, which repaired thither, six were chosen, the
first or principal of which was called Mu^lin, the second Bohari, the third
Buhora yra, the fourth Anecery, the fifth A^ermindi, the sixth Doud; Then the
said Caliph called these six learned men unto him, and commanded them, that
they should go alone into a house, with all the books which till then could be
found of the Sune, and that each of them should by himself collect one book of
all the sayings and deeds of Muhamed which he should conceive to be true, and
that they should each entitle his book with his own name; So these six men went
into a house, with all the books which the Moors had gathered from all parts,
and each of them collected a book, and entitled and called it by his proper
name, and they presented them to the King or Caliph, who, after the said six
books had been viewed and examined by all the other docters there assembled,
commanded that all the other books should be cast into a great river near
Damascus called Adegele, whereupon having laden two hundred Camels with the
multitude of books which were brought thither they cast them into this river:
Likewise the King gave notice by a Decree or public Proclamation throughout
all the countries of the Moors, that no Alfaquy should dare to read or keep
any book but the six aforesaid, and that none should mention any saying or deed
of Muhamed but such as should be found written in the said books; and that all
Moors and Musselmen or believers of Muhamed should receive these books for as
true and authentic as if they were the very Alcoran it self; and that they
should not be less reverenced amongst them than the Alcoran it self. All which
the Moors observe, and have these books in as great reverence as the Alcoran
it self, and the words thereof are amongst the Moors, of as much, yea greater
authority than is the Alcoran: I have the more enlarged my self upon this
point, because that in some cases they follow the sayings of Muhamed, and leave
the sayings of the Alcoran as of no effect, which sayings of Muhamed are
contained in the six books aforesaid, so that the word of God (which in their
opinion is the Alcoran) is made void by Muhameds sayings, as is declared in the
preceding Chapter, and as shall further appear in the eleventh Chapter.

In this manner was Muhamed's Sect restored, and for this, the Moors hold and
esteem the said Caliph for a Saint; Nevertheless, I say that in most part of
what these learned men gathered and collected in those six books, they have
incerted several contrarieties, and diverse sayings and doings of Muhamed which
contradict each other, and do not agree one whit; Which has caused the four
opinions which the Moors have in their Law and retain in their Sect, which
were raised afterward by four doctors, the first whereof was called Melich,
the second Assafihi the third Alambeli, and the fourth Abuhamfa; and ye must
understand that the said difference in opinion is practiced by the Moors in
their washings which they use when they make their Zala or prayer, and not
only in making of their Zala but also in their fasts, and in several other
Ceremonies and customs, but especially in those things which appertain to
Judicature, so that each opinion in it self differs from the other three.

Of Melech's opinion are all the Moors of Medina, and of all Africa, and all
the Moors which are and were in Spain; Of Assafihy's opinion are the Moors of
Meka and the Country adjacent, all those of Arabia the Happy, and the Great,
those of Baldeck and Damascus; Of Alambelii's opinion are the Moors of Armenia
and Persia; and of Buhamfai's opinion are the Moors of Syria and Alexandria,
but in Grand-Cair all the four opinions are followed, I mean, that those Moors
are divided into four parties or Sects. viz. one holds Melich's opinion,
another Alssafihy's opinion, another is of the third opinion, and another of
the fourth opinion, the which proceeds from the great and innumerable multitude
of people in that City; So that by reason of those six Books, and of those four
opinions, Muhameds Sect has always been, and is still consufed, not agreeing
together, especially in their suits of Law or Judicature, Marriages, and
Divorces; And ye must know that the sayings and deeds of Muhamed in the said
Books, are reduced to four kinds or sorts, viz. to certain, and true,
Defective, Abrupt, and Weak. Those words or works of Mahumed, which have the
testimony of his Wife Axa, and the ten Disciples, when they say, that they saw
Mahumed do or say such and such things, arecalled true and certain, and what is
said of Mahumed, and is reported by his other Wives, without the testimony of
Axa, or any of his disciples, is called Defective; and those works and words
which have but the testimony of the learned and principal men which lived in
Muhameds time, are called abrupt, that is, that they came not to the knowledge
of any disciple, nor of the said Axa; and the fourth kind of words and works
are those which proceed from good Doctors, after Muhamed gave out that he was
sick and infirm; In Arabic they are called Caheh, Dahif, Mancof, Zaquini. All
which I prove by what a Doctor says, who made the Book of Flowers, which was
collected out of the said six Books; For he says in his Preface, that all the
Contents in his Book of Flowers were drawn from the certain and true sayings of
Muhamed, and all that is written in another Book, which another Doctor
collected, he says is of the certain defective, cut off or abrupt, and sick;
The words in Arabic are these, O quuille me, etc.

These six Books of the Sune treat of all that Muhamed spoke and did, and
commanded to be done, as will appear by the Contents of the following Chapters,
in which said six Books there are as many Contradictions, fooleries,
superfluous, irrational, and ungrounded things, as there be in the Alcoran;
and the Moors say that the Alcoran is the word of God, which is incredible.

CHAP. IIII.
The fourth Chapter of this book handles certain arguments which may be framed
and brought against the Alchoran, proving that it is false of it self, and not
the word of God; And also against Muhameds Sune, proving that it is of it self
a ridiculous thing, and fit for men of little knowledge and judgment.

THe first argument is from what is said in the second Chapter of the fourth
book, which is in Arabic Ogna Nofigha, etc. (i. e.) that at the end of the
world a trumpet or horn shall sound, and the Angels in Heaven, and men on
earth, shall fall down dead, and afterward the said trumpet or horn shall
sound again, and all as well Angels as men shall rise again; wherein the
Alchoran affirms that Angels are mortal, and that they must all dye and rise
again, the which impugneth divine and humane Law, and is against all natural
reason; and that for several causes; First, because Angels are spirits, having
no body, but spirit only, and not having bodies they cannot dye, for death is
nothing but the separation of the soul from the body, and in regard men are
composed of body and soul, when the soul is separated from the body and
departed, the body becomes a Caryon, and the soul goes whether God pleases,
according to every man's deserts and works; and because the body is composed of
the four Elements, it corrupts and turns to earth; but the soul of man
after it is created never dies; how then can it be as the Alcoran says, that
Angels dye, when humane souls dye not? The second cause is, because Adam's sin
was the occasion of his death, by which sinning, all his posterity were
condemned to dye, whence it follows, that if he had not sinned, neither he nor
any of his posterity had been subject to death; Now tell me O Moore, what sins
have the Angels committed whereby they have deserved death as Adam, who
incurred it by sin? The third cause or ground is a natural reason which gives
all men to know and understand that Angels dye not, neither can dye, which is
this; Lucifer and all the Angels that sinned with him by their pride against
God, were for this sin deprived of the glory of Heaven and Paradise, and were
cast into the bottomless pit for ever, and were not condemned to dye because
they were spirits; And if the devils by reason of their sins were not condemned
to dye, how is it that the Alcoran says that Angels shall dye? So from these
three grounds we may conclude that Angels shall not dye, and that he that says
that Angels dye, speaks not the truth, and in regard the Alcoran says that
Angels dye, I say it is not of God, nor the word of God.

The second Argument is from what the Alcoran says in several Chapters, and
namely in the first Chapter of the first book, in the first Chapter of the
second and fourth books, in which three Chapters he relates the Creation of the
world, and the history of Adam, how he was created of earth by the hand and
Workmanship of God, and how God inspired life into him; and further in the said
Chapters, he says and affirms, that after Adam was created, God Commanded the
Angels to bow themselves down to the ground and worship Adam; and that they all
did so, except Satan who refused to do it, and God asked him why he would
not worship him whom he had made with his own hands, and he says, that Satan
answered, that he was Created of a more excellent nature, viz. Of fire, and
Adam of dirt, then God cursed Satan, and he and all those who had the like
will as he, were cast into the bottomless pit and are cursed for ever; All this
the Alcoran affirms, saying that the cause of the fall of Satan and the evil
Angels was, because that they would not worship Adam; nor prostrate themselves
before him; and the words in Arabic are thus, Ognaidcale, etc. And do
signify that which we have related and declared above: which is not only an
untruth, but also a great Heresy and Blasphemy; Now speak O Moore, and observe
whether this has any sense or reason in it; for you must conceive that if such
a thing were true it would have been written in the first of the five books of
Moses, which is called the book of Genesis or the Creation; wherein he sets
down the Creation of the world, and how God created all Celestial and
Terrestrial things, but does not mention any such imposture: and you must
observe, that God would never command that any should be worshipped but
himself, so that the Alcoran says that which was never true, and which can
never enter into the brains of a reasonable man; and therefore in conclusion I
say, that the Alcoran has not any reason or truth in it.

The third Argument is upon the first Chapter of the third Book, where he
says, that the Virgin Mary, the Mother of Jesus Christ, was the Sister of
Aaron and Moses, and says in Arabic thus, Ogia Mariamu ya ohta Aron, (i. e.)
O Mary, O Sister of Aaron. Observe, O Moore, the great error which the Alchoran
commits in this place, and how he takes one person for another, putting the
Virgin Mary for the Sister of Moses and Aaron, who was called Mary the
Prophetess, and there were above 1500. years between them. Now can we call a
Scripture which erres in so much time, the Word or Scripture of God? And if it
were, as some learned Moors say, that even as God would and Commanded that
Sarah, Abraham's Wife should conceive her son Isaac, when she was already
ninety years old, and was forty years past the time of conception; So also God
had preserved this Mary, the Sister of Aaron, that from her Jesus Christ our
Savior, the Messiah should come. This reason is not good, because in the
second Chapter of the first Book, he relates the conception of the Virgin Mary,
the Mother of Jesus Christ, and how she was offered in the Temple for the
service of God, and that the Priests in those times cast lots which of them
should have the tuition of her, and the said Chapter says, that the lot fell
upon Zachary, and that he took charge of her; And in the same chapter says
further, that this Mary had communication with the Angels, and talked with
them, and that she was fed and nourished with celestial food, which ye may
read thus in the Arabic, Ogna id calati, etc. and likewise he says in
Arabic, O quullenie da hale, etc. (i. e.) That the Angel said to Mary, O
Mary, certainly God has chosen, adorned, and exalted thee above the women of
all generations; and says further, that one day Zachary went into Mary's
Oratory (he having the keys) and there found her eating food which he had not
given her, and he said, O Mary! whence had thou this food, seeing I have the
Keys of the Oratory, and she answered him, that God sent it her. The
Commentators of the Alcoran, say upon this place, that the food which Zachary
found Mary eating, was ripe fruits out of their season. This was the same Mary
to whom the Angel Gabriel came, as appears in the same Chapter, which is
called in Arabic, Sorathe alehamran, (i. e.) a Song of the generation of
Joachim, the Father of the Virgin Mary; I have set down this here for the
greater demonstration and proof, that this Mary was she unto whom the Angel
Gabriel came with the salutation, saying; Hayle Mary full of grace, the Lord is
with thee, and that conceived Jesus Christ of the Holy Ghost. This salutation
is in Arabic thus, Oya Maryemujune, etc. Wherefore O Moore, I conclude, that
this Mary was not the Sister of Aaron, for the Sister of Aaron was not in the
time of Zacharias, the Father of St. John Baptist, as this Mary was; And
Muhamed was deceived here by the name of Moses father, who in Arabic is called
Hembram, by which name Joachim (our Ladye's father) is called in Arabic. And
thus, O Moore, I tell thee, that the reason which the Moors give of Mary's
being Aarons Sister is invallid, seeing it is proved by the same Alcoran, that
this Mary, the Mother of Jesus Christ lived in the time of Zacharias, above
1500. years after the other Mary; So that we must say, that Muhamed and the
Alcoran take one person for another, and err in so long time; A thing which is
not suitable to a Prophet, nor to the Scripture of God; and therefore I say,
that Muhamed was neither a Prophet, nor the Alcoran the Scripture of God; And
hence it appears how the Cutlers made him err, and put one thing for another
in the Alcoran, and transpose the Histories of the Prophets out of due place,
putting the first last, and the last first, as shall hereafter appear; so that
it happened to Muhamed with his Cutlers, as the Proverb says, When the blind
leads the blind, they both fall into the ditch.

The fourth Argument is from what he says in the third Chapter of the third
Book, the words in Arabic are, O qualacad, etc. (i. e.) That God sent the
Alforcan (which is the same with the Alcoran) unto Moses and Aaron for a Light
and admonition to the just; If the Moors say that Alforcan does not signify
the Alcoran, I will prove the contrary by the same Alcoran, which in the second
Chapter of the first Book says, Onzele athorata y aliugile y nezele alforcane
haleique, (i. e.) God inspired the Thora, the Gospel, and the Alforcan into
Muhamed; and the same is in the seventh Chapter of the third Book, in Arabic,
Otabaraque, etc. (i. e.) blessed be he that caused the Alforcan to descend upon
his servant Muhamed for to admonish the Nations; whence it appears from the
Alcoran it self, that Alforcan imports as much as Alcoran, and therefore, O
Moore, I conclude that Muhamed and the Alcoran err likewise in this passage,
in saying that God sent it to Moses, and we need not wonder if Muhamed lay
down this error, seeing he says further in the Sune, that David read all the
Alcoran whilst they sadled his Mule; for he that says the one may as well say
the other, and he that makes one girdle, may make a hundred; And if thou,
say, O Moore, that by the Alcoran is meant the Psalter of David, I say, and
prove the contrary by the Alcoran it self, which in Arabic, says thus, O
qualacad ateyne deude Zabora (i. e.) God sent and gave the Psalter to David,
he does not say that he gave him the Alcoran: And the said Muhamed in the Sune
says, that God sent the Thorah to Moses, the Gospel to Jesus Christ the Son of
Mary, the Psalter to David, and the Alcoran to Muhamed; And so I tell thee that
thou have no other answer than silence. And know thou not, O Moorish
Alfaqui, Chief Priest in the Mohammedan Religion.
who can say the Alcoran by rote, that it says in above 300 places, that God
gave the five books to Moses, which he calls in Arabic, Athorata, and says
likewise in above as many places, that God gave the Gospel to Jesus Christ, and
the Azabor (i. e.) the Psalter to David, and in a thousand such places he does
not any where say that Alforcan signifies the Athora, nor that the Psalter
signifies the Alcoran, therefore consider this well, and thou will see and know
the truth.

The fifth Argument is from what is said in the first Chapter of the first
Book, concerning two Angels called Harod and Marod, who are hanged by the
eyelids in a Cave in the City of Babylon, and are there tormented until the
day of Judgment, the which he expresses thus in Arabic, O guame unzile, etc.
signifying what happened to the two Angels called Harote and Marute in Babylon.
The gloss upon this text says, That God sent two Angels as Judges to the City
of Babylon, to do judgment in that City unto the people, and every night they
ascended into heaven, and descended every morning, and says that one day a
fair Lady came to them, and complained of her husband, and was so acceptable
unto them, that they solicited her chastity; she told them that she was content
to grant their desires, upon condition that they would teach her their Prayer
whereby they ascended into heaven; They through the great desire they had to
enjoy her company, taught her the Prayer, and when she had it perfect, she
presently repeated it, and ascended to heaven; and the Gloss says, that when
the Angels would have ascended again to heaven they could not, and by reason of
the sin which they had committed, they lost the grace of Prayer, and remained
on earth; then God denounced against them, that they should choose their
punishment, whether they would suffer it in this world, or in the next, and
they chose it in this world, and so for that sin they remain hanging by the
eyelids until the day of Judgment. The text of the Alcoran says, that those
two Angels taught the men of that place the art of Negromancy, and diverse of
the Moors say, that this woman was translated into the Star or light of the
morning, (although it be not received for authentic, and approved of amongst
the Moors;) All this aforesaid I prove by the Alcoran, by the gloss or Comment
on the Alcoran, and by the Sune. Now behold, O Moore, who art an Astrologer and
a Philosopher, and consider this History in thy Alcoran, and thou will see
whether there be any reason in it; Likewise behold thou Moore, who art a Divine
according to the Moorish Divinity, which is called in Arabic Tenbid, and thou will see whether it can be conceived by a Moorish Divine, that the Angels were
ever Judges on earth, and whether they have ever known, or can know women; But
thou may say, that they had ground to search this woman. O Moorish Divine,
do thou not conceive, that such a thing does not savor of Divinity, nor can
a wise man believe it, especially a Divine; Likewise tell me, O Moore, who
daily read the Alcoran, how can it consist with the Alcoran? Which said,
that Angels are Spirits, which is in Arabic Roch; for if the Angels are Roch
and Spirits, as the Alcoran makes 'em, then they are not Corporeal, as he
says here, and in diverse other places, and as shall hereafter further appear.

The sixth Argument is upon what is said in the ninth Chapter of the second
book, and the nineteenth Chapter of the third book, and ni^the Chapter of
Dominion or Empire in the fourth book, where he says, that the Stars lie in
the first Heaven, that God set them there for the beauty and Ornament of the
World, and to the end that they should stone the devils; and that the said
Stars are the keepers of Heaven, that the devils may not go into it, and that
God set them there for this purpose; for ye must know, that when the devils
ascend toward Heaven, immediately the Stars go and encounter them with fiery
Darts, as it is in the nineteenth Chapter of the third book, the very words
whereof are in Arabic thus, O gualacad zeynne, etc. (i. e.) That God set the
Stars in the Heaven for the beautifying of the world, and as a guard against
all the cursed devils, and that a Star with a brand or flame of fire does
interpose against the devil that would hear the secrets; and all this or
little less all the Chapters above quoted do allege; And hereupon the Sune
says, that the Stars are set in the first Heaven, bound with chains of gold,
and that the greatest of them is as big as a great mountain, And the Sune says,
that the devils climb up to Heaven and hear divine secrets, and then come down
hither, and tell those secrets to diverse men, their familiars. This Muhamed
says in the book of Flowers, and that the Stars which guard Heaven, do
presently interpose and confront the devils with firebrands when they come, and
the devils flee from them, and go away with what secrets they have heard and
reveal them to divine men. Now speak O Moore, who art a wise Astrologer,
Divine, and Philosopher, whether this can enter into the brains of a man of any
of these professions? tell me where is that Astrologer who grants that the
Stars are fixed and bound to the first Heaven with golden chains? have thou not
read the sayings of Philosophers, who affirm that the least Star is greater
than all the Earth? and for what he says that all the Stars are in the first
Heaven, know thou not that the Planets are in seven Heavens, each having his
particular orb? and know thou not that the Moon is in the first and nearest
to us, Mercury in the second, Venus in the third, the Sun in the fourth, Mars
in the fifth, Jupiter in the sixth, and Saturn in the seventh, highest of all;
Now speak O Moore, what think thou of this thy Scripture, which speaks so
many absurdities; weigh and consider it well and thou will find that it was all
dictated by the aforesaid Cutlers, and not by God, nor sent by the Angel of
God: The names of the Planets in Arabic are these.

1. Hilil, for the Moon. 2. Ymareh, Mercury. 3. Zahra, Venus. 4. Samei, The
Sun. 5. Musteri, Mars. 6. Hotared, Jupiter. 7. Zohal, Saturn.
And all the Stars are in the eighth Heaven, in which are the twelve Signs, the
first of which is called in Arabic.

1. Quabsi, for Aries. 2. Zanre, Taurus. 3. Toguemen, Gemini. 4. Zaraton,
Cancer. 5. Aced, Leo. 6. Alhadra, Virgo. 7. Arinzen, Libra. 8. Alauce,
Sagitarius. 9. Algidi, Capricornus. 10. Alhamle, Scorpio. 11. Adalu, Aquarius.
12. Alhot, Pisces.
I have wrote all this, because that thou O Moore, who art a good Astrologer,
should peruse thy books of Astrology, and what the Moors Astrologers have
written, and see whether thou can find what the Alcoran says, to correspond
with their writings and meanings, and so thou shall see that it is clean
contrary, and not Consonant to what they say and write of this matter.

The seventh Argument is upon what he says in the eighth Chapter of the fourth
book, and in the Chapter of Devils, where he says, that a Company of Devils,
came one night to hear Muhamed and the Moors read the Alcoran; and in these
two Chapters he says, that the Devils took such delight in the Alcoran, that
they presently believed in Muhamed and became Moors: And the words of the
Alcoran in the Chapter of Devils are thus, O coluhia, etc. (i. e.) O Muhamed,
tell the Moors, that a Company of Devils heard the Alcoran, and said one to
another that they had heard the wonderful Alcoran read, and that they believed
it, and were not miscriants against their Creator; And the words of the eighth
Chapter run thus in Arabic, O guaid Zarafna, etc. (i. e.) And when God sent
thee a Company of Devils that they might hear the Alcoran, when they heard it
read, they bad each other be silent, and after they had heard it read, they all
went and admonished their people, saying, O our people! know ye, that we have
heard a book read which is inspired since Moses, which book shows the right way
of Truth, wherefore come ye and obey the Prophet, and believe in him, and God
will pardon your sins, and deliver you from cruel torments, and whosoever will
not obey the Prophet and believe in him, shall not dwell long on earth, and
shall have great torments; All this is in the Arabic verbatim as in our
tongue, and ye may read it in the Alcoran in the two fore quoted Chapters:
Which is not only against reason, and against divine and humane Law, but is
also a great heresy and a horrid blasphemy, being against God, Angels, and men,
against all Scripture, and the very Alcoran it self: For tell me O Moore, who
daily read the Alcoran, does it not direct thee to apply unto God for
defense against evil and cursed Devils? and Commands thee, that when ever
thou take in hand to read the Alcoran, thou must say in Arabic O ahudu
billehi mine Saytani ragini, (i. e.) Preserve me O God from the wicked and
cursed Devil? In diverse places the Alcoran says, that ye must resist the
Devil, because he is the manifest enemy of men, and yet here the Alcoran
says, that they are become the friends of men, God, Muhamed, and the Angels:
Do thou not conceive that this contradicts the Commandment of God, who
cursed the Devil, and for ever deprived him of his favor; and when he says
that God pardoned their sins who became Moors, he contradicts and opposes
the very Angels; For all the good Angels fought against the evil Angels, and
vanquished them and drove them out of Paradise, and they fell from their seats
for ever; and yet the Alcoran says that the Devils must go into Paradise, and
be pertakers of glory with the Angels, and return to their first Stations; Does
it not appear unto thee, O Moore, to be injustice in God, that the Devils whom
he has for ever rejected should return again into his glory? Behold O Moore
and consider this gross error which Muhamed has inserted in his Alchoran, and
thou will perceive that it is not the word of God, nor a Law given by him.

The eight Argument is from the eight Chapter of the fifth book, and the
Chapter of Decoquer at in the fourth book, where he says, that brutish and
irrational creatures shall rise again at the day of Judgment, and that God
shall judge between them; this Muhamed says in the Sune; The words of the
Alcoran are thus in Arabic Oguame mindelbetin, etc. (i. e.) that all the
beasts of the earth, and all the fowls of the air shall rise again in the day
of Judgment; And in the Sune he says, that God shall so do justice betwixt
the creatures, that the beast, that has been gored with ahorne, shall have
satisfaction from the beast that gored it; Likewise he says in the Sune, that
all the sheep which the Moors kill in their feasts or Passeovers, shall rise
at the day of judgment, and pray for the Moors who caused them to be slain;
And says further, that when the Angel St. Michael shall weigh the good and
bad works of men, these sheep shall come and lie in the balance of their good
works, so that the good works of such a man shall weigh more than his evil
works; And for this reason the Moors kill many sheep in their feast or
passover, although they are not bound to kill above one. Now tell me O Moore
who art endowed with reason and discretion, what think thou of this
aforesaid, is it not an unreasonable thing and Contrary to all divine and
humane Laws, yea against the very Alcoran it self? because in the second
Chapter of the second book of the Alcoran, he says these words in Arabic,
Oinne Sarra, etc. (i. e.) that the worst beasts before God are those which are
deaf and dumb, which understand nothing; as if he should say, that brute
beasts are deaf without understanding, and dumb without reason and judgment;
And in regard they are without reason and judgment, therefore they are not
liable to punishment in this world for any hurt they do; for these beasts
daily kill other beasts, and diverse men, but a beast is not to suffer for the
death of another beast, nor for the death of a man; as we often see a bull
bayted kill two or three men, without being punished for it, because that (as
the Alcoran says,) they are deaf without understanding, and dumb without
reason and judgment. How is it then, that the Alcoran says here, that beasts
shall rise to judgment? If we say that beasts shall rise to judgment at the
last day, we must also say that those beasts which have done good works shall
be rewarded and go into Paradise, and those which shall have done evil works
shall be punished in hell; the which Muhamed says and affirms in the Sune,
though the Alcoran say it not; And in the Sune Muhamed says, that the sheep
which the Moors kill at their Easter shall go into Paradise. He likewise
says that the Ram which Abraham Sacrificed instead of his son Isaac was fed
forty years in Paradise; the which the Moorish Alfaquy's also say in their
sermon at the feast of the Adabeyes; The words in Arabic run thus O faatehu,
etc. (i. e.) that the Angel Gabriel brought a black ram to Abraham which had
fed forty years in Paradise. Furthermore Muhamed in the Sune speaking to the
Moors concerning his transportation to heaven, says, that Alborac would not
suffer Muhamed to bestryde him, except Muhamed would promise him to let him go
into Paradise; the Sune says, that Muhamed then promised Alborac that he
should be the first beast that should go into Paradise; whence it appears O
Moore, according to what the Sune affirms, that beasts shall go into
Paradise, the which is contrary to truth and against reason; One thing I will
say O Moore in this place concerning the Ram which Abraham Sacrificed, which
was fed and pastured forty years in Paradise, viz that thou should give me
an Arithmeticall account how many thousand Trickles did that Ram cast in
Paradise during those forty years, the which you may find by the rule of
multiplication; What think thou now O Moore of such and so great a foolery,
and a thing so worthy of laughter? In breife all that the Moors believe and
hold is corporeal and terrene, and not spiritual; as well in respect of this
mundane life and conversation, as in respect of the glory which we are to have
in the world to come; And in Muhamed's Law or Religion it is not sufficient to
say, that men eat and drink in Paradise, but he comes to the impudence as to
say that bruit beasts go, eat and drink in Paradise; and so I conclude, that
the Law, the Prophet, and Scripture, which treats and speaks of such
things, is not the Law, nor the Prophet, much less the scripture of God; for
all the premises do impugn, Truth, Reason, Philosophy, Logic, Astrology, and
chiefly Theology, but not that Divinity of the Moors which speaks not of
spiritual things, but of Corporeal and Terrene.

CHAP. V.
The fifth Chapter of this Treatise discourses of diverse fooleries and
unthruths which are in the Alcoran, from which we may conclude that the
Alcoran is not the Word of God,

IMprimis, That history, which the ninth Chapter of the third book relates of
King Solomon, of which story there is no mention in all the Bible, and in
Arabic it is thus Oguahosira, etc. (i. e.) That King Solomon arrayed his Armies
and Squadrons, as well of men as of devils and birds, and that Solomon led his
Armies unto the river of Pismires, then a Pismire cried out and said to the
other Pismires, O ye Pismires, go into your habitations and Solomon will not
distroy you, neither shall ye perish by his Armies; and that Solomon woundred
at the saying of this Pismire and praised God; The gloss says, that Solomon
heard the voice of this Pismire a Leagues distance; The Story in Arabic
proceeds, and says thus, Ofata facada, etc. That Solomon assembled the birds,
and found that the Whoop was wanting, and out of her place, whereupon Solomon
threatened the Whoop and said, that if she did not give account whether she
went, he would torture her and put her to death. The Arabic proceeds and
says, Ocalet inni, etc. (i. e.) that the Whoop answered Solomon and said, that
she knew that which Solomon knew not, and said that she had been in the
country of Saba, where she found the Queen of Saba, the Lady and Princess of
Saba; Then Solomon said to the Whoop, That he would see whether she spoke a
truth or a lie, and Solomon sent a Letter to the Queen of Saba by the Whoop,
threatening that if she would not obediently come to him, he would come and
ruin her country; The text of the Alcoran prosecuting this history says thus
in Arabic, Ocale ayuquum, etc. (i. e.) That Solomon, knowing that the Queen of
Saba was on her way, would have her Royal palace brought thither before her,
that she might see his power; whereupon Solomon called two devils, and asked
them, which of them could soonest bring the Queen of Sheba's Royal Palace
thither before she arived; One of the devils told him, that he would bring it
in the twinkling of an eye; the other told him he would bring it before he
could stir from his seat; so this devil brought the Palace in an instant.
When the Queen of Sheba came to Solomon, and found her Royal palace brought
thither before her self was come, she marvailed, and said that Salomon's power
was very great. I have inserted all this aforesaid into this Chapter, for two
reasons; first, that all the Readers may know what fables and lies the Alcoran
treats of and relates; secondly, to show that Muhamed lays down nothing in
the Alcoran but what the two Cutlers told him, and as they informed him; and
for this cause the people of Mecca said that the Alcoran was nothing but old
stories, and in diverse places of the Alcoran it is said in Arabic Ocalu inhede
ille azatero aleguelin, (i. e.) That the Alcoran was nothing but ancient
stories.

What the Comment says upon the premises is most ridiculous, amongst other
things it says, that Solomon carried a bed with him three miles in length, and
as much in breadth, all wrought of gold and silver, which bed was carried by
Devils, the riches of the Curtains and Vallens of the said Bed was
unexpressible; And further, that the birds attended this Bed in such an Order,
that they flew touching each others wings, and served for a Canopie or shadow
to Solomon, that the Sun might not scorch him, And that when the Whoop was gone
to the said Country of Saba, her place was left open, through the which the
Sunbeams shone and touched Solomon's face; Whereupon Solomon grew angry, and
threatened the Whoope as is aforesaid, telling her that he would torture her,
and cut off her head.

Now speak, O Moore, what think you of this Story? Consider, that it has no
reason nor any semblance of truth in it, nor is it to any purpose, or necessary
to mention or allege such a story, much less of such a man as Solomon, and
which is not mentioned in all the Scriptures of the old and new Testaments.
Observe likewise, O Moore, the threats and menaces which Solomon used to the
Whoope, of torture and death, which thing and story is more like the tales and
feigned stories which are used to little Children, than the sayings of a holy
Prophet, and a holy Scripture, which the Moors say the Alcoran is; So that I
do hence conclude, that the Scripture which handles such things, is not the
Word of God, and the Prophet that speaks such fables, is not a Prophet of God.
Likewise, O Moore, thou ought to consider, that if the things aforesaid were
true, they would not have been forgotten to have been put into the old
Testament until they were inserted in the Moors Alcoran, wherefore you may
well conceive that this aforesaid neither is true, nor ever was.

Furthermore, in the fourteenth Chapter of the third Book, he brings in another
story of Solomon, which is in Arabic thus; O same dellehum, etc. (i. e.) That
Salomons death was not revealed to the Devils, but only by the worm that eat
Salomon's staff, whereby Solomon sell down, and so the Devils perceived and
knew that he was dead, which till then they knew not; Which story is enlarged
thus; That Solomon had imprisoned several Devils, and kept them tormented in
Dungeons with chains and fetters of Iron, and when Solomon was like to dye, he
commanded that his body should be embaulmed, and that they should cloth him,
as though he were alive, and set him in his royal Throne, to make the Devils
believe that he was living; and what Solomon thus commanded, was done, and they
put a staff into his hand, and fixed it in the ground, that he might sit the
stedier and surer in the Chair; and that a worm came out of the earth, and eat
through the staff, and so Solomon fell down, whereby the Devils knew that
Solomon was dead, and so they came out of the pains and torments wherein he had
put them. All which seems to be, and is, a greater fable and lie than the
former, though they are both two great Impostures, and of little reason and
judgment.

Now tell me, O Moore, whether the things aforesaid are Credible and worthy to
be inserted into the Scriptures of God? to say that the Devils had not
knowledge of Salomons death, when they daily saw Solomon in his Throne, and saw
that he neither eat, drank, slept, rode on horseback, administered justice, nor
did any thing which he used to do when he was living; who can believe these
things to be true? And if they were true, how comes it that they were not
recorded amongst so many other things which are written of Solomon. So that, O
Moore, you must believe that this was all composed and Contrived by the two
Cutlers above mentioned, and not by God.

Likewise the Alcoran says in the 19th Chapter of the third Book, That God
created a Tree in Hell, which tree (as the Comment says) is as big as all
Hell, and that the chief of the Devils is the fruit of this tree; which tree
is called Saiaratazacom; Of which fruit he says the damned shall eat, and
shall drink boiling lead, and with such drink shall fill their bellies; The
words are in Arabic, Oim sajaratazacom talhohaquaro ozosayatim. Of which tree
the people of Mecca and Muhamed's Uncles made a scoff, and made verses on it,
and upon occasion of this tree diverse Moors fell away and returned to their
former opinions, and hereupon this tree in another place of the Alcoran is
called The cursed tree, viz. in the eleventh Chapter of the second Book, which
in Arabic says thus, O guassa jarate, etc. (i. e.) That Muhamed terrified or
threatened the peeple of Mecca with the cursed tree; The Comment says that it
was called accursed, because it was an occasion of the loss of diverse Moors,
who thereupon became advised, and returned to their former Sects.

The Alcoran speaks yet a greater fable than these, saying that God created the
Heavens of Smoke, in Arabic it says thus, O cune aztegne, etc. (i. e.) that
God sits in the Heavens being of smoke, and says, etc.

In the Sune Muhamed says that God has fixed the earth upon the point of an
Oxes horn, and says that Earthquakes proceed from this Ox who bears the earth
on the top of his horn.

Now tell me O Moore, who art an Astrologer, and have read Ptolomy, and
understandest the sphere and the Astrolabe, and also know how the earth is
fixed, and remains firm, for the motion of the Heavens, What think thou of
this Ox who carrys the earth on his horn! for if the earth be fixed on this
Oxes horn, on what does this Ox stand? Consider O Moore this great mistake and
error, which is so ignorant and unreasonable as to affirm that the Heavens are
created of smoke, and that the earth is fixed on an Oxes horn. Likewise O Moore
I would have thee consider whether this Ox be a bruit beast or an Angel; if
thou say it is a beast, then you must consider that the Ox must eat and
drink and dye, and if the Ox dies then is the earth destroyed; But if thou
say that this Ox is an Angel, it must also dye, According to Mahomets
opinion.
seeing Angels dye, and so the earth will be destroyed; And therefore I
conclude that all this aforesaid is a mere vanity, and has neither reason nor
truth in it, but are as great fooleries as those of John de Lenzina; for it was
never asserted by any Philosopher, Astrologer, Prophet, or Scripture, that the
earth is founded or established on the horn of an Ox or Cow.

Muhamed further says and relates another thing in the Sune, which amongst the
Moors is held for an Article of their faith and Law, viz. When any deceased
person is laid in the grave and buried, there come two black Angels to him who
are called in Arabic, Munguir, and Guannequir; one of which Angels carries an
Iron Mace, and the other certain Iron hooks or Forks; and these Angels cause
the dead person to rise on his knees, and the dead person does put on his soul
over his body, even as a man puts on a shirt; but so that here the Sune says
not, that the dead shall rise again out of the grave, but only that the body
shall put on the soul; and after that the dead party has put on his soul and
is raised on his knees, these Angels begin to examine him, and ask him whether
he believed in Muhamed and his Law, and whether he did good works in this
world, that is to say, whether he made his Zala and fasted his Ramadan, paid
Tyths, and gave Alms; and if the dead render a good account of himself, then
these two black Angels leave him; and there come two other Angels as white as
Snow, and one of them sits at his head and the other at his feet, and thus
these two Angels shall accompany the dead person until the day of Judgment;
But if the dead party give an ill account of himself, then (says the Sune) the
Angel that carrys the Mace shall strike him such a blow on the head as shall
run him seven fathom under ground, and the other shall presently fasten his
hooks upon him, and drag him under the earth, and he that has the Mace shall
continually beat him with great blows, and he that has the forks shall
continually drag him until the day of Judgment; All which the Moors hold for
authentic and for an Article of their Faith; The words in Arabic say thus,
Ogua anne Almu, etc. (i. e.) That the Moors are examined in their Sepulchers,
whether they have done good or evil works, and that God will confirm and
accomplish the answer of those that believe in him and in Muhamed, meaning,
that they will answer well, and shall not have any torments: For which purpose
and the Angels examination, the Moors make their Sepulchers spacious, leaving
a void place where the dead lies, and covering the place with plancks that the
earth may not fall on the dead party. Likewise they leave the clothes wherein
the dead is wound up, untyed at the head and feet, that the dead may put forth
his head and feet, and raise himself upon his knees when he is examined. And
also the Moors put about the dead body, certain names written with Safforn and
Oringe-flower water, or wrap them in the winding sheet, to the end that the
dead person may be delivered from the pains and torments of the grave and
Sepulcher. Furthermore the Moors have a prayer, which they say every day after
their Zala or morning prayer; beseeching God to deliver and preserve them from
the torments of the grave, which prayer is in Arabic thus, O allahume negine,
etc. (i. e.) Deliver me O Lord God from the inquisition of the two Angels, and
from the torments of the grave, and from the evil life; Amen. All this I have
here inserted that the Moors may not deny this Article, and that they may also
see the vanity which they hold and believe in their Law, or Worship; For this
is a very vain and ridiculous thing, and without any reason. Now speak O Moore,
who art a man of good reason and judgment, how is it possible that such a
saying as this can enter into thy head, and that thou should believe so
great a mockery and untruth? the which does contradict the Alcoran and the Sune
it self; For the Alcoran and the Sune in several places do say, that at the
day of judgment every body shall receive its soul, and men shall rise with
soul and body, for to give account to God at the last judgment; and every one
with his body shall receive glory or punishment; Now then if this be true, how
is it that the Sune says, that men receive glory or punishment in the grave?
and how can it enter into the brains of a Divine, or of any man of knowledge,
that the body should put on the soul like a shirt? And suppose it were true,
and that the soul did cloth the body like a shirt, nevertheless this body is
not a man that can be examined or tormented, neither is the soul of it self,
Man, for Man cannot be so called but when he is living and composed of soul and
body together: How then can the body answer without a soul, or the soul without
a body? and how can the body when it is a Carcass and lump of earth feel the
Bastinado's or blows of a Mace? So that O Moore, and Wiseman (as thou think
thy self to be) thou have no answer but silence, and to acknowledge that all
this is vanity and the words of men ignorant and of small understanding.

I would also O Moore that thou should tell me, how will the two white Angels
accompany this dead body when it is full of worms, and when it is corrupted and
stinketh horribly; and what blows can the black Angels give, if the body be all
filth, Worms, and Earth? and yet the Sune says that they shall beat it thus
until the day of judgment: So that O Moore thou must believe that the words
of the Sune carry no good reason with them, as neither do the words of thy
prophet Muhamed; And here I will conclude this fifth Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
The sixth Chapter treats of diverse offenses which the Moors took whilst
Muhamed was instituting his Law and Sect, by reason of which offenses diverse
Moors became more cautious, and wise, rebelled against Muhamed, and returned
to their former Sects and ways of Worship.

THe first offense was upon the translation and vision which Muhamed had one
night, and his ascension to heaven by a Ladder, and his riding upon Alborack,
and for the things which he said he saw that night in heaven, as shall more at
large appear in our eighth Chapter; for which the Moors took offense and
rebelled against him.

The second offense was upon the altering of the Alkibla, viz. when Muhamed
dwelt at Mecca and began his Sect, he commanded them to make their prayers and
Zala toward the holy temple of Jerusalem, (i. e.) that when they prayed they
should turn their faces toward the temple of Jerusalem, which command and
practice continued among the Moors 12 years; ten years at Mecca, and 2 years
at Medina, which were two years after the banishment, (which Banishment of
Muhamed is called in Arabic Alhigera;) Now when Muhamed and the other Moors
were in Medina, there were also diverse Jews, who told the Moors that Muhamed
commanded his followers to make their prayers toward the holy temple of
Jerusalem, toward which place the Jews also made their prayers. Likewise the
Jews told them that Muhamed commanded the Moors to fast the same Fast as the
Jews did, and so the Jews told them that they Moors followed the custom of
the Jews in their manner of fasting and of making their prayers toward the
holy Temple of Jerusalem, which two commandments of fasting and prayer are
written in the first Chapter of the Alcoran; and upon occasion of the Jews
talking in this manner, and their disputing with Muhamed and the Moors about
their fasting and prayer, Muhamed commanded the Moors that they should never
observe the Jewish Fast more, but should fast in the month of Ramadan; The
observation of which month of Ramadan was commanded in the second year of
Muhamed's being at Medina, twelve years after he began his Law; and if the
Moors are jgnorant that they fasted the Jewish Fast, I prove it by the first
Chapter of the first book of the Alcoran, which in Arabic says thus, Oya
aynhe, etc. (i. e.) O ye Moors, fasting is commanded unto you as it was
commanded to the former; And the comment says, that those former were the
Jews, and by virtue of this command the Moors observed the Jewish fast 12
years, and until Muhamed commanded them not to observe it longer, but to fast
in the month Ramadan, and this other command is in the same book and Chapter,
and is in Arabic thus, Osabro ramadan alledi onzele fihi Alcoran, (i. e.) That
thence forward they should fast in the month Ramadan, in which month the
Alcoran was inspired; And moreover, the same year he commanded them to chang
the Alkibla, upon the same Reason of the Jews disputing, and that they should
not pray any more toward the holy Temple of Jerusalem, but only toward the
Minster or temple of Mecca in Arab^a. It says in Arabic thus, Ofaqueli
g^^ageheque, etc. which signifies, O Muhamed, when thou praiest turn thy face
toward the temple of Mecca, and ye Moors turn your faces directly toward
that temple; wheresoever ye be ye must turn your faces toward the said temple
of Mecca; so the Moors upon these commands, left off the Jewish fast, and
began to fast in the month of Ramadan, and left the temple of Jerusalem, and
turned toward the Temple of Mecca.

And forasmuch as the aforesaid Idol was in the said Temple of Mecca, the Jews
again opposed the Moors, telling and showing them how Muhamed made them return
to Idolatry again, by commanding them to pray toward the place where the Idol
was. Whereupon the Moors were offended at him, and acknowledged that it was a
greater error, to leave the holy Temple of Jerusalem, and the holy house of
Solomon, and to turn their faces and pray toward Mecca where the Idol was;
toward which place all the Idolaters of the Countries about Mecca turned their
faces in honor to the said Idol. And thus the Moors began to murmur against
Muhamed, and said that it was not good to pray to the Idol, and thereupon
diverse Moors became wary and circumspect, and turned to their former Sects and
ways of worship. And when Muhamed saw the great offense they took, he made the
Verses aforesaid; and thereupon the Moors were silent, and were induced to
make prayers toward the Temple of Mecca, saying that God was pleased with it,
and had commanded it by the Alcoran; And this was the Moors second offense;
And Muhamed and the Moors continued thus five years, making their prayers
toward Mecca, whilst the aforesaid Idol was in the temple of Mecca, until
Muhamed conquered Mecca, and destroyed the Idol; and most part of the people
of Mecca were slain by the sword, because they would not become Moors.

Now tell me, O Moore, what think thou of these five years, during which,
Muhamed and the Moors made their prayers toward the place where the Idol
was? Truly to me, and to any one that has sense and discretion, it seems to be
a root of Idolatry, to turn ones face, and to pray toward the House and Tower
where the Idol was. Therefore consider, O Moore, and weigh all the premises
and what follows, and thou will find that from the beginning of Muhamed's Law,
until it was finished, it always proceeded from bad to worse, was incongruous
and offensive, full of diverse confusions, scandalls, and vain fancies, which
things give us to know, that it neither was, nor is the Law of God.

The third Offense happened upon occasion of a very scandalous and villainous Act,
and great oversight which Muhamed committed, viz. When he said Mattins with the
Moors, (which prayer is called in Arabic, Zalatacobbe,) and was reading a
Chapter of the Alcoran, being the 15th Chapter of the fourth book, which is
called the Chapter of the Star (in which Chapter he mentions the said Idol
called Alethe aluze, and another Idol called Menete Azalicite, and after
naming them, says, that they are Idols and wicked Devils.) For Muhamed
reading the said Chapter, and naming these two Idols, in stead of saying that
they were most abominable and wicked Devils, said, that they were most high
Gods, and that it was good to hope in them; And Muhamed not only committed an
Error in reading and saying these words, but also prostrated himself on the
ground, and diverse Moors with him; but some of the Moors did not prostrate
themselves, but told Mahumed that he had committed an error in reading so, and
prostrating himself; And when Muhamed perceived his error, he answered them,
saying, that the Devil made him mistake, and had taken away the good words of
the Alcoran, and inserted the words which he had spoken, and that through the
deceit of the Devil, he had erred in reading so, and in prostrating himself;
The which diverse of the Moors took notice of, and being offended with it,
turned to their former sects and ways of worship. Thus Muhamed was not free
from temptations, though he gave out that the Angel Gabriel took the black
coar out of his heart; Wherefore, O Moore, you must acknowledge that that is
not true which Muhamed says in the first Chapter, That the Angel launced his
breast, and took forth his heart, and cut out the black coar or filthy matter,
to the end that he might not be tempted of the Devil at any time. For if that
had been true, the Devil had not now tempted him, nor had made him say what he
did, nor had he magnified the Idols, and prostrated himself to the ground to
worship them; whereof diverse took notice, as we said before. And when Muhamed
knew that the people were offended, and that all the people of Mecca, and the
Moors and Jews murmured against him and his Moors, he instituted a Verse
which is written in the fourth Chapter of the third Book, which is in Arabic
thus; Guame alcerne, etc. That God never sent any Prophet which was not
tempted, and when he read the words of God, the Devil would be busy and put
some other words amongst them. Nevertheless, (says he) God commands to take
away the evil, and confirm the good; and by this Verse Muhomed informed the
Moors that that had befallen him from the Devil, even as the like had
befallen other Prophets, and that God commanded that the evil words should be
razed out of that Chapter, and good words should be put in, and that they
should not marvel at this, much less be offended at it; and so upon this
Verse the offense ceased, and the Moors were silent; This thing and offense is
known but to few of the Alfaquie's and Doctors of their Law. And I tell it
thee, O Moore, that thou may know it, if thou desire the salvation of thy
soul, and that thou may acknowledge the truth and follow it.

There was another thing also at which the Moors were offended, viz. when
Muhamed took away his servant Zeidin's wife, whereof we made mention above,
which act was very dishonest, villainous, and scandalous, especially in such a
one as Muhamed, who thought himself a Prophet, and the most perfect messenger
that ever came into the world; Muhamed having at that time nine wives, and his
servant only one, the which Muhamed took from him, and added to his other
nine, and so his servant Zeiden remained wifelesse.

And this act happened in this manner; Muhamed knowing that his servant Zeiden
had a fair wife, and she being Muhamed's kinswoman, one day Muhamed went to
Zeidens house to visit her, and having seen her, told her, that when her
husband Zeiden came home, she should tell him that the Prophet Muhamed had
been there, and had seen a good A Lobster or Crab, it is an Arabic Proverb, as
we say, He found a dainty dish for his own Table.
Crab for his door; These very words are written in Arabic in the book Azar,
and do import that Zeiden had chosen a good and fair wife for him. When Zeiden
came home, his wife related unto him, how Muhamed had been there, and had said
these words unto her, which she could not understand. But Zeiden presently told
her the meaning of them, saying that she was the Crab, and the Door was a
house, and signified the master of the house. At last Zeiden told his wife,
that Muhamed would have spoken with him for no end but to command him to put
away his wife, that he might have her. Now tell me, O Moore, what meant Muhamed
by those words? and whether are they the words of a Prophet and holy man? and
what was his intent? and what opinion had Zeiden of Muhamed, when he presently
conjectured and told his wife what Muhamed would do? And when Zeiden went to
Mahumed's house, and asked what his pleasure was, Mahumed answered him, that he
must repudiate his wife, because he would have her himself; and hereupon
Zeiden went home, and related the whole matter to his wife, and after many
tears and lamentations on both sides, the married couple parted; and the very
same day Muhamed married her. For which act the Moors were offended and
murmured, saying, that it was not the act or deed of a Prophet, nor of a holy
man. And although thereupon Muhamed was much ashamed, yet he quickly ran to his
remedy, and made and composed certain Verses of the Alcoran, and caused his
Secretary to write them, and presently gave them unto the Moors to read; the
which Verses are in the 17th Chapter of the third Book, and run thus, Gua id
teculo, etc. (i. e.) O Muhamed, when thou biddest thy servant Zeiden to take
his wife again, thou say that with thy mouth, which thou meanest not in thy
heart, and would conceal that which God knows very well, (to wit, the love
and affection which he bare to this woman,) and so God told him, that seeing
her husband Zeiden had already had his share in her, God had commanded that
Muhamed should marry her, and that none should be offended with the Prophet for
the same. The Glossers say, that Muhamed for his greater justification, and for
fear lest the Moors should be further offended, bade his servant Zeiden to
take his wife again. The Comentators say, that God said to him, Muhamed through
fear of men says one thing with his lips, but concealeth in his heart the love
he bears to this woman. Wherefore I God command, and am content, that thou
marry her, since her husband has had his pleasure of her, and I God do this,
that thou may not be grieved. The text and glosses say all this Verbatim,
which is the greatest cruelty, bawdery, and wickedness that two Pandars could
plot together, and then to excuse himself from God, and make Verses, saying
that God was pleased with him, and that God did it to content Muhamed, and to
satisfy his desire, telling the Moors that God was pleased at it. All which
is proved by the Alcoran, which writes it as I said before, and by the book of
Azar, which relates all this at large.

Now tell me, O Moore, in what Law or Commandment do we read that a Married
man should love another man's wife, and should endeavor to take her from her
husband? Nay, first tell me, how did Mahumed understand the tenth Commandment
which God gave unto Moses in Mount Sinai? which says, Thou shall not covet
another wife, which Commandments Muhamed in his Law has commanded to be
observed; And then tell me thy thoughts upon this inordinate affection which
Muhamed bore to Zeiden's wife, which inordinate affection God himself
publishes in the Alcoran, which says that God knew the love and affection
which Muhamed bore in his heart to this woman, though he concealed it, and for
fear of men made show otherwise; For thou may well know that he that does
such things is not, neither can be a Prophet, nor a messenger of God, nor a
Legislator or Lawgiver.

CHAP. VII.
The seventh Chapter treats of Muhamed's wives and Virgins, and how many
proffered themselves to him without Contract of marriage, by a special Law which
he made for himself; and of the jarrs, differences, dissentions and offenses,
which happened betwixt Muhamed and his wives and slaves.

I Say and prove by the book of Azar that Muhamed married fifteen wives, and had
eleven wives together, besides slaves, and of all his wives had but two
Virgins, and had also four wives who proffered themselves to him by virtue of
the said special Law; And O Moore if thou do not know that Muhamed had nine
wives together, I prove it by a book called Assamiel, which is the book of the
good customs of Muhamed, where praising Muhamed, and speaking of his virill
strength, it says, that in one hour Muhamed lay with all his wives which were
eleaven; The words of the said book Assaniel are in Arabic Thus, O guamin,
etc. (Which Text might well have been omitted, and better have been silent of
such things than to publish them, for it is unseemly to make a virtue of vice,
and to apply carnal and luxurious things to sanctity and good customs, and to
say that God was pleased and served with such baseness as which we have already
shown, and shall further show in this Chapter,) And I further prove it by the
said book Azar, and by a book called Almazhedi, which say, That when Muhamed
died, his nine wives were present, which nine wives continued widows and so
died, by a special Law which Muhamed made for himself, as shall hereafter
appear. And the four presented wives which Muhamed had, he got them by a
particular and special Law, which he made for himself.

For ye must know that Muhamed made two Laws; one general Law for all the
Moors and himself, and another Law for himself in particular; which Law he
made in four Cases.

The first commanded that no Moore should take or marry any of his wives,
whether repudiated or widows, by which Law his said nine wives remained
widows and never married again.

The second special Law was for the proffered wives, where he commands in the
17th. Chapter of the third book, that what wife soever would profer her self to
the Prophet Muhamed, he might take her and be married to her, without any
Contract of marriage, and this was only permitted to him and not to any other
Moore.

The third special Law was, That whereas there was a general Law and
commandment in the 3. Chapter of the first book of the Alcoran, that every
Moore might marry one, two, three, or four wives and no more, Muhamed excepted
himself, and had power to marry as many wives as he would, in the 17th. Chapter
of the third book.

The fourth particular Law, was concerning equality amongst wives, which the
Morish Laws require of every Moore that has two, three, or four wives, as well
at board, government, as at bed, and if the husband do otherwise, the wives
which find themselves agreeved, may warn and summon him before the judge;
Except Muhamed, who was not bound to observe this Law, neither did it extend to
him, as ye may see in the 17th. Chapter of the third book, where Muhamed
terrifying his wives, says, that they should be content with whatsoever
Muhamed would give them, and whenever and with whichsoever of them he would
please to bed, take his pleasure, and depart, and that they should be content
with every thing, and should not take distaste nor be gerived, but should take
delight to do his will, and rejoice in all things; The words in Arabic say
thus; Turgimen te seu min, etc. (i. e.) O Muhamed, thou shall love which of thy
wives thou will, and shall dismiss to turn away which thou please, with such
condition that they shall be content with all things, and shall be quiet, and
not sorrowful at all for thy doings; The Moors read all this text, but
understand it not, for did they understand it, they would not continue Moors
and Musselmen.

Now speak O Moore, thou reader of the Alcoran, how often have thou read this
and delighted thy self with the sweet sound of the words, and have not thought
or conceived what the words mean, therefore hence forth observe and read, and
consider what thou read, and thou will find many things without reason and
justice; And thus you must understand that this fourth special Law, and the
Verses aforesaid were made, by reason of certain Gentlewomen Muhameds
repudiated Wives, who were not so well governed as the rest, but complained to
Muhamed, entreating him to regard God and his Conscience, and to make them
equal to his other Wives, and seeing they also were his Wives, that they might
not be neglected: unto whom he answered with the verses above, saying, That God
would have it so, and that for his part he was not to follow the Moors in the
matter of equality; And they having understood and heard the verses; and that
God had sent them to him because of them, they were content to take all things
patiently: But nevertheless they all said, that God loved Muhamed exceedingly,
seeing he always sent him Verses and Chapters for every purpose, and
according to his own desires.

And this appears to be true, by another most shameful and scandalous Act
which Muhamed did, upon which he composed almost a whole Chapter for to satisfy
his desires and to repair his honor, giving out that God sent this Chapter to
him and the Moors, for to give them a new general Law; which Law much pleased
the Moors then living, those which followed, and those now living, as will
here under appear.

For ye must know, that a certain King of the Jacobites called Baheira
presented to Muhamed a very beautiful maiden, being a Jewesse, called Marine,
of 15. years of age, with whom Muhamed fell in love and sought opportunity to
lie with her, which at last he did; with this Less was Muhamed taken and
surprised by two of his wives whom he best loved, and were the most noble and
principal of them all; whereof the one was called Axa the daughter of Ubequar,
and the other was called Hafeza the daughter of Homar; And being thus by them
surprised with the said young girl, they reproved Muhamed, telling him that he
had done a thing unworthy a Prophet or a married man, and had committed
Adultery against all his Wives, whereupon Muhamed sought reconciliation, and
told them, that if they would keep it secret, he would swear to them by God,
never to do the like with the said Marine again, and so they were persuaded to
keep the thing secret; but nevertheless (like discreet Women) they told him,
that if he came again to the said Marine, it should be lawful for them to
repudiate him, and be divorced from him; So that what Muhamed had done, did
hereupon remain secret certain days; but nevertheless the affection and love
which Muhamed bore to this young Less, and the jealousy and diligence of his
two wives was so great, that at last they took him again with the young Wench,
and hereupon being much enraged, they went to their Fathers houses as
repudiated Wives; upon which occasion the secret was published, and Muhamed
disgraced, and the people being much offended, murmured and spoke a thousand
blasphemies, whereupon Muhamed was much cast down and confounded, as well for
the disgrace and divulging of the secret, as for his two Wives, who were the
most dearly valued and noblest that he had; and for these reasons Muhamed was
quite dashed out of countenance, but being a very subtle and crafty man, he had
presently recourse to the remedy of the Alcoran, unto which he composed a
Chapter, and made a new Law for all the Moors, that they might lie with their
slaves with as much freedom as with their Wives, notwithstanding that their
Wives were angry and repined at it, as his Wives had done; the which Law he put
in the beginning of the Chapter, thereby to gain the favor of all the Moors;
and in the said Chapter is set down how Muhamed was excused, and did not sin,
and that his Wives ought not to publish any thing which he did in secret, and
that God warned his Wives to return to him; and thus Muhamed cleared himself
and repaired his credit, and got his two Wives again, who were thereupon
satisfied and became conformable, and returned very penitent to Muhamed. And so
Muhamed lay with his slave the young Girl by authority of the Law which he
inserted in the said Chapter; Whereupon all his Wives said, that he did
whatsoever he pleased, like God, and that God sent him Chapters and verses
purposely to satisfy his will. The Chapter which Muhamed made and composed upon
the aforesaid occasion, is called the Chapter of Prohibition in the fourth
book, and says in Arabic thus, Oya ayue, etc. Which signifies: O Prophet,
because that to content thy Wives thou will prohibit what is lawful for thee,
therefore know, that God permits you Moors, freedom to lie with your
slaves, which was not permitted from the beginning; And so the Chapter
proceeds, and says, thus And when the Prophet commits a secret to any of
his Wives which they publish, if ye Wives will repent before God, good will
betide you, but if ye will remain repudiated from Muhamed, his Creator will
give him other Wives, Moors, believers, devout Virgins and Widows. All this
the said Chapter contains verbatim. So that when Muhamed had caused the Chapter
to be written by his Secretary in a table book or scrowl, he made him to read
it to the Moors, and when the Moors heard it and read it, they were much
pleased with such a Law, whereby they might lie with their slaves; and upon the
giving of this Law and Capter they were reconciled to him, and favored him so
much that they all went and exclaimed against his Wives, and told them that God
threatened them if they would not return to him; Insomuch that their Parents
went to Muhamed to entreat him to receive them again, because they desired no
man but himself; And so with this Law and Chapter all things were in peace.

Now speak, O Moore, and consider that Muhamed is not blameless in his actions
although the said Chapter do much favor him; For although in this Chapter he
permits the Moors to lie with their slaves, yet it does not follow but that
Muhamed committed Adultery, Because the Chapter was published, and the Law
given to the Moors after Muhamed had known the slave, and had been twice taken
with her; And besides that Chapter does not acquit Muhamed from the guilt of
perjury; because he swear and engaged his faith to his Wives, that he would
never touch the said young Wench again; So that although the Chapter do favor
Muhamed, and the Moors were pleased with the Chapter, and the loose liberty
which they got thereby, nevertheless, O Moore, thou must confess, that Muhamed
is guilty of such things as do not become a holy man, much less a person so
high and excellent as ye make Muhamed, yea the most holy, most perfect, and
most choice creature that God ever created, as he calls himself, and as ye say
in Arabic, O Muhamed hayri halquilleh (i. e.) That Muhamed is the most chosen
man of God; and if you give him so high a title, and he himself assumes it, and
is so called, it had been very reasonable and just, that he should have been
the chastest, honestest, and truest man in the world; for a man's conditions
should agree with the title and dignity of the man. Finally, O Moore, I desire
thee to observe and consider hitherto, what works and actions the Alcoran and
the Sune are full of, and compare them with the works and deeds which the
Evangelists of Jesus Christ our Savior hold forth, and thou shall see, how the
deeds and works of our Savior agree with his dignity and his holy names, who
is called in the Alcoran, Hice Almaceh quelimetu allah guaroh allah (i. e.)
Jesus the Christ, the word of God, and the spirit of God; of which three names
no man in the world but he was ever worthy, being divine names; and such as
were the names and the dignity of Jesus Christ, such were his life, his words,
his works, and his Counsels. And likewise thou will find the Evangelists so
full of such great and manifest miracles, and pious works which Jesus Christ
did in his life, and of so good and holy Doctrine which his Disciples taught
after him, that there cannot possibly be better; And O Moore, by making this
comparison, thou will see what difference there is between Muhamed and our
Redeemer Jesus Christ, and the Scriptures of either, and so thou will come to
know the truth.

CHAP. VIII.
The eighth Chapter treats of Muhamed's Dream, and the Vision which he says
he had when he ascended to heaven by a Ladder, and rode upon Alborac, and of
the things which he says he saw that night in Heaven, Paradise, and Hell.

THe Alcoran in the eleventh Chapter of the second Book says in Arabic,
Ozubhene, etc. (i. e.) Praised be he that caused his servant to be transported
from the Temple of Mecca unto the blessed Temple of Jerusalem. The gloss upon
this text says, that Muhamed one day being at Almedina, he arose from his bed
to say Mattins (which the Moors call Zalata kobbe) in the Moske or house of
Prayer. The book Azar above mentioned says, that after Muhamed had prayed the
usual Prayer, he turned his face to the people there present, and began to
speak, and told them, that he being that night in bed in Axa's chamber, (whom
he most entirely loved of all his eleven wives) about midnight he awaked, by
reason of the great knocking which was at the gate, and arose and opened the
gate of the Gallery, and there he found the Angel Gabriel with seven pair of
wings, whiter than snow, and clearer than Crystal, who had a beast with him
as white as milk, which beast was bigger than an Ass, and less than a Mule,
and was called Alborack. The said book Azar reports that Muhamed said, that
the Angel Gabriel embraced him, and saluting him, said to him, O Muhamed, God
sends thee much greeting, and commands thee to come along with me this
night, for to see diverse secrets which the sons of men never saw, and Muhamed
answered him, that he was glad of that, and was very willing to go; whereunto
the Angel replied, O Muhamed, then get up upon Alborack, but Alborack turned
aside, and would not let Muhamed get up on him; and the Angel said to
Alborack, why turnest thou aside, and wilt not let Muhamed ride upon thee? know
thou, That never better man than Muhamed has ever rode upon thee, nor ever
shall? Alborack answered, I will never yield that Muhamed get upon me, unless
he first promise me that I shall go into Paradise; Then Muhamed said, O
Alborack, I promise thee, that thou shall be the first beast that shall enter
into Paradise; And no sooner had Muhamed said these words, but Alborack
presently consented, and Muhamed got upon him. And the Angel led Alborack by
the reins of his Bridle, and so they traveled till they came to the holy
Temple of Jerusalem. And the said book Azar says, that as Muhamed was riding
on his way, he heard the voice of a woman, who cried after him, O Muhamed!
Muhamed! And the Angel said to him, O Muhamed, do not answer this woman; and
going farther, another woman began to cry after him, and called, O Muhamed!
Muhamed! And the Angel Gabriel again admonished him not to answer her: and as
they went farther on, Muhamed entreated the Angel to tell him who those women
were, and Gabriel told him, that the first was she that published the Law of
the Jews, and if he had answered her, all the Moors would have turned Jews;
and the other he said was she that published the Law of the Christians, and
that if he had answered her, all the Moors would have become Christians. The
said book Azar further reports, that Muhamed said, that when he was arived at
the Temple of Jerusalem, and was come near to the gate of the Temple, he
alighted off from Alborack, and Gabriel and Muhamed went together to the
Temple, and as they went they met all the Prophets and Messengers who were also
purposely come thither, and they all came forth of the Temple, and received
Muhamed, and greeted him, saying thus in Arabic, O Marhaben birazuli azadih
guanabyi alquerin, (i. e.) Rejoice thou true Messenger and Honorable Prophet;
And then they all carried him in procession with great honor unto the great
Chapel which is called in Arabic, Mihrab, and requested him to make a Zala,
or Prayer for them all; And thereupon Muhamed went into the Mihrab or Chapel,
and made the Zala with all the Prophets and Messengers, and they all made
application to Muhamed, that he would remember them when he should speak with
God, and so they all departed, and Muhamed and the Angel Gabriel were left
there alone. Then they two went out of the gate of the Temple, and there found
a ladder which reached from earth to heaven, all made of the Light of God, and
so they began to ascend the said Ladder, the Angel first, and Muhamed after
him, holding by the Angell's hand, till they arived at the first heaven, which
heaven Muhamed says was made of pure silver, and there they saw the Stars
hanging on this first heaven with chains of gold, and the biggest of them was
as big as the mountain Noho (which is a Mountain near to Almedina;) And the
Angel Gabriel knocked at heaven gate, and the Porter asked, who art thou? And
he answered, I am the Angel Gabriel and Muhamed the Prophet and friend of God
is with me; and as soon as the Porter heard Muhamed's name, he opened the gate
of the first heaven, and they went in and found an ancient hoary-headed man,
which was Adam; And Adam came and embraced Muhamed, and thanked God that he had
given him such a son, and recommended himself to Muhamed; And passing farther,
they saw a great multitude of Angels in this first heaven of diverse shapes and
figures, viz. of men, oxen, horses, flying birds and cocks, and amongst the
Cocks, he says there was one whose feet stood on the first heaven, and his
head reached to the second. Muhamed asked the Angel what it was, and why the
Angels had so many forms and shapes, and what their figures signified; Unto
whom the Angel answered and said, that all these Angels prayed to God for the
Inhabitants and dwellers on the earth, viz. the Angels which had the forms of
men, prayed for men; they which had the forms and shape of Oxen, prayed for
Oxen, and so of the rest, and they which had the form of Cocks, prayed and
mediated for the Cocks. Then said Muhamed, Now tell me, what means that great
Cock; the Angel answered, When this Cock croweth, all the Cocks here of his
shape crow presently, and when the Cocks on earth hear the Cocks of heaven
crow, then they crow also; and whilst Muhamed stood wondering at it, this great
Cock began to crow, and all the Cocks in heaven crowed with him, and presently
afterward all the Cocks on earth crowed also. The said book says, That from
this place they ascended to the second heaven, which was made of beaten gold,
and knocked at the gate, and the Porter asking who was there, the Angel Gabriel
answered, it is I, and Muhamed the friend of God is here with me, and as soon
as he had named Muhamed, presently the gates of that heaven opened of
themselves, and they went in and saw upon all the gates of that heaven the name
of God written together with the name of Muhamed, which is in Arabic thus; Ole
ilehe ille allah Muhemed razolo allah, (i. e.) This God is the only God, and
Muhamed is the Messenger of God; It says that entering in at the gate of this
second heaven, they found Noah, a very old grayheaded man, Muhamed embraced
him, and Noah was very glad to see Muhamed, and to speak with him, and Noah
made application to him, and entreated him to remember him when he came to God.
He says, that in this second heaven, they found a great multitude of Angels,
half as many more as were in the first heaven, and of very wonderful and great
shapes, amongst which was one Angel who stood on the second heaven, and his
head reached to the third, and one of his hands to the East, and the other unto
the West end of heaven, and many other wonderful things they saw here.

And from this heaven they ascended to the third heaven, which was made of a
precious Stone, and there they met with Abraham, being an old hoary man, and
the Angels in this heaven were far more in number than those of the two other
heavens, and much greater, and amongst them they saw an Angel who from one eye
to the other had the distance of 70000. dayes-journey; Which Angel held a book
in his hand, and never did any thing else but look on the said book, and
expunge what was therein written, and write anew therein. Muhamed asked the
Angel Gabriel who this Angel was, and what it was he read in that book, and
what he wrote and expunged. The Angel answered and told him, that this Angel
was called in Arabic Malach almenti, (i. e.) The Angel of the dead; And the
book which he had in his hand was the book called in Arabic, Alhaunhe ahnafod,
(i. e.) the preserved book, wherein are the names of all men that are born, and
the Angel notes and calculateth the years and days that every one must live,
and when any man's days are expired, he expunges such a man's name, and
presently the man dies on earth. Likewise he writes down the names of all men
that are born, and the days of their life, and how long they shall live, so
that this Angel has no other office, but to put in and expunge out of this
book. He says that from thence they went to the fourth heaven, which was made
of a very pure Emerauld, in which heaven they found Joseph the son of Jacob,
who greeted Muhamed, and made great application to him, and there they saw many
more Angels than were in the other heavens, and of far greater bodies; amongst
which there was one great Angel which made great lamentation, Muhamed asked
the Angel Gabriel wherefore this Angel lamented so; and Gabriel answered him,
that that angel lamented the sins of men, and those which went to hell.

From thence they went to the fifth heaven, which was made of a Diamond, where
Moses was, who made application to Muhamed, and in this heaven were as many
Angels as in the other, but far greater; And so they ascended to the sixth
heaven, where was John Baptist, who saluted Muhamed, and in this heaven, they
saw a multitude of Angels far greater than any of the former, and this heaven
was made of a Carbuncle.

In the seventh heaven they met with Jesus Christ, unto whom Muhamed made
application, and this heaven was made of the Light of God, and here they saw
many more Angels than in the other six heavens, and far greater, amongst which
was one that had seventie thousand heads, and every head had seven hundred
thousand tongues, and each of these tongues had seven hundred thousand voices,
with all which voices or languages they praised God day and night. Likewise
amongst these Angels were diverse which always watched without ever shutting
their eyes, others always bowed their heads without ever erecting themselves,
others lay always prostrate and never arose, and others praised God with such
loud voices that they put their fingers into their ears, lest they should
become deaf with the noise of their voices; In this seventh heaven the Angel
Gabriel took his leave of Muhamed, and told him that he might not go further,
and that now God would guide him himself.

Muhamed says, that he began to ascend certain sublimities and hights, and
through so much rain and snow, that he became so wearied and tired, that he
could go no farther, and at that instant Muhamed heard a voice, saying in
Arabic thus, Oya Muhamed, anden gualirabach cellem. (i. e.) O Muhamed,
approach and salute thy Creator. Whereupon Muhamed drew near to the voice, and
saw so great a light, that it troubled his sight; He says, that God had on his
glorious face seventy thousand vayles of Devine light, and the Text of the
Alcoran in the third book says, that Muhamed approached God within two
bowe-shots, or little less; In Arabic it is thus, O zumen, etc. (i. e.) That
Muhamed approached God within little less than two shots of a Cross-bow;
Muhamed says further, that so great a light proceeded from the vayles which
God had on his face, that he could not behold the visage of God; Nevertheless
Muhamed says that God interposed his hand for a shadow unto Muhamed, but he
could not endure it, by reason of the great cold which proceeded from it. He
says, that in this place God spoke to him, and gave him diverse Commandments
of the Law, and told him many secrets; and ye must know, that if I should
write all the things which Muhamed says he saw that night, a ream of paper
would not contain them. Muhamed said, (as the book Azar reports that this
night God granted five things unto him, which were never given to any Man
before nor since.

The first was, that he should be the chiefest and most elect creature that God
ever created either in heaven or on earth, which the Arabic calls Hayriall
quilleh.

The second was, That he should be the most excellent and most Honorable. Lord
of all the sons of Adam at the day of judgment, the Arabic says thus, leydo
qualidiademe y aume alquima.

The third was. That he should be the general Redeemer, which in Arabic is
said Safey Mustafa, and for this cause Muhamed is by another name called Almebi
(i. e.) he that takes away sins.

The fourth was, That he should understand all languages, In Arabic it is
expressed thus, Ohtito jagua ni ih alquelin.

The fifth and last was, that spoils of war and battaills should belong to
him only, which is in Arabic, Ohillet, etc. Muhamed says that God gave him
all these things that night, whereat diverse Moors were offended, and said that
it was all fictions and lies, and that he never went up to heaven nor spoke
with God; And to the end that the Moors should believe all that he said, he
made certain verses in the Chapter of the stars in the fourth book, which in
Arabic run thus; Oguaneginni etc. which in Prose are, That God swears by the
Stars, that he will not suffer your friend to be tempted, nor to speak
untruth, nor to speak vainly, and that it was all a true revelation which
Almighty God had shown unto him, and that he had approached God within two
bow-shots or thereabouts, And that God had revealed to his servant Muhamed what
was revealed to him, and that Muhamed's heart lied not, and that Muhamed that
night saw the great wonders of God, and that God showed him a very high throne
in the divine Empire, where is the Paradise of God. All this Interpretation is
drawn Verbatim from the Arabic in the Chapter aforesaid, So that when the
Moors read these verses they believed, and held it for a great Miracle, though
diverse of them were offended and returned to their former Sects.

In the eleventh Chapter of the second book he says, Oguama, etc. That God put
this Vision for a great offense to men, that is, in respect of their damage
who were offended; the book of Azar says, that Muhamed took leave of his
Creator, and turned back to go down by the same way he went up, and returning
to the seventh heaven he told the Angel Gabriel all that had passed between
him and his Creator, And the Angel said to him, O Muhamed, God has commanded
me that I should lead thee to see Paradise and the secrets there, and
afterward we will go to Hell, and thou shall see the secrets of Hell, and the
people that are there, and how they are tormented of the devil; and hereupon
they went first to Paradise, and saw it is riches, excellencies and beatitudes;
and the chaste Virgins and youths, and the rivers of water, of milk, of honey,
and of wine, which are in Paradise; and the fountains, and their names, the
Palaces, trees and gardens; All which you shall see described at large in the
ensuing ninth Chapter, which is the Chapter of Paradise, from whence they went
to hell, and saw that hell had seven gates, and saw an infinite of Devils of
diverse kinds and figures, some fetterd with chains of fire, others with ginnes
and boults; and diverse men sitting at tables who had good meat set before them,
and amongst the good food also much bad and unwholesome, and they left the good
food and eat the bad, whereupon Muhamed asked the Angel Gabriel what men those
were, and he told him that they were the married men of this world, who left
their own good wives and went to other men's. And he says that they saw diverse
men who never did any thing else but drink boiling lead and fill their bellies
with it, and afterward their bellies opened and all that they had drank ran
out, and then they drank again, and did thus perpetually; And Muhamed asked the
Angel what kind of men those were, and he answered that they were those who
eat and devoured Orphants estates in this world; in brief he says he saw
diverse other things, which would be too long to rehearse. Now hearken. O Moore,
and consider all that I shall say upon this vision of Muhamed, and give ear to
three things which I shall tell thee, and give what answer to them thou can,
The first is a natural reason, which cannot be understood but by reason and
good judgment, The second is a Philosophical and Astrologicall reason, which
cannot be understood but by Astrology and Philosophy, The third contains a
humane and logical reason, for humane and logical reason is that which
separateth truth from falsehood. Now for the first which is held forth by
natural reason, it is from what Muhamed in this vision says, that the Angel
Gabriel brought him a beast called Alborac, on which Muhamed should have rid,
but she would not yeald to it until Muhamed had promised that she should be
the first beast which should go into Paradise; upon this, I ask thee O Moore,
what reason is there, that a bruit beast should or can go into Paradise? yea
(as he says,) that this Alborac shall be the first beast that shall go into
Paradise, for it he be the first, it follows that there must be a second and a
third; Now, how can it enter into the brains of a man endued with natural
reason to believe that bruit beasts shall go into Paradise? besides, in the
six books of the Sune Muhamed says, that the Ram which Abraham killed was fed
forty years in Paradise, and says further, that the sheep which the Moors kill
at their Easter shall go into Paradise, so that O Moore, thou can not avoid
nor contradict any thing of this above which affirms that beasts enter and go
into Paradise, consider this therefore O Moore with thy natural reason, and
thou will see that it is ridiculous, an impudent lie, and utterly false.

Concerning which beast Alborac, I do further ask thee, O Moore, who art an
Alfaquy and a learned man, and who have read all the Alcoran, and the
commentaries thereon, viz. Buhatia, Buzamanim, Azamahxari, Acahalibi and Mahuma
Miquite, and who have also read the six books of the Sune, and the Recele,
Bulugis, Halil, and Almazhodi, and who have likewise read seven hundred
volumnes which the Moors have in their Laws and Sect, if peradventure thou
have found any text, gloss, or paraphrase, which mention this Alborac, or from
whence he came, or whether he went; whether he was from heaven or from earth,
or of what race of beasts he was, or what became of him after that Muhamed came
from Heaven to the gate of the Temple; and so thou will say that there is not,
nor has been any mention made of him in all the writings of the Moors,
although he ought to have been had in remembrance; especially being a beast
which had so much privilege as to be the first that should go into Paradise;
Now what will thou answer me, O Moore to this and to what I shall say further
concerning this beast, which is, That the Moors say and believe, and find in
the Alcoran and the Sune, that those which go into Paradise are Mazhodin
guerammum, bararat, (i. e.) That they are holy, blessed, honored, and
Angelical; So that if this Alborac be gone into Paradise, we must say that he
is blessed, honored, and Angelical; And thus, O Moore, thou have no other
answer to this first conclusion but silence.

For the second, I ask thee, O Moore, who art a Philosopher and an Astrologer,
where does it appear to be true that the first Heaven is of Silver, the second
of Gold, the third of a Pearl or a precious stone, the fourth of an Emerauld,
the fifth of a Diamond, the sixth of a Carbuncle, though he says the the
seventh is of Light; know thou not, O Moore, that Gold, Silver, Pearl, and
the other following stones are obscure bodies, which our sight cannot
penetrate, because they are opacous and not transparent, and know thou not
that we see the Planet Mercury, which is Lodged in the second Heaven; and do
likewise see the Planet Venus which is in the third Heaven, and we see the Sun
which gives light to all the world, and is in the fourth Heaven; we see Mars
in the fifth, Jupiter in the sixth, and Saturn in the seventh Heaven? in
brief, we also see the Stars which are in the eighth Heaven, which Planets we
often cannot see because of some little cloud which interposeth between them
and our sight, and the Moon often Eclipseth and covers the Sune, It is
manifest that in the course of the Moon, at certain times in the year, she
interposeth, Eclipseth, and hides the Sun from our eyes, because the Moon is an
obscure body, although the Sun and the Stars be light bodies, so that if the
first Heaven, the second, the third, and the rest were metalline, as Muhamed
says, how could we see the said Planets and Stars? and now, O Moore, what
answer have thou but silence.

And concerning the third, I intend it for the five things which Muhamed says
God gave him that night, which he never gave before to any Prophet; Consider, O
Moore, if they are not things which cannot be proved either by human
understanding or Logical reason? for human and Logical reason commands and
teaches that a man should say nothing but what can be proved. Now tell me, O
Moore, how can it be proved that Muhamed was the most excellent creature that
God ever created in Heaven or on Earth? Likewise how can it be proved that he
shall be Lord over all men at the day of judgment, or that he shall be the
general Redeemer at the day of judgment? which things are hidden, and unknown
to all the world, neither does his own word give any proof; And therefore I
say, That what cannot be proved by it self, nor by reason, should not be
spoken, nor ought to be regarded. Muhamed should at least that night have
desired of God some special sign, as he gave to Moses, to David, to Solomon,
to Jesus Christ, and to the Apostles after them, which signs and miracles they
wrought in the presence of the people; But Muhamed was very crafty and subtle
to speak of things which the people neither saw nor could see, and thus he sets
down all the miracles which the Moors read of him, none of them were done in
the presence of any Moore, but himself says that he did such and such a thing,
and that such a thing befell such a one, and such a miracle was already done,
but never mentions in whose presence he wrought them; And so also he reported
and composed this mystery of the Vision, but he does not bring in the testimony
of any that saw him when he went up the Ladder, nor when he got upon Alborac,
nor when he made the Zala or prayer on behalf of the Prophets who were already
all Moors, it had at least been reasonable that some man then living, had been
in the Temple at the Zala for to have been witness of such things; So that, O
Moore, I tell thee, that upon consideration of all these things, thou may of
thy self know, that it is all false, and nothing of it true; and because I will
not be too tedious, I will not lay down the Arguments which might be made upon
every thing which Muhamed mentions in this vision, but I will conclude as
concerning the said Vision.

CHAP. IX.
The ninth Chapter treats of the Paradise and glory which Muhamed and the
Alcoran promise unto the Moors in the world to come; and how many Paradises
there are, and how they are called, and how many kinds of glory the Moors
shall have in Paradise.

THe Alcoran, and the Sune in describing the Paradise of the Moors, and the
glory thereof, lay down five things; First, the Paradise it self and the
mansions thereof; Secondly, the riches and ornaments of Paradise; Thirdly, the
food and provisions, the servants, vessels of Gold and Silver, and the eating
and drinking in Paradise; Fourthly, the apparel, garments, and Jewels which
the Moors say are prepared in Paradise; And fifthly and lastly, the Virgins,
their beauty, their names, and whence they are begotten, and wherewith they are
clothed.

Now this Paradise is such, according as the second chapter of the first book
of the Alcoran expresses in Arabic, Cerihoile, etc. (i. e.) That the Paradise
promised unto the Moors is as big as heaven and earth, which is all the world.
But tell me, O Moore, where is this Paradise as big as all the world? or else
we must say that God has Created another world besides this, wherein this
Paradise is, which were very confused to say; therefore, O Moore, I tell thee,
thou must still be silent.

The Alcoran says, that God created seven Paradises, or seven Habitations,
each of which is called a Paradise; the first is called Genete alhodi; the
second, Genete alfirdeuci; the third Genete anahim; the fourth, Genete reduan;
the fifth, Genete azelen; the sixth, Genete alcoduz; the seventh, Genete
Almega. Which Paradises are wrought with gold and silver, Pearls and Precious
stones, and have diverse palaces, halls, chambers, and Gardens, and diverse
Fruit Trees, two sorts or kinds of each; under which palaces run Fountains and
Rivers of waters, and fountains of Milk, Honey, and most sweet Wine. In the
midst of Paradise (as the Alcoran says, and the Sune describes) is a Tree as
big as all Paradise, whereof some leaves are of gold, others of silver, and the
branches of this Tree cover the walls of Paradise, and this tree is called
Tuba; The books of the Sune say, that in every leaf of it the name of Muhamed
is written jointly with the name of God running thus, Le ilehe ille allah
Muhamed razollola, (i. e.) There is no other God but the Lord, and Muhamed is
his Messenger. The Alcoran in the nineteenth Chapter of the third Book, and in
the Chapter of Sacrifices, in the chapter of Mount Sinay, in the chapter of the
Glorious, in the Chapter of the Falls, and in the Chapter of Man, in the fourth
Book, shows and describes how these Paradises are furnished and adorned with
diverse Tapestries and Beds, with Curtains and Vallens of cloth of gold, of
purple, of silk, and with diverse garnishings, quilts, chayrs of gold and
Precious stones; and after what manner the Moors shall sit and lie on these
beds, couches, and tapestries; that they shall laugh and take delight without
care or grief, and be very merry and jocond; Likewise the said Chapters mention
and describe a certain Fountain in Paradise, called Celzebile, and another
called Zengebila, the waters whereof are whiter than snow, and sweeter than
honey; and more especially there is a fountain called Alcauzar, which is only
for Muhamed, by a chapter which is the least in the Alcoran, in the fourth
book, which in Arabic says thus; Asime ahtayneque Alcauzar, (i. e.) we God
have given thee Alcauzar, which is this Fountain, and Alcauzar is 70000. days
journey in length and breadth, with water whiter than snow, and sweeter than
honey, in which Fountain are as many bowls, glasses, and drinking vessels as
there are stars in the firmament, of which Fountain we shall speak further
hereafter; Likewise the said Chapters mention and describe the Pages which are
always in Paradise, which are called in Arabic, Guildemin mohalledun, and
which they say and write, are as beautiful as Precious stones set in gold, and
are clothed with silk garments, green, purple, and with Zunduz, (i. e.) Tissue
upon Tissue, and these Pages wait upon those which are in Paradise, with cups,
bowls, and beakers of gold and silver, and Guildemin Mohalledun, signifies
eternal Pages, which are not of the race of men. Likewise the aforesaid
Chapters write and treat of the chaste Virgins which God has created in
Paradise, and they are called Horhin, and in the singular number Hora, and they
are reclused and well watched and guarded in their Palaces, and their garments
are wonderful; thus he boasts, and says further, that their beauty is as the
Light.

Muhamed in the Sune says, that if any one of these Virgins should appear at
midnight, she would enlighten all the world like the noonday, and if she
should spit in the Sea, the water of the Sea would become as sweet as honey; and
these Virgins are prepared in Paradise for men; and further the said Chapters
mention their Carkanets, Rings, Trinkets, Coronets, and other Ornaments which
are prepared in Paradise; and that these Virgins are not of humane race, but
are continually created.

If I should go about to set down all those things which the Alcoran and the
Sune do write of Paradise, I should be too tedious and troublesome, therefore
I will only set down that which Muhamed in the Sune reports concerning the
feast which God will make to the men and women in Paradise, which feast is
called in Arabic, Hadrate Alcoduz; God makes this feast in the Paradise called
Genetu Alcoduz, (i. e.) the Paradise of the holy; and Muhamed in the Sune
says, that after a time he will by virtue of his general Redemption, release
the Moors who have deserved hell fire; And that these Moors shall come out of
hell black and burnt, and he will bring them to his Fountain Alcauzar, and
cause them to go into the Fountain, and there they shall wash their bodies,
and shall become as white as snow; and when they are washed and purified,
Muhamed will take them with him, and bring them into Paradise unto the other
Moors, who have not deserved hell.

After this, he says that God shall command the Angel Gabriel to take the
Key of the Paradise of the holy, for to make this feast, which Keys are kept
by another Angel, and that when Gabriel shall go to fetch the Keys, and
shall demand them of the Angel that keeps them, the said Angel shall put his
hand to his mouth, and shall draw forth thence seventy thousand keys, each of
which has (a place of) 70000. leagues in length (which make together 2000000
leagues over,) And when the Angel Gabriel shall go to take up the keys, he
shall not be able to lift them, because of their great weight, and hereupon he
shall return to God, and say, Lord, I cannot lift the keys from the gound
because of their great weight, and God shall say unto him, go again, and call
upon my holy name, and the name of my friend Muhamed, and then take the keys,
and bring them hither. Then Gabriel shall go again and call upon those names,
and shall take up the keys, and bring them to God. The words of those names
are those above mentioned, Le ilehe allah Mohamed razolo allah, with which
keys the Angel Gabriel shall open the said Paradise of Alcoduz; where they
shall find a table ready made of a Diamond, of seven hundred thousand days
journeys in length and breadth, with diverse seats of gold and silver about the
Table; they shall likewise find on the said table, napkins and table-clothes
richly wrought and woven; Then God shall command all the Moors to sit down at
the Table, and they shall all sit down, every one in his seat, and presently
the said pages and servants shall come and wait upon the Moors at this feast,
with their Vestments, and Cups, bowls and glasses in their hands, and they
shall set before the Moors most delicious cates and fruits of several sorts,
and Skenk unto them the wine and water aforesaid; and as soon as the Moors
shall have eaten and drunk, the Pages shall presently come with rich apparel
for every Moore, and so they shall cloth and dress themselves, and put their
Jewels and bracelets on their Arms, hands and legs, and rings into their ears;
and when they are clothed, dressed, and adorned with their Jewels and bravery,
the said Pages shall come, every one with a dish in his hand, and in the dish a
Citron, and shall give to every male of the Moors, and as soon as the Moors
shall smell to this Citron, one of the aforesaid Virgins shall issue out of it,
most gallantly attired and beautiful, and shall embrace the Moore, and the
Moore her, and so they shall continue in that Act of embracing each other the
space of fifty years, without rising or separating from each others body,
taking all manner of pleasure that a man can have with a woman. And after they
shall have thus taken their pleasure, God shall say, O my servants, now ye
have eaten and drank, and are clothed, dressed, and adorned with Jewels, and
have taken your pleasure in my Paradise and glory, I will now show you my
glorious face; he says that God shall remove the Vayles which he has on his
face, and shall show his glorious visage to all the Moors, and they shall all
fall to the ground through the brightness which shall proceed from the face of
God, and then God shall say, O my servants, arise and rejoice in my glory,
without fear of ever dying, much less of being sad or discontented to
eternity; Then (says he) they shall lift up their heads, and see and behold
God face to face, in which Vision they shall take delight and content.

He says, That after they have seen God they shall all go from this place to
the other Paradises, to wit, every one accompanied with his Virgin shall go
into his own Palace or mansion, perpetually and eternally eating, drinking, and
taking his pleasure, joyful and without sorrow or fear of ever dying, or
having any hurt.

After this manner the Alcoran and the Sune describe the glory of the other
world; The said banquet shall be made in the Paradise called Genete Alcoduz,
but Muhamed will make another feast to all the Moors at his said fountain
called Alcauzar, and shall give them drink with his own hand as the Sune says,
and in the book called in Arabic Quitebe Alainiar (i. e.) the book of flowers,
the words in Arabic run thus, Aneguaquesin hale, etc. (i. e.) that Muhumed
will be at his fountain, and the Moorish people shall pass by it, and Muhamed
with his own hand shall give every one of them to drink of the water of that
fountain, and those that drink of this fonntaine he says shall never thirst.
In the said book of flowers, Muhamed says that the water of this fountain is
whiter then milk and sweeter than honey, and the buckets, bowls and glasses of
this fountain are as many in number as the Stars of heaven.

Now I will speak to thee, O Moore, and say something upon this glory which ye
Moors are to enjoy in the other world, and although I am weary and troubled
with writing so many gulleryes, and things against reason and all Law,
nevertheless I will speak of two things which I find wanting in your Paradise,
and in all the glory aforesaid.

The first defect is, that whereas the Alcoran and the Sune hold forth such and
so great Paradises, so stately built and so richly adorned, they make no
mention of Easements, and that they are also magnificently built; especially
having spoken of so much eating, and of so much drinking, viz. of honey, milk,
Claret, and Hypocras.

The second defect is, that he makes no mention of the glory of the women; for
whereas the Alcoran and the Sune have promised, that the men shall have chaste
Virgins with whom they shall sport and take their pleasure as aforesaid, they
ought in like manner to have mentioned the women, and to have given them
eternal servants, to have taken their pleasure with them, and then the women
would also have had eternal glory.

But tell me O Moore, what will the women who shall be at this feast, say and
do, when they shall see themselves comfortless, and when they shall see their
husbands which they had in this world, sporting with and embracing their
Virgins the space of 50 years, which he says they shall remain embraced,
sporting and taking their pleasures; Therefore O Moore, I say, that the women's
glory will be turned into punishment, and sorrow, especially when each of the
men shall take his Virgin, and shall go away with her to his Mansion or
fortress, and the women shall be left alone and comfortless like widows; so
that, O Moore, considering all this above, thou may conclude that this is
not a thing of God, nor of a Prophet and messenger sent from God, and thou will
know, that it is all as Solomon says Vanity of Vanities and all Vanity; and
here I will conclude this ninth Chapter.

CHAP. X.
The tenth Chapter shows how the Alcoran contradicts it self in diverse
places, And trcateth of diverse things in the Alcoran which are unseemly and
superfluous, likewise of some miracles which Muhamed says he did, although
they rather resemble gulls, than miracles.

THe Alcoran in the first Chapter of the first book, in the first Chapter of
the second book, and in the first Chapter of the fourth book, says, that God
cursed the devil, and expelled him from the glory of Paradise, and cast him
into the bottomless pit for ever; Likewise in the aforequoted Chapters it says,
that the devil told God, that he would always be man's mortal Enemy, and
would always tempt men and torment them; furthermore the Alcoran in diverse
places admonishes men, saying, that the Devil is man's apparent enemy, all
which is notorious and manifest in the Alcoran; And after all this, the Alcoran
says, that the Devils shall hear the Alcoran, and shall become the friends of
Muhamed, of men and of God; and that God will pardon their sins, and promises
them the glory of heaven, as appears by the Chapters of the devil, and of Caf,
and of the glorious in the fourth book; Furthermore the Alcoran contradicts
it self, when he says in the first Chapter of the first book, that it was given
in the month of Ramadan, and in the Chapter of Smoke, and in the Chapter of the
Holy night in the fourth book, he says, that the Alcocan was given in one
night, both which, the course of above twenty years-time contradicts, during
which Muhamed was making the Alcoran, viz. ten years in Mecca and 13 years in
Medina, which appears by the titles of the Chapters of the Alcoran; For there
are Chapters of the Alcoran which are called Sorath Midiniya; I mean, that the
songs or Chapters which were made at Mecca, during the ten years that Muhamed
dwelt there, are called Sorath Mekiya, (i. e.) songs of Mecca, and the Chapters
which were made at Medina during the thirteen years, that Muhamed dwelt there,
are called Sorath Medeniya, (i. e.) songs made at Medina; and there is not
mention made at Mecca in all the ten years of any of those Chapters made at
Medina, and the Chapters which were made at Mecca, were not made at Medina;
Wherefore I conclude that the Alcoran was twenty three years in composing, and
did not descend in one night, nor in one month, as the Alcoran says.
Furthermore by the Alcoran it self it appears, that it was not inspired in one
night, nor in one month, by the Chapters and verses, which were made upon
several occasions, as upon actions, offenses, and upon controversies and
differences between Muhamed and his wives; and by the diversity of
commandments, and by the alterations which we have shown above, which Acts
and occurrences happened during the thirteen years which Muhamed dwelt at Medina,
and there is no mention made of them at Mecca, during the first ten years that
he dwelt there; How is it then, O Moore, that thou say the Alcoran descended
in a night, or in a month? And if we should say, it is true that the Alcoran
descended in a night or in a month, then I would have thee tell me, O Moore,
where was this night or this month? Whether it were at Medina, or at Mecca? if
thou say that it was at Mecca, then I answer, that those Chapters which were
made at Medina are not to be reputed or judged for the Alcoran; and if thou
say that this night was at Medina, then I say likewise that the Chapters and
verses made at Mecca, are not to be reputed for the Alcoran; so that take it
which way you will, we must say, that the Alcoran says and unsays, affirms and
denies the same thing.

Furthermore, the Alcoran contradicts it self when it says in the fourth
Chapter of the first book, that he charge the Moors to hold twelve things as
forbidden and prohibited to be eaten; In Arabic he says thus, O horrimet, etc.
(i. e.) That God has forbidden the Moors that which is murrain, blood, Swine,
that which is offered to Idols, and that which has bin strangled, that which
dies by the thrust of a horn, or by a casualty, and also wild beasts, etc, He
forbids all these things in the said Chapter, the which also the Moors do
hold for prohibited; And in another song in the fifth Chapter of the first Book
God commands and charge Muhamed, to tell the Moors, that they should say
nothing was prohibited and forbidden to be eaten or drunk, but murrain, blood,
Swines flesh, and that which is offered to Idols; the said verses in Arabic
says thus, O Zolle agido, etc. So that the Moors in the first Chapter forbad
twelve things, and in the other Chapter (contradicting themselves) they forbid
but four; And if thou will say, O Moore, that the verses of the last Chapter
are revoked by the first, I prove, that the first, (much less the last,) are
not revoked, but are verses which remain in force and virtue, and which are
called in Arabic Ayetum Mohquemetum (i. e.) decisory and valid verses; Nay it
is not found in all the Alcoran, that any former verse revokes the second; for
it may be reasonable that the second may revoke the first, but not that the
first should revoke the second; therefore I say, that if the first verse is
valid and decisory, the second verse must likewise be valid and decisory; and
this was so concluded amongst the Moors, viz. That both the verses should be
valid and decisory. What say thou now, O Moore, in this great confusion,
where one verse forbids twelve things, and the other forbids but four; for
hence it plainly appears, that these are not verses of God, nor of a Prophet
sent from God.

Furthermore, the Alcoran in the eleventh Chapter of the second book writes
that the use of wine is allowed, the words in Arabic say thus, O guamin
Zamarati, etc. Which signifies that of the fruit of the dates of the Palm
tree, and of Grapes ye may drink, and take lawful sustentation; By force of
which Verse the Moors drank wine lawfully the space of twelve years, but
afterward upon a fancy which Muhamed took, he forbad it by word of mouth, not
by the Alcoran, so that Muhamed contradicts the Alcoran; and thus in diverse
Chapters ye find that the Alcoran contradicts it self.

Likewise the Alcoran says to Muhamed, that if he doubted whether the Alcoran
was of God or of man, he should enquire of the Jews and Christians, who had
read the Scripture before him, the words in Arabic are thus, O fainz unte,
etc. (i. e. verbatim) O Muhamed, if thou doubtest or art uncertain of this
Alcoran, which we have caused to be sent down to thee, ask of those who have
read the Scripture before thee; All the glossers say, that they who had read
the Scripture are the Jews and Christians; and yet in the first Chapter of the
first book, he says that the Jews and Christians have no Law, and that they
err, and the same Alcoran calls the Jews cursed, and the Christians erroneous;
Furthermore in diverse places he speaks well of the Jews and Christians, and
says that the Thora or Law is the true book of God, and that God sent the said
Law of Moses, good and true; by which Law the Prophets and messengers do
judge, and all those who do not judge by the Thora are unjust, and unbelievers
in God; the words in Arabic in the fourth Chapter of the first book run thus,
Ogua anzelne, etc. (i. e. verbatim.) We God sent the Thora (which is the Law of
Moses) a Light, and straight path, by which the Prophets do judge, and they
who do not judge by this which God sent to the world, are Insidels and
unrighteous; Likewise he says, that the Gospel is the Light, Life, Law, and
Salvation of men; and yet afterward he says, that the Christians and Jews have
no Law, and that they are cursed and erroneous.

And if thou, O Moore, say, (as all the Moors generally do,) That the
Thora and the Evangelists are not now what they were in the time of Moses, and
in the time of Jesus Christ, and that the Christians have altered the Gospel,
and the Jews have perverted the Thora; To that I will answer O Moore, and say,
that that Argument is not good for two reasons; The first and principal, as
concerning the Thora, is, that the same books and Chapters which the Jews had
in the time of Moses, and in the time of the Prophets until Jesus Christ, the
very same they have still, and the Christians have always had them without
wanting a tittle, and not only the Thora which is the five books of Moses, but
also all the old Testament; Now, thou know, O Moore, that the Jews and
Christians differ in Worship, so that if the Jews had changed and altered the
Scripture, it would not have continued one and the same, in the hands of the
Jews, and in the hands of the Christians, as now it is, and has always been.
The reason, O honest Moore, is, because the Scripture was given by God, and
that Scripture which is given by God, will never be lost, as are the books of
Muhamed's Sune, As we have said above in the third Chapter.

The second reason is, because that when Muhamed published his Reliligion, it
was already 600. years, since the Christian Law or Religion had been Preached
to all the world, and so long also had the old Testament and the new been
united, to wit, the figure, and the thing figured, so concordant and
harmonious, as if they had been both one and the same thing. And seeing God
commanded Muhamed to inquire of the Readers of this Scripture for his
information, the Scripture doubtless was then good and true; and is likewise at
present good and true, for the same as it then was, it still is, and if it had
been altered at the time of Muhamed, God should have given Muhamed notice of
it, and have given him to know, that at first it was good, but then bad, so
that O Moore, thou have no right on thy side, notwithstanding whatsoever the
Moors, and Musselmen say, for he that brings the testimony of two for proof of
his own cause, does yield that those witnesses are good and true, not bad and
reprochable, because if they were reprochable and of ill fame, they are not
worthy to be received for witnesses; now if God bids Muhamed to inquire of the
Jews and Christians for his own information, and satisfy himself from their
two Scriptures, you must conclude O Moore; that those Scriptures at the time of
such inquiry, were good and true, as still they are, and will always be; and
for this Reason O Moore, thou must be silent, and acknowledge, that the Alcoran
contradicts it self in diverse places; and so I will conclude this point.

Concerning the superfluous, and immodest things which Muhamed has inserted in
the Alchoran; the first is that which he speaks of, in the first Chapter of the
first Book, which in Arabic says thus, Oniz Uquum, etc. (i. e.) O, ye
Moors, your Wives, are your ground, therefore cast seed into them, as you
please; which Text, or verse, is filthy, villainous, and immodest of it self,
and extreme superfluous; but the Glossers of the Alcoran in expounding, and
excusing it have polluted it more, saying, that those words as ye please, do
not intend otherwise than at the usual Orifice, but also, that a man may lie
with his Wife after what manner he pleases, either standing, side-wayes,
filewayes, or in any other posture; So that although the Text of it self be
filthy and baudie, yet the Gloss and Comment thereon is far worse.

Now tell me, O Moore, what think thou of this verse of the Alcoran? Indeed
such discourses ought not to be written in a Book which you say is the word of
God, at least all the Moors must say, that God will here teach you how you
should use your Wives, which is not a reasonable excuse, for we do not read
that God taught Adam which way he should lie with his Wife, though they were
the first married Couple in the world; therefore I say, that this verse is
superfluous and base, and the gloss far more filthy; for the Scripture of God
should not mention a thing so natural to men, especially in the seventh age of
the world; and which is not only natural to men, but also to bruit beasts and
birds.

Now speak thou Moore, who art beyond the Seas; Do thou not observe the
bashfulness which the Camels use in this Act, for when the Male will Couple
with the Female, he never does it but in the night, and in some obscure place,
where he may not be seen of Man or beast, and if such modesty or bashfulness be
found amongst bruit beasts, how much more ought it to be used amongst men.

Likewise the Alcoran sets down another filthiness and baseness, saying in the
first Chapter of the first Book, that the Moore who repudiats and puts away his
wife once, yea twice, may take her again, if the parties be agreed; but if he
puts her away the third time, he cannot take her again, until she have known
another husband. Now tell me, O Moore, if thou regardest God, what avails it
this woman, that the first and second time she must only return to her husband,
and that the third time she may not return until she have lain with another
husband? for it seems to be very void of Reason, and is an immodest, and a very
superfluous expression; and it does not become God or a Prophet to speak of
such things: this is what he says in the first Chapter of the first book; The
words are in Arabic thus, O Attalcaco, etc. (i. e.) that a woman repudiated
once, or twice, may return to her husband, but if she be repudiated the third
time, she cannot return to her former husband, until another husband has had
to do with her.

Likewise, the Alcoran says, and lays down many superfluous things, which
have no reason in them, and are altogether unnecessary, as is the story of King
Alexander, whom they call in Arabic, Dulzarnaini, in the twelfth Chapter of
the second-Book, where he says that this King Alexander went to the place
where the Sun sets, and from whence it rises, and that he daily saw the Sun
set in a hot Fountain; the which oppugneth Philosophy. Likewise in the same
Chapter he relates another story of what befell Moses, and his servant, and
Enoch, whom they call in Arabic, Alhadir; of which story there is no mention
in all the Bible. Now tell me, O Moore, who art an Astrologer, whether it be
consonant to Reason and truth, that the Sun which is in the fourth heaven,
should daily set in a hot or a cold fountain? does it not appear to thee, O
Moore, to be against Astrology and Reason? Likewise he tells another story of
King Alexander, in the same Chapter, how he locked up the Lake with bars of
Iron, and melted Lead, that those of Gog and Magog might not pass; diverse other
the like stories the Alcoran mentions, which are unreasonable, and altogether
needless, and which I omit, because I would not be too tedious.

But observe and consider, O Moore, that if the said Histories were true, they
would all be found in the Bible; but because they are not true, therefore are
they not found any where but in the Alcoran, and not in any Authentic
writings; wherefore, I say, that Muhamed had done enough is he had inserted
into his Alcoran the histories which are in the Bible. But in regard he put
down nothing, but what the two Cutlers told him, he has inserted stories like
the persons. Now speak, O Moore, and compare the histories which Moses
mentions in his five Books, called in Arabic the Thora, and observe their
order, and their Chapters, and how they follow each other in order and good
Computation, and what distance of time there was from Adam unto Noah, and from
Noah unto the Deluge, and from the Deluge unto Abraham, and from Abraham to
Moses, and from Moses unto David, and from David to Jesus Christ our Lord;
without failing in a day or a moment of Time; whence it truly appears that it
is Divine, and truly inspired by God, and ordained by his will, and then, O
Moore, observe the order of the histories of the Alcoran, and thou shall see
that he keeps no order or succession of time, for he puts the history of
Abraham before that of Noah, and the history of Joseph before Abraham, and the
history of David before Moses, and does not make the Account true, for he says
that Mary the Sister of Aaron was the Mother of Jesus Christ, and that the
Virgin Mary was the sister of Moses and Aaron, wherein his accout fails above
1500. years. Thou should likewise, O Moore, consider, that Moses has set
down the History of the Creation of the World once, in the first Chapter of
Genesis, and sets down the History of Adam and Eve, once, and how they sinned,
and were cast out into the earth, once in a Chapter by it self; he has also
set down the history of Noah, and of the Deluge, and of the Ark once, so also
are set down the Histories of Abraham, Lot, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, David, and of
all the Patriarks and Prophets, each history once, and each orderly in its
Chapter; and thou will see, O Moore, and observe that Muhamed sets down the
said histories in the Alcoran, 12. 15. 16. 20. times, yea, even without order,
for he puts the last first, and the first last; and so thou will come to know,
that the Alcoran is not of God, nor sent from God by his Angel, as Muhamed
says.

Now tell me, O Moore, what avails it, or what Reason is there to insert the
same History so often, and every time in Rymes and Consonance, after the manner
of measured verses; Hence it was that they of Mecca, and the Jews of Medina
said, that this Alcoran was nothing but old stories put in Ryme by Muhamed, who
was a Poet; and this saying is in many places of the Alcoran. I think above a
hundred, calling him in Arabic, Sair, which we call a Poet; and thus, O Moore,
I tell thee, that thou have no other answer but silence. And thus thou may
come to know the Truth, and how unprofitable it is to set down the same history
so often, and to make many verses of one thing, thereby to make the writing
larger.

Futhermore thou ought, O Moore, to consider and observe the order which is
in the Holy Evangelists of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and how they succeed
each other in order with their Chapters, Acts, Mysteries, and Miracles, and how
every one is inserted according to its order and reason, and how all the Acts
and Miracles are done, and set down in their places, which is a most necessary
thing and not superfluous, and shows that the Evangelists are of God, and the
work of the Holy Ghost; not forged by Cutlers whom Muhamed thought were learned
men, and of whom he learnt, and daily wrote down what they dictated and taught
him; whereby they ruined Muhamed, and made him insert so many vanities in his
Alcoran.

Likewise, O Moore, thou should consider and observe the Miracles which are
set down in the five Books of Moses, which Moses did, and which thy Alcoran
mentions, and likewise consider the Miracles which Jesus Christ wrought, which
are related in the Evangelists, and which the Alcoran also mentions, and thou will see, O Moore, what difference there is between those Miracles, and the
Miracles which Muhamed says he wrote, as you may see by some miracles
under-mentioned which Muhamed did, which when I have related to thee, thou will, O Moore, come to know and observe, that the Miracles which were done by
Moses, and by Jesus Christ, were done of Charity, and according to the need or
want which required them, and thou will see that they were divine, true, and
supernatural, and done in the presence of thousands of men and women, and on
the other side thou will see, that Muhamed's miracles were done needlessly,
without Charity, and not in the presence of multitudes of men, no not of a few,
but only done and testified by himself alone; for we do not read of any
miracle of Muhamed done in the presence of other men, but only himself says
it, as is the miracle of the Dream or Vision, and of Alborack, and of the
Angel when he came to him, and several others, which I will relate here,
amongst which miracles you shall not find one man to witness any one Miracle of
all those which he has written.

The first Miracle is that which is mentioned above, in the first Chapter of
Muhamed's life, when the Angel Gabriel launched his stomach, and pulled out
his heart, and took out the black coar, as we have related above; concerning
which Miracle, we do not read in all the Law of the Moors, that any one saw
it done.

The second Miracle is that which Muhamed reports of the Cloud; the book Azar
says, that Muhamed traveling with the Camels of his Master, Gaddiza's
husband, in the journey one day it chanced to be very hot, through the great
Sunshine, and a Cloud settled over Muhameds head, and followed him, and
over-shadowed him all the way. Muhamed says, this happened, when he was 16. or
17. years old, but does not allege any witness, that saw the Cloud follow him,
and overshadow him.

The third Miracle was, when the aforesaid Angel came to him to the Cave and
saluted him, and began to give him the Law and the Alcoran, as it is said in
the first Chapter of Muhamed's Law.

The fourth Miracle was that where Muhamed says, that the beasts, stones,
trees, and birds greeted him, and spoke to him. The book Azar says, that when
Muhamed had received the Embassage from the Angel Gabriel in the said Cave, as
he returned home, all the beasts, birds, trees, and stones greeted him, and
said to him, Rejoice, O Muhamed, for thou art the Prophet, and messenger of
God, and that Muhamed going along the Path, there lay the Trunk of a Tree in
the way, insomuch that Muhamed was about to turn another way, but because he
should not go out of his way, the tree was cleft asunder in the midst, and so
Muhamed passed through the middle of the tree, and as soon as he was passed, the
tree grew together again as it was before; all this Muhamed says happened to
him, and yet there was no one saw it; neither were these Miracles at all
needful, nor done of Charity, nor in the presence of others.

The fifth Miracle was when the Trees came to be a shadow unto Muhamed, and
after they had shadowed him, they returned to their own places again at his
command; In the Sune it is said that Muhamed reported, that being one day
uncovered in the fields, he had occasion to untruss, during which the Sun shone
so hot on his head, that he was all in a sweat; Whereupon he looked toward
certain Trees which were far from him, and called them, and bade them come and
shadow him, and he says that at the same instant, there came two trees tearing
the earth with their roots, till they came to the place where Muhamed was, and
there they shadowed him; and afterward Muhamed commanded the said Trees to
return to their places again, the which they did, and the earth closed up
again, as it was at first; the words in Arabic, say thus; O Guafidubaique,
etc. (i. e.) that Muhamed called the trees to come to him, and by the Divine
will they came very obediently with their boughs. And afterward he commanded
them to return to their places with their roots.

The sixth Miracle was when the Moon divided it self into two pieces; the
Alcoran in the Chapter of the Moon, in the fourth book, says, that the Moon
divivided it self in the midst; and the gloss, and the book of Azar, upon this
Text, say, That Muhamed reported, that one night an Uncle of his called
Bugellin, who was the most potent of his Uncles, came and said to him, O
Muhamed, if thou will do a miracle which I shall require, I will presently
become Moore and Musselman, and will believe that thou art a Prophet, unto whom
Muhamed answered and said, that he was content. Then his Uncle told him, that
if he could make the Moon come to the midst of Heaven, and be in the Full,
(whereas she was then, as the said books report, twenty one days old) and if
the Moon did divide it self in the midst, and come out of Heaven to the Earth,
and those two pieces go, the one through the hole of one of Muhameds sleeves,
and the other piece through the hole of the other sleeve, and both pieces come
out of the Collar of Muhameds Coat, speaking and saying that Muhamed was the
Prophet of God, and join themselves together again, and return again to heaven
where they were at first; if he did all this, he promised to be converted,
and to become a Moore and Musselman. The Books aforesaid say, that Muhamed
prayed unto God, and beseeched him for his Divine power to do all that his
Uncle demanded, and they say, that the Moon presently came into the midst of
heaven, full, and divided it self in the midst, and descended, and did what is
above recited; and after all was done, his Uncle answered, saying, that it was
all done by the Art of Negromancie; these words the said Chapter there
mentions, and in Arabic they are thus, Ogua iniaran aeyten: (i. e.) the wicked
say, that it was a manifest sorcerie.

The seventh Miracle was, when the trunk of the Palm tree wept; the book of
Azar says, that the night when Muhamed departed from Mecca to go to Medina,
(which departure the Moors call Alhigera (i. e.) Lapidation, or banishment;)
Muhamed had a dry Trunk of a Palm tree in his house, and because that the night
of his departure after midnight the Trunk was very moist, Muhamed called the
Moors, and desired them to come and see a great miracle. The Moors answered,
that they desired nothing else but to see Miracles, then he brought them all
where the trunk lay, and bad them touch the Trunk with their hands, and see how
the Trunk wept for Muhameds departure.

These are his greatest miracles, and the most authentic amongst the Moors.
Muhamed says, that he did all the Miracles abovementioned, but he does not
mention any witness that saw any one of them done; Concerning which Miracles
there might be great arguments made, which I omit, for fear of being too
tedious, but shall leave them to the Readers own judgment, that I may conclude
this Chapter; for if I should set down all the Miracles which we read of, and
are reported in the Sune to be done by Muhamed, they could not be comprised in
twenty five quires of paper; for the Sune, and all the six books report, that
Muhamed did a thousand such Miracles.

CHAP. XI.
The Eleventh Chapter treats how the Christian faith is approved for good,
holy, and true, and given by God, by the very Alcoran and Sune of Muhamed.

THe Alcoran testifies that Jesus Christ our Lord is the most excellent
Prophet that ever came into the world, and that his blessed mother Mary was a
Virgin, and brought him forth in her Virginity, and that when she was a little
maiden of three years of age she went into the temple to serve God, and was
attended by Angels, and talked and conversed with Angels in the temple, and
that she was brought up, in the temple, and fed on celestial food, and was
saluted by the Angel Gabriel, who declared unto her that she was the best of
the women of all nations, and that she should conceive of the holy Ghost, and
should bring forth Jesus Christ the word of God, who should be a great Prophet,
and be endowed with all graces. Likewise the Angelick salutation is in the
Alcoran, and the words which the Virgin and the Angel had together, as they
are in the Gospel; and that the Virgin Mary said how can it be, and that the
Angel answered her, the holy Ghost shall come into thee, and the power of the
most high shall overshaddow thee; and that the Virgin Mary consented, and was
impregnated by the operation of the holy Ghost; and that Jesus Christ our Lord
was born of a most glorious and miraculous birth; and that he did all
supernatural miracles; dyed, rose again, and ascended to heaven by his own
power; and how he must come again to the earth to judgment as the true Judge;
and that his disciples were holy men, and wrought diverse miracles, raising the
dead, and healing incurable diseases, and mentions some Saints and Christian
Martyrs; All this above, I will prove by the Alcoran and the Sune.

Furthermore in the first Chapter of the first book he says in Arabic thus; O
delique, etc. (i. e.) That the bible, to wit, the old and new testament, is the
Law and way of the just; likewise in the same Chapter he says in Arabic,
qualazai atenne, etc. (i. e.) We God gave the scripture to Jesus Christ, and
assisted him by the holy Spirit; the same words he says a little further in the
same Chapter. In the second Chapter of the first book he says in Arabic thus,
Onezele haleique, etc. (i. e.) that God inspired the Alcoran into Muhamed, and
sent the Thora and the Gospel for a Law and way unto men. In the 4th Chapter
of the first book he says in Arabic, thus, Ogua attenne, etc. (i. e.) we God
have given the Gospel to Jesus Christ, a way, light, and salvation to men, and
they who will not submit to what God has given, shall be condemned. In
several other places of the Alcoran and the Sune he says, that the Thora of
Moors, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ, came from God, for a Law, salvation,
and Light unto men; and thus I have proved that the Law of Jesus Christ is in
the Alcoran, approved for good and holy.

Concerning the blessed Virgin Mary, in the second Chapter of the first Book,
which is called the Chapter of the generation of Joakim the Father of the
Virgin Mary, he says in Arabic thus, O Guait calet, etc. (i. e.) That when
Anne, Joakims wife, was with child of the Virgin Mary, she said, O, my Creator,
I freely offer unto thy service what I bear in my womb, therefore hear me, O
Lord, for thou give ear, and art wise; and when her time was out, she brought
forth a woman child, which birth was holy, and she called the child Mary, and
prayed God that she and her child might be protected and defended from the
temptations of the Devil; and the Commentators on the Alcoran, say and
conclude on this place, that only Jesus Christ and Mary his Mother, were
exempted from the temptation of the Devil, and they firmly hold that the
Virgin Mary was Conceived without original sin; in the said Chapter he says
that the Virgin Mary came to divine service at the Temple, when she was a
little Maiden, and lived there a most holy life, and that Zacharias the Father
of St. John Baptist had the tuition of her, and that she was fed, and nourished
with Celestial food, and that Angels discoursed and conversed with her. The
Arabic says thus, Ogua id, etc. (i. e.) That the Angel said, O Mary, God
has chosen, and purifyed thee, and exalted thee above all the women of all
generations, and presently he mentions, that she was saluted by the Angel
Gabriel, and that the Angel Gabriel told and discovered to her the mystery of
the Incarnation, and that she answered the Angel, and did consent, and was
with child; in which words, is contained the Ave Marie, and all that which the
Holy Gospel relates, he says in Arabic thus, Ogua Zaleti, etc. which is the
Salutation, and all that which St. Luke in his Gospel sets down about the
mystery of the Incarnation, verbatim.

Concerning the glorious Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, he makes mention in
the first Chapter of the third Book, wherein he again relates the Salutation,
and all the mystery of the Nativity, which birth was most miraculous, and
joyful, and the Moors in Arabic call it Almilid, and the Moors and
Musselmen all the world over do annually that night use great feasting,
dancing, and great melody, especially in the Moresque or mosk of Sciativia in
the Kingdom of Valentia; and of this glorious Nativity the Alcoran says in
Arabic in the said first Chapter of the third Book, thus, O Fane dehe, etc.
(i. e.) That when the Virgin Mary was in Labor, she lay under a Palm tree; the
glossers say, that this tree had been dry 30. years; and the Chapter goes on,
and says, that when Jesus Christ was born, he told his Mother, that if she
would shake the tree, there should presently good and ripe Dates fall from it;
the which she did, and the tree became green, and brought forth good ripe
Dates; the Moors say that this Palm Tree grows to this day, and is fresh and
green, and does annually bring forth dates. I Relate this, to the end that we
may see how great reverence the Moors bear to Jesus Christ, and do esteem him
more than any Saint or Prophet in the world, which the Alcoran testifies in the
second Chapter, and fourth Chapter of the first Book saying, that Jesus Christ
knew the secrets of men's hearts, raised the dead, healed incurable diseases,
and caused the blind to see, and the dumb to speak; all which the Alcoran says
not of Muhamed, nor of any other Prophet; Furthermore the Alcoran sets down
diverse excellencies of Christ's Disciples, whom he calls haguarquin (i. e.)
pure, and chaste; and says that they did miracles above nature, as he writes
in the eighteenth Chapter of the third Book, that St. Matthew, St. Peter, and
St. Paul, did two miracles in Antioch, viz. That they cured a man of a
Leprosy, and raised the Kings daughter, who had been dead five days, by which
miracles all the men of Antioch were converted to the faith of Jesus Christ;
which story the Moors read in the Arabic, but understand it not; in Arabic
it is thus: Ogua drib Lehum, etc. Which is in prose, as the Glosserson the
Alcoran say; that St. Peter, and St. Matthew, (other interpreters say, that they
were St. Peter, and St. John, but they all say that St. Peter and another
Apostle,) went to the City of Antioch, and without the City found a man full of
Leprosy, who was called Habib Anajar, a very rich man, but because of his
disease he dwelt out of the City; unto whom the two Apostles spoke, and said,
that if he believed in Jesus Christ and his Law, they would cure him; and he
was content, and thereupon believed, and was Baptized, and was presently cured,
and seeing himself cured he led the Apostles to his house, and set meat before
them, and laid them down a thousand Crowns of gold, for a gratification of his
health; the Apostles bad him take away his money, in regard that they did not
those things for money, but for love of their Master Jesus Christ; The Text in
Arabic says thus, Oguagee minazca, etc. (i. e.) That when this man saw that
he was healed, he went about the City, crying with a loud voice, saying, O, my
people, follow these messengers, who lead you to the true Law, and cure without
money; all this the Text relates, and proceeds, saying, that because he cried
after this manner, the King took him and martyrd him, and the Text says, that
as soon as this Martyr dyed, he went to Paradise, and then he said, I would to
God that my nation knew, that I am in Paradise, and do discourse among the
honorable, my sins having been pardoned; these words in Arabic are, Ozule
yalli te caumi, etc. and the history proceeds in the same Chapter, and says,
that this King after he had martyrd this man, took the two Disciples, and put
them in prison, but they were presently helped out by a third man; in Arabic
the Text says thus, O faahazezne-bicelicin, (i. e.) That God sent them a third
man for to help them. The Interpreters say, that doubtless this third man was
St. Paul: and the gloss says, that the assistance that Paul did unto the two
Apostles, was, that he went to the King, and told him, that he had heard that
his Majesty had imprisoned two of the Disciples of Jesus Christ, the King
answered that it was true, then St. Paul prayed the King, that his Majesty
would be pleased to do him a favor, which was, to let the two Disciples be
fetched from prison, and brought into his presence, because he would examine them
what manner of men they were, what Law they Preached, and what miracles they
wrought, and that it might be they were delusions; whereupon the King caused
them to be fetched out, and brought before him and St. Paul: then St. Paul began
to examine them, as though he had not known them, and asked them what Law they
Preached, and what miracles they wrought; and they answered that they Preached
the Law of Jesus Christ, and that in the name and by the power of Jesus Christ,
they gave sight to the blind, and raised the dead; then St. Paul desired the
King to let one born blind be called for, and there was presently a child
brought in of five years of age, stark blind; and St. Paul said to the King, O
King, let us go to some of your Idols, and their we shall see this miracle; he
says, that they went to the Temple, and their Paul desired the King, to pray
to his Idols to heal the blind; Whereupon the King prayed to his Idols to heal
the blind child, which they did not; then said he, heal him ye, and I will
believe in the God whom ye preach: then St. Peter took the blind child and
healed him, and the blind came in seeing, with fairer eyes than any one in the
City; then the King told them, that if they would raise his daughter which had
been dead five days, he would become Christian, and all his people likewise,
and the Glossers say, that at the same time they also raised his said Daughter,
and that all the people of Antioch were thereupon converted; The Text and the
gloss of the Alcoran relate all this above; now tell me, O Moore, who bear
great devotion to this Chapter, and which amongst the Moors is in as great
esteem and value as the Gospel of St. John is amongst the Christians, tell me
what think you of this above, which you never understood? behold how thy
Alcoran testifies that the Apostles are Saints, and that St. Paul did what is
aforesaid; and for the Martyr, the Text of this Chapter testifies, that he went
into Paradise for being martyred, and for dying in the faith of Jesus Christ;
why tarriest thou then? O Moore, why do thou not become a Christian? that
thou may go to the place where this Christian Martyr is. I believe that
diverse Moors hear this aforesaid, but do not believe it; but bid thou the
Moore which denies it, to read the gloss of Alzamaxeri, and the gloss of
Buhatia, and if he do not find what I have set down above, word for word in
the said two glosses, let him call me the greatest liar in the world; This
History his Grace Martin Gartia, Lord Bishop of Barchinone has set down in his
Book of the Alcoran, which I translated out of Arabic, into the Spanish tongue
by his Graces command, and himself has the said two Arabic glossaries.

Ye must know that the Alcoran holds forth and attributes three excellencies
to our Lord Jesus Christ, which it does not give to any other of the Prophets;
not to Moses, Abraham, David, no nor to Muhamed.

The first is that which the Alcoran mentions in the second Chapter of the
first Book, viz. That he ascended to Heaven in Soul and Body, and upon this
place the Sune says that he must come into the world to judge as a just Judge;
in Arabic, and the Sune he says thus, Oguayniziolo, etc. (i. e) that Jesus
the Son of Mary shall come down to the earth, and shall be a just Judge therein.

The second excellency which the Alcoran attributes to Jesus Christ is, that it
calls him, Calimethuallah (i. e.) The word of God.

The third is, that he is called in the Alcoran, Rohc alkodus allah (i. e.) The
holy Spirit of God: of which two names never was any man worthy, nor ever will
be; so that having proved that Jesus Christ is the word of God, and the holy
Spirit of God, it is proved that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and very God;
This appears in the third Chapter of the first Book of the Alcoran, which in
Arabic runs thus, Omet mazeho, etc. (i. e.) The Messras Jesus the Son of Mary,
is no other than the word of God sent to Mary, the Spirit of God himself, and
the messenger of God; by which words, O Moore, thou may see that he declares
that Jesus Christ is God and Man.

CHAP. XII.
The twelfth and last Chapter treats and shows, that Christians should not
wonder why Muhamed's Sect has so propagated, and that the Moors should not be
so presumptuous, and say (as they usually do) that if their Religion were not
good it had never propagated so much, for that reason is of no weight; It
likewise shows how Muhamed's Disciples carried themselves after his death;
and what discords, contests, and murders were practiced amongst them for
dominion, and the Vanities of this world; and to become Kings, Califes, and
great Potentates.

NOw, to the end that Christians may not have occasion or ground to wonder, and
much less the Moors to presume, I will lay down three causes whereby the Sect
of the Moors has propagated and augmented, but not by any goodness in it self.

The first cause was, that Muhamed began and instituted this Law or Religion of
the Moors, in a Nation very rustic, ignorant, beastly, and Idolatrous; being
men void and destitute of all knowledge and understanding, for amongst that
people were no Logicians, Astrologers, Philosophers, nor Physicians, but they
were all earthly, given to eating, drinking, and luxury; an ignorant and rude
people, as the Alcoran calls them, in the first Chapter of the first Book, in
Arabic, Sufeha (i. e.) ignorant people; The Country likewise was full of
Idolaters as well in Arabia the happy, as in Arabia the great, and throughout
all Persia and Armenia, where were twelve sorts or Sects of Idolaters, as we
showed in the first Chapter of this book, some of them worshipped a tree, unto
which they Sacrifised, and annually celebrated Feasts, and a kind of Easter,
which tree they called Detulanger, the Lord and Captain of the Province where
this tree was, in Muhamed's time was called Azamahinali. Others worshipped a
great statue made of a black metal, which was three fathoms long, this Idol
was called Bohinum, and it was in the Province of Armenia, the Lord and Captain
of this Idol, in Muhameds time was called Alquazad. Others in Armenia
worshipped the Sun, and the Prince of that people was called, Sanharben
Carquar. They of Mecca, and the Provinces adjacent, worshipped Alzete and
Alluza, as we have said before; so that Muhamed began his Sect amongst the most
blockish people in the world, and unto these Muhamed gave to understand that
they were Idolaters, and that they ought to worship the God of heaven and
earth, who was the true God, who had Created the Heavens, the Planets, the
earth, and the waters; that caused rain to fall from heaven, and fruits to
proceed from the earth, for Man, and beast; that God who caused men to dye, and
after death to rise again, for to reward every man according to his deserts,
with glory or punishment; that God who created the Paradises, with so many
excellent things for the blessed; and that God who created Hell, with so many
Torments for the Damned. All which they of Mecca, and the other Idolaters
denied; and by his preaching this aforesaid to them, (which is the Contents of
half the Alcoran) diverse began to believe in Muhameds. Law or Sect; many
likewise were induced to believe Muhamed, by reason of the great boasting and
threatening which he used, when he read the Alcoran, and the scrowles of the
Punishment of their predecessors, viz. Those who are drowned in the world by
the Deluge, and who escaped in the Ark of Noah; also the People of Lot, and of
the five Cities which are very near unto Mecca; he also threatened, and
terrified them with the example of Pharaohs People, and the nine plagues which
God sent upon them, and told them how they were swallowed up in the Sea,
because they did not believe in Moses; he also terrified them with the pains
of Hell, and with the horror of the things which he writes of Hell; which is
obvious in diverse chapters of the Alcoran; and thus they believed in Muhamed,
and were persuaded that he who Created all things, and has power over all, was
the true God; so that whereas Muhamed converted them to his own opinion, and
made them know nine Articles of the Christian faith, and those other things of
the Christian faith expressed in the precedent Chapter, if he had as well given
them knowledge of the whole Christian faith, and had enjoined them to believe
all the 12. Articles, and be Baptized, he had done very well, and they had all
been Christians; but he would not do so, because he could not that way have
made himself so great as he did. The immoderate ambition wherewith Muhamed was
transported, has undone the Moors, and been the cause of his own and their
error, and utter perdition.

Yet this we must believe, that the Moors who believed in God, and
acknowledged that he who Created all things visible, and invisible, was God,
did acknowledge and believe the Prophets, Patriarks, and Messengers of God, and
believed the Scriptures which God sent by his servants, and also gave credit to
the Evangelists, the Thora, and the Psalter, and believed Jesus Christ, and the
other things above mentioned; so that I say, that although Muhamed in his time
did some wicked things, as we have said before, for which diverse Moors were
offended at him, yet nevertheless, they never lost the faith which they had of
God, and the things aforesaid; for although they were ignorant, they
acknowledged that Idolatry was a wicked thing, and the way to destruction, and
so they have continued till our days, believing all that Muhamed made them
believe; Wherefore I say, that if Muhamed would, the Moors had believed in
Jesus Christ, and had been all saved; but he conceived, that if they had
believed truly, he should not have been reputed for a Prophet, nor a Lawgiver,
nor a great Lord, and this detestable Ambition deceived Muhamed, and after him
deceived his Disciples, as here under will appear; so that Muhamed made the
Moors believe a great part of the Christian Law, but not all, for fear lest
they should become Christians; and he also made them believe a great part of
the Jewish Law, but not all, for fear lest they should become Jews; and made
them also believe the Alcoran and the Sune, and so many other fooleries, which
we have mentioned above, that he might make them Moors and Musselmen.

In this manner the Sect of the Moors increased, not by any reason or
excellency it had in it self; for if Muhamed had begun his Sect among
Philosophers, Logicians, and Astrologers, and a Nation that had had any Law, it
had never had any progress; the which the Apostles of Jesus Christ did; for
they preached the faith of Jesus Christ amongst the most learned of all the
Jews, and amongst the Astrologers, Logicians, and Philosophers of the
Gentiles, yea, without Arms or Battles, and only by their preaching the Law of
Jesus Christ, and his Gospel, and by their miracles, they converted all the
World to the Catholic and Christian faith; besides, the Disciples of Jesus
Christ, wrought not that conversion merely by preaching, and doing miracles,
but also by disputing and arguing of the truth, and by confuting Heretics and
wicked men, who gainsaid them; and thus the Christian faith was agitated and
exalted by disputations, until it enlightened all places, the which the Law or
sect of Muhamed cannot endure; for Muhameds sect will not be questioned by
Disputation, nor be examined by natural reason; for so the Alcoran commands in
the ninth Chapter of the third Book, where he says; Guale tugedilo, etc. (i.
e.) never dispute you with the Jews or Christians; Wherefore I say, and
conclude, that Muhamed withdrew the People of Mecca and Arabia from the error
of Idolatry, and brought them into heresy, doing like those who administer
fatal Physic, which they hide in good tooth some food, and they who eat
thereof thinking they eat some delicate Cates are poisoned. Thus did Muhamed
introducing and mingling his false Law, and his Impostures, and delusions among
the holy and good things of the Old and New Testament, yea, with things of the
Law of Nature, and so he made a Law and Sect which destroys those eternally
that believe it, even as adulterated medicines kill those that take them. And
let this be sufficient for the first cause or reason of the propagation of
Muhameds Law.

The second Cause of the growth and increase of Muhamed's Law was thus; Muhamed
seeing that diverse rebelled against him for the causes aforesaid, and returned
to their former opinions, and required him to do miracles, and to cause signs
to appear from heaven, as Noah did with the Ark, and Moses who caused Manna to
fall from heaven forty years, and made twelve Fountains of water to spring out
of a Rock, and divided the red Sea into twelve Passages, and Muhamed not being
able to do the like, he thought his Law could not be advanced any other way
than by the Sword; to wit, by fighting with unbeleevers, and bringing them to
the obedience of his Law by force; and for that purpose he began to make verses
in the Alcoran, saying, that God commanded them to fight against the
unbeleevers and rebellious, and upon that Argument made a Chapter, which is the
third Chapter of the second Book, all in the Terms and commands of a Warrior;
Wherein he sets down one verse, which is called the Verse of the Sword, and
from this Verse the whole Chapter is called the Chapter of the Sword; which
Verse is in Arabic thus; O Zaltihum, etc. (i. e.) slay the Enemies and
Unbeleevers, and so they shall be tormented, and confounded by you; in the Sune
he says thus, Ozatiluanne, etc. (i. e.) Kill them until they all become
Moors and believers; Which command Muhamed has reiterated in diverse Chapters
of the Alcoran; but indeed he used great policy in it, and brought his purpose
about very subtly, to wit, that in such a kind of War there must be some
partiality, and certain particular Captains, or otherwise it could not be; for
which purpose he sent for ten Men, who were already converted to his Sect, of
the chiefest of all Arabia felix, and Arabia magna, men much followed, and
potent, and of themselves expert in Arms, and well exercised in the Art of War;
the first and chief of them was called Ubequar, the second Homar, and these two
were Muhameds fathers-in-law. The third was called Hozman, who collected the
Alcoran. The fourth was Alifrello, a Cousin of Muhamed, and these were all of
Muhameds kindred. The fifth was called Talha. The sixth Azubere. The seventh
Zadin. The eighth Zahedin. The ninth Abdorazmen; and the tenth Abuhobeyde.
These he convened, and assembled under a Tree abroad in the fields, and there
began to preach a Sermon to them, which were too long to repeat here; In brief,
he told them that he was sent from God, for to withdraw his People from
Idolatry, and that they knew, that there were diverse Jews, and several other
Rebellious persons who opposed his Law, and that it was necessary that his Law
should be advanced and exalted above all other Laws, (which Verse is inserted
into the third Chapter of the Sword of the second book) then he read to them
the Verses and Chapters which were in the said Alcoran, and told them that God
had expressly commanded this way of making war, and that for his part he could
do no good in it without having Captains, and Leaders for that purpose.

These Commanders and Gentlemen found it not good that he should have any other
than themselves, and were content to take the charge upon themselves, and to
side with Muhumed and those of his party, and resolved to dye, both they and
theirs in the advancing of the Law of Muhamed, and in making war against their
own Fathers, Mothers, Brethren, and Kindred, and thereupon took an oath, and
swore to have Muhamed for their Lord, Prophet, and Leader, and he swore
likewise to hold them for his sons and brethren, and promised them Paradise,
and that they should not be bound to give an account of their sins; this is
contained in the 13th Chap. of the 4th Book, where he says in Arabic thus, O
idyobeyhune, etc. (i. e.) that Muhameds disciples swore unto him under the
tree; and so Muhamed with his Captains and their followers whom he had already
converted, began to make war; and the first encounter which they had, was with
300. Gentlemen of Mecca, near unto a River, called the River of Bedrin, where
they of Mecca were all overthrown, and put to the sword; and afterward Muhamed
fought twelve battles against the Jews, until he had vanquished all the
Jews which were at Medina, and the Countries adjacent, and those which
remained alive, became tributary to the Moors; and so in process of time by
wars, bloodshed, and large promises, the sect of Muhamed increased, until he
at last conquered Mecca, and all the Country adjacent, and gained likewise all
Arabia Felix, and Arrabia Magna, and a great part of Armenia and Persia, before
he dyed; and when he was dead, the Primacy devolved to the Caliph or King
Ubequar his father-in-Law, in whose time the strength of the Moors was
increased to threescore thousand horsemen; and after this Ubequar, the
Dominion came to Homar, Muhameds second father-in-law; and these two in their
times with their Moors gained all the Land of Syria and Africa; and in this
manner the Law or sect of Muhamed has spread it self by force of Arms, not by
doing Miracles, as the Law of Jesus Christ did.

The third cause whereby the Law or Sect of Muhamed has augmented, was by the
great promises which Muhamet made to the Moors, and which the Alcoran
promises, that is to say, the glory of Paradise, as it is declared in the
ninth Chapter; the Alcoran promises that those Moors which dye in War are not
dead but living, and that they eat and drink; this he says in the first and
second Chapters of the first Book, in Arabic thus, Oguale, etc. (i. e.) Do
not think that those who dye in War are dead, for they are living with their
Creator, eating and drinking; Wherefore the Moors when they make war, choose
death as soon as life; and hereupon the Sune says that none that dye in this
world, when they are out of this life desire to live here again, except those
which dye in battle, and those (says the Sune,) desire to come again into
this world, that they might dye again in battle, and enjoy again the great
delight which they had in dying; and from thest false promises it is, that the
Moors to this day have fought so valiantly, and have gotten dominion over
their enemies; and besides, he promises them, that all the spoils should be
shared equally amongst them, and so also I say, that if the King our Sovereign
would promise this one thing unto those who would go beyond the Seas to fight
against the Moors, I dare promise before God, that in three years the
Christians would Conquer all Africa, and Asia; and this is the third cause
whereby the Sect of the Moors has increased, the which are against God and
against our Neighbor, nor has Jesus Christ commanded any such thing in his
Gospel, but Peace, Charity, and Mercy, wherewith he will reward every one that
shall deserve it.

Now, O Moore, observe and consider the propagation of thy Law, and by what
means it was, and then observe the propagation of the faith of Jesus Christ,
and how it is altogether founded upon Charity and Peace, without shedding of
men's blood, without robbing, or turning any man out of his own; but Muhamed in
the third Chapter of the second Book says, that they must expel their enemies
out of their houses, and behead them, and kill them.

Now behold O Moore, the difference between these two Laws, and thou will know
thy God and save thy soul.

And the Disciples of Muhamed did not only fight against their enemies, and
expelled them from their habitations, and dominions, but also made War amongst
themselves, killing each other for to have the Califage and Kingdom, and so I
say that (except Ubiquar, and Homar, Muhameds Fathers-in-Law, who dyed natural
deaths,) all the rest killed each other; the first that dyed was Hozman, whom
Haly caused to be slain that he might be King. Haly also dyed in the same
manner, one Moagua causing him to be killed, and the said Moagua was slain by a
son of Haly called Ahoceim, and he was also killed by another, and so one
killed another successively, to the number of thirty Caliphs; of whose
differences, deaths, battails, and quarrels, there is a Book written which the
Moors in Arabic call, Kitabu almu licu, (i. e.) The Book of the King, which
Book they let none read but men of good years, but this Book is not like that
which we call the Acts of the Apostles; and thus Muhameds Sect increased, and
spread by the three causes aforesaid, and not by its own goodness.

Now consider O Moore, the Disciples of Jesus Christ, and what lives they lead
after Jesus Christ's Ascension, Preaching and declaring the faith, and doing
miracles, without Arms, and without envying each other, yea, only to exalt the
faith of Jesus Christ their Lord and Master they were persecuted, and all dyed
Martyrs, not as the Disciples of Muhamed, who as we said killed each other for
dominion, and to be Princes in this world; but we must say as does the Proverb,
as was the Captain such were his followers; the which more plainly appears when
we say, that even as was our Lord Jesus Christ, the greatest Master, and as
were his words, works, and admonitions, (full of purity, chastity,
righteousness, peace, and other graces of clemency, mercy, and piety, a friend
to the poor, and humble) so also were his holy Disciples, full of purity, and
chastity, full of righteousness, patience, charity, friends to the poor,
peaceable, and humble, and left all that they had in the world to follow their
Master Jesus Christ our Lord, Preaching the Christian Faith to all the world,
clothed in sackcloth, armed with nothing but the Holy Ghost, without killing
or fighting, doing miracles, cleansing the Leprous, healing the sick, impotent,
and blind, and raising the dead, as the Alcoran it self testifies, and thus the
holy Disciples of Jesus Christ converted all the world, as David says.

There is no language, tongue or speech,
Where their sound is not heard,
In all the earth and Coasts thereof
Their knowledge is conferd.
But this was not like Muhamed and his words and works, who was altogether full
of pride, vanity, vain glory, Luxury, Revenge, and Cruelty, destitute of all
virtue, and charity, estranged and separated from all mercy and pity, full of
vices, and void of chastity, insomuch that all his thoughts and studies, were
nothing but to kill, rob, and be revenged, and to expel men from their Houses,
and Lands, Towns, and Cities, desiring to make himself a great Lord in this
world, that he might attain to whatsoever he desired; and such as he was such
were his Disciples after him; full of pride, vanity, and vain glory, cruel,
avaritious, and Vindicative; which appeared to be true by their carriage
toward each other, for one killed another, and others those which followed to
be revenged of each other, viz. The Fathers on the Children, and the Children
on their Fathers, so that they were all murderers, through their ambition to be
Lords, Caliphs, Princes, and Kings.

We read in the Sune, that Hosman the third Caliph, and Muhameds Son-in-Law,
was slain by the sword of Haly Muhameds Couzen-german, which sword was
impoisoned by Axa Muhameds wife, so that with Axa's assistance Haly to make
himself Caliph, committed cruel murder, for we read in the Sune, that Hosman
was slain with the said sword in his own house, and when he was dead was cast
on a Dunghill, and there lay three days, neither durst any of his friends
touch him, or carry away his dead Corpse till it began to stink: I relate this
for to show the great cruelty which Muhameds. Disciples did practice, and their
little charity to this Hosman who was Caliph, and Muhameds Disciple, and his
double son-in-Law (for he had married two of Muhameds daughters.) Likewise Haly
the 4. Caliph was slain, by one of Hosmans Kinsmen called Moagua, who slew Haly
whilst he was making his Zala or prayer in the Mosque, and casting him down,
gave him such a blow that he struck his head from his shoulders; and this
Mohagua being afterward Caliph, was killed by one of Halys sons, called
Alhuzemi, who was afterward Caliph; And afterward this Alhuzemi, who was son
of Haly, and Nephew of Muhamed, that is to say, son of his daughter, was
afterward slain by a Kinsman of the said Moagua's, who caused his head to be
cut of, and laid in a Platter, and so had it served up several days at his
table; and thus this destruction, and slaughter of the Caliphs continued until
the 30th. Caliph, which I prove by the book above quoted called Quietebe
Alimeme, that is, the Book of the Caliphs, and Kings, wherefore I conclude and
say, as was the Master such were the Disciples; and therefore the Proverb says
well, when the head aches, all the Members are distempered also.

For conclusion I will here insert one Article which I forgot to set down in
the Chapter of wives. You must know that Muhamed contracted marriage with the
said Axa, who was Ubequar's Daughter, when she was six years old; and
consummated the said Marriage with her, when she was but eight years old; which
thing I prove by the said book Azar, upon which I would ask thee, O Moore, and
would have thee resolve me, whether it was fit for Muhamed to consummate
Marriage with a little girl of eight years old? which is almost a homicide,
and a sin against nature, especially in such a man as Muhamed, and who at that
time had seven wives together. Speak, O Moore, in Gods Name, was it not a great
vice? and was he not a man Luxurious beyond measure? wherefore, O Moore, I
entreat thee to consider all this above, for it is all spoken to give thee
light, and to the end that thou may come to the knowledge of what thou do
not understand; for the truth is, there are very few of the Alfaquies of the
Moors, who understand their own Law, and of the other Moors, not one; and I
do assure thee, that what I have written in this Book, is not of malice, but
because I thought it necessary to make and collect such a discourse, seeing I
had received ability from God to do it, and I render infinite thanks to God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ, for that he has illuminated me by the light of his
grace, and has drawn me from such obscurity, and so great Darkness, and
therefore I say with the Prophet David this verse, which he sings;

Even as a bird
Out of the fowlers Ginn
Escapes away,
Right so it fares with us,
Broke are the netts,
And we have escaped thus.
I Render thee thanks Almighty God, who live and reignest for ever and ever,
for all thy benefits, and especially O heavenly father, I give thee thanks, for
that, not for my merits, but of thy mere mercy, thou have been pleased to let
me have a place in the Company and assembly of Christians: I humbly beseech
thee, that with steadfast purpose I may keep the faith which I promised in
Baptism, and that so I may have a place amongst thine Elect, in glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
FINIS.

