Qui violat Rosam, spinis Coronabitur.
crowned Tudor rose Qui Violat Rosam, Spinis Coronabitur. Sanguine sub nimia
languet, Rosa tincta color
sic luget proprio; purpurat ora rubor:
En! Phoebi reditum madesacta liquore precatur
sub Caroli radiis ut micet illa sui.


AN Entertainment OF Solitariness: OR, The Melting of the SOUL, by
Meditations, and the pouring of it out by Prayers.

By Sir RICHARD TEMPEST, Knight and Baronet.

-- Sine me liber ibis in Vrbem. Printed in the year 1649.

TO His dear Brothers, Nicholas Tempest, and Thomas Tempest, Esquires.
Dear Brothers,
IN you I have enjoyed the happy freedoms and privileges of friendship which
consociate the remotest regions of men's hearts with the participation of their
mutual thoughts. I communicate to you now these Conceptions (the Companions of
my solitariness) that notwithstanding the Press is debaucht, yet by the quick
passage of it, you might participate of my thoughts at this distance; whereby
in part I might turn my Lonenesse into Company and Conversation. And though
the accidents of the time have violently snatched you from me, whereby you have
changed your freedom for restraint; yet all the unpleasing passages of
Fortune, or her most plausible Courtships work nothing upon a mind, seated on
that firm resolution, to be true to GOD, the King, and his friend the very
Heathen could say, Commit thy self to an honest and just action, as to a
tutelar God. Those minds alone that are not raised above the trifles and
vanities of the world, feel the tyranny of passion and adversity; others, who
lie not level with its injuries, carry a happiness in their own breasts,
which tents as it were, they can set down in any condition or place, and be
happy in Saint Paul named no one state wherein he could be content; but had
learned, in what state soever, to be content: and certainly, such a state of
mind only as is agreeable to the traverses of the world, considering every
thing as it is in its own alterable nature, and withal making use of the
prerogative of the Soul, which is above any created thing, can fix or settle
in man's life a felicity, which all men so earnestly court, and so few obtain;
many presenting their service to that Mistress of all men's Souls, out of
vainglory, or covetousness, or worldly interest; she being the most
quick-sighted Lady, which will not confer her favors on any, but who are truly
inamored with it self; God himself being that essential Aeternitie, who is
alone to be loved for himself.

Questo e il vero geiore che nasce da virtu dopo il soffrire.
From Amsterdam, December. 20. 1648. Your faithful Brother, Rich: Tempest.

To the Reader.
HE who sacrifices his Virtue to the genius of the Times, shall find its
favors not so durable, as the reward of his Vice is certain; one may go
smiling, or fearelesse, to destruction; the affections of deceived minds,
change nothing the nature of the evils incurred; there is a fixed unalterable
nature of good, which accidents of fortune and events communicable to good or
bad actions, cannot change nor subvert: success dazles the vulgar eye; and
minds that undertook the service of Virtue, for the love they bare its
rewards, no longer adore the beauty of the other, than their lower minds are
bribed with the petty satisfactions to their inferior interests. Its the most
contemptible slaverie of the mind, to pin its value and esteem of justice upon
the sleeve of fortune; there being nothing truly fixed and permanent, but sacred
Virtue, which men so readily forsake for every thing that of its self
naturally makes progress to change (a necessary mutabilitie and alteration
adhering to the nature of all other things.) By the communication of these
thoughts, the times are not courted, choosing rather to dote upon the foame
falling from the jaws of Cerberus; they being such as Tacitus notes sometime
to happen out, wherein is a certain ruin for those who hold with duty; and
wherein one might justly resume the demand of that Orator, who being applauded
by the vulgar, asked his friend, what ill he had spoke? These papers choose
rather to be as miserable as ever the merry Poets could make any, by their
threatened judgments and witty condemnations, aut piper aut thus. It will be a
loathsome thing to stay behind all that, to which destruction is threatened;
when as with all their protestations, pecuniarie and sanguinarie prodigality,
in stead of bringing home the Golden Fleece, which is that addition of Wealth,
Honor, and Power, to the King and his people, they have only used them all as
means to make them most miserable, by the destroying of what is glorious and
worthy. The Kingdom is touched (as I may say) with Monarchy: and though the
Needle is by a violent hand set to contrary Point of the Compass, and by the
contrary winds of Factions they attempt to sail to Utopian and fancied
Governments yet usque recurret, the Needle will not stand but to its beloved
Pole. All miserable practices upon the healthful constitution of our dear
Mother. But alas! who would grieve truly for thee, must let his veins bleed
purple tears, to deliver thy tender breasts dearest Mother, from the desperate
hands of thy cruel and bloody executioners.

Vale.
The melting of the SOUL, etc.
On Sundays, Holy days, and Fasting days.
HE whose mind remains in the power of Reason, and Religion, orders his
outward observances so, that they may be the transitory Hieroglyphics of his
inward piety. They are unmannerly Devotions, which neglect the Injunctions of
the Church, concerning the time, place, and manner of them: since every action
is invested with such circumstances, and has such formalities annexed to them,
the gravitie and solemnity of enjoined Ceremony will suite better with
regular zeales, than the garbes and forms private fancies would put on them.

Thy holy Word, O Lord, is the Sun, which by casting its beams on the
figures and distinctions of the Churches Dyall, points out and orders to us the
times of our lives.

Some Religions wear only the finer Liverie of Sundays, others love to
appear attended with the sadder train of Fasting days. When I consult with
the Church, I find both enjoined; and when I advise with my own nature, I
find them suited to the two principal affections in man, Joy, and Grief: Let
not my service of thee, O Lord, be misshapen in its parts; but what I do to
please thee, let it be guided by thee.

There is such a confederacy between the soul and the body, they do so
mutually operate one upon another, that even those restraints put upon our
appetites, quicken and make active the motions of the soul: for when the body
its organ is distempered, it retorts and shoots backward its indispositions to
the mind; (our thoughts sometimes condensed into the corporeal delights of
the sense; sometimes rarefied into the pure abstracted pleasures of the spirit.)

And since bodily abstinence aides and contributes aptitude to the mind, for
diviner receptions; let me follow the wisdom of thy methods, Lord, who by the
Churches directions, of their Fasts to precede our Festivals, teaches us,
humility goes before glory, repentance and mortification before true joy.

But now, alas! the outward and material Temples are made to mourn in their
own ashes, while the living ones rejoice over the ruins of Sion. The
loosenesses and indulgences of this Age, rather bears a proportion with the
Religion of the Ottomans, than exhibits Sacrifices pleasing to the most Holy
One. They cashiering all strict observances, as fetters and bonds to their more
free Genius, are misled by their own evil spirits in a wilderness of
Opinions.

The observing these signal days, turns our devotions into the known and
vulgar Character, which the world by our practice (as it were) may read. Our
memory charges the Times with good or bad events happening in them; not but
those good or ill qualities adhere to the things done in those Times, (Time
being only the measure of motion) upon whose skore we retain the remembrance
of what things pleasing, or displeasing, have befallen us.

To quarrel at the observation of Times, is to quarrel at the holy and devout
Exercises at such times usually performed; whence we see so easy a slide in
many, from the contempt of the time, to neglect the humble and pious practices
of the other: To take away the set Days, set Prayers, and set Patrimony of
the Church, is to make the Church contemptible, their lives dissolute, and
their devotions profane.

The Magnificats of hearts, divinely in love, and the heavenly wealth of an
open-handed Charity, makes these days prospect so glorious; and in this
respect, they are enlightened with no vulgar Ray, nor does the Sun shine with
any common beams.

The Heathens marked their fortunate days with white, or precious stones; but
we must observe these with white and spotless actions, by which they will
prove so to us: Our miserable Times we becloud either over again with our
griefs, and distrusts, or else add to them the feathers of vanity, to make
them more insensibly fly away; (the two excesses of our life) too jocular
Vanities, or too sad Dejections.

But from the heights of these days, do our souls take their Aethereall
flights, and range themselves in the Quires of Angels, while they bear part
with them, in their Allelujahs.

Lord grant, that by the continued practice of these Heavenly Attempts, the
chain of my mortality being broke, I may get wing, and fly to thee; and that
constantly reaching my hands to thee from these days, which are the upper
steps of the Ladder of my Life, next to Heaven, thou may at last reach forth
thy hand, and receive me.

Morning Thoughts.
Darkness no sooner gives way to the approach of the Sun, but the whole
Theater of Nature seems to smile; the Clouds put on their severall-coloured
Habits; the Musical inhabitants of the Groves warble forth the Air in varied
and delightful tones of harmony; the Flowers draw forth their several flames
and beauties, offering sweet incense from their fragrant bosoms; all mists and
fogges break up and vanish; and that which before dissembled so bright a
luster, has lost it in the light of the Sun. And now my senses loosned from
the soft chains of sleep, enjoy the prospect of the glory of the Heavens, the
pleasant view of the Woods, Fields, Rivers: but as there be Groves, and Caves,
where the Sun has not access; so my Body is that Cave, where, without the
beam of Reason, to discern the causes and effects of those works I externally
behold, it is still in darkness; nay, I shall still continue so, if with the
reflext beam of Reason I look not into my self, and see what habits and
affections my Soul wears, and what belongs to me, in respect of duties and
several relations without: nay, I am still in darkness, if I behold not with
the eye of Faith the Son of Righteousness arising (as it were) out of the
immense Ocean of his Goodness and Mercy, darting into my Soul the glorious
rays of his Truth and Goodness; then does my little World rejoice, and my
flesh rejoices in the living Lord; then are all my affections, the Birds in my
little Grove, tuned with his praise; then does each thought wear a several
Liverie of its Makers praise, put on from the contemplation of his several
works; then are all the false splendors of Vanity obscured, the mists and
fogges of Passion break up and vanish; then do the flowers of Virtue salute
him with that luster and odor he himself bestowed on them; some yielding
their sweets at a distance, as the tender Virtues of Mercy, Compassion,
Liberality; others impart not their fragrancie, till bruised and crushed, as
the Virtues of Patience, and Constancy: And now, Lord, my imprisoned Soul
beholds thy beams, through the chinks as it were of thy Creatures; but a full
vision of thy presence is reserved for the state of Glory.

Let my mind so feed on thy Works, that they be disgested into thy praise; and
let me look out so constantly through these Cranies, at the rays of thy
Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, that at last my spark may be swallowed up in the
immensitie of thy light.

Evening Thoughts.
HEavens sable Curtains being dtawn, Darkness makes all things alike: the
feathered Musicians of the Wood repose their aeriall spirits amidst the leavie
Groves; a silent horror seems to possess all places, while those
Silver-footed Nymphs, that by so many windings arrive at the watrie arms of
Neptune, send forth their pleasant murmures louder, not drowned with greater
noise: if the Sun has set in a Cloud, it has presaged storms to the
ensuing day.

I find a resemblance in my lesser World, of Nights Liverie, when I wink the
World into Darkness; by which, all beauties lose their distinctions; all lie
lovingly together in the bosom of sleep, and agree in their obedience to
these soft injunctions, and delightful commands of Nature. Here the Miser is
pleasantly robbed of his store, and the miserable man of his sense of being
poor. The ambitious man leaves to court Greatness, and is content with the
ordinary favors of Morpheus: the Lover lays aside the sweet tortures of his
Amors, and solaces himself only in the duskie embraces of sleep: the
Soldier, in making his passage to the gates of vocal Fame, ceases to invite
Death, and is here content with its image.

Now do our senses, which are the Birds that make the Music in man's little
Grove, shroud themselves under the downie wings of sleep. Thus does Death
equalize all things only for a longer time; in its habitations a quiet horror
seems to dwell, where all lie lovingly in the bosom of their Mother Earth,
silently crept under the soft Coverings of Ashes; where our divided parts
revell in their loosened motions, which had before been crowded together in
our sickly composures. I lie merrily down in my Bed, though I expect to rise
again, to resume the burden of all my fears, hopes, and griefs, the
constant attendants of my life; and yet look sadly and mournfully upon the
Grave, my corruption belonging to the maintaining of the order of the Universe;
where, at my next rising, much gayer clad then before, I shall awake to
immortality and endless joy: with the eye of Reason I can look through the
glory of the world, and behold Vanity, and Oblivion; with the eye of Faith I
can look through Oblivion and Corruption it self, and behold Glory and
Eternity. Now I find, how many things do not (that are esteemed in popular
judgments to) make one happy; how little they contribute toward it, to me
alone, till I be mixed with those people, and take pleasure in those Opinions.

We entertain with true and real passions the Scenicall compositions of the
Stage; there being in man's life Plays, not acted, but lived; solemn fictions,
not feigned, but believed. Men now acknowledge their own Natures, whom Precept
had taught to regulate themselves all day, and familiarly own the impressions
Nature has charactered on them.

Now does the ever-running streams of Gods favors, which run over our hard
and stony hearts, speak louder to us, not drowned with the noise of worldly
thoughts. If the Sun has gone down in the clouds of our envy and malice,
it presages future storms of passions to our life.

And now, Lord, I will seek him in my Bed, whom my Soul loves: Let me find
thee, in the rest thou give my Soul from Sin and Vanity, in the sleep thou
give my affections, they being all quietly reposed in thee; and thus I rest
on thee, more than on where I lie.

The Arraignment of the Heart.
I Thought I had so well surveyed this little piece of Earth, that I had known
every turning and winding in it: but, since I had a holy purpose betrayed to
some easy temptation, I suspected that there was something yet undiscovered.
Whereupon, calling my Travel, Study, and Observation thither, I found a
strange Labyrinth, which the thread of my Reason was too short to unwinde me out
of; I found it so incircled with the Serpentine windings of Sin, so
encompassed with those flexuous embraces, that I perceived Vanity entering
under the conduct of its adversary, apt to glory in the contempt of Glory, and
grow proud in the lowest debasing my self: and upon demand of Reason for any
good, it would inform me, That it owed its original to some secret passion,
which would untitle it again.

There is nothing but darkness, and wanderings, here; so that I perceive, O
Lord, I was more secure than safe, since I lodged here such deceitful guests,
that answered at the light knock of every idle passion. I desired to have
discovered my heart to thee, but found it first necessary, that thou should
discover it to me; where was such a wilderness of Passions, such rocks of
Pride, such Maeanders of Deceits, and perplexed paths of contradictorie motions,
that it mocked my past endeavors, and taught me to know, that other things might
be in the light to me, yet I in darkness to my self. And since thy sacred
Spirit has dictated to me, that it is desperately wicked and inscrutable, I
arraigne it before thy Throne, as that corrupt Fountain, whence has flowed
those bitter streams of Vanity, which has overflowed my life; and here,
where my natural life first begins, my spiritual death first arises. I beg
of thee, my God, another Creation, first, of a clean heart; and that then thy
sacred Spirit would move upon the face of these waters, and form this Chaos
into that beauty, and order, where thou would have thy own Power and Wisdom
manifested: breathe forth thy heavenly Light into my Soul, and to the
considerations of my heart, cause a distinction between the Night of Sin, to
be feared; and the Light of Truth, to be desired; make a separation in me,
betwixt heavenly and earthly thoughts; let the other be superior and
predominant over these; dispose all here into form and fruitfulness; plant
the flowers of virtue, which being fed with the Manna-drops of thy Grace, they
may communicate their grateful properties of color and odor to others: Cause
the Lights thou have set in my little World, to shine clearer, that every of
them may have their several and proper influences upon the course of my life:
When the Sun of thy Word shines out, let all other Lights be obscured;
however, let that thy other Light of Reason rule the darker part of my life;
let the lesser Lights of Opinion (whose motions, though they be erratique, yet
do operate upon our actions) keep such place and distance, that they hinder
not the general harmony of the Fabric. That part which denominates my
Species, make new in me; that part formed after thy own Image; and give it
command over the beasts of the field, that Reason may subdue the wildness of
my affections. And now, Lord, let all the motions of this Piece turn upon the
poles of thy Commands; let it be centred in the obedience to thy will, that
there it may find a constant Sabbath, and Rest. This is the regeneration of
this lesser World; element it, Lord, with the fire of thy heavenly love,
surround it with the holy breathings of thy blessed Spirit: Let constancy and
solid fixnesse be in my ways, let the current of all my thoughts empty
themselves into the Ocean of the infinity of thy goodness and glory: And yet,
Lord, this World could not stand a moment, if thou did not behold it through
thy Son. Its the desire of my heart to entertain thee: as thou art the author
of that desire, be thou also the granter of it. I know, a heart being filled
with any thing, denies access to another; I am full of my self, grant me to
deny my self, to be emptied of my self: for here it is, that the pleasures
and trifles of the World hold intelligence, and correspondence, in themselves
not so forcible, but as they flatter my understanding, or affection, with apt
pretenses.

When Perseus in his Expedition was to kill the Serpent, he had a
Looking-glass given him, wherein he was to behold the Serpent, as he should
strike at him, and not to look upon it self; and we shall kill the Serpents
of outward temptations, if we look at their figures, presented in the Glass
of our thoughts, and there destroy them in their images, received in our hearts.

Lord, do thou possess my heart, that it may possess thee; that it may
receive thee, receive it; thou art within all things, not included: let me
find thy infinite Power, in the extension of thy Mercy, and not in thy
Justice; let me put off my self: my self, is my ways, my customs,
affections; thy promise is, for protecting us in thy ways. When I seek to
have my own image represented back again to me more beautiful from the Glass
of popular Opinions, courting Fame, or Applause; when I for fear or flattery
neglect to do my duty to thee my God, or man, then am I in my own ways,
seeking Death in the errors of my life. I give thee, Lord, that one syllable
thou desire, my (heart;) begging the exchange of another for it (Love:) But
because I am a very bubble, which howsoever it be blown into some
curious-coloured Hemisphere, by some good inspirations, yet the least ruffling
wind from abroad makes evaporate: And though I be wound up to some holy
resolutions by the finger of thy Spirit, yet without thy constant assistance, I
should relapse, and fall into looseness and dejectedness; therefore I beg
of thee my Heart again, that thou would before the conveyance of it pass,
give it me under the custody of thy Grace, sealed up by thy blessed Spirit,
that no sinful Passion within, nor outward Glory, nor Beauty, the solliciters
of Vanity, do ever break it up.

Deceit does debase our Nature, and false Policy destroy Governments.
MAn, that Noble Coin, which bears the Image of the King of Heaven, is so
debased with the alloy of his own imaginations, that it will not pass. Lord,
thou art one undivided simple essence, and requirest Truth in the inward parts,
and spirits, wherein there is no guile: Wherefore thou have taught us, that
under the form of Children, we obtain the Kingdom of Heaven; by the
revocation of which innocent and contemptible part of our lives, the value is
brought down of all those false Wares men have fraughted their minds with, in
the voyage of this life; those false Opinions, deluded Affections, which do
create to men their joys and fears. We shall find, Deceit has underminded
all the little structures of Delight men have builded out of Fancy, while
Opinions are entertained in the Soul, which bear not the lawful impression
of Truth, but the counterfeit stamp of their own affection. Truth is the
only firm Basis of man's content and happiness, the images of the things
themselves, as they be in their own natures, received as it were into the
Glass of the mind; settle there that which we call Truth, when there is a
conformity betwixt the things and our minds: but when man vitiates and
distorts his mind with wrong and erroneous apprehensions of those things, then
are our minds a Magic Glass, which shows us the images of things that are
not. Thus are men's griefs Panique, and their joys personate.

Those tears of Alexander were as ridiculous, which the report of another part
of the World yet unconquered, drew from him, as of that poor woman, whom the
Philosopher saw weeping for her Pitcher she had broke.

Man mingling his deceived conceptions with the things themselves, frights
himself with that Vizard he himself bestows on things, which in themselves
are natural, orderly, and necessary. Waters that at the Fountain head are
pure and sweetly tasted, in their subterraneous passage beget new and foraine
tastes. What a Maze does humane nature tread in? How many are the Cozenages of
his affections? Man, as it were in the Tyring-roome of his fancy, bestows his
several Dresses and Attires on things, which he on the Stage of the world
really counts for such as he has clothed them for. Thus are all things made
to bear the Liverie of his imaginations, and are accepted back again into the
affections, according to the richness of the habits he made them fine with.

Folly, says Erasmus, hears it self ill spoke of even amongst the most
foolish: and many would entertain with laughter the story of that fool, who
leapt and danced, because he thought all the ships that came into the harbor
were his own; when perhaps no less Comicall would their own Mirths prove,
which are drawn (perhaps) from the esteem of some things, which serve to make
a great part of their lives seem pleasant to them, which having their worth
viewed in the light of Reason, would be found not sufficient to yield such a
warmth and influence, to warm or recreate their deluded affections at. Some
are overflowed with a deluge of tears, for that, which to another has no such
ugly Character stamped on it. Opinion is sufficient to move passion, and Opinion
many times rises from the bare shows of things; and yet the impressions are no
less violent and strong which Opinion retorts on us, then what comes from
things in themselves ill. Beauty is a glorious Ray, which might raise our
thoughts to the Creator of Lights, who is Beauty it self; and wherein the
Mind might take as much content, with due reflections on the Giver, as in any
other sparks of that omnipotent brightness communicated to the Creature.
Honor is that badge, whereby they will honor Virtue: Wealth is a bank against
the flowings in of the necessities of this life. Yet all these befoole our
loves, and cheat our affections; they not being brought in by the trials and
examinations of Reason, but by the secret motions and recommendations of
Passion: for Beauty, by the Hyperbole and excess of my thoughts, is made
another thing to me than it is; being only those clouds whither the Sun of
men's wit send their beams to gild.

Thus, when we would immortalize the objects of our Earth-borne wishes, or
make Earthly Beauties Divine; then, by this disproportion are our unsatisfied
affections betrayed to Repentance, being it must be recalled from the height
and rate it had carried the thing too: or if one, in stead of true Virtue and
Merit, fall in love with vulgar Breath, and Court that Echo, being as much
taken with those ayrie reverberations, as Narcissus was with the watrie
reflection, seeking for that rich Ore of happiness in other men's souls, which
he would have coined into respect and observances of him; what does he, but (as
Solomon says) possess the wind? Or if one admire too much that Idol of
vulgar minds, Wealth, thinking the felicity of it consists in the abundance;
when as that Divine Aphorism delivers, More than what is necessary, the owner
has but to behold it with his eyes. Men augment their joys from the
greatness of their wealth, as they do their fears from the greatness of the
appearance of his danger. All the Ocean strikes a terror in the mind of him
like to be drowned, when less than a Tun would serve the turn. Or if the
whole Air, that incompasseth the Globe, were infected, one should add the
consideration of the vastness of that, to increase his sorrow, whereas he
could suck in no more than what conferred to his own mortality. Oh, that my
ways were directed with a Line, the Line of thy Word! there being no other
Guide out of this intricacie and perplexednesse of our own natures.

Man was, from the hand of the most glorious Workman, set on the solid Basis of
integrity and justice, and is now crumbled away into trifles, minute-deceits,
which has weakened the soliditie of this best piece of the Creation. Truth is
that noble prey man's Soul is in the inquest after; and to have it, in stead of
realities, stored only with maskes and outward forms, it dishonours our
natures, makes them unhappie and miserable.

The morality of the Heathen, puts out of countenance the late Religions of
our time: How generous, and how becoming a worthy mind, was the advice of
that Orator to his friend Atticus, then Governor of a Province? Whom
instructing first with the qualities and natures of the men he had to deal
with, their dispositions, their ends, how far he might trust some, how far
make use of others; then disswades him from Anger, there being nothing more
ugly, than to add bitterness and sharpness of Fury to Power and Command.
Afterward, that he be sure, that in all his carriage he should let the Native
see, through his constant readiness to aid them, and to do justice, he placed
his glory in their security; and looked upon their prosperity, as the fruits
of his prudence, and his good conduct of their affairs: then, says he, will
they obey you, with the resignation of their wills, as to a father. At last he
concludes, that he should be sure to let integrity, and justice, and wisdom,
be the foundation of his honor and greatness; haec sint fundamenta dignitatis
tuae: But now, in stead of thoughts enlarged to take care of the public,
their Purses are only to take Money in private. Shall they be able, by the
faint rays of Nature, to copy fairer pieces of Virtue, and truer Glory, than
this Age, by the advantages of their supernatural Lights, can afford any
examples of? Who does not look upon, with grave respect, these Relics, these
yet standing Pieces, not wind; which shows, how magnificent a structure man
was? Who can but honor the gallantry of the manners of the old Romans? Who
being called to defend their Country, command their Armies, either to oppose
foreign enemies, or appease domestique insurrections; they desired only, that
they might have, during their absence from home, occasioned by the Wars,
their Plowes and Stocks preserved, and that they might return to the pleasures
and contents of their former Country lives, indemnified in their estates,
having discharged their obligation to the public.

But how different are the endeavors of men in this age? they being all
employed, not as in the champion region of the Commonwealth, but in the
enclosures of their own particular respects. Frugalitie is that Virtue which
stands between unpleasing Taxes, and Gabels, and the peoples hate. Justice is
like the Sun in the Sphere of Government, it gives life and light to all:
Prudence exercise, a Virtue different from the other, not contrary.

The civil Forts, and Strengths of Kingdoms, are politic Axioms of
Conservation, drawn out of the bowels of Reason, and Experience; which to
neglect, were to let go to ruin those banks which hindered the invasion of a
sea of public calamity. Thus is that golden Scepter, to which every one did
bow, while it was supported with Justice and Prudence, broke into a numberless
company of inferior Policies; in stead of those great Luminaries, every one
goes about with the dim Lights of their little Plots, to inlighten the dark
corners of their private designs. So far, Lord, as we withdraw our selves
from the Rule and Law thou have confined our actions in, so far we lessen and
degenerate; in stead of the advancement and exaltation of their natures, they
debase it and becrampe it: there is no progress made, but with all our labor
and pains shall be found only to have gone so far on one side. Thou art
Wisdom and Righteousness; in the one, be thou the light of my eyes; in the
other, the guide of my life: let me not, Lord, turn aside to deceit, but look
well to my paths.

Of Constancy and Perseverance.
Constancy is that Atlas which upholds man's little World; without which, it is
but a piece of contingencie, casual disorderly motions, a world of Atoms. And
yet, Lord, such are the contrary and irregular courses of my life, that I add
to the outward vicissitudes of the world, the inconstant motions of my own
breast. The greater world is full of diverse and different operations, and
motions of Nature, yet a Cosmicall harmony of the Universe is maintained
through all the diversity of those workings; and man, while his actions are
concentrick, and are proportioned to the Rule of those several Laws God
governes us by, he translates the harmony of Nature to his own thoughts, they
all constantly moving in their proper Orbs. I thought I had been so
consolidated within my self, I could have found none of these unconstancies;
so compacted with Precepts and Rules, so fortified by Experience and Discourse,
that all such variations had been excluded; but, Lord, I perceive my self all
in pieces, involved, discomposed: How soon are my devouter resolves made a
Trophie to my innate corruptions, and increase the victories of my more
imperious nature? In braverie of Discourse, and finenesse of Contemplation, the
whole Globe is sometime trampled on, the brags of Wealth and Glory despised;
and yet, as if I were not Commander of this small extension of Earth, I find
my high-flowne thoughts brought down to the lure of some contemptible Vanity;
and that Earth which I even now trod upon, trampling ore my Soul and its
affections.

The Heathens made brave descriptions of Virtues; they designed and curiously
decyphered those heavenly Bodies, but knew not one foot of the way into them.
Who can but honor their gallant expressions? The height and liveliness of
their contemplations? How magnificent are they in their language, when they
with that pomp of rich discourse go to set Reason in its Throne, giving it the
Scepter and command over the passions? And among all the glorious structures of
Virtue they have made, with what state and majesty do they lead their
Readers to that invincible, Fortress of Constancy, seated on a Rock? Here
promising, that all the storms of affliction shall break and ruin upon it.
The Stoic gravely invites your Hand to go into his Bark, to sail to
happiness in, sending Challenges to Fortune; assuring you, by the prerogative
of their Doctrines, a shelter from all its storms.

Impavidum ferient ruina. Who can but admire the heights and transcendencies of
their Souls? Their Pens well feathered with wit and expression, flying home to
the mark of most men's desires, Wealth, Honor, Beauty, and with that Mercuries
Rod condemning them to the Earth; and again, a tougher Will, contesting with
Poverty, Disgrace, Losses, disabling them to make us miserable. These are the
rallyed Forces of men's defeated Reasons, the recollected sparks of man's
weakened Understanding, which may yield a warmth to our dark and frozen
Natures. And yet for all the vaunts of Philosophy, our composures are
loosened; man's Nature got a fall in the Cradle, and in stead of a complete
Building, there remain but the ruins of one.

Its wisdom to come out of a ruinous house: I desire, Lord, to come out of my
self, self-love, selfe-confidence; let it be my strength, to cleave to thee.

Error will sometimes seek to get a luster to it, from its pretenses to this
Virtue: How many seem to chide the slow progress of their Soul, for not
using more wings to fly to those imaginary Crowns their deluded zeales were
put in hope of? Constancy in suffering being no infallible sign of Truth.
Slaves can suffer to admiration, and some by custom, as Patiens Lacedaemon.

Fix, Lord, this volatile matter, untangle this ravel'd piece of thine, and
give me such a conformity betwixt my practice and resolves; such good
thoughts, and such a constant execution of them, that in the chain of my life,
the latter link of Grace may join to that of Glory; lest by any interruption,
or discontinuance, breaking some one of them, I fall into Torment.

Considerations in Travel.
HE who contents himself only with as much as he can behold with his eye; the
stateliness of Building, the outward garb of the People, the rich Liverie
Nature has bestowed on their Soil; seems to receive such a kind of
satisfaction, as one should have from getting to be able to read a different
Character, or Letter, without ever caring for the sense or meaning contained in
them. Out of Natures Alphabet, by the several positions as it were of its
Letetrs, and dispositions of its outward qualities, all things are thus
diversified in form and shape: but if one would study intellectual
satisfactions, he must penetrate deeper; consider the complexions of the
people, and see what influence they have had upon their Laws, they being
framed by Reasons proportioned to them: to see what influence the Laws have
upon the people, in Protection, Wealth, and Peace, for they were framed for the
surest defense and procurement of these, by the people: to see how the tide of
their Wealth ebbes or flows, running in the veins of their Trading; how it
may be diverted, how stopped: to see whether they carry in their own bosom the
seeds of their ruin, parties, and faction, and the prevalencie of these at
Court, and how these operate upon their Counsels; how they stand in fear or
assurance of Allies, or Neighbors, and upon what grounds and interests.

Thus may you view, as it were, the whole frame of Government in motion; a
lively representation of it taken from the practick, and not a flourishing
description of an imaginary Commonwealth; like a Picture drawn only for
Beauties sake, by the observation of their several dispositions; what they owe
to their tempers, their several framing, and mouldings up; what to Discipline,
and Virtue: one will be better able to get acquaintance of himself, to follow
the advice of the Socraticall Oracle: to observe in the French a conversation
easy and facile, whose first familiarity is such, that he has left himself
no power to go beyond it, overflowing with the prodigal excess of a verbal
humanity. On the other side of the Hills, a people wise at home, and
conversible abroad; in themselves considerative, and in conversation agreeable.
The Dutch, as if that divine spark, his Soul, were drowned in its moist
Lodging, not able to make any departures from himself; not having a carriage
so fortified with ceremonies, and respects; not given to Caresses and
Court-like applications, but only such observances, as may make them know he
believes none is better than another; their humors fitted and siding with
equality, whereby they have been easier cast into the mould of a State. In
the French, what advantages their suddenness and first violent motions afford,
in execution of Commands. The Dutch has his slownesse made up, and aided, by
conjunction of Counsels; as if Nature did still incline them to the remedy of
their Constitutions, by a constant communication of their thoughts and
deliberations; their excellency being like that which has not its esteem
from the parts simply considered, but from the totum compositum. The Italians
are fine and quaint in their Counsels, but difficult to put in practice: what
is taken from practice, is easiliest turned into practice again; there being
so much difference many times betwixt the relation of things in Books, and the
things themselves, as is betwixt a Journey in open daylight, and such a one as
Virgil describes a wandering by the uncertain and changing lights of the Moon,
in gloomie Woods:

Quale sub incertam Lunam,
Est Iter in sylvis.
Of Opinions in Religion.
THe Church has always been vexed with Opinions; some, witty and
speculative; others, gross and ugly ones. Religion is called the Mystery of
our Salvation; and yet how conversant is it made in the toils of wit?
Ingeniosa res est, jam esse Christianum; Syllogismi sustinent Ecclesiam. Words
serve to beget Questions, wherein great wits, employed for Victory, leave the
Readers eyes lost, in that pitch, wherein their high flights had Lessoned them;
they decking Divinity up with the feathers of humane Learning, to be able to
soar in the subtle air of Controversy.

When Ambition or Profit has turned the edge of an Heretics wit on one side,
to maintain an Heresy; how ingeniously does he wander in the shades of
Antiquity? uncharitably wresting Texts of Scripture, diligently weeding the
Fathers, making up a solid Body of a Discourse, well-spirited with wit and
invention; where is hard nicetie, elaborate thinness, weak finenesse. These
are curious Models, which conform not to the Prototype, but are delicate
contextures of the Arts of Reasoning. They needed not to have retrived an old
Opinion of a new world, since they might have found a new world of Opinions,
filled with the air of Fancy, surrounded with the Ocean of Error. As in
Philosophy, by their new Theories, they have made, as it were, spurious and
false Globes; that even that sportive Genius of Ovid comes nearer the truth of
the Worlds Creation, than some of their chief Dictators in the Schools: So in
Divinity, which should be the pure white innocent Queen of our Souls,
breathing upon them the soft and gentle gales of Joy, Peace, and Love; now they
have made her like a Scylla, girt about with barking Monsters, full of loud and
litigious Questions and Disputes. They have drawn (as it were) upon the
heavenly Body of Theology false and supposed Lines; new motions, fabulous and
imaginary: yet though it be beautiful in its native Dress, and needs not
the advantage of any foreign Luster, yet it disdaines not to be attended on by
its pure and intellectual servant Learning; many times explaining it self in
its notions, and using its help for Confutation, Distinction, and Explanation.
There are deep Abysmes contained in its most familiar expressions, which are
but the condiscentions and applications, as it were, to our capacities: there
is a profound simplicity in its plainest positions; and that sentence, Whom
God loves he chastises, makes misery it self Rhetorical. If it be too
familiar with artificial discussions, in a few discents, or Genealogies of
Arguments, it forgets its heavenly birth, and begets affinity with Reason. All
Arguments move upon the forms of speech, Syllogism, they are the Products of
Reason; and by a succession of Propositions, the Conclusion at last being
become so far removed from that which originally begot them, that it many
times has not only lost the similitude of favor, but has altered its inward
nature.

Some late Philosophers have proved, that Syllogismes are not sufficient to
evince Physical Verities, but that the subtilties even of Natures workings
evade it subtle forms; how much more Sacred Divinity, which lies not level
with Reason? It being no more able to fathom or reach its transcendencies and
sublimities, then a little thread can by the arm of man be thrown about the
heavenly Pole; seeing it can be proved by Reason, that Religion is above it,
and to be left to men's beleefes.

Boethius says excellently well, That Reason, to see the truth of those things,
must go out of it self; and that the mind should be lifted up to the height
of that supreme intelligence, which should there behold what in it self it
cannot; that is, how certain and determinate prevision may go before the
uncertain events of things. He who is the Truth, and the Light, though not
comprehended by the darkness of the World, converst with men on Earth in the
depth of humility, in the exactness of obedience, in the constant practice of
each holy Virtue. There is a pure and heavenly Light annexed to the devout
aspirations of the Soul; for the blind eye of the mind does not know how to
look up to the God of glory, if he from above shine not upon it with the
inward beams of his Grace: and though Light descends from above, from the
Father of Lights, yet a holy innocence, and true humility, sends clearer
Lights of Knowledge up to the brain, than any speculations can send down the
warmth of Charity to the heart: for the Son of God (the Light it self)
descended, covered as it were with humility, and the heart is the seat of it;
and so that inaccessible Light is conveyed to us, in the dark coverings and
habits of Humiliations. One may employ the brain with lofty and ayrie
Contemplations, and yet let his Soul slip away, for want of Charity, which is
the Soul of Religion; by the infusion of which we are animated, and
spiritually live. Religion is a practical Syllogism, whose premises go for
nothing, if there be not the active conclusion of well-doing.

Therefore, Lord, while others cannot agree, in what order to range and rank
good works, and Faith; let it be my Faith, that the doing of thy will is
necessary; and thy will is, our holiness, and the practice of good works;
and make it part of my works, to pray for Faith and the increase of it. Grant,
Lord, that while others cannot agree about the manner of thy Coming, that my
heart may be so taken up with the Faith and joy of thy beloved presence, that
it give not my head leisure curiously to question the manner of it.

These are the sweet Composures, the blessed Reconciliations, when the disputes
of good things are swallowed up in the heavenly fruition and executions of
them; in this calm Harbor does the Vessel of a Soul, tossed with the winds
of Controversy, safely reside.

And now, Lord, the Ship of thy Church, tossed amidst the furious waves of
Controversies, seems to stand in danger of Ruin: but we know, the Gates of
Hell have all their powers here defeated, though we cry in the tenderness of
our passions; Master, carest thou not that we perish?

It is not so easy to give a Reason of some Opinions in the Church, sitting in
ones Study, as to go abroad, and see that great fabric of Power, and the
vast Treasures, which are built upon the foundation of this nice
Schoole-Divinitie: if the Church seem to seek in some Doctrines, its but
occasioned, as the Fever of that sick man in Martial was, who was only sick,
to take occasion to show the braverie of his house-hold-stuffe:

Faciunt hanc stragula febrim. Error is many times more magnificent in its
structures than Truth; yet, as its Gates, perhaps, may be more gilded, and
shine more gawdily, yet they are like that Door of Sleep in Virgil; the fine
one being that which let out all the false Dreams, while Truth had its passage
out of those that were plainer.

Reformation in Religion is like distilled waters, which being too much
endeavored to be heightened, being once at their (...), they relapse and lose of
their spirit and force; and men's spirits not knowing where they have deserted
that Center and point of Truth, which should have fixed them, stagger and reele
in the circumference and round of their own fancies.

Religion fires men's hearts with holy zeal, making them mourn, as it were, in
the dissolutions and ashes of their past sins; but its no incendiarie, to
delight in those of Towns and Cities. Religion proclaims a holy War against
Sin, and Vice, but never blows the Trumpet of Sedition. Religion exacts from
its subjected hearts, homage to the King of Power, but disclaimes all earthly
Crowns; My Kingdom (says he) is not of this world. Religion has its power,
and force, to the destruction of its enemies; but he has said, it should be
with the word of his mouth, and that the wrath of man fulfils not the justice
of God. Religion is like the Sun, it gives light and life to all, while it
keeps its own heavenly course; but being made to incline to earthly ends, it
causes a conflagration. What ever good effects are produced from any false or
erroneous Religions, its by virtue of those Opinions and Tenets mixed with it,
that bear a conformity to Truth; and what ill actions seem to flow, or be
occasioned from the true Religion, they are the effects of those erroneous
Opinions, that they have mingled with their Divinity, and bear a proportion
with the malignitie of man's nature, rather than the others paritie.

Let me not seek, Lord, thy living Word among the dead acts of natural
Reason, neither in the Calentures of unruly Zeales, nor from among the Glories,
Wealth, and Ends men have on Religion; but let my Soul suck from the breasts of
my Mother, Truth and Salvation, thy Church converting thy Word to my food, and
nourishment.

Of enjoyment of Pleasure.
Music sounds best to one in the dark, because no other outward object
distracts his attention: and to hear the Music of those Precepts delivered
against Pleasure, one must shut up from his eye the delightful objects of the
sense; which other ways would (perhaps) steal away his thought. Yet this is
only a remedy fitted for the weakness of the eye, which so readily
recommends to the mind the flattering Courtships of these Curtizans of the
Sense. But to fortify and strengthen the mind against them, its better to
view them all in the light, looking upon them with the eye of Reason; and
there, all their false splendours would not show so brave. He who has
converst with them most freely, has soonest found, that their inward
dispositions, and qualities, give not him leave to live so happily in their
enjoyment, as their outward beauty flattered him with the hopes of: he has
soonest pierced through that thin and pleasing rind wherewith they are
covered, and tastes of them as they be, in their own natures; where he finds
anxietie, unsatisfied melancholy, diseases, decay of fortune. But to let alone
those ingenious invectives and stoicall raylings against Pleasure, commending
them to a common place; one may observe of it, that most men love to be wise by
their own experience. Man's nature is so poor and indigent a thing of it
self, that it turns it self every where to seek satisfaction; and its the
wisdom of Nature, delightfully to draw us to perform its actions: she has
annexed a Pleasure to the use of our senses, that otherwise it would be a
troublesome thing to maintain our lives; that great Blessing of, Go and
multiply, so much depending of it. Pleasure may make its soft impressions upon
our yielding sense, and its to put off our species, to be insensible of them.
Some would make man another thing than he is, by robbing him of his affections;
Pleasures, say they, would convert him into strange and foraine shapes; and
some of the Philosophers, for a remedy, would convert him into a stone; as if
he must endure the transmutations of the Poet, and act his Metamorphosis.

The sharp and finest edges of Pleasure side with Virtue, and Temperance;
while they perish upon the ruins of their satiated and plenarie fruitions; and
as long as they make no greater sound in the curious instrument of man than
suits with the harmony of his sublimer motions, they help the Music: but if
their greater noise drown the voice of Reason, or the higher faculties of the
Soul, they become lovers of Pleasures, more than lovers of God.

Let all thy blessings, Lord, thy Methods, and Works, make stayres for my
Soul, to ascend to thy right hand, where are Pleasures for evermore.

A Contemplation on our Saviors hanging on the Cross.
NOw am I freed from the noise of Passions, whilst with one look they are
struck dumb. Now am I delivered from the Tyranny of insulting affections,
whilst in him crucified they behold their own death. The glories and pomp of
the world have lost their pretenses, whilst the Son of Glory and Power
suffered, clothed with the frail garment of humane nature, In this blessed
shade, no poisonous Vice will live; the Serpent of Pride will not endure the
look of the true Brazen Serpent, to see him humbled to the death of the
Cross; Envy flies hence, to see him suffer for his enemies.

And now not left to, but freed from my self, my frozen and congealed heart
begins to melt and thaw, dissolving into tears, weeping for its sins, for
which I see my Saviors heart to bleed. Here I sit, and bathe the wings of my
Soul (my affections) in the flames of Gods holy love; and whilst the fire
burns below in my heart, my eyes boil over above with fervent streams: here,
in devout ecstasies, my Soul loses it self, in those ravishments of divine
love: I go out of my self, in wonderment, not able to comprehend it; but
joyfully throw my self into those depths, desiring to be comprehended by it.
The joys of a Soul divinely in love, border upon those inexpressible ones
above; for they swallow one up, in their profound immensities, and leave no
capacity for Reason to marshall them up, in words and expressions; the Wards,
as it were, of that Key being no way fitted, to open the Lock of the mysteries
of this Love; but leaves men's Souls holily inebriated and over-flowed with the
deluge of Pleasures and Joys; I becoming rather theirs, than they mine, being
turned all to Joy and Love.

And now my Soul being melted with the meditation of thy Passion, let it be
poured out to thee in Confessions; let the beams of thy own transcendent Love
be reflected back again from my heart, upon the face of others; that thus
shining one to another, and all receiving our Lights from thee, may at last be
fixed in thy own Court, for ever sill'd with the beams of the joy of thy
presence.

Let others sit in the Chair of subtle Controversy, while I sit at the feet
of my Savior, in meditation of his Passion: Let others boast of their false
Retreats, their Groves, and Eliziums; while under the shades of thy sharp and
thornie Crown my Soul rejoices; nay, while in those shades which Crosses and
Afflictions shall cast upon my life, in conformity to my Saviors suffering,
my Soul rejoices.

A Contemplation upon a retired life.
THe Poets sometimes gratify the largeness of man's Soul with their lofty
flights, writing to immortality; and in the excess of their fancy, converse
with Deities, tumbling among the Stars with Jove: and anon, let the motions
of their Spirits down again, to view the contents of moderate and private
fortunes. Thus we see sometime the Scene of the greatest men's lives altered;
now representing you the prospect of Armies, Triumphs of Victories, Grandeur of
State, the glory of Courts, Camps, and Cities; anon, in their rooms,
succeeding Groves and pleasant Rivers private Walks, Discourses of the Worlds
Vanities, Experiments of Nature, and such Companions of solitariness: When all
the swellings of Pride and vain Opinions are fallen, and Nature freed from those
affectations it has got abroad, it acknowledges it self, its own Bents and
inclinations. A life led according to Nature, is the real enjoying of things
themselves: but if according to Art and Opinion, its like as in Pictures; they
view things drawn well to the Life, representations of Love, Honor, and
Virtue; yet nothing but Colors, that lose their glories by men's nearer
approaches. The joys of an active life are more agreeable to Nature, moving in
the Sphere of Virtue, than any recessions from society can afford, whose
privilege can only be, to think Virtue. The masculine power of the mind is
not beholding to places for their satisfactions; but what is the true and real
dignity of one place before another, by an intellectual Chymistrie he can
extract, and translate to his own mind their preheminencies. There can in no
place be wanting Groves, Rivers, singing of Birds; our bodies are a shadie
Grove, where our Souls sit contemplating; the Music of the Birds without, are
all Gods creatures, which, as it were, in so many diversified Notes do sweetly
sing their Makers praise; the Rivers, are that flux wherein all humane things
are, Times, Persons, Things, which by a succession of their corruptible and
alterable parts, do still keep up that current. These thoughts are, as it
were, the better Genius, which attends the Lakes: without which, their
retirements are but the refuges of men's sickly humors; where they begin to
live of their malady, rather than to cure it; and do only sacrifice the
fumes of melancholy, for that incense of service, which they owe as a tribute
for their being.

Those that would make loanenesse acceptable, by advising men, as through a
Prospective, to behold the greatness of Structures, and braverie of Courts,
through the humility of a Cottage, do make ones deluded fancy the ground of
their content, imagining that he still enjoyes those things, which commonly so
swells men's minds, that they cannot with that evennesse of judgment taste
those purer pleasures, which arise from the observation of Nature, making as it
were his Disease his Cure; the immoderate esteem of the other having so
vitiated his pallat, that he can relish nothing else, though it be by the
proxy of the fancy.

Lord, give me Jacobs Dreams, that my very imaginations may represent things
as Ladders, whereon I may see thy Goodness, Wisdom, and Power descending, our
Allelujahs ascending.

Considerations on these Times.
ALL this goodly Fabric is broke up, The mischiefs of a Civil War.
and disbanded; the Elements of it rudely blended, and hurld together: that
which was high, becoming low; and that which was low, becoming high. The
towering Eagle is shot by an Arrow made of the same Tree, where he had built his
Imperial Nest; and in that Red Sea of Blood, with which Pride and Faction has
overflowed this Island, is the Sun of Justice and Religion almost set: men
growing only politic in Ruin, and witty in Destruction, the best means
applied to the worst ends; the vigor and strength of the Commonwealth consumed
on a Disease.

A Civil War once but named, what evils throng not into our conquered
imaginations? How does our unhappie Country feast the eyes of their enemies
with the numerous funerals of its own Children? What cruel Opinions are
entertained, residing as Tigers in the breasts of men, to which must be offered
the Victimes and Sacrifices of their dearest Countrymen? What monsters of new
Faiths lodge in their breasts, that thus devour and prey upon the tender
Virgins, I mean the ancient integrity and candor of their dispositions? How
do they dabble in one another blood? searching one another bowels, as if
like poisonous Scorpions they should be bruised, to yield an oil to cure the
poison given by their own stings. Of (...) War


A foreign War is like Lightnings in the Sky, which purifies and cleanses
those upper Regions; but then Nature keeps its station: whereas if the
Elements themselves, of which this World consists, should make a War
together, that must needs bring a dissolution. If men saw no reason for it, its
enjoined their beliefes, That a House divided cannot stand. Oh miserable
Triumph of our Ruin! Oh woeful Pomp of our Destruction! How all things wear
the Liverie of Mourning! There may you discern Justice in its sable Weeds, so
far gone in Melancholy, scarce ever to be seen abroad; here Religion in a
corner weeping, grieved to see, that they have so long, like Whifflers, kept
the Door of the Church against the coming in of strangers, till all the
Church is become full of strange Opinions; and that they never more take care
to appear honest and good men, than when most especially they intend to
deceive: in another place, the Laws wildly running about, and lamenting, yet
so loud, that all take notice of it.

And now, as in Orpheus Theater, upon the ceasing of this Music of the Laws,
men return to their frenzies and factions; Men consult not with reason, but
with partio^.
they do not debate, examine, and resolve, but follow, adhere, and combine:
Sequere post me, is the Motto of the Times; every one taking notice of the
Sign, where he has taken up his Lodging; ranging themselves in several
Boxes, which bear some outward Badge of the Faction. The peoples minds with
the fire of Zeal, and the heat of these Troubles, being become fluid, and
melted, are cast in the several Moulds that witty Contrivers had fashioned:
The vulgar spirits, which make up the multitude, to preserve their beloved
Chattels, are prepared to side with parties, since that begets support and
countenance; and that he should be a prey to both, without being a party to
one. Thus every thing is embraced, to which Ambition, armed with Power, can
make its way: Quisque deliberat de partibus, de summa nemo.

The wisdom of later times consisted in witty diversions of these Troubles;
The wisdom of later times to divert troubles* says Bacon.
whereby the many evils threatening the Commonwealth were clearly shunned. An
example whereof, we find in former times, in the people of Capua; who being
resolved to have their Governors no longer to rule over them, one who being
well thought of by the people, and intending to oblige the Senators, used thus
his power he had with them: he tells the Senators, if they would follow his
advice, he would save them; whereupon they consented all to be locked up in a
room, and thither he brings the people, pretending he had got them into that
posture, to sacrifice them all to their furies (for the people will ever be
deceived:) but he desired of them, before they proceeded to execution, they
would choose from among themselves, who should have the others places: They,
divided by their particular affections, and several judgments, were brought
to put in practice the punishment they intended the others, upon themselves;
falling into so great difference and contentions: To prevent which, they all
cried, to have the former Senators released, and restored.

Though the care of former times did keep this humor low, yet, The misery of
this, to buckle with them
like original sin, it was always sprouting into action.

If in the natural body any malignant humor be predominant, it presently
confounds that harmony of health, which consists in an equal and just
temperature of the humors: so in the civil Body, if those that are lovers of
the Commonwealth grow inferior in number to those affecting change, its like
the healthful temperature disordered by a prevailing noxious humor: its the
misery of these present times, to encounter with this obstinate Mass of the
matter. What evils happen through the remedy, is like sickness occasioned by
Physic; and yet many times Potions are entertained with worse faces than a
Consumption^ And such is the nature of some Sickness, to flatter the party
into the opinion, that it is his only delight; and so subtly mingles it
self with their bloods, that the other purple streams of Nature seem to
usurp their azure channels.

There be in all things circumstances, and outward accidents, which mock the
Politicians Counsels, which are governed by the highest Providence, and, like
the Kingdom of Heaven, comes not by observation; yet here we may view the
parties upon the Stage, and see how the Scene is laid.

The Presbyterian shows you out of the Word, a Government of the Church, which
is Christ's own Kingdom, which ought to be superior to all other Powers and
Jurisdictions; and says, its lawful by Arms to impose it upon the
Magistrate, in case he refuse: his practice has seconded his Opinion.

The Independent grows angry at it, that any restraint of the Spirit should be
used; and says, its liberty of Conscience, he can prove it out of the Bible:
its that he has fought for, and will have.

The Cavalier admonishes every man to return to the obedience of the King, and
the Laws made by the consent of the free people of England.

A fourth cries out, Forainers foresaw this, and helped to cast in these seeds
and principles, upon which they contrived our ruin.
they are all Heretics; and these Divisions are Judgments light upon them,
for departing from their Mother Church.

The Matter being thus prepared, the Spark would easily be procured: And thus
are our men placed just in that posture, our enemies desire to play their Game
in.

Our witty Adversaries, by a penetrating insight into the constitution of this
State, have long since contrived our Ruin upon those very Principles this
War has begun upon, and may be continued: Those ingenious artificers of our
Ruin, dexterously applying their active to passives; and by electing fit
instruments, aptly working upon the several parties, have contrived our
dissolution. Though other peccant humors have flowed in, and the ambitious
practices of great ones yielded their malignant aspects, yet the grand matter
of the Disease lay within: and that sharp humor in the Body of the Kingdom
being set on fire, has turned it into a Fever.

They knew well the complexion of our Country, (which is now made too
sanguine) as appears by that Draught of our Ruin, delineated by the Pen of
Campanella; who, though shut up in his Cloister, had enlarged his mind to the
consideration of all Crowns: And writing to the King of Spain, how he might
so treat with every Kingdom and Republique, that taking hold of the advantages
the things themselves afforded, he might become Monarch of the West part of the
World: And concerning the affairs of these Islands, he advises thus: That the
King of Spain should send to King James of Scotland, to promise him his
assistance to the Crown of England, in case of oppositions; and to get back
from him engagements, for the advancement of the Catholic Religion; or at
least not to disturb his Plate-Fleet by Sea, wherein their Shipping (says he)
is so powerful: and at the same time to send his Emissaries abroad, which
should refresh in the people of Englands minds the remembrance of the former
animosities betwixt the two Nations; and to sharpen and sour the minds of the
Nobility, to insinuate to them, That the King coming into England, would
bestow his Places, Honors, and Preferments, upon his Countrymen, to their
under-valuing and dis-respect; as also in Parliament, that it be assured the
Bishops, if the King were admitted once into England, he would bring along with
him the Presbytery of Scotland, to their destruction: Then by witty
Florentines, on purpose maintained at Bruxels, to negotiate here with the most
eminent of the Nobility that were Catholics, promising each of them a part
(the one not knowing of his negotiation to the other) that they should be the
Heads of his party, in the Divisions which would happen among them.

Thus, says the witty Politic, you shall sow the feeds of an immortal War
among them; that by their continual Distractions, they will not be able to
hinder you, in your Designs upon others: or at last, the parties grown
desperate in Arms, shall divide the Kingdom into little Principalities,
whereby at last they will turn your prey.

Thus do they enjoy all our heats and Calentures, and at those fires which are
given in our Wars, bring to maturitie their Design of our Ruin; while each
party seeks to support it self with Counsels, and Strength, separated from
that of the public.

Is there less danger, The fruits of these Wars no other than they designed.
if this be practiced by a nearer State? Perhaps, with the ingredients of many
more fine and well-layed Plots. The Moon has greater influence upon the Earth
than the other Planets; not by reason of its magnitude, as vicinitie. Let them
be phlegmatic, and have no Design; stupid, and have no brain; (and can we
think so of them, whose malice is as active as their constitution?) yet we
force upon them the enjoyment of their Ambitions; they suffer our heats to tire
us.

What is the fruit of all the Blood, and Treasure, which the full Purses, and
the wanton veins of England have lavished out? Does not the present posture of
things represent us in such a condition, as they foresaw we should fall in?
The King in Prison, the Church in Schism, the Country in Oppression, the
City in Faction: new armed men daily springing up from those Dragons teeth,
which are so artificially sown among us. They do not only with the nimble
dashes of their Pen, seek to deface as it were, with one blot, all the fair
and flourishing Letter of this Government, but with Arms do lay in dust what
bravely reared his head with glory to the Sky. Do they not meditate of
Cantonizing? And to resume the same Power they have pulled down, and maintain
it by the same Arms with which they have destroyed the other. Is not that
fair and goodly Mirror, which used to represent the beautiful image of the
Commonwealth, broke into several pieces, each of which represent several
faces? Is not that Mould wherein our Laws were cast, used only now for to
have instruments of War forecast in? Does not every day the Case grow more
perplexed and intricate? New knots, which the most cunning hand will be never
able dexterously to undo, except they be cut; and the necessity of the Sword
must double upon us our former injuries. Is it not truly observed, that Arms
once raised, turn to many uses, which at first were never thought of?

And thus our misery, like Proteus, begets every day new forms and shapes.
The farther we send our eyes, to look what will become of these Divisions;
do we not lose them in those vast depths of Misery and Ruin, in that Gulf
of Destruction, we do precipitate our selves into? Is not the fire only
likely to be quenched with the Ruins of the House?

One may seek England in England, and not find it, The present condition of
the Government unestablisht.
as touching its Laws and Constitutions; the Government being like a Ship that
is almost covered with billows, scarce visible, yet in being, the outward
adventitious condition of the thing only altered: And whether it shall be
brought into the Port of Peace, or it must find in those vast gapings and
yawnings of the Sea, a liquid Grave; Heaven only is the Insuring Office.

The people do not apprehend the Reason, and Wisdom of those Laws, by the
benefit whereof, they had their lives and estates secured; till by the neglect
of them, the effects thereof fall upon them, in Oppressions, Injuries, and
Wrongs; and till, in the utter extremities of Misery, they learn the causes of
men's entering first into Society.

If men make use of their prerogative, and that part wherein men excel their
fellow Creatures, they will find there is no way imaginable to hinder the
corruption of a State, but by the reducement of it to its principles; for every
State, drawn within its proper Rules and Laws, is strong, like the Tortoyse,
within its self: but if through abuse, in time, they wander out of themselves,
into other practices, they become weak and obnoxious.

A State founded upon Principles, proportioned and fitted for a War, finds it
self unsupported in a Peace; and when that which was the ground of the others
upholding, is taken away, it of it self vanishes.

Its a visuall delusion, to think the Land goes from us, when we put off from
the Land; the Shore has not left the Boat, but the Boat the Shore: the
Kingdom is founded in a Monarchy, in the person of the King the supreme
Authority.

Of Books and Learning.
THe Cabinet wherein the Pearl of Knowledge is contained, receives ornament
and augmentation; the Pearl it self no enlargement, or advantage, but in the
beauty is bestowed on its outward case. Words and expressions conveigh
Knowledge to us, and the various compoundings of men's Conceits are infinite,
and men are glorious and splendid in the Arts of Speech: but as words are
multiplied by the diverse setting and joining of Letters, so are Books grown
numerous by the multiforme and different deliveries of the things understood in
Nature; that one may justly resume that ingenious Complaint, That Books are
increased, but not Learning. The account of men's Travels into the remotest
parts of Arts and Sciences, are exact and full; and for every one who have only
by a Compendium viewed the Confines of some of them, to write a Relation of his
Journey, is to fill the world with imperfect Diaries of their junior sallyes
and excursions: and if he would avoid running upon things already performed,
and gain a glory, Qua se quoque possit tollere humo, he must venture for a new
Discovery, by which the conversation of the intellectual world may be truly
enlarged. The most observing eye will hardly bring any thing from our neighbor
Countries, Spain, or France, which has escaped the industrious scrutinies of
former Travelers; but those who fly over the flowrie fields of Learning, upon
the wing of sublimer inquiries, and return well laden with the Nectar of true
Knowledge, and Science, to the Hives of Learning, make their Professions as
much beholding to them, as they are to their Professions; live nobly of their
own Labors; not like Drones, idly conversing still with the performances of
others. Error now covers the Press with its sable wings, and uses that
privilege only to enlarge its commerce with the world, being enabled with
more celeritie to hold a speedier intelligence with the souls of men: such a
swarm of misshapen Pamphlets flying every where, up and down, like Batts,
that loves the Night; which, upon the return of the Sun, become condemned to
ccrners: And grant, Lord, that the Sun of Majesty, which thou have set in
the Sphere of our Government, by his sudden appearing again in our Horizon;
those Birds of the Night, unto whose eyes those Royal Beams are mortal, may
go to those places whereto Darkness is banished.

The Schools swell, as if they had reached the highest Link of Knowledge;
contrary to the opinion of those, who thought that they were all placed above
their too modest Reasons, and that nothing was to be known. Some nobler wits
have with the arms of their reason extended the Empire and command of man's
understanding over Nature, beyond the limits of any extant Authors, using the
Motto of that great Emperor, Plus ultra; while others have been ready to
apply to these, as some did to the martial expeditions of the other beyond
Hercules Pillars, presenting a Crab, with the Motto of Plus citra. Certainly,
true Science is a solid thing, and carries one rather to the bottom and depth
of things, than lifts one up in ayrie estimations, like that false Knowledge
mentioned by Saint Paul, accompanied with that flatuous quality: Therefore, a
little to lay down their Plumes, and lay aside the swelling opinions of the
complete and full enjoyments of the means of Knowledge, without provoking
Academick rage, they may cast their eye, what esteem one of their most Learned
had of their auxiliarie and isntrumental Arts, in one of their Methods he
takes, Hooker,
That it will keep men from growing over-wise; and that how-ever this Age
carries the name of a Learned Age, yet if men had the right help and aid of
Arts added to their reasons, wherewith their inquiries might be advantaged,
they should as far go beyond the learned man now, as the learned man now
does a child. One was handsomely commended for his conversing with the Laws
and Methods of Nature, while others lost themselves in a wilderness of
notions, and art of Methods: Reliqui cum Vlysse promundum vagantur,
Tu cum Penelope domi moranis.


The Understanding is like a Looking-glass, which represents the images of
things set before it: The ways and Arts of Empire and Governments presented
there, Creates the intellectual pictures of those things, which begets that
Science which is called Polities: and when by the prerogative of man's Mind,
which can look into it self, and see its self, all its passions, affections,
and how these command each other, and how Reason, them; then are the internal
images of those things represented in that Chrystalline Glass: which notions
constitute that Science, named Ethics; man, as it were by a reflexed beam of
Reason, made visible to himself. When the Prospect is altered, and the motions
and course of the Heavens are contemplated; the Laws of Nature imposed upon
those heavenly Bodies being understood, frames there that knowledge of
Astronomy: and when the Mind descends and viewes the lower Globe, there does
the description of the lower Globe lively made, in the understanding, become
that Science of Geographie. Truer knowledge is acquired, by the inspection into
the Book of Nature, and the things themselves, than by the things themselves,
or the Book of Nature, can be known, by looking only into the understanding;
for the truth of those things are without: the things themselves are truth,
which being understood, become so too in the understanding. Therefore many are
ingenious, in giving reasons of Natures workings, framed only by their active
fancies, and prescribe other imagined ways and Laws, than really Nature is
governed by; who do, as it were, in stead of relating a true History, make a
Romance, and tell the adventures of some fabulous Hero: it belonging to the
Poets, to mold the World over again by fiction; to the Philosopher, to
understand the true World.

All Learning, is but Reason; and it, applied to the Consideration of several
things, beget several Names: as the Sea saluting the coasts of Spain, is
called the Spanish Sea; and leaving that for Ireland, begets the name of the
Irish Sea: though men have been so desirous, for ostentation of Art, to set
out each part and portion of Knowledge so admirable, for curiosity of method,
and terms, that it almost (by the circumscription of the Rules set about it)
has forgot its affinity with the rest. Knowledge got from the things
rhemselves, do settle the Mind in the true value and esteem of every thing;
but that which is got-from Man himself, and so many Books, by a disproportion
they bear with the things, do benight the Understanding, and fill the Mind
with mistaken passions: The attaining such degrees in Knowledge, and Learning,
puts men in the same condition, as if they had seen no farther then the third
or fourth days work of the Creation; whereas he that attaines more, still is
presented to him what is more glorious, and saw not before; till in the end he
attain the full view of the Oeconomie of this great Fabric, and make the true
use of Gods works, by admiring his infinite Power, and Goodness; resting on
which, is the Souls true Sabbath.

Of the vicissitude of Things.
IT is observed by a late Philosopher, that there be certain Idols begot in
the minds of men; some, arising out of their own individual tempers; others,
out of the imperfections of our common nature: whence many (says he) conceit
to themselves a more perfect circular method in the motions of the Heavens,
than indeed the nature of those Bodies will admit; man being apt to imagine all
things after an exact order, conceived within himself. Thus do they err
against the Changes and Revolutions, with which all things labor, who fancy a
more constant process of things than is suitable to the altering disposition of
all things. The elements are in continual transmigration, and alternative
conversions; their qualities form our constitutions, and our bodies, which
have affinity with their fellow creatures, act upon our minds; that inspired
part of us being able to plead no immunitie or exemption, from suffering from
its earthly Tabernacle; though by the light of it, it can discern the
mutabilitie of all other things, and by the strengths and advantages it
acquires from Reason and experience, can from its own height look down upon
all things inferior to its immortality. The Sun, according to its
approaches, and retreats, makes all things bud, flourish, and decay: every
thing finds their periods and dissolutions, by the force and power of that Law
imposed on it; the whole frame of Nature is in motion, a constant course of
Nature in its several revolutions, Se sequiturque fugitque. Arts, humors,
opinions, have their returns; the same conduct in Princes, whether it be to
act by violence, or by counsel; the same general genius in the people,
whether the Belgians revolt under the Romans, or the Spaniards.

Invention of things, like some Rivers, sometime appear in one place; and then
emptying themselves into the earth, have traveled undiscovered, into places
far remote. Every age in part sees the fulfilling of those Prophesies of
Wars, Earthquakes, Plagues; the Scene as it were still renewed to the
succeeding spectators, by the turning and rolling this great Piece about; This
age shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled.

Governments, as well as the World, contain in the matter of them appetites of
dissolution, but are overcome by form, Law, and order: you shall not tread the
Stage of any Kingdom, but can afford in its Histories the prospect of its
affairs diversified with the barren Hills and Risings of Seditions and
Rebellions, and again falling into the fruitful Valleys and Flats of Peace
and Tranquillity. To recover of a Sickness, is to grow young again, says
the Physician; and bad Humors in a State discharged, is in order to
convalescence, or long duration of Empire. Upon this Theater of the general
vicissitude of things appears the execution of Divine Judgments, and the
wonderful methods of Providence; there being many times a Labyrinth in the
dispensations of it, to the humbling the proud reasons of men. Make me, Lord,
obey thee, in the executing thy Commands, though I find a reluctancie in my
Will; and also to believe thee, though I find a repugnancie in my
Understanding. Its our affections we ought to have a care of, and not so much a
disposing and ordering outward things, which can procure our Contents. Boethius
has elegantly described those Fetters and Chains, wherewith our affections
make us undergo the torture of Fortunes Wheel:

Sed quisquis pavidus pavet, vel optat
Quod non sit stabilis, suique juris;
Abjecit clypeum, locoque, motus
Nectit, qua trahi queat catenam.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 46. wind, read ruined.

P. 76. to seek, r. sick.

P. 80. parity, r. purity.

P. 80. acts, r. arts.

P. 91. morions, r. motions.


