THE BAR, against Free Admission to the Lords Supper, FIXED. OR, An Answer to
Mr. Humphrey his Rejoinder, or, Reply.

By Roger Drake Minister of Peter's Cheap, London.

(...).

This nourishment is with us called the Eucharist; of which none may partake,
but he that 1 Believes our Doctrine to be true: 2 Is washed with the laver of
Regeneration for the remission of sins: 3 Lives so as Christ has commanded.

Justin: Martyr Apol. secunda pro Christianis; sub finem. 1 Cor. 10. 21. Ye
cannot drink the Cup of the Lord and the cup of devils; ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords Table and the table of devils.

London, Printed for Philip Chetwind. 1656.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
IN dispute about verity to contest for victory, and in heat of debate to turn
to extremes, is a fault too frequent even among the best: I wish it were
excommunicated, or at least suspended.

My design in this answer to Mr. Humphrey his Rejoinder, is (according to my
poor talent) to find out and to clear up truth though clouded and sullied (I
fear) by the dust raised between us (in these Polemical discourses) through
mistake, passion, or prejudice on either hand, which as I will not justify in
my self (being conscious, the pen is a slippery piece, as well as the Tongue)
so I cannot approve the same in Mr. H. who by putting my words upon the wrack,
makes them too often speak what he pleases, and then condemns me as malicious?
A charge so improbable, he being a person unknown to me; and who before his
Rejoinder came forth, never did me any personal wrong, that any indifferent
Reader will easily clear me of so foul an aspersion. I confess, I hate his
principle of free Admission, nor can his Rejoinder extirpate that Antipathy in
me against such loose Doctrine, though I love and honor his person. I will
not say his Rejoinder is a piece of scorn and malice (let me be rather
Passive than Active in such kind of Dialect) but sure I am, he deals very
unbrotherly with me therein: And therefore (as he confesses in the close)
considering our common corruption, he might well expect I should pay him in his
own coin.

But my blessed Lord and Master has taught me, not to return Evil for Evil,
Romans 12. 17, 21. nor reviling for reviling, 1 Pet. 2. 23.

Its against my mind and design, that any Gall or Vinegar would drop from my
pen; and if any such passage have slipped me, I condemn it before hand. What
bitterness he imputes to me in my book, see answered in their proper places.
One passage he takes notice of in my preface. My words are these. When I
seriously consider his loose principles held forth to the World in this
Treatise, with his being so excessively favorable to the looser and prophaner
sort, it makes both my self and others apt to suspect his practices may
possibly be as loose as his principles.

Answ. I am very unwilling to speak what I can by way of just Apology for the
forementioned expressions, till I be necessitated thereunto. At present, let
this suffice.

1 Loose principles give just suspicion of loose practices.

Yet 2 I did not charge Mr. H. with loose practices.

Nor 3 Did I say, I suspected he was guilty of loose Practices; But only, that
his loose principles make me and others apt to suspect his practices might
possibly be as loose as his principles. Let the Reader judge whether herein I
was uncharitable. But to pass this unpleasing subject, The Reader may please to
take notice, that by diverse concessions in his Rejoinder, Mr. Humphrey yields
his cause. And 1 By allowing the suspension of persons, ipso jure
excommunicate, pa. 21, 22. For they being intelligent Church Members, and not
actually excommunicated, yet lawfully suspended as Mr. H. grants, he must needs
yield, that some may be suspended though they be not excommunicated.

2 By allowing self-suspension when a man finds himself wicked and living in
sin; provided he resolve to prepare against next Sacrament, page 37.

And by granting, That unpreparedness may excuse a man from receiving at
present; provided his abstinence serve to humble him, etc. page 246.

We say such a one must abstain; Mr. H. says he may abstain. Shall we contend
about that which we think is a duty, and he thinks is lawful?

3 By asserting, that Sacraments cannot convey unto the soul any thing that is
real, but only that which is relative, page 41. And that God ingages not to
give man faith by the Sacrament, page 171. If the Sacrament convey nothing
real, then it conveys no inherent Grace, and so cannot convert: And if God
engage not to give man faith by the Sacrament, then no man can expect Faith
from the Sacrament, and so by consequence, no other grace. Upon which it
necessarily follows, the Sacrament is no converting Ordinance: and so one great
foundation of his free Admission fails him.

4 By allowing a negative suspension upon prudential grounds, page 82, 83.
Whence it follows, that in some cases he grants suspension of intelligent
Churchmembers warrantable. And therefore if he cannot receive it upon our
grounds, let us entreat him to accept it upon his own account.

5 By granting, we may compel trial of Church Members by way of Catechism;
wherein no man is too old to learn, page 60.

And by allowing private Trial upon charitable suspicion, page 92. If
Church Officers may try my fitness as to point of knowledge, surely they may
judge of such fitness: And if upon trial I be found so ignorant, as that I can
neither examine my self, nor discern the Lords body, may they not suspend me
till I have gained more knowledge?

6 By granting, that a general faith, and acknowledgment of the Gospel, or
Covenant of Jesus Christ as the only means to be saved by, is prerequifite to
adult Church Membership, and so to the Sacraments, page 198. And, that the
Conversion of assent, to believe in God, and Jesus Christ, in opposition to all
other Religions is necessarily prerequisite to adult Church Membership, and
both the Sacraments. Page 209. Does it not hence follow

1 That grossly ignorant persons (who know neither Christ, the Gospel, nor
Covenant) must not be admitted.

2 That such Persons are scarce so much as Church Members.

And 3 Does it not follow from all the forementioned Concessions, that Mr.
Humphrey is a better friend to Suspension than the world takes him to be?

Withal, I observe, that even those who for the substance agree about
Suspension as distinct from the greater Excommunication, yet differ about
diverse circumstances thereof: nor are the best here, in every particular, of
one mind. Its Vain to expect it, Tyrannical to exact it, in lesser matters. As
Palates, so Judgments are various; that may relish me which has an ill tang
with an other. Oh, that we could bear with, pity and pray more one for an
other, Laboring as much as may be to Center in love and practice, though the
Lines of our judgment may in some lesser things be at a distance.

Two Positions of mine being the chief grounds of difference between Mr. H. and
my self, and the arguments for proof of each being scattered in my Bar fixed, I
thought fit to sum them up together in this place, for the ease and
satisfaction of the Reader.

The first is, That I hold, The Lords Supper is no converting Ordinance. My
grounds are

1 Because Sacraments presuppose initiall Conversion. Should any person
desiring the Sacraments declare before sufficient witness that he would not
believe in Christ, and that he were resolved to his dying day to live in a
known sin, what Minister could admit such an one either to Baptism, or to the
Lords Supper? Now that which ever supposes Conversion, does never work
Conversion.

2 Because, I no where find in Scripture, that the Lords Supper is a seed of
Regeneration, but a meal or feast for nutrition.

3 Because, there is no promise of Conversion annexed to the Lords Supper.

4 Because, he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation or
judgment to himself; but he that is converted by receiving, sure does not eat
and drink judgment to himself, but grace and mercy. All these laid together
seem not only probable, but cogent arguments.

The second Position is, That no unregenerate person ought to receive the Lords
Supper.

My grounds for this are, 1 Because, receiving cannot convert, but does
prejudice such a one in statu quo.

2 Because, no natural man can either examine himself, or receive worthily, in
the Apostles sense.

3 Because, Christ forbids such to receive as have fellowship with devils, 1
Cor. 10. 20, 21. But all natural men have fellowship with Devils, Ephe. 2. 2,
3. and 2 Timothy 2. 26. Ergo.

Others add the following reasons.

1 Only friends must partake of the Lords Table.

2 Its the bread of the faithful, and must not be cast to Dogs.

3 Its a Sacrament of union by charity, which natural men want.

4 Its spiritual nourishment, and therefore is receptible only by spiritual
persons.

Withal, I entreat the Reader to note, that though with us, the rule of
receiving be real worthiness; yet, the rule of Admission is visible worthiness,
which consists in competent knowledge, profession of piety, and immunity from
scandal.

It may happily be expected, I should now take Mr. Timson to task: but I must
herein crave to be excused, since 1 I want leisure. 2 Love not to ampliate
controversies. 3 My present answer to Mr. Humphrey, if solid, will also subvert
Mr. Timsons principles, as to the main.

When I consider the zeal and strictness of the Primitive times, (in which a
clear difference was put between the Catechumeni, the Fideles, and the
Poenitentes; of which only the middle sort received the Sacrament, though in
some cases the Penitents were allowed to see the Lords Supper administered, yet
might not receive) I fear we sin on the one hand in point of defect, as their
zeal might carry them too far on the other hand in point of excess. In
Corporations well ordered, all of the same Society have not equal Privileges;
but visible worth is the gradual foundation of Honor and Trust: And why it
should not be so in the best of Corporations, I see nothing either in Scripture
or Reason to the contrary. The judicious Reader by comparing what has been
writ on both sides, will easily enough discern where the hinge of the
Controversy turns, what to choose or refuse in either. I shall only add this
in general, That what ever he finds in this, or the former Treatise, of
error or weakness, he may be sure that is mine, what ever of truth or
strength, that is none of mine, but comes from the fountain of all truth and
strength. My scope in this return to Mr. H. his Rejoinder, is no way to vent my
spleen against Mr. Humphrey, upon whose head I would heap coals of fire to melt
him, not to vex him.

Yea, in the close of his second Vindication published this very month, though
he adhere to his former opinion of free Admission, yet page 144. he expresses
himself with much Candor, in these words.

I both allow and reverence the Piety, zeal and pains of many Ministers, that
prudentially take occasion hereby to look into the state of their flocks, only
for their admonition and just instruction, without driving them from their
duty: And I do bewail the frowardness and off-wardnesse of most unto so easy a
submission; utterly disliking at the bottom of my heart the spirits of such
Christians, who either out of Conscientiousnesse of their own ignorance, or
Haughtiness of their minds, will be content be deprived the Sacrament, rather
than give an account of their faith, to those that ask it in the spirit of
Meekness for their Edification. Nay, I do profess for my part, were I under
the Presbytery, I should most freely subject my self to their trial, as being
afraid to grieve the spirit of my Pastor (supposing him to require it merely
out of the tenderness of his Conscience) and give example of obstinacy unto
others, etc. and afterward he proceeds thus.

To this end I could wish, that for the ignorant, there were Catechists in the
Church, and some prudent kind of Law for the bringing of all such to submit to
be catechized: and for the scandalous, that there were some Authoritative way
for the exercise of that most yielded and least practiced duty of Fraternal
correprion, etc. I wish that ignorant and scandalous persons, with all haughty
opposers of Sacramental Trial, would now at last imitate Mr. Humphrey in his
Christian moderation; were this once obtained of our people, and would all
Ministers and other Church Officers in their places, manage this work of
Trial, with humility, faithfulness, and Christian prudence; and would
Governors of families, make conscience of initiating and training up their
Children and Servants in knowledge and piety, and send them to be catechized,
We trust that in a short time through grace (instead of disputing for a
sacramental Rail or Bar) we should unite together in blessing God for that
light, amity, and order, which would make the Churches in these three Nations
glorious.

How ever, I shall rest in having done my duty; and where any scapes have slipped
me through weakness, incogitancy, multiplicity of occasious, etc. Let the
Reader consider, Humanum est errare; but, through grace assisting, I shall not
wittingly persist in any error. The Lord send us all the Spirit of Truth,
Holiness, and Meekness.

From my Study in Silver-Street June 24. 1656. Thy Servant in Christ, Roger
Drake.

THE BAR TO FREE ADMISSION, FIXED. Or An Answer to Mr. Humphrey his Rejoinder.
The First PART.
Sect. I.
SO prevalent is old Adam (since our primitive apostasy) in the hearts of the
best, that we find it very hard to contend for the Faith in any particular,
without the breach of Love and Charity: I wish it were not so between Mr.
Humphrey and my self. Standers-by usually see more then Gamesters; and sorry I
am to see and hear, that any passionate expressions on my part, or bitter
scoffs falling from Mr. Humphrey his pen, on the other part, should contribute
more to pierce the hearts of any of Gods precious ones with grief, than the
managing of this controversy on either hand, has contributed to satisfy their
judgments and consciences by solid conviction. If in heat of dispute I have any
way transgressed (I am assured I was far from malice) I shall be ready to throw
the first stone at my self, and bless God who has given me the opportunity
to mend first, which once was in Mr. Humphrey his hands, before he put forth
his Rejoinder. Some sores are better cured by lenitives then by corrosives.

Passing therefore his reflections upon my self, in a great part of his
Preamble, as extrinsecall to the matter in debate, I observe page 5. and
believe he speaks in good earnest, That unless his Latitude of Admission be
allowed, tender consciences can never have solid peace at the Sacrament:
Sacraments will still be neglected by Ministers and People, separations
fomented, human Forms set up as necessary, etc. Ans. If this hypothesis were
true, and such inferences did naturally and necessarily flow from our
principles, well might we be at a stand, and look with a more favorable eye
upon Mr. Humphrey his principles and practice. Scruples may possibly be raised
in tender consciences, and false conclusions inferred by mistake, etc but far
is it from us to hold forth any such principle, or principles as of their own
nature have any aptitude to stumble the weak, or offend Christ's little ones:
And this I hope by Gods assistance to make out in the following discourse, as
the forementioned particulars shall come to be scanned in their proper places.
Page 6. He thinks me very for: ward to be known among the Elders in the Gate-
and, Charges me for passing sentence before conviction. Ans. Had Mr. Humphrey
known how often I was solicited to write, how unwilling I was to have my name
appear either in the frontispice or otherwhere in the book after it was
finished, he would not have passed so rash a censure: had I not been acted more
by conscience of my duty, then by desire of vainglory, it might have been long
enough ere so poor an inconsiderable person as my self had took him to task.
For his second charge, I hope Mr. Humphrey does not imagine I made the Title
Page first, and my Answer afterward; and for a due Examen, let the Answer it
self speak, whether I took not some pains (according to my poor model) in
order to his conviction, before I passed a public sentence: The cause indeed
may suffer much by my weakness, but I hope it neither then did, nor now shall,
suffer by my wilful negligence. Page 7th. he spends, in endeavoring to excuse
those harsh expressions I noted and represented as savouring more of pride then
of humility, contrary to his profession in the frontispice; and that first, by
begging pardon, if any pious men are offended at those expressions. 2ly. By
professing, that to his utmost memory, none of those passages came from him,
with the least reflection upon any. Ans. Taking it for granted, Mr. Humphrey
speaks the truth, I believe it is the best Apology he could make: Yet secondly,
Mr. Humphrey cannot blame me for charging those expressions with pride and
censoriousnesse, since verba are indices mentis; and if proud and censorious
words do not argue pride, acting (though not always reigning) in the heart, I
know not what does. Let the Reader peruse those expressions of Mr. Humphrey in
the third and fourth pages of my Bar to free Admission and if I have past a
wrong sentence, let him judge me for Pride and Censoriousnesse.

Sect. II.
Page 8 Mr. Humphrey charges me with a contradiction, as if I had said in one
place, Christ cannot give Judas the Sacrament, and in another, he cannot deny
it him. Ans. page 8. I only bring Arguments to prove Judas did not receive the
Sacrament. Page 9. I say, it was not sit Christ should be both judge and
witness. And page 11. Christ acting as a Minister, could not be both witness,
Judge, and Executioner. Where, I pray, is the contradiction? Let Mr. Humphrey
produce but one place where I say, Chirst cannot give Judas the Sacraments. I
bring arguments indeed to prove Judas did not receive, but whither Christ
denied him the Sacrament, or ordered it in providence Judas should go out be
forehand, and so miss of the Sacrament; that is left in medio, and the latter
seems more probable. And whether Judas received or not, it is not much
material for Mr. Humphrey his cause, no not in Mr. Timsons judgment, in his
bar to free admission removed. page 3. and 4. though otherwise a great friend
to Mr. Humphrey his Latitude for Sacramental receiving.

In answering my 2d. Argument against Judas his receiving, he says Christ died
for the sins of the whole world, and so for Judas, 1 John 2. 3.

As. When Mr. H. can prove that by whole world, There, are meant the Reprobate
as well as the Elect, he says something indeed to invalidate the argument;
otherwise he does but shuflle. And the Sacrament had been a poor Cordial to the
Apostles, had it sealed no more to them than it does to Reprobates. But I shall
not trouble my self or my Reader with the further vindication of those five
Arguments here, as studying all possible brevity and judging it not material in
this business, whether Judas received or no, what ever weight Mr. Humphrey may
lay upon it. But whereas page 10. He says, I answer those five reasons my
self. In that he mistakes. I brought indeed five reasons to prove Judas did not
receive; but I brought no reason to prove Christ denied him the Sacrament, nor
do I believe Christ did deny him the Sacrament Only by laying open his
wickednessc, its probable Christ did either shame him away, or fright him away,
or occasion his going away in a pet; and Judas being gone, Christ spoke very
comfortably, and applicatorily to the Eleven, which very probably he would not
have done without a distinction, had the Traitor been present.

Page 10. 11. He says, Many more Authors are of opinion, Judas did receive it,
than those I produced out of Gelaspi to the contrary. Answ. 1. This is said;
but not one word of proof brought by Mr. Humphrey. 2. Grant it true, he answers
himself, or I may answer him with his own words, I do not value them at the
rate of Scripture. Its well, we both agree here: I wish heartily all Disputers
were of this mind. Here therefore Mr. Humphrey presses Mark 14. 23. They all
drank of it. I answered, All is put for all present, and twelve for eleven,
from 1 Cor. 15. 5. To this Mr. Humphrey returns, page 11. If All be put for All
present, then is it put for the whole twelve, for the twelve sat down with
him, Ans. 1. The weakness of this answer of Mr. Humphrey will easily appear
to a mean capacity. The twelve sat down with Christ, ergo the twelve (that is,
every of the twelve) received the Lords supper. To make out his assertion, he
must prove not only that all the twelve sat down together, but that they also
stayed all the whiletogether til the Comon-supper, the Passover, and the Lords
Supper were ended. Does it follow because twelve sit down together at a Feast,
therefore they must needs all sit at Table together, or be present in the same
room til all the Courses be served? we grant Judas was present at the
Common-supper; happily also he received the Passover, which yet some doubt; but
does it hence follow, that he was present at the Lords supper also? Is it not
said that upon the receiving of the Sop, immediately Judas went out? John 13.
30. and that Sop he received at or before the Passover; after which, the Lords
Supper was instituted and administered.

To my second, That twelve is here put for eleven, He answers, None that can
tell twenty will believe me. Ans. 1. Let Mr. H. remember his own rule, and a
good rule, and stand to the judgment of the Scripture, 1 Cor. 15. 5. Christ
after his resurrection appeared to the twelve, but Judas was at this time dead,
and Matthias was not yet chosen in his room; Ergo, here twelve is put for
eleven. Secondly, this is ordinary, for roundnesse of number: yea in this very
case, Mar. 14. 17. twelve are put for ten, since two of the Apostles he sent
before to prepare the Passover ver. 16. and, at the evening, himselfcomes with
ten of them, who yet verse 17. are said to be twelve.

Mr. Humphrey proceeds. Page 11.
His argument is this. Because twelve is put for eleven when there were but
eleven, therefore twelve must be put for eleven, where there was twelve.

Ans. What is this but a mere begging of the Question? Mr. Humphrey asserts
that all the twelve received the Lords Supper. I answer, its not affirmed in
Scripture, that the twelve received. 2. Had it been affirmed yet twelve might
be put for eleven by roundnesse of number, as in the former instance; to which
his final answer is, I, but there were twelve there, which is the very
question in dispute between us. By the Law of dispute (he being opponent, and I
respondent) he ought to solve my distinction; and not barely to say, but to
clear it, that twelve in the business of the Lords Supper cannot be understood
or taken for eleven by roundnesse of number.

I shall ever acknowledge the force of St. Luke, as of every other Scripture:
but I deny that Luke says, either in terms or by consequence that Judas was
present at, or received the Lords Supper, and therefore as yet neither my five
Arguments nor 26. Authors are confuted by St. Luke. See Mr. Collins more to
this purpose in his vindic. suspensionis etc. page 62. 63.
True, Luke mentions per (...) those words of our Savior: But behold the hand
of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table, after the Celebration of the
Supper; does it therefore follow they were uttered in that order? I have proved
the contrary by comparing the two other Evangelists. I shall instance in
another Hysterology, wherein the order is inverted by Saint Luke, yet without
any prejudice to the truth, Matthew. 4. 8. The temptation to worship the Devil,
is the third and last, which yet Luke makes to be the second and middlemost,
Luke 4. 5. In like manner Matthew mentions the prediction of Peter's denying
Christ, after their going to the mount of Olives, Matthew. 26. verse 30 34. so
does Mark, Chap. 14. verse 26-30. which yet Luke mentions before it, Chap. 22.
verse 34-39. as also does Saint John, Chap. 13. verse 38. compared with Chap.
18. verse 1. Here then, in two of the Evangelists, there must needs be an
Hysterology, without any prejudice to the truth of the narrative; and why not
in our business also? We deny not but those words, Behold the hand, etc. were
spoken at the Table; but it lies upon Mr. Humphrey to prove, that it was the
Lords Table at that time, when our Savior uttered those words: We believe it
was first a Common Table; secondly, the Paschall Table; thirdly, the Lords
Table; and that those words were spoken by our Savior when it was a Common
Table, or a Paschall Table, but not when it was the Lords Table; and withal,
that Luke attended not so much upon the order, as the truth of the narrative.

But, suppose Judas was present and received, what does this advantage Mr.
Humphrey He thinks much, because neither Christ nor his Apostles did examine
Judas, etc. Ans. The Apostles (upon supposition of Judas his receiving) were
but his fellow communicants; nor do we think it necessary that fellow
communicants should examine one another before receiving. And for our blessed
Savior; it follows not, because he thought it not necessary then to examine
the Apostles, therefore it is not necessary for Church Officers to examine the
people before receiving: Yea, as Mr. Collins well notes, in his Vindiciae
suspensionis, etc. page 41. and 53. It is worth the observing, that Christ did
not so much as call upon the Jews in the same house, to receive the Lords
Supper; which he would have done probably, if he had intended it for All; or,
for a converting Ordinance. Christ thought it not necessary then to admit
either ordinary Christians or Women to the Lords Supper, or to put the Apostles
upon selfe-examination before the Lords Supper at this time; is it therefore
now not necessary that the people, and particularly women, should be admitted
to the Lords Supper? or, is it not necessary a man should examine himself
before he eat, etc? Must Church Officers give an account of their people to
God, and must they not take an account of their people?

I added further, That as Judas was not suspected by the rest of the Apostles,
so he had not yet actually betrayed Christ, and it is absurd to punish any for
a future sin.

To this Mr. Humphrey opposes an other passage of mine, page 102. and then
infers, Christ may not keep away Judas, because he had not actually betrayed
him; but Mr. Drake must needs keep men away, for fear they should betray him.
Ans. 1. Let the Reader take notice, that Mr. Humphrey wrongs my Text, page 102.
by leaving out a very material part of it; the words are these, We keep men
away, to prevent certain scandal, by the admission of Persons visibly
unworthy: Which last words of my Text he utterly omits, that thereby my sense
may appear more ugly: But those words being added, there is no contradiction
betwixt Christ's practice and ours (upon the supposition that Judas did receive)
since Judas was not visibly unworthy to Christ as a Man or Minister, but as
God; who knew both Judas and other hypocrites from the beginning, John 6. 64.
yet admitted them as Disciples: Yet, it follows not thence, the Church should
admit such before it have good satisfaction (at least, in the judgment of
charity) about their sincere conversion; otherwise the Disciples did ill to be
so shy of Saul, till they had good evidence of his sincerity from Barnabas,
Acts 9. 26 27. Christ as God, knew by knowledge of vision, who were unclean and
defiled the Temple: yet, he drove none out, but such as visibly defiled it,
John 2. 15. So he knew Judas was unworthy by his divine Omniscience, but acted
not by virtue of that knowledge in point of suspension: Nor was Achan censured
upon divine discovery, till clear evidence of his theft was produced, Josh. 7.
verse 20. to 24. And if Christ's rule of suspension, or other censure, be
visible unworthiness, we hope our way and practice is not contradictory to
Christ's rule. 2. We keep not any away barely upon fear, lest they should betray
Christ (for this fear and jealousy we may have of diverse whom we admit) but,
1. Because they are visibly unworthy. 2. That we may in the use of Gods means,
endeavor their fitting against the next Sacrament, and they who upon this
account withdraw, suspend themselves, as refusing the Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, rather then they will accept of it upon a most equal and honorable
condition. Had Mr. Humphrey been as zealous against selfe-suspension, as
against Ministerial suspension, and showed the people their sin in standing
out against Sacramental trial, he might have brought God more honor,
himself more peace, and have done the Church more service, than by aspersing
Sacramental Trial, as if the end of it were rather to exclude men from, then
to fit them for, the Sacrament. Whereas therefore Mr. Humphrey is pleased to
say, Page 13.
that I suspend, to prevent the sin men have not committed, and that the
supposal only of future sin is the very ground of my excommunication. I am
sorry to see him biased by so much uncharitableness, when as he knows, that
in these censures we proceed by the rule of visible unworthiness; and does
oppose with might and main our acting in these kinds by the rule of visibility.
We aim indeed at the preventing of sin, in this and other Church Censures; but,
I dare appeal to Mr. Humphrey his conscience, whether that be our sole End.

The following passage is sadder, and charge us deeply, as if we gave more
power to the Presbytery in point of suspension, then to Jesus Christ the great
Master of Discipline.

Ans. I am sorry to see what prejudice and uncharitableness will draw men
upon, to wrest such false and odious conclusions from, or put such uncouth
interpretations upon, our principles. Far be it from us to offer wittingly to
detract the least tittle from our blessed Lords authority and sovereignty; we
would loath our own principles, could any such conclusion be justly deduced
from them. My words which he wrests to that purpose, are these, Page 9. f.
Christ here acting as a Minister, it was not fit he should be both judge and
witness; and it might have been an ill president for Ministers, to take upon
them by their own power to deny the Sacrament judicially to whom they please.
Christ had a three fold power: 1. Absolute, as God. 2. Mediatory, as God-Man.
3. Pastoral, as a Minister. Now my former assertion (which he carps at)
meddles not with Christ's power as God, or as Mediator (neither are they any
presidents or rules for our imitation) but only with Christ's power as a
Minister. And if Mr. Humphrey be of the mind, that Christ as a Minister
(waving his Divine and Mediatory capacity) might alone be Judge and Witness,
and suspend judicially whom he pleased, must he not of necessity also yield,
that any other particular Minister may do the like? See what a dust is raised
to make our ways and principles odious; whereas Mr. Humphrey himself (if he
will speak religion and reason) cannot but be of our mind: yea, Mr. Timson,
his cordial Abettor, lays it down as a solid principle, Page 67. f.
That no single Pastor alone, but such as are so in Association, as to derive
authority from the whole, can exercise Church Censures authoritatively. Yet I
hope Mr. Humphrey will not thence conclude, that Mr. Timson by this assertion
gave more power to the Presbytery then to Jesus Christ, the great Master of
Discipline.

To what further I add, page 9, 10. That none are suspended by us, but such as
suspend themselves, by sleighting or refusing due trial; Mr. Humphrey replies,
Suppose a religious man, nay, suppose twenty, upon grounds of conscience or
prudence, will not submit to his trial, yet offer themselves at the Sacrament;
dare he refuse to administer it to them? Alas Sir! will you not let men serve
God, and save their souls?

Ans. Suppose a godly Minister; nay, suppose twenty, upon grounds of conscience
and prudence dare not admit such a person or persons; yet beseech them, as they
tender the honor of God, reformation of the Church, and their own comfort and
edification before they receive, to give an account of their faith and hope
that is in them, will they refuse so easy and honorable a duty? and yet tempt,
yea, press him or them against the rules of conscience and prudence, to admit
them to the Sacrament? Alas Sirs, do not thus wound the consciences, and grieve
the Spirits of those whom God has set over you.

D. Dr. Secondly, Besides the former, we suspend none but such, who upon
trial, are found unworthy.

Mr. Humphr. But I pray, have you any thing at first to allege against them:
if you have not, how will you bring them to trial?

Ans. 1. From Scripture evidence and experience, that many Church Members are
unworthy. 2. From the Scriptures warranting an universal trial, upon less
ground of suspicion then we have, and punishing the neglect thereof; witness
Achans case, Josh. 7. 3. From the fruit of this trial, which being rightly
managed, will prejudice none, but edify all, by putting them upon the exercise
of, or seeking after, knowledge and grace.

Mr. Humphr. If they come willingly, and you find them unfit, then you go
about to punish again them for a future sin.

Ans. 1. If the prevention of future sin be a punishment, the Lord send me
store of such punishments. 2. He mistakes: we go not about to punish any for a
future sin, but to prepare all for a future mercy. 3. He may as well say, pious
Governors of families, and Ministers in the times of the Prelates, punished
children and servants, because they kept them from the Sacrament till they were
fitted by Catechisticall trial. Gal. 6. 6. the Apostle will tell him, that
every Churchmember is a Catechumenus. Nor need Mr. Humphrey here fly
especially upon the trial by Elders, since both this paragraph and his whole
discourse, manifest him to be against all trial, either by Ministers or Elders.

D. Dr. None of the Apostles were ignorant or scandalous, no, not Judas
himself, therefore his or their receiving is no warrant for any ignorant or
scandalous person to receive.

Mr. Humph. This is not true for indeed we shall find both ignorance in the
Apostles, and scandal in Judas: The Apostles were ignorant of Christ's Death
and Resurrection, and of the Sacrament; and Judas had made his bargain to
betray Christ.

Ans. 1. They knew Christ to be the Bread and Water of Life, and the Savior of
the World, John 6. 68, 69. Secondly, had as much knowledge as might stand with
grace. Thirdly, were willing upon all occasions to be further instructed and
Catechized by Christ. And we trust Mr. Humphrey shall never be able to charge
us with keeping any away who are of this temper. As for Judas, though he had
made his bargain of betraying Christ, yet it was not then scandalous: Nor did
Christ (though he knew it well enough) discover, that Judas had made any such
bargain, but did only foretell that Judas would betray him. However therefore
page 15, and 16. he is pleased to charge me as speaking a very untruth; a grain
of charity might have informed him, that Judas (however he purposed, plotted
and contracted, all which he knows, or may know, I believe as well as himself)
yet betrayed not Christ, as to the Execution, till he kissed him in the Garden.
True, in Gods account a purpose, plot and contract of evil is an Execution
thereof: but civil and Ecclesiastical Courts proceed usually by evidence of
the fact, not of the purpose, plot or contract. I might add that John 13. ver.
18, 19, 21. 27. our blessed Savior (even after the discovery) looks at Judas
his betraying him as a future act. In some sense therefore, it is a truth that
Judas had not betrayed Christ. And if so, then I did not speak a very untruth,
in saying Judas had not yet betrayed Christ, no more then Peter had denied him,
understanding it of the ultimate and completing act of his Treachery, which
Christ endeavored to prevent by the Commination, as well as Peter's denial by
the Premonition. Besides, our Saviors dispensation here was extraordinary,
admitting only men, Ministers, Apostles, and that without self-examination
foregoing, which is no rule for our imitation in point of Sacramental
admittance; no more is his admittance of Judas, supposing he did receive; And
if this supposition fail, where is Master Humphrey his superstructure upon it?

His upbraiding me again, by comparing Christ with the Presbytery, has been
formerly answered: Which therefore, with other passages of less moment, for
brevities sake I pass. I shall only add this, Judas his treachery (if it
were, before the completing of it, matter for a Judicial cognizance, and if
Christ's extraordinary knowledge and discovery of it were legal evidence, as
Mr. Humphrey would ^ave it) was a just ground of excommunication; yet our
Savior did not excommunicate him for it, no more then he did suspend him; nor
did he send to the High Priests or their officers for evidence against Judas:
May not the Church therefore excommunicate or seek for evidence against
scandalous or suspected persons? Even before this, all judgment was committed
to Christ, John 5. 22. yet we read not that Christ judged any, either Civilly
or Ecclesiastically, but rather the quite contrary, John 8. 11, and 12. 47.
Does it therefore follow that either the Magistrate, or the Presbytery do lift
up themselves above Christ the great Master of Discipline, because they
undertake that, both in Civil and Ecclesiastical Judgment, which our blessed
Lord would not meddle withal in his State of humiliation?

Mr. Humphrey. Page 18.
As for the Question, whether he acted as a Minister or Mediator? It is vain,
for he acted as both: He could not institute an Ordinance for his Church, but
as he was Head and Mediator, nor could he administer it but as a Minister.

Ans. 1. If this Question be vain, the more to blame Mr. Humphrey, who troubles
his Reader with it, especially since we both agree Christ acted here both as a
Mediator and as a Minister.

Secondly, I only distinguished between Christ's acting as a Mediator and as a
Minister; And added that Christ is imitable, not in his acting as a Mediator
but as a Minister: We doubt not but Christ as Mediator, might be both Judge and
Witness; But in that he is no pattern for our imitation. If, as a Minister, he
might be both Judge and Witness, then every Minister may be both Judge and
Witness.

Thirdly, Mr. Humphrey himself here grants Christ could not administer the
Sacrament but as a Minister; Yet, at the same time Christ was Mediator. We say,
Christ as Mediator might be both Judge and Witness, but not as a Minister:
Will he forbid us the same liberty of distinction he takes himself?

The other instances he excepts against, page 18. of Christ's administering it
only to Ministers, etc. prove strongly that all Christ did at the Supper, is no
necessary rule for our imitation: amongst which Judas his Admission (upon Mr.
Humphrey his supposall) being one, falls under the same notion; unless Mr.
Humphrey can prove that Christ did not only admit Judas (a person then, as he
says, scandalous) but also with this very intention, that his practice herein
might be a Rule for all Ministers to the end of the World to admit to the
Sacrament scandalous persons. As for his appeal in the close of page 18, I have
showed formerly that Mr. Timson, though his Second in this cause, looks not at
Judas his receiving, or not receiving, as clearly argumentative in this cause,
page 3, and 4. And should the stresse of this controversy lie upon Judas his
receiving or his not receiving, at what uncertainties should we be about our
practice herein, when it is so hard to determine out of Scripture whether Judas
received or not.

His Quotation out of Doctor Hammond, makes not for his purpose: We easily
grant with that learned Clerk, That Christian professors may lawfully be
admitted, though their hearts be full of villainy: and when we have done all we
can, such will be admitted. Where we find competency of knowledge, professed
subjection to all the ways of Christ, not contradicted by a scandalous life,
we bless God for the good we see in them, cheerfully give them the right hand
of fellowship, leaving their hearts and inward condition to Gods Judgment. For
that other worthy Gentleman he quotes in the end of this Section; I have some
reason to believe (what ever may be his judgment about Judas his receiving)
he is not of Mr. Humphrey his Latitude for admittance to the Sacrament.

Sect. III.
Mr. Humphrey comes to the stating of his Question; In which for explication,
page 20. He premiseth, That between these two, a covenant relation visible, and
truth of grace which is invisible, there is no middle thing enjoined in the
Scripture for the rule of our Admission.

Answ. If this Rule be true, then Mr. Humphrey does very ill to coin diverse
middle things for the rule of Admission, as that persons to receive, first must
have some maturity of understanding: Secondly, must be in their right wits:
Thirdly, must not be jure excommunicate. If it be objected, that these he
excepts afterward by way of Explication. Ans. 1. His Explication must never
contradict his Rule. Secondly, By the same reason he can find three middle
things, we shall find more, as I hope to make evident when we come to
particulars.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 19, 20, and 21.
Some are incapable of the Ordinances by Nature; namely, such as can discern no
meaning thereof: As infants, the distracted, natural fools, in opposition to
the ignorant that are of age: And that first, Because discerning the Lords Body
cannot be a duty in the former, etc. Secondly, Because signs cannot work upon
the unintelligent, as to any real effect.

Ans. 1. Here you see one middle thing between Church Membership and truth of
grace. Infants, etc. are Church Members, and diverse of them have truth of
grace; Yet are incapable of admittance to the Lords Supper in M. Humphrey his
judgment for lack of understanding, which therefore must be added to
Church Membership as a Qualification for admittance. I here dispute ad hominem.
Secondly, Why may not unintelligent persons be admitted as well to the Lords
Supper as to Baptism, since they understand and discern the Body of Christ as
much in that, as the Water of the Spirit in this; and if Bread and Wine cannot
work upon the unintelligent, no more can Water, both being Sacramental signs.
If therefore Mr. Humphrey will keep to his rule, he must deny Infants Baptism
as well as the Lords Supper. If he urge^, That discerning the Lords Body is
required in all receivers of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 29.

Ans. 1 If discerning the Lords Supper be necessary, as to admittance; This
strongly justifies our way of trying persons before we admit. If it be not
necessary, as to admittance, then how dares he exclude any Churchmember from
the Sacrament, and punish Infants, etc. by suspending them who are only
naturally incapable, when at the same time he wittingly admits those who are
morally incapable. We grant Elder persons ought to get understanding, which we
endeavor to work in them, by offering to instruct them whom we find ignorant
against the next Sacrament; and diverse we doubt not will bless God to
Eternity, that by a temporary suspension, they were brought out of the
Darkness of Ignorance and sin into the Light of Knowledge and Grace. But does
it follow that because they ought to get understanding, therefore they must be
admitted before they have it. Is not their privative Ignorance a greater Bar
then Childrens negative Ignorance? We further grant they may be wrought upon by
many parts of the Sacrament, and therefore suspend them not from presence, but
only from actual receiving, it, till Mr. Humphrey can prove the ultimate act
of receiving to be a converting Ordinance. But till then, these two great
reasons of his, may well prove gravell-stones in his own bowels, but not in our
teeth, what ever he may please to fancy of them.

Mr. Humphrey allows, Page 23.
that persons excommunicate, ipso jure, should be suspended, namely, persons
guilty of notorious and evident crimes, etc. Yet, this he minces again, saying,
I do not hold the Minister or Church is always bound to take cognizance
hereof, for what has been shown already so plainly in the pattern of Christ.
See more of this kind, page 26. where he makes the keeping away, or suspending
of persons, jure excommunicate, but a prudentiall.

Ans. 1. Is not here another middle thing to be a rule of admission, besides
Church Membership? Persons jure excommunicate, are Churchmembers, till actually
excommunicated, and therefore either must be admitted, or Mr. Humphrey his
former rule is false. 2. Note further, and tremble, Mr. Humphrey holds, the
Minister and Church are not always bound to take cognizance of a Zimri and
Cosbi, a person stark staring drunk, incestuous marriages, those who come newly
reaking out of open enormities, such as publicly renounce Christ, or say, they
will not believe on him; such as being in notorious malice, will not forgive, but
profess their obstinacy: but may admit these coming to the Sacrament, though
convicted by evidence of the fact; so they be not juridically sentenced, and de
facto excommunicated. Let the Reader compare page 21. and 22. and see if I
wrong him. If this latitude of Admission turn not Gods House into a den of
Thieves, I know not what will. Well may persons excommunicable (as he calls
them) be admitted, if the former rabble of hell may pass. 3. Note further the
good use he makes of Judas his admittance, (supposing he was admitted by our
Savior) by making it a president for the admittance of the vilest convicted
miscreants, that ever the earth groaned under, so they be not actually
excommunicated. Let me (to evidence the absurdity of this instance of his)
enlarge it a little: As Christ did not suspend, so he did not excommunicate
Juaas, nor send to the High Priests or Officers for evidence against him,
though he were jure excommunicate for the foulest treason that ever the Sun
beheld, Ergo, the Church must not excommunicate actually the vilest monsters of
men, though never so clearly convicted by evidence of the fact; or at least,
they do not sin in not excommunicating them, because Christ did not think fit
to excommunicate Judas actually, who was jure excommunicate. See whither an
engagement in loose principles will not drive men! But I hope Mr. Humphrey,
upon a review, will be of another mind, how ever prejudice and preingagement
may cloud his judgment for the present.

Mr. Hum. Page 23.
And here I must complain of my Opposer. Were not these words (Unless
excommunicate, ipso jure, or, de facto) page 24. in all three Editions; and why
then does he so overly and contemptibly bring an odium on me, by being willing
not to see or understand them, etc. Ans. Herein I am sure I have cause to
complain of my Opposer Let the Reader peruse his Vindication, page 24. and
find (if he can) one word of excommunicate, jure or facto there. Indeed in
that page he challenges both Independents and Presbyterians, but in the
Edition of his Vindication, printed 1642. I find not one word about
excommunication, much less that distinction of excommunicate, jure and facto;
nor do I remember it is in any part of his Vindication; so far was I from
shutting mine eyes against it, that had I found it there, I should probably
have improved it then, as I do now, in order to his conviction.

Mr. H. Page 23.
As to the Church or Minister, I held, and do hold, that all Church Members,
that are neither unintelligent, nor excommunicate, ought freely to be admitted
to this Ordinance: some cases in Spiritual and Temporal prudence being
considered.

Ans. 1. Does it not hence clearly follow, that the suspension of persons, jure
excommunicate, is but a case of prudence: and if so, then we should plead for
the suspension of others (who are visibly unworthy) only as a case of prudence
too. Nay, 2ly. will it not follow hence, that the excommunication of persons,
jure excommunicate, is but a case of prudence too, the admitting of women to
the Sacrament, etc. is but a case of prudence too. I believe Mr. Humphrey will
find at last, that such cases of prudence, are good cases of conscience, it
being the most prudentiall (as well as conscientious) way, to submit to all the
commands of Christ, whether they be in express terms, or by good consequence
laid upon us in the Scripture. In the same page he comes to my Exceptions: the
first, that Infants and the distracted (as deaf persons) are to come to the
Word, therefore they are not incapable of the Ordinances.

Mr. Humphrey. For the deaf, he speaks miraculously well; for Infants, they
were better keep at home, but only for the sake of them that tend them: His
Text, Deuteronomy. 29. etc. is good to prove their Covenanting by their Parents in
Baptism, where there is only a passive reception, and the benefits relative;
but as to the Ordinance of Hearing, it must be actual, and they are incapable
of any real work by it. Ans. 1. Saving the jest, which Mr. Humphrey can break
miraculously well, my discourse, page 13. and 14. speaks nothing of any
miraculous working, farther then every work of conversion is miraculous, and
indeed a far greater miracle then all miraculous cures upon the body, John 14.
12. The working upon Infants and deaf persons at the Word (I do not say by the
Word) upon blind and paralytick persons at the Lords Supper, may be
extraordinary; but no more miraculous, then is the working upon persons at age,
and who have their senses perfect. No Ordinance is a natural, but only a
moral instrument of conversion, which God uses arbitrarily, and can, when he
pleases, work without them. I do not say this is all God requires, but this is
the least he requires.
That, God requires of his creature, is either active or passive presence; that
I should either present my self, or be presented before the Lord, according to
my capacity. The Ordinances have an aptitude to represent, offer, or seal, and
(when specially elevated by divine benediction) to apply Christ, and grace
either initiall or progressive (all of them, the latter; some of them, the
former also) to any Churchmember, whether he have an active, or only a passive
capacity. Thus Infants sanctified from their mothers womb, may, at the
Ordinance of Baptism, at least have further degrees of grace infused; and that
God, who infuses grace into some of them before any Ordinance used, can infuse
more grace upon the use of any Ordinance, though the Infant be no more sensible
of progressive, then of initiall grace, or of the Ordinance, by, or at which,
it is wrought. Gods operation upon Infants and others, naturally incapable, are
secret; the creatures work is to get in the way and road of grace, that the
very shadow of mercy passing by, may overshadow some of them. Acts 5. 15. If I
be in the way of mercy, who knows but it may spread a skirt over me, and make
it a time of love, Ezekiel. 16. 8. A beggar bringing his babe to a rich man's gate,
may obtain, not only strong meat for himself, but milk for his babe, though it
be not sensible of the benefit, or how it comes by it.

The places I quoted are not so slight, to prove Infants must be present at the
Word, Read, or Preached etc. as he would make them. True, Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12.
they were before God to enter into Covenant: But Deuteronomy. 31. verse 11, 12. they
were to be presented before God in ordinary, at the great anniversary feasts;
that they might hear, etc. and while Infants are but present, God can teach
them, though man cannot, Jesh 8. 35. every word was read before the little
ones, as well as others, 2 Chronicles. 20. 13. In a day of humiliation, their little
ones were presented before the Lord as well as others: And, Joel 2. 16. the
very same thing is commanded; and to take away all cavil about their age, they
are expressly noted to be such little ones, as suck the breasts. What though
they understand nothing? cannot that God, who bids us present them before him,
lay his hands upon their hearts, and bless them at his Ordinance. As God
teaches many elder persons convincingly, whom he does not teach savingly; so
he can teach infants savingly, whom he does not teach convincingly, namely, by
infusing saving knowledge and grace, Esaias 54. 13. May not they be comprehended
by Christ at the Ordinances, who cannot at all comprehend him, Ioh. 1. 5. Phil.
3. 12. Before I pass, I shall only note that, about Infant Baptism. Mr.
Humphrey speaks ambiguously, yet seems to hint, as if the benefits of Baptism
to infants were only relative and not absolute; which if I were certain of, I
had more to say to him, but till then, I forbear. I shall only add this, that
however Infants may be incapable of any real work [by] hearing, yet, they are
not incapable of a real work [at] hearing. Had Christ bid an Infant stretch
out his withered hand, his Almighty power at the same time might both have
cured him, and also acted him to stretch forth the same hand, being cured,
although the Babe understood not one word Christ spoke. And cannot Christ cure
an Infants withered soul, as well as his withered body, though the Babe
understand nothing of the word of command in either.

He tells the Reader, Page 24.
my second Exception is, That Infants and the Distracted, are as capable of the
Sacrament, as the Ignorant are, though of age.

Ans. Herein Mr. Humphrey wrests both my words and meaning. Are these two
Propositions equipollent, Infants are capable as well as Elder persons that are
grossly ignorant; and, Infants are as capable as Elder Persons that are grossly
ignorant? Or more clearly, The Creature is good as well as God; and, The
Creature is as good as God: The former Proposition is a truth, the latter, an
horrid lie and blasphemy: The former notes the truth of Predication in both:
the latter, afferts a parity of the Predicate in both.

I grant, afterward he lays down my own terms; but by Mr. Humphrey his
leave, the Reader might easily have been abused to believe the second exception
above mentioned to be either my own terms, or at least my sense: My words are
these, I ask Mr. Humphrey, why are Infants capable of Baptism, and not of the
Lords Supper? If he say, because they cannot examine themselves nor discern the
Lords Body, etc. then I answer, no more can grossly ignorant persons, etc. To
this, Mr. Humphrey, Sir, you must excuse me, I shall not answer you altogether
so; but, because Infants are really incapable, in Baptism, there is required
only a passive, but in the Lords Supper, an actual reception. 2ly. Because it
is not their duty to examine themselves, and discern the Lords Body.

Ans. To omit the absurd opposition of actual to passive (which happily was an
error only of the Press) are not Infants naturally incapable of Baptism as
well as of the Lords Supper? Do they, or can they apprehend any more, either of
the Sign, or thing fignified, in Baptism, then the Lords Supper? Or, in
Baptism, is there only a passive reception required? True, in Infants, God
requires only a passive reception, because they have no active capacity at
present: But in Elder persons Baptized, God expects an active, and not only a
passive reception; namely, the acting of faith, to receive the blood of
sprinkling, and an active endeavor (especially at the time of Baptism) to
mortify sin, and rise up to newness of life, besides the profession of their
faith in their own persons; none of which, either God or man, expects of
Infants, whom yet the efficacy of Baptism may reach, as well as Elder persons,
though it be not limited to this or that time; nor does the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost, always accompany the Baptism of Water, either in Infants or in
Elder persons. In Elder persons then Baptized, there is not only a passive, but
an active reception, as at the Lords Supper there is not only an active, but a
passive reception. For his second Reason, Because it is not the duty of Infants
to examine themselves, and discern the Lords Body. Ans. No more is it the duty
of Infants to examine themselves, at, or before Baptism, or to discern the
blood of Christ, and the water of the Spirit represented thereby. etc. which
Elder persons baptized are bound to, and sin if they do not; yet, I hope this
natural uncapableness of Infants, in order to examination and discretion is no
bar to their baptizing; therefore upon the same account (I argue now ad
hominem) they are no just bar to Infants receiving the Lords Supper. If
therefore I should say, God requires selfe-examination, and discerning the
Lords Body of Elder persons, but not of Infants, would it not follow, that
Infants might better be admitted to the Lords Supper, then Elder persons that
are grossly ignorant, since there is not that danger of unworthy receiving, in
Infants, as in Elder persons, and that because the absence of examination and
discretion in them, makes them, co nomine, unworthy; not so in Infants, because
God requires not those acts of them as conditions, to make them evangelically
worthy. Might I not here retort Mr. Humphrey his own argument upon himself,
The Apostle says, Let a man examine himself, and so eat. He does not say, Let
him not eat, unless he can and do examine himself: should I add, that the
Jewish Children ate the Passover, yet were naturally incapable of it, as ours
are of the Lords Supper. And further, that Children are Disciples as well as
Elder persons, and that the Disciples assembled together to break bread, Acts
20 7. (by which argument principally, we prove, women may, and ought, to
receive) I might thereby not only discover the weakness of his two
forementioned Reasons, but happily also might make him a Proselyte to
Infant-receiving. And its a Question, whether a Minister might not with more
comfort administer either Sacrament to an Infant, than to a grossly ignorant or
scandalous person, who either professedly or really rejects the Covenant sealed
and exhibited by those signs. Mr. Humphrey might very well therefore have
spared those words, page 25. If the man had not been too slighting of me, he
would never have run himself into the contempt of so many repetitions of this
Infant passage: I will reckon them as I go, here is one.

Ans. I hope the Lord has learned me to slight no man, much less a Minister:
But its an hard matter, that I cannot press an argument, which to me seems
solid (I have now demonstrated there is more weight in it, then Mr. Humphrey
was aware of) but I must presently be judged as slighting the person of my
Opponent. I wish Mr. Humphrey would lay his hand upon his heart, and sadly
consider, whether his bitter scoffs do not smell rather of slighting, then my
frequent pressing of this, or any other argument. If the argument be valid, it
cannot be too often pressed, and I am confident, I press it no where, but
where Mr. Humphrey puts me upon it. Let me be good at Weight, and I shall not
envy his being good at Number. I hope his reckonings will bring me in a good
shot in the issue. His reckonings with me shall learn me I trust to make the
more frequent and strict reckonings with my self.

Mr. Humphrey having granted that persons jure excommunicate, may be suspended,
adds these words. If you shall demand of me a subflantiall proof for yielding
thus much, I must answer you, the Church is of age, ask it. What she in
prudence has allowed, I am ready to think there may be good reason for, though
I know it not.

Ans. If Mr. Humphrey be real in this his profession, he cannot be an Enemy
to Suspension, which (besides the warrant of Scripture) has the Church for its
Patron, whether by Church he understand the Greek and Latin Church before
their Apostasy: Or general and particular Councills, especially the Council of
Ancyra. An. 308. or thereabouts, and the general Council of Nice gathered by
Constantine the great, by whose Canons, Suspension from the Sacrament is
ratified. Or if by Church he understand our own Church of England; Let him
consult the Book of Common Prayer, and particularly the Confirmation, where
Ministers are ordered to Catechize in public; and Governors of Families are
to send their Children and Servants to be Catechized. And the general rule in
the Close is, that none shall be admitted to the Holy Communion until such
time as he can say the Catechism. Here you have an evidence of Suspension for
gross ignorance. And for scandalous persons, turn to the Communion in the Book
of Common Prayer: 1. They are dehorted from receiving, in these words.
Therefore if any of you be a Blasphemer, etc. or be in malice, envy, or in any
other grievous crime; Bewail your sins, and come not to this Holy Table, lest
after the receiving of that Sacrament, the Devil enter into you as he entered
into Judas, and fill you full of all iniquity, and bring you to destruction of
Body and Soul. And in the Rubric before the Communion, persons, before
receiving, were to give the Minister notice of their purpose therein; and if
any of them were a notorious evil liver, or wronged his Neighbor by word or
deed, or were in malice and hatred, he was first to dissuade them from the
Sacrament, and if that would not prevail, he was to deny them the Sacrament,
not suffering them to be partakers of the Lords Table until he know them to be
reconciled, etc. I might here add the twenty sixth Canon, which expressly
says, No Minister shall in any wise admit to the receiving of the Holy
Communion, any of his Cure or Flock, which be openly known to live in sin
netorious, without repentance; Nor any who have maliciously and openly
contended with their neighbors, until they shall be reconciled. If by Church
he mean, the Church of England as it now stands, and has stood since the
downfall of the Prelates; Has not Suspension been revived and ratified by the
Assembly of Divines siting at Westminster, an Assembly (I may say, I hope
without flattery) as Learned and plous as ever the Christian World saw; And
afterward confirmed by Civil Sanction of both Houses of Parliament in the Form
of Church Government (...) that bare Church Membership (though never so much
contradicted by practice) is sufficient for admittance to the Sacrament. Upon
which account I might refer him to my former answers yet I shall add a little.

Church Membership being a relation must needs have some foundation which
foundation failing, the relation cannot hold: what is this foundation but
consent (either implicit or explicit) to walk with the Church of God in all
the ways of God for His glory, and their mutual edification. This consent
failing, the Foundation of Churchrelation ceases, and such a person unchurches
himself, and that visibly too, where this consent fails visibly, as it does in
persons who wilfully refuse knowledge, and live against conviction in
scandalous sins: And can the Church then be blamed for denying the Sacrament
(a special Church-priviledge) to those who renounce their Baptism, and
unchurch themselves, who really deny the faith, and are worse then Infidels? 1 Timothy 5. 8. who are among us, but are not of us. 1 John 2. 19. And if such be in
the visible Church, and ever will be, so long as it is Militant; can you blame
Church Officers for endeavoring to find out such by their fruits, Math. 7. 16.
to uncase false Brethren, and deny them the Sign, who renounce the thing
signified?

As for the seeming Contradiction, he would fasten on me, page 27, and 28. He
that reads it observantly, may easily perceive the Cavil; since our
undertaking to fit the people, is but conditional, provided they will be ruled
by us; and therefore if ignorant persons will be ruled by us, we shall
endeavor to fit them by instruction; if scandalous persons would be ruled by
us, we shall teach them to live unblameably, whereby they may be visibly
worthy: And to make all sorts really worthy (if they will be ruled by us) we
shall endeavor their conversion and actual preparation though when we have
done all we can, we dare not say, we endeavor our utmost de jure; we leave
that to Mr. Humphrey.

The question about an unregenerate man's duty, to abstain from the Sacrament,
which Mr. Humphrey touches upon, page 28, I shall pass here, as referring it to
its proper place: And being rightly understood, I hope it will not appear so
heterodox.

Sect. IV.
Mr. Humphrey, If we must hold the Sacrament to be a means of grace only to the
Regenerate, and that none may come without these Sacramental graces, etc. we
cannot approach this holy Table, but the terrors of the Lord must fall upon
us, as trembling to be guilty of the blood of Christ, and eat our own
damnation. The best of Gods people (who are most apt to question their
spiritual estates) will be discouraged; and others, upon slight trial, will
conclude their estate to be good, presume upon the Sacrament, and thereby bring
upon themselves security, and the blood of their own souls, etc. This I take to
be the substance of page 29. and 30. The case is very serious, and pathetically
propounded.

Ans. 1. We all agree (from express testimony of Scripture) that they who
receive unworthily, eat and drink judgment to themselves, and are guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. 2ly. Mr. Humphrey is not ignorant of a twofold
unworthiness (as well as worthiness) acknowledged generally by our Divines;
viz. the unworthiness of Person, and of Preparation, and that either of these
unworthinesses make a man obnoxious to the forementioned guilt and danger. 3ly.
Its confessed that hypocrites may be very confident, and true Nathaniels may
doubt very much they have neither the worthiness of person nor preparation; or
through infirmity, sloth, and negligence, may fail very much in point of
preparation, yet have the worthiness of Person.

4ly. We must distinguish between the rigor of the rule, as laid down
doctrinally, and the equity of the rule as reduced to practice. To explain this
by the Law of the Passover: the rigid rule was, no unclean person should eat
thereof; yet, it might fall out, that many unclean persons did eat thereof, and
that without blame or danger, provided they were not supinely negligent either
in avoiding or searching out their uncleanesse. Otherwise no man durst have
eaten the Passover, since its possible he might have been defiled though
unwittingly.

5ly. Abstinence from the Sacrament is twofold 1. Out of profanesse and
slighting of Christ, and his grace. 2ly. Out of clear conviction or grounded
jealousy about our spiritual estate. In like manner, Receiving of the
Sacrament is twofold. 1. Out of Custom or other sinister respects. 2ly. Out of
Conscience rightly informed (about truth of grace inherent) or deceived and
mistaken, or doubting and scrupulous; namely, when it cannot clearly either
assent or dissent: Or when it inclines in assent to the better part; yet with
fear and jealousy of the contrary.

These things premised we say. 1. That for Persons totally destitute of the
worthiness of person, (such are all in their natural condition) it were happy
if the terrors of the Lord were more upon them that by fear of murdering
Christ, they might be kept from murdering Christ, at the Sacrament.

2ly. If upon trial, an erring conscience tell them they have truth of grace,
they are exposed to a snare whether they receive or not: since if they come
not, they sin against their consciences; and if they come, they receive
unworthily, and thereby contract guilt and incur danger; as it is in other
cases, when an erring conscience puts a man upon sin as duty, or pulls a man
from duty as sin.

3dly. If any doubt of truth of grace (be the ground of his mistake right or
wrong) and thereupon fear to receive 1. this abstinence of his, is far from a
slighting of Christ. 2ly. cannot be prejudicial, but advantageous to his
soul, provided he sit not down in a doubting and despondent condition.

4ly. A true Nathaniel wanting evidence, and so fearing to aproach is by the
Sacrament put upon it to be more diligent in making his calling and Election
sure: And by self-examination, backed with prayer and advice of experienced
Ministers and Christians, may through the blessing of God attain such a measure
of evidence, as that he may with comfort approach the Lords Table, and go away
with a double Portion of the spirit of evidence; and for such in special, the
Sacrament was instituted as a Cordial to refresh their fainting hearts, and as
a seal to ratify the Covenant of grace, and to put it out of question to
their consciences. So that if we be rightly understood, here is no sadning of
those whom God would not have made sad nor any strengthing the hands of the
wicked on the other side: And for those whose portion is sorrow, they had
better be in the house of mourning then in the house of feasting. As for the
Objection Mr. Humphrey moves from Rom 14. last: He that doubts is Damned, if
he eat etc.

Ans. 1. In things indifferent, to act doubtingly is a sin, but Sacramental
eating is not a thing indifferent to him that has truth of grace.

2ly. What if he doubt, he shall sin by abstaining as well as by eating: May
not such a case possibly fall out, when the faith of evidence is balanced by
an opposite doubting?

3ly. The word put for doubting, (...).
signifies in the Original a discerning, or putting a difference, as 1 Cor.
11. 29. Jude ver. 22. which notes a positive act, and not a bare hesitancy or
neutrality between assent and dissent.

Let us now peruse Mr. H. his Commentary upon 1 Cor. 11. from page 32. to 38,
for some ease (as he terms it) of the forementioned perplexities. Page 32. he
has these words, I would not have men think Saint Paul advances this Ordinance
( which he speaks but lowly of, 1 Cor. 10. 4.) above others, as prayer, the one
being only Instituted the other Natural worship.

Ans. 1. I think Mr. Humphrey is mistaken in saying Saint Paul speaks but lowly
of the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10. 4. I conceive its no low expression to call the
Manna spiritual meat, the miraculous Water, spiritual Drink; and the Rock
(out of which it flowed) Christ. And though both Manna and Water were common,
(they all ate and drank thereof) this is no undervaluing of either, since the
choicest mercies are most common, at least as to the tender of them: (witness
God himself) especially in the Church.

2ly. Whether the Apostle intended here to advance the Sacrament above other
Ordinances (which to me seems probable,) or not: I believe it excells other
Ordinances; And that because it is made up of them all, to wit, the Sign, the
thing signified, the word and prayer; besides the commendation it has by our
blessed Saviors institution at such a time, and for such high ends. And if all
these Ordinances combined, are better then any one of them single; surely the
Sacrament must have the preheminency.

3ly. Upon the same account, instituted worship excells natural worship,
because it includes it, and superadds institution. Particularly faith in the
Mediator is instituted worship; yet I hope it is not inferior to natural
worship, which it includes, and superaddes Institution. There is no Ordinance
but has its peculiar use and excellency, for which we have cause to bless
God and be thankful; nor need we trouble our selves with comparisons of this
kind, which are for the most part curious, and too often odious. Yet, were
actual receiving a converting Ordinance, I think we might well honor it as
the Crowning Ordinance, since it excells in point of Confirmation, and
represents Christ effectually to so many senses: but I forbear.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 32, and 33. Here is a Church-sinne; that sin is making that
common which was sacred, the using of this Sacrament but as their Love Feasts,
etc.

Ans. 1. Yea supposing, they were joynned together, as were the common Supper,
the Passover and the Lords Supper.
Its gratis dictum, that they made the Lords Supper a common supper as their
Lovefeasts: Nor does he produce any argument or Classical Author to avouch it.
The Apostle indeed blames their schisms, intemperancy, disorder, and slighting
their poor Brethren, etc. 1 Cor. 11. ver. 18. 21. but where is one word of
making the Lords Supper a common supper?

Page 33. and 34. He seems to question whether the Lords Supper be first a
seal. 2ly. Whether it be a sign of future things, and particularly says, that
Remcanbrance is of some thing only that is past.

Ans. 1. Why should Circumcision be a seal, and not every other Sacrament, and
so by consequence the Lords Supper?

2ly. Has it not the Office of a Seal in ratifying the Covenant of grace as
well as other Sacraments?

3ly. How does the unworthy Receiver eat and drinkjudgement, unless this
Sacrament by sensible signs applied (as in sealing there is First a sign;
Secondly, Application thereof; Thirdly, Ratification thereby) ratify judgment
to him without repentance?

4ly. Mr. Humphrey forgets himself in saying Remembrance is only of things
past; otherwise how can I remember the Sabbath to sanctify it, or remember my
latter end? etc.

5ly. Why should not this Sacrament be a sign of future things as well as
other Sacraments? Circumcision and the Passover were signs of future things.
Baptism is a sign of future things; Namely, of Regeneration, Mortification and
Vivification, which (in most baptized persons that attain them) are future: and
why should not the Lords Supper be a sign of future, as well as of past things
(especially upon Mr. Humphrey his principles, who makes it a converting
Ordinance)? Is not the coming of Christ future, and how can this Sacrament
declare Christ's death till he come, and not remember the receivers of Christ's
coming that is future, as well as of Christ's death that is past? 1 Cor. 11.
26. Page 34. In opening, what is this eating and drinking unworthily; he
distinguishes between a worthy Receiver and receiving worthily. This last he
places mainly in coming with Reverence.

Ans. 1. I deny not but Reverence is a part of worthy receiving, and that he
who receives irreverently, receives unworthily with a witness.

2ly. Yet as it is competible to a natural man, he makes it lie very much, in
fearing his own Damnation, which (grant it be a duty in statu quo) being but
slavish fear, is no part of Evangelicall worthiness; and therefore cannot be a
main part of receiving worthily. Its such a worthiness, as he that has
committed the sin against the holy Ghost may receive with.

3ly. If further by reverence he mean, some inward awe, and outward demure
behavior, its a very easy matter to receive worthily, yea though a man
neither have truth of grace, nor make conscience either of examining or
preparing himself. Certainly when the Apostle said, Let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat, etc. he apprehended that who ever of age received without
self-examination received unworthily; but Mr. Humphrey tells us, the main of
receiving worthily, lies in reverence; and this reverence a natural man may
have, and receive with; yet never so much as examine himself. From such worthy
receiving, good Lord deliver me. Not but that I think this reverence is
necessary, but it falls infinitely short of receiving worthily, and he that
receives no more worthily, will eat and drink damnation to himself.

4ly. If receiving worthily lie mainly in this reverence, then it does not lie
mainly in the acting of Faith, Love, Hungring and thirsting after Christ,
Evangelicall repentance, etc. Which how absurd and contrary, not only to the
consent of Orthodox Divines, but chiefly of the Scripture it self, which
places Evangelicall worthiness in closing with Christ, and unworthiness in
the rejecting of him, and withdrawing from him, Matthew. 5. 3, 4,5. and 22. ver.
5. 8. Acts 13. ver. 45, 46. Such cold, loose, and jejune interpretations, may
well make cold and loose Christians, but will contribute poorly in order to
receiving worthily.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 35.
What is the meaning of that phrase, not discerning the Lords Body? Is it the
not putting a difference between this Sacred, and a common Table: When men have
no more respect to this Bread and Wine then to their ordinary meats.

Ans. 1. By way of concession; this is a gross breach of the rule indeed, and
which grossly ignorant persons are very subject to. This gross sin we should
endeavor to prevent by Sacramental trial, and instruction of the Ignorant,
how ever our care herein find little favor in Mr Humphrey his eyes.

2ly. The very laying open of the sin, in the Text, imports a contrary duty of
discerning the Lord Body, if we would receive worthily: and this lies not
barely in historical faith, discerning the Elements to be holy in use, though
common in nature; and that the Lords Body is distinct from them though united
Sacramentally with them; but principally in the discretion of saving faith and
love (words of knowledge in Scripture being put for acts of the will and
affections) whereby the Heavenly Eagles, discerning the body, fly to it, and
feed upon it; the discretion of taste being held forth in the Sacrament as well
as the discretion of sight; and otherwise what is our discerning of the Lords
Body more then a Devil may do? Intellectual discretion without cordial
discretion, is so far from being a main part of receiving worthily, that
without this latter, it does but aggravate our sin, and increase our doom. Let
my soul never rest, nor please it self in such discerning.

Mr. Humphrey. The Apostle enquires not into the state of the person, whether
regenerate or not, but looks to their manner of receiving, etc.

Ans. 1. But does he not put them upon enquiry into their own estates? What
else is meant by that precept; Let a man examine himself, etc. Let the Apostle
interpret himself. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 6. 4. And when is there a fitter time to
examine my estate, actions, growth; then before and after a Sabbath or
Sacrament? Sabbath days being with them Sacrament days?

2ly. If they must look to the manner of receiving, must they not then see to
it, they receive graciously; and what was either their receiving, or remembering
Christ's death (as to their particular good and comfort) if they did not both in
a right manner? 3ly. Can we be so uncharitable as to imagine, they came not to
the Lords Supper as a memorial of Christ? Could they either name or receive
the Lords Supper, and at the same time utterly forget the Lord, whose Supper it
was, and look at it only as a common Supper?

Mr. Humph. If the meaning of either of the phrases were, to come without faith
or regeneration (as some too harshly press it) then the Corinthians that were
punished for this sin, must have been not only chastened, but condemned with
the world, which they were not, verse 32.

Ans. 1. Its probable, diverse of them did come without faith and regeneration
(many of every Congregation being in their natural condition, and under
impenitency, which the Apostle hints of the Corinthians in particular, 2 Cor.
12. last, and 13. 5. compared) yet it follows not, they were condemned with
the world, since they might repent in their sickness, which the Apostle
prescribes, verse 31. as the remedy. 2ly. Even the godly amongst them might
happily come profanely, though they made it not a common Supper; and undoubtedly
to these. God gave repentance before their death. His argument then is very
weak, to conclude their damnation from their unworthy receiving. They indeed
who repented not, were damned; but there is no connection between any man's sin
and his damnation, unless that sin be accompanied with final impenitency.
3ly. If it be harsh to say, that they who come without faith and regeneration,
receive unworthily when it is delivered only in thesi, how harsh is it to charge
a Church in hypothesi, with such high profannesse, that they received the Lords
Supper but as a common Supper, and never so much as remembered Christ in it, who
is both the Author, Matter, and End of the Sacrament, and whose Name in an
special manner is called upon it?

Page 36. Mr. Humphrey opens that expression, of being guilty of the Body and
Blood of Christ, and grants, that unworthy receivers contract this guilt, by
offering an indignity to the thing signified: but he approves not that harsher
language of murdering Christ. Ans. 1. Whether he that is guilty of blood be
not a murderer. 2ly. Whether degrees of murder vary the kind. 3ly. Whether
in murder all be not principals. 4ly. Why should sleighting of Christ in
Apostates be murder, Heb. 6. and 10. and not in unworthy receivers? If
sleighting my Brother be murder, shall slighting my Savior be no murder? The
least murder is murder as well as the greatest. This language therefore, by
Mr. Humphrey his leave, is not harsh, unless it be harsh to call a Spade a
Spade.

His next head of explication, Page 37.
is, about selfe-examination, wherein Mr. Humphrey and we agree very much. To
his second caution I shall only add thus much, That whosoever upon trial, is
truly sensible of, and grieved for, the want of grace; humbled under, and
resolved against, sin: this man has truth of grace at present, and is the
worthyest communicant in Gods account. In his third caution, he grants, that in
order to better preparation against the next Sacrament, a wicked man may
abstain at present; but if he resolve to go on in sin, then he is bound to come
and to apply damnation to himself, unless he repent.

Ans. 1. By way of concession, every obstinate sinner is bound to apply
damnation to himself, in statu quo. 2ly. This he may do in an especial
manner, when present at the Sacrament, though he receive not. 3ly. By receiving
so maliciously, he contracts more guilt, then by abstaining, it being a Judas
sin to betray and murder Christ any where, but most of all at his own Table,
to eat of his bread with a resolution of lifting up our heel against him. John
13. 18. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, how much
more when he brings it with a wicked heart. Prove. 21. 27.

4ly. Supposing it were his duty to come and apply Damnation by receiving, what
if he will not apply Damnation, and comes with an intention not to apply
Damnation but Salvation, as Deuteronomy. 29. 19. is it his duty to come, though he
will apply Salvation and not Damnation by the Sacramen. Is it his duty to come
though he come presumptuously? Much I confess might be said for his coming
absolutely, Let his intentions be what they will, were actual receiving a
converting Ordinance. But of this, in its proper place.

Page 38. He says, that unless a man use the Lords Supper as a common thing,
there is no peculiar eating damnation there, more then at any other Ordinance.

Ans. 1. This cannot be, since the Sacrament is a complex Ordinance: He that
eats his Damnation at four Ordinances, eats it more then he that eats it but at
one Ordinance. At the Sacrament Christ crucified is held forth by reading,
hearing, prayerr, and the Sacramental Elements and Actions; in all which
Christ is murdered by the unworthy receiver. He who murders Christ four
times, sure is more guilty then he who murders him but once.

2ly. He that by eating Damnation, seals Damnation, eats Damnation more then he
that eats it without sealing: As a godly man at the Sacrament eats Christ more
then at the word, so does a wicked man eat Damnation.

Object. If this be true, then a wicked man by presence at the Sacrament, may
murder Christ as well as by receiving.

Ans. 1. True, but not so much.

2ly. The three Ordinances of reading preaching and prayer are converting; not
so, actual receiving: upon which account we dare not deny any the three
former, nor dare admit every one to the latter.

Page 39. He distinguishes between eating and sealing Damnation: That is the
effect of irreverent unworthiness: this is a confirming of the truth of the
Covenant, to every man according to his condition, which is a duty, etc. and of
high concernment, as they look to be converted and saved.

Ans. He is too narrow in limiting the eating of Damnation only to irreverent
unworthiness, as if there were no other Sacramental unworthiness but that.

2ly. We must distinguish between Gods sealing and man's sealing; God by the
Sacrament seals Damnation (as to state) unto wicked men whether they receive
or not. Man at the Sacrament seals Damnation to himself, wittingly or
unwittingly. Wittingly, in Mr. Humphrey his sense, when he receives the seal
with an intent to apply the threat of Damnation to himself, in order to his
deeper humiliation; unwittingly, when being person^lly or relatively unworthy
he lays hold of, and applies the seals either rashly or presumptuously, which
ever seal salvation or damnation according to the state and carriage of the
receiver and if not the former, then necessarily the latter: as a man by
inconsiderately sealing to a Bond, may easily ratify his own undoing, though
happily at the same time he dream of no such matter; That we may call an
intentionall, this areall and actual sealing. The distinction being thus
cleared and stated, I believe that every unworthy receiver does seal his own
damnation really, whether he mind what he does, or no.

2ly. That if such a person in statu quo, will venture to receive, he ought to
seal and apply to himself only his own portion which is Damnation otherwise he
were bound to seal a falsity.

But thirdly, that any man is bound to receive for this very end, that he may
seal his own Damnation; I desire a scriptum est from Mr. Humphrey. Certainly,
were this a duty, the Sacrament were more necessary for persons either de jure,
or facto excommunicate then for any other: The proudest sinners have most need
of sealing their own Damnation, that thereby they might be driven to
humiliation and repentance.

The comfort of poor souls, (who being sensible of their unworthiness, fear
their Damnation,) is sealed and cannot be reversed, lies in this. 1. That the
sealing in the Sacrament is not according to their Apprehension, but according
unto Truth. Let men think themselves never so unworthy, if they be
Evangelically worthy, not their Damnation but their Salvation is sealed. 2ly.
Supposing their Damnation be sealed, its sealed but conditionally, as to the
Event, however it may be sealed absolutely, as to their present State. If
therefore they keep not the condition of Damnation, the sealing thereof shall
no more prejudice them then the sealing of Salvation shall advantage
Hypocrites, who keep not the condition of Salvation. His distinction of Actual
and Potentiall sealing is not so accurate, since every receiver does actually
seal both parts of the Covenant, namely, both Salvation and Damnation only the
one he seals absolutely, the other conditionally, according to his particular
state and continuance therein. Only the worthy Receiver has this singular
advantage, That his Salvation is sealed absolutely, both as to State and Event;
not so the Damnation of the unworthy Receiver, I mean as to the latter.

Mr. Humphrey. If the Sacrament be a Seal, it does exhibit and convey something
to the Receiver; and that, to the Unregenerate, must be dangerous. Here then
let us know and arm our selves, that Sacraments being only moral Instruments,
cannot convey any thing that is Real unto the Soul by way of Obsignation; but
only that which is Relative, making no change, but as to our Estates, and
Relations to God, etc.

Ans. 1. If the Sacrament being only a Moral Instrument, cannot convey any
thing that is real, then the Word being also but a Moral Instrument, cannot
convey any thing that is Real. The Word Preached, may work Knowledge
physically, but it cannot work grace physically. He that looks at any
Ordinance under Christ, as more then a Moral Instrument of Grace, does at once
debase God, and Idolize the Ordinance.

2ly. If Sacraments can convey nothing Real and absolute but only Relative,
then Sacraments cannot convert and regenerate; these being Real and absolute
privileges, as Justification and Adoption are Relative privileges; (not to
stand upon his opposition of Real to Relative, as if a Relative state were not
a Real state.)

3ly. Suppose they could convey no Real thing to the Soul by way of Obsignation
yet they may by way of Signification. The Sacrament is a Sign as well as a
Seal, and preaches Christ crucified to the eye, as the Word does to the ear.

4ly. As a Seal conveies an Estate to him that keeps the Conditions of a
Covenant for Estate; so the Sacrament conveies degrees of Grace to him that
keeps the condition of the Covenant. True, the Seal is nothing without the
Writing, for it must have some what to seal to; and that is the Covenant: but,
as annexed to the Covenant, it makes a complete Instrument, and does not only
signify, but also convey Christ with all his benefits to the worthy Receiver:
That is, gives a Title to Christ, as by exhibiting, it gives possession in part.
and if so, then not only Relative, but also real and absolute Privileges:
namely, more degrees of Sanctification as well as further evidence of
Justification and Adoption. The Iron therefore he complains of, page 41. will
still stick in his Soul, since neither word nor Sacrament convey either wrath
or mercy Physically, but only Morally: Both represent by way of Signification,
which if the spirit please to set on effectually, may contribute much in their
several kinds; but the Sacraments excel in way of Obsignation and
Ratification.

Sect. V.
Having vindicated the Apostles Text against Mr. Humphrey his gloss: Page 44.
Let us see, what he has to say to my Confutation of his proofs.

D. Dr. If Mr. Humphrey plead that only Legal uncleanesse, excludes from the
Passover, I ask him, why? He will answer, because it defiled the holy things,
etc. but so did Moral uncleanesse, etc.

Mr. Humphrey. Here Mr. Drake is miserably mistaken. Mr. Humphrey intends not
to answer him so sillily: but because it was Gods positive Command, that
Levitically-inclean persons should be separated from the Camp; but there was no
such Law for Moral uncleanesse at all, but the contrary, that all the
Congregation were to eat thereof.

Ans. 1. There is no positive Command that all unclean persons should be put
out of the Camp; the more famous uncleanesses indeed were so to be separated,
Numb. 5. 2. but not every uncleanesse.

2ly. God himself assigns this reason, why they should be separated, namely,
least they should defile others. Levit. 5. 3. therefore Dr. Drakes reason was
not so silly, it being Gods own reason.

3ly. Moral uncleanesse defiled as well as Legal uncleanesse, as Mr. Humphrey
confesses from my proofs, Levit. 18. and Ezekiel. 23.

4ly. Church Officers were set on purpose to keep all unclean persons from the
holy things, 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. Those that were unclean in any thing. If no
unclean person were to enter, and persons were unclean by Moral, as well as by
Legal pollutions; then my proofs were not busily vain as Mr. Humphrey would
make the world believe. Whether therefore the charge of petulancy and reviling,
be justly laid upon me, I leave to the judgment of the impartial Reader; not
that I shall, or dare, excuse every word written in heat of dispute, as well
knowing my own weakness, and that the tongue and pen are slippery pieces.

D. Dr. That all unclean persons were to be suspended the Passover, is evident
by 2 Chronicles. 23. 19.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 45.
For shame do not say so. 1. Does that place speak of the Passover: Or, 2ly. of
Suspension: Or, 3ly. of Moral uncleanness?

Ans. 1. The term Passover, is not mentioned in my Text, quoted by Mr.
Humphrey, page 19. 2 ly. Had I said, that all unclean persons, were not only to
be suspended in general, but in particular to be suspended the Passover, had
it been any more then the truth? I would not here be mistaken, as if I thought
that either Moral or Leviticall uncleanness did exclude from all Ordinances,
but only from some Ordinances; and that both under the Legal and Evangelicall
dispensation. Amongst which, I apprehend that the Passover then, and the Lords
Supper now, are in a special manner distinguishing and separating Ordinances.
This I have in part made out here, and shall, by Gods assistance, clear it more
hereafter, in its proper place. 3 ly. I brought not that place, 2 Chronicles. 23.
19. to prove it in terms, but by consequence. The Resurrection is not in
terms in these words, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; yet, those
words prove the Resurrection strongly. From the fore-quoted place its evident,
that unclean persons were to be kept from those holy things, which were
instituted for meat's of Edification, not of Conversion. I assume: But the
Passover was such an holy thing; therefore they were to be kept from the
Passover. 4 ly. As the term Suspension, is not named here, so the term
Excommunication is not mentioned, either in the Old or New Testament: Does it
follow therefore, that suspension cannot be proved by this Text, nor
excommunication by Scripture? Mr. Humphrey can conclude, we suspend those
persons whom we do not admit, and can he not as well conclude, that Jchofada
suspended those persons whom he did not admit? 5 ly. Let me retort a passage of
his Answer in this page, changing only the term of Leviticall for Moral: Is
it probable, that the Levites at such a time, did, or could, in such a
concourse, try, and examine them concerning Leviticall cleanness and
uncleanness? Let Mr. Humphrey tell me, how they could try all for Leviticall
uncleanness; and I will tell him, how they could try all for Moral
uncleanness. I avouch not, page 202. that an excommunicated person might come
into the Temple; but into the Church, where presence does not defile. And as
for the Publican, his Office did not make him unclean, nor did John the Baptist
bid them renounce the Office, but be just and righteous in their places, Luke
3. verse 12, 13. Indeed generally, Fublicans were very oppressive and hateful,
but their Office was warrantable and therefore upon that account solely, they
could not be kept out of the Temple, I mean the Court for the people. But it
follows not, that because Publicans, as so, might not be excluded the Temple,
therefore when morally unclean, by horrid oppressions, etc. they might not be
kept out.

For my second Exception, about Children eating the Passover, it seems probable
enough, that Children who were capable of eating flesh, and could conveniently
be brought up to Jerusalem, did eat of it; from that general Precept, Exodus
12. 48. nor does Mr. Humphrey deny it, though he seem more inclinable to the
contrary opinion. This granted, makes much against Mr. Humphrey, his excepting
Children from the Lords Supper. Since therefore he will needs be scoring, let
him took notice of it, as a probable evidence against himself.

He does well in passing over my instance of Hezekiah's Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30.
verse 18, 19, 20. which proves, that Moral uncleanness made them more
incapable of it, then Leviticall pollution, God accepting those who set their
hearts aright, though they were not cleansed after the purification of the
Sanctuary.

D. Dr. Excommunication was a bar to the Passover, and this was for scandalous
sins, not Levitical pollutions.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 46.
Who will not be willing to grant this in the main? But what follows then?
only, as I hold, that men must be first excommunicate, before they be kept from
the Sacrament.

Ans. 1. Take notice, that Mr. Humphrey grants excommunication is a bar to the
Passover. Now I would entreat him to give me but one express Text of Scripture,
that in terms asserts this conclusion: If he can prove it only by consequence,
let him not deny the same just and equitable favor to us, of proving
suspension from the Sacrament also by consequence. 2 ly. Take away the
homonymie and equivocation of the term Excommunication, under which Mr.
Humphrey beguiles his Reader; and it will easily appear, that I have not played
with my own shadow, what ever he, through prejudice, may imagine. Mr. Humphrey
takes excommunication for a juridicall exclusion of a Person from all public
Ordinances at least. I know no such excommunication in Scripture, unless it be
evident, a person has committed the sin against the Holy Ghost: and this also
is demonstrable only by our consequence, because we are sure no Ordinance can
do such a one good, no more then the Devil himself. I take excommunication in
the Latitude, as it notes a turning out of Communion, whether in order to any
Church privilege, or in order to dis-Membering, which is properly a casting
out of the Church, in the rigor of the phrase. Accordingly, I prove there were
several degrees of excommunication in practice, both in the Jewish and
Christian Church, page 21, 22. built upon Scripture grounds: as, when we are
forbid to eat with a scandalous Brother, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Romans 16. 17. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. commanded to avoid them, not to keep company with them; the very
end whereof (that they may be ashamed) seems in a special manner to respect
separation from such at the Sacrament, since by suspension they are put to
public shame, a far more effectual remedy to reduce them, then private
separation alone; which yet must concur and back this public shame, for the
better obtaining of the forementioned end and purpose. Hence I concluded, that
suspension is excommunication, and the first degree thereof. And as degrees of
heat do not alter the nature and kind of heat, but that the least degree of
heat is as truly heat as the highest degree thereof; so the least degree of
excommunication is excommunication (that is, a turning out of communion, though
but in part) as well as the highest degree. And therefore Mr. Humphrey
granting, that excommunicated persons may, and ought, to be kept from the
Sacrament, does therein grant, that suspended persons may be kept from the
Sacrament since suspension is excommunication, though in a low degree.

For my exception about the word (Type) he deals very ingenuously, and
acknowledges, That if strictly taken, it is not amiss. Only thence he infers
against me, that exclusion of the Legally unclean from the Congregation, is not
proof for me to plead, that the Morally-unclean ought to be kept from the
Sacrament; but a Type indeed, that such, in whom the Leprosy, etc. of sin
reigns, shall be excluded Heaven.

Ans. 1. I do not bring it as proof yea, I believe, that if sequestring any
out of the Camp, did typifie an Evangelicall Censure, it should rather typifie
turning out of Church membership (especially if their uncleanesse were
incurable) than Suspension: but for my part, I believe its a type of neither.

2ly. I go upon the general rule, that all unclean persons were to be kept
from those holy things which cannot convert, but prejudice them in statu quo.
The Scripture is clear, that Moral uncleanesse is worse then Leviticall
pollution, and that therefore it does desile as much, yea, more then any Legal
pollution, Levit. 18. Ezekiel. 23. To which I might add, Ezekiel. 44. ver. 9-14. (a
Text the more considerable, because a prophecy of Gospel Times) Where persons
uncircumcised in heart as well as in flesh, were forbid Entrance into Gods
Sanctuary: And the Priests formerly guilty of Idolatry, were cut short of
choice Privileges in the Church an evidence that neither Church Members nor
Church Officers were, eo nomine, to enjoy equal privileges, but a difference
was to be made in point of privilege according to their visible worthiness or
unworthiness. So Mat. 5. 23, 24. Christ forbids a malicious person in statu
quo, to draw near in order to Sacrifice; and will he allow a malicious person
to draw near in order to the receiving of the Sacrament? But of this more
hereafter. Yea the Sacrifices did typically expiate Moral as well as
Leviticall uncleanesse, Levit. 5. and 6. though neither the one nor the other
were to enjoy the benefit of Sacrifice, till evidence given to the Priest
either of their Moral Legal, or Spiritual cleansing, either by the mercy of
God curing their unclean diseases or by their application of more private
Leviticall means of cleansing, or by the public testification of their
repentance, and faith, for their Moral uncleanesses. Levit. 5. ver. 5, 6. and
6. ver. 4. 5. and 15. ver. 13. 14. and 13. ver. 4. to 11. Yea further, for the
searching into, and discovery of Moral uncleanesse (though but upon jealousy
and suspicion, and that where there was no witness at all) the Lord was
pleased to work a miracle. Numb. 5. ver. 13. to 31. Acts 5. ver. 5. to 11.
thereby warranting and encouraging, both Church Officers and private Christians
upon any grounded jealousy of Moral Pollution, not to stay till Evidence come
to them, but to improve all lawful means of discovery, as they tender their
own peace and safety, or the peace and safety of the whole. Compare Jos. 7.
Add to this the example of Jehojadah, 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. Its evident,
Church Officers were of purpose set in the Gates of the Lords House, to keep
away those who were unclean in any thing: and if persons unclean in any thing,
were to be kept off, then persons unclean by gross, or reigning sins (which is
moral uncleanesse) were to be kept away; since in that place there is no more
mention of Levitical then of Moral uncleanesse; but the Scripture commends
Jehojada's care for keeping back those who were unclean in any thing: I argue
therefore from a Moral precept, not from a Leviticall type; nor does the
Suspension of persons Levitically unclean any more exclude the Suspension of
persons Morally unclean, then the Suspension of persons Morally unclean does
exclude the Suspension of persons Levitically unclean, seeing neither of them
are named in the forementioned Text, but both included in the general.

D. Dr: It is evident that Niddui was a Bar in particular to the Passover.

Mr. Humphrey. I pray mark it. Niddui was an excommunication for thirty days.
Now if it were a Bar to the Passover, a man could never be excommunicated but
at Easter. The truth is, Niddui was no more in reference to the Passover then
any Society; and it is twelve to one throughout the year, whether it ever
happened to concern the Passover, etc.

Ans. 1. I pray mark it, Mr. Humphrey grants Niddui was an Excomunication.

2ly. Page 46. he grants that Excommunication was a Bar to the Passover. Why
then does he find fault with me for saying no more, then what himself says
and grants, namely, that Niddui in particular was a Bar to the Passover?

Object. I but Niddui was an Excommunication only for thirty days; and if it
were a Bar to the Passover, a man could never be Excommunicated but at Easter.

Ans. 1. Mr. Humphrey cannot be ignorant, that the time of this
Excommunication, might be doubled or trebled, yea, extended to the end of a
man's life, if he continued impenitent; See Goodwins Jewish Antiquities, page
200.

2ly. Its very absurd he says, that then a man could not be Excommunicated but
at Easter. True, his Excommunication could not keep him from the Passover, if
he were absolved from it before the Passover came; no more can Suspension be a
Bar to the Sacrament, if a man be absolved from it, before the Sacrament come:
but the sentence of Niddui might be issued out against a person at any time of
the year.

3ly. Its likewise a gross mistake (supposing this Excommunication lasted but
thirty days) to hold that it is twelve to one throughout the year, whether
ever it happened to concern the Passover. Has Mr. Humphrey forgot there were
two Passovers every year, and that the second Passover was in the Second Month,
for those who could not receive in the First Month? Numb. 9. ver. 10, 11. and 2 Chronicles. 30. ver. 2, 3, 15. therefore upon his own supposition it was but six to
one in the year, that this Excommunication might concern the Passover. But what
will Mr. Humphrey say, if Niddui extended to an whole year, yea, to a man's whole
life; did it not then clearly Bar such a person from the Passover?

4ly. Niddui was a Separation from eating and drinking with any, and how then
could such a one receive the Passover which was never to be eaten alone? Its
apparent then that Suspension is no Novell invention: That their Niddui and our
Suspension were very like one to the other, since under both, men were kept
from the Sacrament, but not from other Ordinances, but might be present at
Divine Service, either to hear, or to teach, etc: Only our Suspension is far
milder: since the males of persons under the sentence of Niddui, might not be
circumcised, etc. Besides, with us many persons suspend themselves, and choose
not to receive at all, rather then they will give an account of their faith to
those must give an account to God for their souls. Had Mr. Humphrey improved
his Art and skill in persuading the people to return to their duty, instead of
discouraging Church Officers from painfulnesse, watchfulness, and
faithfulness in their duty, he had contributed far more (than now he does) to
the glory of God, the Reformation and edification of the Church, and the peace
of his own Conscience. But I forbear. How ever therefore Mr. Humphrey soars
high in confidence, as if we had nothing to say against the daylight of his
Free-Admission (as he is pleased to term it) Page 47.
yet it has formerly appeared, and will further appear by this ensuing
parallel, that we have more to say for Suspension, and against his
Free-Admission, then he was aware of.

The Parallel lies thus. Every Churchmember was bound to receive the Passover.
Every Churchmember is bound to receive the Lords Supper. This General is
limited by an exception of Legal and Moral uncleanness. This General is
limited by an exception of Moral uncleanness. It lay as a duty upon
Church Officers, to keep away such as were unclean. It lies as a duty upon
Church Officers, to keep away such as are unclean. Those pollutions which
excluded a man from the Passover, did not exclude him from the means of
Conversion. Those pollutions which exclude a man from the Lords Supper, do not
exclude him from Prayer, Hearing, etc. which are means of Conversion. If a man
were unfit to eat the Passover in the first Month, he was to forbear till the
next Passover in the second Month. If a man be unfit for the Sacrament at this
time, he is to forbear till the next Sacrament.

The question is, What if a man were unclean at the second Passover? Ans. He
was either to forbear, till the Passover recurring the next year; or else, to
endeavor to make amends for his Legal pollution, by striving more after, and
giving stronger evidence of his moral purity, 2 Chronicles. 30. verse 18. to 20.
Whereby it appears, that Moral pollution was a greater Bar to the Passover,
then Leviticall pollution.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 48.
My second proof was from 2 Cor. 10. 17. These Corinthians were scandalous
many of them; and yet, says the Apostle, We being many, are all partakers of
one bread. Against this, Mr. Drake has his three exceptions, page 25, 26, 27.

1. He extenuates their crime, and counts it no bar to their receiving.

Ans. 1. I may more safely extenuate their crime, then he may aggravate it. 2
ly. Himself does not charge them with Idolatry, but says only, that they were
ready to go to Idols. 3 ly. Yet that they were ready to commit Idolatry, is not
evident by Scripture; only they gave great occasion of scandal and suspicion in
that kind, by eating things sacrificed to Idols, and that in the Idols
Temple; which the strong judged a part of their Christian liberty, and thereby
offended the weak: Whereupon 1 Cor. 10. latter end, the Apostle disputes
against this carnal liberty of theirs, and by commanding them to flee from
Idolatry. verse 14. he wills them to avoid the signs, appearances, and
occasions thereof. This carriage of theirs, I grant, was bad, but not enough
(especially before sufficient admonition given) to bar them from the Lords
Supper. Let the Reader now judge, whether in this extenuation (if Mr. Humphrey
please to call it so) I have sinned, either against the light of Truth, or the
law of Love.

Mr. Humphrey. Secondly, He confutes this himself, and proves, they were
guilty of gross sins, by 2 Cor. 12. 21. and so will not allow them to be
admitted. Ans. 1. Having denied they were guilty of Idolatry (which Mr.
Humphrey himself dares not charge them withal) did I afterward confute my
self, by granting they were guilty of other gross sins? Let us set the two
Propositions together. 1. Prop. The Corinthians were not guilty of Idolatry. 2.
Prop. The Corinthians were guilty of other gross sins. Is here any
contradiction? or, does the latter Proposition confute the former? 2 ly. All
that I say, page 25. and 26. is in substance this, Yet, taking it for granted,
many of them were guilty of greater sins, as appears by 1 Cor. 15. and 2 Cor.
12. 21. how proves he from the place, that all these were notwithstanding
admitted, etc? Let us here again set both Propositions together. 1. Prop.
Persons abusing their Christian liberty, are not presently to be suspended the
Sacrament, especially before sufficient admonition given, 2. Prop. Persons
guilty of gross sins, are to be suspended the Sacrament. Are these two
Propositions contradictory? or, does the latter confute the former?

Mr. Humphrey. Thirdly, He supposes this too, and questions only Paul's
allowance of it. Thus you see how playfull the man is; and that at one breath
he can blow his bubble out, and in, and out again. Ans. Sure Mr. Humphrey was
merrily disposed when he wrote these things, and hoped, the Reader would never
put himself to the trouble of comparing what I wrote with his Answer, but take
all he says upon trust. Its well, since he was resolved to be so merry here,
and in other parts of his Rejoinder, that he has pitched upon so inconsiderable
a person as my self for the object of his mirth. The Lord has been pleased of
late years to give me the cup of contempt and slighting, by the hands of
precious friends and acquaintance, whom I honor in the Lord; I may well
therefore take this cup out of the hands of a stranger. Let him alone, the Lord
has commanded him, who shall say unto him, wherefore have thou done so? 2 Samuel
16. 10.

But to come to the matter: my scope in the forementioned words (which he
wrests so pleasantly) was to give Mr. Humphrey all the fair play he could
desire in order to his more effectual conviction. Therefore I grant him, 1.
That the Corinthians went too far toward Idolatry. 2ly. That besides this they
were guilty of other grievous sins. I deny, 1 That his Quotation proves those
gross sinners were admitted to the Sacrament. 2ly Supposing they were admitted
de facto, I deny that his Quotation proves the Apostle allowed, much less
commanded such a Free-Admission. I hope Mr. Humphrey will give me leave to tell
him these are serious matters, and will not be put off with a Jest.

Mr. Humphrey. For the first it is manifest, that these Corinths were
Fornicators, etc. For the Second, the Text is full to the point. St. Paul
says, they were all partakers of this Bread. Mr. Dr. says, but how will he
prove, notwithstanding they were admitted? and that they had only a right to it
in actu primo. Whom shall we believe Mr. Paul or St. Drake.

Ans. 1. That many of the Corinths were very scandalons, is agreed on both
sides.

But 2ly. I say, That, these scandalous persons were admited to the Lords
Supper, is not proved convincingly, by that Quotation: And my reason is,
because both in Scripture and particularly in the Epistles to the Corinths,
universal propositions are not understood de singulis unius generis, or the
word All does not always include every particular person, or thing which in
form of speech seems to be comprehended under it. For instance, 2 Samuel 11. 1.
David sent Joab and All Israel, etc. will any thence conclude that not one man
was left in the Land of Canaan, but that every male passed over Jordan to
destroy the Ammonites? Matthew. 23. 3, All therefore whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do: must All there be understood without any
restriction? then Christ's Disciples must observe the Traditions and corruptions
taught by the Pharisees, contrary to our Saviors express commands otherwhere.
But to come nearer, 1 Cor. 8. 1. We know that we all have Knowledge: Yet 1
Cor. 15. 34. Some of you have not the Knowledge of God, I speak this to your
shame: and ver. 36. he calls them Fools, for their gross ignorance about that
Fundamental point of the Resurrection. Yea, in that very particular about the
Latitude of their Christian Liberty. 1 Cor. 8: He that says, verse. 1. We all
have Knowledge, yet says v. 7. How be it there is not in every man this
Knowledge; a clear evidence that All in the first verse must not be understod
universally? I shall trouble my Reader but with one place more. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
But we All with open face, beholding as in a Glass the glory of the Lord etc.
Will Mr Humphrey hence conclude, that every Member of the Church of Corinth had
saving Knowledge and grace? Certainly every one, who, with open face beholding
the glory of the Lord, is changed from glory to glory by the Spirit, is a godly
man and this the Apostle affirms of all the Corinths, as well as of himself:
yet no man will urge that place to prove that every Member of the Church of
Corinth was truly godly. And why then should Mr. Humphrey conclude, that all
the Corinths did actually receive the Sacrament, because the Apostle here uses
a like phrase, saying, 1 Cor. 10. 17. We All are partakers of that one Bread.
It is not my work now to digress, by giving my Reader an account why the
Scripture using general expressions, does not include all particulars under
that general Its sufficient that it is usual in Scripture under a general to
comprehend but some particulars for which, hundreds of instances might be
produced: Yea, seldom in Scripture does any general include all particulars
under it; and this kind of expression is usual in common discourse, All the
World knows such a thing, and who knowsaot this nor that? However therefore
Mr. Humphrey is so merrily disposed, that he will break a jest upon Saint Paul
rather then he will not be merry with Dr. Drake; Yet I hope it is now evident
to the Reader, that Mr. Humphrey might well have been more serious in so
serious a matter, and that though St. Paul's Doctrine be true, yet it is
misinterpreted and misapplyed by M. Humphrey.

Mr. Humphrey. For the third, that he allowed of this practice, that is
manifest too, In that he did not forbid it, which if it had been sin, he must
have done etc.

Ans. 1. Must a Minister, when treating of the Sacrament, or of any other
Ordinance, needs particularly forbid every sin committed, or committable
against that Ordinance: then he may make Pouls work of it indeed.

2ly. Does Mr. Humphrey think there were no other sins committed against the
Sacrament, but those mentioned in 1 Cor. 10. and 11. by the Apostle?

3ly. May he not have forbid the admitting of scandalous persons other-where,
as 1 Cor. 5. 11. etc?

Nay, 4ly. Does he not forbid it, in this very Chapter. 1 Cor. 10. 21? You
cannot drink of the Cup of the Lord, and of the Cup of Devils, etc. What can
the meaning of these words be, but that they who did partake of the Devils
Table, might not partake of the Lords Table It was naturally possible enough
(and probably diverse of them who ate the Devils Sacrifices in the Idols
Temple, ^id also receive the Lords Supper) but it was morally impossible,
because sinful and prohibited: and by coming to the Lords Table from the
Devils Table they provoked the Lord, ver. 22. Page 49.
But more of this, happily hereafter. Mr. Humphrey indeed endeavors to avoid the
evidence of this place, saying, The Apostle speaks not of diverse persons (in
the whole Church) going to one Table, but of the same persons going to diverse
Tables: and he plainly reasons from their p^rtaking of the one, against the
other.

Ans. 1. Its evident the Apostle speaks of diverse persons (supposing, as Mr.
Humphrey would have it, they who are the Idoll-Sacrifices, did also partake of
the Lords Table, which is probable enough; though Mr. Humphrey his ground to
evidence it be not convincing) in the whole Church going to one Table, some
strong Christians who took liberty to eat things offered to Idols, some weak
Christians who were offended with this their liberty, both Church Members, and
both probably partaking of the Lords Table, 1 Cor. 10. ver. 28, 29 32. compare
1 Cor. 8. ver. 7. 10. unless Mr. Humphrey be of the mind that only the strong
did receive the Lords Supper, and not the weak Brethren.

2ly. We grant and agree with Mr. Humphrey, that the Apostle does plainly
reason from their partaking of one of these Tables, against their partaking of
the other, which makes much for us, and against himself. From their partaking
of the Devils Table, he argues against their partaking of the Lords Table as
well as from their partaking of the Lords Table, he argues against their
partaking of the Devils Table. What follows then (by Mr. Humphrey his own
grant) but that, as those who partake of the Lords Table, ought not to partake
of the Devils Table; so those who partake of the Devils Table, ought not to
partake of the Lords Table; A clear evidence for S. spension of Church Members
that were Morally unclean: the Apostle does not say, they ought to be
Excommunicated (in Mr. Humphrey his sense, by sequestration from all
Ordinances) but they ought not to receive the Lords Supper; and what is this
but that they are to be Suspended? But whereas he adds, Those who were engaged
from going to Idols, partook of the L^rds Supper: but, it was not the
regenerate only, but all their intelligent members, were hereby engaged from
Idols. Ergo, All their intelligent members partook of the Sacrament, and were
to partake of it, if the Apostles argument were sufficient.

Ans. He may as well argue, Those who were engaged against open renouncing of
Christ, buggery, witchcraft, blasphemy, murder, the sin against the Holy
Ghost, etc. partook of the Lords Supper; but it was not the regenerate only,
but all their intelligent Members, were, by the Apostles Doctrine, engaged
against the former crimes (even those who were most guilty of them, and that
upon open conviction, having no show of repentance, and so being ipso jure,
excommunicate) Ergo, all their intelligent members, yea, even those who were
jure excommunicate, did partake of the Sacrament, and were to partake of it, if
the Apostles argument were sufficient. You see how the man rises in his
latitude for admission to the Sacrament: page 21. and 22. he yields, that
persons ipso jure excommunicate, may be kept from the Sacrament, though they be
not actually excommunicated: Mr. Humph. says not so in express terms, but it
follows necessarily by consequence from his way of arguing.
Here he tells us, that even persons ipso jure excommunicate ought to receive,
and therefore must not be kept back, or else the Apostles argument is not
sufficient. Yea further, if Mr. Humphrey's argument be good, should not
children, distracted, and excommunicated persons, be admitted also to the Lords
Table, since all these are engaged against sin, as well as the regenerate? But
this I will not press.

His next proof is drawn from 1 Cor. 10. verse 3, 4, 5. Here he brings in
Calvin, as agreeing with him in his explication, that all the Israelites were
Baptized, did eat of the Manna, and drink of the Rock, and had free Admission
to those Sacraments. All which we easily grant, as being clear in the Text.
Against this, he says, I bring two exceptions. 1. I say he speaks gratis, in
saying they were admitted to our Sacraments.

Mr. Humphrey. I pray see the words: does Saint Paul speak gratis: They did all
eat the same spiritual meat? etc. Nay, he says not only the same spiritual
meat, but the same spiritual Symbols, etc.

Ans. 1. The words (...), the same, refer clearly (as the scope of the
context evidenceth) not to the unity of their and our Sacraments, in order to
the Symbols or Elements of each, which are as manifestly distinct, as
wheaten-Bread and Manna, Wine and Water: But, to their unity in receiving, or
their mixed communion in those Elements pel-mel, without distinction of good
and bad, distracted or sober, infant or elder person, circumcised or
uncircumcised, Israelite or Heathen, in the mixed multitude, Exodus 12. 38.
Numb. 11. 4.

Ans. 2 ly. Their Baptism indeed had the same Symbol of Water with ours, but
were their Sacramental meat and drink the same Symbols with ours? then their
Manna was our Manchetbread, and their Water was our Wine. Well may Mr. Humphrey
persuade men, that all Church Members, before Excommunication, may, and ought,
to be admitted to the Lords Supper, if upon his dictate, they can presently
believe, that the Manna was bread made of Wheat, and the Rock-Water was Wine.
Christ can turn Water into Wine, but then it must cease to be water; but Mr.
Humphrey can make the Element of Water to be both Wine and Water at the same
instant. Nor will that shift help him, because we sometimes have Sack,
sometimes Claret: since Sack and Claret are evidently under one kind, namely,
under the kind of Wine; but so is not Water. And to strip him of this cavil,
let Mr. Humphrey give Water in stead of Wine at the Sacrament, will any say, he
gives the same Element, or Symboll, with Wine. I deny not, but Calvin says,
they enjoyed the same symbols. But does not Mr. Humphrey know, there is
Identitas generica and specifica, generically a man and a tree are the same;
yet, it is absurd to say, A man is a tree, or, a tree is a man* So, generically
Wine and Water are the same Symbolls, both being under the genus of corpus
inanimatum; but he who therefore should say, that Wine and Water are the same
Symbols, would speak incongruously, and may as well ay, that Bread and Water
are the same Symbols, since they are the same generically, as being both of
them inanimate bodies. Mr. Humphrey therefore might well have spared this
(...), as understanding my meaning well enough; and that I grant Their
Sacraments and Ours are the same as to the thing signified.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 50.
Whereas he urges here, The Uncircumcised and Infants (which is now thrice)
were admitted: his argument will but ever come to this, That because our
Scriptures sometimes seem to prove more, therefore they cannot prove the less.

Ans. 1. Mr. Humphrey saw he was pinched here, and might with far more honor
have confessed his error, than, by making a vainflourish, have bafled his
Reader; especially considering, whether this place be for him or no, it is not
much material to his cause, the Sacraments being extraordinary, both in their
institution, and their use; miraculous in their institution, common in their
use: And as to their Sacramental Elements, their very Beasts did partake at
least of some of them, or else they must have choked for want of Water, Exodus
17. verse 32. 6. Numb. 20. 8. which puts a wide difference between them and
Sacraments in Ordinary. 2 ly. Here further his vanity appears, in upbraiding me
now the third time, with that passage of Infant-Admission, which makes so much
for me, and against himself. 3 ly. We deny not the strength of that argument
(either in Scripture or elsewhere) drawn a majore and minus, but willingly
grant, where the Scripture proves the greater, it proves the less; where it
proves more, it proves fewer, in a right sense: and thence we deduce that,
Where it proves excommunication, There it necessarily proves suspension. 4 ly.
We say, that Mr. Humphrey his Bulwark from this place, is a Battery against
himself, and makes him (...). That, he would prove out of this place, is, That
all intelligent Church Members, not actually excommunicated, ought to receive
the Lords Supper, because all intelligent Church Members did receive those
Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10. We answer, If his argument be good from this place,
then, pariratione, all unintelligent Church Members, yea, persons
excommunicated, yea, very Heathen, (not to instance in bruit Beasts) ought to
receive the Sacrament. Therefore, say we, this argument cannot serve his turn,
there being an apparent hiatus in it. Mr. Humphrey therefore page 50. perverts
and corrupts the scope of the Apostle, who never intended to encourage the
Corinths to receive pel-mel, because the Israelites did so: For then, by the
same reason, he should also have given encouragement to admit pel-mel, all
persons of age (living in the same Parish or Neighborhood) to Baptism without
any Examination or Confession of their Faith, they being so Baptized unto
Moses, 1 Cor. 10. 2. whereas the apparent scope of the Apostle was, to warn the
Corinthians, and in them all Christians, not to presume upon Outward
Privileges, but to study real Piety, else they should perish for all their
Privileges; Yea, their perishing would be sadder, because of their
Privileges; as is evident by comparing 1 Cor. 10. ver. 6. to 12.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 51.
For the difference he makes between our Elements and theirs, which he says is
manifest, namely, theirs was to nourish their Bodies as well as their Souls,
etc. It is gross, and fit for none to say but the Papists, that hold, there is
left only the qualities of the Bread (that cannot nourish) in Transubstantion.

Ans. My words are Page 29, and 30. Herein is a manifest difference; Their
Sacramental Elements had a double use and end, namely, to nourish their Bodies
as well as their Souls; nor had they ordinarily in the Wilderness other food to
live upon, and therefore must either receive these Sacraments or die: I hope
there is not such an absolute necessity of our Sacramental Bread and Wine etc.
I appeal now to the Reader, whether this be gross and Popish; nay, whether
this be not a very truth, which Mr. Humphrey cannot contradict, and therefore
discovers too great a spirit of Cavilling and wresting my sense and meaning.
Can any rational man apprehend that I insinuated. 1. That our Sacramental
Elements have lost their substance, and retain only the Accidents of Bread and
Wine Or, 2ly. That I took away all bodily nourishment from the Sacramental
Elements? My scope is clear that their Sacraments were their ordinary food, and
when the people needed them no more for food, they failed, Jos. 5. 12. so not
ours; and that if they had eaten and drunk no more of their S^craments then we
do of ours, they must have starved and choked, unless Mr. H. could have
taught them an Art, to live an whole month or six weeks upon one bit of Manna,
and one draught of Water.

Mr. Humphrey. Whereas he says, they must have choked and starved also. I
say, if it be necessarily sin, to eat of Christ Sacramentally, unl^ss men be
regenerate, there is no doubt but they should have rather dyed than be guilty
of Christ's Blood, etc. If it be not a sin, but accidentally, here is good
reason indeed for their eating and drinking all of them: But what reason is
there, Saint Paul should parallel our eating and drinking with theirs, unless
it be true likewise that we are to eat?

Ans. 1. For the first Branch, he answers himself; saving that his distinction
whereby he opposes a sin necessarily to a sin accidentally, is lame as being a
distinction without a difference, in the present subject; Since the same sin
may be a sin accidentally, and yet necessarily a sin also. For example, a
wicked man in hearing, praying, etc. fins accidentally; yet he sins
necessarily, and cannot but sin so long as he continues in that estate. It is
so in receiving the Sacrament, and the great reason we bring for his non
admission to the Sacrament is, because in statu quo, (understand it of actual
receiving) it cannot benefit, but will certainly hurt and prejudice him. Wicked
men sin necessarily in their Ordinary repast, yet must eat to prevent starving.

2ly. Yet further as some other instituted precepts) this is dispensable with,
in case of necessity: as was David's eating the Shewbread that was
Sacramental, and for the Priests only.

3ly. Parellels (as Similitudes) do not run on 4. feet, nor does the present
Parellel lie in countenancing a mixed communion like theirs, but in warning us,
to take heed of abusing our Privileges like them; we have Privileges like
them, Sacraments like them, are apt to abuse our Privileges like them, and
upon this abuse are in danger of Gods wrath as well as they. But for admitting
all pel-mel to the Sacrament as they did to their Sacraments of Baptism, Manna
and Water, I am confident it never so much as entered into the Apostles heart.

4ly. He breaks the neck of his own Parallel, and therefore cannot blame us in
making bold with it. If his Parallel run even, then, as all sorts without any
difference did eat of the Manna, and drink of the Rock, so all sorts without
any difference ought to receive the Lords Supper, and then admit Infants,
distracted and excommunicated persons; yea, Heathen also: Which, how absurd!
Had Mr. Humphrey said thus, What reason is there, Saint Paul should parallel
our eating and drinking with theirs, unless it be true likewise that we are
All to to eat, to wit Infants, excommunicated persons, etc. as they were all to
eat of the Manna; the nakedness of his inference would have been shamefully
uncovered. He therefore very prudently omits the word All, which would would
have cried out against him, Fie for shame.

Mr. Humphrey. I have two things here for tender Christians. 1. That to eat
Christ symbolically, is no such dreadful thing as is made of it, (I mean above
other Ordinances): for Saint Paul makes no account to say, they all drank
Sacramentally of of him, provided always you come with reverence, etc.

Ans. 1. Extenuation of sin, and Alleviation of duty, is at best, a wrong
course to relieve tender Consciences. The Gospel holds forth duty in its
stricknesse, sin in all its aggravations more then the Law; and that Minister
who lightens either, sins against Moses, or against Christ, and that to his own
great peril. Matthew. 5. 19. But herein the Gospel makes amends, that it gives
strength, in, and through Christ, to perform in sincerity the strictest duties,
and abundant consolation in Christ against the guilt, filth, and power of the
greatest sins repented of, etc.

2 ly. The Apostle tells us, that to eat Sacramentally, is of very great
consequence, if the danger of being guilty of Christ's Body and Blood, or of
eating and drinking Damnation to our selves, be of consequence. Mr. Hnmphrey
tells us, to eat Christ Sacramentally is no such dreadful thing. Whom shall we
believe, St. Paul, or Mr. Humphrey?

3 ly. Eating Sacramentally must needs be more dangerous, if to abuse Christ at
four Ordinances be more dangerous, then to abuse him at one or two Ordinances.

4 ly. Mr. Humphrey says, there is no great danger, so you come with reverence
(which yet a wicked man may do in his sense.) St. Paul says, there is great
danger in receiving unworthily; and the Scripture says in effect, they come
unworthily, who come without the Wedding Garment; as that evil guest did, else
he had not ben so reproved and punished, Matthew. 22. verse 11. to 13. yet, he is
not censured for want of reverence. Let tender consciences take heed, lest by
making light of sin and duty, they bring themselves, first, to searednesse, and
at last, to desperation. There is no danger in aggravating sin and heightning
duty, provided thereby you be driven and led to Christ: but very much danger in
lightning of either.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 52.
2 ly. That the want of grace is no just hinderance, or excuse, from our
profession, etc.

Ans. 1. By way of concession: The want of grace, is no just hindrance to duty;
yet too often it is an hindrance. And 1. naturally, to some duties that are
more spiritual and abstracted, since I cannot do the chiefest part of my duty
without it. Thus he who wants a principle of Gods fear, cannot do his duty in
fearing God actually. Here the want of grace is an impediment, though no just
impediment as to the excusing of him who omits the duty of fearing God.

2ly. The want of grace is an impediment Morally, when at present a person is
incapable of that, for which the Ordinance was instituted, namely, spiritual
Edification, which is the case of natural men coming to the Sacrament. And
therefore, whether the want of grace may be an excuse or no its enough for our
purpose, that its a Bar to some duty or Ordinance. And if a natural man will
receive, he comes at his own peril of murdering Christ, and of eating and
drinking Damnation to himself: For which indeed self-judging, rightly taken, is
the remedy, but every natural man falls infinitely short of it, as being a
self justifier, not a self-judger, till God by a Spirit of conviction force him
to Legal selfe-judging; and by a spirit of grace lead and enable him to
Evangellical self-judging.

3ly. The want of grace is no just excuse from profession in General; yet may
well be a Bar to some particular Act, wherein profession is held out else it
were unlawful to suspend persons ipso jure excommunicate, which yet Mr. Humph
allows.

Mr. Humphrey. My fourth proof was from the Parable of the Feast, Matthew. 22,
Luke 14. Mr. Drake here is in a straight: If he allow it applicable to the
Supper, it is clear against him. The Servants bring in all, both good and bad.
If he will not allow it, he goes against the stream of Divines, and wrests out
of their hands, their main Argument from the exclusion of him that had not the
Wedding Garment. The truth is, the Feast does not signify particularly the
Supper, but it is as true it does it in general, as other Ordinances. The Feast
is Jesus Christ, etc.

Ans. 1. Let Mr. Humphrey remember, that he who here charges me conditionally,
with going against the stream of Interpreters, goes himself absolutely against
the stream of Divines in his Interpretation of 1 Cor. 11, about the Doctrine of
the Sacrament. See his Rejoinder, page 32. to 38.

2ly. Dr. Drake his straight, is only in Mr. Humphrey his pen or fancy; he
easily grants the Feast is served at the Sacrament as well as at other
Ordinances, which is evident by his comparing Christ to the Feast, the
Ordinances to the Dishes, in which the Feast is served. But the great Question
is, whether the Feast must needs be served to every Guest in every dish.

3ly. Taking the Parable as particularly applicable to the Sacrament; its said
indeed, the Servants brought in good and bad; but did the King or Master of the
Feast allow chose bad Guests? did he not in (the Parable of the Guest coming
without the Garment) command those very Servants to bind and cast out evil
Guests? I wish there were not too many Servants, who bring in Guests of all
sorts: but let such remember, its their Lord's will such should be turned away:
they who, have not the Wedding Garment, and care not for the Feast it self, are
unworthy of the Dish.

4ly. That it cannot be meant particularly or strictly of the Sacrament or any
other Ordinance, especially in reference to hic and nunc, is evident, because
those who absented themselves upon their necessary worldly occasions, are
judged as unworthy: but certainly, he that absents himself from a Sermon or
Sacrament upon a necessary worldly occasion, is not presently unworthy of the
Marriage Feast, but he that withdraws from Christ, who is the Feast.

5ly. Its remarkable, Mr. Humphrey grants, that the stream of Divines improve
the instance of the Guest, who wanted a Wedding Garment, against his free
admission. All he has to say against them herein, Page 53.
is, That this exclusion, being the Act of the Lord, their Inference from it,
is not well applied.

Ans. 1. Let Mr. Humphrey plead the practice of the Servants for admittance,
while we have he command of the Lord for Exclusion.

2ly. Are not those very Servants who brought him in, commanded to shut him out?

3ly. Is not this done at the very same Sacrament, to which he was invited, if
Mr. Humphrey will needs have it to be the Sacrament?

Mr. Humphrey. It is true, if men be scandalous, they are liable to censure;
but who does not see this upon another account, I mean of Discipline, to
satissie the Church, amend them, and warn others. But if you do it upon this
ground of setting up a aiscriminating Ordinance, I think it not according to
the mind of the Lord of the Feast.

Ans. Let Mr. Humphrey practice Suspension upon the account of Discipline,
which is a very good and warrantable account: We shall not strain his or any
man's Conscience else, to rise up to our account of a discriminating Ordinance.
Men may agree in the same practice, upon several principles. We have several
Judgments as well as several palates: One may eat Sugar because its sweet, an
other because its abstersive, a third because its healing and consolidating.
Let us agree upon Unity of practice, and I hope we shall not fall out upon
diversity of principle. Excellent is the counsel of the Apostle 1 Phil. 4.
ver. 15, 16. Let Christians endeavor agreement in practice as far as they can,
and wait upon Heaven, for further light, to reconcile them in Unity of
Principles.

Mr. Humphrey mistakes me. Page 54.
I hope he takes me not for a Ranter, or One above, or against all Ordinances.
Though I distinguish between the Feast and the Dishes, in which it is served;
yet I do not separate the Feast from all the Dishes. Does it follow, a man must
eat the Feast without a Dish, because he must not eat it in every Dish? we
grant all may eat the Feast in the Dish of the Word. Contra, Himself would have
some eat the Feast without any Dish, to wit, persons excommunicated. His fine
story therefore is more applicable to himself then to us, who grudge the egg
of the Gospel to none, though we do not think, it is to be eaten in every
shell.

Mr. Humphrey. He urges, then should Heathen be admitted. Ans. And so they may,
if they come in an orderly way.

Ans. Content, And so may every Churchmember if he come in an orderly way: but
the admittting of grossly ignorant, and scandalous Church Members is no orderly
way.

Mr. Humphrey. Thirdly, He adds, How were the unthank full Guests also
excluded? And answers himself, Because they would not come.

Ans. Its apparent, they were shut out by the decree of the King, Luke 14. 24.
and that others were compelled in to fill the house, that there might be no
room for the unthankful Guests. Whence its probable, the Parable more directly
and immediately concerned the rejection of the Jews, that the Gentiles might
be received in Romans 11. ver. 19, 20. 25. 28. 30.

2ly. If it be particularly applicable to the Sacrament, what follows, but that
they who slight the Sacrament, deserve to be suspended from it. But does Mr.
Humphrey think there is no sleighting of the Sacrament but by keeping from it?
Did not he that came without the Wedding Garment slight the Sacrament, as well
as they who profanely kept from it?

3ly. As sleighters of Christ crucified, repenting, may yet partake of him; so
sleighters of the Sacrament, the Picture of Christ crucified, may yet partake
of it, upon their repentance. Only remember. That, as sleighting is visible or
invisible, so repentance must be visible or invisible: And if visible
sleighters repent visibly, we hope, Mr. H. nor any else shall have cause to
censure us for keeping them away.

Mr. Humphrey. Fourthly, he tells us, Worldly business may detain a man from
the Sacrament. Ans. Who doubts it? but there is no strength in this reason.

Ans. Worldly business detaines a man either from the time and place of
receiving; or takes a man so up, as he wants time to prepare himself for the
Sacrament. Upon either of these accounts abstinence is justifiable, if the
business be indispensible. In the latter branch, worldly business keeps a man
from the Sacrament, because it hinders him in order to actual preparation. And
if persons who want actual preparation, must for present abstain, does it not
follow a fortiori, That persons who want both actual and habitual preparation
ought much more to abstain? But such are all grossly Ignorant persons, and most
of scandalous persons. Let the Reader judge then whether there be not much
strength in my reason, what ever Mr. Humphrey may fancy to the contrary: for
he brings not one argument against my reason, only with a ridiculous story
endeavors to catch his Reader.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 55.
In the way. For my quoting that text, Luke 12. 42. etc. Mr. Drake need not
have given me such ill words, etc.

Ans. I meddle not with his person; Only, I say that his Interpretation (or
rather application) of that Text, to encourage Ministers to admit all
Intelligent Church Members pel-mel, is gross, senseless and profane; and if
my reason urged, page 32. be not convincing to prove it so, then let me suffer
as a rash Censurer. If judging an error, be it where it will, to be as bad as
indeed it is, be a giving of ill words to that person who holds it, then who
can uncase an error without breach of charity? I shall thank Mr Humphrey for
laying open my errors in their native dress. Error (as well as Vice)
deforms, though it does not unstate a godly man; it does not, I am sure it
should not, gain Luster by his piety. An error that is gross, senseless, and
profane, may be taken notice of, and branded though it fly to a godly man
for Sanctuary. I think its no breach of Charity severely to censure an erour in
a godly person, so it be without bitter reflection upon his person yet a
passionate reflection is not so cutting as an Ironicall reflection.

Mr. Humphrey. My Fifth proof was from John's Free-Baptism even of those, he
calls Vipers: And yet Mr. Drake as he is wont, answers me thus overly. He says
but proves not that John Baptized all Comers. He should say, he does not prove
it, only brings Scripture for it.

Ans. 1. That All is not in many places to be understood Universally, I have
formerly cleared.

2ly. That it is not here to be taken Universally, is as evident; for then John
must have Baptized every man and woman in Judea, and round about Jordan; which
how unlikely, let Master Humphrey himself judge.

3ly. That it cannot be meant of all Comers, neither is demonstrable from the
Text, unless Mr. Humphrey can make it out, that all Comers did profess their
repentance, and confess their sins, Matthew. 3. 6 and particularly the Pharisees
whom he calls a Generation of Vipers, and falls very foul upon them coming to
his Baptism, ver. 7. In saying therefore, Mr. Humphrey proves not. I mean, he
brings not Scripture; for Scripture misinterpreted and wrested is not
Scripture. Mr. Humphrey I see is upon a merry pin, but seriousness would more
become him. Let the Reader peruse my answer, page 32, and 33. and he will
easily perceive, there is no such ground of insulting on Mr. H. his part.

For his Rule, Adultis eadem est ratio utriusque Sacramenti. I must tell I him
again, It makes much for us, and against himself. Since by this Rule at every
Sacrament, men ought to give an account of their faith, as they do at Baptism.
The force of this answer to avoid, Page 56.
Mr. Humphrey shuffles page 56, and tell us, there is eadem ratio, but not in
omnibus, and that the very coming of Church Members is their profession.

Ans. 1. Is it fair Mr. Humphrey should bring a Rule to bind us, and yet will
not be bound by it himself?

2ly. Whether it hold in omnibus or no, it must hold in the matter
controverted. Now the business in controversy between me and Mr. Humphrey is,
whether every Receiver before receiving ought to make profession of his faith
and repentance. This Mr. Humphrey denies, and for an argument makes use of this
Rule, Adulits eadem est ratio, etc. We say, Content, but Adulti are bound to
profess their faith and repentance before Baptism, therefore they are bound
to profess the same before Receiving, for (according to Mr. Humphrey his Rule)
there is the same reason of both Sacraments. And as the offering of ownes self
to Baptism, is not sufficient profession in order to Baptism; so the offering
of ones self to the Lords Supper, is not profession sufficient in order to the
receiving of the Lords Supper.

M. Humphrey. My proof is Acts 2. 41, 42, 46. which Text he leaves out; you may
conceive, it has silenced him: For while we find thousands admitted thus
freely and equally (not omitting his phrase of pel-mel) in their breaking bread
(I say even wholly alike) as in doctrine and prayer, we dare not fall down to
that Sacramental Rule upon trial he would set up.

Ans. 1. What ever Mr. Humphrey may think of me, I hope one convincing
Scripture for his feee Admission, should have silenced me every where and not
only here. I desire to be in their Number, who can do nothing against the
Truth, but for the Truth.

2ly. Not conviction of the strength, but apprehension of the weakness of his
proof as to the point intended, together with study of brevity, made me pass
it over in silence. But since he will needs have me lay open his nakedness, as
well here as else where, I shall not think much of my pains for his further
conviction, and the Readers satisfaction.

3ly. Their Admission, therefore, pel-mel makes nothing for Mr. Humphrey his
Admission pelmel since those three thousand had but just before made profession
of their faith and repentance; 2ly. Held forth that profession exemplarily both
in works of Piety and Charity. 3ly. But two of them (Ananias and Saphira)
contradicting their profession by Hypocrisy, were put to an othergates Test
then our Church Members are. Contra, Diverse of our Church Members are grossly
ignorant, or openly prosane, covetous, griping, oppressive, or erroneous and
heretical in fundamentalls. Will Mr. Humphrey put no difference between the
first and purest Primitive Church and our leavened Congregations?

Mr. Humphrey. Page 67.
My seventh Text was Acts 10. 28. which I apply only as to the Expression: Yet
does he pur sue it in four pitiful exceptions, page 34, 35. The first whereof
is untrue: Saint Paul says not, Tit. 1. 15. The unbeliever is unclean to us,
but all things are unclean to him.

Ans. 1. Are those words Dr. Drakes which first he pins upon my slieve, and
then charges with untruth? My words are these, That God, who taught Peter to
count no man unclean, taught Paul to count some men unclean; yea, persons
within the Church, and not excommunicated, Tit. 1. 15, 16. where, in all these
words, do I say, The Unbeliever is unclean to us? Does not the Text brand some
with defilement as well as unbelief?

2ly. Does not the Apostle explain what defilement he means, when he tells us,
their very mind and Conscience is defiled?

3ly. Is not this contradictory to Mr. Humphrey his profession: That he counts
no man unclean, unless excommunicaeed? I had thought Excommunication did not
make a man unclean, but declare him to be unclean, and cast him out as unclean,
1 Cor. 5. 7. The incestuous Corinth was a Leaven of uncleanesse before he was
cast out. His sin made him unclean really, Excommunication declaratively.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 57.
This Text Act, 10. 38. may be full and solid, for those weak Christians who
think they shall be defiled if they communicate in our mixed Churches, though it
reach not others. Mr. Drake should be more tender then to debilitate their
supports.

Ans. 1. It follows not, that because Peter was to count no man Levitically
unclean, therefore we must count no man Morally unclean.

2ly. Mr. Humphrey knows, its my declared judgment, that he who is absolutely
unclean, is not straightwaies relatively unclean: and that wicked men's presence
and receiving does not defile the godly who receive with them; but the godly
contract guilt and pollution by virtuall consent to their wickedness, as if
they do not reprove them, or inform against them being obstinate. I hope tender
Consciences will not look at me, as one that debilitates their supports,
because I cannot encourage them to build upon a sandy-Foundation. Sin cannot
defile me but by a touch, 1 John 5. 18. It cannot touch me but by consent
either formal or virtuall. Its not sin in the wicked, but sinful connivance
in the godly, that does defile the godly. Levit. 5. 1. and 19. 17.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 58.
While persons are Federally clean, we need not doubt that they may be
communicated withal, without any pollution; and a man is not Faederally
unclean, till excommunicated.

Ans. Be persons federally clean or unclean, they may be communicated withal
without pollution, provided I do my endeavor in my place to reform them or
keep them away. Suppose through the connivance of Church Officers, an Heathen
or person excommunicated come and partake of the Sacrament: This great disorder
I dissent from, complain of, and desire it may be reformed, but my desire will
not be granted shall his presence and receiving either defile or turn me from
the Sacrament? Its their sin indeed who admit him, and who give consent to his
admission; but the presence and partaking of such a one, is no Bar to my
receiving, nor can defile me having done my duty. A man might be Levitically
defiled without, yea against his consent, but so he cannot be morally defiled.
But what is all this to their receiving, and the Churches admitting of them? A
person unclean may sin by receiving, and the Church by admitting him wittingly,
while at the same time his presence and receiving defiles none who are innocent.

2ly. Children of Christian Parents are faederally clean by Birth, before they
are admitted solemnly into the Church by Baptism, 1 Cor. 7. 14. nor does
faederall holiness cease til themselves do formally renounce Christ and the
Covenant, and thereby cut off themselves and their Posterity. Romans 11 19, 20.
Hence one that turns witch, Jew or Pagan is faederally unclean, though he or
she be not excommunicated: And a person excommunicated, may after
Excommunication be both faederally and really holy, since Excommunication, till
it rise up to Maran-atha, is medicinal and not destructive, as a branch cut
off, that it may faster and better be grafted in. He erres then, in making.
Faederall holiness to lie in Church Membership, seeing a man may be a
Churchmember, and yet faederally unholy; and faederally holy, yet no
Churchmember in his sense.

Mr. Humphrey. He objects, wicked Christians reject Christ, page 35. and
answers himself with me, page 84. Though they transgress, they do not renounce
the Covenant as Turks do, and are Church Members, till Excommunicacated.

Ans. 1. Set both Propofitions together, 1. Prop. Wicked Christians reject
Christ. 2. Prop. Wicked Christians do not renounce the Covenant as Turks do,
and are Church Members till excommunicated. If these three, a rejecter of
Christ, a Churchmember, and a non-renouncer of the Covenant, may stand
together in a right sense, then here is no contradiction: but these three may
stand together in a right sense; Instance in Simon-Magus, Acts 8. By his
wickedness he rejected Christ virtually, compare 1 Samuel 10. 19. John 12. 48.
Yet at the same time he was a Churchmember, and did not renounce Christ
formally.

2ly. Therefore there is a twofold renouncing of Christ, 1. Virtuall by
wittingly acting or living in any known sin, especially gross and scandalous.
2ly. Formal and express by word and deed, as Witches, Jews, and Turks do.
Both these a man may do and yet be a Churchmember, (in Mr. Humphrey his sense)
till Excommunicated. The latter makes him faederally unclean, not so the former
at least presently. Therefore the Children of the former are more capable of
Baptism then the Children of the latter; yea, supposing the former were
Excommunicated, the latter not: much more, if the former be not Excommunicated.
A formal and express rejection of Christ and the Covenant, contributes far
more to Separation from Christ, then a virtuall and interpretative rejecting of
either. By all has been said, it appears that by the two forementioned places
compared (which Mr. Humphrey would feign set together by the Ears) I answer,
not my self but Mr. Humphrey. My other three exceptions, because he only
Quibbles upon them, but answers them not, I pass; as also his vapor in the
close, since my work is not to answer words but Arguments.

Mr. Humphrey. For the close hereof, I gathered up some Texts, as, Rev. 22. 17.
etc. that does set forth the most free offers of Jesus Christ, which, though
Mr. Drake make but light of, etc.

Ans. 1. I make not light of the offers of free grace, but say, those free
offers are no ground for his Free Admission to the Sacrament, since those
offers are free to Heathen and excommunicate persons (as well as to
Church Members) who undoubtedly are not to be admitted to the Lords Supper. 2
ly. Add Church Membership to these free offers, since persons, jure
excommunicate, are Church Members, and are also under these free offers; yet,
may be kept away, as Mr. Humphrey grants, page 21. Is it not evident, that free
grace may be conditionally offered and applied to Church members, though they
do not receive the Sacrament, but are justly barred from it for the present. 3
ly. Whereas he adds, Jesus Christ is proportionably gracious in his exrernall,
as he is in his internal privileges, etc. What follows from thence, but that
as they who reject internal privileges, shall miss of, and be kept from,
them; so they who reject external privileges (further then those privileges
are necessary, in order to their conversion) ought to be kept from them.

Object. True if they reject them: But we keep many away who desire the
Sacrament. Ans. So Christ keeps internal privileges from many, who, in some
sense, desire them, Luke 13. 24. May not an Hypocrite desire truth of grace, as
a necessary means to free him from Hell etc. who yet at the same time, rejects
and hates holiness? Now the sign and thing signified are Correlates, and he
that rejects either, rejects both interpretatively. He then that rejects Grace,
rejects the Sacrament the sign of Grace; and therefore upon Mr. Humphrey his
own Principle, ought to be kept from it, unless actual receiving be a
converting Ordinance, etc. of which afterward. What therefore Mr. Humphrey
says, Page 59.
What sense is there in this? Jesus Christ is to be freely showed forth, to
bring men home effectually to him; and yet must the Receiver make out that
right unto the Minister, before we dare offer, or conditionally apply him to
them, reaches not our case home: We granting that Christ ought to be freely
offered, and conditionally applied to all, be they Church Members or not: But,
is there no way of offering, or conditionally applying, Christ, to all, or to
any, but by his actual receiving the Sacrament?

Mr. Humphrey. We must not make the notion of sealing so dreadful, and bring
so much blood upon our souls; we need not fear to judge the Heathen, visible
Rebels, etc.

Ans. 1. If the notion of Sealing a man's own Damnation must not be made
dreadful, I know not what must. 2 ly. What ever cavil may be made about the
notion of Sealing, he will not deny, but to eat and drink a man's own Damnation,
is very dreadful; and that, every one who receives unworthily, does, 1 Cor.
11. 29. 3 ly. We should not indeed bring so much blood upon our souls; but
they who receive unworthily, do bring so much blood upon their own souls, if
the Apostle speak true, verse 27. and they who admit such, when they may be
regularly kept away, are accessory to this their bloodguiltinesse. 4 ly. Are
Heathen visible Rebels, who never professed subjection to Christ; and is not he
a visible Rebel, who after, yea under, professed subjection, acts open
Rebellion, doing the same, and worse, acts of hostility against Christ, than
Heathen do? 2 Kings 21. 11. and, 1 Cor. 5. 1. Was not Judas, at the time of
Christ's apprehension, for all his profession, as visible an enemy of Christ, as
the Ruffians who came to take him? 5 ly. Should not all care and diligence be
used to discover and make visible those Judasses, who after, and under,
profession, are worse enemies of Christ, than heathen are, Matthew. 19. verse 14,
27. Rev. 3. verse 15, 16.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 60.
The word is no sealed word, (even outwardly) but to the Church.

Ans. This is gratis dictum. In the Word Preached, the Covenant is held forth
conditionally to all the World, instance, Mark 16. 16. and John 3. 16. And if
all the World be in the Covenant conditionally, then when ever the Covenant is
sealed (as it is ever in the Sacrament) it is sealed to all the World
conditionally, and that whether they receive or no; yea, though they be not so
much as present, as a Pardon may be sealed conditionally to Traitors, though
they be absent; yea, in the height of their Rebellion: Is Christ's death showed
forth to all at the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. 26. and is it not offered to all at
the Sacrament, and sealed there to all conditionally? Why may not open Rebels
be present at the sealing, as well as at the publication of a Pardon? Here
seems to lie Mr. Humphrey his great mistake, in that he thinks the Covenant is
not sealed to me, unless I actually receive. Indeed by receiving, I, in a
special manner, put to my Seal, and God does more particularly seal to me;
but, whether I receive or no, God, in the Sacrament, seals to the Covenant, in
which, I being comprehended as a party, its no more absurd, the Covenant should
be sealed to me, being absent, then it is absurd, a Covenant of Indentures
should be sealed to a person absent; yea, to a child unborn, who likewise does
seal virtually, though not formally. As at every Baptism grace redounds, and
the Covenant is by it sealed, not only to the party Baptized, but also to all
present, yea, to all the world conditionally, who are not hindered from presence
at any Baptising: And why should it not be so at the Lords Supper.

Mr. Humphrey. We cannot compel any trial of Church Members more (unless by
way of Catechism and Instruction, wherein yet, there is no man too old to
learn, Luke 14.) but it must be as to the truth of their profession, or
effectual sincerity: which for to do (where no scandal calls them in
question) is to go about to judge men's hearts, and to enter into the seat of
God, etc.

Ans. 1. Note it, Mr. Humphrey grants we may compel trial of Church Members,
by way of Catechism and Instruction, from Luke 14. 23. and that moan are too
old to learn. Does not Mr. Humphrey know, that one great makebate is, because
many Elder persons will not be persuaded, much less compelled, to trial, by
way of Catechizing, no, not by their own Minister, though none of the Elders be
present?

2 ly. By Mr. Humphrey his own confession, in some cases persons may be tried,
as to the truth of their profession, or effectual sincerity, to wit, when some
scandal calls them in question. Let Mr. Humphrey give any Scripture-rule for
such trial, in case of scandal, which will not extend to the like trial upon
other occasions.

3 ly. If trial, as to the truth of profession, be a going about to judge men's
hearts, and to enter into the seat of God, how can Mr. Humphrey allow it at any
time, in any case? If it be not an entering into the seat of God, then Mr.
Humphrey his main Argument against it, fails him.

4 ly. If putting a man to the test about his sincerity, be an entering into the
seat of God, then Philip in asking the Eunuch, Whether he believed with all his
heart, Acts 8. 37. entered into the seat of God; and Ministers, when they ask
the party Baptized (supposing he be of age) Do thou for sake the Devi^l and
all his works, etc. enter into the seat of God: Yea, then Jehu asking
Jehonadab, 2 Kings, 10. 15. Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?
entered into the seat of God. He indeed that will undertake to know the heart
immediately, intuitively, and infallibly, enters into the seat of God: Not so,
I hope, he, who by discourse, observation, and consequent effects, labors to
draw out what is in the heart, Prove. 20. 5. The Tree may be known by its Fruit,
yea, by its Leaves; and the heart may be known by some expressions and actions,
or at least shreudly guest at: Otherwise how did Peter perceive Simon Magus to
be in the gall of bitterness, Acts 8. 23. yet, I hope at that time, he entered
not into the seat of God. A dying man sends for his Minister to comfort him:
May not the Minister puts him to the Test, whether, at least in the judgment of
charity, he be a subject capable of comfort: May he not 1. try him in point of
Knowledge? 2 ly. May he not enquire about his truth of grace, and from
Scripture-evidence, labor to find out whether he has true faith and
repentance, that accordingly, he may either comfort or warn him? 3 ly. In so
doing, is he justly chargeable with entering into the seat of God? Do we any
more to people, in order to their Sacramental preparation, then they will be
glad to have us do at the hour of their death, if they have any sense of their
spiritual condition, and mind their poor souls in any measure? The truth is,
if many of our people minded Heaven but half so much as they mind Earth, they
would upon their very knees entreat us, to do that against every Sacrament,
which we beg of them we may do but once, in order to their edification,
comfort, and salvation: Yet, they will not hearken unto us, upon which account,
in some poor measure (though we dare not say, we have endeavored our
uttermost, de jure, in any thing) we may wash our hands from the guilt of the
blood of their poor souls. Oh Sir, I beseech you do not bolster up People in
that, of which one day, both you and themselves will see, there is great cause
to repent.

Mr. Humphrey. I must confess, I believe, it was only the zeal and piety of
good men, that made them thus to rise up against ignorance and sin, without
intending to enter upon Gods Throne; but, if we have erred, etc.

Ans. 1. Sir, you speak in part, truly and charitably, as to the first branch:
Therefore I beseech you, be not a Quench-cole to that zeal and piety.

2ly. It was not a blind zeal acted them herein, but a zeal according to
knowledge; I beseech you, do not seek to hide that Light under a Bushel.

3ly. In so doing, they neither did, nor intended to enter upon Gods Throne. I
beseech you, do not charge them falsely and uncharitably: But where you have
erred (I wish the same to my self) by false Doctrine, misapplication and
wrong-imputations, be content to lie down in the dust, to acknowledge the truth
whereby you may be sweetly led to acknowledge Gods hand in returning your
Captivity from the Rivers of Babel, when you have sat down and wept, etc.

Sect VI.
Having surveyed Mr. Humphrey his stating of the Question, and his proofs from
Scripture, and laid open what strength or weakness I apprehend therein; I
shall now proceed to his Reasons and Arguments, with candor and simplicity of
heart by the grace of God, as in the presence of God, to whom both of us must
one day give an account of this, and all other our Transactions. Glad shall I
be to close with him in any truth, and to keep company with him one mile, if I
cannot go with him twain: And where I am forced to shake hands with him, I
shall endeavor to give him and others such grounds of my dissatisfaction in
the Spirit of meekness, as thereby it may appear, I do not act either
irrationally or uncharitably. The Lord send the Spirit of truth, grace and love
into all our hearts, to lead us into all truth, holiness and unity.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 61.
My first reason was from the nature of the Sacrament, It is the showing of
Christ's death, a visible Gospel, and so a firm ground of free Admission. Unto
this the sum of what he says over and over from page 37. to page 52. comes but
to this. All may be present, but not actually receive, granting the foundation.

Ans. 1. If the Reader will please to peruse my Text, I am confident he will be
more candid to me then Mr. Humphrey has been, and not judge I have spent those
seven or eight leaves in mere tautologies. Such weak imputations argue more
strength of passion then of reason, and serve rather to catch, than to convince
the Reader.

2ly. Can there be fairer play then to yield my Antagonist (by way of position
or supposition) as much as he desires for his stronger conviction?

3ly. If Mr. Humphrey his Free-Admission flow not from this Principle, I hope
he will remember himself better, and not here-after charge his Brethren as
going about to abolish the remembrance of Christ's death, because they cannot
admit all as Receivers, whom yet they are willing to admit as Auditors and
Spectators at the Lords Supper, be they Church Members or no: And I think in so
doing, we make better provision for the Publishing and declaring of Christ's
death, then Mr. Humphrey does by admitting only Church Members, and shutting
the Chancelldoor against all others, as if men might not see Christ crucyfied,
and hear a crucified Savior speak, because they may not feed Sacramentally
upon a crucified Savior.

Mr. Humphrey. I shall begin with the last. His words are these. The word and
the Sacrament, it is true, must go hand in hand together: but the Covenant of
grace, or the Word is not (visibly) applicable to all, therefore not the
Sacrament. Mr. H. For my answer to this, which is all his weight with but a
very few grains more: We must know, The Ministers of Christ are the Ministers
of the New Covenant to be revealed, and that not of the absolute, Heb. 8. which
is secret, and belonging to Election; Page 62.
but of the conditional Covenant, (or the Covenant in its conditional
capacity) which is tenderable to all the World and that more especially
applicable with a distinction of outward privileges, and interest to the
Church. Now look what is the Tenor of the Covenant, the Sacrament seals; and
nothing else. May not I say to all, and every Intelligent Churchmember, If
thou believe thou shall be saved? and may not I seal to such what the Word
says?

Ans. 1. Granting we are Ministers of the conditional Covenant, how does that
exclude us from being Ministers of the absolute Covenant? Is not the absolute
Covenant revealed in the Word, as well as the Conditional Covenant; and ought
not Ministers to declare unto people the whole Counsel of God. Acts 20. 29. Is
not the writing of the Law in the heart, part of the absolute Covenant, Heb. 8.
10? and is not the whole Covenant of Grace sealed at the Sacrament? Are not
Ministers Instruments of Conversion, and Edification, and thereby of applying
the absolute Covenant. 2 Cor. 3. 6? Is the Sacrament (in Mr. Humphrey his
professed judgment) a means of Conversion, and yet has it nothing to do with
the absolute Covenant?

2ly. If the Conditional Covenant be tenderable to all the World (as Mr.
Humphrey rightly asserts) will it not follow (he building his Free-admission
upon this Principle) that all the World ought to be admitted to the Sacrament.
To use his own words, May not I say to all (not only to every intelligent
Churchmember) If thou believe, thou shall be saved? and may not I seal to
such what the Word says? Christ is tenderable to all, conditionally, be they
Church Members or no, and that in every Ordinance, therefore even Heathen may
be present at prayer, hearing, Baptism, etc. and why not proportionably at the
Lords Supper, etc? in all which the conditional tender of Christ is
universally held forth. But does it thence follow that Christ is, or must be
applied to all by way of promise or Seal in either of these? The Latitude then
of the Covenant-tender, is no ground for the Latitude of Mr. H. his
Free-Admission.

3ly. Nor will the Latitude of the Covenant Tender, prove it should be applied
by the Sacrament to all Intelligent Church Members: for then it ought to be
applied to persons jure Excommunicate, who yet (according to truth, and Mr. H.
his own grant) may be suspended. Might not Theodosius have pleaded the Latitude
of the Covenant, when Ambrose denied him the Sacrament diverse months together
for his cruelty in Massacring thousands of Thessalonians upon the Theater? Yea,
might he not have pleaded, that considering his great guilt he had more need to
receive the Sacrament, that thereby he might seal Damnation to himself for his
deeper conviction and humiliation? yea, if Mr. Humphrey his Doctrine in this
particular be true, ought not persons jure excommunicate, of all others, to be
admitted to receive, that thereby they may seal damnation to themselves?

D. Dr. page 42. Dares Mr. Humphrey say to a person in the state of Nature,
Sir, All the benefits of the Covenant are actually yours! The Language of every
actual giving is, Christ is thine in particular.

Mr. Humphrey. I answer, this is a manifest error: The Language of the
Sacrament, is the Language of the Covenant; and that is not, Christ is thine,
but Christ is thine if thou will believe. And who doubts, but I dare say so to
one in the state of Nature, conceiving we know it not, and cannot judge thereof.

Ans. 1. That the Language of the Sacrament is, Christ is thine, and that in a
saving way: Let our Savior be judge, Luke 22. verse 19, 20. This is my Body
which is given for you, not against you: And, This Cup is the New Testament in
my Blood, which is shed for you; and for what end? see Matthew. 26. 28. for the
remission of sins: Which words we use as an Argument, to prove Judas did not
receive, since our Savior could not say to Judas (who was to Christ visibly in
the state of Nature) This is my blood which is shed for thee, for the remission
of sins. And that it is otherwise with any receiver, is accidental by reason
of his unworthiness: which unworthiness, if it may be discerned, why ought
not Church Officers, by Suspension, to prevent the sin and misery of such a
person, at least in part?

2 ly. Mr. Humphrey wrongs my Answer, by leaving out a very material word in
it: My words are these, Dare Mr. Humphrey say to a person, visibly in the state
of Nature, Be assured, etc? But, in quoting my Answer, he leaves out the word
visibly, to my no small prejudice. We dare say, to persons in the state of
Nature, (where we have not clear evidence against them, or good ground to
suspect their sincerity) from the fair account they give us, of the truth of
grace in them, All the benefits of the Covenant of grace, are thine; By which
assertion we do not exclude Mr. Humphrey his supposition (Christ is thine if
thou believe) but declare our persuasion about such a person; namely, that we
believe he has the condition, which entitles him to Christ, as, 2 Timothy 1. 5.
which persuasion we cannot have of any, who is visibly in the state of Nature,
and therefore dare not say to him, Christ is thine.
yea, we dare in the Name of the Lord command them to believe so, where we have
no ground to suspect the absence of the Condition in them, but have very good
evidence of the condition of the Covenant performed in them, and by them
through grace. If upon trial we have ground to suspect them, then we can speak
those words to them only conditionally: But, when we have evidence they are in
the state of Nature, and know they have not the Condition, it is in vain to say
to them in that estate, Christ is thine, if thou do believe; And it is all one,
as if I should say to a proud and insolent Traitor, acting in the height of
Rebellion, Sir, Pardon is yours, if you do come in and submit; taking the words
in their Grammatical construction, I may assure him he shall be pardoned, if
he will presently come in, and submit: But, it is incongruous to say, Sir,
Pardon is yours, if you do submit, since at present he is visibly neither an
object of pardon, nor a subject of submission. Upon which account I apprehend
those expressions of Mr. Humphrey, not so congruous, Christ is thine, if thou will believe: I may say, Christ is thine, if thou do believe, where I have not
clear evidence of the dominion of unbelief: Or, Christ shall be thine, if thou will believe, where I have never so clear evidence of unbelief in dominion:
But, to apply the Promise, de praesenti, upon a condition, de futuro, I think
is neither Grammatical, Logical, nor Theological: Some truth there may be in
it, if understood Rhetorically; but Rhetoric is fitter for an Orator, then a
Disputant.

3 ly. Mr. Humphrey himself scruples to use these words, to a person visibly
in the state of Nature, witness, those expressions of his, Who doubts, but I
dare say this to one in the state of Nature, conceiving we know it not, and
cannot judge thereof? Where therefore we know, and can can judge a person to be
in the state of Nature, Mr. Humphrey will not encourage us to say, Be assured,
all the benefits of the Covenant of Grace, are actually thine. Page 63.
To answer therefore Mr. Humphrey his retortion, I dare say to the visibly
Godly, what Christ said before me in the Sacrament, The Body of Christ is
broken for thee, the Blood of Christ is shed for thee, for remission of sins.
But these words I dare not say to one, against whom I have evidence (by his
gross ignorance, or profane conversation) that he is in the state of Nature.

However therefore, page 63. Mr. Humphrey utterly renounces the very
undertaking to make any Churchmember visibly in the state of Nature; Yet, that
herein he is heterodox, is evident by clear testimony of Scripture, Matthew. 7.
verse 15. to 20. our Savior there teaching us, that, as a Tree, so a Person,
may be known by his fruits. And, Acts 8. 23. Peter, by that wicked offer of
Simon Magus, knew he was in the state of Nature. See also Tit. 3. verse 10, 11.
the Epistle of Jude, 2 Pet. Chap. 2 and 3. and 1 Cor. 6. verse 9, 10. and
Ephesians. 5. verse 5, 6. But I will not trouble the Reader in so clear a case. And
indeed, if gross ignorance, fundamental errors obstinately maintained, open
profaneness, scoffing at holiness; if these, I say, lived in (especially
after due means of conviction) be not palpable evidences of a person at present
in the state of nature, then the forementioned texts must be rased out of
Scripture, and Ministers (as to this particular) must learn a new Gospel of
Mr. Humphrey.

Mr. Humphrey. The solidity of this answer may appear the more, by this man's
weakness, to solve the objection, page 48. which otherwise cannot be done. It
is this, Does not the a Minister seal to a lie, if he seal to the unworthy? He
answers most miserably, He does but seal to an untruth, not to a lie, so long
as he comes in to the Elders, and is thought visibly worthy by them. Well, but
what if the Elders should admit one visibly unworthy, and the Minister judge
him so to be; yet the Major part carrying it, what shall become of him then?
^g. 64.
Here his untruth must be a lie again. It is not his pleading an admonition, or
that he cannot help it, will serve him, if it be positively a lie, or a sin to
admit any that is visibly unworthy, he may not offend his Conscience, and
presume upon God though he lost his place and life too. So that he must of
necessity come over to us, and then he may know how neither to commit an
untruth nor a lie neither, by saying, He offers or applies Christ but
conditionally, etc. The truth is, seeing the Minister is Gods Ambassador, and
what he does is by his Commission, we may as soon say, the God of Israel can
lie, as that the Minister ever Seals an untruth, or lie either, in doing his
Office, etc.

Ans. This charge being heavy, and managed with a very high hand by H, I
thought it needful to recite his words more carefully, lest by altering of
them (as he has done mine) I should seem to wrong him.

1. Therefore, in propounding the Objection, he takes not my words; but frames
it for his own advantage and my prejudice. My words are these, But does not the
Minister Seal to a lie by giving the Sacrament to those who are visibly worthy,
yet really unworthy? page 48. Mr. Humphrey propounds my Objection thus. Does
not the Minister Seal to a lie if he Seal to the unworthy? The Objection thus
propounded may bear a very foul sense, as seeming to include persons both
really and visibly unworthy, whereas my Objection clearly hints a distinction
between persons visibly worthy, yet really unworthy, and between persons both
really and visibly unworthy. Besides that in the latter branch also, I use not
the term of Sealing, but of giving the Sacrament. And however he may possibly
agree with me in sense, yet the terms altered may occasion a foul mistake in
the Reader. But to pass that: Let us scan his exceptions against my answer to
that Objection.

And 1. He corrupts my Text in the answer, as he did in the objection. Mr.
Humphrey frames my answer thus, He does but Seal to an untruth, not to a lie,
so long as he comes in to the Elders, and is thought visibly worthy by them.
page 63. This Answer thus framed is obscure, absurd, and little better than
nonsense. Obscure, the second Person thee, being there applicable, either to
the Minister admitting, or to the person admitted. Absurd, etc. as making the
Reader believe we hold, That the Minister, without danger of a lie, may assure
that Communicant of a saving interest in Christ, who he is assured has no part
in Christ, and all because the Elders have approved that Communicant against
the vote and certain Knowledge of the Minister. Besides, That expression, He
is thought visibly worthy, is little better then nonsense. For I pray, what is
a person visibly worthy, but one that is thought and judged worthy, at least
upon evidence of competent knowledge and vacancy of scandal. So then to think
a person is visibly worthy, is to think I think such a man worthy, which for my
part, I think is little better then nonsense, either in Grammar, Logic, or
Rhetoric. Thus you see how Mr. Humphrey propounds my Answer, I will not say,
faithfully, but I dare say very prudently.

My answer to the Objection is this, page 48. He may possibly Seal to an
untruth, but does not Seal to a lie, in admitting that person, whom in charity
(being approved, upon due trial) he may and ought to judge worthy. 2ly. If the
Minister suspect a person legally approved, he may and ought the more carefully
to warn him, etc. and by this means I conceive he may clear himself, but cannot
keep back him that is approved by the Major vote of the Eldership. Only
afterward has power to appeal, etc. Let the Reader now judge, whether by
Sealing a saving interest in Christ to a person whom I may and ought to think
Evangelically worthy, the Minister does Seal to a lie. Or 2ly. If he Seal a
saving interest in Christ to a person whom himself suspects (yet cannot evince
to be unworthy, and whom others having the same power and piety with himself
judge worthy) be a Sealing to a lie? If indeed the Minister know this person to
be unworthy, as being in the state of nature or jure Excommunicate, here the
case is much altered: of which I speak not in that Paragraph, only I am much
beholding to Mr. Humphrey for endeavoring to pin such an absurdity upon my
sleeve. If Mr. Humphrey and the Reader desire my judgment in this particular;
For my part, if not only a Presbytery, but if a Classis, yea, Province voted a
person worthy whom I knew to be unworthy (as having sufficient evidence of his
gross, ignorant, or scandalous conversation backed with impenitency and
obstinacy) I must desire them all to excuse me for giving the Sacrament to such
a one. Yet would I not make any stir in the Church, if they appointed an
other Minister to give him the Sacrament in my Congregation: By which means, I
apprehend, I shall be both clear of the guilt of his Admission, and withal
preserve the peace and unity of the Church. And, should this carriage of mine
cost me a Sequestration, I hope I should choose rather to suffer a penal then
to commit a Moral evil. The case may be illustrated by other Acts of
Judicature, both Civil and Sacred. Suppose the Eldership vote the
Excommunication of a person whom I knew to be innocent, or vote the
non-Excommunication of a person whom I knew to be jure-Excommunicate: In such
case they must give me leave to enter my protest, and not to act according to
their vote against my Knowledge and Conscience. Again, in Civil Trials,
suppose the Jury find a person guilty, whom the Judge knows to be Innocent,
were I Judge in that case, I hope, by Gods assistance, neither Law nor Jury
should prevail with me to pronounce sentence against such a person. The like
might be said about the Judges clearing a person whom he knows to be guilty,
yet is acquitted by the Jury, if the Judge should be put to pronounce a
Sentence of absolution against his Knowledge and Conscience: Which yet I think
is not in practice amongst us, since the Verdict of the Jury does acquit the
Prisoner; only the Judge in such case might happily complain of the Jury, etc. My
drift and scope in all this, is to show the weakness of Mr. Humphrey his
Cords, wherewith he thinks to bind me, and withal that I might make it appear
to the Reader, That however page 64. Mr. Humphrey triumphs before the Victory,
yet we are not forced either to lie on the one hand, or to come over to Mr.
Humphry on the other hand.

For the last clause in this Paragraph, That, seeing a Minister is Gods
Ambassador, and what he does is by Commission, we may as soon say, the God of
Israel can lic, as that the Minister either Seals an untruth or tie, in doing
his Office.

Ans. Either the sense is, That a Minister when he acts clave non errante,
Seals neither an untruth nor a lie, which is as pertinent, as if I should say,
when Mr. Humphrey Preaches Truth, he Preaches not an untruth or lie. Or his
meaning is, that, because a Minister is Commissioned by Christ, therefore he
cannot err in this or any other part of his Ministerial function; which as it
is a palpable error, so it smells strongly of Popish infallibility.

What he adds by way of amplification; Page 64, 65, 66.
as there is much truth in it, so his great mistake lies in apprehending, that
we cannot judge a person to be worthy or unworthy, but presently we meddle with
Gods Ark, and enter upon Gods Throne. The weakness of which inference has
been formerly laid open, and therefore I do but only note it here.

For his answer to my exception against diverse Church Members receiving, Page
66.
though all may be present, etc. That yet the Minister may be free in his
Office, in delivering the Sacrament in general as Christ did, and that
especially because it is a visible Word.

Ans. 1. This indeed accompanied with due admonition, may be a relief to the
Minister, he being thereby excused from giving the Sacrament to persons
visibly unworthy; My meaning is, If the Minister acquiesce in the vote of the
Elders, and do not his endeavor in a Moral way to have such a person kept
from receiving. For I do not think the Minister is bound to thrust him away
from the Table, or to pull the Bread and Cup violently out of his hands, who
upon the unrighteous vote and encouragement of the Elders lays hold upon those
holy mysteries.
but it cannot clear him of guilt, as permitting them to eat and drink judgment
to themselves, whom he ought to keep back.

2ly. Though the Elements and diverse Sacramental actions be explicatory, and
so a visible word common to all, be they Church Members or no, yet giving and
receiving are applicatory, and where a Minister or a private Christian cannot
apply the writing or promise of Christ (I speak as de jure) there they cannot
apply the seal of that writing.

Here I cannot but take notice of Mr. Humphrey his ingenuity, in confessing,
That presence at the Sacrament is more free than actual receiving, in these
words: Page 68.
Not that I am so moved at free presence, but that actual receiving is not as
free to our intelligent Members. Not that bare presence makes them guilty, but
their unworthy carriage at the Sacrament, and their unprofitablenesse under it
as a visible word.
And I do as easily yield to him, that by presence only, persons may be guilty
of the Body and Blood of Christ as well as by receiving, but not as much, since
actual receiving is like Judas his betraying Christ with a kiss, whereby he
contracted deeper guilt then others of his damned Crew, especially such as came
happily to see Christ taken, but put not forth a tongue or hand in order to
Christ's apprehension. Yet withal, it being agreed on both hands, that presence
is freer then receiving (for which Mr. Humphrey himself holds forth the
practice of the Primitive Church) let him confider how he will salve his own
Objections against this Tenet; and that it argues weakness for a man to yield
the Cause, and yet to dispute against it.

Mr. Humphrey. Indeed if persons be Excommunicate (as the Primitive Church did
punish such with bare presence) or men have their gathered Companies; if they
do not communicate with those who are present, and hear, their reason is open,
they own them not as their Members: But as for us, that are not yet convinced
by them, either we must maintain, or new-mould, our mixed Congregations.

Ans. 1. Mr. Humphrey cannot be ignorant, that in the Primitive times, persons
excommunicated in this sense, were not to be present at the Sacrament, since
the fourth degree of excommunication, called (...), shut persons quite out of
the Church, where they were to stand with tears, requesting those who entered
in, to pray for them; and thence they were called Plorantes. See Goodwin's
Moses and Aaron. They who were quite shut out of the Church, could not be
present at the Sacrament, administered in the Chancell. 2 ly. It appears further
by this Answer of Mr. Humphrey, that in the Primitive Times, suspension was a
part or degree of excommunication, since some persons excommunicated might be
present, yet, not receive; but others might neither be admitted to presence,
nor to receiving. And this makes much for us, and against himself, who grants,
that persons excommunicated, may be kept from the Sacrament: But, say we,
persons juridically suspended, are excommunicated (both in our sense, and in
the sense of the Primitive Church) Ergo, By Mr. Humphrey his own Principle,
they are to be kept from receiving. 3 ly. The ground of their separation from
us, who are in gathered Companies (yet are not Brownists) is it not, because we
admit pel-mel, Church members visibly unworthy? And, had our Sacraments been
kept pure, their very pretense of separation had been cut off (I mean, as to
the point of Communicants). Besides, some of those separated Congregations,
have admitted to their Sacraments our Church Members, whom they apprehended
godly, when at the same time, other Church Members of ours, concerning whom,
they have not had sufficient evidence of their piety, did not pass for
current. A clear evidence, that they (as well as we) look more at visible
worthiness, then at Church Membership.

D. Dr. Page 37. If the Sacrament have the same latititude with the Word, then
a Heathen may receive it as well as a Christian.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 69.
He has left out my main caution (within the Church). The Word may be
considered as a bare word, and an Instrument in writing, etc. or, as a Sealed
word and instrument, delivered to peculiar use. The Covenant is a sealed
Covenant, only unto the Church, etc.

Ans. 1. We demand Scripture-proofe for all this: Mr. Humphrey indeed quotes
Romans 3. 2. To them were committed the Oracles of God. And, Romans 9. 4. To whom
pertained the Covenants. But, 1. There is not one word of the Sacrament. 2 ly.
If he will urge those places, then Heathen must be excluded from the Oracles
and Covenant, whether sealed or unsealed, there being not one word about that
particular of sealing. Suppose the Apostle had said, To whom belongs the
Oracles, and the Covenants, and the Sacraments. If Mr. Humphrey will thence
argue, Therefore Heathen ought not to partake of the Sacraments, is it not
easy to retort out of the same place, that then, by the same reason, they
ought not to read the Scripture, or to hear the Word Preached, and the Covenant
declared and published, since all these were in some way, peculiar to the
Jews. Yea, to some Sacraments, Heathen were admitted; namely, to Baptism
under the Cloud, to the Manna, and to the Rock-Water, to wit, the mixed
Multitude, as well as diverse uncircumcised Israelites, in which there was
somewhat extraordinary. I agree with Mr. Humphrey, that Heathen may partake of
the Word, yet not of the Sacraments; but his proof thereof from Romans 3. and 9.
is not valid.

2 ly. He mistakes, in saying the Word is not a sealed Instrument to Heathen;
and in thinking, the Word is not sealed to Heathen by the Sacraments, unless
they partake of the Sacraments, Show me any Covenant in the World, where the
Seals does not concern them, whom the Articles of the Covenant do concern. If
the Articles of the Covenant of Grace concern all the World, and are published
and tendered to all conditionally, what absurdity is there, in sealing the same
conditional offer to all, in the Sacrament?

3 ly. The sealing of the Covenant is general or particular; on Gods part, or
on man's part. In general, God seals the Covenant by every Sacrament
conditionally to all the World: Particularly, he seals the Covenant to the
worthy Receiver at the Sacrament. Further, whether I Receive or no, God seals
the Covenant to me as well as to others, in general; but, by Receiving, I my
self seal in particular, which standers by do not. We easily agree with Mr.
Humphrey, That every Churchmember (without a just forfeiture) has a public
right to the use of the Sacrament. But, the Question is, Wherein this
forfeiture lies? We say, the forfeiture lies in visible unworthiness: He
says, it lies in Excommunication. We answer, That cannot be, since forfeiture
of a privilege is grounded upon an offense; but, excommunication rightly
managed is no offense. The Church indeed by excommunication takes the
forfeiture, but the Churchmember by the offense makes the forfeiture. This
offense known, is nothing else, but his visible unworthiness, upon which, the
Church may justly deny him the use of the Sacrament for all his public right
to it as a Churchmember. Herein indeed, an unworthy Churchmember is
distinguished from an Heathen, in that he has a public right to the Sacrament
(as a Jew, when unclean, had to the Passover; and a Priest, when unclean, had
to the holy Things) which no Heathen have. But the influence of that right is
suspended, as to his actual receiving, till he visibly repent, of his visible
unworthiness.

D. Dr. There are some righteous persons in their own conceit, many false
justitiaries, etc.

Mr. Humphrey. Of all men, I think, such as these, had most need of conviction;
but I find not the Scriptures send forth any spiritual hue and cry, to make
search for them; If it did, I will not for any thing, say, who are the men, etc.

Ans. 1. That conviction they may have, by presence at all Ordinances. 2 ly. A
Scripture hue and cry for such has been formerly noted, and I shall not here
trouble my Reader with repetitions. 3 ly. For any to profess, They will not
help to discover those, after whom the Scripture makes hue and cry, argues at
the best, very great weakness, and is in effect to say, I will not do what the
Word of God commands me.

4 ly. For his reflection upon diverse of our Ministers and Elders; let Mr.
Humphrey but discover in particular, those whom he charges in general, and
make good his charge, we shall thank him for it, and trust, through mercy (so
far as our power reaches) we shall not be willingly partial in Gods Law, but
be ready to throw the first stone at our selves. And as we have cause to thank
God, where he has kept any of us from breaking out into grosser abominations;
so we desire at all times, especially at the Sacrament, to lie low in the sense
of our own great unworthiness, to renounce our own righteousness, as well as
our unrighteousness; Psalm. 15. 4.
and to pity, not presently to despise, the greatest offenders, whether they
fall under the sentence of suspension, or of excommunication: And this we hope
is not Pharisaisme, Luke 18. verse 9. to 14.

D. Dr. Page 70, 71, 72.
All may be present, but not actually partake, etc. Against this, Mr. Humphrey
has four Exceptions. To the first, I answer, he wrongs me, in making the
World believe, I make nothing of the whole Administration, but only of actual
Receiving. I have formerly showed, that they who hear and see unworthily at the
Sacrament, are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ; as well, but not as
much, as those who receive: Yet, because hearing and seeing may be means of
Conversion; not so, receiving; therefore all may hear and see, but not receive.
I determine not here, whether seeing the Sacramental Elements do convert; but,
am very inclinable to believe, that the observation of the humble devotion of
the Communicants, may be effectual for such a purpose; as, 1 Pet, 3. verse. 1,
2. And as the courage of diverse Martyrs have been means to change some
Persecutors.


To his second Exception. We hold not, that Baptism is to be repeated; nor do
we believe, that Christ has commanded absolutely all intelligent
Church Members to receive. But, as a Circumcised Jew might be kept from the
Passover, when Legally or Morally unclean; so may a Baptized Christian be kept
from the Lords Supper, when Morally unclean.

Doctor Rivet, upon Exodus 12, notes, 1. That Women were admitted to the
Passover as well as men. 2 ly. That profession of their faith was required (of
adult Females) before they were admitted to the Passover. A clear evidence of
visible Moral purity requisite as well as Leviticall purity.

To his third Exception we answer. An unregenerate man's undisposednesse, does
no more frustrate Gods precept, of receiving the Lords Supper, than an unclean
man's indisposednesse did frustrate the command, for all the Congregation to
keep the Passover, Exodus 12. 47.

For his fourth Exception, That we go contrary to the express command, Drink
ye all of it, we answer, 1. If Judas received not, (which is probable) then it
is evident, the command reaches only those, who are really and visibly worthy.
2 ly. Supposing Judas did receive. 1. Let Mr. Humphrey peruse Mr. Timson's
Answer, page 3. and 4. who, though zealous for free Admission, yet looks at
this Argument as very weak. 2 ly. I have answered formerly, that in Judas his
Admission, Christ's dispensation was extraordinary, and so not imitable by us. 3
ly. We admit all to the Marriage Feast, as well, yea, more then himself, but
not to cat the Feast in every Dish; yea, we admit all to the Sacrament, but not
to every Sacramental action. 4 ly. If putting the ignorant upon knowledge, the
careless upon diligence to prepare, the hard-hearted upon repentance, be to
make them more secure, careless, and hard-bearted, we must confess our selves
guilty of Mr. Humphrey his charge; otherwise, not. And certainly, if our
suspension from but part of one Ordinance, do harden (as he apprehends) what
will his excommunication from all Ordinances do? 5 ly. For his charging us, To
afflict tender Consciences; We see not how any such Conclusion can flow from
our Principles, rightly understood; or, that our Principles tend, to lay wast
the Ordinance of the Lords Supper. We desire, that every Ordinance may be used
in every Congregation, particularly, the Lords Supper, where there are any
Churchmembers capable of it. Nor do we believe, the Administration of this
Sacrament does absolutely depend upon the being or acting of the Elders, who
are not necessary to the esse, but to the bone esse of the Church, and to the
more regular Administration of the Sacrament. We believe, the principal care
of Souls lies upon Ministers, who therefore ought to do their duty (whether
they have Elders or no) in fitting their people for, and then admitting them to
the Sacrament. Nor do we apprehend what there can be in this carriage of ours,
to afflict tender Consciences, whom of all persons we shall most willingly
admit: If indeed we forced any to approve, and own trial before the Eldership,
there might be some plea against us in that kind; but, that there should be
any such thing in giving an account of our faith before any, especially to our
Minister, who, without all controversy, is charged with our Souls, as he that
must give an account to God for them, is to me a very strange paradox. Yet
further; Suppose one be kept from the Sacrament, yea, unjustly kept from it,
what is there here to scruple his conscience? It may indeed grieve his spirit,
and cause him to reflect, and that to his great and spiritual advantage; but
the sin is theirs who do unjustly detain him. For our part, if we know any
thing of our selves, our great care is to invite, and encourage tender
Consciences, to partake of, not to keep them from, the Sacrament; and such we
are assured, will never put us against our Consciences, to admit all pel-mel. A
tender Conscience is tender of other men's Consciences, as well as of its own.

Page 72. to 74. Mr. Humphrey thinks, I wrong his Simile, and take hold of it
by the left handle.

Ans. Let the Reader peruse my Answer, page 40, and 41. and compare it with
page 14. of Mr. Humphrey his Vindication, he will easily perceive Mr. Humphrey
wrongs himself by it; but I wrong neither him nor his Simile. God is the
Prince wronged, Christ is the great Favourit, upon whose intercession Grace is
proclaimed to all the World conditionally, and sealed in the Sacrament. Now
mark what Mr. Humphrey adds, page 15. of his Vindication, Can it be imagined,
there is any the Proclamation belongs to without the seal? is not the seal
public, as the contents of it? Is not here a free Admission for all the World,
and thereby even for Heathen, to the Sacrament? That grace is proclaimed
conditionally to all the World, see Matthew. 28. 19. and Mark 16. verse. 15, 16.
Mr. Humphrey adds in the forementioned words, The Seal is as extensive as the
Proclamation; therefore by his own Principles, they must be admitted to the
Lords Supper, since they are part of the World, yea, the greatest part. Nor
will his following words be a salvo for this wide gap, That as we offer the
conditions thereof to any, so likewise may we, and must we, the seal (upon
their desire) etc. page 15. of his Vindication: Unless we have good evidence
(at least in the judgment of charity) that their desire is real, Acts 8. verse
36, 37. And hence, when Heathen came on to the Church, they were first
Catechumeni, and gave evidence of their faith and repentance, before they were
admitted Church Members, and Baptized: Nor was Paul himself admitted by the
Church of Jerusalem, till upon good evidence, Acts 9. verse. 26, 27. And why the
like care should not be used in the Sacrament of growth, as was in the
Sacrament of initiation, there being with us so great a distance of time,
between the one and the other, and we having so good ground to fear the
declension of Church Members, as well as they had to fear the hypocritical
approach of Church-candidates; Mr. Humphrey, I believe, can give no solid
reason. All Heathen may, and must, be admitted to Baptisine, upon their desire,
and all Church Members may, and must, be admitted to the Lords Supper, upon
their desire provided, the desire in both be regular. And certainly, if
moderate inquisition after the sincerity of Heathens desire, be no entering upon
Gods Throne; then the same inquisition after the sincerity of Church Members
d^sires, cannot be charged as an intruding upon Gods secrets. For our parts, we
believe the Covenant is sealed conditionally in the Sacrament to all the World,
as well at to all Church Members: But, from thence to argue, that all the
world, or every Churchmember, should receive the Sacrament, is a conclusion,
Mr. Humphrey himself cannot swallow, much less others, who are not of his
large Principles. Whereas therefore he adds, Page 74.
We may not judge, men are outwardly Rebels, unless we have somewhat to
allege against them, and then they must be excommunicated. Ans. 1. We judge
not any to be outwardly Rebels, unless we have something to allege against
them (as David had against Absolums party, who, I think, were outwardly
Rebels, as well as Edomites or Philistines) to wit, ignorance, obstinacy,
scandal; and if trial of Church Members be commanded, he that wilfully
refuses it, shows himself a Rebel, as well as he that wilfully refuses to
obey his Prince. 2 ly. Such we judge are to be excommunicated but not
presently, with the highest degree of excommunication, unless the greatness
and palpablenesse of the offense, with other circumstances, do require the
same. 3 ly. Whereas he pretends, There is not Scripture-warrant for trial of
Church Members. Ans. Besides what has been formerly said to this, I add, If
Scripture warrant trial in general, and apply this rule particularly to some
Church Members, this is enough for us; and it lies upon Mr. Humphrey to prove,
that this trial must not be against the Sacrament, which when he can do, we
shall easily yield him the cause. Now that Trial is commanded in general, see
1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. we are commanded to Try all things; and if a person be not a
thing, let Mr. Humphrey put him out of that general. Private Christians may
put each other upon trial, Jam. 2. verse. 18, 20. We ought not to refuse trial
from any, where there is just occasion. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
In particular, the Deacons were to be tried, 1 Timothy 3. 10. Ministers, or such
as pretended to be Ministers, were to be tried by the people, 1 John 4. 1. The
Church of Ephesus is commended for trying the false Apostles, Revel. 2. 2. See
Jer. 6. 27.
If people have power to try their Officers, shall Church Officers have no
power to try their people? Has every Churchmember a trial and judgment of
discretion, and shall not Church Officers have a trial and judgment of
decision? Whereas therefore in the foot of this page, he upbraides me again, as
giving more power to the servant, then to the Lord himself; As I pardon him
this wrong, so I must mind my Reader, that that cavil has been already
answered. We doubt not but Christ, as Lord and King of the Church, might have
tried, suspended, or excommunicated Judas by his own power, had he pleased so
to do; yet, Christ forbearing to do either of these, is no rule for our
imitation. What Christ might do as a Minister, is an other question; and of
that I spoke, and said, That if Christ, as a Minister, might suspend or
excommunicate, then every Minister might by himself alone suspend and
excommunicate; which power, if given to every particular Minister, might
provefatall to the Church: Nor do I find in Scripture, that one particular
Minister is the Church governing, Matthew. 18. 17. Yet withal, for further
explication of my self in that particular, I think we may safely distinguish
between a regular and irregular state of the Church. Where Church Government
cannot be settled regularly, in that case, I believe, much lies upon the
Minister: or, where the Elders will not act, I do not apprehend, that therefore
Sacraments are to be omitted; but the Minister, who on all hands is
acknowledged as an undoubted Officer, must endeavor to supply that defect.
Happily, in some cases, and for some persons, the Elders for a time may devolve
the sole power of trial upon the Minister, where they have good assurance of
his integrity. 2 ly. I distinguish between the Ministers Pastoral and
Judicial power: Suppose he cannot suspend an ignorant and scandalous person
Judicially, may he not therefore suspend him Pastorally? Suppose he cannot
suspend such by a formal sentence, may he not suspend his own act, as being
not bound against his conscience to give the Sacrament to one visibly unworthy?
May there not be a negative, where there is no formal Suspension?

Page 75.
He thinks I slander the Sacrament, in comparing it to the bitter Water, and
saying, It can do good to none, but such as are good already. Ans. 1. Though I
be not bound to answer Mr. Humphrey his thoughts, but his arguments; yet,
herein I dare refer my self to an indifferent person, what slander it is to
compare any of the Ordinances to the bitter Water, which ever did good or hurt,
as every Ordinance does, not according to its own nature, but according to the
disposition of the subject, or the dispensation of free grace. 2 ly. I believe
the Sacrament may do good, even to those who are bad; upon which account all
sorts may be present: Only, I dissent about actual receiving, which if Mr.
Humphrey can prove a converting Ordinance, he shall not only make me his
Proselyte, but a greater Zelot for free Admission, yea, freer Admission, then
himself is. What he repeats here and page 76. I pass, as having been formerly
answered. Page 75. Mr. Humphrey feeling himself pinched with the instance of
godly Parents and Masters, keeping their Children and Servants from the
Sacrament, till they were visibly qualified, has nothing to except against,
but my ill language, as he is pleased to term it. Ans. The worst of my ill
language is to ask him, whether it be not a shame for one, scarce out of the
shell for Learning and Divinity, to reflect upon such eminent and pious
persons, who were Counselors and Authors of Church Government amongst us, As
if they were children of Simon Magus, and went about with Judas to make a
bargain of Christ at the Supper. To be a young Scholar or Divine is no
reproach; but, for such a one to censure an Assembly of such Senators and
Divines as he does, I think is shameful; if it be not, I shall willingly ask
Mr. Humphrey pardon for saying so.

As I deny not, Page 77.
but the Word and seal must go together, so I am assured, they do both go
together in every Sacrament, and that the Covenant is sealed conditionally in
every Sacrament to all the World, though the greatest part of the World do not
receive. But it follows not from thence, that all may receive: Nor can Mr.
Humphrey bring any Scripture-evidence, That men must come to the Sacrament to
seal their own damnation: Yea, probably such Doctrine Preached, would be a
greater bar to his free Admission, then the Trial before the Eldership, which
yet he so much decries. I perceive the instance of Infants and scandalous
persons troubles him, which though he snarle at, will not budge or move their
place. But that I pass, as having been formerly cleared. He is also
displeased, that we go by a rule of visibility, in admitting Church Members to
the Lords Supper: But, let Mr. Humphrey answer himself, and either admit all
Church Members, or give us a better rule then the rule of visibility, to wit,
That such members as are visibly capable of the Sacrament, should be admitted,
others not. His rule of visibility is natural intelligence, when
Church Members have the use of Reason: Our rule is spiritual intelligence, and
vacancy of scandal, when persons have some competent knowledge of Divine and
Sacramental mysteries, and live unblamably. Will Mr. Humphrey in one breath
cry up and cry down the rule of visibility? If yet he ask, Where is there any
ground to try Church Members, whether they be ignorant, or no, etc. Let him
answer himself, Where is there any ground to try Church Members, whether they
have the use of reason or no? Or, where does Christ forbid the admitting of
distracted persons? If the ground be, because they cannot examine themselves,
the same ground will reach ignorant persons in the Church, whose inability for
selfe-examination is so much the worse, as it is wilful.

Mr. Humphrey. For his answer to my four Considerations, I reply as briefly. 1.
An Historical Faith suffices to Baptism Acts 8. 13.

Ans. What is this Reply to my Answer, page 42? my words are these, Those whom
we would not Baptize, had they bin to have been Baptized at years of
discretion, those we cannot admit to the Lords Supper, though Baptized, etc. To
this, all he answers, is, that, Historical Faith is enough to Baptism. As, 1.
its utterly impertinent: So, 2 ly. its false, since not only an Historical
Faith, but also profession of Repentance, is necessary to Baptism, which is
therefore called, The Baptism of Repentance. Mark 1. 4, 5. 3 ly. Profession of
Faith and Repentance, cannot stand with conviction of gross ignorance, and
with scandal. We refuse none, who make a charitative profession of Faith and
Repentance. And here once more, let Mr. Humphrey remember his own rule, Adultis
cadem est ratio utriusque Sacramenti.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 78.
A Church Members outward Acceptance is his Receiving; as for any other, the
Scriptures he pleads as abundant enough, are none at all.

Ans. In my answer to his second consideration, I do not quote Scripture,
therefore Mr. Humphrey should either have mentioned those Scriptures, or
referred the Reader to them. But, to come to the point; Will Mr. Humphrey stand
to that assertion of his, That a Church Members outward Acceptance, is no other
but his Receiving? What thinks he of public Prayer, Hearing, the Parents
confession of Faith at the Baptising of his Children, etc. are not each of
these an outward acceptance? Then sure Receiving the Lords Supper, is not the
sole outward or visible acceptance. How many Church Members will scarce come to
Church from years end to years end, who yet would think themselves much
wronged, if the Sacrament be denied them? Is their offering to Receive once a
year, acceptance enough, who all the year after will scarce come to the public
Ordinances? Do not they as visibly reject Christ, by neglecting to Hear, etc.
all the year long, as they do accept Christ, by coming once a year to the
Sacrament? 2 ly. True, Receiving is an outward acceptance of the Sacrament; but
is it a sufficient outward acceptance of Christ and Grace, offered in the
Sacrament? Then persons jure excommunicate, cannot be suspended. Suppose a
Churchmember publicly renounce Christ, and yet desire to Receive; this
Wretch, by Mr. Humphrey his rule, must have the Sacrament, if outward
acceptance be enough. For his charging me here again with foul language, why
did not Mr. Humphrey transcribe it, as a further evidence against me? Let the
Reader peruse page 43. 44, and 45. of my Bar, he will easily unvail the
mystery. The truth is, in those pages I lay open his foul slanders, and this,
forsooth, is my foul language.

Mr. Humphrey. To the Third, where are many things, I say 1. Though conviction
is not enough to convert without grace, what then? Is it not a means therefore
with it?

Ans. 1. Sure Mr. Humphrey forgot his own words, page 16. of his Vindication,
Let a man be fully convinced of the free grace of Christ, his heart can stand
it out no longer against his conversion. Is it not here evident, he makes full
conviction alone, a means of conversion, yea, a sufficient means? If a man
cannot stand it out against full conviction, then full conviction is a
sufficient means of conversion. This was it, I excepted against: To which, in
his Reply, he Answers, Conviction, with grace, is a means of conversion. For my
part, I believe it is a means of conversion, either with, or without grace; but,
not a sufficient means. An Horse is a means to draw a million of weight, but I
hope not a sufficient means: but, if a horse alone could draw it, he were a
sufficient means. If Mr. Humphrey his first assertion (to which I answered) be
true, then full conviction, even without grace, must be a sufficient means of
conversion.

Mr. Humphrey. 2 ly. Conviction of the truth of the Covenant comes directly by
sealing it; and conviction of the general offer, by applying it to every
single person.

Ans. There is a double sealing in the Sacrament: 1. By application of the Seal
to the Covenant it self. 2 ly. By application of the Seal to particular
persons in their receiving. In the former sense we agree, conviction comes by
sealing the general offer, even to those who do not receive, but may be
present: But it follows not immediately, nor directly, that because the
Covenant is particularly applied to some persons, therefore it is offered to
all. It Is bad Logic, to argue from a particular to a general, unless upon a
general reason: And hence, the consequence from a particular to a general, is
not immediate, but remote. It follows not, that because pardon is by the seal
applied to some Traitors, therefore it is offered to all Traitors: No more is
it true (...), that, because grace is sealed by particular application to some
persons in the Sacrament, therefore it is offered unto all. The consequent
indeed is true, not so the consequence. In the last clause, Mr. Humphrey is
ambiguous: If by every single person he means every man, woman, and child in
the world; then undoubtedly, conviction of the general offer, flows properly
and immediately from such application: But there never was, nor will be, such
an application. If by every single person, he means some single persons of all
sorts, neither is there such an application at the Sacrament, even in Mr.
Humphrey his own judgment who excludes, not only Idiots, but also Heathen and
excommunicated persons. If by every single person he mean only, every person
admitted to receive, here his every person notes but some persons in the World;
nor will it follow, that because the Covenant is applied to some persons, by
actual Receiving, therefore it is offered unto all? My assertion then holds
thus far true, That conviction of the general offer of the Covenant, comes by
signification, and general obsignation, not by personal and particular
obsignation and application: which was the thing I drove at, and which Mr.
Humphrey must evince, if he will speak to purpose; nor is the distinction
between offering and applying so nice as he would make it.

Mr. Humphrey. 3 ly. Conviction that Christ is mine in particular, as to faith
of particular evidence, comes not at all by the Sacrament: 1. Because the
Sacrament seals nothing, but the Word; which speaks not particularly, I
believe. 2 ly. What is common to the hypocrite with the true believer, cannot
bring any evidence to me, etc.

Ans. 1. Let the Reader mark it: Mr. Humphrey denies, that faith of evidence,
comes either by the Word or Sacrament. 2 ly. He denies it upon a Popish ground,
because the Word speaks not particularly. 3 ly. We grant, the Word says not
particularly, Thou John Humphrey, shall be saved; no more does it say, Thou
John Humphrey, shall rise from the dead; or, Thou John Humphrey, shall have no
other Gods but Jehovah. Cannot Mr. Humphrey therefore attain to a faith of
evidence, that he in particular shall rise, and that its his duty in
particular, to have Jehovah only for his God? 4 ly. We grant, the Sacrament
seals nothing, but the Word; but, does not the Sacrament by sealing ratify
the Word? And then, if the Word conduce to faith of evidence, does not the
Sacrament also? Take for instance the syllogism of Assurance: He that
believes, shall be saved; I believe, therefore I shall be saved. The
Conclusion, I shall be saved, is faith of evidence. This Conclusion depends
necessarily upon both Propositions: The Major is Scripture in terms, Mark 16.
26. The Minor, we say, depends partly upon Scripture, in respect of the signs
of true faith laid down therein: According to Mr. Humphrey here (with whom we
also agree) the Minor depends upon the testimony of my own Conscience, and the
Spirit. The Conclusion flows necessarily from both: If so, then Assurance
depends in part upon Scripture, and particularly the Promise; this Promise is
ratified by the Sacrament as by a Seal: and how then can Mr. Humphrey his
Assertion hold Water, That faith of evidence comes not at all by the Sacrament.
If my evidence for a Possession depend upon a Deed, and that Deed be ratified
by a Seal, is it not clear, my Evidence depends much upon the Seal? Is not a
Deed cancelled, by pulling off the Seals, and does it not then depend much
upon the Seals? True, Gods Word (considering his infallibility) is as good as
his Bond; yet, to strengthen our weak faith, he is pleased to annex Seals,
etc. that by strong assurance, we might have strong consolation, Heb. 6. 17,
18. His second Argument, as it makes further discovery of Mr. Humphrey his
judgment, so it shamefully lays open his weakness: It discovers his judgment,
that he believes, no outward Ordinance can bring any evidence: it discovers his
weakness, in asserting, That nothing common to hypocrites with believers, can
bring evidence to any, which, though true in some sense, is false in his sense;
and he may as well say, Nothing common to hypocrites with believers can
convert, and thereby deny the power of Conversion to the Word preached. Can the
Word convert, and can it not evidence conversion? Can it convince me to be in
the state of Nature, and can it not as well convince me to be in the state of
Grace? Can it do the greater, and can it not do the lesser? True, nothing
common to hypocrites with believers, can be a formal cause of evidence; but,
diverse things common to both, may be efficient causes of evidence, I mean, as
instruments; to wit, Prayer, by impetration; the Word, by conviction; the
Sacraments, by obsignation; and conscience, by reflection; all backed by the
Spirit as the Principle, who by the Word, etc. convinces of righteousness and
judgment, as well, as of sin, John 16. 8.

For his Reply to my Answer of his fourth Consideration, Page 79.
illustrated by the Magitian and his Friend, it may indeed take the Reader with
its pleasantness; but is altogether impertinent, unless Mr. Humphrey can
prove, that Suspension is not only the occasion, but also the proper cause of
Church-division. I wonder Mr. Humphrey does not cry out of all Church Censures,
and excommunication it self, upon the same account. See my Answer to his
fourth Consideration, page 49, and 50. of my Bar, which Mr. Humphrey only
plays with, in his Reply, as well knowing it will bear jest better than
earnest.

Sect. VII.
Page 80.
In defense of his second Reason, he makes the Sacraments essential notes of
the visible Church.

Ans. I grant, the Sacraments rightly administered, are infallible notes of the
Church visible; but, I question whether they be essential notes, because such
notes hold both negatively and affirmatively. An essential note of a man,
proves the subject where it is, to be a man, and the subject where it is not,
to be no man: Upon which account, I dare not say, the Sacraments are essential
notes of the Church visible, since a Church may be truly visible, though it
have them not for a long time: Such was the Church of those Israelites, who
were not Circumcised in the Wilderness, Josh. 5. ve s. 5, 7. which answers our
Baptism: Nor do I doubt, but Constantine the Great was a true member of the
visible Church, even before he was Baptized: The like may be said of Abraham's
family, before Circumcision was instituted; and likewise of the Catechumeni,
who were members (though incomplete) of the Church-visible, yet were admitted
to neither of the Sacraments, which however necessary, necessitate praecepti,
yet are not necessary absolutely necessitate medit, so their absence proceed
not from contempt. The Church cannot be visible without combination, in order
to the Preaching of the Word, and Prayer^ but was visible from Adams fall to
the days of Abraham, without Sacraments in ordinary. 2 ly. If the Lords Supper
be an essential note of the visible Church, then many Congregations of
England, who have been without it for diverse years of late, are thereby
unchurched, which I believe, Mr. Humphrey is more charitable than to assert.
How many Congregations have for ten or twelve years together, assembled
constantly at the Word and Prayer, without the Lords Supper, yea some of them,
happily, without Baptism? A great fault I grant; but, I hope, not so great, as
to unchurch them.

I perceive, Mr. Humphrey is too willing to lie at catch, who cannot forbear
snapping at me, even when I plead for him, and excuse him. His definition of a
Church-visible I showed, was liable enough to exception; yet, took it in the
best sense, supposing he meant more then he said. He defines a Church visible,
to be a number of such, as make profession of Jesus Christ. This definition, I
said, was deficient, as wanting the copula, that united them in one body;
namely, Combination for Church-ends: Page 81.
Yet, supposing this might be his meaning, though not mentioned in his
definition, I pass it: For which he flouts me, as curious, and with a pretty
story, thinks to catch his Reader. But, Mr. Humphrey should remember, that in a
Dispute, the Reader must be convinced with Arguments, not caught with
expressions. Would he play the Logician more, and the Rhetorician less, naked
Truth would sooner take place. Let me ask Mr. Humphrey, whether the Members of
the invisible Church be not a number of Professors? If so, What
distinguishes the visible from the invisible Church, but this Combination for
Church-Ends? When all the parts of a body can make a totum without union, then
all the members of the Church visible, can make a Church visible without the
former combination. Professors make the Church invisible, by invisible
combination in Christ; and the Church visible, by visible combination at the
Ordinances of Christ, the most necessary of which, the visible Church cannot
want.

In the same Page, He asserts directly, That all Professors and Saints by
Calling, must, eo nomine, be admitted to the Lords Table.

Ans. If so, then many who are not Members of the Church visible, must be
admitted to the Lords Table. Suppose an Heathen converted, and making
profession, yet, seeks not Baptism; nay, suppose he be Baptized, yet, joins
not to any particular Congregation, but Hears here and there, where he
pleases, as an unconverted Heathen may, 1 Cor. 14. 24. Jam. 2. verse. 2, 6.
Will Mr. Humphrey admit this Professor to the Lords Supper? If not, then a
Professor and Saint by Calling, may not, eo nomine, be admitted. If he will
admit him, then one, who is no member of the visible Church, may be admitted to
the Lords Supper. Now mark, I pray: If one who is no Churchmember, may be
admitted, and diverse who are Church Members, may not be admitted to the
Saceament; is it not evident, that the ground of Admission to the Lords Supper,
lies not properly in Churchmembership, but in visibility, since a visible Saint
may be admitted, though no Churchmember; but diverse Church Members may not be
admitted, though invisible Saints.

Page 82.
By this also may appear the weakness of that assertion of Mr. Humphrey, page
82. That he thinks, a visible Professor, and Churchmember, are terms
convertible. True, every Churchmember, eo nomine, is a Professor, but every
Professor is not presently a Churchmember: Yet as a Churchmember, he may be
only a Professor at large, not in the stricter acception of the term, and as
it is commonly taken, when we say, Such a man is a Professor, in opposition
(not to Heathen, but) to loose and profane Church Members.
Fit matter he may be for a Church, if his knowledge and conversation do suit
in some good measure with his profession; but, he is no more a Churchmember,
till in union, than a beam or stone is part of the House, till compacted with
the building. This is further evident in the case of excommunication, whereby
even a pious Churchmember, may be cut off, for a scandalous sin, yet remains
still, both a professor, and a real Saint: As, Suppose David had been
excommunicated for his Murder and Adultery. It Is evident there, that a
Professor, and Churchmember, are not terms convertible, since they are not
predicated each of the other universally.

The Argument drawn from Infants and Idiots, which here again he flies upon
with such contempt and scorn, has been formerly vindicated, to which I refer
the Reader. For what he adds, That Saint Paul enjoynes us to examine our
selves, and to discern the Lords Body: Nor does it excuse any of age, but they
are both to do so, and come; both to prepare, and eat. We must do what we can
still, when we cannot do as we ought: But, as for Infants, etc. it is no sin of
theirs, if they are not fit to come. For ignorance then, and scandal; if it be
not such as makes us forfeit our Church Membership (that is, become
excommunicate) it cannot contradict our outward Profession.

Ans. 1. By concession, in sensu composito, all of age, must do both: But the
Question is, de sensu diviso, whether all of age must receive, though they
cannot, will not, receive worthily? It was a duty to kiss Christ sincerely,
Luke 7. 45. but the very kiss was a sin, and worse then not kissing, when
given treacherously, Luke 22. 48. So likewise to worship Christ is a duty, John
9. 38. but better not worship him at all, then worship him ironically, Matthew,
27. 29. Are not all unworthy Receivers, of this Fraternity?

2 ly. Again by Concession. We must do what we can morally, but not always
what we can naturally, when we can not do what we would. Else, suppose a person
were stripped of all apparel, must he of necessity come to the Sacrament, though
naked, because he can get no apparel? The nakedness of unworthy Receivers,
especially, if visibly so, is a great deal worse.

3 ly. Suppose a man be drunk before the Sacrament, must he therefore Receive
the Lords Supper, even when he is actually drunk, because by this sin of his,
he wilfully made himself unfit for the Sacrament? Upon Mr. Humphrey his
Principles he must; for, he tells us, that children and Idiots are excused,
because they are not wilfully unfit for the Sacrament; but, persons of age
being intelligent, must receive, though they be unfit, because these are
wilfully, and by their own default, unfit. Will it not hence necessarily
follow, that the vilest miscreants, who are jure excommunicate, are bound to
come and receive, because by their foul scandalls, they wilfully unfit
themselves for the Sacrament? And by proportion, the more vile and wilful
sinners are, the more they are bound, to receive the Lords Supper. And
therefore a person actually drunk, by his own default, must receive, even when
drunk because he was wilfully unfit; but, a person forced to be drunk by
others, may be excused from Receiving, because he did not wilfully make
himself unfit and incapable. Wherefore are Idiots kept away, but because they
are children in understanding, and cannot put forth those acts, which are
necessary to worthy receiving? Are not all grossly ignorant persons, children
also in understanding, as well as the former, 1 Cor. 14. 20. If he say, they
are not wilfully so, that is not true of diverse, who by their lusts, break
their brains, and grow distracted. If yet he say, ignorance may be cured, so
may distraction and madness also; but, till both be cured, the one by
spiritual, the other by bodily Physic, I believe the one may plead admission
as well as the other.

4 ly. Again, by Concession. Ignorance and scandal do not universally
contradict profession, whether I be a Churchmember or not: It Is enough for us,
if either of them contradict profession particularly: As, he that contradicts
any one Commandment by wilful disobedience, though he keep the other nine;
yet, really contradicts the whole Law, Jam. 2. 10. So he who holds up
profession in many things, yet, walks contrary to it in one visible scandal, by
that one scandal contradicts his whole profession. He that yields up nine Forts
to his Sovereign, but keeps him out of one, is as truly a Rebel, as he that
keeps him out of all. As one sin lived in, contradicts real holiness; so one
sin visibly lived in, contradicts visible holiness, which is Profession. If
visible profaneness, arrayed with visible holiness, must be admitted, then a
known Wolf, clothed with a Lambs skin, must be used as a Lamb; and a Dog,
having on a Child's coat (though known to be a Dog) must sit at the Table with
the Children. The Tridentine Papists do not universally contradict profession,
yet we admit them not to our Sacraments, because they contradict profession in
diverse fundamentalls, though not universally: upon which account we look at
them, as universally contradicting profession, and that justly. Do not many
Members of our Churches raze the foundation by abominable errors and practices,
as well as Papists? And shall such be admitted to the Lords Supper upon this
poor account, because they are not actually excommunicated? If so, then let the
rankest Papists receive also, since they were never excommunicated by us. We
indeed separate from them, and so we may from persons, who wilfully go on in
gross ignorance or scandal (though neither of them be excommunicated) till
they profess their repentance. Why may not sincere Professors in a Church, as
to Sacramental Communion, separate from scandalous Professors in the same
Church, as we do from Papists, though we neither excommunicate the one nor the
other. Want of separation in Churches, is the cause, or at least the occasion,
of separation from Churches; and will, I fear, if not timely remedied, turn the
Church of Christ into the Synagogue of Satan.

Mr. Humphrey. He grants my Notes, but objects the keeping of Children and
Servants, till they can give some tolerable account.

Ans. I take it for granted, that the Word and Sacraments rightly administered,
are true notes of the visible Church; I do not grant the Sacrament is an
essential note, and that upon the account forementioned, because the absence
of Sacraments does not unchurch a People, but they may still be a Church, as
Combined, for constant hearing of the Word and Prayer, (in which sense godly
Families are true, though incomplete Churches, Philem. verse. 2.) though at
present they have not the use of Sacraments. Now let us see what Mr. Humphrey
says to my Objection: He tells us, Page 83.
There is a difference between what is done juridically, by compulsion, and
what is done only as prudentially by advice; between forbearance and exclusion.
His ground is good, Because affirmative precepts oblige us, semper, but not ad
semper. And upon this account, He commends godly Parents and Masters, so long
as they follow them with instruction, and allows the same in spiritual
Fathers, that go no further in the like admonition.

Ans. 1. I am glad we agree thus far, that both Oeconomicall and Spiritual
Parents have power in a prudentiall way, by advice, to cause persons under
their several charges, to forbear the Sacrament. Now let Mr. Humphrey give me
any Scripture-ground to persuade persons, be they never so wicked, not to Hear
and Pray. The worst are bound to pray every day, and to Hear as often as their
just and necessary occasions will give them leave. Why so? Because 1. These are
parts of natural Worship, unto which all are obliged by the Law of Nature. 2
ly. Because these are means of Conversion, from which none should be kept,
least of all the worst, who have most need of Conversion. Contra, Sacraments
(as such) are not natural, but instituted worship. 2 ly. Not means of
Conversion, but suppose Conversion: whence persons visibly in the state of
Nature, ought not to be admitted to them.

But 2 ly. Mr. Humphrey speaks obscurely and comes not home to the point,
though what he granted make against himself. For, the next Question is, What
if those Children and Servants (though grossly ignorant and scandalous) in
spite of admonition, will thrust themselves upon the Sacrament? In this
Paragraph Mr. Humphrey says I think a man may conscionably forbear his coming
sometimes upon many occasions, and much more upon pious ends, regarding
preparation. You see now the man's ^incing of the business. 1. He may forbear;
he does not say, he must forbear. 2 ly. He may sometimes so. bear es^ecially,
upon want of due preparation He does not say, he must forbear, if he want due
preparation. 3 ly. He hints not one word here, what superiors must do or not
do, in case a person grossly ignorant or scandalous, will, against their
admonition come to the Sacrament, upon which, yet, the very hinge of the
Controversy turns. For our parts, we are clear, 1. That persons unworthy ought
to forbear; understand it of Evangelicall unworthiness, especially, when
sensible; I mean, one who has no faith and repentance, especially when
convinced he has them not. 2 ly. So long as he continues in this condition, he
ought to forbear. If upon self examination he apprehend himself (though
falsely to be in the state of Grace, then his case is the same with his who
thinks a sin to be a duty who of necessity must sin, whether he act or act not;
in that, against the rule; in this, against his Conscience: Or, as he who
received the Passover, thinking himself clean, yet, was really unclean. If he
came not, he sinned against his conscience; if he came he sinned against the
rule: yet, this necessity of sinning is only hypotheticall, not absolute. 3 ly.
If Oeconomicall Parents know their Children or Servants to be grossly ignorant
or scandalous, they ought not only to dissuade them, but also to improve their
Authority to keep such (being in statu quo) from the Sacrament. 4 ly. It lies
upon Oeconomicall Parents to make search, who are grossly ignorant and
scandalous in their families, by Catechizing and watching over their Children
and Servants, and in the use of private, as well as public means, to bring
them to some competent measure of knowledge, and at least, to profession of
repentance, before they suffer them to Receive, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Prove. 31. 27. And
why Spiritual Parents should not do the same (there being the same ground of
the one as of the other) a solid reason cannot be given: Both are betrusted
with souls, both must take care to prepare those under their charge for the
Sacrament; which is impossible for them to do (at least, in respect of diverse,
both Children Servants, and People) if in spite of Parents, persons, though
never so ignorant and scandalous, might thrust themselves upon the Sacrament.

3 ly. Because he lays so much stresse upon keeping persons from the
Sacrament, uridicall, and by compulsion: I believe it would puzzle Mr. Humphrey
to prove, that we have kept any away in that manner. Diverse of our people will
not come to Sacraments, though they may: others desire to come, but will not
submit to trial: Such we entreat to excuse us, and thereupon they abstain,
though with discontent. But where have we juridically, or by compulsion, kept
any from the Sacrament? If there be any such thing amongst us, I am confident
it is very rare. I wish Mr. Humphrey were so good a friend as he pretends, to
this prudentiall care of Church Governors about the Sacrament; then would he
persuade people upon prudence, to submit to trial, and not blow up the
division between Pastor and People, by crying out so causlesly, Violence and
Compulsion. Where any benefit or privilege is offered, upon fair and
honorable conditions, and, upon sleighting the condition, is denied, will Mr.
Humphrey look at such a condition as compulsion? Or, if any refusing the
condition, shall catch at the Commodity by violence, may not his violence be
repelled with violence; and in such case, is not the former chargeable with
violence, rather then the latter? Yet, God be thanked, we have no such custom;
but, we have reason to fear, that Mr. Humphrey his Book may put heady people
upon ways of violence, in order to the Sacrament, though he drive no such
design in the publication thereof.

Mr. Humphrey being urged with the Book of Common Prayer, answers, As for the
Rubricks allowing the Minister to suspend some notorious evil livers, I take
it upon the account of ipso jure excommunicate, etc.

Ans. 1. The Minister is not only allowed, but commanded to suspend, in these
words, The same course shall the Curate take with those, etc. not suffering
them to be partakers of the Lords Table, etc. 2 ly. The object of the
Suspension is not only adulterers, etc. but, malicious, envious, and ignorant
persons; yea, such as wrong their neighbors, in word or deed, and will not be
persuaded to make them reparation; all which indeed are very great sins, though
too rife in, and slighted by, many Professors and Church Members. And
particularly for persons grossly ignorant, I appeal to the form of confirmation,
which gives charge for their suspension in these words, There shall none be
admitted unto the holy Communion, until such time as he can say the Catechism:
In order whereunto, both Ministers and Governors of Families are commanded, to
be diligent in point of instruction, and then to return the names of persons so
instructed, to the Bishop, that he might examine and approve them. From all
which, compared with Mr. Humphrey his present Explication and Interpretation, I
conclude, That either ignorant and envious persons are ipso jure excommunicate;
or, that persons may be suspended, though not ipso jure excommunicate.

He adds, Page 84.
We may distinguish happily between sins that cannot stand with sincerity, or
with profession, as Church Members. It may be the Rubric teaches the last.

Ans. Passing his hesitancy in this distinction, for which, it may be, his
heart checked him; we are beholding to Mr. Humphrey for this answer. 1. He
grants some sins, and particularly wilful sins, cannot stand with sincerity.
Thence I gather, That in Mr. Humphrey his own judgment, an hypocrite may
evidently and certainly be discerned. If so, then I hope we may judge some men's
hearts to be naught, without entering upon Gods Throne, or prying into Gods
secrets; an heavy charge he laid formerly upon us.

2 ly. It Is Mr. Humphrey his judgment, that though it be certainly known a
person is a wicked man, in the state of nature, and in the gall of bitterness
(for such are all who have no sincerity) yet, he must be admitted to the
Sacrament, so he be a Churchmember. Are they jure excommunicate, who fall into
some scandalous sin, (though, as to their state, real or hopeful Saints) and
shall not they be jure excommunicate, who are known to be in the state of
nature? Shall the Lamb for a Wolvish act, be denied the Childrens bread; and
shall a known Wolf, stripped of his Sheeps clothing, sit at the Childrens
Table, upon this account only, because he is crept into the Fold? Jud. ver. 4.


Mr. Humphrey. But for Mr. Drake now, me thinks he should blush, to produce me
this Authority which himself despises.

Ans. 1. Suppose this charge were true, may not I urge him with that Authority,
I conceive he ownes, because I own not the same Authority. Were I a Jew, and
despised the new Testament; yet, I hope, it would not be irrational for me to
press him, being a Christian, with the New Testament. 2 ly. His Charge is
false; I despise not the Book of Common Prayer, though I approve not diverse
things in it and about it; and for which, I have both solid reason, the consent
of the most pious in the Nation, and both Houses of Parliament to back me. As
to the point in hand: If the Exhortation in the Communion make it utterly
unlawful to be present, unless we receive; I must crave liberty to dissent
from it in that particular, and must oppose to this precept the practice of the
Primitive Church. But, may there not be a candid interpretation of that
Passage? The Exhortation is but against those, who slight and neglect the
Sacrament, and withal stand by as Gazers. Compare Acts 1. 11. who may come and
will not. This certainly is a great sin. But will Mr. Humphrey thence conclude,
that because some may not taste, therefore they may not hear and see the
goodness of the Lord in the Sacrament? Shall I not come as near the Lord as I
can, because I cannot come so near him as I would?

Page 85.
Mr. Humphrey, page 56. Mr. Drake acknowledges this practice of his were against
the well being of a true visible Church, if the Lords Supper were a privilege
due to all members.

I think herein his cause is yielded (to all clearly, but what we have
excepted.) Why, I pray? Because our outward or visible right is
Church Membership. As for the subdistinction of this, to be more remote or
immediate, found out by some, we cannot receive, without warrant from Scripture.

Ans. 1. To proceed by his own Rule: What warrant of Scripture has he for his
own exceptions, the vanity whereof I have formerly uncased. 2 ly. If warrant
from Scripture will satisfy him, I shall give him one from the Old, another
from the New Testament: For the first, All Church Members had a remote right to
the Passover, as is evident by that universal command, Exodus 12. 47. All the
Congregation of Israel shall keep it. 2 ly. That all Church Members had not an
immediate right, is as evident, because no Israelite was to eat thereof, when
unclean; but to stay till the next Passover, Numb. 9. For the New Testament,
That all Church Members have a mediate right to the Lords Supper, we grant, and
Mr. Humphrey disputes eagerly for it, making Church Membership the formal
ground thereof. That all Church Members have not an immediate right, is
evident; 1. In Infants and Idiots. 2 ly. From that famous place, 1 Cor. 10. 21.
You cannot drink of the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils, etc. He speaks
to Church Members; and that Cannot holds forth, not a natural, but moral
impossibility: for, whatsoever is unlawful, is morally impossible. Those
Church Members then, who drank of the Devils Cup at the Idols Temple, might
not drink of the Lords Cup at the Sacrament. They had then a mediate right as
Church Members; but, not an immediate right, because defiled by the Idol-Feast.
His cavills against this place have been formerly answered. I might here add
for confirmation, the practice of the Primitive Church, and our own Church, in
not admitting Church Members, till they had competent knowledge, and were free
from scandal: But, I forbear repetitions.

Those three thousand he speaks of, Acts 2, had competent knowledge, and by
professed repentance cleared themselves of scandal. Compare 2 Cor. 7. 11. To
such Church Members we shall not deny the Sacrament: The Lord increase the
number of them in our Churches.

Mr. Humphrey. So long as he is in Communion, how can he be debarred the
Communion?

Ans. He is actually in Communion, though jure excommunicate; yet, here Mr.
Humphrey will allow Suspension. Is it not clear then, by his own grant, that a
person in Communion, may be debarred the Communion?

D. Dr. Page 86.
Good Government lies in the Geometrical (not Arithmeticall) Administration of
Censures.

Mr. Humphrey. Mr. Drake 's Suspension hangs by Geometry, between admonition
and excommunication.

Ans. Be it so: that which hangs by Geometry hangs fast enough, however persons
unskild in Geometry, may fear it will fall. He does well to make up in Wit,
what is defective in Reason. Suspension wants not a Bottom in Scripture, though
it hang in the Air of Mr. Humphrer's Brain. But, of this, formerly, and more,
happily, hereafter.

Page 87.
He triumphs, because we grant suspension is not in terms in Scripture.

Ans. No more is Excommunication, which yet, I hope, is an unquestionable:
Ordinance. 2 ly. He deceives the Reader, in telling him, I place the whole
business of excommunication in suspension from actual Receiving, when its
evident by my whole discourse, I place but part of the business of
excommunication in it; it being a lower degree; and but a negative
excommunication, as we manage it, like his excommunication of Infants and
Idiots.

After sundry pitiful shufflings (with some scoffs intermixed) to make the
Parable of the Tares serve his turn, Page 88, and 89.
Mr. Humphrey at last Matthew. 13. 25.
coming to issue, and being pinched with the Doctrine of Excommunication,
which cuts the throat of his Interpretation of that Parable; is pleased to take
notice of my Objection, in these words, If the Lord will have the Tares let
alone until the day of judgment, what will become of Excommunication? To this,
all he answers, is, There is no doubt of Christ's reconciling his own
Ordinances, page 89. f.

Ans. Has Mr. Humphrey no more pity upon tender Consciences, then to leave
them thus in the suds? In opening the Parable, he tells us, the Tares cannot be
taken up, without prejudice to the Wheat; that is, the Wicked cannot be
separated from the Church, without prejudice to the Godly: Yea, so confident is
he herein, as to assert, That visible unworthiness is not so much, as the rule
of Excommunication, in these words, I think Mr. Drake must shut his eyes upon
this Text, if he will yet persists, in making visible unworthiness, the rule
of Excommunication, page 88. If visible unworthiness be not the rule of
excommunication, what is? Is visible or invisible worthiness the rule? Or, is
invisible unworthiness the rule of excommunicating Church Members? What was
the Incestuous Corinth excommunicated for, but for visible unworthiness?
unless Mr. Humphrey will say, that the charge of Incest made good against him,
was not his visible unworthiness. Church Members are not excommunicated as
Saints, but as Sinners; nor as sinners absolutely, but as visible sinners;
else, where is Mr. Humphrey his jure excommunicate? What is visible sin, but
visible unworthiness? And though all visible unworthiness do not make me
Evangelically unworthy; yet, visible unworthiness in dominion, does. This
Dominion is either Tyrannical, by some enormous act wasting the Conscience:
or, Regal, when a person is in the state of sin; both which make him Tareish,
and if visible, a visible Tare, to be plucked up (though in order to cure, if
possible) by the hands of Excommunication. By Tares then, are meant, persons
visibly wicked in the Church, (be it habitually or actually) Matthew. 13. verse.
27, 38. compare John 8 34. These Tares Mr. Humphrey will by no means have
plucked up. We Answer, Then farewell Excommunication, which is a plucking up of
the Tares. This Mr. Humphrey does not answer, (leaving Christ to answer for
himself, if he please) yet is resolved to hold the Conclusion. What heresy
may not pass for current if Mr. Humphrey his Disinity be good? For instance,
The Anthropomorphites teach, that God is a Body, and that, because eyes, ears,
hands, etc. are attributed to him in Scripture. We reply, God is a Spirit, John
4. 24. and therefore cannot be a Body. How easily now, may they with Mr.
Humphrey, hold the Conclusion still, and say, There is no doubt of Gods
reconciling his own Truth. God will indeed reconcile his own Truth and
Ordinances, be we never so negligent to reconcile them; but we can expect but
little thanks from God and Christ, if either through carelessenesse or
prejudice, we do not our endeavor to reconcile them. For the Satisfaction
therefore of tender Consciences, whom Mr. Humphrey leaves in a confused maze of
doubt: Know 1. Its true in some sense, that the Tares must not be plucked up,
for the Scripture says it, and the Scripture cannot be broken, John 10. 35. 2
ly. In some sense it is true, the Tares must be plucked up, because
Excommunication (which is a plucking up of Tares) is a Scripture-Ordinance, 1
Cor. 5. 5, 7. The terms are seemingly, but not really, contradictory: The
Tares must not be plucked up; and, the Tares must be plucked up. As others of
the like nature, God sees no sin in his Children; and, God sees sin in his
Children. The Church is without spot; and, the Church is spotted, etc. all
which are only seemingly contradictory, because not understood under the same
respect. For the difficulty about plucking up, or not plucking up, the Tares,
we cannot have a better Reconciler than Christ himself, Matthew. 13. 29. where
the ground of the Prohibition, is the rule and bound of the Prohibition. From
thence I gather, 1. That the Prohibition is not absolute, but with a caution,
Lest you pluck up the Wheat also, how ever Mr. Humphrey, page 89. is pleased to
judge of it, and in the close, to favor me with a jest. 2 ly. That men visibly
wicked must be tolerated in the Church, rather then persons visibly godly
should be prejudiced, by rash and preposterous rigor, against wicked
Church Members; as it fell out by the Anabaptists: See Calvin and Pareus upon
the place.

Others think, the Tares in Palestine were like the Wheat, whence there might
be danger of eradicating the Wheat with them. But, its evident, the Servants
knew the Tares, and were offended with them (whether by servants you understand
Church Officers, or other discerning Church Members) whence it seems to
follow, that either some may be known to be Tares, who cannot juridically be
proved to be so; and such was the case of Judas: Or, though they can be proved
to be such, yet, circumstances may so fall out, that just severity against
them, by way of excommunication, may be noxious to the godly: In which cases,
such Tares must be patiently tolerated, till either God open a door for the
Church to cast them out, or deal with them himself by particular or general
judgment. 3 ly. That Church Members may be known to be wicked, and in the state
of nature, without danger of entering upon Gods Throne; This Mr. Humphrey grants
here, and the Parable holds it forth, Matthew. 13. 26, 27. however he dispute
against it elsewhere. 4 ly. That where wicked men may be cut off without
prejudice to the godly, there the plucking up of those Tares is not prohibited
by the Parable; this will be done at the day of Judgment, has been done, and
may be done by excommunication. 5 ly. That a Ministers knowledge of a man to be
a Tare, is not enough to cast him out of the Church, since its of great
concernment, that the Wheat (as well as the Servants) should know the Tares:
that the Congregation (as well as Church Officers) should be satisfied, a
person is a Tare, before he be plucked up, which order being observed, there can
be no such danger of plucking up the Wheat. A Minister may suspend a positive
Act, in not giving the Sacrament to such a person for the present; but, he
cannot put forth a positive Act, to cut off such a person from the Church,
without consent or satisfaction of the Church, at least, representative. And,
if in the former case, the Minister do wrong through mistake or passion, etc.
himself is accountable to the Church for that particular injury; and the
person so wronged, ought to be righted by the Church. If Mr. Humphrey can
reconcile the Parable better with excommunication, we shall have cause to thank
him: If not, I shall entreat him not to scoff at what he cannot mend: But,
however he shall please to deal with me, let him remember, it is a Ministers
duty to satisfy, not to increase, the scruples of tender Consciences;
especially when his professed design is, the satisfaction of tender Consciences.
When two Scriptures seem to clash, is it fit for a Minister to leave them
together by the ears, and say, Matthew. 27. 43.
Let Christ part them if he will? Such carriage is fitter for a Jewish Priest,
then for a Gospel Minister. Is Mr. Humphrey so careful to reconcile Christ's
Members, and so careless to reconcile Christ's Truths?

Mr. Humphrey. Page 89.
Public confession will hardly down, and Auricular we hardly approve of, etc.

Ans. 1. No more will good Physic down with too many; yet, a wise and
faithful Physician will take some course to get it down, where he apprehends
its useful for his Patient. 2 ly. Public Confession of sin indeed is harsh,
because by it, one takes public shame to himself, which the proud heart of
man is loath to do; yet, in some cases it must be submitted to: But public
Profession of faith is honorable, and which its a shame for a Christian to be
ashamed of. Brides are not ashamed to profess their love of, and confidence
in, their Bridegrooms before the Minister, and the Church, if need be; and
shall Christ's Spouse be ashamed to declare her faith in, and love of, her most
precious Lord and Husband, before the friends of the Bridegroom?

3 ly. This Profession is not so public, as to offer violence to the modesty
of any, it being made but before two or three, who are also ready to prompt the
Bride, when her modesty seals up her lips with silence.

4 ly. To avoid the imputation of auricular Confession, etc. this Profession is
not made to the Minister alone, but before persons also of known integrity,
whom we hope, without offense, we may call Elders; and if they be not such, its
the error and fault of those who choose them, and may be remedied by themselves.

Mr. Humphrey. Christ sometimes conversed with Pharisees, I hope to do good
upon them, etc.

Ans. 1. So I hope Christ's Ministers will make conscience to converse with
Pharisees and Publicans to do them good, and bring them to repentance. 2 ly.
Christ admitted neither of them to the Sacrament, till he had done them good,
and brought them to repentance. And if this make not for us, and against Mr.
Humphrey, I pray what does?

This is the more remarkable, because both Pharisees and Publicans were members
of the Church (diverse Publicans being Jews, as is evident by Matthew, Zacheus,
etc. and is made out by Jerome against the mistake of Tertullian: See Goodwin's
Moses and Aaron, Lib. 1. Cap. 2.) Christ conversed with both to do them good,
but admitted neither to the Lords Supper, till after profession of repentance,
as is evident in the case of the Apostle Matthew, who was a Publican, Matthew. 9.
9. and 10. 3. compare Matthew. 26. verse. 20. 27.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 90.
Mr. Drake need not so unjustly and so direfully, first accuse me, and then
condemn me, for what he forges, as if I deserved to be more then suspended,
which in his sense makes me tremble it should enter into his heart. Why should
I be thus devoted to the pit of Hell, even irrecoverably? These Censures are
things too sharp to be put into the hands of such children of thine. It may be
the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and requite me good for his cursing
this day, etc.

Ans. Such passionate digressions (at which Mr. Humphrey is excellent)
contribute far more to take upon the affections, then his arguments do to
convince the judgment. Had he struck at so inconsiderable a person as my self
alone without such sad reflections upon the whole Presbyterian party (whom he
looks at as Children, not fit to have the knife of Church Censures committed to
them) well might it have been born, and buried in silence, though I believe,
that Ministers are bound more then others, in the use of all honorable means,
to wipe off from themselves the blot of false aspersions. Nor can I blame Mr.
Humphrey for vindicating himself, if I have been so injurious in my charge, as
he pretends. But to the point. Such stresse does Mr. Humphrey lay upon Judas
his receiving (a thing, 1 so controverted, and improbable enough. 2 ly. So
insufficient a ground for universal admission, though granted, his own party
being judges) as he concludes in express terms, What need more be urged, but
that men, when they are willing not to see, will let any hand (put over their
eyes) be enough to blind them. By this rash censure of his, I noted, that 1. He
condemned the Churches at home and abroad, as sinning wilfully against light,
in owning and practicing Suspension, contrary to the clear and undoubted
example (as he apprehends) of Judas his admission. 2 ly. That his Pen savoured
rankly of pride, in this unchristian censure. 3 ly. That himself, I fear,
deserved more then suspension, for this his scandalous and wicked censure. In
all this, 1. Where is there any forgery, unless the quotation of his own words
be a forgery? 2 ly. Where is the least word of cursing him, or of devoting him
irrecoverably to the pit of Hell? I, but in my sense it is so. Ans. Let the
Reader judge, if herein Mr. Humphrey deal charitably with me: I charge him only
with his own express terms; he charges me with that, of which I wrote not one
tittle, merely upon jealousy of my sense and meaning. 2 ly. He charges me
formerly as entering into Gods secrets; yet, here takes upon him to enter into
Gods secrets, and to judge of my heart and meaning, where my words bear no such
thing. 3 ly. He charges me with cursing him, and devoting him to the pit of
Hell irrecoverably, who had not one tittle in my book, nor own thought in my
heart to that purpose. I, but all this is employed, when I say, he deserves more
then suspension. Ans. 1. I say more against my self, and the Presbyterians in
general, upon supposition, that we were guilty of Mr. Humphrey his charge;
namely, that then we were in the high way to the sin against the Holy Ghost,
and deserved not only to be suspended, but also to be excommunicated. 2 ly. I
said not peremptorily, that he deserved more then suspension but, that I feared
he deserved more then suspension. 3 ly. Had I said, he deserved for this his
uncharitableness everlasting damnation, (supposing he were so uncharitable, of
which, let the Reader judge by his own words) I said no more then the truth,
unless it be false Doctrine that an uncharitable act deserves damnation 4 ly.
If the saying, that such or such a sin deserves damnation, be the cursing of a
person guilty thereof, or the devoting of him to damnation, then I cannot tell
a man, his sin deserves hell and curse, but in that very act I curse him, and
devote him to the pit of hell; and so the greatest act of charity, shall be
made the foulest act of uncharitableness. 5 ly. As my words bear no such
cursed sense, as Mr. Humphrey pins upon them, so I here profess, that in those
words, I was far from cursing, or devoting him to the pit of hell; but, did
apprehend indeed that such an uncharitable censure of the Churches of Christ at
home and abroad, deserved a higher degree of excommunication then suspension
is. And if Mr. Humphrey or any else, can make it out, that therein I have been
uncharitable, I shall willingly cry both God and him mercy, and be ready to
make as public reparation, as I have given thereby public offense. I never,
to my remembrance, heard before now, that to say, a man deserves
excommunication, is a cursing of him, and a devoting of him, irrecoverably, to
the pit of Hell, nor do I believe, that the Apostle, by excommunicating the
incestuous Corinth, did either curse him, or devote him to the pit of Hell, but
designed rather to bring him to Heaven, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Whereas therefore, page
90. he makes his appeal to Heaven in these words, Judge me, O Lord, try me, if
herein there be any iniquityin me: I shall not wish him so ill as he wisnes
himself, but do heartily beg of God, that he would please to open his eyes, and
pardon this, and all other his iniquities; and if this be uncharitable, I shall
thank Mr. Humphrey, or any else, for such uncharitableness toward me.

Sect. VIII.
Mr. Humphrey. Page 91.
My third Reason was drawn from Church Fellowship, which ought to be in
charity, humility, without judging, every one esteeming others better then
themselves. Now, if men will go to set up a discriminating. Ordinance, they
cannot keep themselves from entrenching on these duties, and occasioning
divisions. Our sad experience has made this Argument too weighty for Mr. Drake
's particulars, which are not worth the naming, unless he could first prove
its the Ministers duty, to discern between the worthy and unworthy, as the rule
of Admission. In the same page also, Mr. Humphrey denies, that the rule of
visibility has any foundation in Scripture, etc.

Ans. 1. That Church Fellowship ought to be in charity and humility, we
willingly grant, and earnestly desire it.

2 ly. We say, that this may stand with Suspension, as well as with reproof,
admonition, or excommunication; all which may be corrupted with pride, or
graced with humility and charity, according to the temper and affection of
those, who do either administer or receive them: and that each of them do
ordinarily occasion divisions and heart-burnings, where they meet with persons
disaffected through ignorance, prejudice, or malice; for which, not the
Ordinances, but our naughty hearts, deserve blame.

3 ly. In charging us to set up a discriminating Ordinance, he seems to deny,
that Church-Ordinances are discriminating: If that be his meaning, I apprehend
it is erroneous, since every Ordinance is discrinsinating in some sense, as in
an other sense every Ordinance is common. Every Ordinance, so far as it is
public, is common, as to presence; yet, all parts of every Ordinance, are not
common immediately and absolutely to all. The Word is common to all, yet, not
every part of the Word; the Sacraments are common to all, yet, not every part
of the Sacrament, namely, not the participating part.

4 ly. Because here Mr. Humphrey charge us, with setting up an Ordinance of
our own invention, by pleading for the divine right of Suspension, I shall
therefore briefly by one or two Arguments, endeavor to wipe off this
aspersion; and prove, that Suspension is not an human invention, but a divine
institution: I shall only premise, that Suspension is either Juridicall or
Pastoral, Affirmative or Negative; the latter branch of the distinction being
granted, the former will necessarily follow, since what a Minister may, or
ought, either to do, or omit, as he is a Minister; much more may he, or ought
he, to do, or omit that particular, upon the vote and sentence of the
Eldership. And here, upon second thoughts, I must a little correct what I
delivered in my Bar to Free Admission, page 47. namely, That the Minister has
not power of himself to admit or keep back, without judicial Process,
wherein himself cannot be both Judge and Witness. I delivered it then with
some hesitancy, and do now apprehend it to be a mistake, is unquestionably both
a Ruling and Teaching Elder, has at least a Pastoral power of trying and
judging; and if the Evidence be clear of it self, or by sufficient witness,
he may suspend his own Act, of giving such a person the Sacrament, till either
the party be better qualified, or the matter do come to a juridicall process.
These things premised, the Argument stands thus. The first Argument.
Non-admission of some intelligent Church Members is commanded by Christ, Ergo,
Suspension is commanded by Christ. The Consequence is clear, becausethe
formality of Suspension lies in non-admission to the Sacrament; and, let us
have but this, we shall not much contend about the manner of managing it,
whether by a juridicall act or otherwise. This is further proved by the very
term: What is Suspension in the very notion of it, but a demur or forbearance
at present, to give unto a person the thing he desires? The Minor is proved
thus, Non-admission of a Brother that is a Fornicator, etc, is commanded, Ergo,
Non-admission of some intelligent Churchmember is commanded. The Consesequence
is clear, 1. Because Brother is opposed to them without, 1 Cor. 5. verse 10,
11. and therefore this Brother is a Churchmember. 2 ly. That he is an
intelligent Churchmember may be clearly evinced (should Mr. Humphrey deny it)
since diverse lusts there mentioned are not practicable by any, but grown
persons. The Assumption I prove thus: Not to eat the Sacrament with a Brother
that is a Fornicator, etc. is commanded. Ergo, Non-admission of a Brother that
is a Fornicator, etc. is commanded. The Consequence is valid, because of the
necessary connection between the Non admission of such a person to eat with me,
and my not eating with him. If I must not eat with a person, then (as far as in
me lies) I must not admit that person to eat with me; for his eating with me,
and my eating with him being Correlates, if you grant one, you must of
necessity grant both, since he cannot eat with me, but I must eat with him; nor
can I eat with him, but he must eat with me. The Antecedent I prove from 1 Cor.
5. 11. If any man that is called a Brother be Fornicator, etc. with such a one,
no, not to eat. All that can rationally be objected against this proof, is,
That by eating here, is not meant Sacramental eating, the indefinite
Proposition being not to be understood universally.

Ans. 1. To this I oppose the received Rule of interpreting Scripture in its
utmost latitude, unless a solid ground of restriction and limitation can be
given: But, no solid ground can be given, why Eating here, should be restrained
to civil eating.

And 1. Not, that Precept of our Savior, Matthew. 26. 27. Drink ye all of it:
Since 1. If Judas were not then present (which is probable enough) none but
real as well as visible Saints, were commanded to receive.

2 ly. Supposing Judas were present and received, yet, he was a visible Saint;
and so far were the Disciples then from being scandalized at him, that they
scarce understood Christ's uncasing Judas, but suspected themselves rather than
him: Yea, if Luke observe the exact order of time, Judas (it seems) was not
uncased, till after the Sacrament, Luke 22. verse. 19, 20, 21. since these
words, Behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, etc. do not precede, but
follow the Sacrament; so that at least Judas had received the Bread, before he
was discovered nor can it be evinced from Luke's narrative but that he had
partaken of the Cup also, it being left in medio, whether Christ did discover
him immediately after the command to drink; or, whether he deferred the
discovery till Judas and all the rest had drunk of the Sacrament all Cup This I
note, not as my own judgment, but upon the supposall of Luke's exact timing of
that Circumstance: But, whether it were before or after, the objection lies
fair, that Christ knew Judas to be naught, yet commanded him to receive; so far
was Christ from improving his Pastoral power to suspend Judas: Ergo Ministers
should not only admit those whom they know to be stark naught but also command
them to receive. The Reader must remember, that here I give Mr. Humphrey his
own advantage, as yielding him (by way of supposall) the Question he begs,
namely, that Judas did receive the Sacrament.

This premised, I answer, The Argument will not hold from Christ's practice to
ours, since 1. The discovery of Judas was extraordinary, by immediate
revelation: And, should God immediately discover an unworthy Receiver to a
Minister, I question, whether without an immediate command, this Minister might
suspend such a person. Achan was not censured immediately upon divine
revelation, but upon evidence of the fact, and his own confession. We see that
for all our Saviors discovery, Judas seemed to deny the charge, in that
question, Master, is it I? and the Apostles were very inclinable to a good
opinion of him. Suppose God should immediately discover an Hypocrite to a
Minister, and upon that discovery, this Minister should suspend that Hypocrite;
might not the Elders or Congregation desire evidence against the party so
suspended; and would the Ministers plea of divine revelation, satisfy the
Congregation, in case the party so suspended, denied the charge? Yea, if this
Doctrine were good, might not a Minister upon pretense of divine revelation,
take liberty to charge any with Hypocrisy, and to suspend them at pleasure? I
wish, upon this occasion, that those who will be tried by the Minister alone,
and not before the Eldership, would seriously consider, what a snare they put
both themselves and their Minister upon.

2 ly. As the discovery was extraordinary, so our Savior acted extraordinarily
in admission and other circumstances, that concerned this first Sacrament: As
1. He admitted only men, no women. 2 ly. Only Ministers, not the People, no,
not the Jews that were in, or of, the same Family, where the Lords Supper was
first celebrated, as Mr. Collins well observes. 3 ly. In admitting only
extraordinary Ministers, namely, Apostles. 4 ly. In admitting them suddenly,
without previous examination and preparation. 5 ly. In celebrating the
Sacrament at night, after Supper, and in private etc. And why may not Christ as
well act extraordinarily, in admitting a known Hypocrite? If Mr. Humphrey will
tie us to imitate Christ in one of these, why not in all of them? I might add,
that if Christ's practice in admitting Judas be our rule, then it were a sin to
excommunicate any, since Christ did not excommunicate Judas, though he knew
Judas deserved excommunication as well as suspension.

Nor 2 ly. Is that a ground to exclude Sacramental eating, out of the
forementioned Text, 1 Cor. 5. 11, Because all are invited to repentance, for
then even Pagans should not be debarred the Sacrament; yea, if none should be
denied Sacramental eating, because all are invited to repentance, why should
any be denied civil eating with Church Members, since all are invited to
repentance? May not there be in the one as well as in the other, 1.
Testification of love. 2 ly. Familiarity. 3 ly. A desire to win the
offending-Brother. And 4 ly. Is not the one offensive as well as the other?

Nor 3 ly. Is there any contradiction between 1 Cor. 5. 11. and 1 Cor. 11. but
rather a sweet harmony; since in the first place be forbids unworthy ones to
eat; in the second place he shows their great sin and danger, if they presume
to eat: Here is no opposition, but a regular subordination.

Nor 4 ly. is Sacramental eating excluded out of 1 Cor. 5. 11. because it is
not particularly mentioned in the Text; for then, by the same reason, both
civil eating, and eating at their Love Feasts, should be excluded also, since
neither of them are mentioned particularly in the Text, but only eating in
general, which is common to Sacramental, as well as to civil, eating. It Is
sufficient, that Sacramental eating is intended by the Apostle, under the
notion of a Feast, 1 Cor. 5. 8. there being no Gospel Ordinance so properly
and Literally a Feast, as is the Lords Supper, which supplies the Feast of the
Passover, and comes in its room; and in it, Christ, our Passover, is
representatively and declarativly offered for us, and actually offered to us,
more then in other Ordinances, Gal. 3. 1. Before whose eyes (not only, to their
ears) Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified among you.

If yet it be objected, There Is good reason civil eating should be included in
the Text, since the Apostle speaks evidently of such an eating, wherein I may
converse with an Infidel, but not with a scandalous Brother. Ans. Therefore we
grant the place may be understood of civil eating, but deny it must be
understood solely of civil eating, there being good reason also, why it should
be understood of Sacramental eating, since the Sacrament is Literally (as well
as Spiritually) a Meal, a Feast, in which I testify love to every Communicant,
as well as I do to any, by admitting him to my own Table; and the scandal of
admitting a scandalous Brother to the Sacrament (where it lies in my power to
keep him away) will be great, as well as it will be, if I admit him to my
private Table. A scandalous Brother then, was debarred some privileges of an
Heathen, some privileges of a Church-m^mber, and might not be admitted with
Christians, either to a Civil Feast, or to the Love Fe^sts, or to the
Sacramental Feast: Yea, the Apostle tells us particularly, Such were spots in
their Feasts of Charity, Jude, verse 12. And those Love Feasts were Appendixes
of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. verse 21, 22.

Object. They were all partakers of one bread; yet, in the Church of Corinth,
there were many scandalous sinners. 1 Cor. 10. 17.


Ans. The word All, can be of no larger extent then visible Saints (such as
were those to whom the Apostle wrote) and surely, visible workers of iniquity
cannot be visible Saints. This not mine, but Mr. Gillespy's answer, who asserts
also, that it cannot be proved, that any came actually drunk to the Sacrament
in which, both the term (...), and the phrase (...), favor him, 1 Cor. 11.
21. This Interpretation is more evident, by the manner of expression, 1 Cor.
10. 17. (compare a like place, Rom 8. 35, 39.) We all are partakers etc. the
Apostle putting himself in the number, though he were not a Member of the
Church of Corinth, or of any other particular Church; but, as a real and
visible Saint, did partake where ever he came: Yea, where Ministers, or other
Christians, traveled from one Country to another, they were not easily
admitted to Church Communion, without some Testimonial of their real or
visible Saint-ship, by either word of mouth, or by writing, Acts 9. 26, 27. and
15. verse 25, 26, 27. and 18. 27. and 2 Cor. 3. 1. and 3 John, verse 5-8. etc.
What a poor recommendation had it been; I pray receive the incestuous Corinth,
or such a one as denies the Resurrection, to full Church Communion, for he is a
Churchmember. The Congregationall Churches, yea, and other reformed Churches,
will not admit Church Members of our Congregations, barely upon the account of
Church Membership (though they acknowledge diverse of our Congregations to be
true Churches) but put us upon the Test (unless they have otherwise sufficient
testimony) of our visible Saintship. More to this purpose, together with sundry
opposite answers to several other objections, made against this Scripture, see
in Mr. Gillespy and Mr. Collins his late Vindic. Suspensionis, etc. unto whom
(for brevities sake) I refer the Reader.

2 Argum.
My second Argument for Suspension (which is also Mr. Collins his Argument) is
this: It Is unlawful to admit some intelligent Church Members to the Lords
Supper: Ergo, They ought to be suspended. The Consequence is clear, since to
admit, and not to admit, are terms contradictory; and therefore, if the one be
unlawful, the other must needs be a duty: Now Suspension in its formal
Nature, is a non-admission; and therefore if it be unlawful to admit, it is a
duty to suspend. The Minor I prove thus: It Is unlawful to admit those who
cannot eat of the Lords Supper: some intelligent Church Members cannot eat of
the Lords Supper: Ergo. By persons that cannot receive, I understand those who
are morally incapable, and who (if they be of age) fin by their very receiving,
as being forbidden to partake of the Lords Supper, because at present they are
visibly unworthy by gross ignorance or scandal; as well as Heathen are
forbidden to receive, upon the account of being no Church Members. Both have a
natural, but neither of them have a moral power to receive: Nor is an Heathen
in express terms forbid to receive the Lords Supper, but only by consequence,
as are unworthy Church Members. This premised, the Major is evident, upon the
very explication of the terms: for, if it be unlawful to admit those, who sin
by their very receiving, then it is unlawful to admit those, who cannot eat of
the Lords Supper in a moral sense, since that, and that only, is morally
impossible which is sinful. Compare Genesis 39. 9. Deuteronomy. 21. 16. Josh. 9. 19. and
2 Cor. 13. 8. they had all natural, but no moral power, to do the things
there mentioned; yet they say absolutely, They cannot do such and such things.
Those places, Deuteronomy. 16. 16. and Josh. 9. 21. are rendered, He may not, and, We
may not, etc. but in the Original it is (...), he cannot, and (...), we cannot
etc. or, shall not be able. This is the more remarkable, because the same
phrase is used about the Passover, Numb. 9. 6. Certain men were defiled by the
dead body of a man, that they could not keep the Passover on that day. Moses,
in the Old Testament says, You cannot eat the Passover, and touch the dead
body of a man. Paul, in the New Testament, says, You cannot partake of the
Table of the Lord, and of the Table of Devils. In both, the Cannot is moral,
not natural. An unclean man might not eat of the Passover; one in communion
with Devils, might not receive the Lords Supper. Now that all intelligent
Church members have not a moral power to receive, is evident by the words of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 21. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of
Devils; ye cannot be partaker, of the Table of the Lord, and the Table of
Devils. Undoubtedly they had a natural power to eat the Sacramental bread,
etc. but they had not a moral power because, being under the guilt of
communion with Idols, it was unlawful for them at that time to eat. The
Steward sins against his Lord, in giving bread to those of the Family, or
otherwise, who ought not to eat it. Does Christ, the Master of the Family, say
I will not have such a one to eat of my Supper; and dare any Minister say to
that person, Take and eat? If the Lord say, its morally impossible for such a
one to eat, he says, its unlawful for him to eat. And what a man must not do,
that no man must tempt him to do, nor permit him to do, when he can lawfully
hinder it: But, Church Officers may very lawfully and easily hinder those from
partaking, who may not partake; and such are all who have fellowship with
Devils. Now fellowship with Devils is either explicit, as in Witches, etc.
or implicit, when men drive the Devils trade, and do the works of Satan
willingly, John 8. 44. and 1 John 3. 8. From which number, I know not how
persons grossly and wilfully ignorant and scandalous, (especially after due
admonition) can be exempted: Sure I am, they communicate more with Devils,
then did the Corinthians, who are of the Idols Feasts, in the Idol Temples,
without any intention to honor the Idol; as judging, that under the Gospel
there was no uncleanness, either of meats or of places: Yet, even these are
forbid by the Apostle to receive the Lords Supper, when they feasted at the
Idols Temples. The Argument stands thus: He that has communion with Devils,
cannot (that is, ought not to) partake of the Lords Table. All grossly ignorant
and scandalous persons have communion with Devils: Ergo, No such ought to
receive: And, if they ought not to partake, surely the Minister ought not to
admit them, and therefore he must needs suspend them.

This I might further illustrate and confirm, by comparing 1 Cor. 5. 12. With
such an one, no, not to eat, 1 Cor. 10. 21. You cannot partake of the Lords
Table. And 1 Cor. 11. 20. This is not to eat the Lords Supper; or (as its
rendered in the Margent) Ye cannot eat, etc. The Verb substantive (...) being
put for (...). If I may not partake with other of Gods People, nor they with
me, surely I must be suspended; for what is Suspension really, but
non-Admission?

By what has been delivered, I hope it will appear, that the Sacrament is a
discriminating Ordinance, as to the point of receiving; and that Suspension is
not an human invention, but a divine institution, which (as other Ordinances)
may be dispensed with love and humility, if the dispencers thereof be wise,
holy, and humble persons, that make conscience to judge themselves more then
others; and when ever, by virtue of their Office, they are called, to try and
judge others.

Sundry other arguments for the divine right of Suspension or Abstention, See
in Mr. Collins his Vindic. etc. The ground, why I pitched upon the two
forementioned Arguments, was, because I apprehend they come nearer the point,
not only in their scope, but also in the very letter. Now, lest the Reader
should think we go alone, or have only some few inconsiderable persons to abet
us in this cause, I shall take a little pains to evidence the contrary. And
first (besides the declared Judgment of the Church, in ancient Councills, and
modern Synods, of which before) let us consider the testimonies of the Fathers,
diverse of which are cited by Gerhard, in this matter of Suspension from the
Sacrament.

To begin with Justin Martyr, in his Apology for the Christians, Hoc alimentum
apud nos appellatur Eucharistia, quod nulli alii participarelicitum est quam
veram esse doctrinam nostram credenti, and lavacro propter remissionem
peccatorum and regenerationem abluto, and, ita ut Christus tradidit, viventi.

Basil. Lib. 2. de Bapt. Cap. 3. Probat, quam periculosum sit, si quis non
repurgatus ab omni inquinamento Corporis and Spiritus, edat Corpus Domini,
ejusque sanguinem bibat.

Chrysostom. Homil. 3. ad Ephesians. Cum tali puritate accede semper; sine hac ne
praesumas unquam: Regem utique non audeas osculari, siquidem os tuum olet
graviter; et regem Caelorum impudenter oscularis, anima tua vitiis olente, etc?

Augustine. de Eccle. dogmat. Cap. 53. Habentem adhuc voluntatem peccandi,
gravari magis dico Eucharistiae perceptione quam purificari. Yea, he says
further, Persons unreformed, receive unto judgment; that they are rather
corrupted then healed, rather killed then quickened, by receiving the Sacrament.
Sermon. Dom. 1. Advent. Tom. 10. Sure then, he thought not, receiving did convert.

Hesychius. Lib. 6. in Cap. 22. Levit. Polluti non sunt admittendi, nec mundati
prohibendi. This he explains afterward to be moral pollution, which is a bar
to the Sacrament till repented of.

Chrysostom. Homil. 83. in Matthew. professes, He had rather lose his life, then
admit an unworthy person to the Sacrament.

Cyprian, Sermon. 5. de Lapsis. from 1 Cor. 10. 21. and 1 Cor. 11. 27. declaims
vehemently against those, who come from Idol-Feasts, or, under the power of
moral pollution, to the Lords Table.

Author Sermonis de Coena, thought to be Cyprian, has these words: Inter
Dominicae Coenae convivas, animalis homo non admittitur; Quicquid caro et
sanguis dictat, ab hoc coetu excluditur, etc. I pray, what is the animal-man,
but the natural man? 1 Cor. 2. 14. I hope then its not my singular opinion,
That persons unconverted ought not to receive. What was the opinion of Calvin,
Beza, and their Followers, is well known; therefore I shall not trouble my
Reader about it.

Let us descend to the Lutheran Churches, of whose consent with us, in this
particular, Gerhard (a person of great learning and industry) gives a
satisfactory account, in his 5th. Tome. treating of the Lords Supper, cap. 21.
his words are these, Neque vero omnes Christiani promiscue admittendi ad Sacram
coenam, sed juxta regulam Paulinam, 1 Cor. 11. Next he shows who ought not to
be admitted, and 1. Such as either cannot, or will not, examine themselves;
particularly, Heretics, notorious sinners: And here he argues from the
analogy of the Passover, and from 1 Cor. 5. 11. Persons excommunicated,
possessed, that are deprived the use of reason, that exeroise infamous Arts or
Trades; shows in what cases deaf and dumb persons may be admitted; upon what
account Infants were admitted to the Sacrament, for 600 years together in the
Primitive times, and produces Chrysostom, professing, That he had rather lose
his life, then admit unworthy persons to the Lords Supper. He notes further
against Bellarmine, that the Hussites admit to the Sacrament Infants of six
weeks old: And for my part, I believe, that upon the account of unworthiness,
there is less exception against an Infant, then against a grossly ignorant and
scandalous person.

Cap. 22. Gerhard has these words, Sedulo providere debet Ecclesiae Minister,
ne quis indigne, hoc est, sine vera poenit entia and fide hoc Sacramento
utatur. Whence its evident, he judges them unworthy who want true faith and
repentance: See Sect. 232 of the same Chapter.
Who do not try themselves, that is, who do not acknowledge their sins, do not
seriously grieve for them, do not judge themselves, have not a serious purpose
of amendment and walking regularly; that are not reconciled to their
neighbors. In the same Chapter he grants, that 1 Cor. 10. 20. is valid, to
prove, that they who have fellowship with Devils, ought not to partake of the
Lords Supper; and shows out of Lyranus, and by comparing other Texts of
Scripture, that the Cannot there, must be understood of a moral impossibility.

Yea, lastly, the very Papists themselves are strongly against Mr. Humphrey his
free Admission: I shall produce only Aestius and Biell.

Aestius upon 1 Cor. 11. 27. shows first who receives unworthily, to wit, not
only he who comes irreverently, as Mr. Humphrey would have it; but also he, Qui
affectum gerit aut reatum peccati mortalis. And though their distinction of
sins into Mortal and Venial be corrupt; yet, seeing they conclude, he is in
mortal sin, who 1. Affects sin. 2 ly. Is not duly humbled and contrite. 3
ly.Is unpardoned. See Biel, Lib. 4. Distinct. 9. Quaest. 2. Its evident, they
must needs conclude, that none in the state of nature can receive worthily:
Yea, Aestius, in the forequoted place, notes, that he who comes to receive with
a spirit of enmity against God, yet unreconciled, is guilty of high Treason
against our Lord Jesus Christ, and deserves to be puninished as Judas, who
betrayed Christ, and those who spit upon him, bound, and crucified him.
Further, upon 1 Cor. 11. 28. he shows, 1. That every one is bound first to
examine himself, whether he be a fit guest; and if he find he be not, he must
labor to be such a one, by purging his Conscience from sin which makes him
unworthy of the Lords Table. The Council of Trent, Sess. 3. Cap. 7. besides
Contrition, requires Sacramental Confession (where it can be had) of all
sorts, before they partake of the Lords Supper, which they ground partly upon
that precept of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 28. and partly upon an Ecclesiastical
Custom. It seems they were not for Mr. Humphrey his free Admission, but
judged, that before Receiving, satisfaction should be given to the Church;
though in determining what that satisfaction must be, they declined to
Superstition and Tyranny.

In the ancient Lyturgy, the Minister, before the Sacrament, cried out, Sancta
Sanctis. See other testimonies of the Fathers, cited there by Aestius, and
several arguments he uses, to prove, that no natural man ought to receive the
Sacrament. Upon 1 Cor. 5. 11. the same Aestius has these words, His verbis
excommunicationis poena significatur; minor tamen ea qua superius plecti voluit
incestum illum: Where he also cites Augustine, as referring the place to a
lesser degree of excommunication, which may fall upon him who is a Brother, and
so a Churchmember.

And upon 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. he expressly says, Haec excommunicatio, non a
consortio fidelium, sed tantum a Sacramentis Ecclesiae removet hominem. And,
upon verse 15. of this Chapter, Excommunicatio hujus loci non separabat hominem
ab Ecclesia, ut, membrum ejus, et proinde fidelium frater, esse de sineret,
etc. By which its evident, they held, that positive Suspension was 1. A degree
of Excommunication. 2 ly. That it did not unchurch a man. 3 ly. That it was a
bar to the Sacrament. Our Suspension (which yet Mr. Humphrey cries out of) is
but negative, and so not a Church Censure, but an entreaty to forbear, till
fitted by competent knowledge, etc. to receive.

Biell upon the Sentences, Lib. 4. Dislinct. 9. Quaest. 1. Effectus
Eucharistiae non est prima gratia qua justificatur impius, sed illam
praesupponit. Effectus enim manducationis Eucharistiae est gratiae augmentum,
qua anima Deo gratae nutritur et crescit in gratia, ut ad perfectionem
perveniat. The Papists then acknowledge, the Lords Supper is no converting
Ordinance.

In the second Question he shows, that diverse, by coming to receive, sin
mortally; and withal, that in some cases, if a man be scrupulous, and fear he
is under the guilt of mortal sin, he must lay aside such a scrupulous
Conscience before he receive, but must not receive against Conscience. He
shows also, out of other Schoolmen, in what cases a Minister sins, if he admit
such to receive; and instances (as the Lutherans) in diverse sorts of
Church Members that are not to be admitted; and concludes, that, Nulli danda
est Eucharistia qui non potest habere devotionem, nec fidem actualem. And for
the instance of Judas (Mr. Humphrey his great foundation for free Admission)
both Lutherans and Papists, though of his mind, that Judas did receive; yet,
look at it, as no ground at all, for the free admission of all intelligent
Churchmembers. I hope Mr. Humphrey will be more charitable, then to say, that
Councills, Fathers, the Reformed Churches, Lutherans; yea, diverse Papists, put
their hands over their eyes, and sinned against Light, because they were not of
his mind, that Judas his admission (suppose he were admitted to receive) is a
solid ground for his free Admission.

For fuller satisfaction in this particular, let the Reader consult Mr. Collins
his Responsoria Bipartita, Cap. 13. where he makes it out by authentic
Testimonies, that Suspension, as distinct from absolute Excommunication, has
been the constant judgment and practice, of the Servants and Churches of
Christ, in all Ages.

Cap. 14. Mr. Collins takes pains, to good purpose, to clear from the writings
of the Ancients, the several degrees of persons not excommunicated, yet,
suspended from the Lords Supper.

And for those of the Congregationall way, that they are no enemies to
Suspension, as distinct from the greater Excommunication; Read what Mr. Collins
notes in his 13 Chapter, page 153. of his Responsoria or Vindiciae, etc. in
these words, For our dissenting Brethren, it is their practice, when once they
have admonished an offender; to suspend him from the Sacrament till he repent,
or, be wholly cast out of the Church. At this time, in this City, is one who
has been suspended these twelve Months, if he be not lately restored nor
excommunicated.

Page 91. and 92. Mr. Humphrey allows public Church-tryall, upon conviction;
and private trial, upon charitable suspicion, as, Job 1. 5. This ingenious
acknowledgment, I shall (with Mr. Humphrey his leave) improve for his
conviction.

And 1. If the instance of Job be sufficient to warrant private judgment, why
may not the instance of the suspected woman, Numb. 5. warrant public
Church-tryall upon suspicion?

2 ly. If Governors of Families may privately try Children and Servants under
their charge, and improve their Authority, to keep from the Sacrament such
Children or Servants, in case they be ignorant or scandalous; why may not
Church Officers (who are Stewards of Gods House) do the like to those who are
under their charge, as Parents, etc. may, to those under their charge?

3 ly. How was Jeremith set as a Watchtower amongst Gods people, to try their
ways? Jer. 6. 27. How was Timothy sent upon suspicion, to know the faith of
the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5? Why was Ephesus commended, for trying the
false Apostles, Rev. 2. 2? Why must Deacons be tried, and that upon charitable
suspicion, 1 Timothy 3. 10? If it be objected, The neglect of their trial is more
dangerous: Answ. True, therefore more care must be had in their trial; but,
Magis et minus non variant speciem: Nor does their trial exclude the trial of
private Christians; which, if neglected, may prove as dangerous to the Church,
as the neglect of trying Public Church Members, if the multitude of private
Christians be compared with the paucity of Church Officers. Nor can the trial
of all, of its own nature, prejudice any, but is very conducible to the
Edification of Rulers and People.

Page 92. Mr. Humphrey A judgment of probability, as to fitness and
unfitness, may be solid, as to advice and counsel; but, not as to be a rule
of admission and suspension.

Ans. 1. Then by Mr. Humphrey his own grant, Church-Tryall of every
Churchmember is warrantable, in order to advice and counsel. If so, why does
not Mr. Humphrey persuade the people to submit to such trial, which, we are
verily persuaded, would soon put an end to the controversy. Mr. Humphrey cannot
be ignorant, that too many will not admit trial upon any terms. 2 ly. What if
upon trial in order to advice and counsel, the party tried, be found grossly
ignorant or scandalous? Is he not, ipso facto, upon such discovery, made by
trial, visibly unworthy above suspicion? And must the Church, notwithstanding
this apparent unworthiness, admit such an one? Yet, even here, our ordinary
course is, rather to advise and counsel, then to suspend. And if upon scandal
proved, they testify their repentance, we dare not refuse them, or, if upon
conviction of gross ignorance, they desire to be further instructed, we doubt
not, through Gods mercy, in a month or two, to instill so much knowledge, as
may stand with truth of grace, and so make them visibly worthy; leaving the
secrets of the heart to Gods judgment alone, unless hypocrisy break out
visibly afterward. What he adds, page 92. and 93. either it has been already
answered, or makes not against us; since Suspension is no prejudice to the
firmness of Excommunication, but either a degree of it, (if juridically
passed) a preparative to it, or a charitable prevention of it, by bringing a
person to himself and his duty; and, happy that Church, who by such an
incision, can for ever forestall excision. We think, as well as Mr. Humphrey,
It were a wretched Interpretation to say, the Church could not bear evil
persons only at the Sacrament; but, it is a good Interpretation to say, She
cannot bear them at the Sacrament, though not only there: For, after
Suspension, the Church has patience, to see if that will amend the Offender;
if not, She may proceed to Excommunication. So that his censure of me, page 63.
he builds, partly upon his own misreport of my words, both, as to the matter
and manner of expression; partly upon his own mistake, who makes Sacramental
trial (as we hold it forth) the cause of diverse miserable effects, of which,
it is only the occasion; but the proper causes are, the ignorance or pride of
too many, not only Refusers, but even Tryers and Judges.

Mr. Humphrey. There cannot be expressed more bitterness to a fellow-Minister;
etc. (if he would know it) than to number me in the company of Korah,
Sanballat, and Tobiah.

Ans. How unjustly Mr. Humphrey loads me with bitter censoriousnesse, the
Reader will easily judge, if he please but to peruse my Text, page 66. My words
are these, He takes no notice how many are admitted, etc. who bless God for
the care our Builders take, in purging and repa^ring Gods House, and the new
Jerusalem, how ever opposed and discouraged by Sanballat, Tobiah, and other
Samaritans. And I wish too many, I hope, real Jews, did not too much
correspond with them. I am sure Mr. Humphrey, by this unhappy Book of his, has
done Sanballat and Tobiah more service, then either Nehemiah or Ezra; the Lord
forgive him.

Here 1. is not one word of Korah. 2 ly. Half an eye of charity will easily
see, that in those expressions, I looked at Mr. Humphrey as a true Jew, rather
then a Samaritan. 3 ly. Yet with grief I declared my apprehension, that by his
Treatise of free Admission, he has done service to Samaritans rather than to
true Jews. This is my judgment still, not only of Mr. Humphrey, but of the
godliest under Heaven, who some way or other, first or last, by error or
practice, are too subservient to Sanballat, 1 Cor. 3. verse. 12, to 15. And
herein I am far from excepting my self, being the weakest of ten thousand. If
Mr. Humphrey his Tenet be erroneous, sure he has done Sanballat service: If
his Tenet be true. I confess I have done Sanballat service, in opposing it.
Let Mr. Humphrey or any make this good, I shall thank them for their pains and
be the first shall put fire to my ney and stubble. I hope the pious and
judicious Reader will not count this bitter censoriousnesse; no nor Mr.
Humphrey neither, upon a second review. I cannot judge Sacramental trial a
truth, but I must needs judge the opposite Doctrine an error, and by
consequence, that they who promote it, do work for Sanballat, as to that act;
however, as to their persons, they may be true Jews. Let Mr. Humphrey say as
much of me, I shall not think him censorious at all, much less bitterly
censorious.

Indeed page 65. I speak these words to Mr. Humphrey, Let him take heed, lest
in this rash censure he be not like Korah and his Company. Yet 1. I hope, not
every one that does something like Korah, is presently of Korah's company. Nor,
2 ly. did I say he was of Korah's number or company, only, I ventured to Item
him, that in rash censuring, he be not like Korah, etc. 3 ly. In my best
apprehension, his rash censure is too like the clamor of Korah, etc. Numb.
163. And 1 Korah affirms, that all the Congregation was holy (just as all our
Congregations are cried up to be holy, yea, every member of our Congregations.)
2 ly. That Moses and Aaron took too much upon them, and lifted up themselves,
etc. (as too many judge the Presbyterians, though I must not say Mr. Hamphrey
does so, for fear I should be thought censorious) Let the Reader consult Mr.
Humphrey his Vindication, page 20. and his Rejoinder, page 91. and I hope he
will judge more charitably of my former Item, then Mr. Humphrey does.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 94.
And should I now return him his own language, page 61. See you not here, how
the vizard of piety falls off, and his breath and pen savor rankly of pride?
Should I say, If this do not smell of sublime Pharisaisme, I beseech you what
does? For my part, when he can even wish the earth might open and swallow me, I
sire the Lord to open his eyes, to see the rents he helps to make, to swallow
up the Church, etc.

Ans. 1. Does not a godly man's Unchristian censure, make the vizzard of piety
fall off, and his breath and pen smell rankly of pride in that act? Those words
Mr. Humphrey left out of his charge, against the Letter of my Text; by omission
of which, the Reader might conceit I censured his person as a proud hypocrite,
which uncharitableness I desire to adhor. The reason why I concluded, those
words of his savoured of pride and hypocrisy, see in my Bar, page 60. and if
it be not solid, let the Reader censure me, for so condemning that passage of
Mr. Humphrey's. Proportionably, may not some acts of a godly man savor of
sublime Pharisaisme? 2 ly.Far be it from me to wish, The earth might open and
swallow him: Let Mr. Humphrey show but such a wish in all my Book, I shall
heartily ask God and him pardon; I know of no such expression, I abhor it, and
shall abhor my self for it, if any such bitter passage slipped from me, I desire
Mr. Humphrey to convince me, or to clear me. 3 ly. I desire as heartily as Mr.
Humphrey, that God would open mine eyes, to see where I make any rents in the
Church: Surely, either Mr. Humphrey or my self must be guilty of this sin; he
thinks, I am; I think, he is; happily, both of us may be too guilty, by our
inordinate heats: We cannot tell how to debate and convince each other, but we
must be angry. And truly, when the Shepherds are so hot in divifion, the
Flocks cannot be very firm in union. Yet waving passion on both sides, as
extrinsicall, yea, prejudicial to our cause; that party who promotes and
stickles for error, helps by rents to swallow up the Church. Mr. Humphrey
charges me, I him, with Error, about Sacramental trial; let the Reader weigh
Arguments and Answers on both sides, and then judge, who is the Rent-maker, and
Church-swallower.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 96.
I pity Mr. Drake's poor excuse, telling us, that the Pharisees judgment, Luke
18. was private and without trial; as if a thing, for being the more public,
were the less evil; and when he judges himself worthy, and many unworthy, he
asks this Question. Yet, how do we think our selves better then others?

Ans. 1. The Pharisee's judgment was private, as to his Call or Authority. 2
ly. It was rash, without trial had; so is not the judgment of Church Officers,
who are called by Christ to judge, and proceed according to evidence, from the
party himself, or from sufficient witness. Mr. Humphrey leaves out this
latter, and plays with the ambiguity of the word Private, to make my sense
ridiculous.

2 ly. How do I judge my self worthy, who was not admitted to the Lords
Supper, but upon the same account, upon which (if regularly) Mr. Humphrey
himself was admitted to be a Minister; namely, upon trial and examination by
Church Officers. Does Mr. Humphry judge himself worthy to be a Minister,
because with the Presbytery of Ministers, he tries candidates for the Ministry;
and, upon evidence of insufficiency, he with other assisting Ministers, judges
some of those candidates not yet fit for the Ministry? Surely (if any) they who
make themselves the sole judges of their own Sacramental or Ministerial
worthiness, are the persons that judge themselves worthy.

Mr. Humphrey. Mr. Drake will a^mit none to Christ's Table, unless converted
a^ready.

Ans. Dr. Drake has no such word, nor any such intention, his whole discourse
being for the admission of all Church Members, who are in the judgment of
charity converted, whether they be really converted or no. In the same place he
finds fault with my Interpretation, of Christ's calling not the righteous, but
sinners, Luke 5. 31, 32. and says, it must be taken in regard of the effect,
not tender of his grace.

Ans. 1. If so, then Christ does not call proud Pharisees effectually: What
then does Mr. Humphrey think of St. Paul? was not he a proud Pharisee, yet
called effectually? If he say, Paul was not called effectually while he was
proud; True, no more was he called immediately to saving repentance, till he
was legally humbled. As therefore Christ called not Paul to Evangelicall
repentance effectually, till he was legally humbled; so he tendered not saving
grace immediately to him, as proud, but as legally humbled, which is a middle
thing, between a proud Paul and a converted Paul. Christ tenders grace
mediately to the proud sinner, immediately to the humbled sinner, Matthew. 11.
28. nor does he call the proud sinner effectually, till humbled, and by
humiliation. Christ's Call then, does as truly respect the tender as the effect;
he tendering grace orderly, as well as calling to grace orderly.

Mr. Humphrey, page 97. The third was a sweet place, John 8. where, who does
not see, how importinent Mr. Drake is, about opening that Text, as if he could
not distinguish between a proof and illustration, etc.

Ans. 1. Who sees not how impertinent Mr. Humphrey is, in charging, but not
proving, me to be impertinent: Let my Text speak for it self against this
charge. See my Bar, page 68.

2 ly. I had thought that illustration, a paribus and similibns (if pat and
pertinent) had been argumentative.

3 ly. In this very particular, Mr. Humphrey intended not only an Illustration,
but an Argument; else, what mean those words, page 20. of his Vindication, To
give weight to this (discoursing on his third Reason,) remember three passages
of our Saviors. Now the last of those three, is the instance of the Adulterous
woman, John 8. Mr. Humphrey cannot be ignorant, that Illustration, as such,
affords only light; but as Argumentative, gives weight. Himself affirms, that
his illustrations give weight: who sees not then, they must needs be
Argumentative, and have somewhat of the nature of proofs? If therefore Mr.
Humphrey be pertinent in his illustration, Dr. Drake cannot be impertinent in
his charge, wherein also he looked at Mr. Humphrey his three illustrations,
only, as so many amplifications. See my Bar, page 66, 67.

4 ly. Take that instance in Mr. Humphrey his declared sense, it makes against
those, who are forward to censure others (See Mr. Humphrey his Rejoinder, page
97.) which we all agree to be very sinful, but impertinently applied by him
against Sacramental trial. I wish his own illustration may open his eyes, to
discern his own forwardness to censure others.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 98. If Sacramental trial were once proved a precept of
Christ, I would yield to Mr. Drake in every particular.

Ans. The profession is very ingenious, and gives some hope, that ere long, Mr.
Humphrey will be more favorable to Suspension, then at present he seems to be.

Sect. IX.
Proceed we next to the matter in Controversy betwixt us, about Mr. Humphrey
his fourth Argument, drawn, as he says, from the vanity, formality, and
impossibility, of selecting people to this Ordinance.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 101. What Dr. Drake has to say against this Argument, is
barren. (You must suppose my ground is barren, because it will not bear Mr.
Humphrey his corn) In general he says. 1. In the rule of Admission, they go
not by the truth of grace. It is well he is brought to confess this, which so
often otherwhere, he thinks himself bound to pry into.

Ans. 1. We think our selves bound to look after those trialls, which are 1.
Negative. 2 ly. Sensible; as gross ignorance, heathenish profannesse, visible
impenitency, which is walking in a tract or course of any scandalous sin, or
falling into some foul abomination, which argues at least the tyranny of fin.
By such effects as these, we may safely judge a person Evangelically unworthy,
without prying into his heart, or into Gods secrets, which is impossible for
the Creature to do, and sinful to attempt it: Did Peter pry into Simon Magus's
his heart, when he said, I perceive thee to be in the gall of bitterness, etc.
Acts 8. 32? Or did Philip pry into the Eunuchs heart, when he put him to it
about the reality of his faith, Acts 8. 37? If Mr. Humphrey will condemn us for
the like practice, our comfort is, we have good warrant to bear us out, and
good company to suffer with us, under this imputation of his. In vain
therefore, page 101. of his Rejoinder, does Mr. Humphrey labor to set me
against my self, by comparing page 117. of my Bar, (How many outwardly pious
are there, who, upon trial, might easily be uncased to live in some known sin)
with page 73. of my said Bar (That truth of grace in the heart, is not our rule
of admitting to the Lords Supper) there being a sweet harmony, but no
dissonancy between those two assertions; The former holding forth, that we
judge of men by what is visible, of the Root by the Fruit, according to our
Savior's rule, Matthew. 7. 16. The latter showing, that we judge not of persons
by what is invisible; but, as sin, or grace appear visibly in any, so we judge.
Were I sure Judas had no grace, yet, if he were knowing, and walked orderly, I
could not suspend him. Again were I sure Peter had grace, yet, if he walk
disorderly, he ought to be suspended, till his repentance be evident as well as
his fall, 2 Thessalonians 3. verse 6. 14, 15. Further, let the Reader take notice,
that, however Mr. Humphrey, page 102. is pleased to favor me with a jest, for
denying, that Profession in his sense, is the rule of Admission; yet, he only
says, but proves not, That such profession is the ordinary road of Christians;
a Tenet contrary to Scripture, to Antiquity, and the late, as well as present
practice of our Church. (Here let the Reader know, that Mr. Humphrey takes a
piece of Profession, namely, Baptism, and coming to Church, for a sufficient
ground of Admission to the Lords Supper.) We deny not, that complete Profession
is enough for Admission; but, such Professors must have 1. Competent knowledge.
2 ly. Suitable conversation, besides initiation by Baptism, and attendance
upon the public Ordinances; otherwise, like Agrippa, they will be but half
Professors. As knowledge and pious carriage will not make one a complete
Professor, unless he be Baptized and attend ordinarily upon the public
Ordinances. So Baptism and attendance upon the public Ordinances will not
make a complete Professor, unless competent knowledge, and pious conversation,
be superadded. When a half hour is an whole hour, then an half Professor may
go for an whole Professor.

Mr. Humphrey. Page 102. Christ tells us of no medium, while he divides all his
guests into the Called and Chosen, Matthew. 22. 14.

Ans. Does not the Parable expressly mention two sorts of Guests called, besides
those that were chosen? 1. They, who made light of the very Call, verse 5. 2
ly. Such as came, and were not discerned by the very Servants, yet wanted the
Wedding Garment, verse 11. and what are these last but medium participationis,
so much decryed by Mr. Humphrey. 1. Were not they Professors who slighted the
Call? (unless he will say, that the Jews and Pharisees, against whom the
Parable was directed, were not Professors) 2 ly. Was not this their slighting
visible to the Servants? Compare verse 7. and Luke 14. 21. And does it not
thence necessarily follow, that there are some Professors, that vifibly reject
the grace of the Gospel; some, that cordially accept thereof? And between both
these (as a middle of participation) are they, who friendly accept of grace
offered, and visibly walk up to it, as did he that came without the Wedding
Garment, whom neither the Servants, nor the other Guests, discerned, but only
the Master of the Feast. Withal the Reader may note, that the Feast in this
Parable is not the Lords Supper (this Parable being delivered by Christ, before
the Lords Supper was instituted) but the offer of Christ, and the grace of the
Gospel in general, which is openly slighted by some, accepted by others, and
by some of these feignedly, by others cordially. Some Professors reject Christ
offered both outwardly and inwardly; some accept him both outwardly and
inwardly: Between both these (as a middle of participation) are they, who
accept Christ outwardly, but reject him inwardly, as do all cased Hypocrites.
It Is evident then, that Christ, in this Parable, ownes a middle of
participation between both extremes.

By the way take notice, how again, page 103. Mr. Humphrey is pleased to put
off my instance of Children with a jest, which at good earnest will be too hard
for him: His wit and mirth may tickle the Reader, and make his Books the more
vendible. But I shall not tire the Reader, with repeating what I have said
formerly, in order to the vindication of that instance.

For that other Argument of mine, to prove Mr. Humphrey his Principle loose,
because it will open a door for the wickedest varlets: Hear what Mr. Humphrey
says to it, page 103. He should say in plain terms, it is a loose Principle,
because it is not his Principle, and then he had hit it.

Ans. What is this to the eviction of my Argument? May not I as well return,
Mr. Humphrey should say in plain terms, his admitting pel-mel is a good and
warrantable practice, because it is his practice, and then he had hit it: What
weight can such froath bear, in the balance of right Reason and Religion?

D. Dr. If profession be Mr. Humphrey his ground, how dare he excommunicate any
Baptized person, though most wicked?

Mr. Humphrey. I answer, As the Priest durst shut up the Leper from the whole
Congregation, because of Gods special command.

Ans. And with us, persons are suspended from the Lords Supper, as they were
suspended from the Passover, by Gods especial command, 1 Cor. 10. 21. May I
forfeit a right to all Ordinances, and may not I forfeit a right to one
Ordinance? Was not the Incestuous Corinth a Professor, even when
excommunicated? That he was Baptized, Mr. Humphrey will grant; that he was kept
from Hearing, or any other Ordinance, but actual receiving, Mr. Humphrey
cannot prove. He was then a Professor, even after excommunication, though not a
Churchmember till received again, upon testification of his repentance. If
therefore profession be enough for admission, then, even persons excommunicated
ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper. In persons at age, profession must
precede Churchmembership, and may continue, after a person is cut off from
Church Membership, unless he openly renounce Christianity, which, I believe,
few excommunicated persons do.

D. Dr. Did he never hear of real and visible worthiness? Mr. Humphrey. Page
104, and 105. I confess I have heard of the visible Church, Saints by calling,
Professors, etc. But this visible worthiness, as distinguished therefrom, I
have not leightly read of, but in him; and look at his expression and his
meaning therein, as exotic to the Scripture.

Ans. 1. Let Mr. Humphrey show me the term visible (as applied to the Church)
in Scripture if he can; I am assured he cannot. 2 ly. The thing of visible
worthiness, the Scripture warrants, as distinct from Church Membership; for
which, take these Texts, 1 King. 1. 52. If he will show himself a worthy man,
etc. But, if wickedness shall be found in him, etc. Is not worthiness shown,
visible worthiness? and contra, Is not wickedness found in a man, visible
unworthiness? Again. Matthew. 10. 11. Enquire who is worthy in a City. Surely,
Christ sets them not to enquire who had truth of grace, that were (as Mr.
Humphre phrases it) to pry into Gods secrets. Nor does he bid them enquire
barely, who were professors, by Church Membership, fince the whole City, or the
greatest part thereof, were such, as being Jews, to whom only the Apostles
were sent, Matthew. 10. verse 5, 6. It must needs then be a worthiness of
accepting the Gospel, and of suitable pious walking, that the Apostles were to
look after, and not to lodge in profane, but in religious families; which
worthiness might be found out by inquity. And if this be not visible
worthiness, I pray what is? Once more, Luke 7. verse 4, 5. The Elders of the
Jews testify, the Centurion is worthy: Surely they were no merit-mongers, nor
would Christ have acted upon such an account: He had then a worthiness of
meetnesse, and this worthiness was visible, by his love to Gods people, in
building them a Synagogue. That this Centurion was Circumcized, Baptized, or a
Churchmember, I think Mr. Humphrey will not assert; I am consident, he cannot
prove it. Yet, here is worthiness, and visible worthiness, in one, that was
neither Baptized, nor a Churchmember. The like may be said of Cornelius, Acts
10. 22. From all which, I conclude, by Mr. Humphrey his leave, that visible
worthiness, as distinct from Church Membership, is not exotic to the
Scripture.

In the close of this Section, after some flourishes, at which he is excellent,
I perceive, that my anatomizing of his Onyon (which I hoped might open his
eyes, and make him weep) has put him into an angry (I will not say, spiteful)
distemper; I had rather such words should drop from Mr. Humphrey his pen, then
from mine. And because he cannot justly quarrel with my words, therefore he is
pleased to put a sense upon them, As if I censured him, and all of his mind,
to be opposers of the Church; and the wicked; and my party, only to be the
godly, page 106.

A sad charge, and very uncharitable, in reference both to my words and
meaning. My words are these, page 75. of my Bar: The best use therefore that
can be made of his pield Onyon, is, to draw tears from his own, and others
eyes; for those extravagant discourses of his, whereby he has as much as in
him lies, troubled the Church, hindered reformation, strengthened the hands of
the wicked, and sadned the hearts of the righteous, etc. These are my words,
and 1. Have I in them spoke any more, then the very truth? 2 ly. Is here one
word, charging him, and all that are of his mind to be wicked. Thirdly, does
not this discourse of M. Humphrey sadden the Godly, and make the wicked
rejoice? I uttered not these expressions by roat (as he is pleased to upbraid
me) but deliberately, and with grief and Sympathy. Fourthly, what is there of
spite, or of the Spider sucking poison, in those expressions of mine? As for
Antiquity, I wonder how in the same page Master Humphrey can pretend to it,
which (if he know any thing of Antiquity) he cannot be ignorant is against him.
I see the man is galled, and cannot bear the gentlest Item of reproof, but
presently throws malice and spleen in the face of the reprover. Truly Sir,
what I spoke was not by roat, nor in passion. I am of the same mind still, what
ever bitter misconstructions you are pleased to make of those words of mine.
Indeed I looked at him, and all that vent themselves for his loose principles,
as troublers (I did not say opposers, though even this word is not culpable, if
rightly, and heartily understood) of the Church in that act; but I neither
looked at all of his mind as ungodly, nor at all of our minds as Godly. I am
far from limiting piety to a party in his sense, but desire rather to sit down
and mourn, that Godly men are so accessory to, in the making, and abetting of
parties, both against faith and charity.

Sect. X.
In the tenth Section by instance of the passover, etc. M. Humprey labors to
make it out that every Churchmember ought to receive. The answer is easy. As
all circumcised persons were to eat the passe-over, yet diverse in some cases
might not receive at such, or such a time, so all Church Members are to receive
the Lords Supper, but not till they be prepared. If all were bound to receive
every Sacrament, then were it a sin for any at any time to forbear, and a sin
to persuade any to forbear. Which I believe Master Humphrey will not assert, as
that which is Heterodox, and may prove a dangerous snare. If any be kept from
the Lords Supper, generally they may thank themselves, as might those Jews, who
neglected to purify themselves for the passe-over. For an additional proof he
produces humane testimony. And 1. he quotes Mr. Perkins, page 109. and 110.

Answ. 1. That all Church Members ought to receive we deny not, if rightly
understood, as above, that is, they ought to examine and prepare themselves,
and so to receive, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Secondly, that in order hereunto all must
make conscience to fit themselves, Mr. Humphrey confesses, page 110. Thirdly,
that any ought to receive hic and nunc, when unprepared Mr. Humphrey cannot
prove. Fourthly, that Mr. Perkins is not of Mr. Humphrey his mind herein, to
me seems more than probable, because in the third Proposition cited by M.
Humphrey he concludes, Every one is to receive according to the laudable custom
of his own Church; But it has been, and still is the laudable custom of the
Church of England to try persons at age before they receive. We shall not deny
the Sacrament to any that will receive it, according to the laudable custom of
the Church of England.

Page 110. Note. 1. If M. H. be Judge, his words are oracles, my answers are
trifles. Secondly, Poor infants are a mighty rub in his way; they make him
complain now the ninth time. God knows how to perfect praise out of the mouths
of Babes and sucklings. Thirdly, he frights me with two terrible Thorns, but
tells me not what they are, happily to make them more formidable. I guess they
are the Thorns he put in the hand of infants and idiots; which upon trial I
have found to be but painted Thorns; but being turned upon himself, they prove
real Thorns; No wonder the man complains more then seven times. Fourthly, he
tells the Reader, I say, and say on. Happily the Reader might suspect I said
nothing, unless Mr. Humphrey had spoke out for me. I thank him he will honor
me so far as to be my Crier. Fifthly, he finds fault I am too fine, yet
suspects I am not in good earnest. Truly Sir, I hope I affect not finery but
seriousness. I part not those actions Christ has joined, nor will join those
which Christ has parted. As the Covenant, so the Seals are applicable to all
conditionally and mediately; but the Covenant is not absolutely, and
immediately applicable to any that are visibly out of Covenant; and therefore
by proportion, neither the Seals of the Covenant. The Covenant is
conditionally, and mediately, Mark. 16. 15, 16. even to Heathen applicable, yet
I hope M. Humphrey will not admit Heathen to the Sacrament: His instance of
ipso jure excommunicate will not help him as has been formerly showed. For 1.
if such a person must be suspended before excommunication, then suspension is a
distinct ordinance from excommunication by Mr. Humphrey his own grant.

Secondly, if Christ's universal (do this) be limited by Paul's exception (put
away from you such a person) then its further evident that Christ's commanding
all Church members to receive is limited by Paul's exception, that a Brother,
or Church member, if a raylor, a drunkard, unclean, covetuous, etc. must not be
admitted to the Lords Supper, as being ipso jure excommunicate: and withal
that any sin in visible Dominion makes a person ipso jure excommunicate, as
covetousness, railing, fornication, etc. though not capital; and then I pray
why may not ignorance in dominion suspend as well as scandal.

His amplification from Math. 5. 23, 25. makes rather against than for him.
Since its evident by that Text. First, that moral pollution, as malice (till
removed) suspended a man from Sacrifice. Secondly, that moral (as well as
Levitical) pollution may suspend a man from instituted, but not from natural
worship. Sacrifices and Sacraments are instituted worship, prayer, and hearing
are natural worship. A Zimri is bound to hear and pray, be he never so bad, not
to so offer Sacrifice, or receive the Sacrament in statu quo. The law of
Creation binds to natural worship, which no unworthiness of the Creature can
dissolve. Hence the Lord dispenses much in, and about instituted worship, not
so in natural worship, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Jer. 7. 22, 23. Hosea 6. 6. Math. 12. 4,
5.

Thirdly, what if the Sacrificer will never be reconciled, must he
notwithstanding be admitted to offer? Our Savior says he must first be
reconciled and then offer; Paul says, he must first be prepared and so eat;
surely then he must not offer till reconciled, nor receive till prepared; And,
if his malice and unpreparednesse be visible, he may and must be suspended.
Fourthly, from Mr. Humphrey his own grant, If there be many occasions of
forbearing a duty, and unpreparednesse be a just occasion and a grand occasion;
then, as this unpreparednesse should occasion my forbearing; so, if visible, it
should occasion the Churches suspending of me; and such is visible ignorance or
prophaenness in any Churchmember. If he may forbear upon just occasion, why
may not the Church or any particular member advise him to that which is
lawful; If he must forbear, why may not the Church, or any particular member
advise him to his duty; and in case he will act against his duty, why may not
the Church use her power to suspend him from that unlawful act? I make my self
no more Lord over Gods command by telling my Brother this is not his duty, than
by telling him, this is his duty. In both I make my self Lord of Gods command
if my advice be contrary to the affirmative and negative precept; in neither,
if my advice be consonant to the rule.

Mr. Humphrey, page 112. To hold it is not a man's duty to receive while
unregenrat; this reaches the semper and looses the bands of Gods commands.

Ans. 1. It reaches the semper only conditionally, as legal uncleanness might
happily reach the semper in order to the passe-over, and as excommunication may
reach the semper in case the person excommunicated continue obstinate.
Secondly, How does it loose the bands of Gods command, when Gods command is
none shall receive till rightly prepared. If the truth of the promise offering
Christ to all conditionally be not loosed though no unregenerate person partake
of Christ, then the bands of the precept commanding all conditionally to
receive are not loosed, though no unqualified person receive till Doomes day.
The reason is clear, because neither command nor promise are absolute, but
conditional till the condition be performed. Thirdly, As to particular
persons, the command of suspension is a spur to conversion and practical
holiness; And since none continue in impenitency but by their own desault,
they may thank themselves who thereby make the command of abstention or
detention perpetual. Fourthly, Yet by presence at the Sacrament the
Christ-murtherer may behold the Corpse bleeding, see his own condemnation sealed
and both hear and see Christ offered conditionally, though he neither receive
nor touch the Sacramental Elements. But to press an impenitent and scandalous
person to receive in order to the sealing of his own condemnation as Mr.
Humphrey asserts, page 113. to me seems a very uncouth opinion and
contradictory to Mr. Hums phrey his doctrine for suspending of persons ipso
jure excommunicate, who (upon such an account) ought of all persons to receive,
in order to the sealing of their own comdemnation, and the more effectual
promotion of their own conversion.

Dr. Drake, an unregenerate man sins in all his duties, yet he must do them;
but there is not par ratio in order to a receiving. 1 Because it is not his
duty.

Mr. Humphrey, page 113. If receiving be not the duty of an unregenerate man,
then must regeneration be an essential antecedent to the Sacrament; But so it
is not: For 1. Then baptism was not administered validly to many by the
Apostles, Acts 8. 13. etc.

Ans. 1. I might note the impropriety of that expression essentially
antecedent. Nothing is essentially antecedent to any thing, but it is
constitutive principles; and we do not make regeneration a constitutive
principle of receiving the Sacrament. Secondly, if by essential here he mean
necessary, we grant regeneration a necessary antecedent in order to the person
receiving, and that by virtue of the precept; as purity was a necessary
antecedent of receiving the Pass over. Thirdly, where as he infers, That then
the baptism of many was not valid, I deny his consequence, since in many
things, Quod fieri non debuit factum valet. Secondly, because however, the
person to be baptized, being unregenerate ought not to offer himself to
baptism, yet this reaches not the Minister that is to baptize him, unless his
unregeneration be visible. I may not offer my self to partake if unregenerate;
but the Minister may admit me coming, if he have charitative grounds to judge
me regenerate. The same answer will satisfy his second objection, for baptism
is valid where there is no essential faylure; if the person baptized be a
visible Saint, the person baptising be authorized by Christ, and the Element be
rightly applied according to Christ's institution; in a word, if Christ's form of
baptism be observed Math. 28. 19. but this may be done to a person
unregenerare, and is valid being done, though the Catechumenus sin in offering
himself, if unregenerate; but need not be baptized again when once regenerate.
Acts 8. 37.


It will also satisfy his third objection: A Minister may in faith administer,
either of the Sacraments to others besides himself, since the rule he is to
proceed by is not holiness as real, but as visible; and where he has a
charitative ground to judge any to be regenerate, he both may and ought to
baptize such a person, in case he offer himself to be baptized regularly.

For his fifth objection, that then no doubting Christian can himself receive,
for he cannot act in faith so long as he is not fully persuaded of his own
regeneration.

Ans. 1. It Is a fallacy to argue from the necessity of regeneration to the
necessity of the clear and full evidence of regeneration. He that has truth of
grace, sins neither materially nor formally in receiving; provided he be not
wanting to himself in due examination and preparation. Secondly, if a doubting
Christian cannot act in faith, then no man in the world can act in faith, since
the best of Saints are more, or less pestred with doubting, and that both in
the faith of assent, of adherence and of evidence. Thirdly, he may as well
doubt whither he sin in abstaining as in receiving, since some comfortable
hopes of grace encourage him to receive, as some dark fears on the other hand
discourage him. Fourthly, if evidences for grace be praedominant, the contrary
fears should not discourage him. Fifthly, if hopes be balanced with equal
fears, or overballanced with Symptoms of unregeneracy, his surest way is to
apply himself to some faithful and experienced friend, or Minister, upon whose
advice he may comfortably approach, or forbear the Sacrament for that time.
Yea, this advice is very safe and useful, where any one doubt about my
spiritual Estate arises, which by a diligent self-scrutiny cannot be resolved;
It being dangerous in point of doubts (as well as in other cases) to keep the
Devils counsel. For a brief, yet full resolution of the case about persons to
be suspended, I refer the Reader to the larger Cathechisme of the Assembly of
Divines, where they handle the Doctrine of the Lords Supper: where also they do
positively affirm, That such as are found to be ignorant and scandalous,
notwithstanding their professions of the faith, and desire to come to the Lords
Supper, may, and ought to be kept from that Sacrament by the power which Christ
has left in his Church, until they receive instruction and manifest their
reformation. I hope its no presumption to say, That such a Testimony for
suspension from so many Reverend, Learned, and pious Divines will balance, if
not preponderate the opposite Testimonies produced by Mr. Humphrey, were they
as full to his purpose as his heart could desire. But I trust to make it appear
(which in part is done already) that those eminent persons by him quoted are
rather friends to our suspension than to his free Admission.

If yet it be objected; I, but will not this Doctrine of doubting Christians
admission to the Sacrament, be a precipice to unregenerate persons, who upon
slight and trivial evidences will conclude themselves in the state of grace,
and so rush upon the Sacrament unworthily?

Ans. 1. Its no more a precipice to them than all other parts of the Gospel
are: Offer promises, Hypocrites are forwardest to catch presumptuously at them;
thunder out threatenings, Hypocrites will put them off with a wet finger; bind
them with precepts, Hypocrites have an hellish art to cut, or break this
Gordian knot which they cannot untye fairly, Psalm. 2. 3.

Secondly, This is a precipice not of Gods, but of their own, and the Devils
making, who are willingly thereby deceived, and so catch both at promises and
Sacraments, writing and feal, to their own destruction. To prevent which
mischief (as much as lies in man) cautions are an useful boundary in order to
the promises, and suspension in order to the Sacrament; which though it cannot
keep away all Hypocrites, yet it serves to uncase diverse, and to make all
Church Members studious of competent knowledge and outward reformation, a
blessing highly to be prized in every reformed and reforming Church.

Mr. Humphrey in his vindication, page 24. Let our Independents answer, why do
you allow a Syntax in the whole service of God besides; and being in a quae
genus of Anomalaes and Heteroclites, only at this Ordinance.

Dr. D. My answer hereunto, see page 79. and 80. of my Bar. Indeed I looked
at those words of his as a challenge to both parties. To which the first part
of his answer in his rejoinder, page 116. is so modest, that I think my self
bound to note it with approbation.

Mr. Humphrey. For the Later branch, that the Independents scruple not a free
admission of their own Members, etc. lb.

Ans. 1. Note his own words, whither they turn away any before excommunication,
I cannot say, but guess so. The expressions are ingenuous, but do a little
thwart his former assertion. He that speaks only by guess cannot assert that
which he speaks to be a truth. Secondly, though some separated assemblies own
diverse of our Congregations as true Churches, yet will they not admit diverse
(not only of our Church Members, but also) of our Communicants, upon this very
account, because they apprehend them not so visibly worthy; An apparent
Testimony to me, that they with us measure the subject of Sacramental
Admission, rather by visibility than by Church Membership. Especially,
considering withal, that one main ground of their first separation from us was
offense taken at the promiscuous Admission of Church Members to the Lords
Supper: Upon which account those who feared God among the Presbyterians were
the more zealous for Sacramental trial, that by reformation in this particular
they might prevent further separation; and if it might be, reduce our brethren
of the Congregational way by removing that unhappy stumbling block.

Mr. Humphrey, ibid: Mr. Drake tells them, They are beholding to me for my too
favorable opinion of you.

Ans. Mr. D. says, The Independents are much beholding to him for his
favorable opinion of them. He does not say, they are beholding to him for his
too favorable opinion of them. I will not utter what I guess to be Mr.
Humphrey his design in crowding in the adverbe too, but I apprehend by that
addition he was not too favorable unto me.

The next question in debate is, how we can baptize the Children of Church
members, and at the same time turn away their parents from the Sacrament of the
Lords supper?

Mr. Humphrey, page 117. I will not infringe what Mr. Drake has said page 82,
83, 84. I wish it may be maintained. But as for those who never took notice,
or not approved of any other ground of their baptism, but as they are
immediately born Christians of such as visibly profess Christ according to my
terms the right which the Parents derive upon their Children unto baptism must
be acknowledged to be in themselves unto the Sacrament, unless there be a
manifest impediment to retrench that right, or the present enjoyment of it by
excommunication, distraction or infection.

Dr. Drake. Ans. 1. He granting my conclusion, that the Children of all
Church Members (be they suspended or not) may be baptized, his exeption is
impertinent as to us, who hold and approve other grounds of admitting Children
to baptism than the right they have to it by their immediate Parents either as
Professors or as Church Members: Nay, were both the immediate Parents
excommunicated we shall not refuse to baptize their Children, provided any
person of trust will undertake for their education in the Christian faith into
which they are baptized. The right a Child has to baptism by his immediate
Parents is a good right, but not the sole right. See more in my barrel, page
81. 87.

Secondly, should I retort the question upon Mr. Humphrey, how can he allow
baptising the Children of diverse Church members, and yet discourage those very
Church Members from the Sacrament? He that discourages from the means
discourages from the end, Mr. Humphrey discourages from Sacramental trial, the
means, Ergo. Here indeed we come to the very hinge of the controversy which Mr.
Humphrey, page 117. and 118. states bewtixt us thus.

Mr. Humphrey, the substance of the whole comes unto thus, that the Parents
must have a further right to show than what they have common with their Child
to this ordinance. And here indeed lies the very point of our difference: I
hold it is Church Membership (where there is none of our former yielded
impediments) that gives an immediate outward right to the Sacrament. He holds a
man must be first tried if he be visibly worthy, and it is that alone can give
him admission.

Ans. In my Bar, page 81. I proved, that Church Membership is not the
adequate foundation of receiving, because the all Church Members should be
admitted to the Lords supper: But all Church Members ought not to be admitted,
Mr. Humphrey himself being Judge, to wit Infants and Idiots; to which I may now
add out of Mr. Humphrey persons ipso jure excommunicate, all which he grants to
be Church Members, yet is pleased to suspend them from the Lords supper. If the
Lord has excluded them let Mr. Humphrey show the Decree of Heaven by some
express place of Scripture. Where has God said in terms, Infants, Idiots and
persons jure excommunicate shall not receive. If it be, because they cannot
prepare themselves rightly, nor discern the Lords body, no more can ignorant,
and scandalous persons in statu quo: therefore say we, either exclude all or
none. If he say, the inability of Infants and Idiots is natural, but that of
intelligent Church Members is moral.

Ans. 1. Natural inability does not exclude from all ordinances, instance in
Circumcision then, baptism now, the word preached, etc. Secondly, that natural
inability excludes from the Lords Supper is more than Mr. Humphrey can prove,
unless he make it out by consequence. Thirdly, the inabiliby of persons jure
excommunicate is moral, yet their suspension Mr. Humphrey allows; and why not
the suspension of other intelligent Church Members also, who are morally unable
as well as they. If yet he say, Persons jure excommunicate are suspended to
avoid scandal, upon the very same account say we, must ignorant and scandalous
persons be suspended. Object. Persons jure excommunicate are suspended in order
to excommunication. Ans. So may ignorant and scandalous persons be also, if
they shall wilfully persist in gross ignorance, or scandal, though of an
inferior allay; yet we had rather use suspension to prevent, than to prepare
for excommunication. The issue of all is this: That either Mr. Humphrey must
show express Scripture for his Limitations, or else admit our Limitations
also, which have as good vvarrant from Scripture as his: were I of Master
Humphrey his mind, that Church-member-ship gives an immediate right to the
Lords Supper (see page 118. of his Rejoinder) I should rather undertake to
maintain the Admission of Infants, Idiots; yea, persons jure excommunicate, and
with more probability of argument, than he does his free Admission, which yet
excludes a great part, if not the greater part of Church Members. If he be for
free Admission, why does he limit it; if he will needs limit it, how is it
free; yea, why does he condemn us for that of which himself is guilty, if it
be an error? We grant, all Church members ought to receive, if there be no
impediment, natural, or moral; this Mr. Humphrey grants also, yet in one and
the same breath as it were blames us, for doing that which himself allows; you
see how the stating of the question for himself overthrows his conclusion for
free Admission. Now let us see how he states it for us, in the latter branch.

Page 118. of his Rejoinder Mr. Drake holds a man must first be tried, if he be
visibly worthy; and it is that alone can give him Admission.

Ans. We hold: 1. That it is the duty of every Christian, or Churchmember, to
be willing, and ready to be tried by any, upon just occasion; yea, though it
may prove prejudicial to their outward man, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you. Secondly, That they are more bound to submit to trial by those, who are
over them in the Lord, who must give, and therefore take an account of their
Souls, Heb. 13. 17. Such are Superiors in Family, Church, and State. 3 ly. The
Time, Frequency and Manner of trial, as to Persons, Method, etc. (as in sundry
other parts of worship) is not expressly determinded in Scripture, no more than
how often the Sacrament shall be received; but is lest to Christian prudence.
Fourthly, That as this trial does, especially respect the Sacrament an
Universal, Spiritual, and effectual Ordinance, containing the Letter and Spirit
of all other Ordinances, so the fittest time for this trial in Christian
prudence is judged (by wiser and better persons than Mr. Humphrey and my self)
to be before the Sacrament, or between the past and succeeding Sacrament; which
as an help to self-examination may very much through grace promote our
Sacramental preparation.

These things premised, we say: 1. That every Churchmember is bound to submit
to Church-tryal, by virtue of the fifth Commandment; by virtue of the general
precept aforementioned, 1 Pet. 3. 15. and by virtue of that principle of
spiritual self-love, which either is, or should be in him. Secondly, That real
worthiness gives a person a right before God to either of the Sacraments, and
that abstractedly from Church-member-ship, or Church-tryal; upon which account
he may desire and demand them, or either of them as his due orderly; first
baptism, and afterward the Lords Supper: there being in a right sense (as Mr.
Humphrey notes) par ratio utriusque Sacramenti. That intelligent person whom I
will admit to baptism, I will also admit to the Lords Supper, Acts 8. 36, 37.
If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may. Believing with all the heart
(which is real worthiness) gave the Eunuch a right to baptism; who yet
thereby was not admitted a Member of any particular Congregation, (as Children,
or grown persons are with us) and whither be joined himself to any, or no, is
questionable. Thirdly, That visible worthiness is necessary as the fruit and
sign of real worthiness; just as profession and confession is a necessary
companion, or consequent of faith and grace within, Romans 10. 9. both being in
effect one and the same thing. Such was the Eunuch's deportment and profession
of his faith before Philip baptized him. It Is agreed on all hands, that no
person really (that is habitually and actually) worthy must be denied the
Sacrament; as all Jews, if clean, were to eat the Passover. The question is
how the Priests then, and how Church Officers now should put a difference
between clean and unclean, between worthy and unworthy: That both were to do it
doctrinally is agreed: That both were to do it practically is evident by the
rule, Numb. 9. Secondly, by practice approved in Scripture, 2 Chro. 23. 29.
Acts 9. 26, 27. and by theirs, and our Church Discipline, together with their
lesser degrees of excommunication, answering ours of suspension; Demonstrative
proofs of cleanness and worthiness, were, and are very difficult (if not
impossible) to them and us. As therefore they did, 1 Samuel 21. 4, 5. so must we
rest in topical and probable evidences; such are with us competent knowledge,
verbal and real profession confirmed by our own observation, or by sufficient
Testimony. Proportionably, gross ignorance, or scandal appearing by due trial,
observation, or Testimony, as above, are topical arguments of real
unworthiness, and in our Saviors judgment amount to knowledge, Math. 7. 26.
Church Officers then must put a difference, not only Doctrinally, but also
practically between clean and unclean, worthy and unworthy, denying those
privileges at present, to persons visibly unclean and unworthy, which
otherwise were their due to enjoy. An Executor, or Administrator is not bound
immediately upon demand to give Legacies bequeathed to any Legatee, till he
have at least probable evidence that the party demanding is a Legatee, and
qualified according to the conditions annexed to the Legacy by the will of the
Testator. In like manner Church Officers, who are Christ's Administrators, and
Overseers must not look at every one as a Legatee, who says he is so, yea,
though he be a Member of the household; nor can look at those, who are grossly
ignorant, or scandalous as Legatees in statu quo, since they can neither
examine themselves, nor discern the Lords body in the Apostles sense. Let the
Reader here take notice. 1. That we hold not that trial is absolutely necessary
for every Churchmember: where persons are well known to be men of knowledge
and piety, there trial is requisite only in a prudential way, least suspected
persons should presume, upon their Admission in this manner, to challenge the
like favor. The end of Trial being discovery, what need we try that which is
well known? Only such do well to submit to trial (among other grounds) for
good examples sake, and to prevent exceptions that otherwise will be taken.
Secondly, That we hold not that trial gives admission (it being indifferent to
Admission, or Suspension) but discovery of Sacramental worthiness in order to
Receiving, to which he had a right by real worthiness: As discovery by trial,
or otherwise gives a Legatee, the enjoyment of that Legacy to which he had a
right by the will of the Testator. Mr. Humphrey therefore is not so accurate in
the stating of our opinion as he would make the world believe: Since. 1. Our
rule of trying, who are worthy is not (in our judgment) universally
obligatory, but may admit a dispensation. Secondly, Because we hold not that
trial alone can give a Churchmember Admission to the Lords Supper, but
approbation upon trial, or otherwise. All which laid together, discovers the
vanity of his insulting in the following words, page 118. For the one now, look
over Mr. Drake, and you shall find still whenever he falls upon this thing,
he has nothing against it, but that silly reason (from the unintelligent) so
often repeated. Had he any thing else would it not be alleged? and has he
nothing else and will now be captivated? For the other, look over the
Scripture, and see if he can produce you any precept of God for it. If he has
none, will his own word go? while he has so little against us, and no Text for
himself, his skirts are discovered and heels made bare.

Ans. 1. Mr. Humphrey is no Oracle; nor is a reason silly, because he says so;
nor is that reason (from the unintelligent) silly (however he looking through
the Spectacles of prejudice apprehend it so) as has been else where proved.
Secondly, Is nothing alleged to confute his free Admission, but the reason
drawn from the unintelligent? Let the Reader peruse my Bar from page 81. to
87. (besides other places) and then judge how much Mr. Humphrey his passionate
assertions are to be credited? Thirdly, Will he have us produce Scripture to
prove his fancies? We hold not its trial alone will give Admission, will he
blame us for not proving that which we hold not? Fourthly, It has been proved.
First, That unworthy Church Members (though intelligent) ought hot to receive.
Secondly, That all must submit to trial upon just occasion. Thirdly, That they
who upon trial are found unworthy are to be suspended. Fourthly, We believe
that they who refuse trial without any sufficient ground given for that their
refusal, ought also to be suspended. Our reason is, because by such an Act they
appear to Church Officers as sinners against light, which makes a person as to
them actually unworthy, how ever he, or she may be habitually worthy. Fifthly,
We can produce as good Scripture for our Limitation, as Mr. Humphrey can for
his Limitation. Here may I not speak to the Reader in Mr. Humphrey his own
words by way of retorsion? Look over all the Scripture, and see if Mr. Humphrey
can produce you any precept of God for suspending the unintelligent, and
persons jure excommunicate (understand me of express Texts, for if he fly to
consequences, let him not blame us for using the same mediums, which we judge
valid as well as an express Text) if he has none, will his own word go, etc.

Mr. Humphrey, page 119. I do willingly yield to all our known bars (under the
unintelligent and excommunicate) the Church has allowed; but am fully persuaded
that this Bar, Mr. Drake would not set up otherwise, has no foundation in the
Scripture, etc.

Answ. Mr. Humphrey his preswasion is no Demonstration; or if it were,
certainly in all equity, the same privilege should be granted to our
persuasion: what follows thence but an absurdity and impossibility, that there
are, or may be two contrary Demonstrations in order to that which is every way
one and the same, as if there could be one Demonstration to prove Sun has
light, and another Demonstration to prove the Sun has not light.

Secondly, He yields to all our known bars, etc. Why so? 1. Because the Church
allows them: And has not the Church, both in former ages, and does it not in
this age allow also the Bar of of visible unworthiness. Secondly, Because his
allowed Bars have a foundation in the Scripture, not to my Bar as he is pleased
to phrase it. 1 Cor. 11. 28.
Ans. The same, or like foundation, that his Bars have, our Bars have; his Bars
are founded, either upon inability to examine ownes self, as in the
unintellent, or in visible unworthiness, as in persons jure excommunicate; our
Bar has the same foundation, to wit, 1. Inability to examine ownes self, 2
ly.scandallous living.

Here, to Evade, Mr. Humphrey is fine, and subtle, page 120. making a
distinction where God makes none. He distinguishes between unintelligent
persons that are bound to get knowledge, and unintelligent persons that are not
bound to get knowledge; and then tells us the former may be suspended, the
latter not. A stout affirmation, but where is his proof, or Demonstration?
Where has God said, that persons naturally unintelligent shall be suspended,
but persons morally unintelligent shall not be suspended? Let him produce a
Text of Scripture for it, if he can; if he cannot, will you believe Mr.
Humphrey upon his bare word? We easily grant its the duty of all visibly
unworthy to get knowledge, etc. not so of Children and fools: but does it
follow thence, that the former, though grossly ignorant, must be admitted,
because its their duty to get knowledge, the latter must be suspended, because
its not their duty to get knowledge. Mr. Humphrey his foundation is the precept
of actual examination, 1 Cor. 11. 28. in order to receiving. Infants do not,
cannot examine themselves, and therefore must be kept away says Mr. Humphrey.
On the other hand: 1. Ignorant persons do not, cannot examine themselves, and
therefore must be kept away, say we. Here to evade, Mr. Humphrey, tells, us,
the former are not bound to examine themselves, and therefore must be
suspended, the latter are bound to examine themselves, and therefore must not
be suspended. Here we call for a proof, and for lack of a better must accept of
M^. Humphrey his assertion, a sufficient proof indeed to fancy and affection;
but if weighed in the balance of Scripture and solid reason, it will be found
lighter than vanity. If actual examination be required, as is evident by the
words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat, etc. then defect of actual examination is an Apostolic Bar. This is Mr.
Humphrey his foundation to exclude Children. Examination is required, Children
cannot perform this duty, therefore they must be suspended. We infer, ignorant
persons cannot examine themselves, therefore they also must be suspended.
There Is not one tittle in this Text, or elsewhere, to exclude those who are
naturally unable, and to admit those who are morally unable: Nay, if any, the
latter are rather to be excluded than the former: we believe that both are to
be excluded, the former as negatively, the as privatively unworthy: And for
further confirmation dare appeal to Mr. Humphrey, if he will be true to
himself. He grants that intelligent Church Members, if jure excommunicate may
be suspended. This we grant also: Only the ground of his grant, if solid, is
the same with ours, namely, by shame to bring the person suspended to
repentance, to satisfy the godly, and to be a good example unto others. See
page 22. of his rejoinder. These are some, though not all of our grounds for
suspending the ignorant and scandalous. Will Mr. Humphrey allow these grounds
of suspension for some intelligent Church Members, and not for all. If this be
not strange partiallity, I pray what is?

As for what he adds, page 120. As for infants and the distracted, we know
signs cannot have any real work on them.

Answ. 1. What if they cannot, is this a sufficient ground to deny them the
signs, then let Mr. Humphrey turn Antipaedobaptist.

Secondly, Though the sign cannot work, cannot God work by the sign as an
instituted antecedent, or concomitant of Divine operation? Otherwise Children
are baptized in vain. There is better ground for applying signs to persons
naturally unintelligent, than to persons morally unintelligent. I can baptize a
Child that is naturally unintelligent, not so a person at years of discretion,
who is morally unintelligent: And if there be par ratio utriusque Sacramenti;
then he, who is not to be baptized (because of his gross ignorance) at years
of discretion were here then unbaptised, ought upon the same account to be
denied the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, though formerly baptized.

Mr. Humphrey, If I should do the Church service In submitting to this way
only as humane, then I shall do God service, to oppose it as divine, and not
let it sit in his Seat, as a necessary antecedent to this ordinance.

Answ. 1. Where an humane order is pressed as a divine ordinance, I may and ought
so far forth to oppose it, and shall do God good service therein, so my
opposition be regular. Yet secondly, at the same time in some cases I may
submit practically to the same, provided it be in it is own nature indifferent,
especially upon declaration of my dissent from it as a divine ordinance; thus
Paul opposed, yet practited, Circumcision upon occasion, which then was no
divine ordinance, yet was by the Jews pressed as a divine ordinance; compare,
Gal. 2. 3. and 5. 2, 3. With Acts 16. 3. Had Mr. Humphrey persuaded people to
submit to trial, though not as a divine ordinance, he might have done both God
and the Church more service than now he does. Several judgments may unite in
the same practice upon several principles without prejudice to Gods worship or
the breach of faith and love. I both wish and hope. Mr. Humphrey may be of this
mind, we desire unity of practice and shall pray for unity of principles,
Philip. 3. 16.

Thirdly, To submit to trial, or to be ready always to give an answer to every
man that asks us a reason of the hope that is in us is (in a large sense as a
thing commanded) a divine ordinance; the timing of this trial is humane and
prudential, in which I hope we may adhere to the judgment of a Parliament and
Assembly of Learned and pious Divines, rather than to the judgment of any
private Christian or Minister. Hearing and receiving are divine ordinances;
hearing at ten in the morning, and receiving every first Lords day in the
month, are humane orders and prudential; yet they who will not hear and receive
at times particularly appointed by man, may happily go without word and Sacrament
all their days, and are guilty of excommunicating and suspending themselves.
Will any be so fond hence to conclude that either the State, Church or Minister
hold the timing of the Sacrament to be a divine ordinance, or a necessary
concomitant to the Lords Supper by way of special institution? In like manner,
that all should submit to trial is a divine ordinance or precept; but that they
should be tried before or after a Sacrament, and often or seldom, or but once
in all their life, is humane and prudential; and no more a necessary Antecedent
of receiving than the timing of the Lords Supper is a necessary concomitant of
receiving; yet as he who will not come to receive at the time ordered suspends
himself from the Sacramant; so he that will not submit to the time appointed
for trial is a self suspender. Submission to trial is a duty, the season of
this trial is indifferent; and being agreed upon by a common order or consent
ought not to be slighted or opposed by any private Christian or Minister. Let
the trial be when it will, it must be either before or after the Sacrament. And
if the term Antecedent be offensive, we shall only desire the people to
submit to a consequent trial. Page 121. Mr. Humphrey is pleased to close this
section merrily with a Jury of 12. I envy not his mirth, but wish it may do
himself and his reader much good. If it hurt not himself more than me, he will
have no great cause to repent of it.

Sect. XI.
Mr. Humphrey his sixth Argument is drawn from his innocence in admitting all.
And 1. Because he does but his duty therein. Dr. Drake, This is the main thing
to be proved. Mr. Humphrey, The precept of dispensing and receiving is general.

Ans. 1. The 12. were not all the Ministers of that time. Secondly, That all
the 12. did receive is not evident. Thirdly, The adjective all is seldom used
in Scripture to note absolute universallity; and if in the matter of the
Sacrament it be so universal, then Mr. Humphrey his limitation of that
universal is erroneous. But of this formerly.

Secondly, Mr. Humphrey I have no power to turn away any. This Mr. D. accounts
most true, but makes lamentable use of it.

Ans. 1. I say not this is most true, but that I take this assertion of Mr.
Humphrey for one of the truest passages in all his book. Secondly, He wrongs me
in reporting that I do boldly and openly tell the people, that Christ had not
so much power to turn away one of his disciples as I and my Elders have over my
people. My words are, that Christ as a Minister had no juridical power to turn
away Judas or any other. What power he had as God or as Mediator is not
imitable. Thirdly, Though happily a Minister have no power of himself to suspend
any or turn him away, yet he may have power over his own act; and forbear
giving the Sacrament to a visibly unworthy person, and withal may round him in
the ear (if occasion serve) and bid him beware least taking the Sacrament
unworthily, he do eat and drink judgment to himself.

Thirdly, He hopes the best of all, and there admits all without trial.

Mr. Drake, So did the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, yet could not bear them
that were evil, and tried the false Apostles, Rev. 2. 2.

Mr. H. while the Church hoped well of them, it might bear with them to do them
good.

Ans. 1. How ever the Church might hope well of them etc. till convinced, yet
she did not forbear to try them. I may at the same time hope well, and yet out
off an holy jealousy fear evil, yea of an whole Church, much more of any
particular person, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. May private persons pass a judgment of
discretion upon things or persons, and may not public persons pass a
judgment of decision? May I upon just occasion try all things, and may I not
try all persons? 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. and 1 John. 4. v. 1, 3. Or can either of these
judgments pass without trial?

Object. I, but then admit them till they be tried.

Ans. 1. That is, pass them for current before tried. I may pass some pieces
for current (before tried) upon an honest man's word; but if I have the least
suspicion of them, he must not be angry if I try his gold; or should he be
angry, might not this anger of his be looked upon as a further ground of
suspicion? Secondly, What if they will not submit to trial at all? Must I pass
them for current upon their own word? Does not their opposing of trial make
them the more suspicious? My other answers he passes as answered elsewhere.
Ans. Then I hope those answers of mine are vindicated elsewhere. My instance of
the Magistrates trying all, though he also hope the best of all, Mr. Humphrey
passes over with a slight in these words, page 124. And for the Magistrate
what follows? Ans. It follows strongly; that hoping the best of all is no bar
to the trial of any. This Mr. Humphrey did well to slubber over, because too
strong an evidence for us and against himself.

Fourthly Mr. Humphrey page 124. I know God can turn even the worst at this
ordinance if he please: This Mr. Drake counts true, but questions his will, and
requires of me some promise or president for it. For promises we have
sufficient, Amos 5. 4. and 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Math. 7. 7. Let any show me an
exception in particular against this Sacrament, or else these particulars stand
good.

Ans. 1. For that promise Amos 5. 4. The thing promised here is life; this life
is initiall or graduall: That life initall, or the first infusion of saving is
grace premised to every ordinance, as it is to the word preached, does not
appear by this place; and were it true, Mr. Humphrey does ill to allow the
suspension or excommunication of any from any ordinance: The Lord forbid we
should deny the means of initiall conversion to any without express warrant
from Heaven: therefore we pray for all, that ordinance being a means of
conversion by way of impetration, be the persons prayed for present or no.
Therefore we preach to all, the word being an instrument of conversion, an
immortal seed, etc. Acts 17. 30. Romans 10. v. 14, 17. and 1 Petr. 1. v. 23, 24.
But where is the Sacrament so styled? The Sacraments suppose, but do not work
conversion. For the other branch of the text, namely the condition or precept
of seeking God. That every one is bound to use every ordinance in order to the
seeking of God thereby for imitiall conversion is not proved by that place,
which only requires the seeking of God in general, but lays no command upon
every person to partake of every ordinance, but only to seek God in those
ordinances he is capable of: we must here again distinguish between natural and
instituted worship; Those ordinances which are parts of natural worship lie
upon all, and are beneficial to many in order to conversion, not so those
ordinances which are parts of instituted worship. This is evident in hearing,
prayer, Sacrifices and Sacraments, the two former being incumbent upon all at
years of discretion, not so the two latter. All are bound to seek God in all
estates, as well as in all ordinances, but all I hope are not therefore to get
into all estates or to partake of all ordinances. Instance, I am bound to seek
God in the Ministry, or in a married condition, if I be in either of these
estates, but I hope every man is not therefore bound to be a Minister or to
marry. In like manner, I am bound to seek God in all ordinances, if or when I
do partake of all, but it follows not thence that I am bound to partake of all
ordinances, no more than I am bound to marry or to be a Minister; but if I be
in either of these estates I am bound to seek God in them. Here that precept or
permission of our Savior is pertinent though with a little variation of his
scope. Math. 19. 12. (...).

The like may be said of the other two promises Mr. Humphrey quotes; yea, of
all general promises about Ordinances. 1. I must seek God by partaking of all
Ordinances that I am capable of. Secondly, My great design must be to seek God
in all those Ordinances I do actually partake of: But it follows not thence
that I must partake of every Ordinance whither I be capable of it, or no. Yea,
Mr. Humphrey his jure excommunicate proves that all Church Members are not
capable of all Church-Ordinances. This is (among others) the exception we make
to his alleging the general promises; and which Mr. Humphrey must own, or
contradict both the truth and himself. His whole side of Rhetoric following
(at which I must confess he is good) will not help him where Logic and
Divinity fail him. Therefore I let those flourishes pass.

Fifthly, I endeavor my utmost de jure that all come prepared. Mr. Drake. This
self encomium is unseemly, false, proud, dangerous. Mr. Humphrey, Upon this he
reviles me two or three pages.

Ans. 1. How can there here be reviling when I speak. 1. no more than the
truth, 2. ground what I say upon his own express terms, he professing he
endeavors his utmost de jure (and that in a series of actions, if he have
administered the Sacrament often) 3 ly. since I say no more of him than I may
warrantably say of the Godliest man under Heaven, if he dare make such a boast
of himself. Let the pious Reader peruse what I say of this matter, page 92. 94.
of my Bar, and judge whither it is a piece of reviling, or a necessary, though
sharp reproof. I hope, without offense, I may propound one question to Mr.
Humphrey, and leave it upon his conscience. Dare he profess, and stand upon it
before Christ at the day of Judgment; That he has endeavored his utmost de
jure that all come prepared: If not, let him acknowledge Dr. Drake, is his
friend, not his reviler, in so seasonable and necessary a reproof; Yet further
to clear himself, page 125. Mr. Humphrey has these words, To exhort men to
examine themselves, and to warn them of the danger of neglecting their duty, is
all the Minister can do de jure; which Mr. Drake himself grants, where there is
no Presbytery.

Ans. If by that exhortation and warning he mean only public exhortation and
warning (which to me seems more than probable) this is not all a Ministers duty
de jure; what ever a private Christian, as such is bound to, that much more a
Minister is bound to: but private Christians are bound to exhort, and warn each
other, Heb. 3. 13. and 1 These. 5. 14. besides the example of the Apostle, who
like a good Minister, did not only teach the people publicly, but also from
house to house, Acts 20. 20. made conscience to visit his people to see how
they did, Acts 15. 36. or in his own necessary absence could not forbear to
visit them by a Deputy (besides his frequent writing to them) 1 These. 3. v. 1.
and 5. surely in all these endeavors the Apostle did no work of
supererogation. And if he did thus, upon whom lay the care of all the Churches,
2 Cor. 11. 28. what should not we endeavor, who are burdened only with the
especial care of one Congregation? Let me be bold to ask, Mr. Humphrey. Has he
endeavored to put all his intelligent Church Members upon the Test.
(especially in these apostatizing times) that he might know their faith? as 1
These. 3. 5. has he visited them, or exhorted and warned each of them
personally, has he offered to assist them in order to self and Christ
discovery? Does he Catechize the ignorant, either in public, or in private,
that thereby they might both get, and grow in knowledge, etc. or does he offer
himself to each of them to do for their Souls these, or the like Offices of
Pastoural love? If he say, he does not think himself bound to this, let him
take heed he be not mistaken, since such a mistake (especially if avowed) may
prove very dangerous, both to himself and to his people. Besides, then his
profession might have run in these terms with far less offense. I endeavor
what I apprehend to be my uttermost, de jure. that all may come prepared. But
to say, I endeavor my utmost de jure, is (in my poor apprehension) to say I
endeavor as much as Gods command in its rigor requires of me; which
expression seems to me very haughty and arrogant, though it fell from the mouth
of a Paul, or Timothy. Does Mr. Humphrey know (or the learned Clerk in the
world) the utmost bounds of any command de jure, I mean as to the matter
required in it, besides the degree and circumstances enjoined? See Psalm. 119.
96. And can he endeavor what he does not know? If he could, that were but
blind obedience. I do not charge him to say, He does his utmost; but for him
to say, He endeavors his utmost, and yet in the same particular to confess
his Omissions, is as much as to say, He endeavors his utmost, and yet
endeavors not his utmost. Is Mr. Humphrey guilty of omitting no endeavor? Or
are not endeavors actions as well, though not as much, as complete Acts? He
wrongs me in reporting, page 125. That I say, that all the Minister can do
(where there is no Presbytery) is exhortation and warning. I believe, a
Minister unpresbyterated, ought to try his people himself, and where he finds
any ignorant, scandalous, or wilful refusers, he may suspend his own act of
giving such the Sacrament, though he cannot suspend them juridically. I believe
further, That every Minister ought to endeavor much more then he knows, and
therefore by consequence much more then he does actually endeavor. Indeed,
page 47. of my Bar I say, That I humbly conceive, that where no Presbytery is
settled, that Minister may clear his own Soul, if he do particularly persuade
and warn an unworthy Churchmember. Secondly, That he cannot juridically,
either admit, or suspend such a person; and I hope I am not mistaken in
holding, That no Minister unpresbyterated can admit, or suspend any person
juridically. But I never said, That such a Minister might not suspend his own
Act of giving the Sacrament to such a person; which elsewhere I call Pastoral
suspension. This I am forced to add, because I perceive Mr. Humphrey is so
prone to mistake, both me and himself: and that through Gods assistance I might
be a poor instrument to discover to him more pride in these expressions then
happily he was aware of. If this be malicious reviling, the Lord send me store of
such malicious Revilers.

Sixthly, Mr. Humphrey, page 126. I humbly confess all our sins, desiring true
repentance, and a pardon for all our Omissions. This Mr. Drake cannot but
approve in me, but would have you note here a contradiction. If Mr. Humphrey
have done his utmost de jure, what need he desire pardon for his Omissions? Mr.
Humphrey, I answer for my failings, de facto in particular, though I should
have done in general what de jure I ought to do; which yet I dare not assume to
my self without flying to Gods mercy.

Answ. 1. Note here, Mr. Humphrey confesses he fails de facto, both in general
and particular. Secondly, This granted, evidenceth that Mr. Humphrey does not
endeavor his utmost de jure, since he fails particularly in that endeavor de
facto, to which by virtue of the precept he was bound de jure, the precept
binding not only to all complete acts, but also to all possible endeavors. Is
it not a contradiction to say, I endeavor my utmost de jure, yet fail in my
endeavor de facto? Dares Mr. H. say and stand by it, That he has endeavored
his utmost de jure, in that very particular wherein (by his own confession) he
failed of doing his duty de facto? If he can say so truly, I dare say he is
the best man that ever trod upon Gods ground, excepting our blessed Savior,
and our first Parents in innocence. I beseech you, Sir, as you love your own
Soul, take heed of pleading innocence where conscience cannot but cry guilty:
We acknowledge your charge, That when we have done all we can, we are but
unprofitable servants; yea, though we had done (which is impossible in statu
quo) the uttermost de jure, both as to endeavor and complete Act. But is not
he unprofitable also (if not much more) who says he has endeavored all, or
his uttermost de jure, and yet at the same time falls short of endeavoring
that which they perform de facto, who confess they fall short even of
endeavoring in any one particular of all their lives, their utmost de jure?
Are not righteous endeavors part of righteousness, and does not the Prophet
expressly say, Isai 64. 6. That our righteousness; yea, our righteousnesses;
yea, all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and can Mr. Humphrey say he
has endeavored his utmost de jure in any one particular? If so, then that
endeavor is perfect, and so not an unclean rag: and Mr. Humphrey can bring
somewhat that is perfectly clean (namely an endeavor that is perfect de jure)
out of that which is unclean, an extraction, I believe, too high for any
mortal. Sure I am, Job was of another mind, Job 14. 4. and the Apostle, Romans
7. 21. Does not sin dwelling in me, oppose and refract my pious endeavors as
well as my complete actions? then sin hinders in every thing, (not as to the
doing of my endeavor in sincerity, but) evermore as to the doing of my utmost
endeavor de jure. I shall close with this friendly Item, That Mr. Humphrey
will gain neither comfort nor honor, either with God, or man, in persisting to
avow, that he endeavors his utmost de jure in any one particular. He may
fancy what he please of me; but, if I know my own heart, it is not malice, but
love to his Soul makes me herin so plain with him. To what he adds, page 127.
by way of vindication, I answer briefly. 1. There is no necessity to admit all.
Secondly, There are other ways to do them good by besides receiving. Thirdly,
Hope depends upon faith, and faith upon a promise of doing good. St. Paul
says, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself, Mr. Humphrey hopes the contrary. Whom shall we believe, St. Paul, or
Mr. Humphrey?

In the close, page 128. He reflects upon me as boasting, because I say of the
Godly Presbyterians (of which number I hope I am, though most unworthy) That
they go beyond him in their care and endeavor to fit all sorts for the
Sacrament. And to make this expression the more odious. 1. He brings me in
(against the very Letter of my Text) speaking so of my self in the first person
singular. Secondly, As saying, that I far exceed him in fitting all sorts for
the Sacrament. Whereas 1. I express it in the first person plural. 2. Say that
we go beyond him in our actual care and endeavor to fit all sorts. Is there no
difference between fitting all sorts and endeavor to fit them? Yet withal I
add. 1. That we fall exceeding short in the very point of endeavor de jure. I
hope my Preesbyterian brethren will not think I lay vile expressions upon them
in so saying, however Mr. Humphrey charge me so for averring, and proving that
he has not endeavored his utmost de jure to prepare his people, etc.

Mr. Humphrey, Ibid. Let our consciences bo free, our scruples, etc. healed,
and I have done. Ans. I beseech you Sir, what scruple is there in making a
profession of your faith before any? What snare of conscience when we press
you to nothing that is against conscience? Did we indeed urge you to
acknowledge, that Presbyterian Government is of divine right, or 2. That trial
before the Presbytery is built upon jus divinum, or else would not admit you;
then might you well complain we lay snares for your consciences, etc. We indeed
profess our judgment for both in the affirmative; but we bind not any person
under trial to be of our judgment herein. Yea, before trial (if he please) let
him profess his judgment in the negative; that shall be no bar to our
admitting him, provided be not ignorant or scandalous. Nor shall profession of
assent with us about the jus divinum of Presbyterian Government and
Sacramental trial open the door for any, that upon trial or otherwise are found
ignorant or scandalous. We enquire not whither men submit to trial in point of
prudence or of conscience: Our great enquiry is, whither they be Evangelically
worthy; or have that competency of knowledge and vacancy from scandal which
makes them visibly so: and we think it our duty to bid such, and only such,
welcome in the name of Christ.

Sect. XII.
Mr. Humphrey in his free admission propounds the command as an argument to
prove that all must receive. In my Bar I answer, Christ did not command all to
receive, and instance in Mark, Luke, Nathaniel, etc. What says Mr. Humphrey
to this page 124. of his rejonder.

Mr. Humphrey. Christ did not command all to receive, because Mark, Luke and
Nathaniel were not there; Is not this pretty? Ans. I leave prettines to Mr.
Humphrey, which appears (as else where) so in this pretty answer. But I pray,
Sir, Had Christ intended (as you pretend) to make this first administration a
president for universal receiving, had it not bin easy for him to have
commanded all his Disciples (whithet sincere or hypocritical) either to
receive with himself or in their particular meetings and families, as himself,
did immediately after the Passe-over? This Christ did not: nay he did not so
much as invite those Jews who were in the house to receive with him, who yet
were Church Members as well as the Apostles. Hence we conclude; that Christ's
commanding his Apostles to receive is no warrant for all Disciples to receive
pel-mell. He that commanded them before hand to meet him at Galilee, Math. 26.
32. compare Math. 28. 7.10. and 1 Cor. 15. 6. could have commanded them before
hand to celebrate this Sacrament immediately after the Passover, had he
pleased.

Page 25. Of his vindication Mr. Humphrey uses an argument for free Admission
drawn from the good of coming namely conversion of the unregenerate. In my Bar
page 98. I deny the Sacrament to be a means of initiall conversion. Mr.
Humphrey in his Rejoinde^ page 125. returns. This arguing is palbably weak,
(besides the matter untrue) Is it not the unregenerate man's duty because it
will not convert him? As though it were man's benefit were the ground of duty,
and not Gods precept.

Ans. 1. Here M. Humphrey fails a little in his Logic, mistaking an answer
for an argument. Mr. Humphrey himself argued affirmatively from man's benefit to
his duty, thus, the Sacrament is a means of conversion, ergo, The unregenerate
must receive. I deny the minor, which being not proved by Mr. Humphrey the
conclusion falls as to that bottom. Who sees not that here I am not the
opponent but the respondent, and that it lies upon Mr. Humphrey to prove the
Sacrament (as to it is receiving, for otherwise we hinde^ none from coming) to
be a converting ordinance. But because he referres that to an other place, I
shall also refer my answer.

Secondly, Had I argued on the negative, There Is no Spiritual benefit in such
an act, Ergo it is no duty, the argument had bin firm enough being founded upon
divine grace which has inseparably united divine glory and man's Spiritual
good in every duty; whence it follows strongly, that if no Spiritual good can
accrue by such an act to such a person, then that act is not the duty of that
person. Understand me here of persons under Spiritual cure; and withal that
this Argument reaches not the (...) but only the (...).

For the instance of Judas; It seems I cannot satisfy, Mr. Humpbrey, nor he me;
nor is it much material whither Judas did eat or not. Therefore I pass it. But
where he adds in the same page, For 1 Corint. 11. It Is manifest, after St. Paul
had convinced the Corinths of their unworthines, yet their coming together he
approves, and that not to look on, but to eat. v. 33.

Ans. 1. That the Apostle reproved their unworthy receiving is evident: that he
allowed none to look on but receivets, or any to receive but persons
Evangelically worthy is not evident; the verse quoted proves no such matter,
but shows that when persons come to eat they must observe order. Is it
probable the Apostle should condemn receiving unworthily and yet allow
receiving though unworthily? If receiving, though unworthily, be allowable,
then let persons jure excommunicate receive, for they can but receive
unworthily.

Page 130. Mr. Humphrey charges me with two Schisms. and 1. For saying that an
unregenerate man must examine himself and so abstein. Ans. I say no such thing,
if examination be taken in the Apostles sense for the whole work of
preparation and as oppsed to unworthynes in the next verse. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29
The end of examination being self discovery and reformation, these two last
must needs be included in it. Let an unregenerate man thus examine himself and
I am confident he is bound to receive; so far am I from seperating between such
examination and receiving. Mr. Humphrey. Nay Mr. D. says, he most be present
too, but not eat; which is an other Schism in the Actions. Ans. I believe all
may be present without sin, 1. Because I find no prohibition to the contrary,
Secondly, because they may receive good by presence, which inclimes me to
believe presence is a duty here, as at Baptism. Yet herein I dare not be so
peremptory as in the other branch, that all must not eat. When Mr. Humphrey can
make out an inseparable union between presence and receiving then I shall be
ready both to confess and reform the Schism he charges me withal: till then
he must excuse me. But whereas Mr. Humphrey charges me with slander as
affirming I say, Let a man eat though he do not examine himself. Ans. I do not
remember nor can find this passage in this paragraph, yet happily elsewhere I may
have expressed as much and believe it is far from slander, yea should be very
glad were I mistaken therein. I shall therefore put it to this issue. Either
Mr. Humphrey is of the mind the a man must eat though be do not examine
himself: or he is of the contrary mind, for between two contradictions there
is no middle. If he be of the former mind then I have not slandered him. If he
be of the contrary mind then he is of our judgment, That self-examination
abstractedly taken is not enough to vvarrant receiving. To evidence this, let
us compare the two propositions. 1. Prop. Let a man eat, though he do not
examine himself. 2. Prop. Let not a man eat unless he do examine himself. If
the former be not his judgment, then the latter must needs be his judgment,
it being contradictory to the former, and so Master Humphrey is of judgment
that a man must not eat unless he do examine himself; namely when he either
does not examine himself at all, or upon examination he finds himself
Evangelically unworthy; the end of examination being not only, or principally,
discovery, but reformation which therefore must needs be included in Apostolic
examination. He that tryes only in order to discovery had as good not try at
all; yea, such trial will aggravate his judgment, and make him more
inexcusable as sinning against conviction, James 4. 17. If now I have slandered
Mr. Humphrey, as I am sorry for the material slander, though unwittingly done;
so I am not a little glad he is more of our judgment in this particular then I
formerly took him to be. But be it what it will, he must either clear me of
slander, or accuse himself of error. Yet withal, let me be bold to tell Mr.
Humphrey, That he, who says, let all receive, must by necessary consequence
say, let those Church Members receive, who do not examine themselves, unless
he can make it out that all Church Members do make conscience of examining
themselves.

Dr. Drake, The Sacrament must not be attended on as the word (understand it as
to actual receiving) in order to conversion but to edification.

Mr. Humphrey, page 131. we must not receive this doctrine without Scripture,
which will wholly dispeople this Ordinance.

Ans. 1. I hope, in due place Mr. Humphrey wants not for Scripture proof.

Secondly, In the mean time, is not Mr. Humphrey too uncharitable (as to many
other so particularly) to his own Congregation in his sad Prophecy? If the
Sacrament must be quite dispeopled, unless it be a means of conversion, them
belike Mr. Humphrey, has no communicants, but such as receive in order to
initial conversion. If so then there is not one Godly person in all Mr.
Humphrey his Parish, or amongst all his receivers: A censure so uncharitable
that I dare not pass it for a world: but hope that among his Communicants
there are some who partake in order to edification, I mean that are truly
Godly, and receive for growth in grace and comfort.

Mr. Humphrey, Page 131.
The Sacrament is not instituted to convert Heathen, for the word is not a
sealed word unto them.

Answ. 1. By way of Concession. Truly if it be not instituted to convert any.
1. Neither is it instituted to convert Heathen; Yet secondly, Prayer and
preaching two necessary attendants upon the Sacrament are instituted to convert
Heathen as well as any. Thirdly, That a means of conversion should universally
be denied to any, who need conversion, is a Doctrine we cannot receive without
Scripture. Fourthly, That the word is not a sealed word unto Heathen is soon
said, but not so easily proved; cannot a privilege be sealed to me Is not this
proposition (whosoever believes shall be saved) a branch of the revealed
Covenant? Secondly, It is not sealed at the Sacrament? Suppose now an Heathen
stand by at the the Lords Supper, Is the forementioned propositioned sealed to
him conditionally, or not? If it be, we have enough. If not, then the Sacrament
does not seal, that the aforesaid proposition is true (...); and so the seal is
not as extensive as the writing: for the Covenant says, all that believe shall
be saved, but the seal, belike, assures only, that all Church members that
believe shall be saved.
unless I eat the seals? Indeed only some few are fit to eat and drink the
seals; but who may not hear the Covenant proclaimed, and see it sealed at the
Sacrament, yea, to himself in particular conditionally, whither he be a
Christian, or an Heathen, whither he receive, or not?

Mr. Humphrey, Page 132.
Forbearance of the Pass over was allowed to none but for a month.

Answ. 1. This is great is dictum; what if a person were unclean not only at
the first, but also at the second Passe-over, was he bound to receive the
second Passe-over, though never so unclean? Indeed, if a man were clean, and
brought not the Lords offering he ran a great hazard; but where is he
threatened that forbore, because he was unclean at the second Passe-over? Then
belike even Lepers ought to eat the Passover in the second month. Yet
secondly, our case is far better, we having eight or twelve Sacraments every
year; and he who is unclean at this Sacrament may receive the next month, or
six weeks, if the fault be not his own.

Mr. Humphrey, ib. His exceptions against the parable, Math. 22. are vain
things. Those that murdered the servants were part of them that were invited,
and not to be opposed; for the contempt of the feast is the main business
intended, as appears by Luke 14. where nothing else is mentioned.

Ans. 1. I make no exception against the Parable, but against Mr. Humphrey his
wresting of it.

Secondly, True, all those who murdered the Servants were invited to the
wedding feast, but were they invited to the Sacrament? Then Heathen were
invited as well as any. Herod murdered one of the servants, Acts 12. 1.2. Was
he invited to the Sacrament?

Thirdly, If the contempt of the feast be the main business intended, then the
higher the contempt the greater the unworthynes; but such was the contempt of
those Murderers who therefore were excluded by the command of the Master, Luke
14. 24. My exceptions then were not so vain as Mr. Humphrey makes them.

To his two questions I answer; to the first, All refusers are unworthy of Gods
Ordinances, but I hope he will not count all absteyners refusers.

To the second, 1. No ungenerate person comes to the Sacrament as preparedly as
he can, yea too many make little conscience even of natural preparation.

Secondly, There is no total omission on the Christians part if he prepare for
and attend upon the Sacrament, but is denied actual receiving (whither justly
or unjustly) by Church Officers: See Mr. H. his Rejoinder 131.
or if he forbear at present out of an holy jealousy of self unworthines, so he
resolve through grace on better preparation against the next Sacrament.

Thirdly, in diverse cases better leave the matter undone than to fail in the
manner.

Dr. Drake, page 102. In opposition to Mr. Humphrey, It is neither a certain
duty on the Ministers part to admit all, nor on the peoples part for all to
receive, etc.

Mr. Humphrey, page 132. Let Mr. Drake take heed how he is carried through
opposition, least in opposing Mr. Humphrey he directly oppose the command of
Christ. He grants page 47. That, where there is no Government settled, the
Minister by a due forewarning may clear his soul, but how sadly does he revers
this here, and weap himself again in a fatal cloud? for if it be not his duty
it must be his sin, there is no medium for his excuse.

Ans. 1. I pray Sir, next time be more careful in transcribing my words right,
and do not wrong first my text and then my self. I bear no Spirit of opposition
to your person, but desire to hate error and love truth in you, in my self and
in every one else.

Secondly, It smells strongly of perverseness that he charges me as directly
opposing the command of Christ, when at the same time (if it be an opposition)
him self takes the same liberty. Christ says drink ye all of it. Mr. Humphrey
says all here must be limited to intelligent Church Members and to persons not
jure excommunicate; we say it must be limited to Church Members that are
Evangelically worthy. Mr. Humphrey in the same breath (as it were) cries up his
own limitation and cries down ours. Has Mr. Humphrey an especial privilege
from heaven to limit Christ's universalls? If he have, let us see his Commission.

Thirdly, should I revers what he charges me to say page 47. Supposing it
erroneous, Mr. Humphrey should rather be glad than sad at such a reversment.

Fourthly, I see more need of a candid interpretation on Mr. Humphrey his part,
than of a reversment on my part. True, I say there, that I humbly conceive that
the Minister may clear his own soul (where there is no Church-governement
settled) if he persuade or forewarn one that is visibly unworthy not to
receive, but has no juridicall power either to admit or keep him back. But did
I there say, the Minister had no Pastourall power, or that he had no power to
suspend his own Act? If a drunkard, etc. after admonition will rush upon the
Sacrament, let him take it at his own peril; I do not think the Minister is
bound either on the one hand to drive him from the Table or on the other hand
to deliver him the Sacrament. The Minister then does neither admit nor suspend
him juridically; but suspends only his own Act. If a Minister by his
Pastourall power (where no Government is settled) may admit all that are
visibly worthy, then he may be the same power suspend those who are visibly
unworthy; that is, he may deny to give them the Elements. The Logicians tell us
that Contrariorum est eadem (...). He that has power to admit has so far
power to suspend. Here then, by Mr. Humphrey his leave is a medium. It Is
neither my duty to admit a drunkard, that is to give him the Elements, nor is
it my sin to permit him to receive; that is to let him take the Elements
himself. Is not permission a medium between admission and suspension. A
Minister unpresbyterated can neither admit nor suspend, but may permit. He can
neither admit nor suspend juridically, but may do both Pastourally. Worthy
Church Members he must both admit and encourage, unworthy ones he may permit to
receive, but must discourage from receiving in statu quo. He has no juridicall
and coactive power, but has a Pastourall and disswasive power.

Mr. Humphrey, page 133. For his distinction of mediately and immediately; he
should have forborne the wound and saved his Salve; for there is none that
denies but that every man is to examine himself and prepare as well as come.

Answ. I perceive M. Humphrey is resolved to cut me out work enough; otherwise
he would not have inserted such trivial exceptions. Yet, he is so charitable
toward me as to think I make conscience of being at the cost of a Salve where
I have wounded any.

But, I pray, where is the wound? My words page 102. Of my bar are these, It Is
neither a certain duty on the Ministers part to admit all, nor on the peoples
part for all to receive; unles you understand it mediately; as the getting of
assurance is a duty lies upon all; yet not immediately, but first they must get
true grace the ground of assurance. So all must come to the Sacrament, but
first they must be prepared, All must be admitted to receive, but first they
must he visibly worthy.

Will Mr. Humphrey say, it is the Ministers duty to admit all Church Members
without limitation, or that it is the duty of all to receive immediately? Do not
his own limitations perclaim the contrary? If therefore any wound be given, Mr.
Humphrey is as truly guilty thereof as my self; But it seems, by his own
coufession, I am more careful to being a Salve to cure it than he is.

Mr. Humphrey, Ibid. But whereas he holds a man should examine and prepare
himself (suppose as well as he can) yet if they judge him not visibly worthy he
must not be admitted: And if he judges not himself really worthy, for his own
part, he must not eat; he has stretched a line of division over the Church, a
plummet of lead on weak consciences, and wiped the Sacrament as a man wipeth a
dish, wiping it and turning it up side down in wiping.

Answ. Some are notable at Cyclopick Divinity, let the Reader judge whither M.
Humphrey be not excellent at Cyclopick Rhetoric, which in stead of
illustrating does obscure his sense and make it ambiguous could we not guess
at his meaning by his mewing. Grammar and Logic had bin here more useful
than Rbetoricke. Does not the word stretch a linse of division over the Church?
See Jerem. 15. 19. Does it not stretch a plummet on weak consciences? but to
regulate them, not to crush them. The Sacrameut indeed is the Dish, Christ the
meat in that dish; should not the handmaids of wisdom wipe her dishes clean on
all sides so far as lies in their power, that is, purge and keep pure this and
other Ordinances? If his meaning be, that by Sacramental trial we cause
sinful division, wound the consciences of the weak or grieve them, and make
the Sacrament a nullity; this, first is false: Secondly a new dressing of what
is elsewhere answered. I pray Sir, be not offended, that we dare not make the
Table of the Lord contemptible, that we dare bring no bread to the Lords Table
but such, as, upon grounds of charity, we apprehend to be Shewbread, Malach 1.
v. 7. and 12.

I wonder therefore Mr. Humphrey so forgets himself, page 133. as to charge me
bitterly with censoriousnesse, but for noting his censoriousnesse. To which I
briefly answer:

1. What need I quote Chapter and verse in a place so well known, and quoted by
himself?

Secondly, That I charge him with censuring us in a Rhetorical way, did I not
therein say the very truth, unless Interrogation be no part of Rhetoric? Does
not M. Humphrey turn the Apostles assertion into an Interrogation, and is that
no part of Rhetoric?

Thirdly, Did I frame any interpretation, but what his words must of necessity
carry, unless he will have them speak non sense? He finds fault with us for
doing evil that good may come; what is that evil, but want of free Admission,
the very same with Suspension in a negative sense? That this is the evil Mr.
Humphrey charges us withal is evident, both by the context, and by the whole
scope of his book. Let the Reader now judge whither I frame an interpretation,
or speak Mr. Humphrey his genuine sense. That Suspension is not a sin, but a
duty has been elsewhere proved; nor are we ashamed, Sir, that you charge us
with Suspension as our Act and practice, but think you do us wrong by charging
us with this practice as a sin. The Act we confess concerns us, but the guilt
must rest upon him, who charges guilt wrongfully. Is not he censorious, who
charges me with a sin I am not guilty of? Yet that nothing may be wanting in
point of censoriousnesse, Mr. Humphrey, page 134. charges me with spite for
forgiving him and praying for him. Lord, how does passion, and prejudice blind
a man to interpret the preatest acts of charity a plece of spite and malice?

Sir, I find not fault with the terms of giving, or humbly committing your
reasons; but that you mistake weight for number, and think you give them by
weight, when you give or humbly commit them only by number. For a farewell,
Mr. Humphrey, 1. Tells me, I rail at his Arguments, Secondly, Takes his leave
with a scoff. Thirdly, To sharpen his Sarcasme abuses Scripture, and so
concludes the first part of his Rejoinder, whither with that piety and charity
becomes a Brother and a Minister, I leave it to indifferent judgments.

THE BAR TO FREE ADMISSION, FIXED. OR An Answer to Mr. Humphrey his Rejoinder.
The Second PART.
Sect. I.
IN the beginning of his second Part, though Mr. H. hesitate about the account
of our practice in the matter of Excommunication, yet since he is so charitable
as to acknowledge it may be fair, I cannot but look at it as a good beginning
in order to a right understanding, and hopes of an happy close. I shall
therefore proceed to that wherein we more palpably differ.

Dr. D. p. 107. of his Bar. In his description of Church Censures Mr. H. omits
their main end, which is, the amendment of the party censured.

Mr. H. p. 146. of his Rejoinder. I express it just over the leaf as soon as it
is to purpose. Ans. In dispute, and only by the way, I note your description of
Church Censures as defective. Logicians tell us that Finis is a necessary
ingredient in our description of an action, the end being essential to the
moral goodness of actions. This end, Sir, you omit in your description of
Church Censures, which your mentioning in the next leaf will not salve.
Therefore, by your leave, I was neither blind nor cruel in censuring, unless
the Respondents discovery of the faylures of his Opponent against the rules of
Logic be malice and blindness; and if so, then a Disputant, because he acts
rationally in order to the conviction of his Adversary, is blind and malicious.
In this I allude only to his own story.
Such Logic is fitter for St. Albans executioner, than for a Scholar or a
Divine.

Next, he blames me for extending Churchcensures to ignorant persons, or to any
other wilful sinners; Yet in the same place grants some Church Censures belong
to such, but not suspension or excommunication. Ans. Sir, I extend not
Church Censures to ignorant persons simply, but to persons wilfully ignorant:
And till Mr. H. can prove such ignorance and wilfulness is not a great and
scandalous sin, he does ill to censure me for saying they deserve a
Churchcensure, yea some degrees of excommunication if persisted in. If this
doctrine would soon leave him destitute of Church Members, as himself
confesses, p. 147. Surely his Church is in a very lamentable condition, whose
members are (it seems) not only grossly ignorant, but also wilfully ignorant. I
do not charge them to be so, but only show them what a slur their own Ministers
argument casts upon them.

Mr. H. ib. Dr. D. challenges all the world to show him proof that persons
excommunicated may not be present at any public Ordinance, etc. If he think so
learnedly of himself, let him send his challenge to Dr. Hammond, etc.

Ans. I know far better than Mr. H. or any other, that I have great reason to
think very meanly of my self, nor will I stand to justify the manner of
expression, which yet had its mitigation or allay, would Mr. H. have pleased to
take notice thereof, my challenge being only in order to Scripture Proof. by
which I still believe it cannot be made out, that an excommunicated person
ought to be kept from all public Ordinances; yea, the Scripture seems to
favor the contrary. I dare not compare with that learned Clerk he mentions, or
with any other that bears the name of a Scholar or Divine, nor desire to
expatiate in controversies, which I look at as the shell, not the kernel of
Divinity: Nor was I, or am I acted with malice in coping with Mr. H. in this
unhappy controversy which himself (among others whom I honor in the Lord)
started against the votes and judgment of a Parliament, assisted by an
Assembly of very pious, orthodox, and learned Divines, to the general sadning
of eminently godly persons in the Nations, who looked at the Presbyterian
Government, and the exercise of it in this particular, for the substance
thereof, as most consonant to the rule, as the fruit of many prayers that have
long hung upon the file in heaven; and as the great Instrument under Christ to
extirpate Ignorance, Error, Profaneness, Schism, etc. and therefore opposed
by some maliciously, by others through weakness and prejudice, in which last
rank I place Mr. H. however he look at me as malicious. If the Lord shall bless
my poor endeavors to convince him, I shall think it abundantly worth my pains,
though it be to me a troublesome work in the midst of other weighty
avocations. However, I shall submit the issue to God, and sit down in peace,
that I have sincerely, though weakly endeavored to do my duty; and hope some
body will be the better by this poor piece, though it must expect to meet with
much contempt and opposition.

Mr. H.p. 147. I shall propose him only that one Text, Matthew. 7. 6. Give not
that which is holy unto dogs: Excommunicated persons are generally interpreted
to be dogs and swine; the word and prayer are holy things as well as the
Sacrament (which yet was not instituted when this precept was first given, and
so cannot he primarily intended here) Ergo.

Ans. 1. All excommunicated persons are not dogs. Even godly men upon just
ground may be excommunicated; and I hope children are not dogs.

2 All dogs are not to be denied holy things. Heathen are dogs, Matthew. 15. v.
22. 26, 27. yet may be admitted to the word preached, 1 Cor. 14. 24.

3 Some persons within the Church are dogs, yet must not be denied the
Sacrament, if upon trial it appear they have competent knowledge, and no
scandal be objected or proved against them; the Church in censures being bound
to proceed, Secundum allegata and probata.

4 Therefore we must distinguish of dogs: Some are dogs really, but not
visibly; such are natural persons undiscovered, (these with due provisions) can
be denied no Ordinance. Others are dogs both really and visibly; Such are
Heathen, who must not be denied the Crumbs, though they may not sit with
Children at the Table. Others are scornful, and malicious dogs, and therefore
are in an especial manner unworthy of any Ordinance, and so far as they are
visible must be denied

1 The pearl of private reproof more particularly there intended by our
Savior, who forbids private judging of any, and private reproof of some,
unless it be for others sake.

2 They must be denied that holy thing the Sacrament, which (as the Cabinet of
that pearl of price) they slight visibly. But as for public prayers and
preaching (unless they be public Affronters and disturbers of the very
exercises of these Ordinances, which are means of their conversion, and which
do not so much irritate their spleen, as being not particularly and personally
applied against them) I see no warrant of Scripture to thrust any dog from
them, unless it be known he have committed the sin against the Holy Ghost. In
this sense Mr. Perkins his Comment upon Matthew. 7. 6. I cordially subscribe to,
That such dogs as do publicly blaspheme and vent their heresies against the
truth, at the very time when it is delivered, are to be forced away from the
public Ordinances, or separated from, if the Church want co-active power (
Act. 13. v. 45, 46, 50, 51. where you have both the barking, and the tearing
dog) as well as they must be denied private reproof (at least for their own
sakes) where they scoff at, and oppose it privately. This rule our Savior
seems to explain Matthew. 18. v. 15-17. where the remedy rises up gradually with
the malady, and neglecting to hear is a degree of Swinish-trampling. But little
does Mr. H. think how he has prejudiced his own cause by this quotation of
Reverend Mr. Perkins, page 148. especially where in a Parenthesis, he bids the
Reader (Mark that) Mr. Perkins his words quoted there by Mr. H. are these:

Indeed, if the party be excommunicated for some particular crime, etc. then
although he be excluded from communion in the Sacrament and Prayer (Mark that)
yet may he be admitted to hear the word to help him to repent, which is the end
of all Church Censures.

Is not Mr. Perkins here clear that some persons excommunicated, yet may be
admitted to the word preached, and that in order to their conversion? And what
is our suspension in the rigor of it, but an excommunication from the
Sacrament, with an admission at the same time to the word preached? Mr. Perkins
then is a professed friend to suspension, which is also beholding to Mr. H. for
affording it so honorable a testimony. You will say, I but Mr. Perkins
excludes such from prayer also. Ans. True, and probably because he looked not
at prayer as a converting Ordinance, which had he done, its not likely he would
have been against presence either at Word, Prayer, or Sacrament, by which all
that are cureable, may receive good, although they do not actually receive the
elements.

5 If the Sacrament be not primarily intended here, because this precept was
given before the Lords Supper was instituted; no more was it primarily intended
in the wedding feast, Matthew. 22. upon the same account; which yet Mr. H. builds
upon as a bottom for free admission. Its enough for our purpose, First, That
the Sacrament is an holy thing.

Secondly, That by Mr. H. his own grant, its to be denied to some dogs, to whom
other holy things are not to be denied, namely, heathen, and persons jure
excommunicated, to which last at least he yields it may be denied.

Thirdly, That upon Scripture-ground it is to be denied to some dogs within the
Church, yea to real children. But neither must holy things, nor dogs be
understood universally, which both the manner of expression, and our Saviors
reason hint sufficiently, where a pearl is, First, cast away; Secondly, exposed
to contempt; Thirdly, exposes the giver to danger, there its not to be tendered
caeteris paribus. An indefinite Proposition is not equivalent to an universal,
unless in materia necessaria. He that says absolutely, No holy thing must be
given to any dog, does not only sin against faith, as corrupting the Text, but
also against charity, as cutting off innumerable persons from all means of
conversion.

His distinction p. 148. of real and relative exclusion is pithy, pertinent,
and well expressed, and may do very much to compound our controversy, if
passion and prejudice were on both hands laid aside. We grant;

First, That an heathen, or excommunicated person, has no relative interest in
any public Ordinance, the former being no Churchmember, the latter being cut
off from Church Membership.

Secondly, That all Church Members have both a real and relative interest in
all Ordinances in actu primo, or signato, but not in actu secundo or exercito,
as a Jew, or a Priest, had right to holy things, but might not at all times act
that right, namely, if he were unclean, etc. And if their uncleanness were
perpetual, they might for ever be secluded from holy things, as in the case of
leprosy, etc. 2 Chr. 26. 21. Proportionably suspension is no bar either to
real or relative interest, but only withholds the actual enjoyment of that
interest till the party interested be actually fit for that enjoyment (at least
visibly) which otherwise would prejudice, but not benefit him. The point of
difference between us, and Mr. H. is not real or relative interest, but actual
enjoyment of that interest, and that only too as to actual receiving in the
Sacrament.

Mr. H. page 149. I hold a man is to be debarred actual receiving by
excommunication. Mr. Drake will have him to be debarred without it.

Ans. I pray Sir, forget not your self, Do not you hold persons jure
excommunicated, may be debarred actual receiving? Consult page 21. of your
Rejoinder. I hope persons jure excommunicated are not actually excommunicated;
therefore Mr. H. will have some intelligent Church Members debarred actual
receiving, before actual excommunication, and what is this but suspension? May
Mr. H. distinguish between excommunication ipso jure and de facto, and may not
I distinguish between receiving ipso jure, and de facto. Grant all
Church Members as such, may be receivers ipso jure so they be not receivers de
facto, we shall soon put an issue to this controversy with Mr. H. Is there not
an admission de jure and de facto, as well as an excommunication de jure and de
facto? A person excommunicated de jure, but not de facto, is as truly a
Churchmember as a person admitted de jure, but not de facto; and if the former
may be suspended, notwithstanding his Church Membership, I pray why not the
latter?

By this collation it further appears, That Church Membership even in
intelligent persons, is not the adequate reason of actual receiving. A person
ipso jure excommunicate, is still externally in Covenant (in Mr. H. his sense)
as being a Churchmember, and yet may be debarred the external seal thereof;
witness Mr. H. page 21, 22. of his Rejoinder; when Mr. H. can untie this Riddle
of his own making, he will teach us to untie the Riddle he puts upon us page
150. where likewise he says, but proves not, That excluding men from the
Sacrament does not bind or retain their sins. This is false, if applied to
Juridical suspension, or Pastoral suspension, in some cases.

Somewhat he would bring there like an argument from a misunderstanding of
Matthew. 1619 as if there were no censure of the Keys without exclusion from the
Church; forgetting in the mean time, his own distinction between the Church and
the Chancel. Has the house of God but one room, one door? or cannot a man be
shut out of the Chancel, but he must needs be thereby shut out of the Church?
Cannot a Father shut his child out of the Parlor, but he must needs shut him
quite out of doors? True, some persons censured must be to thee as heathen,
Matthew. 18. 17. but must all persons censured be so? Surely the Apostle is more
charitable, 2 Thessalonians 3. v. 14 15.

Page 151. Mr. H. says, That the second degree of excommunication among the
Jews called Cherem, may put Mr. Drake to shame, that so blindly asserts the
parallel, p. 21. and yet every where denies the matter.

Ans. Good words, I pray Sir; page 21. and 22. of my Bar, I prove the Antiquity
of suspension from the practice of the Jews, and of the ancient Greek Church;
as also that with them it was a degree of excommunication, as juridical
suspension is with us. I neither assert, nor justify their practice
universally, much less their excluding of persons excommunicated from all
public Ordinances. Cannot I quote their practice in favor of suspension, but
I must needs justify what ever was in use among them in point of
excommunication? Such blind imputations, I am sure should shame Mr. H. who it
seems cannot distinguish between the improving of an instance or practice, and
the owning of all the aberrations that attend upon that practice.

Mr. H. ib. Its a very fond conceit of Mr. D. to make two degrees of
excommunication beneath dismembership, that is, two degrees of putting men out
of the Church before they be put out of the Church.

Ans. 1. Mr. H. should do well to tell the Ancient Church of the Jews, and of
the Greeks, etc. that their conceit is fond in making two or three degrees of
excommunication before dismembership. It was their conceit before it was mine,
nor am I of their conceit in every particular about excommunication, or its
degrees, though I will not say their conceit was fond: I leave that work to Mr.
H.

Secondly, What is excommunication (in the very notion of it) but a turning or
keeping out of communion: And because turning out of communion is gradual,
therefore excommunication must needs be gradual. He that is turned out of any
part of communion, is as truly, though not as much, turned out of communion, as
he that is turned out of all communion: Sacramental communion is part of
communion, from which he that is turned away, is truly turned out of communion
as to that particular, and therefore is truly excommunicated, though not
dismembered. What ever therefore himself, or others may think of those Texts, 1
Cor. 5. 11. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. is not the Question, but what those Texts do
really hold forth, which because they have been formerly handled, I here
forbear.

Dr. D. p. 107. I grant that by excommunication, they are made as Heathen and
Publicans, and are in statu quo, no members. Mr. H. page 153. Now how strange
is this, That while he cannot deny the excommunicate are dismembered, he should
keep such ado to set up a censure which is no dismembership, and make it a
degree too of excommunication, which he confesses it is not?

Ans. Here Mr. H. discovers either gross ignorance, or want of ingenuity. I
cannot think him so grossly ignorant of my meaning, as here he seems to be. He
cannot but know, that in the former place (which he only carps at) by
excommunication, I mean the last degree of excommunication which reaches unto
dismembring, not so the two former degrees, which yet are truly called
Excommunication, though not in the more famous and rigorous sense. Sir, I deny
the excommunicated are dismembered, if excommunication be taken for the lower
degrees of that censure; I grant they are dismembered, if excommunication be
took for the highest degree thereof. I hope here is no inconsistency or
contradiction.

Mr. H. ib. And p. 154.
Excommunication refers directly to Church membership, and consequentially only
to the Ordinances; so that a man must be put out of the Church, or else he
cannot legally be put from the Communion. Even as the Leper was not kept from
the Camp, that he might be kept from public worship, but was kept from
communion in worship, because he was kept from the Camp.

Ans. This is gratis dictum, two degrees of excommunication, at least referring
directly to some Ordinance, namely the Lords Supper; from which the party
suspended is separated really; the party dismembered is separated both really
and relatively. His illustration is as weak as his conclusion, the Leper being
kept from the Camp (though not solely, yet) principally that he might be kept
from some parts of worship. Take Vzziah for instance, 2 Chronicles. 26. 21. his
leprosy cu: him off not only from Civil, but also from Sacred employments.
This is further evident by the practice of Moses, who pitched a Tabernacle
without the Camp, and called it the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Exodus 33. 7.
Does Mr. H. think a Leper without the Camp might come to that Tabernacle to
seek the Lord, as other Israelites that were clean did and might? If his
presence would defile the Camp, Number. 5. 3. would it not much more defile the
Tabernacle; or was not Gods presence more eminently in the Tabernacle than in
the Camp? He was therefore kept from the Camp, that he might be kept from
communion in some part of worship; not simply from communion in worship,
because he was kept from the Camp; for then he might have been admitted to
worship in the Tabernacle when it was without the Camp, which is evidently
false.

What Mr. H. notes page 154. of the practice of gathered Churches, it has been
spoke too formerly. For his exception against my reason, a majori, illustrated
by the similitude of a Judge: He answers himself, page 155. in these words, I
think when a man is relatively deprived fellowship in general, the Church may
use mitigation or severity to a real permission of him to some Ordinances (and
so perhaps for civil converse) according to prudence, for his edification or
destruction. What speak these words, but that the Church may admit an
excommunicated person to some Ordinances, who yet by Gods command is debarred
all Ordinances, if Mr. H. define excommunication rightly? Is not this to set
the Church above Scripture, and to allow her power of mitigation where God
commands severity? Besides if the Church may use mitigation after dismembring,
why not also before it? If she may admit a dismembered person to some
Ordinances, why may she not suspend an undismembred person from some
Ordinances; yea what in effect is her greater excommunication mitigated, but
suspension? To keep to his own terms, That Magistrate who may according to Law
inflict a greater punishment, may according to Law inflict the lesser
punishment. Proportionably, if the Church may dismember a person, she may
suspend him, but both according to Christ's Law, which is the Gospel. That the
Church does it according to Law has been formerly proved, which therefore I
shall not repeat.

But, I pray Sir, may a Judge mitigate a severe sentence when passed, and might
he not before have pronounced a milder sentence? May a Judge after sentence of
Confiscation and Death pronounced, mitigate the execution only to confiscation,
and might not the same Judge beforehand have passed a milder sentence of
confiscation only? In like manner, may the Church after sentence of dismembring
admit the person dismembered to some Ordinances, and may not she susspend the
same person from some Ordinance without dismembring him? Will Mr. H. mitigate
after the sentence of dismembring, and may not we mitigate before the sentence
of dismembring? May he break a poor man's head, and then give him a plaster,
and may not we prevent both the fraction and plaster by a little scratch?
(such is suspension to dismembring, especially as managed by us) If therefore
suspension be an offense or injury, its an error on the right hand by too much
mildness. I pray Sir, forgive us this wrong. I am glad the Presbyterians, who
were looked at as a company of rigid fellows, are now at last found guilty (as
it seems) of too much lenity and moderation.

Mr. H. p. 155. Suspension is null without dismembership; insomuch that if a
Jew were under Niddui (which was their lowest degree) if unabsolved, his
children might not be circumcised: And why not, but that they reckoned him no
Church member?

Ans. 1. The assertion is gratis dictum: and, 1. If we look at negative
Suspension, that is not null without dismembring, instance in unintelligent
Church Members. 2. Nor is positive Suspension null without dismembring;
instance in persons jure excommunicate, who (he grants) may be suspended, yet
its evident they are not dismembered.

2. His confirmation drawn from the practice of the Jews is weak, it being not
probable that he who might teach ordinarily in the Church, was dismembered from
the Church. 3. In denying Circumcision to the Males of a person under Niddui,
the Jews were wife above that which was written, supposing the father had been
dismembered by that degree of Excommunication, and that because the child might
have been circumcised in the right of his mother or grandfather, etc. To me,
it seems probable, the Jews might deny Circumcision in the aforesaid case, out
of prudence, the more effectually by that means to humble and bring in the
Patent: But I see no Scripture warrant for it, and therefore may here use the
words of our Savior, From the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19. 8. This may be
a sufficient Therefore for Mr. H. his Wherefore.

Fain would Mr. H. run away with a mistake, That Excommunication by the
Scripture is referred still to Church Membership, and not to the Sacrament. But
I must crave pardon for my not running along with him in that opinion.
Excommunication is directly opposite (not simply to Church Membership, but) to
Communication or Communion, a term given especially to the Sacrament. Which
Communion, because it is gradual, therefore its opposite Excommunication must
needs be gradual also. Cannot a member be deprived communion, unless it be cut
off? I had thought a Ligature as well as Excision, might have deprived my
finger of communion with my body, and might prove far better physic than
Excision or Mutilation. If the Ligature of suspension will cure, its cruelty
(in my poor judgment) to cut off a Member. A Brother in Scripture phrase is a
Churchmember, though under a Churchcensure; compare 1 Cor. 5. 11. with 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14, 15. If so, then all Church Censures rise not up to dismembring.
This I note the rather, because page 152. Mr. H. confesses, that diverse of the
learned apply the forequoted Texts to Excommunication. What is our suspension,
but denying a Churchmember some part of communion?

Mr. H. p. 156. God forbid but we should put a distinction between sins that
stand not with sincerity, and that stand not with public profession. I do not
think the detection of a man living in any known sin that contradicts the one,
ought to excommunicate him: but the open conviction of such sins which are
notoriously scandalous, and obstinate, bringing discredit on the Church, and
contradicting the other.

Answ. 1. By concession; a difference must be put between sins that stand not
with sincerity, and that stand not with profession caeteris par^bus. This we do
by suspension and dismembring: But Mr. H. will have no Church-censure applied
to them who live in known sins that contradict only sincerity; whence it
follows, that by his doctrine, known hypocrites must enjoy all
Church Priviledges, as well as persons of known integrity.

2. Note here, Mr. H. grants the Church may know a man's heart, and particularly
that he is an hypocrite, which yet flowing from my pen, was by him declaimed
against, as a prying into Gods secrets; though we profess to know the heart
only as Mr. H. does, namely, by the fruits, when a man is known to live in
fins that contradict sincerity.

3. To me it is a paradox, how the open conviction of living in any known sin,
should not be notoriously scandalous, bring discredit on the Church, and
contradict public profession especially if continued in obstinately; which I
wish were not the case of too many Church Members. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor.
5. 11. That a Churchmember who is covetous, a railer, or extortioner, is to be
censured as well as he that is a fornicator, an idolater, or a drunkard. Does
it not discredit the Church, that any Churchmember, convinced of gross
ignorance, and continuing therein obstinately after the use of means, should
still be embraced and honored as a Churchmember? He that will make a
profession of he knows not what, does he not by that act contradict his very
profession, before all to whom his ignorance is known? should any profess
learning, and be known at the same time to be grossly ignorant of the very
Alphabet, were not such profession ridiculous, and a contradiction of it self,
especially if continued in wilfully after sundry means used to put him upon and
promote him in learning?

Mr. H. ib. As for the Antiquaerist he quotes here of his side so
magnificently, and so often, Mr. Prin tells us, it is himself. Let another man
praise thee, and not thine own mouth, etc.

Answ. These words, as they are impertinent, so they discover too palpably a
spirit of Cavilling, Page 105. of my Bar, I have this passage, Eating, 1 Cor.
5. 11. is extended to Sacramental, as well as domestical eating, as is cleared
by the Antiquaerist in his answer to Suspension suspended; to which therefore I
refer. Now, I pray, Sir, what do these words import of quoting the Antiquaerist
magnificently?

2 How does it appear the Antiquaerist is my self? I grant Mr. Prins testimony
is valuable, where he speaks upon his own knowledge; but may not Mr. Prin be
misinformed? And if 1. There be no vaunting expressions. And 2. The
Antequaerist be not Dr. Drake, is not Mr. H. guilty of a double flander? Nor do
I think it expedient to inform him in this particular, who is so apt to make a
bad use of his information.

From the same spirit flows that Aspersion, p. 156. There are many precious
Christians herein made weak, which yet are not to be slighted with Mr. Drake,
but tenderly to be satisfied.

Does not Mr. H. here reflect upon me; as if I slighted many precious
Christians, and were not tender about their satisfaction? yet forgetting
himself, in the very same page he quotes those expressions of mine, which show
I was far from sleighting them. Thus out of the Eater comes meat, and the
slander carries its own confutation in its mouth; yea, himself assents to two
of my conclusions about that particular: To the first absolutely. To the second
conditionally: about which, to cut off ambiguity and dispute, I pray Sir, take
notice, That in that place, under presence I include receiving, though I did
not express it. But how the Assertion is superstitions, as expressed in my own
terms, I may happily understand hereafter, if Mr. H. will please to inform me; by
which information, I trust he shall soon bring me to reformation. I would not
that my heart, hand or tongue should wittingly be abettors of Superstition.

Mr. H. p. 157. The third is much amiss, and equivocal. They partake of those
sins they should have reproved, and do not, but not of any sin in their
receiving, any more then in their hearing and praying. Such words as these are
subject to do hurt, as if it were our duty simply to keep one another from Gods
service, and that this were the only eminent piece of piety; when its
certainly our duty to excite, call, provoke them to, as counsel, fit and
prepare them for the attending all Ordinances.

Answ. The conclusion Mr. H. lays load upon is this, They partake in their
sins, who do not their duty to reform them, or keep them from the Sacrament
otherwise. Here 1. He does me wrong in leaving out those expressions which
render my sense clear and fair. My words are these, page 109, of my Bar, They
partake in the sins of unworthy receivers, who do not their duty to reform
them, or to keep them from receiving, in case they will not be reformed. As Mr.
H. quotes my words, I grant there is much ambiguity; to instance in one, and a
gross one. The Reader may apprehend, that I am of opinion, that if the Church
keep unworthy persons from the Sacrament, she is not bound to do her endeavors
to reform them. A conceit far from my thoughts and expressions, if entirely and
heartily represented. Mr. H. makes my sense worse, as if I were of the mind,
that its our duty simply to keep one another from Gods service: yea, that this
is the only eminent piece of piety. A flander so gross and absurd, that the
very naming of it is sufficient confutation.

2. Those words of Mr. H. ( They partake not of any sin in their receiving,
more than in their hearing and praying) are erroneous. For clearing whereof
note, we may sin two ways about our duty: 1. In the matter. 2. In the manner:
Proportionably two ways I may partake of other men's sins: 1. If I do not
instruct and warn them about their duty, both for matter and manner, where I am
called so to do. 2. If I admit them to do that which instatu quo they are bound
to forbear, and I am bound in my place to endeavor to keep them from. To apply
this, I sin not in the matter by admitting any to prayer or hearing, provided
they be not disturbers, etc. but I sin in the very matter, by admitting some to
receiving, who ought not to be admitted; else how can persons jure
excommunicate, be denied the Sacrament? we preach to, and pray for, and with,
the vilest malefactors that are ready to be sacrificed to Justice, but dare not
admit them to the Lord's Supper, till they testify their repentance. Its
evident then, I partake more of sin in admitting some to the Sacrament, than in
admitting them to prayer or hearing. In the former I may be guilty, both in
matter and manner, not so in the latter, but only in the manner. We
acknowledge it our duty, and profess it our practice, to excite, call and
provoke all intelligent Church Members to receive; and to counsel, fit, and
prepare them for the Sacrament: but too many care not to come, and diverse who
affect to come, are extremely unwilling to be counseled, fitted and prepared
by us as they ought. Hinc, hinc, illae Lachrymae. We wish all Professors were
worthy Receivers, we charge all to make conscience to fit themselves, we offer
our selves to help to fit them, and cordially admit those who are visibly fit,
waiting upon others, till God give them real and visible fitness, but till
visibly fit, we dare not admit them.

Page 157. Mr. H. thinks I wrong him, by charging him with self-contradiction.
Let the Reader compare my Bar, page 109. with Mr. H. his vindication, page 32.
and then judge. I but he spoke those words only secundum quid, not simpliciter.

Ans. His peremptory delivery of them both negatively and affirmatively,
insinuates strongly that he spoke them simpliciter.

Mr. H. ib. But how do any of these ends concern them, as to their own act of
receiving?

Ans. By them he means either the parties censured, or the Congregation. I
think Church Censures, and particularly suspension, do much concern them both:
the party censured, to bring him to repentance; the best of the Congregation in
order to their satisfaction, who are much offended by the admission of persons
visibly unworthy; and the whole Congregation, who by the suspension of any are
warned to take heed of his sins, left they be suspended as well as he: as also
to prevent that guilt which would defile them, should they consent to his
admission, whom they know to be unworthy. Such consenters are they, who after
due admonition in private, do not give notice to the Church of a person they
know to be unworthy; as also those Church Officers, who admit him in the like
case. As Church Members, we are bound in the use of all lawful means to prevent
one the others sins; Receiving is a sin in persons visibly unworthy; therefore
Church Members, as such, are bound to prevent it. Some acts are essentially
sinful, which never can be done by any; some are accidentally sinful, by the
manner of doing; some are relatively sinful, when done by a person incapable,
as when a private person takes upon him the office of a Judge: Here judging is
not essentially evil, for then none might judge; nor upon the supposition is it
accidentally evil, as to the manner of judging, for the private person may pass
a right judgment: but its relatively evil, because a private person takes upon
him the work of a public person; and such judging we truly say is evil in
fieri, though it be not essentially evil. In like manner, a person receiving,
who ought not to receive; sins in the fieri, as to the act of receiving, though
the act of receiving be not a sin essentially, but only relatively. I hope all
persons must not practice all affirmative precepts: to judge and preach are
duties, must all men therefore judge and preach? Are not the very acts of
judging and preaching sins in some persons? They are not so essentially, but
relatively when men who are not called undertake these works.

Mr. H. p. 158. It is indeed the great fallacy here that misleads many, when
they plead our duty of watching over others, etc. they wind it all in still in
order to the Sacrament, as if they were to be done merely in reference unto it,
when as they are each of them distinct duties, and the neglect of, or doing
one, is no ground or hinderance of the other.

Ans. The particulars Mr. H. mentions are,

First, Watching over others.

Secondly, Not partaking in their sins.

Thirdly, Getting the scandalous to be censured.

Here first, by way of concession we wind them all in, in order to the
Sacrament, but not merely in reference to it; That is Mr. H. his fallacy
wherewith he would fain deceive the Reader. Whereas we make use of all three in
order to private communion, and in order to dismembring, as well as in order to
suspension.

Secondly, True, They are each of them distinct duties; but its false, That the
neglect of, or doing the one, is no ground or hindrance of the other. For
first, Omission of the one (whether it be by neglect, or otherwise) is a ground
for the omission of the other.

I must not reprove my neighbor, unless I first watch over him, it being a sin
to reprove blindly, which he must needs be guilty of, that observes not;

First, The sin.

Secondly, The person committing that sin. He that watches not, is it any
wonder if he mistake either the fact, or person, or both?

Secondly, Its false, That doing the one is no ground of doing the other; for I
must watch over others, that I may reprove and admonish (as well as encourage)
them, lest I partake of their sins: And I must take heed I partake not of their
sins upon this account among others, that I may be the fitter to reprove and
admonish them, and more effectually instrumental to get the scandalous
censured; since fellow delinquents will never be forward to call each other to
account. Is it not more probable the entire part of the Church will call the
corrupt part thereof to account, rather than the corrupt part will call it self
to an account? we grant the three forementioned duties are distinct, but are
they not therefore copulative? Distinction I hope is no enemy to union, whether
in a way of co-ordination or of subordination. By all it appears, there is a
subordination of duties, as well as of sins: And as some sins cannot be
committeed without other previous sins; so some duties cannot be performed
without other foregoing duties, of which nature is the act of receiving, in
order whereunto self-examination is ever necessary; and Church-examination also
where it may regularly be had; or at least in its room Pastoral-examination.

Page 158, 159. Mr. H. falls ironically upon me, as if I took a great deal of
pains seemingly to confute him, when I only speak his part for him. The bitter
scoffs wherewith he here closes this first Section, instead of returning an
answer, discover both the weakness of his cause in that particular, and the
impotency of his passion. But to the matter it self. Mr. H. in his second part
undertakes to answer several objections against free Admission to the
Sacrament. The first Objection you have p. 30. of his Vindication. The
Objection is this,

This Doctrine will take away the use of the Keys, and excommunicate
excommunication, etc.

Page 31. Mr. H. tells us, This Objection is grounded upon three false
surmises, and particularly page 31. he says, This Objection surmises a most
near and essential relation between excommunication, and the communion, as if
it were a part of it, etc.

In answer hereunto, page 110. of my Bar, I say and prove, That this objection
infers or surmises no such mad consequence, as Mr. H. is pleased to fasten upon
it. It lay now upon Mr. H. to prove that the objection does surmise such a mad
inference, else his own surmise must needs be false, and absurd. But of this
not one word, only being convinced his own surmise was irrational and could not
be made good, he smothers the truth, flouts me, and flams the Reader, instead
of giving an answer, or confessing his mistake. We both agree the thing
surmised is very absurd; yea so absurd as Mr. H. is ashamed to own his own
Brat, of which he alone is the Father, but the objection is not the Mother; and
thus he is doubly guilty of slandering, 1. The Objection. 2. His Antagonist.

SECT. II.
IN vindicating the second Objection Mr. H. begins p. 159 by way of denial and
distinction, in these words. It is not visible real worthiness up on trial, but
visible relative worthiness, or external Covenant Relation gives a man a right
to, and is the ground of Admission.

Ans. Mr. Collins, p. 90. of his vindication answers him. Visible relativ
worthiness (according to Mr. H.) is men's being within the external Covenant,
baptized, and in the Church, and this gives them a right, etc. I always
thought this had been the (...), Whether all baptized persons may be admitted
to the Lords Table though ignorant and scandalous, if not cast out of the
Church; or whether if such, they ought to be suspended?

We say, They ought to be suspended; and argue from, their real unworthiness
and incapacity visibly appearing, to our duty in denying the Sacrament to them.
What says Mr. H. to this? says he, They are not unworthy relatively, though
they be visibly unworthy really. Strange language say we, what spells it? says
he, they are baptized, and not excommunicated. If this be not petere (...), I
know not what is; for we brought our argument to prove, That a visibility of
real unworthiness made a relative unworthiness: So that Mr. H. says, this in
short, They are not unworthy, because they are not unworthy. Thus far M.
Collins. Nor is it material whether worthiness and unworthiness be visible upon
trial, or otherwise upon which account, happily Mr. Collins took no notice of
that expression. Its enough to our purpose, that visible worthiness is the rule
of Admission, and contra. When Mr. H. can show us a better way of discovering
worthiness or unworthiness, than by trial of Church Members, he shall have us
both thankful and pliable to his direction.

Page 160. Mr. H. makes light of that place, 1 Pet. 3. 15. which proves its the
duty of Christians to submit to trial.

And first, He says its nothing to the Saerament.

Ans. If I must always be ready to give a reason of the hope that is in me,
then surely at, or about the Sacrament, unless Mr. H. can prove that to be no
part of time. I had thought that semper had included all parts of time.

Secondly, He says, That place speaks clearly as to the defense of our hope in
case of persecution.

Ans. I grant it speaks more particularly to that case, but not exclusively: If
I must give an account of my hope when demanded maliciously, much more when
demanded charitably; If to open enemies, much more to friends, and those who
are over us in the Lord; If when it may cost me my life, much more when it
contributes directly to my edification and comfort.

Secondly, He tells us, Hope is taken here objective for Christian doctrine,
not subjective for the truth of grace we would inquire into.

Ans. First, He that professes his hope objectively does therein profess it
also subjectively, since the object, principle, and act of hope are
infeparable, and therefore as they cannot be, so they cannot be professed, the
one without the other. The notions indeed are distinct, but the things
themselves ever go together. My meaning is, That hope cannot be in actu
exercitu, but it must flow from a principle, and tend to an object.


Secondly, The very application of this distinction is contrary to the Text;
The Apostle bidding us be ready to give a reason of the hope that is in us,
(...), Mr. H. says not so, but of the hope that is without us; whom shall we
believe, St. Peter, or Mr. Humphrey? Hope objective is without us, hope
subjective is within us; which last must needs be meant here by the Apostle,
yet not excluding the former, they being both inseparable, as the act and
object. And what I pray is hope subjective, but the grace of hope, which
therefore the Apostle calls us to give a reason of, against Mr. H. his gloss.
Its a contradiction to say, I hope objectively in the word of the Gospel, and I
do not hope subjectively in the word of the Gospel, and all one as to say, I
hope in Christ, and yet I do not hope in Christ.

Mr. H. adds, But suppose he urge it as an office of common charity, does all
this follow upon it straight? etc.

Ans. As every Christian is bound to do all offices of common charity in his
place, so proportionably every Christian is bound to accept of all offices of
common charity where he needs them. If every Christian be bound in his place to
reprove, admonish, etc. then every Christian is bound proportionably to submit
to reproof, admonition, etc. Trial of Church Members being (as Mr. H. here
confesses) an office of common charity, every Churchmember must make
conscience to submit to it, and bless God that those who must ere long give an
account to God of their souls, do make conscience to take an account of their
souls. For the scoff he is pleased here also to favor me withal, I look at it
as the scum of his little pot soon hot, by which he prejudices himself more
than me.

Mr. H. ib. When Christ says, Do this; how dares Mr. D. say, Do it not?

Ans. When Mr. H. can prove Christ bids all Church Members (be they never so
unworthy) to receive, Mr. D. will not dare to forbid them. But Mr. H. forgets
that this is the (...).

Mr. H. Instead of examine, and so eat, Mr. D. commands, Let a man examine, and
so not eat.

Ans. Instead of examine, and so eat, Mr. H. commands, Let a man eat, though he
do not examine.

Secondly, Take examination in the Apostles sense, and then Mr. D. never says,
Examine, and so eat not.

Mr. H. his instance, That by the same argument, we may say, Let a man so pray,
therefore he must not pray, holds not water;

And that first, because Prayer is a part of natural worship, to which all are
bound, not so to receiving, a part of instituted worship.

Secondly, Because Prayer is a means of conversion, not so receiving. Upon this
account, even heathen are bound to pray, not so to receive the Sacrament.


His arguments to convince my Assertion of weakness, are these, p 161. First,
Because affirmatives, are not exclusive.

Ans. It has been proved that some affirmatives are exclusive, that is, I must
not do the matter unless I observe the manner. Thus a Jew might not eat the
Passover, unless he were clean. A Christian must not reprove, unless by good
observation, or sufficient information, he know the party, to be reproved,
guilty.

Mr. H. his second argument is, Man's impotency cannot annihilats Christ's
authority.

Ans. True, but man's malice or wickedness may render him incapable of some
privilege and duty; Faith of evidence is a duty, as well as a privilege, but
of this duty and privilege a natural man is incapable in statu quo.

Dr. D. If the visibly unfit will thrust in, it is the Churches duty not to let
them murder the Lord of glory.

Here Mr. H. calls for Scripture Proof.

Ans. That proof is given him above, therefore I forbear to repeat.

He tells us, ib. That the former assertionis an occasion of separation.

Ans. That particular Congregation, which wilfully and totally neglects her
duty, admitting all pell-mell, gives just occasion of secession in point of
Sacramental communion to other Congregations that make conscience of their
duty, about which matter yet there had need be very great caution.

True, as Mr H. notes p. 162. A natural man sins in praying, hearing, etc. yet
must pray and hear. But there is not par ratio in receiving, as has been
formerly showed. Many things, though good materially, are sins relatively in
such a person, and not only because they are done in an evil manner, as for a
private person to do the work of a Judge. Proportionably, a person may be
incapable of one Ordinance in statu quo, who in the same state is capable of
other Ordinances; But of this formerly.

A perjured person will not be admitted to swear, and shall the same person be
admitted to the Sacrament upon the bare account Church membership? which (as a
relation to such a Corporation) supposes worthiness in a person, or at least,
that it should be in him; but is neither his worthiness, nor the efficient
cause thereof, unless you refer it to the impulsive cause, since
Church Membership is or should be a special motive and spur to habitual and
active worthiness, and is an aggravation of the want of either. Indeed if
Christ did bid all Church Members receive, then receiving were not morally
impossible to any, though never so bad, but this is the question begged, nor
can M. H. prove that indefinite, (...), to be an universal, if applied to
Church Members, as such. Understand me here rightly, Christ bids all
Church Members prepare, and so receive: But where does he bid them receive, be
they never so unprepared? It is not then bare Church Membership makes me
capable of the Sacrament.

M. H. p. 163. A man may be Evangelically unworthy, yet receive worthily in his
kind, t^gh not worthily in the Apostles sense. This is full of sweetness, etc.

Answ. If by the latter worthy receiving, he mean a partaking of the Sacrament
upon due examination, with a sense of my own unworthiness, hungring after
Christ, and mercy, etc. what is this but a receiving worthily in the Apostles
sense? All such, and only such, as come thus affected in truth, are worthy
Receivers, and receive worthily in an Evangelical sense, though happily they may
judge themselves unworthy, not only Legally, but also Evangelically. He may as
well say, a person may discourse learnedly, and yet not be learned, as say a
person may receive worthily, and yet not be a worthy receiver. If M. H. has
any other sense that is not Apostolic, he must pardon us, if we do not receive
it. An unworthy person may do a worthy act, but he cannot act worthily.
Receiving is very comfortable to weak Christians, but what comfort can
hypocrites or profane persons expect from it?

M. H. ib. That man is to be accounted to receive worthily, that makes an
effectual use thereof according to his own condition, whether regenerate or not.

Ans. 1. Suppose this were true, would it not exclude most Church Members? what
natural man of an hundred makes an effectual use of the Sacrament, according to
his own condition? Are not all natural men apt to conclude from their very
receiving, that they are in a good estate? Is this an effectual use of the
Sacrament, according to their condition?

2. Suppose in receiving, he be convinced of his ^d estate: is receiving, backed
with such conviction, a receiving worthily? We ask a proof for this new and
strange doctrine. That which is common to worthy and unworthy receivers, cannot
be a receiving worthily: of this nature is receiving backed with conviction,
common to good and bad, elect and reprobate: and which coming alone, is so far
from making a person worthy, that it increases and aggravates his unworthiness.

3. Suppose he were converted by receiving, (which we deny) it follows not
thence, that he received worthily, though it would follow he received
worthiness. As at the word preached, a natural man hears unworthily, at that
very Sermon which converts him, the very moment before his conversion; so at
the Sacrament, the same person receives unworthily the very moment before his
conversion, supposed to be wrought by receiving, since worthiness must be
wrought in me before I can act worthily.

Page 164. and 165. Mr. H. only words it, crying out, Oh what a burden and
weariness is it? What everlasting troubles and difficulties will it create,
that Church Officers should be bound to try the sincerity of every receiver,
and that both they, and other Church Members must be accessory to the guilt of
unworthy receivers, if they do not their endeavor to reform or discover them?
and here again, he asks for Scriptureproof, etc.

Ans. 1. By way of concession. I believe indeed a threefold trouble discourages
many Ministers.

First, The trouble of pains must be taken.

Secondly, The trouble of offending those who are averse to trial, upon which
account they may as well forbear the work of preaching faithfully, Matthew. 15.
12, and 1 Cor. 1. 23.

Thirdly, The trouble and fear of losing their salary in whole, or in part. To
such I must commend the practice of the Apostle, Gal. 1. 16. and entreat them
to take heed of consulting with flesh and blood.

As for weak and tender Christians, Sacramental trial can be no matter of
offense to them if they be rightly informed.

2. Suppose the burden were never so intolerable. Acts 15. 10. Its a burden of
Christ's laying on, and therefore must be born; The difficulty of duty never
discourages, where faith eyes the promise; Heb. 11. Be willing to bear the
gates of Gaza at Gods command, and he will give thee Sampsons strength.
Admirable is that of the Father, Domine, da quod jubes, and jube quod vis.
Nothing is difficult to faith and love, Matthew. 11. v. 28 29. and 1 John 5. 3.

3. Experience proves the contrary, that this burden is not intolerable
(through grace) in those Congregations where Sacramental trial is held up.

4. By trial we pry not into men's hearts, but only by the fruits appearing
judge of the tree.

5. It has formerly been proved, That its the duty of Church Officers, and
Church Members to watch over one another in order to the reformation, or
discovery of unworthy persons, who by the Apostle are called roots of
bitterness, etc. and therefore must be narrowly pried into, Heb. 12. 15. Here
every Churchmember is commanded to play the Bishop, lest by neglect of this
duty many be defiled. The word in the original is (...); yea by neglect of this
prying I become accessory to the gall of wormwood, which this root of
bitterness in Christ's Garden bears. Jos. 7. v. 1. 12. It cost the Children of
Israel dear, because they went not upon a privy search for Achan, till they
were well whipped to it; and much dearer would it have cost them had they refused
to play the Bishops in order to the visitation of that accursed person and
family; who yet was a Professor, a Churchmember, and a circumcised person.

When we plead for our selves as more favorable than Mr. H. because we suspend
to prevent the greater excommunication, etc. He tells me with a scoff, That our
suspension is as severe as the greater excommunication. I pray take special
notice of his reason for this assertion, page 165. because M. Drake holds, A
man cannot be debarred any Ordinance, but actual receiving, in the greatest
censure.

Ans. 1. I believe no person, be he Churchmember or not, is to be debarred
presence at any Ordinance, provided he be not a disturber of the Administration.

2. Its false, that suspension is as severe as the greater excommunication,
dismembting being far more severe than denial of the Sacrament. In good things,
relatives are privileges as well as absolutes, otherwise Justification and
Adoption were no privileges. Of this nature is Church Membership, which the
greater excommunication deprives a man of, not so suspension.

3. His reason to confirm his assertion is weak, since, 1. Suspension (as
generally administered by us) is not an act of severity, but of mercy. 2. Yet
where it is an act of severity, the greater excommunication is far severer, as
denying not only an absolute, but also a relative privilege. To cast a person
out of family (though he be permitted to be a retainer) is more severe, than to
deny him the use of any one particular dish upon his masters table. His
flouting similitude, brought to supply the place of a serious argument, is
impertinent: Had the man by falling from an house only lost a Limb, or put it
out of joint, the good woman might with reason and charity have said, What a
mercy is it he had no more harm? But then the similitude had not been to M. H.
his purpose. Against next time, let me entreat M. H. to produce a fitter
similitude, lest he lose both his labor and credit by the Application.

SECT. 3.
MR. H. comes to the third Objection, Holy things, to holy men.

Dr. D. Some outwardly holy thing may be administered to those who are not
outwardly holy.

M. H. p. 166. What then? therefore may it not be administered to those who are
outwardly holy?

Ans. In some cases an Ordinance may be denied him who is outwardly holy, and
yet at the same time be administered to him who is outwardly unholy. That may be
denied a dog within the Church (till he testifies his repentance) which is not
to be denied a dog without the Church, to wit, reproof, instruction, etc. Acts
13. 46. An Heretic blaspheming, may be denied presence at the Ordinances, unto
which at the same time an Heathen may be admitted, yea, and invited.

To what he adds in the same page, I say, when M. H. can give me an instance
of obstinate profaneness in any professor, that is not sufficient to
excommunicate him, I shall return an answer to his ambiguous and loose
question. To his other exception, I answer, its gratis dictum, that
excommunication makes a man no professor, because it makes him no
Churchmember. He may as well say, that expulsion out of the University makes a
man no Scholar, or incapable to profess learning. Nothing can make a man no
professor, but his own voluntary act, renouncing the practice and profession of
piety. Here note by the way, that Church Membership and profession are all one
with M. H. True, any course of profaneness does virtually contradict
profession, but only universal renuntiation contradicts it formally.

In the same page, to slur me, he baffles the Reader with the ambiguity of the
term, Visible Saint. For unfolding of which mystery observe, M. H. his Visible
Saint, is a Churchmember, though visibly a Devil incarnate; my Visible Saint;
is one that does not contradict his relation and profession by gross ignorance
or scandal: to this Visible Saint, visible interest in the Covenant is sealed,
not so in our judgment to M. H. his Visible Saint. This at once salves the
contradiction he would fasten on me, and shows withal, that the same thing is
not strength in me, and weakness in Mr. H. The other supposed contradiction,
that a man may be a professor, and yet contradict his profession, has been
cleared a little above. M. H. forgot the distinction, (...) and (...), when he
charged me here with a contradiction.

Page 167. He says right, all in a Churchstate, etc. are to be admitted, unless
such as the Scripture gives ground to except. But he rambles woefully in the
minor, asserting that the Scripture allows no bar to any, unless the
unintelligent and excommunicate. In the same page he flouts me, as if bare
confidence were my fundamental argument, and all: because I say, page 121. of
my Bar, That I am confident the Oxthodox Interpretation of those places which
Mr. H. quotes, p. 40. of his Vindication, will never open the Chancel-door to
grossly ignorant, or profane Church Members.

Answ. Let the Reader but turn to those places where Church Members or
professors are said to be in Christ, to be bought by him, to be sanctified with
the blood of the Covenant, etc. and observe whether those places do not make
rather against, than for their admitting to the Sacrament; since of the same
persons it is said, in the same places, that 1. They are taken away, cast
forth, and withered. 2. That they deny the Lora that bought them. 3. That they
trample upon the blood of the Covenant, etc. And think you its Christ's mind,
that such should be admitted to the seals of the Covenant?

Page 168. M. H. quarrels with me for denying that a visible historical faith
gives a right to the Sacrament (if solicary) yet in his answer closes with me,
and acknowledges, that the faith which admits a man to the Sacrament, must be a
faith accepting the true God, etc. And what is this but faith of adherence,
without which historical faith is but the faith of Devils, and renders a man
most unworthy of the Sacrament in an Evangelical sense.

Dr. D. Then the excommunicated have a right, for they have historical faith.

Mr. H. How vain is this? who knows not that the state of the question supposes
us within the Church?

A. Either Church Membership alone, or historical faith alone, or both
together, give a right to the Sacrament. If the first, then Church Members,
though destitute of historical faith, have a right to the Sacrament. If the
second, then one who is not a Churchmember may have a right to it, which Mr.
H. confesses to be absurd. If both, then the Church upon just ground may
enquire after the one as well as after the other; since I may be a
Churchmember, and not have historical faith, or may have historical faith, and
not be a Churchmember: And if the Church may enquire after faith of assent,
which is secret, why not also after faith of adherence? I think this is to the
purpose, though not to M. H. his purpose, and will soon overthrow his free
admission. Besides, its not excommunication simply takes away my right to the
Sacrament, but a just excommunication, otherwise man's wickedness may rob me of
my right to Christ's Ordinance, which is impossible. My right to the Sacrament
depends more upon my faith, than upon my Church Membership; nor do I simply
forfeit my right, because the Church excommunicates me, but the Church ought to
excommunicate me, because I forfeit my right, which forfeiture the Church takes
by excommunication: When therefore visible faith is contradicted by visible
profaneness, that man has visibly forfeited his right to the Sacrament, and
the Church by suspension or excommunication, does but take the forfeiture.
True, he may in some sense have jus ad rem, but he has not jus in re, till he
make up the breach by visible faith and repentance; yea, though a man have true
justifying faith, yet by gross scandai he may visibly contradict his faith, and
so forfeit his jus in re. Withal, it will be very hard for M. H. to prove, that
Simon Magus had only historical faith: The will follows the last dictate of
the understanding, and so far forth as I assent to Christ's sufficiency and
willingness to save me, there is some propension in the will to rest on him for
salvation, though in hypocrites usually the assent is but opinionative, and the
adhesion is but presumptuous, Mich. 3. 11. As the assent is common or saving,
so is the adhesion. Only a Devil, or he that is under the power of Despair, or
that has committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, assents to the Gospel
without adhesion: in which case also, though there be an assent about Christ's
sufficiency, yet there is a dissent about his willingness, which if partial,
causes doubting; if perfect, despair. Withal, as profession of faith, not
contradicted by ignorance or scandali, gives a right to Baptism, so does it to
the Lords Supper: And were Baptism to be iterated (as the Lords Supper is)
those persons whom we baptized in their infancy, we would not baptize, when at
age, if they were then grossly ignorant or scandalous.

SECT. 4.
THe fourth Section is spent about that Objection, The Seal is set to a blank,
if all be admitted. In the very entrance Mr. H. is pleased to charge me with
confusion, and ungrounded confidence, and it must be so because ipse dix it.
Were the suffusion, in his eye cured, he would see clearer; confusion is oftener
in the eye, than in the object.

Next, page 170. Mr. H. tells us, he holds, No persons within the Church are
visible blanks.

Ans. Are there none in the Church visibly destitute of saving grace which is
the writing of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 3? There were such in the Primitive times,
witness the second Epistle of Peter, and the Epistle of Jude, etc. I believe
our Churches will scarce vie with theirs for visible holiness and purity. Nay
to come closer to Mr. H. are not many of his jure excommunicati visible blanks?

Mr. H. ib. When I say the Sacrament is not a seal of faith, I mean it still as
the thing sealed, (to wit, on Gods part.)

Ans. If the grace of faith be not part of the thing sealed, then God does not
promise in the Covenant degrees of faith to his people; then we cannot pray for
degrees of faith, the promise being the foundation of prayer; then the
Sacraments do not confirm and strengthen faith, for they confirm nothing but
what is promised. But all these how absurd?

The weakness of this his assertion will appear further by his reason annexed;
The Sacrament is not an appendix to faith, but to the Gospel.

Ans. As if faith promised were not a part of the Gospel as well as other
graces promised.

Faith is considerable first, as promised, and so its a branch of the Covenant
unto which the Sacrament is an appendix.

Secondly, As wrought, active and growing in us, and so its the execution, or
making good of the Covenant. Faith promised and sealed, or the promise of faith
sealed in the Sacrament confirms faith inherent.

First, By way of security as a seal does the belief of any Covenant.

Secondly, By way of exhibition or conveyance, as an Indenture sealed and
delivered, does convey and make over an estate.

In the Sacrament the promise of degrees of faith is signed and sealed to faith
of assent, but exhibited and conveyed to faith of adherence, the whole
Covenant, and every branch thereof being signed, sealed, and delivered in the
Sacrament to the worthy receiver. Faith of Assent acknowledges the Covenant as
true, faith of Adherence receives the Covenant as good.

Page 171. After some distinctions premised, about the conditions, benefit and
tender of the Covenant, Mr. H. has these words, God ingages not by the
Sacrament to give man faith; if he did, every Receiver should have it.

Ans. first, We thank Mr. H. for this principle, which strongly evinces the
Sacrament is no converting Ordinance. No Ordinance converts, unless God engage
to convert by it, and if God engage not to give faith by the Sacrament, then
God ingages not to convert by the Sacrament. The principle is sound, and our
inference is evident, and make much for us, and against Mr. H.

Secondly, Mr. H. his Argument to confirm this principle is very weak; and by
proportion, we might as well argue, God ingages not to convert man by the word
preached; If he did, then every hearer should beconverted, does he not know
that though an Ordinance be converting, yet still God reserves to himself his
own liberty of converting, when and whom he pleases, the Ordinances being not
natural, but arbitrary means of conversion in the hands of God.

Page 172. while Mr. H. would seem to be more accurate by way of distinction,
he faulters woefully; and tells us, That the Sacrament confirms not faith
formaliter, but only consecutive and improperly, as putting us upon the
exercise of faith, and thereby strengthening the habit.

Answ. 1. By concession, the Sacrament confirms faith consequentially. Yet,

2. Its true also, that it confirms faith formally, by ratifying those promises
which assure the increase of faith, as well as of other graces; which promises
are a special part of the Covenant. Mat. 13. 12. Our Savior tells us, He that
has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance. Is this promise
a part of the Covenant, or no? I presume Mr. H. will not deny it: If it be,
then increase of faith is formally sealed in the Sacrament, or else the promise
it self is not formally sealed. If by formaliter he mean immediate, as may seem
by the opposite branch consequenter, we grant the promise in that sense is
confirmed formally, that is, immediately by the Sacrament, and faith mediately:
the promise of says is confirmed immediately, faith inherent is confirmed
mediately by the promise ratified by the Sacrament; and that not only by
putting us upon the exercise of faith, which may be done by the bare promise,
without a seal, but 1. by giving faith greatersecurity by the seal annexed to
the promise. 2. by conveying farther degrees of faith to the worthy receiver,
upon his acting of faith in the Sacrament, spiritual habits being confirmed not
only naturally, by their acts, but also supernaturally by divine infusion,
their growth being suitable to their birth. Initial faith is infused, not
acquired, gradual faith is got both by infusion and acquisition.

M. H. ibid. Whatsoever God does properly ratify by way of seal, he attests
the truth thereof; but he does not attest the truth of our faith by the
Sacrament; ergo, The Sacrament is not the Seal of our faith.

Answ. 1. Its enough to us that God attests the truth of the promise by the
Sacrament, and the promise undertakes for degrees of faith, as well as for
perseverance in it; therefore to every worthy Receiver, the Sacrament does
formally and properly seal increase of faith.

2. God in the Sacrament does attest by consequence to the truth of the worthy
Receivers says.

M. H. ib. The Sacrament is common to Hypocrites with Believers, therefore it
cannot ascertain any that he has grace.

Ans. 1. Its common indeed in use and practice, but whether so by divine
institution is the Question.

2. The thing it self that is common cannot ascertain, but the right use of it
may. Neither Providence nor Ordinances evidence grace of themselves, but only
the right use of either, or both of them. The Worthy Receiver gets evidence of
grace, not simply by receiving, but by worthy receiving.

M. H. ib. The Sacraments are not seals, because they confirm our faith (which
is the error) but they confirm our faith because they are seals. And page 173.
Its derogatory, I think, to say the Sacrament is only a metaphorical or
tropical seal; whereas indeed it is a very proper formal seal to the Covenant,
Romans 4. 11.

Answ. 1. Here are dictates indeed, but what proof? Dictates charging error
upon others; but where is conviction? M. H. should blush to be so excessive in
dictares, so defective in proof, who himself is so apt to censure others for
the same fault, and too often without a cause.

2. What is a seal, but an instrument of confirmation annexed to a Covenant?
and is not the Sacrament such a thing? And if faith be a branch of the
Covenant, is not the Sacrament a seal of faith, because it confirms faith?

3. Let us spell out M. H. his meaning in those words of his, The Sacraments
confirm our faith because they are seals.

If they confirm faith because they are seals; I pray, what or whence is their
sealing? Is not their sealing-vertue in its very formality a confirming virtue?
And have they not this confirming or ratifying virtue from divine institution?
If he mean the latter, we easily agree the Sacraments are seals, because God
instituted them to be such, which makes nothing against us; if he mean the
former, he speaks a mere tautologie, telling us the Sacraments are seals,
because they are seals, and confirm our faith, because they confirm our faith;
and so by making only a flourish, abuses both me and the Reader; unless his
meaning be the same with ours, That the Sacrament confirms faith promised,
formally and immediately, but faith inherent consequentially and mediately: but
then its still a truth in the (...), at least, That the Sacraments are seals,
because they confirm our faith, as well as its a truth in the (...), That they
confirm our faith because they are seals by divine institution.

4. He trisles in opposing tropical to proper, as if that were not proper which
is tropical. Its not proper indeed, as to the first notion or intention (the
first and second intention being not formally the same) but its proper enough
as to the thing intended or signified. Do not we hold against the Papists, that
the Sacramental words, Hoc est corpus meum, are proper enough as to the sense,
though they be tropical as to the terms. The Scripture indeed calls
Circumcision a seal: but where does it deny it to be a tropical seal? or where
does it say, that a tropical seal is not properly a seal? A seal in its native
signification, is a bodily substance graven, and so apt to make a sensible
impression of it self in a fit subject. Will M. H. say, the Sacrament is a seal
in this native signification? he will not be so absurd. Then it must be a seal
tropically; yet properly also, because it has the essential use of a seal,
namely, to confirm and ratify, which is all we contend for, and M. H. opposes,
but in vain.

M. H. p. 173. If confirming or strengthening a man's faith, were enough to
denominate it a seal: Then 1. Acts of grace should be the best seals. 2. Then
all other Ordinances should be seals too. 3. Then Baptism should be no seal to
infants. 4. Then shall both the Sacraments cease to be seals, when they are
admitted who have not true faith.

Answ, 1. By concession, acts of grace are the best seals. He that is sealed
with the Holy Spirit of promise, is better sealed than he that is sealed only
with the Sacrament, Ephesians. 1. 13. and 5. 30. where you see a seal is applicable
to persons, as well as to a Covenant.

2. It follows not that therefore all other Ordinances are seals, though they
confirm faith, because its not every kind of confirmation makes a seal, but a
confirmation by way of authentic ratification, which makes a deed good in Law,
or more good in Law than otherwise it would be.

3. That Infants, who before Baptism have initial grace, are not confirmed by
Baptism (by degrees of grace superadded) is a truth M. H. will not be easily
able to confute: yet withal, Baptism is truly called a seal as to them, because
of its aptitude to ratify the Covenant to them, as well as to elder
Christians, though they for lack of maturity cannot apprehend its ratifying
virtue. Hence

4. It follows, that neither of the Sacraments cease to be seals, though
persons without faith be admitted to them, they being denominated seals from
their aptitude to confirm, though the effect of confirmation do not follow. A
deed sealed is authentic in law, though some concerned in it, give not credit
to it.

We grant, that faith of Assent is confirmed by the Sacrament as a seal, but
are not of M. H. his judgment, p. 174. That a true historical assent, and
particular faith of evidence, are not divided in the regenerate (if he mean as
to their exercise) since, 1. In diverse regenerate persons there is faith of
assent, and of adherence too, yet without particular faith of evidence;
otherwise we must hold, there is no true faith without assurance, and thereby
weaken the hearts and hands of many true Nathanaels. Understand me here of
sensible assurance.
2. Historical faith is a direct act, faith of evidence is a reflex act, and
the direct act may be divided from the reflex act, yea, often is divided from
it. Withal, though degrees of grace are not properly conveyed by the Sacrament
as a seal, yet they may be conveyed by it as an instrument, the Sacrament being
(as M. Perkins well describes it) a sign to represent, a seal to confirm, and
an instrument to convey Christ and all his benefits to believers.

M. H. ibid. No faith of particular evidence can be confirmed by the Sacrament
as a Seal, but what is confirmed to me already by my experience.

Ans. There is a twofold experience, one real, the other sensible: The
Sacrament confirms nothing, but what is confirmed to me by real experience; but
it may confirm to me, that which is not confirmed to me by sensible experience,
at least prevalently. How many come doubting to the Sacrament, but return with
evidence? No true faith, but gives real evidence by its acts, yet may be so
overborn by unbelief, as the true believer may be rather oppressed with doubts
and fears, than comforted with evidence, as conceiving those acts of faith to
be but a fancy. His inference therefore is but weak, the Sacrament being
tropically, yet properly, a seal both to the Covenant, and to faith.

M. H. page 175. My part of the Covenant is the condition which God does not
seal; if he did, my business were at an end; for then all were to come hither
for it.

Ans. 1. God seals all he promises, and nothing but what he promises: To the
Reprobate he promises not the condition, and therefore seals it not: To the
Elect he promises the condition; namely, initial faith; and to the regenerate
he promises all the acts and degrees of faith, as well as of other graces,
Ezekiel. 36. v. 26, 27. John 6. 44, 45. which M. H. must grant, unless he will
profess himself an Arminian or Pelagian. God undertakes in the Covenant of
Grace for the Believers part, as well as for his own part. Now, what is
promised in the Covenant, is sealed in the Sacrament; therefore its sealed in
the Sacrament, that he who has true faith, shall act it, and increase it.

2. Yet it follows not hence, that therefore all must receive, the Sacrament
being not an Instrument of working initial, but gradual faith; and though it do
seal in general, that all the Elect shall believe, yet that seals nothing to my
especial comfort, till election break out in my effectual vocation. M. D. then
is not at a loss, since

1. Faith may be promised in the Covenant, though men cannot be in Covenant
effectually without faith.

2. Initial faith is never promised upon condition we do believe, but gradual
faith: otherwise there would be progressus in infinitum.

M. H. p. 175. The Sacrament seals not the absolute Covenant, or the
everlasting engagement between God and Christ.

Answ. This is gratis dictum: I had thought the Sacrament had sealed the whole
Covenant of grace, and so the absolute Covenant: It seals that Christ's blood is
shed for many, as well as for those believers, that at present partake of it,
compare Matthew. 26. 28. and Luke 22. 20. Christ from eternity contracted with
the Father for many: In time he shed his blood for those many: This himself
tells us is signified and sealed in the Sacrament; And what is this but the
absolute Covenant?

That the conditional Covenant is sealed (though not solely) we deny not. But
that we are to take sealing for conveying or exhibiting, is a new light of Mr.
H. p. 176. this is to confound distinct offices and uses of the Sacrament, and
to fight against sense and experience.

True, the Sacrament signifies, seals and conveyes, but its signification is
not its sealing, nor is its sealing its conveying. Let a Bond or Indenture be
signed and sealed, there is no conveyance till it be delivered. Therefore some
of the Sacramental actions do both signify, seal, and convey the Covenant;
they signify and seal the letter of the Covenant, they convey as instruments
the good things promised to believers; yea, that very act of faith, whereby a
worthy receiver apprehends Christ at the Sacrament is wrought in him
instrumentally by the Sacrament. This one thing rightly considered, will shake
universal admission, for though all may be admitted to see the Covenant signed
and sealed even to themselves conditionally; yet how can Christ's officers
convey the Covenant instrumentally to any, unless they have a charitative
evidence that Christ has conveyed it to that person particularly?

Mr. H. ib. A moral instrument acts not Physically. To speak freely in this
sense of obsignation, the Sacrament does no more sanctify us than glorify us,
etc.

Ans. 1. Its enough for us it acts really as an Instrument; I hope a moral
instrument, is a real Instrument, though it be not a physical Instrument,
otherwise the Devil was not an instrument of our first patents fall.

2. We say, The Sacrament is an instrument, because its an arbitrary means in
the hand of God to convey the benefits of the Covenant gradually to the worthy
receiver, the Lord at the Sacrament in a especial manner giving him delivery
and seisin; as by delivery of a bond, there is not only a conveying of
parchment, writing and seal, but also and principally of the good things
specified in that Deed, which are not conveyed by writing, signing, or sealing,
but only by delivery.

Withal, Mr. H. may as well say, The word preached does not sanctify
gradually, because its not a physical, but a moral instrument. Both Word and
Sacrament are real Instruments of sanctification; the word both to the
regenerate and unregenerate, the Sacrament only to the worthy receiver, I mean
quantum ad praesens.

Page 177. Mr. H. charges me to be censorious, but why, or in what ne gru
quidem. Is not this really to prove himself censorious? Further, we grant the
tenor of the Covenant is sealed to all present (that is, the good things of the
Covenant are conditionally sealed to them) whether they receive or no, which
therefore is no argument to prove free admission, but only free presence or
attendance at the Sacrament.

But whereas he adds ib. There can be no seal to a blank so long as there is
truth and writing in the Gospel.

This in some respect is a truth, but not to the purpose: Did I ever affirm the
seal was put to a blank as to the Gospel sealed? We grant there is no real
blank at the Sacrament, but there are many personal blanks. The seal of the
Sacrament, and of the Spirit should ever go together, and how can I seal him
with the Sacrament, whom I have ground to believe the Spirit has not sealed.
Hence principally flows evidence in the Sacrament, because the Spirit together
with the Sacrament seals the worthy receiver, and does not only seal to him. In
Circumcision, not only the Covenant, but also the person was sealed, Genesis 17.
13. Rev. 7. many persons were sealed: The promise secures not only good things
for believers, but also believers for those good things, 1 Pet. 1. v. 4, 5. and
what the Covenant holds forth, that the Sacrament seal.

True, as Mr. H. notes p. 178. God has commanded us to baptize all Infants
within the Church, and to admit all visible Saints, all which yet have not the
benefits of the Covenant exhibited in a right sense?

But what is this against us who are bound in charity to judge or hope they are
real Saints, till they contradict this judgment of charity by visible
profaneness, etc.

2. True, Christ submitted to the Sacraments, and there that was sealed to him
of which he was capable, as to Adam in innocence; but neither Adam in
innocence, nor Christ, ever needed pardon, and as by Adams fall the Covenant of
works was broken, so had Christ finned in the least, the Covenant of grace had
been broken.

3. True, Christ was baptized to fulfill all righteousness, but is it a
fulfilling of righteousness to receive unworthily?

4. True, As relative grace is sealed to the worthy receiver, so relative
judgment is sealed to the unworthy receiver. But 1. Relative judgment is
sealed to some unworthy persons whether they receive or not. 2. For my part, I
shall neither counsel, nor easily admit any to murder Christ, and thereby to
seal relative judgment to themselves.

5. True, To some unworthy abstainers the Sacrament is a savor of death. But I
hope Mr. H. will be more charitable than to assert that all who abstain at
present are unworthy abstayners.

Mr. H. ib. By way of inquiry I question, how Gods establishing his Covenant by
way of seal does import this exhibition of the effectual benefits to those he
seals?

Ans. 1. It must convey them necessarily, if sealing and exhibition be all one,
as Mr. H. makes them to be, p. 176.

2 With us, Gods sealing of the Covenant, does not always import exhibition of
the benefits of the Covenant, we holding that sealing and exhibition are two
distinct Sacramental actions. The Covenant may be sealed to all present, though
diverse of them receive not, but the benefits of the Covenant are exhibited to
no receivers, but those who are Evangelically worthy.

His inference p. 179. hangs upon the premises like a rope of sand: Therefore
Mr. Drake must affirm here, that God seals to a blank (which he most
desperately does) or that this Objection comes to nothing.

Ans. Here indeed are rash and desperate expressions. Mr. D. never said, God
seals to a blank as to the Covenant, but he says, Mr. H. pleads for sealing to
a blank as to many receivers.

2. The Objection stands good, because diverse Ministers who admit all pell-mell
(and amongst them Mr. H. professedly) seal to personal visible blanks where
Christ has given them no such Commission.

Mr. H. ib. A scrupulous Christian may receive the Sacrament as a sign, though
happily he cannot receive it as a seal.

Ans. This scrupulous Christian is Evangelically worthy, or not. If the former,
he both may and must receive it as a sign, and as a seal; yet withal he must
endeavor to get his doubts resolved. If the latter, then being present, he may
learn by the Sacrament as a sign, though he do not receive it as a seal.

Mr. H. p. 180. Here is Mr. Drakes great error, to confound the outward and
inward Covenant, the external and internal sealing.

Ans. Here is Mr. H. his great error, to mistake union for confusion. Mr. Drake
thinks, that on the receivers part, the inward and outward Covenant and sealing
should go together, and that he who wants the inward seal should not dare to
meddle with the outward seal. He does not confound the inward and outward seal,
as Mr. H. does sealing and exhibiting, by making them all one, but unites the
inward and outward seal together in point of duty on the receivers part.

Mr. H. ib. If the seal be set to a blank until Gods Law is written in the
heart, then no mortal can apply the seal to any, seeing that cannot be
discerned by any.

Ans. This is a mere non sequitur. A Minister may without sin set the seal to a
blank, where in charity he is bound to judge or hope that person is no blank;
and this he is bound to hope of all that have competent knowledge, and live
without scandal. The receiver must act by the rule of reality, the Church by
the rule of visibility. I do not then contradict my self when I say, p. 72. of
my Bar, That truth of grace in the heart is not the rule of our admission.
Grace real is the rule of an intelligent Church Members receiving, but grace
visible is the rule of the Churches admission, whether it be real, or no.

Mr. H. ib. Now I pray note it, If Mr. D. apply these texts, 2 Cor. 3. 3. Heb.
8. 10. (which speak only of the inward writing) to confirm the Objection, that
the Seal is set to a Blank if all be admitted, then the world must know that
the truth of grace is his rule, or else the new Covenant written in the heart
is not truth of grace with Mr. Drake.

Ans. 1. Its apparent by my text, I brought the fore-quoted places for
illustration, not for proof of the Objection, Mr. H. therefore might well come
with an if; But what if Mr. Drake did not bring those places to prove the
Objection, let the Reader consult my text, p. 123. of my Bar, where he will
easily perceive Mr. H. his foul play with me in this particular, who to fasten
an absurdity upon me would fain confound the rule of Admission with the rule of
Receiving. Mr. H. cannot be ignorant that our principles are these:

Real Blanks must not receive, visible Blanks must not be admitted by the
Church; and that the scope of the Objection was to dispute against the
admission of visible, not of real personal Blanks.

Mr. D. This Blank is either visible, or invisible; to God all Blanks are
visible, and he may use his liberty to set his Seal where he pleases.

M. H. p. 180. In what a sad case has be brought himself through his former
error, when he must lay this for his foundation, That God who cannot lie, may
set his seal to a visible Blank? If the Minister who is Gods Ambassador seals
to a visible Blank, it is such an heinous sin, he says, as murdering Christ;
and yet does he affirm that God sets his seal to a visible Blank without
scruple. It is no wonder the man deals so coursly with me, that uses such rude
and uncivil language toward God.

Answ. Such absurd and unreasonable imputations as these, make it too
suspicious, that M. H. disputes rather for victory, than for truth. I hope he
will not dare to say in cold blood, that those expressions of mine vent any
thing of rude language to God; but that in the very letter, as well as in their
sense, they give unto God the glory of his Sovereignty, who is not bound (but
where himself pleases) to the rules by which he binds his creatures.

Object. If it be irregular in the Minister to seal to a visible Blank, why not
in God also? If the Minister murder Christ by sealing to a visible Blank, how
is God free, who does the same thing?

Answ. The Minister is guilty, because it pleased God to make it murder, by
consent in him to seal to a visible Blank: but who can give law to God, and
make it murder, by consent in God, to seal to a visible Blank? Its murder in me
to take away my neighbors life at pleasure: I hope M. H. will not infer, that
therefore its murder in God to take away any man's life at pleasure.

Object. But does not God by sealing to a visible Blank, testify that such a
person has truth of grace?

Answ. Absurd. When God knowingly and professedly seals to Blanks, how can it
be imagined that his design in sealing is to testify they are no Blanks. God
indeed by sealing to a Blank, binds that Blank to labor for the writing; but
its contradictio in adjecto to say, that sealing to a Blank, makes that Blank
no Blank. Its not the seal, but the writing, makes a paper or parchment no
Blank: nor is it the seal of the Sacrament, but the writing of the Spirit,
makes a Churchmember a real Saint, or an Epistle of Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 3.

Object. But then why may not the Minister by sealing to a visible Blank, bind
that Blank to labor for the writing, as God does? (Understand a sealing here by
way of admission; for otherwise the Covenant is sealed in the Sacrament
conditionally, not only to the receivers, but also to all present, yea, though
they be very Heathen, who yet are not sealed by receiving the Sacrament.)

Answ. Because he has no warrant to seal to that Blank in that manner; the
rule being, that persons must 1. Be Church Members. And 2. Visibly worthy,
before the Minister seal to them by admission. But who can bind God to this
rule?

Object. But is not this the very language of the Sacrament, Christ is thine,
etc. And how can God seal this to a person that has no part in Christ?

Answ. The natural language of the Sacrament, as well as of the Covenant, to
whomsoever it is proclaimed, is, Christ is thine, etc. This gift is mine, 1. By
way of tender. 2. By way of acceptance. That Christ is theirs by way of tender,
God seals by the Sacrament to all present, whether they receive or not. That
Christ is theirs by way of acceptance and possession, God seals to no receiver,
but the worthy receiver. The Sacrament says to all present, Christ is thine
conditionally, and by way of offer; but to the worthy Communicant, it says, by
way of evidence, Christ is thine, as sure as the outward elements are thine,
being received by thee; and that because he performs the condition of
believing; which condition yet is promised in the Covenant, and wrought
instrumentally in the Sacrament, which acts faith objectively as a sign and
seal; but effectively, as an instrument, faith apprehending Christ through the
Sacrament, as the eye does an object through a Perspective-glass; yea, the
Sacrament does not only clear the object, but also strengthens the visive
faculty of the soul, by drawing a fresh supply of visual Spirits from Christ
the head.

My meaning (in all has been said) is, that God, by the Sacrament applied to
any, does not testify to such a receiver, that he has truth of grace; though
by receiving, every Communicant be obliged to act grace: But the Minister, by
giving the Sacrament to any, testifies his persuasion, or hope, that such a one
has truth of grace; which persuasion, or hope, is grounded upon that competent
knowledge and good affections (accompanied with immunity from scandal) that he
finds, upon trial, or other good evidence, to be in such a Communicant.

Page 181. M. H. does only make a flourish by abusing the homonymie of a
visible Saint.

To which I briefly answer, A person may be said to be a visible Saint two
ways: 1. Relatively, as he is a Churchmember, born and bred in the Church. 2.
Absolutely, as he walks up visibly to his profession. Now, that God would have
all relatively visible Saints (which are M. H. his visible Saints, though they
be absolutely visible Devils) admitted, is 1. Against the truth. 2. Against the
practice of the ancient and modern Church. 3. Against M. H. his own profession,
since persons ip so jure excommunicate, are such visible Saints, yet he allows
their suspension. That root of bitterness, Heb. 12. 15. was relatively a
visible Saint, as being a Churchmember; but absolutely he was a visible Devil.
The Lord keep me from giving my vote for the admission of such visible Saints.

M. H. ib. Its M. Drakes error to say, there are any visible Blanks in the
Church, for how then can we baptize all children? A visible Blank is one
visibly out of Covenant: But to be in a Church State, is to be externally or
visibly in Covenant, etc.

Answ. 1. Then its M. Drakes great error to say, there are any visibly profane
in the Church.

2. We baptize all children in the Church (among others) upon this account,
because none of them are visible Blanks; knowledge we expect not from them, nor
are they guilty of any scandal. Besides, we look at their foederal holiness in
either of their Parents, 1 Cor. 7. 14. or in their grand Parents right, who may
undertake for their Christian education, etc. 2 Timothy 1. 5. But of this formerly.

3. The same person, at the same time (though not in the same respect) may be
visibly in Covenant, and visibly out of Covenant. Instance in a known Witch,
she is visibly in Covenant in M. H. his sense, as a Churchmember, till
excommunicated; yet visibly out of Covenant in our sense, as visibly renouncing
Christ and Religion. They who visibly break the Covenant, by lying in visible
impenitency and unbelief, are visibly out of Covenant in an absolute sense,
though at the same time they are visibly in Covenant in a relative sense, as
not being excommunicated. Such were many of the Israelites, who are called the
holy people, Dan. 12. 7. and Gods people, Hos. 4. v.6. 8.12. and 11. 7. yet
Hos. 1, 9. Ye are not my people; and Hos. 2. 2. Your mother is not my wife.
These seeming contradictions are easily reconciled, by distinguishing between
Gods people relatively and absolutely considered: They were Gods people by
external Covenant Relation, as are all Church Members: they were not Gods
people by an external holy carriage, suitable to their external holy relation.
Such Lo-Ammies, though in some sense Ammies, we dare not admit to the
Sacrament, till by visible repentance their name is made Ruchamah, and Ammi,
Hos. 2. 1.

M. H. p. 182, In case any make a forfeiture, which M. D. says the Church ought
to take; its manifest then he must be excommunicate, that is, put out of a
Church State, or external Covenant; for while he stands de jure entitled as a
member, it is a manifest wrong to suspend him the Symbol thereof.

Answ. 1. The Church takes the forfeiture in part, by suspension: but that she
must take the highest forfeiture at the first bout by excommunication, is both
false doctrine, and uncharitable doctrine.

2. Note here from M. H. that among Intelligent persons, some are
Church Members de jure, others only de facto. This is hinted from those
expressions of M. H, He stands de jure, entitled as a member; and again, here
our distinction of ipso jure dismembered and de praesenti dis-tituled, must do
its service. ibid.
Next, that he is not for the Admission of all intelligent Church Members de
facto, unless they be also Church Members de jure; whence I infer from his own
principles, that Church Membership and intelligence, are not the adequate
foundation of Admission to the Sacrament; but there must be somewhat else which
makes him a Churchmember de jure: And this is the very thing we contend for.
The point of difference is now brought to a narrower compass; and could we but
agree about the character of a Churchmember de jure, our controversy would
soon come to issue. Now Church Membership being a relation, it must needs have
a foundation. The foundation of Church Membership de facto in intelligent
persons, is Admission to that Society; the foundation of Church Membership de
jure, is that which encourages the Church to admit such a person: And what is
this but competent knowledge and piety visible? This is evident in the
Catechumeni, who stood upon their trial before they were made complete
Church Members; nor did the Jews easily admit any for Proselytes, till upon
good evidence of their faith and piety. This foundation then failing,
Church Membership de jure must needs cease; and this is the very case of grossly
ignorant and scandalous persons, who therefore being not Church Members de jure
(at least, if they obstinately persist in those sins) ought not to be admitted
to the Sacrament.

M. H. ib. The bare elements do not confirm the Covenant, but the elements, as
instituted to that use: But they were instituted to be eaten and drunken;
therefore those that are present, must receive too, etc.

Answ. 1. By concession of the first branch, the confirming virtue of the
Sacramental elements depends upon divine institution: but have they a
confirming virtue only as received? Do not the elements set apart by the
Minister, in the name of Christ, signify and seal that branch of the Covenant,
that Christ from eternity was set apart by God the Father for man's redemption?
Do not the elements broken and poured out, signify and seal Christ's Body
broken, and his Blood shed to ratify the Covenant? And is not the Covenant
hereby confirmed to all present, even before they receive, yea, though diverse
of them do not receive at all?

2. To the second Branch I answer also by way of concession, in part. The
elements were instituted to be eaten and drunk: But that therefore all present
must eat and drink, is a mere non sequitur. The Institution is kept entire, if
a competent number do eat and drink, though all present do not receive. Diverse
waiters might be in the room at the celebration of the first Sacrament, but
Christ bid the Apostles only to receive.

M. D. They confirm the faith of the worthy Receiver; therefore none but
Evangelically worthy may partake.

M. H. He may as well argue thus, Baptism confirms the faith only of those
that understand it: Therefore Infants may not partake of it. The word and
prayer confirm faith, therefore none but the regenerate may hear and pray. This
is no consequence; for whatsoever ordinance can confirm faith, may beget it.

Answ. To the first Branch I answer, by denying that Baptism confirms the faith
only of them that understand it. For,

1. Baptism may confirm the habit of faith in Infants regenerated before
Baptism, though it cannot confirm the act of faith, which they are not capable
of.

2. It may confirm as an instrument, though it cannot confirm faith in them as
a sign or seal.

3. Baptism applied to Infants may confirm faith in the same persons when they
come to years of discretion, though in their Infancy it should not confirm: and
therefore it is not to be denied to Infants. If persons Baptized in Infancy,
could never be capable of the confirming power of Baptism, then the argument
were strong, that they should not be Baptized.

To the second I answer, If the word and prayer did only confirm faith, then
the inference had been solid: but such is the condition of the Sacrament.

To the third I answer, A posse ad esse non valet consequentia, That which
camconfirm faith, may beget it, if God please to appoint that Ordinance to
beget, as well as to confirm: But this is the question in dispute, Whether God
has appointed the Lords Supper to beget faith.

Page 182, 183.
M. D. They confirm judgment to the unworthy receiver.

M. H. And I pray now what is become of the Blank? p. 183.

Ans. The Blank is still where it was, namely, at the Lords Table, and may
thank Mr. H. his free admission for it. Let the Reader here note Mr. H. his
perverse dealing with me, who still turns the Argument to a real Blank, when I
applied it only to a personal Blank. His distinction about confirming faith
formaliter and consequutive has been formerly answered, P. 184.
which therefore I pass.

Mr. H. ib. To seal to faith is nothing else but that it seals conditionally,
which answers the whole Objection.

Ans. 1. If this be good Logic, then the Sacrament seals as much to unbelief
as to faith, since it seals judgment conditionally to unbeleef, as well as
mercy conditionally to faith.

2. Its absurd to say it seals conditionally to faith: It seals indeed mercy
conditionally to a person that has not faith, and judgment conditionally to a
person that has faith; but it seals absolutely mercy to faith, and judgment
to unbeleef. I pray upon what condition does the Sacrament seal mercy to faith?
Is not faith here the very act of believing? And does the Sacrament seal grace
to believing upon condition of believing? True, it seals mercy to a person upon
condition of believing; but to say it seals mercy to faith upon condition of
faith, how absurd? and all one as to say, it seals to the condition upon
condition of the condition; would not here be progressus in infinitum?

3. After all, This answer does not satisfy the Objection: For whether the
Sacrament seal conditionally or absolutely to faith, still it is a seal of
faith, and to faith; and still it seals to a Blank, supposing the person
receiving be unregenerate, which is the Blank the Objection looks at.

Mr. H. ib. Here is his constant error; for the writing the Sacrament seals to,
is not the inward Covenant in the heart, but the outward in the Gospel.

Ans. 1. By way of concession of the last branch, That the Sacrament seals to
the outward Covenant, and in that respect never seals to a Blank.

2. By denial of the first branch, That the Sacrament seals not to the inward
Covenant or writing: For 1. It seals to it by way of obligation, binding all
Receivers to the inward Covenant as the condition. 2. It seals the outward
Covenant and writing to the inward; the good things promised to faith and
grace. 3. It seals the inward Covenant or writing by confirming faith of
evidence, and this, by ratifying the signs of grace upon record in the
Covenant, which signs are the touchstone of faith; the Sacrament assures the
Scripture trials of Faith are good, experience assures those signs are in
Peter, the conclusion is Peter's faith of evidence which depends upon the major,
sealed by the Sacrament, as well as upon the minor, confirmed by Peter's
experience. 4. To the believer it seals the inward Covenant; namely, the
condition not only by way of obligation as a duty, but also by way of security,
as a privilege, assuring him of future actings of faith, of growth, and of
perseverance. Hereby it appears the great error is on Mr. H. his part, who
asserts, That the Sacrament seals not to the inward writing or Covenant.

Mr. D. How can the Minister say, This it the blood of Christ for the remission
of sins to the unmorthy?

Mr. H. As Christ said the same to Judas.

Ans. 1. What is this but a begging of the Question. Let Mr. H. first prove
that, Christ said those words to Judas, and then make as much of that instance
as he can.

2 Suppose Judas did receive, does not Christ immediately and particularly note
him as a person of whom he meant not those words, and who should have no part
and interest in his blood or pardon, Luke 22. v.20, 21, 22. If Mr. H. will
press our Saviors example for Judas his receiving, why does he not likewise
press the same for the public and personal nomination and uncasing (at the
Lords Table) of every Judas that is guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and
who had better never have been born if he repent not unfeinedly of his
betraying of Christ, such rugged work undertaken by him would soon open his
eyes to see the justness, equity, and expediency of suspension.

Mr. H. p. 185. Mr. D. confesses God does not attest our faith.

Ans. Mr. H. abuses me by mangling my words. I say, page 128. of my Bar, God
does not in terminis, attest my faith at the Sacrament. The Sacrament ratifies
only what the Covenant holds forth, but the Covenant does not hold forth, Thou
Peter or John by name have true faith, and art in the state of grace, no more
than it holds forth, Thou Peter and John by name shall rise at the day of
judgment. But it were absurd to say, the Gospel does not attest John's
resurrection, because it does not say particularly, Thou John shall rise; and
it is as absurd to say, The Scripture does not attest John's faith, because it
does not say particularly and nominally, Thou John beleevest.

"Dr. D. The Seals may be applied before all, not to all.

Mr. H. ib. He that looks on shall be sure to be damned if he eat not Christ
spiritually, and to be saved if he receive Christ spiritually, whether he
partake of the elements, or not; And what then becomes of all this dreadfulnes
that is laid upon our consciences, with a bare touch not, taste not, handle
not? This actual receiving then serves but to affect us the more solemnly with
our condition, and be a more serious obligation by the outward, to that inward
eating, whereby alone we look to be saved.

Ans. 1. By concession; We are saved only by eating Christ spiritually; yet
withal, we may be damned by eating Christ Sacramentally, if we eat him not
worthily; therefore his condition who eats Christ Sacramentally, but not
spiritually, is worse caeter is paribus, than his who wanting faith to eat him
spiritually, forbears to eat him Sacramentally. He that kisses Christ, and
betrays him, has more to answer for, than he who betrays him without a kiss.
The higher profession we make of love to Christ, the worse is our sin in
murdering him; but he who receives, makes an higher profession of love to
Christ, than he who at present forbears, as fearing he does not love Christ,
and believe savingly in him; therefore an unbeleeving receives, sins more than
an unbeleeving abstainer; and here lies the dreadfulness laid upon our
consciences, though Mr. H. is pleased to put it off lightly.

2. Again, by concession: Actual receiving serves to affect and oblige us more
solemnly to the inward eating; whence it follows, that he who eats outwardly,
but not inwardly, sins more caeter is paribus, than he who eats neither
inwardly nor outwardly, because the former sins against a greater obligation,
as M. H. well notes; which therefore makes for us, and against himself.

M. H. ib. and p. 186. M. D. is notable, The Sacrament he counts not a seal
properly, but figuratively to the Covenant it self. I pray mark it. So in the
former leaf, he concludes it tropically a seal: now read but a few lines
further in the very same page; and he tells us, As it confirms the Covenant, it
confirms faith: and if this be not to seal in a proper formal sense,
Theologically, I know not what is. Is not this pretty? The Sacrament is not a
proper formal seal, but figurative and metaphorical; and yet* if it does not
seal in a proper formal sense, he knows not what does, M. Drake does often tell
you of my contradictions, when he only goes about to make them, but I need not
tell you he has any.

Ans. Let the Reader but consult my Text, p. 129. of my Bar, and he will easily
perceive how M. H. abuses first my self, and then his Reader in this particular.

1. Therefore note, That by proper in the former branch, I mean a litteral seal
in the Grammatical sense, as is evident by my explication of my self in the
forequoted place, of purpose to prevent this captious mistake, in these words,
In a proper sense a seal is an artificial thing fit to make a visible
representation or impression. In this sense, I say, the Sacrament is not
properly a seal: For 1. It is not an artificial thing. 2. It makes not a
visible impression either upon the Covenant, or upon the receiver. Let me ask
M. H. is the Sacrament a litteral seal? I have heard (in this sense) of a
golden or silver seal, etc. but never of a Breaden seal.

By Proper, in the latter sense, I mean a real seal, in opposition to a feigned
and counterfeit seal, or the picture of a seal. This is known by the effects:
hence we prove the Sun to be fire, because it has the effects of fire, though
it differ much from our culinary fire. Now the main effect and use of a seal
being to confirm and ratify, and this being the proper effect of the
Sacrament, we conclude, that the Sacrament is properly a seal, though it be not
literally a seal.

2. M. H. mistakes grossly, in opposing tropical to proper; whereas tropical and
figurative is not opposed to proper, but to litteral. Christ is properly a
vine, yet tropically a vine; but not literally a vine. He is the true bread,
Joh. 6. 32: His flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, ver. 55.
Surely that which is true bread, that which is meat and drink indeed, is
properly so, yet it need not be so literally, it being enough, that it is so
tropically and metaphorically. The mistake of this distinction, was the ground
of that Capernaticial error, John 6. 63. of Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation, and is the ground of M. H. his topical mistake, and
perverting of my present Text.

M. D. Nor will his instance of Circumcision help him, which was applied to
none but visible Saints, etc.

M. H. That is the whole Jewish Nation, Josh. 5. v. 3. 6.8. when of age,
without examition and profession, which declares both that all Church Members
are visible Saints, and that that alone gives a right to be admitted.

Answ. 1. Its evidently false, and against the very letter of Scripture, that
all the Jewish Nation were circumcised at Gilgal, see Josh. 5. v.5, 7. the text
tells us, that only they who were born in the wilderness by the way, were
circumcised; the rest having been circumcised in Egypt.

Object. Were not all who were born in Egypt, destroyed in the wilderness?

Answ. No such matter, but only those who were twenty years old and upwards at
their coming out of Egypt, Caleb and Joshuah only excepted, compare Numb. 26.
v.64, 65. and 14. v.29, 30. and 1. v.2, 3.

2. That all these were not only visible Saints, but eminently visible Saints;
should M. H. deny it, the Scripture would convince him, Deuteronomy. 4 v.3, 4. Josh.
24. 21. Judge. 2. 7.

3. That the Israelites circumcised at Gilgal were not at all examined, nor
made any profession of their faith and piety, is more then M. H. can prove; his
argument for it at best is but negative, because it is not recorded Josh. 5.

4. That they did make profession of their faith before this circumcision, is
evident enough by another place, Deuteronomy 26. 17. and that probably within a week
before they were circumcised; and diverse times the whole Nation were put upon
it to make profession of, and engage for God and Religion, Josh. 24. and 2
Chro. 15. and 34. v. 32. 33. which last is the more remarkable, because it was
done just before the Passover, that answers out Lords Supper. So Ezr. 10. and
Neh. 10. and 11. and particularly its noted, Ezra 6. 21. that not simply all
Church Members, but such as had separated themselves from the filthiness of the
Heathen, to seek the Lord, did eat the Passover; which is also remarkable in
Hozekiahs Passover, where moral pollution was looked at as a greater bar than
Levitical pollution, 2 Chronicles. v. 18. -- 20.

5. Whither will not men fall when once they are sliding, if God leave them to
themselves? We had though before, M. H. had been only for free admission of
persons baptized unto the Lords Supper, now he is for the free admission of all
persons at years born in the Church (of Christian parents) unto the Ordinance
of Baptism, without either examination or profession. Here he falls an Ace
below the Anabaptists, who will not admit the Children of Christian Parents to
Baptism, without profession of their faith, etc. must we indeed baptize the
children of Anabaptists, Quakers, Ranters, etc. being at age, without any trial
of their faith and piety, without any engaging of them to profession of Christ,
or obedience to him? All this laid together, will abundantly discover the
vanity of M. H. his conclusion, and prove, that bare Church Membership is not
enough for admission to the Lords Supper.

M. H. ib. To the simile that follows, I have spoken, and I refer you to M.
Calvin, who pleases himself with it, in showing the same point; to wit,
Sacramenta non desinere esse testimonia gratiae Dei, Licet impiis quoque
porrigantur. Just. l. 4. cap. 14. sect. 7.

Answ. 1. His similitude I convince of weakness, page 130. of my Bar; to which
it will be hard for M. H. to speak to purpose argumentatively, though I know he
can speak fluently. The similitude I grant is good, if rightly applied; at
which application (I hope I may speak it without offense) M. Calvin is better
than M. Humphrey, and he is far enough from applying it to M. H. his purpose.

2. We deny not what M. Calvin asserts, That the Sacraments are testimonies of
Gods grace, even when they are offered to the wicked. The essence of an
Ordinance is not changed by man's wickedness: But what is this to the justifying
of their practice, who offer the Sacrament promiscuously; against which Calvin
is so zealous, that he calls it, 1. An ataxie, or disorder. 2. Sacrilege. 3. A
profanation of the Sacrament. 4. A prostitution of the holy treasures. 5. A
gross injury done to God. 6. So great an evil, that after all means used in
vain to redress it, a Minister may warrantably forsake such a people as
incorrigible, yea, ought not to stay with them. All this you have in one
Epistle, page 438. and 439. of Calvin's Epistles, printed at Geneva, An. 1617.

M. D. How dare a Minister by word and seal apply the Covenant of grace to
those that visibly reject it?

M. H. Page 187.
Unto this M. D. shall first answer, p. 84, of his Bar, Though they transgress,
they do not renounce the Covenant. 2. They are members of the visible Church
till excommunicated. Well, now let him come to speak about the Sacrament, p.
131. All who are visibly in the state of nature (says he) are visibly out of
Covenant. I pray mark it; if natural men be members of the visible Church, how
are they visibly out of Covenant: If they are visibly in Christ, how do they
visibly reject Christ?

Answ. 1. I have answered this cavil formerly by comparing the Prophet Hosea
with himself, and with other Scriptures.

2. Experience proves that some Church Members do in the very letter reject the
Covenant, instance in Witches; therefore my first assertion must be understood
indefinitely, not universally.

3. Were not the Jews visibly in Christ as Gods professed people? yet they
rejected Christ visibly in the letter before Pontius Pilate, Acts 3. 13. Do not
Arrians also visibly reject the Deity of Christ?

4. The same person may own Christ one way, yet visibly reject him another way:
Thus too many who own Christ by profession, reject him by profaneness; attend
upon him at the Ordinances, but renounce him in their conversation. Here is no
contradiction, as M. H. would make the Reader believe. Does he think that
Christ is not at all renounced, unless he be universally renounced?

M. H. ib. So long as the Lord owns a people in Covenant, the Minister may
apply the outward seals of it: But while men are Church Members, the Lord does
own them outwardly as his people.

Answ. The Minister may own them as God owns them; but God so owns a people
professing his Covenant, as at the same time he disowns them breaking his
Covenant, as has formerly been showed; therefore so may a Minister own them as
Church Members, but not as worthy Church Members, and fit Gommunicants.

M. H. ib. So long as men are not excommunicate, I see no reason why Christ may
not be offered Sacramentally, as free as verbally, to work them to repentance.

Answ. 1. Why then does not Mr. H. allow the suspension of persons jure
excommunicate, who are not yet actually under excommunication?

2. When he can prove that Christ received sacramentally, works repentance and
conversion, then he speaks something to the purpose for free admission. For his
similitude of a sealed pardon here repeated again: we grant, as the pardon is
offered to all conditionally (which general includes every particular) so its
sealed in the Sacrament to all conditionally, whether they receive or no. But
what is this to their receiving the sign, who visibly reject the thing
signified? As the Promise, so the Sacrament, is offered to all, if they will
believe and repent; but unbelievers and impenitent persons, must neither
partake of the promises, nor of the seals.

M. H. p. 188. Absolutely the Sacrament seals no man's interest, as M. D. vainly
imagines.

Answ. 1. If it seal not the believers interest absolutely, then the best Saint
can take no solid comfort by the Sacrament. This vain conceit of M. H. like the
Philistims earth, would stop up the well of comfort to Gods Isaacs.

2. Therefore, a thing is absolute two ways, 1. When without condition. 2. When
the condition is performed: but the condition of faith is performed by the
worthy receiver; therefore the Sacrament seals his interest in Christ
absolutely.

M. H. ib. When other means will not work upon them, there remains
excommunication, and let that content him.

Answ. 1. Were M. H. serious in this particular, he would not be so favorable
to gross and affected ignorance, which by his rule must neither be suspended
nor excommunicated; and how then shall that damnable sin be cured?

2. If there can be content in so sharp a remedy, we are content with
excommunication as the last refuge, provided all other means be first used,
among which we look at suspension as a very considerable one, how ever M. H. is
pleased to overlook it.

M. D. The Sacraments are Gods seals, as relating to Gods Covenant, etc.

M. H. p. 188. A good confession. Then they are not Gods seals, as relating
unto faith, and instituted formally to ratify faith. They are not seals of
faith for righteousness, etc.

Answ. Is not this strange Logic? The Sacraments are Gods seals, as relating
to the Covenant, therefore they are not Gods seals as relating unto faith. He
may as well argue, Isaac was Abraham's son as relating to the promise, therefore
he was not Abraham's son as relating to his faith: or, Isaac was a child of the
promise, therefore he was not a child of faith. I hope God, Faith, and the
Covenant, are not at such a distance, but that each of them may have a
propriety in one and the same seal. Besides, if faith be a part of Gods
Covenant (which has formerly been proved) then the Sacrament must needs be
faiths seal, as well as the Covenants seal. Is the Covenant, Gods Covenant; the
Sacrament, Gods Sacrament, as the Author thereof; and is not my faith also Gods
faith, as the Author thereof? and why then may not Gods seal be my faiths seal,
as well as the Covenants seal? We dispute not about formalities, but realities;
its enough for us that the Sacrament is truly faiths seal, as well as Gods and
the Covenants seal, though in some respect it may be faiths seal, in which
respect it is not Gods seal.

M. D. Is not faith and every saving grace promised in the New Covenant, unless
M. H. will turn Pelagian?

M. H. ib. We neither make faith the birth of man's free will, nor yet to be
given by virtue of the Covenant made with man, which the Sacrament seals; but
to be Gods most free gift that proceeds from election and discovers the
mysteric thereof.

Answ. 1. I am glad M. H. is so Orthodox, as to acknowledge faith to be the
birth, not of man's free will, but of Gods free electing grace. This agreement
in fundamentals is comfortable, though we differ in superstructures.

2. That in general, faith and other graces are promised in the New Covenant,
is to me unquestionable; for proof whereof I shall entreat M. H. to turn to
Jerem. 31. v.31, 32, 33. See likewise Ezekiel, 36. v.25, 26, 27.
And 1. There you have a Covenant. 2. A future Covenant, I will make a
Covenant, as distinct upon that account from the eternal Covenant made with
Christ, which even then was a Covenant past. 3. A New Covenant, and that either
in opposition to the Covenant of works made with Adam, or (which is the proper
scope of the place) in contradistinction to the Legal Covenant made with the
Israelites at Mount Sinai, compare ver. 32. 4. A Covenant expressly made with
man, even with the house of Israel and Judah, ver. 31, and 33. 5. Mark, I pray,
what is given by virtue of this Covenant thus made with man, ver. 33. I will
put my law in their hearts, and write it in their minds, etc. And what I pray,
is the Law written in the heart, but faith and other graces? This is the more
considerable, as pressed by the Apostle twice, Heb. 9. v.8, 9,10. and 10. v.15,
16.

3. He mistakes in opposing a free gift to a Covenant, since the same thing may
be a free gift and yet a covenanted mercy; and that two ways, 1. When
covenanted absolutely, instance in Gods Covenant against a future universal
deluge, Genesis 9. v. 9. to 17. 2. When covenanted conditionally, yet so as the
condition is promised in the Covenant, God therein undertaking for our part, as
well as for his own: And such is the Covenant of Grace to all that are elected
and effectually called, but to none else.

To illustrate this by Sampsons covenant with his thirty Companions, Judge. 14.
v.11, 12. Had the agreement been, that as many of them as could declare his
riddle, should have each of them a sheet, etc. and at the same time Sampson had
resolved to declare the riddle to three of the thirty, before the seventh day,
undoubtedly that Covenant with the three, though conditional in form, yet had
been absolute in reality. And if a conditional proposition be not absolute, the
condition being supposed or performed, then there is no absolute proposition in
the world. Instance, If M. H. be a rational creature, then he is a man: this is
a conditional proposition, yet I hope the consequent, That M. H. is a man, is
an absolute proposition. Why? Because the condition is really in M. H. In lake
manner, if Peter believe, he is justified, etc. this is a conditional
proposition, yet upon the same account the consequent, Peter is justified, is
an absolute proposition. Why? Because the condition is really performed by
Peter. And thus its easy to make the most absolute propositions conditional by
an hypothetical demonstration of any subject by its properties, 1 Kings 10. 21.
If the Lord be God, follow him: this is conditional, yet I hope to follow the
Lord is an absolute duty. Why? Because the condition of Deity is in him, and in
him alone.

For further explication note, A proposition (taking it here in a large sense)
may be

1. Absolutely true, and conditionally false; as, Judas shall be damned, and,
Though Judas repent he shall be damned.

2. Absolutely true, and conditionally true; as, Peter shall be saved, and, If
Peter believe he shall be saved.

3. Absolutely false, and conditionally true; as, Judas shall be saved, and, If
Judas repent he shall be saved.

4. Absolutely false, and conditionally false; as, Peter shall be damned, and,
Though Peter believe he shall be damned.

Its evident then, that Conditionality is no bar to Absoluteness: That which is
conditionally true, may be absolutely true; and that which is absolutely true,
may be conditionally true: And thus the Covenant is both conditional and
absolute to the Elect, but only conditional to the Reprobate. Its conditional
to both because a condition is required of both; its absolute to the one
because the condition is purposed and promised to them, and wrought in them,
namely, saving faith and repentance. And, as the Covenant is, so its sealed in
the Sacrament.

Its evident then, that faith is the fruit, not only of Gods free gift, but
also of Gods Covenant.

Mr. D. If the Covenant be Gods, if the Seal be Gods, and faith promised in it
be Gods also, is it not apparent that Gods Seal must needs be faiths Seal also?

Mr. H. ib. and p. 189. If he count this apparent which is a very Chaos, you
may guess what light to expect from him. The truth is, as faith is our
condition it is not a branch of the Covenant that God seals; which puzzled this
man; for if it were, every man should unquestionably come, and engage the Lord
by his own Seal to undertake for his condition; and consequently, if God
perform what he ingages, every one should be saved.

Ans. 1. If Mr. H. his ipse dixit be enough, how suddenly can he turn an
apparent light into a Chaos? Now to dispel this Chaos of his making, not with
words, but arguments. Note the ground of the forementioned hypothesis opposed
by Mr. H. is the near relation between God, the Covenant, and Faith, which are
so inseparably united in the matter of grace, as that which is the Seal of the
one, must needs be the Sea^ (...) the other; and that which is a Seal to the
one, must needs be a Seal to the other. Thus if the Sacrament be a Seal of, and
to God, it must needs be a Seal of, and to the Covenant, and of, and to Faith.
They must needs be sealed as they are promised, but they are all promised
together, and they must needs seal as they promise; but God, the Covenant, and
Faith promise together, therefore they must needs both seal, and be sealed
together; particularly, that the Covenant is promised. See Jer. 32. v. 31. etc.

2. Its an untruth, That faith as our condition is not a branch of the Covenant
that God seals. He may as well say, That the Law written in the heart, is not a
branch of that Covenant; and that perseverance (which also is a condition) is
not a branch of that Covenant. Sure the Prophet was of another mind, Jer. 32.
v. 39. 40. where you see God undertakes for the condition it self, as well as
for the good things promised upon that condition.

3. His argument to prove the former assertion is absurd, if his should relates
to execution, not to obligation. We grant, every one under the Gospel should
come, in point of duty, and humbly and seriously engage God to perform the
condition in him, and by him, upon which God would perform what he ingages, and
every such person would be saved undoubtedly; but we deny that in point of
execution every one can, or will come, and thus engage God, excepting only
those who are elected, and effectually called, taught and drawn by the Father,
Joh. 6. v.44, 45. Compare Jer. 29. 12 13. and 21. 9. Ezekiel. 36 v.25, 26, 27, 37.
Zach 12. 10. Joh. 6.^.
True, salvation is promised to all conditionally if they believe, and faith is
required of all that live under the Gospel; but faith is not either promised,
or given to all that are planted under the means of grace, but only to the
Elect, Matthew. 13. v.13, 14, 15. Joh. 6. 64. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Romans 11. v.7, 8.
Joh. 6. v.44, 45.

Mr. H. p. 189. This Mr. D. sees p. 134. 135 and is quite lost in his very
first particular, for while he supposes the Covenant promises initial grace to
the Elect, and the Sacrament seals that Covenant, and the Seal secures what is
in the writing (which are all his own terms) he must necessarily take upon him
to judge who are Reprobates, which is sinful to do; or all must be admitted;
For though men are visibly yet in the state of nature, they may be elect.

Answ. Mr. H. his necessary consequence is, a mere non sequitur in both
branches. True, the Covenant promises, the Sacrament seals, the seal secures
grace absolutely only to the Elect, and effectually called; When I say initial
grace is sealed in the Sacrament to the Elects I would not here be mistaken: I
do not mean, that initial grace is sealed to an elect person (now in the state
of nature) as progressive grace is sealed to a person effectually called. For
illustration, Suppose Paul before conversion receive the Sacrament, or be
present at it, etc. I do not think the Sacrament can assure Paul (though
elected) that he shall be converted; but that it assures only in the general,
that all the Elect shall be converted, who indeed are the Seed, and the true
Israel. Rom 9. v.6, 7,8. compare Jer. 31. 33. And this at present I cannot but
assent to, till I be convineed, that the whole Covenant of grace is not sealed
or confirmed in the Lords Supper, which in its very institution, was a sign and
seal of Christ's blood shed not only for the Apostles, but also for many for the
remission of fins; compare Matthew. 26. 28. and Luke 22. 20. And why that (many)
should not include all the Elect (as well as some of them) I know not, yet I
will not be peremptory, but shall very willingly learn of Mr. H. or any other
that will inform me better.
But how does it thence follow that I must necessarily take upon me to judge
who are Reprobates, or else all must be admitted? Mr. H. gives the reason,
because men may be visibly in the state of nature, and yet elected. A pitiful
reason, which I shall endeavor to evince by these Arguments.

1 Did I infallibly know a person to be elected, yea effectually called; It
follows not that therefore I must presently admit him to the Sacrament, for he
may be notwithstanding actually unworthy, as lying under the guilt of some
scandalous sin, etc. much less then must all be admitted upon a supposition
that possibly they are elected. Nor on the other hand does it follow, That I
undertake to judge who are Reprobates; For though it be true, that initial
grace is promised, sealed, and secured in the Sacrament only to the elect; and
though it be also true, that I dare not admit all Church Members to the
Sacrament, yet it cannot flow from these two propositions, that I undertake to
judge who are Reprobates, since we neither look at admission of any, as an
infallible evidence of their Election, nor at suspension of any as an
infallible evidence of their Reprobation; Nay we believe in thesi, that many
persons admitted are Reprobates, and that diverse persons suspended are elect
vessels of mercy; the rule of Church-admission being not electing grace, but
visible worthiness, and the rule of Church-suspension, being not Reprobation,
but visible unworthiness.

2. Yet further to convince him from the conditional Covenant which he grants
is sealed in the Sacrament. It follows not, though the Covenant be sealed
conditionally to all Church Members, that therefore all Church Members must be
admitted, or else I must take upon me to judge who are in the state of nature,
since the ground of suspension, is not simply men's being in the state of
nature, but their actual unworthiness as visible, whether they be in the state
of nature or not: Now if it follow not from the conditional sealing of the
Covenant in the Sacrament, that I must either admit all, or undertake to judge
who are in the state of nature; why should it follow from the absolute sealing
of the Covenant, that all must be admitted, or I undertake to judge who are
Reprobates? And this is the more considerable, because the conditional Covenant
is sealed to all, not so the absolute Covenant. And if the conditional Covenant
sealed to all be no ground for universal admission, much less is the absolute
Covenant, sealed only to some Church members, a ground why all Church Members
should be admitted.

Again, if denying the Sacrament to diverse to whom the Covenant is sealed
conditionally be no argument to prove that I judge them to be in the state of
nature, much less is the denying of the Sacrament to any an argument that I
judge them to be Reprobates. My suspension of any argues indeed that at present
I judge such a person to be visibly unworthy, at least actually; but it argues
not necessarily that I judge him to be in the state of nature, much less, that
I judge him to be a Reprobate.

Mr. H. ib. Had not the man so much contemned me, he might have found how to
distinguish between what comes from Gods undertaking with man, or the
conditional bosom of the Covenant; and what comes from his undertaking with
Christ, or the free, absolute bosom of Election.

I perceive here the man is troubled as apprehending that I contemn him, which
is a fond and groundless jealousy. I hate his errors, but I honor his person.

Withal he twits me as not distinguishing between what comes from Gods
undertaking with man, and what comes from Gods undertaking with Christ.

I confess I am too dim-sighted, and therefore shall willingly be instructed by
Mr. H. or any other, provided they will suffer me to see with my own eyes, and
not take things upon bare report and trust.

I shall therefore crave leave to distinguish between Gods undertaking for man,
and Gods undertaking with man. For man God undertook with Christ from eternity
to call some effectuality. With man God undertakes two ways: 1. With all, at
least to whom the Covenant is proclaimed, to give them salvation by Christ,
upon condition of their faith and repentance. 2. With some (that is, the
effectually called.) 1. To give them perseverance in the condition which
himself has already wrought in them (partly of free grace, and partly by
virtue of the Covenant made with Christ on their behalf.) And 2. In the issue
to give them eternal salvation upon the forementioned account of Christ and
free grace. And why Gods undertaking for man may not be sealed in the
Sacrament, as well as Gods undertaking with man; as yet I must confess, I see
no convincing reason.

M. H. ib. I pray compare M. D. his third particular with this first. The
Sacrament, he says there, is for nourishment (and that I hope to the Elect) So
p. 147. it seals not initial, but progressive grace: and yet here, the Covenant
(he counts) promises initial grace to the elect, and the seal secures what is
in the Covenant. So that what need I to dispute with Mr. Drake, when his own
particulars have an opponent and defendant among themselves? etc.

Answ. 1. The Sacrament seals not nourishment at present to the elect
unregenerate in sensu conjuncto, as the Covenant promises not growth to them
before they have life. As the Covenant promises, so the Sacrament seals
orderly: 1. Life and initial grace. 2. Nourishment and growth; M. H. therefore
might have spared his parenthesis, but that by it he hoped to slur me.

2. To slur me yet more, M. H. corrupts my text, page 147. of my Bar: my words
are these, The Sacrament (as received) is not a means of initial, but of
progressive grace, does not beget grace at first by regeneration, but increase
and strengthen grace by nourishment and confirmation, etc. There is no such
words in that page, as M. H. fathers upon me; namely, that the Sacrament seals
not initial, but progressive grace.

Object. What the Sacrament seals, that it begets: But the Sacrament ( Dr.)
Drake confesses) seals initial grace; ergo.

Answ. Absurd, if understood universally. The Sacrament seals Christ's death and
satisfaction, I hope it does not beget them. It begets some things it seals;
namely, progressive grace and evidence; but it does not beget all things it
seals, amongst which initial grace is one. True, p. 135. of my Bar, I have
these words (for omitting of which I do not thank M. H. his kindeness) The
Lords Supper being a Sacrament of nourishment, seals not properly initial, but
progressive grace, nor can the Church apply it to conversion, but edification,
etc.

Thence some may argue, that I assert, the Sacrament seals not initial grace,
yet elsewhere affirm, that the Sacrament does seal initial grace: which two
propositions seem contradictory.

Answ. True, had I not inserted that term properly; and that upon this account,
because though the Sacrament seal or assure, that all the elect shall have
initial grace: yet this cannot effectually comfort Timothy (supposing him then
in his natural estate) because at the same time his election is uncertain to
him, though certain in it self. As that branch of the Covenant, That all the
elect shall have initial grace, cannot comfort me, till I know I am elected: so
the sealing or assuring of that branch, cannot comfort me, till I know I am
elected, Therefore I said, the Sacrament seals not initial grace properly,
because, though it seal really, that all the elect yet unconverted, shall in
due time be effectually called, and so shall have an interest in the blood of
Christ declaratively shed in the Sacrament, for the remission of the sins of
many: yet by that sealing, an elect person in the estate of nature, can have no
special comfort; because he cannot in an ordinary way know he is elected, till
he be effectually called, at which time initial grace is wrought, and is the
ordinary and sure evidence of election; and to such a one the Sacrament does
not seal initial grace, as future, and to be wrought, but as past and already
wrought, but it properly seals progressive grace, in the sense abovementioned.
My own particulars then do not fall together by the ears, though M. H. do his
best to make them mutual Opponents and Defendants, that by their seeming
variance, his error of Free-Admission might get the day.

Having laid this foundation, I shall now come to his posing Questions, page
190. unto which I shall endeavor to give a clear and a candid answer.

Mr. H. Q. 1. Whether it be one and the same Covenant I speak of there?

Answ. As to eternal Salvation, and the necessary conditions thereof (to wit,
perseverance and suitable growth in grace) I believe the Covenant made with
Christ from eternity, and with those of the elect, who are effectually called
in time, is one and the same substantially, though in other particulars there
be a vast difference.

M. H. Q. 2. How the Covenant being conditional, does promise absolutely?

Answ. Because as it requires the condition of the regenerate, so it promises
the condition to the regenerate.

M. H. Q. 3. How it promises initial grace? For faith and repentance are the
conditions of the Covenant; and how can faith be promised upon condition we
have grace?

Answ. 1. That it does promise initial grace, is evident by Scripture, Ezekiel.
36. 26, 27. unless the new heart, the heart of flesh, the spirit put within us,
be not initial grace.

2. Initial faith and repentance are not promised, upon condition we have faith
and repentance, or grace (I own not that Brat, though M. H. would fain father
it upon me) But because its promised or foretold absolutely in the Covenant,
that initial grace shall in due time be wrought in all the Elect yet uncalled
(not so in the reprobate) And because I apprehend the whole Covenant is sealed
or assured (as to its truth) in the Sacrament, I must confess (with submission
to better judgments) I know not how to shut this branch of the Covenant here
out of doors.

Object. This Objection supposes the promise of salvation made conditionally to
natural men.
Is it not a mockage to make a conditional promise to him, who I know cannot
perform the condition?

Answ. Not at all. Supposing 1. He be bound to the condition. 2. That the
condition was once in his power. 3. That he lost that power by his own default,
which is the case of all Adams posterity by natural generation. Does God mock
natural men who are under the Law, by promising them life upon condition of
perfect obedience? Matthew. 19. 17. Has God lost his authority to command,
because we have lost our power to obey? And may not God annex a promise to any
command, but he must be thought to mock his creature? And if God may promise
life to perfect obedience, without mockage; may he not promise life to faith,
without mockage, though the creature left to it self be able to perform neither
of the conditions? May the creditor promise liberty to an insolvent debtor,
upon condition he satisfy the debt, and that without mockage; and may not God
promise life to an impotent creature, upon condition the creature believe, etc.
without mockage? God by requiring impossible conditions, and annexing promises
to those conditions, designs not to mock his poor creature, but to demonstrate
the creatures impotency, and thereby to out it of self, etc.

Mr. H. Q. 4. What difference is there between the Covenants offer of grace,
and promise of grace conditionally?

Answ. As much difference as there is between the tender of 100 l. down upon
the nail, and the promise of the said money without tender. The tender of the
money upon the day will excuse the debtor in Law, not so the promise of that
money. I think there is some difference between saying, Come when you will, and
you shall have your money; and saying, Here is your money, I pray tell it and
take it.

Mr. H. Q. 5. How can the offer of grace. be said to be sealed, as offer is
distinguished from promise?

Answ. As he that tenders money promised under hand and seal, may by witness,
hand and seal, attest that the tender was made to all, and accepted by some
creditors, but refused by others. I hope here the tender sealed, is
distinguished clear enough from the promise sealed.

Mr. H. Q. 6. Whether the Minister can seal which he please, either the offer
or promise; and why he shonld not content himself to seal the offer which is
sure to all present, rather than to seal the promise where he may err, seeing
his visible Legatees, really may not be such?

Answ. 1. The Minister must seal what Christ would have him, and that is both
offer and promise, they ever going together in the Sacrament; nor is he at his
own choice, to seal whether he please. What God promises in the Covenant, that
he offers by his Ambassadors, both in the word preached, and at the Sacrament;
only at the Sacrament; there is not only a promise and offer, but also a
sealing of them both.

2. The promise and offer are considerable, 1. As to their real existence; and
thus the Sacrament seals, that the promise and offer of Christ to all present
(yea, wherever the Gospel is preached) conditionally, is no fiction, but a
fundamental truth. 2. As to its attingency and efficacy; and thus its not
promised or offered to all present, or to all receivers. My meaning is, that at
the Sacrament, Christ with all his benefits is never so either promised or
offered, as that all present are assured thereby, they shall either obtain
infallibly the good things promised, or accept the good things tendered. Whence
it follows, that though the Minister may mistake (as a man) about the person of
any receiver, thinking charitably he has grace, when he has it not: yet he
cannot mistake as to his office, since he undertakes not to promise or tender
Christ effectually to any (that being only Gods work) though he groundedly
hope God by him does effectually promise and tender Christ to diverse receivers;
namely, where the Spirit is pleased to strike in effectually with the promise
and tender sealed, in the Sacrament, by the Minister as Christ's Ambassador.

Object. How can the Minister seal absolutely to the regenerate, when he cannot
seal to them but upon condition of regeneration? And since he knows none that
are regenerated (I mean, as such) must he not needs seal conditionally to all,
and so to the regenerate among the rest?

Answ. As a promise may be both absolute and conditional, so it may be sealed
both absolutely and conditionally: Now the promise is made to the regenerate
both absolutely and conditionally; therefore it may and must be sealed to them
both absolutely and conditionally. The promise of salvation is made and sealed
to Timothy, 1. Conditionally, that is, upon condition of his acting and
persevering in faith, etc. 2. Absolutely, because really the condition is and
shall be performed by him. The same promise is made and sealed to Judas only
conditionally, because those conditions are neither performed nor performable
by him: whence the promise can no way be made or sealed absolutely to Judas, as
it is to Timothy. Though therefore the Minister at the Sacrament seal
conditionally to Timothy, yet at the same time he seals absolutely also (though
happily unwittingly) because the condition of eternal salvation is performed by
Timothy, not so by Judas.

Mr. D. Christ may be given to all at the Sacrament (if you take giving for
holding forth) though they do not receive.

Page 190. M. H. What an unworthy shift is this to be made use of so often! As
Christ is held forth to all Sacramentally, he is held forth to this end to be
Sacramentally eaten and drunken. Take eat, this is my body; that is, thus taken
and eaten it is his body, and not otherwise. The Sacrament then gives not out
Christ, or holds him forth Sacramentally, but to those that receive it. The
fallacy lies in the term Sacramental. At the Lords Supper you have Christ
Spiritual and Sacramental. At every Lords Supper Christ Spiritual is offered to
all present, and its their duty to receive Christ Spiritual: But it follows not
thence, that Christ Sacramental (that is, the Elements) must be offered to, and
received by all present. They are justly denied the sign, who visibly refuse
the thing signified.


Answ. I perceive M. H. has a strong breath, to blast a man's sense, where he
cannot convince it. I dare not boast of any worthiness either in my person,
words, or actions; I hope the Lord has made me truly sensible of my exceeding
great unworthiness in them all. However (as I have) I shall endeavor, through
grace, to assert and vindicate truth, though, I must confess, too unworthily.
As to the point in hand:

1. Its false, that Christ is or must be held forth to all present
Sacramentally, if by holding forth you mean an offer or tender. Suppose one
jure excommunicate be present; must the Minister offer Christ Sacramental to
him? M. H. himself has granted the contrary. True, he is held forth to all
present Sacramentally by way of Declaration, but not by way of Oblation or
offer to all present. All present may see Christ set apart and broken
Sacramentally, etc. they may also see the Covenant sealed in the Sacrament to
all present conditionally: But it follows not thence, that Christ must needs be
offered Sacramentally to all present, though he be always offered to some
present Sacramentally, and must be so received by them.

2. Its false, that unless the Sacramental bread be eaten (understand
proportionably of the Sacramental Cup as Christ's blood) its not Christ's body:
for 1. Its Christ's body by consecration, according to Christ's institution,
before it be taken and eaten, otherwise the Minister would utter an untruth in
speaking those words, Take eat, this is Christ's body, etc. 2. The not receiving
of some present (whether it be orderly or sinful) cannot make void Christ's
institution, but by virtue thereof the bread is Christ's body, so long as the
solemnity of the Sacrament continues.

3. Though Christ be not offered Sacramenttally to all at the Lords Supper, yet
he is offered Spiritually to all present, and the promise of Christ spiritual
is sealed conditionally to all present; who seeing Christ crucified by them,
and for them, may be much affected and wrought upon, though they do not receive
the Elements, Gal. 3. 1. as well as the Communicants themselves, who I hope,
are affected with the Elements set apart, broken and poured out, before their
actual receiving. May not a Look upon Christ crucified, affect as well as a
receiving of Christ crucified? Zach. 12. 10. I do not say as much, since both
of these actions will affect more then one of them.

M. H. p. 191. As the Minister does not only loose, but bind in the word; so
does he in the Sacrament, but conditionally in both.

Answ. If his meaning be, that the Minister looses and binds only
conditionally, then he looses the wicked as much as the godly, and binds the
godly as much as the wicked; the reason is, because at the same time that he
looses the godly conditionally, he binds them also conditionally; and at the
same time he binds the wicked conditionally, he looses them also
conditionally. Dare he say absolutely to a godly man; Thy sins are remitted,
though thou repent not; or to a wicked man, Thy sins are bound, though thou
repent? I pray what difference between Timothy and Judas as to this particular,
upon M. H. his principles. Timothies sins are loosed if he repent, and bound if
he repent not; Judas his sins are bound if he repent not, and loosed if he
repent. Is it not evident here, that Judas is loosed as much as Timothy, and
Timothy bound as much as Judas, if the binding or loosing be only conditional
on both sides. Therefore say we, the Minister looses the wicked conditionally,
when he binds the wicked absolutely; he looses the godly absolutely, when he
binds them conditionally: yea, when he loose the godly conditionally, he
looses them absolutely; and when he binds the wicked conditionally, he binds
them absolutely; and that because the conditions upon which the first is
loosed, and the second bound, are in them absolutely, or are performed by them.
And a conditional loosing or binding, where the condition is performed, is
absolute, as before. The Minister acting clave non errante, binds the wicked
absolutely, as to his present state, but looses the godly absolutely both as to
his present and future-state, because the godly has performed the condition of
loosing, and shall certainly persevere in the performance of that condition;
but many wicked men do not persevere in the condition of binding (namely,
unbelief and impenitency) therefore the Minister cannot bind them absolutely
for the future. Now as the Minister looses and binds, not only conditionally,
but also absolutely in the word, so he does in the Sacrament: And so he seals
my loosing or binding, whether I receive or not, since the Sacrament seals the
whole Covenant of Grace made with man, whereof loosing and binding are a great
part. Nor is it material the Minister should know (as such) the persons whom he
binds or looses absolutely, the binding or loosing being as sure and
effectual, though he do it ignorans, as though he did it sciens volens. Only
the Minister must take heed he lose not either pastorally or juridically where
he thinks in his conscience he ought to bind; nor bind where his conscience
tells him he ought to loose, whether it be with the key of Doctrine, or of
Discipline.

Mr. H. ib. The word is a sealed word only to the Church, the seal is delivered
only for her use, and therefore is to be applied only to her members.

Ans. 1. He may as well say, The word is a sworn and written word only to the
Church. God has not only written, but also sworn, and sealed in the Sacrament
the salvation of all believers, and the damnation of all unbelevers, whether
they be Church Members or no; And do we think the oath and seal shall not take
hold of them as well as the writing.

2. Cannot the word be a sealed word, unless the Seal be applied to persons, as
well as to the writing? I hope a Will is a sealed Will, though the Seal be not
applied to the Legatees, but only to the Will it self. Had God appointed the
elements only to be broken and powered out; I hope those very actions had sealed
the Covenant, though no person present had received; and even now they do seal
the Covenant before any person does receive. The Sin-offering did both signify
and seal pardon to the penitent offerer, though he are not one bit thereof; and
so does the baptizing of a child seal the Govenant to the whole Congregation,
though baptismal-water be applied only to the Babe.

Mr. D. Not only the tenor of the Covenant is sealed absolutely to the worthy
receiver, but also his interest in it. And though the word speak not
particularly of any man's single interest by name, yet it does by signs, etc.

Mr. H. p. 192. If a man's particular interest depends upon these signs and
marks, then is his interest only conditional, and must be sealed as it is; and
the rather, because the word does no where tell me, that I have these signs and
marks.

Answ. 1. I deny the consequence as propounded by Mr. H. my interest indeed
upon the supposition is conditional, which is no bar to absoluteness, as has
been formerly showed. But that it is only conditional is Mr. H. his mistake:
For where the condition is performed (as it is in the worthy Receiver) there
his interest is absolute, and is sealed absolutely, yea, though neither the
Minister, nor the Receiver know the condition to be performed, God ratifying
his Covenant absolutely to them that keep Covenant, though neither the
Minister, nor themselves know they keep Covenant.

2. The word does no where tell Mr. H. in particular that he has the signs of
a man, yet I hope the general. That all men shall rise at the day of judgment,
does as certainly prove that Mr. H. shall rise, as if the word had said
particularly, John Humphrey Minister of Froom, Anno 1653. shall rise at the day
of judgment. In like manner, The word never says, Thou Timot by shall be on
Christ's right hand at the day of judgment, but it says, All the sheep shall
be then at Christ's right hand; therefore it says absolutely Timothy shall be
at Christ's right hand; Why? Because Timothy is a sheep; for the condition being
performed makes the promise or prediction absolute; and otherwise its not an
absolute truth that Mr. H. shall rise at the last day. Set the propositions
together;

1. If Mr. H. be a man he shall rise at the last day.

2. If Timothy be a sheep, he shall stand on Christ's right hand at the last
day. Here both the propositions are conditional in terms, yet I hope they are
absolute in sense. Why I pray? Because the conditions are performed in each of
them, for Mr. H. is a man, and Timothy is Christ's sheep.

Mr. D. visible interest is sealed to visible Saints.

Mr. H. ib. Church members are visible Saints, therefore consideratis
considerandis, must be admitted.

Answ. 1. I speak of visible Saints absolutely so, he of visible Saints only
relatively so, that is, diverse persons worse than heathen, that have nothing to
plead, but that they are born in the Church, baptized in their infancy, and
have the name of Christians.

2. True visible Saints must be admitted consideratis considerandis; but Mr. H.
will not considerare omnia consideranda; therefore by his own rule his visible
Saints must not be admitted.

Page 192 and 193. Mr. H. falls foul upon me as questioning Mr. Baxters truth
of grace, whom yet he quotes so blindly.

That 1. He mentions not Mr. Baxters name.

Nor 2. His book out of which he quotes.

Nor 3. Did I know it was Mr. Baxter, or who it was particularly.

Nor 4. Have so much as read Mr. Baxters Aphorisms, out of which the Quotation
was taken.

Nor 5. Had Mr. H. reason to censure me for putting an if so, upon Mr. Baxter
presented to me under a confused disguise, when himself puts an if so upon all
the godly men in the world, in saying, The Minister cannot seal salvation to
any but conditionally, that is, if he be Evangelically worthy; and what is
this, but an if so? Yet, I hope, by that if so, he does not out of a bitter
spirit question their piety. If herein I am more charitable to him, than he
has been to me, I hope he will not take it unkindly. My words p. 140. of my
Bar, are these:

I hope that godly person (if so) was converted before Mr. H. his Embryon was
hatched.

Upon these very words, Mr. H. is pleased to charge me with self-conceit,
prejudice, and a bitter spirit, p. 192. when as himself in that very place
where he quotes Mr. Baxter so blindly, p. 48. of his Vindication, gives him in
effect, an if so, in these words, I cannot but be glad to find a piercing godly
man (I take him) etc. Himself dare not say absolutely he was a godly man, but
he takes him to be so; I say that godly man, if so, was converted before, etc.
I leave it to the judicious Reader, whether Mr. H. or my self were more guilty
of self-conceit, prejudice, and a bitter spirit. Withal, what ever Mr. Baxters
judgment be for Mr. H. his syllogism, I am sure he is not of Mr. H. his
opinion for admitting all pell-mell. Mr. Baxter is a person whom I highly honor
in the Lord, though I cannot in every thing jurare in verba magistri.

Page 193. Mr. H. comes to his syllogism, Whosoever believes shall be saved, I
believe, ergo, I shall be saved. p. 141. of my Bar, I endeavor to prove the
conclusion of this syllogism (I shall be saved) is sealed in the Sacrament. My
argument is drawn from the general, and particular promise, Joh. 3. 16. and
Romans 10. 9. and confirmed from the particular offer of grace, and from the
argument a genere ad speciem. See p. 141. and 142. of my Bar. Now what is
promised in the Covenant is sealed in the Sacrament.

Mr. H. denies my argument, and gives his reason, page 193. because the
Covenant promises only conditionally that I shall be saved.

Ans. It has been formerly showed, that what is promised conditionally, is
promised absolutely, where the condition is performed; and what is promised in
the Covenant, is sealed in the Sacrament. As in this conditional proposition,
If Mr. H. be a man, he is a living creature. I hope the conditionality of this
proposition is no bar to the absoluteness of the consequent. Mr. H. is
conditionally an animal, as is evident in the hypothesis, yet he is absolutely
an animal too. Why? because the condition of animality (namely humanity) is in
him.

In like manner, If Timothy believe, he shall be saved; the consequent (Timothy
shall be saved) is absolute in sense, because he has performed the condition
of faith, though it be conditional in terms: And that promise which says, All
that believe shall be saved, says Timothy shall be saved, because Timothy
believes; as he that says, All men shall rise, says Timothy shall rise,
because Timothy is a man.

Note by the way, that I do not say, The conclusion is absolute to all, but
only to those who have performed, or have in them the condition; and withal,
that though it be true, that he who once receives with faith shall be saved,
yet it follows not, that he who once receives without faith shall be damned, as
Mr. H. absurdly infers, page 194. since even a state of unbeleef does not prove
absolutely that I shall be damned, but only that at present I am in a state of
damnation; much less does a receiving once without faith infer any such direful
conclusion; and the reason is, because a state of unbeleef is changeable
through grace, but a state of faith is unchangeable through grace; and one act
of faith, argues a state of faith, but one omission of the act of faith, does
not argue a state of unbeleef.

Ib. His argument is too weak to convince my distinction of weakness, for
though the matter of the offer and promise be all one, yet that grace may be
offered absolutely which is not accepted, but no grace is promised absolutely,
which is not, or shall not be accepted.

Mr. D. Where the condition is performed, there the promise is absolute.

Mr. H. ib. I deny it; what is but upon supposition is not absolute; you may
say, It is as good to me, as if it were absolute; it is certain, (there lies
the equivocation) but how is it certain? not absolutely certain (as election
is) but conditionally certain; for the promise is still the same, and no new
promise.

Answ. 1. If a conditional promise be as good to me, as if it were absolute;
that is, certain, then M. H. does but wrangle about terms. Grant the Believers
salvation is certain, as if it were absolute, we have enough: And its evident,
there is a wide difference between the conditionality of Peter's and Judas his
salvation, since Peter's conditional salvation is certain, not so Judas his
conditional salvation. That which is absolute can but be certain, and that
which is conditional is certain. Now that which is certain in the Covenant, is
sealed in the Sacrament; therefore its sealed in the Sacrament that Peter shall
certainly be saved (not so that Judas shall certainly be saved) which is the
conclusion of the Syllogism.

2. There is no equivocation, but a plain and downright assertion, That
conditionality is no Bar to absoluteness: And, if this be not true, there is no
absolute proposition in the world. To instance in that of election, which M. H.
grants is absolute. Let the proposition be, All that are elected, shall
certainly be saved. This proposition in truth is absolute, and is so granted to
be by M. H. Now let M. H. or any other, prove this proposition; he will clearly
see, it is conditional also. For evidence whereof, I shall propound this
Agument, If God be all-wise, all-sufficient, and unchangeable in his eternal
purpose of freegrace, then all that are elected shall certainly be saved. But
God is so; ergo. Is it not here evident, that the consequent (which is the
conclusion) is conditional? yet withal, we say truly, it is absolute. Why?
Because the condition of infinite wisdom, power, and unchangeableness (which
are the necessary mediums to prove the conclusion) are really, necessarily, and
essentially in God. Now if conditionality be no bar to the absoluteness of
election, why should it be a bar to the absoluteness of the promise as made to
the elect and regenerate, for whom, or by whom the condition either is, or
shall certainly be performed, and is undertaken for in the promise, as well as
are the good things promised upon that condition.

M. D. When I believe, the condition is performed; ergo, the promise, that I
shall be saved, is absolute.

M. H. ib. That which assures me of a benefit only upon condition, and does
not assure me the condition, does not assure me absolutely of the benefit. The
Sacrament assures me of salvatition only upon condition I believe, but does
not assure me I believe: Therefore it does not assure me absolutely of
salvation.

Answ. 1. M. H. his answer is not home to the matter immediately under debate;
I speaking of the absoluteness of the promise to a believer, and he answering
of the Sacraments sealing to a believer. Now the promise is absolute, whether
the Sacrament seal or no, yea, though there should be no Sacrament or Seal at
all.

2. There is a twofold assurance, 1 Real. 2. Sensible. The Sacrament gives to
Peter real assurance of his faith, though not always sensible assurance, for
which not the Sacrament, but Peter himself is to be blamed, who fails happily, 1.
In a direct act, not considering the nature and use of the Sacrament. 2. In a
reflex act, not observing his own faith of adherence; whereupon he may well
fall short of sensible assurance. The Sacrament can seal but what is in the
Covenant, and the Covenant does not undertake so absolutely for faith of
evidence, as it does for faith of adherence.

3. There is an ambiguity in the words, I believe: The Sacrament does not seal,
I believe, de praesenti, unless actually I do believe de praesenti, for then it
should seal a falsity; which how absurd? But it seals, 1. That every true
believer has saving grace. 2. That he has believed, and shall believe by
intervals till he dye. And this it does by consequents; namely, by sealing the
Covenant, and therein the truth of those marks and signs which accompany the
act of adherence, produced by a Believer at the Sacrament, or at any other time.

M. H. ib. Again, That proposition that contains the Covenant is sealed: But
the major contains the Covenant, not the conclusion; therefore the major not
the conclusion, is sealed.

Answ. 1. The major of his Syllogism is not sufficient to infer the conclusion,
unless the term only or alone be added to it.

2. I deny the second branch of his minor, and affirm the contrary proposition,
namely, That the conclusion is in the Covenant, to wit, remotely, and by
consequence, though not immediately, as is the major. M H. will not deny; that
all solid consequences from Scripture are virtually in Scripture; otherwise our
Savior could never have proved the Resurrection from that text, I am the God
of Abraham, etc. Let us compare the Syllogisms.

1. Syllog.

If God be the God of Abraham, etc. then there is a Resurrection: God is the
God of Abraham; therefore there is a Resurrection. 2. Syllog.

If all believers shall be saved; then Peter shall be saved: All believers
shall be saved; therefore Peter shall be saved. The Antecedent in each
Syllogism is express Scripture, and virtually includes the Consequent. Nor is
it material as to the present Conclusion, whether Peter by a reflex act knows
that he does believe, the conclusion of certain salvation flowing from the
presence, and acting of faith in Peter, not from Peter's knowledge thereof.
Peter's comfort indeed depends upon the knowledge of his faith; but that is the
minor of the first Syllogism of assurance (of which anon) not the conclusion.

M. H. p. 195. M. D. p. 143. undertakes the minor, although before, p. 128. he
tells us, He knows none so simple as to assert, that God does attest our faith:
Yet here he is grown so wise as to assert, that God does seal to this
proposition, I believe.

Answ. In these expressions M. H. does not carry himself as a fair and candid
Adversary, but mangles and corrupts my text, thereby to slur me. My words, p.
128. of my Bar, are these, I know none so simple as to assert, that God does in
terminis attest our faith in the Sacrament. And to prevent (what in me lay) all
possibility of cavil, I have these words in the margin, My meaning is, The
Sacrament does not say in express terms. Thou Roger believe, no more than the
word does, but only by consequence. Now M. H. (more prudently than honorably)
leaves out those words, in terminis; and withal, takes not the least notice of
my marginal explication, that thereby he might make the Reader believe I speak
here a contradiction; whereas if both my assertions be heartily presented,
there is no show of contradiction. For proof, let the propositions be compared.

1. Propos. The Scripture says not in express terms, Thou Roger believe.

2. Propos. The Scripture says by consequence, Thou Roger believe.

I hope its no contradiction to affirm, The Scripture says that by consequence,
which it does not say in express terms. But enough of this cavil, which I leave
at M. H. his door, and proceed.

M. D. What the Covenant assures, the Sacrament seals: The Covenant assures me
that I believe; therefore the Sacrament seals that I believe. The minor is
proved, because the Covenant gives me clear evidence of my faith by infallible
signs of faith, etc.

M. H. p. 195. You may see here how much prejudice will blind a man. The
mistake is manifest in reckning that to the minor, which belongs to the major:
for when the word says, If I believe, I shall be saved, it is all one with, If
I receive Christ for righteousness, and have these and these marks, whereby it
describes this faith to me: All which go to the major. Now the minor or
Assumption is, But I have these marks, signs, or that true faith thus
described. And this is no where affirmed to me in the word, and consequently
not sealed.

Answ. 1. If this Logic of M. H. be good, there is no minor or Assumption, but
the proof of it belongs to the major. Take one instance, I would prove my self
(by Philosophy) to be a man, the very same way I have proved my self (by
Scripture) to believe. Observe now how the argument and answer run parallel
with my argument, to prove I believe, and M. H. his answer applied thereto; by
which comparison the absurdity of M. H. his answer will evidently appear. The
argument stands thus; If I am animal rationale, I am homo: I am animal
rationale; therefore I am Homo,

The minor is proved, because Philosophy gives me clear evidence of my
animality and rationality, by sure signs thereof.

May not M. H. here with as much show of reason argue, The mistake is manifest
in reckning that to the minor, which belongs to the major; for when Philosophy
says, If I am animal rationale, I am homo; it is all one with, If I am a
sensitive body endued with a reasonable soul, and have all other necessary
signs and marks whereby it describes animality and rationality to me, then I am
Homo, all which go to the major. Now the minor or Assumption is, But I have
these marks and signs, or that true animality and rationality thus described:
and this is no where affirmed to me in Philosophy; for Philosophy does not say
in express terms, Thou Roger have the true signs or marks of animality and
rationality; therefore Philosophy does not say, Thou Roger art a man; and so it
cannot be proved from Philosophy that I am a man. You may argue as absurdly,
from Scripture, if you please, The Scripture does not say in express terms,
Thou Roger have the certain signs of animality and rationality, therefore it
does not say, Thou Roger art a man: And so, belike, it cannot be proved from
Scripture, that I am a man. Is not this rare Logic think you? If now I should
desire M. H. to prove himself to be a man, he must prove it from Scripture or
Philosophy. And how I pray, but by those infallibly and necessary marks laid
down in Scripture, or in Philosophy? Suppose then I should return, and say, I
but Sir, neither Scripture nor Philosophy say those signs are in M. H.
therefore neither Scripture nor Philosophy prove that M. H. is a man: Did I not
deserve to be hooted at for such a return?

It is evident then, that though neither Scripture nor Philosophy say in
express terms, Thou Timothy art a man; yet because both of them lay down the
certain signs of a man, which are really in Timothy; therefore both Scripture
and Philosophy say by consequence (though not in express terms) Thou Timothy
art a man. Proportionably, though the Scripture say not in express terms, Thou
Timothy believe; yet because the Scripture lays down the infallible signs of
faith, which are really in Timothy, it says by consequence, Thou Timothy
believe. And that which the Scripture speaks by consequence, is as true, as
that which it speaks expressly. If the Scripture say, whoever has these marks
of faith, has saving faith, it says Timothy has saving faith: And though the
proposition be conditional, If Timothy have these marks, he has saving faith;
yet the consequent is absolute, because the condition is performed in Timothy.
And it is as absurd to argue, I but the essential marks of faith are the same
with faith; and therefore cannot prove believing to be faith: as to argue, The
essential marks of a man are the same with a man; and therefore cannot prove
Timothy to be a man.

You see the absurdity. If you ask how M. H. was beguiled to close with such an
absurdity?

Answ. He was deceived by a false principle, as apprehending, That whatsoever
is a medium of demonstration, must not be one and the same with the thing it
demonstrates. This is evident by those expressions of his, p. 195. When the
Word says, if I believe I shall be saved; it is all one with, if I receive
Christ for righteousness, and have these and these marks, etc. The Argument
stands thus, If I believe, I shall be saved: I believe, therefore I shall be
saved.

The Antecedent (which is the same with the minor) is thus proved, He that
receives Christ for righteousness believes: I receive Christ for righteousness;
therefore I believe. The first Proposition is not at all asserted in the major,
but supposed: the second proposition is asserted only condionally in the major:
but that is asserted absolutely in the minor, this in the Conclusion. And
though both propositions were false, yet the major or hypothesis is good, if
the connection be right.
Here M. H. answers, that receiving Christ for righteousness, is the same with
believing; and therefore belongs to the major, not to the minor or Assumption.
True, it belongs to the major materially, as one part thereof; which major
being an hypothetical proposition is compounded of two propositions; namely,
the Antecedent and the Consequent, I receive Christ for righteousness, I
believe; both which propositions are united by the note of consequence (if) but
it does not formally belong to the major, as an hypothetical proposition, or as
a Consequence, whose essence lies not in the truth of the parts, but in the
connection of the parts. Reduce the hypothetical into a Categorical Syllogism,
it will evidently appear, that this proposition (I receive Christ for
righteousness) belongs not to the major, but to the minor. Thus: He that
receives Christ for righteousness believes: I receive Christ for righteousness;
therefore I believe.

Will M. H. now say, the minor belongs to the major?

Object. I but Receiving Christ for righteousness, and believing, are all one,
and so you do but prove idem per idem.

Answ. True: And how will M. H. prove idem, but peridem? Is not that the
clearest and strongest demonstration that proves a subject a priori, by its
essential principles, that are the very same with the subject? Can he
demonstrate the definitum better, than per definitionem? and is not definitio
the fame with the definitum? Is not animal rationale, the very same with homo?
And if M. H. will prove himself to be a man, is not the best demonstration
thereof by animal rationale, which yet I hope is one and the same thing with a
man. The definition indeed differs vatione from the definitum, but not really.
In like manner, is not ens the same with unum, verum, bonum? yet Philosophy
demonstrates ens by those properties of ens, as it does also per essentiam,
which must needs be the same with ens. Thus too, it demonstrates animal per
animalitatem, which animalit as is the very same with animal. To conclude, Gods
essence is demonstrated by his properties, and one divine property is
demonstrated by another; yet Gods essence and properties are all one and the
same thing, the divine nature having not the least composition; yea, can M. H.
prove himself to be a man by that which is not really a man? If the best
demonstration be per idem, then sure I err not in demonstrating faith by it
self; which if M. H. will deny, he must make not only a new Logic, but also a
new Scripture, seeing the Scripture describes, and so proves receiving Christ,
and believing in Christ, each by other, John 1. 12.

Object. Is not this a circular demonstration?

Answ. Not at all, so the medium or argument be notius, more known of it self,
or to the learner, than the thing proved is. Thus, If you ask me, what is
faith? Ans. Its a receiving of Christ for righteousness. This description is
the very same indeed with faith, but more known to a learner than the term
faith is; and therefore does very aptly both open and demonstrate the nature of
faith, as being the same with faith realiter, though not ratione. Its evident
then, that though faith be the very same with receiving of Christ, yet its no
Paralogism to prove or demonstrace faith by receiving of Christ, as M. H. would
make the world believe.

M. H. ib. I will therefore return his argument; If the word or Covenant does
not assure me, I leeve, then this minor cannot be sealed; but this it does not,
for it no where says, I have these marks and signs, ergo.

Answ. Since Mr. H. will needs be absurd, let me be absurd also to convince
him. Suppose the minor be I am a man. Let me now act Mr. H. If neither
Scripture, nor Philosophy assure me that I am a man, then the minor cannot be
proved from Scripture or Philosophy; but this they do not, for they no where
say, I Roger have the marks and signs of a man.

Yet further to evidence the absurdity, let us argue proportionably about the
Command, as we have done about the Promise. I ask Mr. H. then, Whether the
Scripture does not say, I Roger must not commit adultery. I prove it does,
thus: The Scripture says, No man shall commit adultery; Therefore it says, I
Roger must not commit adultery. The minor of the Enthymeme, I Roger am a man,
is thus proved, He that has the necessary marks of a man, is a man; I have
these marks, therefore I am a man.

Object. I but the Scripture or Philosophy no where say, That I Roger have
those marks of a man, therefore it cannot be proved from them that I am a man,
and by consequence it cannot be proved from Scripture that I am forbid to
commit adultery: Would not such an answer be both ridiculous and profane? Yea
by such a loose argument might not all obedience be waved, as also the especial
commands of the Gospel? If the Word and Covenant do not assure me that I must
repent, then it cannot be proved from Scripture that I must repent. But this
the word does not assure me, ergo. The minor is proved, because the Scripture
no where says, Then Roger must repent; ergo. How will Mr. H. now convince me
but by arguing thus? The Scripture says, Every man must repent, Acts 17. 30.
Thou Roger art a man, ergo; suppose now I should return, the Scripture no where
says, Thou Roger art a man, or have the marks of a man (understand the same of
Philosophy) therefore it cannot be proved that I am a man, and by consequence,
that I am commanded in Scripture to repent. Would not such a reply deserve a
Cudgel rather than an answer? Its evident then that the Scripture does by
consequence (though not in express terms) assure Timothy That he does believe,
which is the minor of the syllogism of assurance: And what the Covenant
assures, that the Sacrament seals, namely, That Timothy does believe, etc.

Mr. H. ib. and p. 196. Again, if it were in the word, it were an object of
faith; but it is no object of faith; Probo, That which is seen is no object of
faith, for sense takes away faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7. and faith is an evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. But the minor, I believe, is an object of sense,
spiritual experience, or thing seen.

Ans. 1. It is in the word (by consequence) and so an object of faith, That
Timothy believes.

2. Mr. H. his argument to prove the contrary is invalid, since the same thing
may be both an object of faith, and an object of sense; and such was Christ's
resurrection both to John and Thomas, Joh. 20. v. 8. and 29. both which saw and
believed that Christ was risen. Christ's resurrection then was the object both
of faith, and of sense.

Object. How then shall we reconcile the Scriptures quoted by Mr. H.

Ans. Very easily, thus: Faith and sense are not always opposite in order to
the object, but in order to the manner of apprehending the object. Both faith
and sense may at the same time apprehend the same object, but not in the same
manner. Thus faith assents to Christ's resurrection as a thing revealed by divine
testimony; sense assents to it as a thing seen and felt. Joh. 20. 27, 29. Faith
assents not properly upon the principles of sense, nor does sense assent upon
the principles of faith. The proper object of faith is a thing not seen, the
proper object of sense is a thing seen; and the same object in one sense is
considerable as not seen, in another sense as seen. Thus heathen by sense
assent to a Deity, Romans 1. 20. Christians both by faith and sense; whence the
Deity is said to be both visible and invisible in the fore-quoted place, and
Heb. 11. 27. invisible to sense, visible to faith; invisible in its essence,
visible in its effects. Its evident then that in some respects sense does not
take away faith, and that therefore this proposition, I believe, may be an
object both of faith and sense. It depends upon faith in order to evidence by
Scripture signs, it depends upon sense in order to experience by an act of
reflection. Thus the major in the syllogism of assurance depends purely upon
faith, the minor partly upon faith, partly upon sense. The Conclusion flows
necessarily from both. Mr. H. his illustration if rightly stated will favor
us, in order whereunto I shall reduce Mr. H. his Thesis to an hypothesis, Thus,
Josh. 2. The Spies treat with Rahab about articles of peace and safety, upon
condition of her constant friendship to them, which is the qualification. How
is Rahab now assured of her preservation? Ans. By being assured of her constant
friendship. How is she assured of her constant friendship? Ans. By the sure
marks thereof given by the Spies; namely, if she continued to keep their
counsel, and to keep them safe from the King of Jerico his danger, etc. Is it
not here then true, that the evidence of her friendship to the Spies, depended
upon an act of humane faith, That the forementioned hiding of the Spies, etc.
were sure signs of her friendship; and partly upon experience, by reflection
that she had these signs. In like manner in the spiritual treaty, Timothy is
assured of his salvation, by being assured of his faith. He is assured of his
faith, by the infallible signs thereof held forth in the Covenant. Suppose
(which is M. H. his illustration) Articles are granted and sealed to a Town,
upon such and such qualifications; here it concerns me (if a Townsman) to
evidence that I have the right qualifications. For evidence hereof, I must
appeal, not only to witnesses, but also to the Covenant of Articles, where
there is any controversy about the rectitude of my qualifications; else might
not the General say? Friend, you bring witness of such and such qualifications,
but you are mistaken in the manner of them, or in some necessary circumstance
about them? must not I now appeal to the Covenant of Articles to make out that
the qualification thus evidenced, is right for manner, and all requisite
circumstances? And does not my evidence then depend partly upon my witnesses,
and partly upon the Covenant? Now in proving the minor, That I believe, it
seldom falls out, but there is some dispute within me against this act of
evidence, which may arise from temptation without, from the opposite corruption
within, and from the weakness of my faith, etc. upon which account, I must to
the Covenant for the clearing of those objections and exceptions. And
otherwise, why do Ministers take so much pains in laying down trials, signs and
evidences of faith, and other graces, but to help my faith of evidence, which
is the minor of the Syllogism of assurance? A godly man will easily assent to
the major, That all who believe, are justified by Christ, this being express
Scripture, Acts 13. 39, but the difficulty is to bring him to say confidently,
I believe, which is the minor of the Syllogism of assurance. Now to produce
this assent, you must clear it by Scripture-evidence, that his act of adherence
is conformable to the rule of the covenant. In order whereunto two things are
necessary, 1. An assent by reflection, that I have produced an elicite act of
adherence upon Christ. 2. An assent of faith in my understanding, that this act
of adherence is not an act of presumption, but a regular adherence, according
to the mind of the Covenant. Both these concur to make out the minor, which
therefore depends partly upon faith, and partly upon inward sense and
experience. Now so far as my faith of evidence depends upon Scripture, so far
its evidenced by the Covenant, and sealed in the Sacrament, which is all I
drive at. And here I must entreat M. H. to take heed, lest by opposing the
truth I bold in this particular, he turn not too much aside to the Papists, who
upon this very account deny faith of evidence (without an immediate revelation)
because its no where said in Scripture, The J^ or William believe. If I
mistake not, this is a good maxim in Divinity, The act of Grace is seen by
reflection, the truth of grace in that act is known by comparing it with the
rule of trial. Evidence is the beautiful child of a direct and reflex act
married together. Its possible some evidence may be (like Christ) a virgin
birth, but ordinarily that evidence which has not both the forementioned
parents is a Bastard, presumption instead of faith.

Mr. D. The marks and signs which Conscience makes use of to evidence the
minor, are in Scripture; therefore the minor is consequently in Scripture.

M. H. ib. That is, because the medius terminus is both in the major and the
minor; therefore whatsoever proves the major, must prove the minor.

Answ. That M. H. wrongfully fathers on me so absurd a Consequence, I shall
endeavor to evidence by clearing his misty expressions: which must be done by
instance and example, thus; The Syllogism of Assurance is, He that believes
shall be saved: I believe; ergo.

The minor (I believe) is thus proved; He that receives Christ for
righteousness believes: I receive Christ for righteousness; ergo. The middle
term or argument in the first Syllogism is believing; the middle term in the
second Syllogism, is receiving Christ for righteousness. Whence its evident, I
prove not the minor of the first Syllogism, by proving its major; for the
argument that proves the major, is pure Scripture in express terms. If any
should say, its false, That he who believes shall be saved, will you bring
receiving of Christ for righteousness, as the medium to prove it? He will still
deny, That he who receives Christ for righteousness shall be saved; and so in
infinitum. Therefore to prove the major irrefragably, you must argue thus, That
which the Scripture says shall be, that shall certainly be: The Scripture says,
He that believes shall be saved; therefore he that believes shall certainly be
saved. The major holds forth the connection between faith and salvation; the
minor holds forth the assertion of my faith; which as they are very different
propositions, so they are proved by very different mediums. The way to prove
the minor, is not pure Scripture in express terms; for no Scripture says in
express terms, Thou Roger believe, etc. But partly Scripture, and partly
Experience, namely, Reflection upon an Act compared with the rule of Scripture,
and therefore cannot be the same way of proof, with express Scripture, unless
simple and compound be the same. Therefore I do not prove the minor, (I
believe) by the same medinus terminus by which I prove the major (He that
believes shall be saved.) Where a thing consists of more terms than one, it
must be proved by more terms than one: Faith of evidence does nor depend upon a
simple or double direct act, as do sundry other proofs drawn from Scripture;
but upon a direct and reflex assent combined, which holds so long, till the
reflex assent be as evident to me, as it is evident that I see or hear, etc.
for if there be the least doubt or scruple, it must be removed by Scripture,
else the reflex assent cannot be firm and undeceiving. Suppose I would prove
that Paul had faith of evidence, or affurance. I must use this Syllogism, He
that by producing regularly a direct and reflex act, assents to grace inherent
in himself, has assurance: Paul did this; ergo he had assurance. Here you see
the medium proving Paul's assurance is a direct and reflex act regularly united:
or, he that assents directly to this proposition (He that receives Christ
believes) and reflexly to this proposition (I receive Christ) has assurance
that himself believes. Paul had both these assents; ergo, he had assurance.
But faith of evidence consists of more terms than one, namely, a direct and
reflex act, and therefore must be proved by more terms than one; which terms
yet being united, make one compound medium or argument. You may prove Gabriel
to be an Angel, by one simple term of spirituality; but you cannot prove David
to be a man, but by two terms, of Spirituality and Materiality united. Why?
Because David is compounded of spirit and matter; and therefore must be proved
by those terms united in one medium or argument. In like manner, faith of
evidence consists of two terms, namely, a direct and reflex act united, and
therefore must be proved by two terms united: not so the faith of general
assent: But two terms united are not the same with one simple term. And if
proof by two terms united, be not the same with proof by one simple term, then
the medius terminus proving that I believe, is not the same with the medius
terminus proving that He who believes shall be saved.

M. H. ib. Though the evidence in actu signato be in Scripture, this is
nothing, seeing that goes to the major proposition: But his evidence in actu
exercito is the business; and that is no where I hope in Scripture, by his own
Confession.

Answ. 1. If by going to the major, he mean an Identity with the major; its
true, the evidence in actu signate is the major, or the same with the major,
the evidence in actu exercito is the minor. But I pray, may I not prove a weak
and trembling evidence in actu exercito (such are generally our evidences) by a
strong and firm evidence in actu signato?
If by going to the major, he mean proving the major of the foregoing Syllogism
(which he must mean, or he speaks not to purpose) then its false, that the
evidence in actu signato goes to the major; which I must evidence by the former
instance of the Syllogism of Assurance: thus, He that believes shall be saved:
I believe; ergo.

The minor (I believe) is thus proved. He that receives Christ for
righteousness, believes: I receive Christ for righteousness; ergo. In the
second Syllogism (which proves the minor of the first Syllogism) is the
evidence of my faith; 1. In actu signato, in the major (He that receives Christ
for righteousness believes.) 2. In actu exercito in the minor (I receive Christ
for righteousness. Now, I pray, how does the major of the second Syllogism,
prove the major of the first Syllogism? Set them together in an hypothetical
Syllogism, and see if they hang not together like ropes of sand: thus, If I
receive Christ for righteousness, then he that believes shall be saved: I
receive Christ for righteousness; ergo.

I pray, what connection is there in the forementioned hypothesis? Had it run
thus, If I receive Christ for righteousness, then I believe: I receive Christ
for righteousness, ergo. There is an evident connection: but in the former
hypothesis, there are clearly quatuor termini: 1. The pronoun, I. 2. Receiving
Christ. 3. Believing. 4. Salvation. The major then of the second Syllogism does
not prove the major, but the minor of the first Syllogism, as is evident,
because not the major, but the minor of the first Syllogism is the conclusion
in the second Syllogism.

He that receives Christ for righteousness believes: I receive Christ for
righteousness; therefore I believe. The conclusion (I believe) is the minor of
the first Syllogism; and that was the thing to be proved, but not the major of
the first Syllogism, which was taken for granted, as being express Scripture.

2. That the evidence in actu exercito, is in Scripture by consequence, I have
formerly proved, and wait to see what M. H. has further to say to it.

M. H. p. 196, 197. Whereas Mr. D. puts this off with a not in terminis, but by
consequence, Let us see his Consequence, All are sinners, therefore thou Roger
art a sinner: All must rise, therefore thou must rise. This is true, because
the one includes the other. So, whosoever believes, shall be saved, includes
this de fide, If thou Roger believe, thou shall be saved: but it cannot
include de fide Therefore thou Roger believe.

Answ. 1. If that proposition (All that are men shall rise) include, Therefore
thou Roger shall rise; then this proposition (All that believe shall be saved)
includes, Therefore thou Roger shall be saved. The reason is, because as the
former proposition includes not Roger but as a man (humanity being supposed to
be in him) so that latter proposition includes not Roger but as a Believer
(faith being supposed to be in him) which faith being really-in him as well as
humanity (upon the supposition) its evident the last proposition includes Roger
as well as the first; and therefore Rogers salvation is as sure as his
resurrection. True, seldom is it as sure to Roger, because Rogers faith is
seldom as evident to him as his humanity: but it is as sure in it self. Thus,
if Roger be a Babe, his resurrection is sure in it self, though not to Roger,
because he cannot reflect to know himself to be a man; and so if Roger be a
Babe in Christ, he cannot by a reflex act discern himself to be a true
Believer, as he can discern himself to be a man; yet his salvation still is as
sure as his resurrection, though not as sure to him: And the Conclusion is
firm, Roger shall be saved, though Roger do not know he shall be saved.

2. As that proposition (Whosoever believes shall be saved) includes this de
fide, If thou Roger believe, thou shall be saved; but does not include de fide,
Thou Roger believe: So that proposition (All men shall rise) does include de
fide, If thou Roger art a man, thou shall rise; but does not include de fide,
Thou Roger art a man. And if Roger may be sure by Scripture-evidence, that he
shall rise at the day of Judgment, though the Scripture does not say in
express terms, Thou Roger art a man; then Roger may be sure he shall be saved,
though the Scripture does not say in express term, Thou Roger believe.

M. H. ib. M. D. says, Yes, because the minor here is the Conclusion in the
Prossyllogism; to wit, He that has these signs believes: But I have these
signs; ergo I believe. I answer contra, seeing the Conclusion in the
Prosyllogism is the same with the minor in the prinpal Syllogism, it cannot be
in Scripture or de fide, by the same consequence he proves it can: For that he
has these and these signs, is not in Scripture: but to have these and these
signs is all one with to believe, ergo, That he believes is not in Scripture,
or de fide by consequence. He that has these signs, I say, is all one with, he
that believes; and so his Prosyllogism then comes effectually but to this, He
that believes, believes: But he believes; ergo he believes.

Answ. Here Mr. H. undertakes to prove, That the minor, (I believe) in the
Syllogism of Assurance, is not in Scripture so much as by consequence: An high
attempt, I confess, and of so sad consequence (if true) as to thrust out of our
Sermons all Uses of Trial, break in pieces bruised reeds, increase the fears of
doubting Christians, and in a word, discourage all sorts from the great and
necessary work of self-examination; for wherefore should I try my faith by
Scripture, unless by Scripture I can come to know that I believe? If by
Scripture I can come to know that I believe, then it follows necessarily that
this proposition (I believe) depends some way or other upon Scripture: but it
does not depend upon Scripture in express terms; therefore it must depend upon
Scripture by consequence: And so by consequence the Scripture says, I believe,
or, Thou John, Peter, or Roger believe, which is the minor in the Syllogism
of Assurance. Now, what in me lies, to convince M. H. and to stablish weak
Christians, that they may not be overborn by principles that strike, not only
at Church-examination, but also at self-examination, I shall endeavor as much
plainness as the subject will bear, being made the more intricate by terms of
art; and the rather, considering I have to deal, not only with a Scholar (my
Antagonist) but also with weak and plain-hearted Christians, whose life of
comfort lies very much in the Vindication of this sweet truth here opposed by
Mr. Humphrey.

Let me only premise (to prevent mistake) That the minor in the Syllogism of
Assurance is not sealed in the Sacrament, as it is formally the minor or
Assumption of the principal Syllogism, but as it is the conclusion of the
Prossyllogism, He that receives Christ, etc. believes: I receive Christ;
therefore I believe. And thus, as the conclusion of the principal Syllogism (I
shall be saved) depends partly upon Scripture, as to the major; partly upon
sense and experience as tp the minor: so does the conclusion of the
Prossyllogism (I believe) and therefore as the first, so the second conclusion
depends upon Scripture by consequence, etc. Amesius is clear to this purpose in
his Cases of Conscience, Lib. 1. Cap. 9. Sect. 2. speaking of the application
of conscience in the conclusion of such practical Syllogisms; in these words,
Pendet igitur ista conclusio partim ex generali illo jure quod in propositione
Synteresis dictar, and partim ex recognitione illa facti vel status quae in
assumptione continetur, etc. thus, He that receives Christ, etc. believes: I
receive Christ; therefore I believe. This conclusion (I believe) in Dr. Amesius
his judgment, flows from the major as well as the minor, and so in part
depends upon Scripture.

I shall in order hereunto, first propound the principal Syllogism, and the
Prossyllogism. The principal Syllogism is, He that believes shall be saved: I
believe; therefore I shall be saved.

The Prossyllogism is, He that has the true marks of faith believes: I have
the true marks of faith; Therefore I believe. Amongst which marks receiving of
Christ is a principal one.


Here you see the minor of the principal Syllogism (I believe) is the
Conclusion of the Prossyllogism.

Now says Mr. H. Page 197.
Seeing the Conclusion in the Prossyllogism is the same with the minor in the
principal Syllogism, it cannot be in Scripture, or de fide, by the same
consequence Mr. D. proves it can. Why I pray? For, that he has these signs and
marks is not in Scripture; but to have these and these signs is all one with to
believe, ergo. That he believes is not in Scripture, or de fide by consequence.

Answ. Though the Conclusion in the Prossyllogism be the same with the minor in
the principal Syllogism, yet it is in Scripture, or de fide by consequence.

M. H. His reasons to prove the contrary are invalid, his scope being to prove.
That the Conclusion (I believe) is not de fide by Consequence, because its
medium (I have the true signs of faith) is not de fide expressly, or in terms.

His second reason is, Page 197.
Because to have these and these signs of faith is all one with to believe; And
so my Prossyllogism comes effectually but to this, he that believes, believes,
but I believe; Therefore I believe.

Answ. 1. Proportionably, to have the marks and signs of a man is all one with
to be a man; and so the Prossyllogism, proving that I am a man (and therefore
shall rise) comes effectually but to this, He that is a man, is a man: but I am
a man; therefore I am a man.

In like manner, To have the marks and signs of a living creature is all one
with to be a living creature; and therefore my argument (proving Mr. H. to be a
living creature) comes effectually but to this, He that is a living creature,
is a living creature, But Mr. H. is a living creature; therefore he is a living
creature; and so its impossible to prove Mr. H. to be animal, for I cannot
prove it but by the marks of animality, and these marks and signs are the same
with animality. You see now to what streights and absurdities be has brought
himself, and all by that fundamental error against faith and reason, That a
thing cannot be proved by it self; which if true, then I cannot prove the thing
defined by its definition; I cannot prove entity by unity; I cannot prove God
by his Attributes, yea it is impossible to demonstrate any thing a priori by
its essential principles; and then farewell Divinity, Science, Reason, and all.
But of this more largely before.

Now contra, If I may prove a thing by it self, then I may prove a man by the
marks of a man, which (if essential, and a priori) are himself; I may prove
faith by the marks of faith, which (if essential, and a priori) are faith it
self: And such is that mark of receiving Christ for righteousness. Nor is there
any absurdity in it, so the Argument proving be not both re and ratione, the
same with the thing proved. Thus the Whole or totum is defined or described by
all its parts; all which together differ (...) re, but only ratione from the
whole, and that whether this Totum be Universal, Essentiale or Integrale.
But in Mr. H. his absurd Syllogism, Believing is the same both re and ratione
with believing; but believing is not the same ratione with receiving Christ for
righteousness, though it be the same realiter, as animal rationale is not
ratione the same with homo, though it be realiter the same with homo; but
differs, as definitio differs a de finito.

Mr. H. ib. And whereas to illustrate this he so elaborately demonstrates he is
a man, and so that he shall rise, etc. partly by sense, partly by faith: first,
by a direct act, and then by a reflex act on the signs of his humanity, etc.
Spectatum admissi? when, I am a man, and I believe, are propositions of equal
evidence. Mr. Drakes Argument shall carry it. He that is a man, is a man; he
that believes, believes; he that is in the right, is in the right; But Mr. D.
is in the right, ergo, he is in the right.

Answ. Nay, soft there Sir, rather because they are not propositions of equal
evidence, therefore Mr. Drakes Argument will carry it. If I believe were of
equal evidence with I am a man, then (happily) I had no more need of Scripture
marks to prove I believe, than I have of Scripture marks to prove I am a man,
though it be a truth that both propositions are by consequence in Scripture;
But because my faith is not so evident as my manhood, therefore I must to
Scripture for proof of my faith, when I need not go to Scripture for proof of
my manhood: And if I must to Scripture to prove I believe by the marks of
faith, then its evident that this proposition, I believe, depends upon
Scripture by virtue of those marks, as well as upon sense and experience by
virtue of my reflection.

2. Let me ask Mr. H. whether this Conclusion ( John shall rise at the day of
judgment) be in Scripture by consequence or not? If it be not, then by the
same reason, No particular Conclusion drawn from a general expressly in
Scripture, is in Scripture by consequence; which how absurd? for instance, then
it is not in Scripture by consequence, That I must not steal, etc. If it be,
then upon the very same ground it is in Scripture by consequence, That John
shall be saved: For as John being a man is included in the general, All men, so
John being a believer is included in the general All believers: And as by
consequence I may argue from Scripture, If all men shall rise, then this man
shall rise; so I may firmly argue, If all believers shall be saved, then this
believer shall be saved. It flows then as necessarily from Scripture, That John
the believer shall be saved, at it flows from Scripture, That John the man shall
rise again. So likewise that John the receiver of Christ is a believer, as that
John the reasonable creature is a man. I grant for the most part it is not so
evident that John is a believer, as that he is a man; and that therefore it is
not so easy for him to believe that he shall be saved, as to believe that he
shall rise; but still its a truth, That both these Conclusions flow from
Scripture by consequence, and therefore are in Scripture by consequence, which
is the thing here opposed by Mr. Humphrey. He might therefore well have spared
himself the labor of his merry Tautologies (he that is in the right, is in the
right, etc.) but that he hoped to catch his Reader by a frothy expression,
rather than to convince him by a solid Argument. Had he closed with this
Syllogism; If Mr. D. be in the right, then Mr. H. is in the wrong, but Mr. D.
is in the right, ergo, he had done both himself, his Reader, and his Antagonist
more right than now he does.

Page 198. Mr. H. mentions an Objection of mine about the Sacrament supposing
assurance and faith; unto which he says, I can make no solution, when at the
same time my solution is laid down, p. 147 and 148. of my Bar; only he tells
the Reader that he is not of my mind, That we must forbear the Sacrament, till
we have effectual faith: And truly I think he is not of my mind in that
particular; nor is it material what is his mind, or what is my mind, but what
is the mind of truth.

Ib. Mr. H. grants, That a general faith and acknowledgement of the Gospel, or
Covenant of Jesus Christ, as the only means to be saved by, is prerequisive to
adult Church Membership, and so to the Sacraments.

Answ. Then 1. What will become of all grossly ignorant Church Members that know
nothing of Faith, Christ, or the Gospel? He that blames us, as too severe for
suspending them; is here so severe as to excommunicate them, and make them no
Church Members.

2. We accept (as to the latter branch) his good confession, which makes
strongly against the free admission of grossly ignorant Church Members.

Again, we grant with Mr. H. ib. That the condition is not absolutely
prerequisite to engage to the condition; but the Question is whether a natural
man be bound to engage all manner of ways to the condition; He may engage to
the condition (and so to the Covenant) though he do it not by receiving the
Sacrament.

Page 199. Mr. H. tells us, The receiver seals not to his condition necessarily
in esse, but in fieri.

Answ. What then? Our present debate is not what the believer seals to God, but
what God seals to the believer in the Sacrament, and God at the Sacrament may
seal to the believer the condition, in esse, when the believer cannot seal to
God that himself has the condition in esse.

In the same page Mr. H. pins upon me another contradiction, by mis-quoting my
Text, p. 147. of my Bar; which says not the Sacrament is, but may be the means
of initial assurance; and its one thing to say the Sacrament is; another thing
to say it may be the means of initial assurance. I believe if God please, the
Sacrament may be the means both of initial grace, and of initial assurance; I
do not say it is the means of either. Besides, initial assurance is real, or
more sensible. The word that works conversion works real assurance at the same
time it works grace, which yet is not then so sensible, as being hid and
overborn by much corruption, till the beams of grace have in some measure
dispelled the cloud; but the first sensible or prevailing assurance may be
wrought at the Sacrament. Grace (as light) brings its own evidence with it,
though a person diverted happily minds neither for a while: He wrongs me
therefore in saying, p. 200. That I affirm the Sacrament is sometimes the means
of initial assurance; whereas my express words are, The Sacrament may be
sometimes the means of initial assurance, and a posse ad esse non valet
consequentia. I hope he that says, Mr. H. may be mistaken, does not therein
say Mr. H. is mistaken. Mr. H. If the Sacrament work further degrees in the
same kind, why not the kind it self?

Ans. If food work further degrees of life, why not life it self? Must every
thing that strengthens a weak man, needs raise a dead man? Acts produce moral
habits, but no act of the will works in it self supernatural habits; yet, I
hope, acts of the will may, and do promote supernatural habits, therefore that
may further degrees, which cannot produce the kind. Nor is the first grace
wrought effectually, either per modum obsignationis, or proponendo objectum, or
per moralem, actionem, or mediante significatione; (for then all would be
converted who have these) but per creationem and infusioonem, since the first
grace (as some think of man's soul) creando infunditur and in fundendo creatur.
Understand me here, that initial grace is not wrought by any, or all of these
joined regether (if abstractedly considered) as moral habits may be, but as
assisted in an especial manner by divine concourse, which concourse amounts to
a Creation. Not opus operatum, but spiritus operaus, acts eminently for the
production of initial grace.
And God may annex this creating act to what Ordinance he please. Now the great
controversy between us is, whether God do thus infuse initial grace by the
Sacrament as a moral Instrument thereof, as he does by the word? This Mr. H.
seems to affirm, but we deny.

M. H. p. 201. For this we thank him; and if a man may come as lost and undone,
then he may come while he judges and humbles himself, though he is in doubt of
his regeneration.

Answ. 1. I am glad of any agreement between us in this unhappy controversy,
especially in a point of this nature, which tends so much to the binding up of
bruised reeds. Yet

2. There is some ambiguity in that expression of M. H. If a man may come as
lost; nor are they my express terms, p. 148. of my Bar. A man is lost three
ways, 1. Really, when in the state of nature (I mean, he is in a lost
condition.) 2. Sensibly, and that either in himself (and thus we must ever be
lost, if we mean to be saved) or by mistake, thinking he is in the state of
nature, at that very time when in truth he is in the state of grace. 3. Both
ways, when clearly convinced by the Spirit of bondage, that he is in a natural
estate, and so under the work of Legal humiliation, which is ever accompanied
with reigning pride, till evangelical humiliation melt the rock, and level the
mountain. By legal humiliation a person is humbled, but by Evangelical
humiliation he is made humble; by legal humiliation God humbles him, by
evangelical humiliation he humbles himself; the one is humbled passively, the
other actively.

To apply the distinction:

1. He that is lost really, and sensibly, ought at present to abstain: Such are
they, who know themselves to be in the state of nature, and have no resolution
at the present to come up to the terms of the Gospel, but are under the Regal
power of sin, especially of some bosom corruption, and that sensibly.

2. He that is lost really, but not sensibly, as thinking himself converted,
when unconverted, is (I conceive, with submission to better judgments) in the
condition of one who thinks a sin to be a duty, ligatus, but not obligatus,
bound, by conscience misinformed, to receive; but not obliged to receive; yea,
obliged by the precept, to abstain: or as he who thought himself clean, but was
unclean, was bound and obliged in order to the Passover.

3. He that is sensibly lost (as thinking himself unconverted, when really
converted) seems bound by conscience to abstain, but is obliged by the command
to receive; and in order thereunto, must endeavor to get his doubts satisfied.
He that is both really and sensibly found, as having sensibly evangelical
preparation (of which self-loss, and self-unworthiness in a Gospel sense, is a
chief part) is both bound and obliged to come, unless detained by a just
occasion.

What M. H. adds page 201. I shall go along with him as far as I can, and be
glad of his company too. And therefore grant 1. That the Sacrament is a seal of
faith Consecutive. 2. Objective. 3. Conditionaliter. 4. Obligatorie, as
obliging the receiver to believe. 5. That the Sacrament is not properly a seal
of reason and experience; and therefore in a strict sense, does not seal the
Conclusion, as it depends upon the minor, which speaks experience; but as it
depends upon the major, which speaks express Scripture.

But whereas he adds, ibid. But if you say it is a seal of faith subjective,
properly to confirm and ratify faith, or any way so to assure or evidence
faith, that God shall be made to set his seal to a lie, if any come without
saving faith, this must be denied and rejected, and answered, that the
Sacrament is not thus a seal of faith (to wit, formally, directly, properly)
but of the Covenant, etc.

Answ. 1. If I may but crave to be heartily understood, its no such monster as
M. H. would make it, to assert, That the Sacrament is a seal of faith
subjective; namely, that by Consequence the Sacrament seals to Peter, that he
believes. The reason whereof has formerly been given, because it seals the
major proposition, upon which the Conclusion of Assurance does partly depend.
For, as no Conclusion depends only upon the major, or only upon the minor,
but upon both premises; so the Conclusion of the Prossyllogism ( That Peter
believes) depends not solely upon the major (He that receives Christ, etc.
believes) nor solely upon the minor (Peter receives Christ) but upon both. And
therefore so far forth as this Conclusion (Peter believes) depends upon the
major (which is express Scripture, and as a sign discovers to Peter, that the
act of adherence he produces is not counterfeit) so far forth its sealed in the
Sacrament, it being sealed in the Covenant only as it is in the Covenant;
namely, by Consequence; as is that Conclusion, That Peter shall rise, which
depends upon the major, That all men shall rise; as well as upon the minor,
That Peter is a man.

2. Whereas M. H. hints, that by this means God shall be made to set his seal
to a lie, if any come without saving faith: this is a most false, gross, and
uncharitable inference and imputation, it being far from my judgment or
argument to hold forth, that the Sacrament seals to all receivers, that they
have true faith; but only unto those who have saving faith indeed. Suppose now
Judas did receive; the Sacrament which seals to Peter that he believes, seals
no such matter to Judas, but the quite contrary, namely, That he does not
believe; and that because it seals, That he who does not receive. Christ
rightly, does not believe: But Judas never received Christ rightly; therefore
by consequence it seals to Judas his unbelief, and so his damnation in statu
quo.

3. Therefore, If by formally, directly, properly, M. H. mean expressly, we
grant the Sacrament is not so a seal of faith subjective; for it can seal
nothing thus expressly, but what is in express terms in the Covenant, and that
is only the major: yet this is no bar, but that the Sacrament may seal that
consequentially, which is consequentially in the Covenant; and such is this
Conclusion, Peter believes, as well as that Conclusion, Peter shall rise.

As for his vapor therefore in the close of this Section, I shall say but only
this to it, However my arguments be but earthen ware, yet God can use them to
break his conceited bar of iron.

SECT. 5.
THe fifth Objection is, The Covenant belongs not to all; therefore the Seals
neither.

Page 202. M. H. first states his answer to this Objection, and in the same
breath overthrows it in these words, The state of my answer then lies plainly,
that all those to whom the Covenant belongs by way of interest in it, though
but according to title, are in Covenant so far as the external seal belongs to
them, without some known bar otherwise.

Answ. Grant the whole, it will not much prejudice either us or the Objection:
Not us, who easily yield that all Churchmembers are to be admitted without a
known bar, the term known being rightly understood. Nor the Objection, since
the seals cannot belong to any, but as the Covenant belongs to him (speaking
now of the visible Covenant) but the Covenant cannot visibly belong to any who
visibly reject it: and this (with us) is one of the principal known bars.

Mr. D. The Sacrament belongs conditionally to all, but absolutely to the
worthy Receivers.

M. H. p. 203. If there be any sense and validity in this, he must argue thus,
The Sacrament is not to be delivered to all it belongs conditionally, but to
those only to whom it belongs absolutely: But it belongs only to the worthy
receiver absolutely; therefore it must be delivered only to the worthy
receiver. Now this you see is apparently false, seeing he admits some only
visibly worthy, to whom he himself counts it belongs not absolutely.

Answ. 1. To show the fallacy, let us put the same case about the Passover, and
the receivers thereof: thus,

" The Passover belongs conditionally to all Israelites, but absolutely to the
clean Israelite. Suppose now Mr. H. reply as above, mutatis mutandis.

If there be any sense and validity in this, he must argue thus, The Passover
is not to be delivered to all it belongs to conditionally, but to those only
to whom it belongs absolutely; But it belongs only to the clean Israelites
absolutely; therefore it must be delivered only to the clean Israelites
absolutely: Now this, you see, is apparently false, seeing he admits some only
visibly clean, to whom himself counts the Passover belongs not absolutely. Is
not the first branch now evidently false? namely. That the Passover is to be
delivered only to those to whom it belongs absolutely. I hope the Priest or
Master of the Family might, and ought to admit all persons visibly clean to eat
the Passover, when at the same time he that was visibly clean, but really
unclean (to whom therefore the Passover belonged conditionally, but not
absolutely) sinned in receiving the Passover.

2. Is it not a mere non sequitur, as to the Objection, which mentions not to
whom the Passcover is to be delivered, or not, but only to whom it belongs, or
does not belong?

Apply now the same answer to the Lords Supper, and it will appear my sense is
good and valid; and that I do not argue, as M. H. would make the Reader believe
I do, who to make my sense absurd, shuffles into his own answer the term
delivered, in stead of the term receiving. Let my answer run thus, The
Sacrament is not to be received by all to whom it belongs conditionally, but
only by those to whom it belongs absolutely: But it belongs absolutely only
to the worthy receiver; therefore it is to be received only by the worthy
receiver.

Where is now M. H. his absurd Conclusion, Therefore it must be delivered only
to the worthy receiver?

The Minister, I hope, may, and in some cases ought to deliver it to them, who
at the same time ought not to receive it, he acting (as Christ's Officer) by the
rule of visible, not of real worthiness, and so regularly admitting those to
whom it belongs visibly, though at the same time it belong not to them
absolutely. They to whom the Covenant belongs conditionally, to them the seals
belong conditionally; to whom it belongs visibly, the seals belong visibly; to
whom it belongs absolutely, the seals belong absolutely. The first must neither
be admitted, nor receive till they have visibly or really performed the
condition. The second must be admitted, but if only visible Saints, ought not
to receive. The third must both be admitted, and ought to receive, unless
detained by a just occasion.

Page 203. M. H. charges me with railing, for showing him the horrid conclusion
that follows from his loose principles; namely, That the Sacrament does more
ingenuously belong to one out of Covenant, than to one in Covenant: See p. 51.
of his vindication. Which if true, it must more ingenuously belong to
Drunkards, Whoremasters, Murderers, etc. than to real and visible Saints, the
former being out of Covenant, the latter in Covenant. An inference so
monstrous, that I apprehended such a soar and ulcer required a sharp knife to
open it; yet withal, I told the Reader what M. H. his meaning should be,
namely, that the Sacrament belongs more ingenuously to weak Saints, than to
strong Saints. An Adulterer, etc. resolving sincerely to believe and repent,
has already begun to do both; and so is not out of Covenant, but a weak Saint.
This was my scope, and is the same still, though I will not justify every
quick expression that either there or elsewhere passed from me.

What he cites from my text elsewhere, to salve his contradiction, will do
himlittle service; since I charge him not with absurdity for saying, a man may
have a good resolution before he is in Covenant; but for saying, The Sacrament
be longs more ingenuously to one out of Covenant, if he have some good
resolutions for kind, through fear of Hell, etc. (which are but legal or mere
velleities) then to a real and visible Saint, who comes fully up to Christ's
terms in point of sincerity, but acts weakly, as a Babe in Christ. That a man
may not only resolve well, but also enter into Covenant with God, and yet his
heart be naught, I never questioned; or that he may have good resolutions
before be believe, or enter into Covenant sincerely, as M. H. notes, p. 204.
But what is this to M. H. his purpose? or how does it follow (what he charges
me ib.) that I am too narrow in speaking of these things, unless because I
cannot extend my self to his latitude? If study of brevity, and therefore
passing by those things which are well known, and not to our present purpose,
be narrowness of expression, I must confess I affect such narrowness, and wish
I were better at it than I am: But M. H. his clouding and jumbling things
together, forces me to be larger than otherwise I would; yea, withal, I must
confess, I am always too narrow in discoursing of the things of God, which are
far above my weak comprehension, much more above my poor expressions. This ever
is the glory of divine Truth, That the apprehensions and expressions of the
ablest, are but cockle-shels to its Oceans, Psalm 119. 96. and mine are but
cockle-shels to the flood of their appehensions and expressions.

Page 151. of my Bar, I took some pains to reconcile (if it might be) M. H. to
himself; which being difficult to do (happily because of my dullness and inability
to reach his sease) I was bold to conclude, that he wrote contradictions. For
this M. H.p. 204. and 205. is pleased to correct me as one very dull, and prone
to vent contradictions.

Answ. 1. I thank him for his reproof.

2. Entreat him to write more plainly.

3. As I have in part, so I hope to clear it, that I write not contradictions;
or if at any time I do, I shall not wittingly own them.

I shall relate M. H. his words, and then let the Reader judge whether my dull
apprehension might not be puzzled about them. His words are these, page 51. of
his Vindication, The benefit of the Covenant you may truly say belongs not yet
to him, until he is in Covenant (Where note from M. H. that some Church Members
are not in Covenant) but the Covenant it self is of epidemical concernment, and
so far belongs to all, that it is to be tendered freely, and offered to them,
etc.

Had he now said, That the benefits of the Covenant do not belong to him, as to
right or fruition, till he be in Covenant: but the condition of the Covenant
belongs to all by way of obligation, and the benefits of the Covenant belong to
all by way of tender, etc. I am sure he had spoke plainer to my dull capacity,
and I think also to the capacity of diverse of his Readers.

He that divides the whole into parts, and presently gives the name of the
whole to one of those parts, speaks neither Logically, nor clearly. But this
does M. H. by distinguishing the Covenant into its condition, and its benefits;
and then saying the Covenant is of epidemical concernment as to its tender (he
supposing and holding, that the conditions are required, not tendered, and that
only the benefits are tendered conditionally to all) here the Covenant is the
totum, the condition and benefits are the parts; which last part (in applying
his distinction) he presents under the notion of the whole, and thereby makes
his sense obscure and subject to exceptions. Nor does he clear it in his
answer, p. 204. though in order thereunto he distinguish the Covenant into its
Condition, Benefits, Tenor, which consists of both. For still I ask him,
Whether the Tenor of the Covenant belong to all by way of Tender? If he hold
the affirmative (as he seems to do) I disprove him thus, The whole can belong
to none further, than as both parts belong to him: But both parts of the
Covenant belong not to all by way of tender; therefore the whole (namely the
tenor) belongs not to all by way of tender. The major is firm, as I shall clear
by instance. Let homo be the totum, its evident homo cannot belong to Socrates,
farther than materia and forma hominis, which are its parts belong to him. The
minor, That both parts of the Covenant belong not to all by way of tender, is
as evident (upon M. H. his principles) since, according to him, the condition,
which is one part, is not tendered, but required. The Condition then belongs
not to all by way of tender, but only by way of duty and obligation. And
though it be a truth, that the benefits of the Covenant are tendered to all
upon condition of faith, yet because M. H. holds that faith is not tendered,
but required, (in the revealed Covenant sealed in the Sacrament, of which we
now speak) he cannot say the tenor (called by him the Covenant) is tendered to
all, without contradicting himself; but must say, if he speak uniformly to his
own doctrine, that the tenor of the Covenant is partly required of all, and
partly is tendered to all; the tenor consisting (as himself declares) of the
condition required, and of the benefits tendered; and he may as rationally say,
the tenor is required of all, as say the tenor is tendered to all; both being
false in his sense, and contradictory to his Doctrine.

Page 152. and 153. of my Bar, I oppose four things to M. H. his universal
obligation of receiving.

1. Infants, etc. and because this infant-passage offends him now seventeen
times, I shall put in the room of it his ipso jure excommunicate.

2. I say there, All have a mediate, but not an immediate right.

He tells me, page 205. This distinction is in vain, because all must prepare
as well as come.

Answ. True, yet 1. I hope a person prepared has a more immediate right, than
a person unprepared. 2. If he sin who prepares, but does not receive when he
may, why does not he sin also who receives, but does not prepare when he ought?
Let not M. H. separate, where himself confesses that God has joined.

My illustration from the Passover, he tells me, That one Text, 2 Chronicles. 30.
18, 19, 20. may convince.

Answ. True, when M. H. can prove that one extraordinary dispensation makes a
rule and command to be void.

The third Mr. H. says is answered somewhere else.

Answ. And I hope that answer is confuted somewhere else.

4. I say, That in a strict sense, actual receiving is no more an act of
worship, than preaching is, etc.

Mr. H. answers, I should say they are no duties neither, else it will not add
one cubit to my stature.

Answ. Mr. H. did prudently omit my third answer, which but mentioned had stopped
the mouth of this Objection. There I show that affirmative precepts bind not
at all times, nor in all cases; therefore though receiving be a duty, yet being
an affirmative precept, it binds not at all times, nor in all cases. For his
flouting Simile in the close of this Section, I forgive him, and confess that
in some part of it he speaks too true, I being no bigger than my shadow, that
is, an empty nothing, and so very unfit to compare with him, or any of my
brethren and fathers in the Lords work. The Lord send me more humility, and him
more charity.

Sect. VI.
THe sixth Objection is, The Sacrament is only for the regenerate; it is no
converting Ordinance, etc.

From page 206-212. Mr. H. is large by way of preamble, before he come to
downright blows.

And 1. He says, Suppose the Sacrament convert not, yet it must be received by
all, because God commands all to receive it.

Answ. 1. Is not this the very (...), whether God command all to receive?

2. Mr. H. knows I dispute against a natural man's receiving, not only upon the
supposition, that it cannot convert him, but also because it can do him no good
in statu quo, but evil; which answers his instance of Alms-deeds commanded a
natural man, though it be not converting. And this argument does no where cross
Gods revealed will, but highly commends his rich and free grace, which commands
nothing but what is profitable to the creature, as well as what is honorable
to his Majesty. I grant God may command without respect to the creatures
profit, but I deny that in the Covenant of grace he does command any thing, the
performance whereof is not (of its own nature, and by divine institution)
advantagous to the creature. Its a slander therefore, that by this argument I
advance my benefit above divine authority, etc. as Mr. H. would make the Reader
believe, p. 206. yea I join together Gods authority, and my benefit, in saying,
That in the way of duty, I am ever in a possibility, yea probability of
spiritual good, 1 Timothy 4. 8. and that act which imports no such possibility, or
probability is no duty. Yea Mr. H. himself confesses in the same page, That
there is no man, but so far as he does his duty, it shall tend to his good;
which if true, then that which tends not to my good, is not my duty. If
therefore this doctrine be a tradition, Mr. H. is guilty of it, as well as my
self.

Page 208. Mr. H. makes the Sacrament a converting Ordinance, not for Heathen,
but for Church Members.

Answ. 1. I desire a Scripture proof for this distinction.

2. I perceive Mr. H. is not clear in opening this distinction, but confounds
Conversion, and Edification together, in these words, The Sacrament, as it
serves to edify unregenerate Church Members, it must be a means of their
regeneration, p. 208. I had thought Conversion was the Foundation, Edification
the superstructure, and that as there is a double Conversion, 1. To profession.
2. To truth of grace, so there is a double Foundation, the one upon the sand,
the other upon the rock, Matthew. 7. v.24, 26. and proportionably a double
Edification, one of the house upon the sand, the other of the house upon the
rock, which doctrine, if true, then surely the house upon the sand is not
properly edified by saving Conversion, but is new founded upon the rock.

Page 209. Mr. H. lays a foundation in two Propositions.

1. That the same faith which served to admit men to be Church Members, served
to admit them to the Communion.

2. That a faith that falls short of saving (to wit, the very receiving of the
Apostles doctrine) served to make men disciples, and add them to the Church.

With all, he grants there, That conversion of assent (which alone reaches so
far as to engage one to the Covenant) is necessarily prerequisite to adult
Church Members, and both the Sacraments; not so the conversion of Consent,
which he opens well; and page 210. concludes, That in order hereunto, God uses
this Sacrament especially, where is a more vigorous confluence of all the
Ordinances.

Answ. 1. By concession of both Propositions in relation to admission (which is
Mr. H. his own term) though I do not believe, that receiving mentioned, Act. 2.
41. fell short of saving grace in most of them. The Minister must sometimes
admit him, who at the same time ought not to receive.

2. If the forementioned Conversion of assent be necessarily pre-requisite to
adult Church Members, and both Sacraments (which is the very truth, and
acknowledged here by Mr. H.) then those Church Members who cannot give such an
assent, ought not to be admitted to the Sacrament (I might add, by Mr. H. his
present doctrine, they ought to be excommunicated; though we rise not,
especially at first, to that severity) but this is the condition of many,
grossly ignorant adult Church Members, whom if you ask, Whether Christ be a
woman? They are as like to give their assent, as if you ask them, Whether
Christ be God-man? And so of other fundamental truths.

3. We grant, The Sacrament (as having a more vigorous confluence of all
Ordinances) may be singularly useful in order to conversion of consent (as he
expresses it) and therefore judge, none should be hindered from presence at it,
any more than from presence at Baptism, where by presence they may be
converted, though they partake not with the child, or Catechumenus, of
Baptismal water; and the rather because the Lords Supper (as well as Baptism,
Prayer, or Preaching) is a public Ordinance, and therefore may be honored
with universal presence, though not abused by universal partaking.

Whereas p. 310. Mr. H. pleads humane testimony.

Answ. With due respect to the Authors, Man's testimony is either 1. Ambiguous
in this point; Or 2. may be balanced by opposite testimonies of man; Or 3. at
best is not authentic. Man's testimony may suadere, but only Gods testimony can
persuadere.

As for his distinction about real and relative grace here repeated; The latter
branch thereof has been formerly answered, which therefore I pass.

Page 211. He thinks its unsound to hold the Sacrament conveyes real grace
morally by way of Obsiguation: Why I pray? Because moral instruments cannot
exhibit any thing real.

Answ. 1. If this be true, then how can the Sacrament convey grace by way of
signification, since the Sacrament (himself confessing) is only a moral
instrument. And if it convey grace neither by way of signification, nor of
obsignation, nor of exhibition, it conveyes grace no way. Thus by Mr. H. his
principles the Sacrament conveyes no grace at all; and if so, then it neither
converts, or edifies, which how absurd? yea, pari ratione, how does the word
convert, since it also is but a moral instrument?

2. Grace is not strengthened, but by super-added degrees (I mean ordinarily)
but grace is strengthened by the sealing, as well as by the signifying virtue of
the Sacrament, therefore degrees of grace are morally conveyed by the sealing
power of the Sacrament. The major is firm till Mr. H. can show some other way
of strengthening grace immediately (for of that strength I now speak) besides
superadded degrees. The minor is proved by instance, the Sacrament is a Seal,
assures the Covenant to faith; by this assurance faith is confirmed, as was
Abraham's by the Seal of Circumcision, Romans 4. 11. Faith is not confirmed but by
intention; an habit is not intended but by degrees superadded. The conclusion
then will follow, That degrees of grace are conveyed by the sealing power of
the Sacrament; and because the Sacrament works only morally, therefore they are
conveyed by it morally.

I doubt not but the Sacrament may beget grace; but the Question in dispute is,
whether every Sacramental action does so, and particularly the act of
receiving; for till Mr. H. proves this, he is still at a loss, and while he
would charge me, p. 212. as being injurious to poor Christians, disvaluing this
means of grace, bringing in question how it can beget any degree of grace at
all (a charge to which, I trust, I can groundedly plead not guilty) himself is
found guilty of his own charge, by denying the Sacrament conveyes real grace
morally; as I have showed in the foregoing Paragraph.

Mr. H. p. 212. I agree with him as for Infants; but for the intelligent, John's
Baptism may convince him, whom we find admitting all to it, and then exhorting
them to amendment, as the use or end of it, etc.

Answ. 1. If Baptism be a converting Ordinance, I see no reason why Mr. H.
should suspend Infants any more from its efficacy than from its use. And to
what purpose are Infants baptized, if they are (in statu quo) capable of no
good by it? especially those of them who dye within few hours or days after
Baptism. They were relatively holy, and so members of the Church (in the right
of their parents) before Baptism, 1 Cor. 7. 14. as in hereditary Kingdoms, the
Heir upon the death of his Father, is King before his Coronation. His argument
drawn from their non-intelligence seems as strong against their edification or
confirmation by Baptism, as against their conversion and regeneration by it,
since the baptized Infant can understand no more in order to his edification,
than in order to his regeneration by his Baptism.

Therefore (with submission) I rather apprehend, That Baptism being a Divine
Ordinance, does undoubtedly attain all its ends for good in the elect vessels
of mercy, be they Infants or grown persons; and that either in their Infancy,
or when they come to riper years.

Upon supposition that it is a converting Ordinance, I see no absurdity in it
if we say, it may (at the very moment of Baptizng) be morally instrumental to
convert the Infant-baptized, not by way of signification to the apprehension of
the Babe, who can understand nothing of it (nor is it necessary he should
understand; man cannot get into the heart, but by the head, God needs not that
porch or threshold) but by way of supernatural concourse with this, as with
other Ordinances when ever they become effectual. Christ at the very moment
when the Minister baptizes the Babe with water, can baptize it with the Holy
Ghost, and power grace into its heart as the Minister powrs water upon his face,
the child being equally passive both in the sign, and in the thing signified,
and understanding nothing of either. If an Infant may be bewitched by a
Diabolical Ceremony used by the Devils ministers, and that Witchery be removed
by a spell, or the like, which the Babe cannot understand (and if he could, the
understanding avails not to its efficacy) why may not the same Babe be
regenerated by a Divine Ceremony applied to it by Gods Minister? the Devil in
things of this nature being but Gods Ape. How did Jordan cure the Leper? 2
King. 5. 14. How did Peter's shadow cure the sick? Acts 5. 15. How did Paul's
handkerchiefs both cure diseases, and cast out Devils? Acts 19. 12. All these
were but signs and seals of Gods miraculous presence. And why may not God (when
he pleases) concur supernaturally with Baptism, in order to Regeneration, as he
concurred with Jordan, a Shadow, or Handkerchief, in order to cure or
dis-possession? I believe Divine concourse is much after this nature in every
Ordinance when savingly effectual. And Baptism applied to an Infant, or to a
man, is but as Paul's handkerchief was to an Infant, or to a man. The man might
understand this handkerchief came from Paul's body, and would be effectual to
heal him; this the Infant could not understand, yet the effect of healing
followed alike in both. Nor was the handkerchief more powerful to heal the man,
because he was intelligent; but possibly his intelligence might prove a bar, he
being thereby capable of an act of unbelief, which might hinder the cure,
Matthew. 13. 58. and 17. 19, 20. Mark 6. 6. and 9. 23, 24. Acts 14. 9. which
actual unbelief Infants are not capable of. Thus the word preached has a
natural aptitude to illuminate the mind with common knowledge of Christ, but
never of it self can work a saving understanding or regeneration, this being
wholly in Gods power. We must therefore extend the notion of a moral instrument
further than M. H. does; that being truly a moral instrument, not only which
works by way of signification to my understanding, but that also upon which
being used, an effect of another kind follows, by way of compact, or
otherwise, whether I understand it or not. Thus a Witch is the moral cause of a
childs death, but the Devil is the physical cause thereof, he applying his
natural power (by Gods permission, upon the Witches using of his ceremonies for
that purpose) to kill the child. And thus the Minister and Ordinances are the
moral instruments of conversion, but God is the physical, or rather
hyperphysical cause thereof.

Nor do we by this doctrine deviate to the Popish opus operatum; but honor Gods
Liberty, Sovereignty and Grace, who when he pleases concurs with his
Ordinances supernaturally, in order to Conversion and Regeneration wrought then
infallibly, and not otherwise. And certainly, if Baptism be a converting
Ordinance, why may not Infants thus be converted by it as well as elder
persons? especially when at the hour of Baptism, faith and devotion are upon
the wing in the Parents, Friends, Gods people, and the Minister, assembled to
wrestle with God, that he would please to wash the child in the Laver of
Regeneration, etc. whence public Baptisms are more eligible than private
Baptisms. And thus upon the supposition, it may also be effectual to the
intelligent person baptized; yet not simply because he is intelligent, but
because of Gods supernatural concourse in him, as well as in the Infant, the
work of Conversion being supernatural in every subject.

2. Whereas M. H. says, ib. John first baptized the people, and then exhorted
them to repentance.

If his meaning be exclusive, that John did not exhort to repentance before,
but only after Baptism, I believe he will find little favor from the Text for
such an opinion. Its evident, Mat. 3. 11. that John leads them from his Baptism
to Christ, for the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, as a future thing; withal, that
he preached to them before he baptized, to me seems more than probable, by
comparing verse. 2, 5, 6, 7. of Mat. 3. Besides, supposing the exhortation were
after Baptism, and that some were converted upon the place, the great question
will be (which shows the weakness of M. H. his inference) whether they were
converted by John's Baptism, or by his following exhortation? For his instance
in the Converts, Acts 2. it is more than M. H. can prove, that their faith was
only historical. Likely, it might be so in some of them; but what is this to
prove that their Baptism did convert them (any more than it did Simon Magus)
who might afterward be converted by some of those Sermons which they heard
every day, or hold out in a form of Godliness to their dying day, as Ananias
and Saphira did. The Text says, they were all baptized, Acts 2. 41. but it does
not say, that any of them were converted by Baptism.

M. D. Can any man make the Seal a cause of the writing?

M. H. p. 212. Here is the man's error still; the seal of the inward writing in
men's hearts, is not the Sacrament, but the Spirit, and that seal I hope, is the
cause of the writing, etc.

Answ. 1. That the Sacrament is a seal of the inward writing (though not the
sole or principal seal) has formerly been proved, which therefore I pass.

2. That one and the same thing may be both a seal and a cause (as well as a
sign and a cause) I deny not: but I hope it is not a cause as it is a seal. The
Spirit first works, then evidences grace wrought; in that it acts as a cause,
in this as a seal: When therefore I say, the seal is not the cause of the
writing, my meaning is, that as a seal, it is not a cause of the writing, but
under an other notion. M. H. interprets it simpliciter, which I propound
secundum quid, and so abuses both me and the Reader.

Page 213. M. H. would fain court me from my yielding to universal presence, to
yield to universal receiving. But I must entreat him to excuse me, since I
find none in Scripture forbid to be present; but I find diverse in Scripture
forbid to receive, as has formerly been proved. And I hope, that upon second
thoughts, he will be more charitable, than to judge me upon this account, as
trifling with this holy Ordinance, and with the Consciences of people.

His argument drawn from the seeing to the tasting of Christ Sacramental, will
not hold, till he can prove that a sight of Christ Sacramental is effectual to
convert, and withal, that the precept (Take, eat) does immediately take in all
intelligent Church Members; and if so, then let his jure excommunicate receive
also. His instance of Thomas feeling and believing, proves only that feeling
may draw out an act of faith, from a principle of faith inherent: But what is
that to the producing of a principle of faith; where there is no faith at all.

Lastly, M. H. should consider, not barely the application, but the end of
application in the Lords Supper, which is evidently nutrition, but no where (as
I know) Conversion.

Mr. D. Taking and Eating call for acts of faith, but presuppose the habit, etc.

M. H. p. 214. When Christ and his Disciples preached (Believe and Repent) the
command did call for faith and repentance, but I hope it did not presuppose the
habit in those who were to be converted; so when Christ says here, Take, etc.
There is a virtue or power from Christ goes along with his command.

Answ. True: so far as Christ has promised, virtue shall go along with his
command. But the great question is, Where Christ has promised that converting
power shall go along with his command of taking in the Sacrament, as he has,
that it shall accompany the command of believing in the word preached?

M. H. p. 216. God has promised in general, to meet with those that wait on
him in his ways.

Answ. Here he begs the question; as if receiving were a way God commands
unregenerat men to walk in.

M. H. ib. Christ consecrated this Ordinance with a blessing.

Answ. So he did the Ordinance of the Ministry, yet I hope all are not
therefore bound to turn Ministers.

Mr. H. ib. Mr. Drake tells us this (Take) is a short exhortation, and will he
demand a promise to prove that Exhortation is Converting?

Answ. Mr. D. p. 158. of his Bar, only supposes the word Take, as a short and
virtual Sermon, may convert; and then adds, What think you of that person who
stands out against this word also, can he be converted by actual receiving?

A Supposition, I hope, is not a Position. Besides, it will puzzle Mr. H. to
prove, that every virtual Sermon is converting; for then every moral Precept,
yea, every Creature, should be a means of Conversion.

M. D. The word is both seed and food, not so the Sacrament.

M. H. p. 216. The Sacrament works by the word, and therefore may work the
first grace, as well as further degrees of grace.

Answ. The question is not, What the Sacrament may do, if God pleases, but what
it does. Let M. H. produce one Scripture to prove that the Lords Supper, as
received, is converting.

M. H. p. 217. In the Sacrament there is a Take, and this is certainly seed;
and there is an Eat, including food,

Answ. A strange interpretation, and contradictory to it self, That the command
of taking Christ for nourishment, should be seed, as is the command of taking
Christ for Conversion.

M. H. ib. Prayer is no where called the immortal seed, yet it is seed, I doubt
not, in this sense, to beget grace in us.

Answ. Prayer, as such, converts not as seed, but by way of impetration,
setting God on work to cast the seed of grace into the heart. If an Husbandman
upon Mr. H. his request cast seed into the ground, I hope M. H. will not say,
His request was the seed wherewith the ground was sown.

2 The matter of Prayer is the Word, since we can ask nothing but what is
promised; Upon which account Prayer in some sense may be called an immortal
seed, and may prove very effectual, in order to conversion, especially where
spiritually and powerfully uttered: But as Prayer, it works properly by way of
Impetration, Psalm. 2. 8. And thus Stephens prayer, Act. 7. 60. might be
effectual to convert Paul.

Mr. H. ib. Ex quibus nascimur, ex iis nutrimur, That which nourishes us can
beget us.

Answ. I perceive Mr. H. is better at quotation than at translation: A
Grammar-Scholar would have translated it better thus, That which begets us,
nourishes us, or we are nourished by those things by which we are begotten:
Which makes for us, and against Mr. H. we being nourished by the word that
begets, but not being begotten by the Lords Supper that nourishes us. And
though nourishment contribute remotely to the making of seed, yet I hope
nourishment (as such) is not seed, though sometime seed may be nourishment.

Mr. D. But suppose a man stouts it out before and after the word take; If
actual receiving can convert him, the Apostles rule is not universally true, He
that eats unworthily eats judgment to himself.

Mr. H. Suppose the Jailer had stouted it out against the word, Believe, etc.

Answ. He belonging to the election of grace, the Lord, no doubt, would have
converted him by another word of command to believe, etc. as he does all the
Elect sooner or later, 2 Pet. 3. 9. the word being still the Instrument of
conversion, not so the Lords Supper.

What ever Mr. H. may think, or would make the Reader believe, a Dilemma, if
right, is no Sophistry, but a forcible Argument. On the other hand, Let me warn
the Reader to take heed he be not deceived by Mr. H. to think that a person in
the state of nature can receive worthily in the Apostles sense; Or, that the
sin of not discerning the Lords body, is nothing else but the making of the
Table of the Lord a common table, in the gross and litteral sense. But of this
formerly.

Mr. D. But suppose a man may be converted by that short exhortation, Take;
this may be done by presence, etc.

Mr. H. Page 218.
If all come to this still, you may see what he must have, a Sacrament without
receiving, which yet himself decryes.

Answ. Soft, Sir, no such thing follows; If there be persons either visibly, or
really worthy, there will be no Sacrament without receiving: If there be none
such in a Congregation, I think that at present there ought to be no Sacrament
in such a Congregation. Though the Sacrament as a mixed Ordinance, may convert
standers by, yet I am far from turning the Sacrament into a Mass to be received
by the Minister alone, all the people in the mean time being only Spectators,
and Auditors. I believe some present must receive; but it follows not that all
must receive who are present, or that none must be present unless they receive.
Nor is the command of Taking an empty liveless word, unless it convert; I hope
an edifying word, is no empty liveless word.

Page 219. Mr. H. is a little too confident in daring to lay his life upon his
opinion, That Christ would never have so indeterminately commanded, Drink you
all of it, if so many thousands of unregenerate members that come thither, must
but necessarily therefore eat their damnation. He considers not that the term
all in Scripture Phrase, very seldom notes an absolute universal.

Mr. D. Every natural man, notwithstanding all his preparatory acts, has still
the unworthiness of person, and comes to the feast without the wedding garment,
etc.

Mr. H. p. 219. f. This himself satisfies, for the feast he says is Christ,
and I hope a man must come to Christ for conversion, etc.

Answ. A man indeed must come to Christ for conversion, but not under every
notion. I come to Christ as a Father for conversion, I come to him as a Feast
for nourishment and edification. Christ as a Father beget^ us by the word, as a
Feast he nourishes us by the Sacrament. Such confounding of notions by Mr. H.
may well puzzle, but will not inlighten, or edify the Reader.

Page 220. Mr. H. catches now again at a marginal escape of mine, p. 160. of my
Bar, which I will not justify; but thank Mr. H. for showing me my error,
though it be with a scoff.

That fruit is to be attained by the Sacrament as tactible and gustible, I deny
not, but the Question is whether the fruit of regeneration be attainable by
touch and taste; and whether an unregenerate person can attain any benefit at
all by receiving. I seek not to vilify Antiquity by saying, that Ite missa
est, was an humane tradition; but desire Scripture Proof to make it a divine
Ordinance, which is not evinced by Christ's commanding all the Apostles to
receive (supposing Judas did receive also) for that proves not that all present
did receive; For 1. Can he say, Our blessed Savior did receive? 2. Does he
know what waiters were present at the Celebration; or can he say groundedly
that none were present? He will find tough work of it to prove such negatives.

Page 220. and 221. Mr. H. flourishes, but speaks not to the purpose, Instead
of answering what I laid down, That humiliation, if not right, leaves a man
still in the state of nature, and so Evangelically unworthy, He asks me how my
soul was infused into my body after due preparation of the matter, I can tell
him some hold, It is ex traduce; others that creando infunditur, etc. But
whether I can answer him or no, as to that particular, this I am assured of,
That till the soul be united to the body, that body has not the dignity of a
man; and til grace be in the heart, that man has not Sacramental worthiness.

Mr. H. p. 222. Me thinks the man here speaks very carnally. His doctrine is
this, If you partake of the Lords Table without faith, you are without danger;
but if you actually touch the bread upon the Table, and eat, you become a
debtor.

Ans. Here Mr. H. does me a great deal of wrong. Where do I teach any such
doctrine, That if you partake of the Lords Table without faith, you are without
danger? I believe that standers by do more partake of the Lords Table than they
do of Baptism, yet they may receive much good by presence at both Ordinances,
be they regenerate or unregenerate. For the latter branch, I hope Mr. H. will
not deny that unworthy receivers are debtors. Surely he that does not eat
cannot be guilty of unworthy eating, though I grant he may be guilty of
unworthy carriage; yet not so deeply guilty caeteris paribus as he that
receives unworthily.

Page 164. to 167. of my Bar, I endeavored to convince Mr. H. of his error, in
holding, That the Ordinances are primarily and directly means of grace, and
remotely means of conversion and confirmation.

For answer, page 223. Mr. H. says I mistake him for want of distinguishing
between gratia operans and gratia operata; and that his meaning is, the
Ordinances are primarily means of gratia operans, and then of gratia operata.
If by gratia operans he mean an act of the creature unconverted, which is the
cause of habitual grace, or initial conversion; will it not thence follow, that
Mr. H. believes a natural or moral act of free will, can, or does produce a
supernatural habit? a thing extra sphaeram activitatis liberi Arbitrii; And
what is this but Pelagianism?


Ans. That this cannot be his meaning (unless he mistake himself) is evident by
his own Text, page 59. of his Vindication, in these words, This grace we
receive in the use of them, is that which converts some, and strengthens
others. Now grace received is not the divine Act, which he calls gratia
operans, but the terminus of that action, called gratia operata, and which
being received, does, formally and immediately convert, regenerate, and change
the heart; of which effect or terminus the word preached is the moral
Instrument, but God as creating and infusing is the principal cause: and as the
divine action is really distinct from the terminus wrought by it, so the divine
action is not receptible, but only its terminus, namely the habits of grace.
Whence it follows strongly against Mr. H. (by his own explication of himself)
that the Ordinances as they are primarily and directly means of grace, so they
are primarily and directly (not remotely) means of conversion, they being the
primary and direct means of grace received, which grace received is nothing
else but the habits of grace infused, not the divine action of creating and
infusing, for that cannot be received.

In vindicating his distinction of outward and effectual conversion, Mr. H. p.
223. and 224. has diverse mistakes.

And 1. He mistakes in saying, That conversion to the knowledge of what we knew
not before, is necessarily wrought by teaching only, and persuasive arguments,
unless by miracle. There is a wide difference between humane, and divine
discoveries; the former does change our understandings in an ordinary way, the
latter (when effectual) by special and supernatural concourse, 1 Cor. 12. 3.
True, by hearing or reading, I may come to have a notion or apprehension of a
thing, be the report true or false, but the understanding is not converted by
the knowledge of apprehension, but by the knowledge of assent, Joh. 8. 32. And
this assent is not wrought only by teaching and persuasive arguments, but by
the power of God concurring with them, Joh. 6. 45. yea though it be but a
common assent, 1 Cor. 12. 3. yet we call not this Assent miraculous in Mr. H.
his sense, because God ordinarily works it in the use of means, to wit, the
word preached, though the means cannot work it without Gods especial concourse.

Mr. H. his second mistake is p. 224 (supposing the Sacrament a converting
Ordinance, which is his position) That God has not appointed the Sacrament to
convert heathen.

Answ. 1. I desire a Scripture Proof, That God has not appointed the Sacrament
(suppose it be converting) to convert Heathen, as well as unconverted
Church Members. His argument from analogy of the Passover reaches not home,
for though uncircumcised persons might not eat thereof, yet they were no where
forbid to be present at the Passover eaten (suppose an uncircumcised sojourner
or hireling desired to see the Passover eaten in the house where he lodged,
where does God forbid such to be spectators or auditors?) Nor is any unbaptized
person forbid by Christ to be present at the Lords Supper, though I believe he
ought not to receive till first initiated by Baptism.

2. M. H. grants, p. 223. and 224. That the Sacrament is apta nata to convert
an Heathen sufficiently knowing in the mystery of our Religion, if he be
present, though he do not receive; and I pray then why may not presence convert
a profane Christian sufficiently knowing, though he do not receive? And if the
Sacrament cannot convert an ignorant Heathen, how shall it convert an ignorant
Christian? yea, lastly, if it have an aptitude to convert any present, though
he do not receive, how can M. H. forbid any to be present at that which is apt
to convert him, without an express warrant from heaven? If he have any such
warrant, let him produce it.

His argument for excluding infants, Because the Sacrament converts by a joint
virtue of the word and discernment, which children have not, may as well
exclude them from Baptism, of which they have no more discerning than of the
Lords Supper.

Page 224. M. H. grants, 1. That the Lords Supper is instituted for
edification. 2. That this edification refers to the whole Church.

Whence I infer from M. H. his five principles, That those intelligent
Church Members who are warrantably suspended (instance in his jure
excommunicate) at least may (if not must) be present in order to their
edification, to which in his sense the Sacrament refers. How can I edify by an
Ordinance, if I be not present at that Ordinance? He that is absent in
reference to place, is further from edification, than he that is absent in
understanding, 1 Cor. 14. v.17, 24.

His conceit of making regeneration to be edification, has been formerly
answered. We dispute not about the latitude of the word edification; but grant,
that in a large sense, he who lays a foundation edifies, if the foundation be a
part of the building; yet I hope, in precise speaking, the terms and notions of
founding and building, are distinct, both in the Civil and Spiritual Edifice, 1
Cor. 3. 10. and that an Ordinance, or part of an Ordinance, may be effectual to
edify, which is not effectual to found in a precise sense. Besides,
edification must be proportionable to the foundation; therefore edification in
common grace follows and suits with the foundation of common grace; and
edification in saving grace, follows and suits with the foundation of saving
grace, which is regeneration: Common grace founds but upon the sand, saving
grace founds upon the rock, which are two distinct foundations, and must have
two distinct edifications. But of this formerly.

M. H. p. 225. In that word (fancy) he wrongs me; for his sense is answered: A
vital Ordinance can beget life.

Answ. Then M. H. wrongs himself, the word Fancy being his own word, page 63.
of his Vindication. An Ordinance may be called Vital, not only as it begets,
but also as it preserves and increases life. Christ indeed is vital food, but
not before he be vital seed, and in the Sacrament he is received as vital food,
not as vital seed.

Page 170. of my Bar, I blame M. H. for saying, That confirmation of the
Covenant is a primary end, confirmation of faith a secondary end of the Lords
Supper.

Page 225. of his Rejoinder, M. H. tells me scoffingly, That I blame him for
saying but what I say my self. For confirmation whereof he quotes page 126. of
my Bar.

Answ. I say there indeed, That Sacramental seals confirm, 1. The Covenant. 2.
The faith of the worthy receiver. But where do I say, that confirmation of the
Covenant is the primary end, confirmation of faith the secondary end of the
Lords Supper? Is not that generally first in time, which is last in intention.
Confirmation of the Covenant, as a means, is first in order of time, or at
least in order of nature, before the confirmation of faith, as the causa
synechtica, is before the effect: but the confirmation of faith, as the end, is
in order of intention, before the confirmation of the Covenant. That is first
in order of existence, which is last in order of intention, and contra. In
order of existence, the confirmation of the Covenant, is before the
confirmation of faith, as the means are before the end; but in order of
intention or design, the confirmation of faith, is before the confirmation of
the Covenant, as the end is before the means. I say, the confirmation of the
Covenant is in order of existence, before the confirmation of faith. M. H.
says, it is in order of intention, before the confirmation of faith. Let the
Reader judge whether these two propositions are all one; and whether M. H. does
not violate the Law of Moral Philosophy, as well as Divinity, in holding, That
the confirmation of the Covenant is the primary, the confirmation of faith, the
secondary end of the Lords Supper. Who knows not, that the Covenant is
confirmed by the seals (as well as by Gods oath, Heb. 6. v.17, 18. in order to
the confirmation of our we ak faith. As Gods oath, so the seals, by confirming
the Covenant, do (...) in order to the confirmation of our faith, as the end.
And if so, then the confirmation of our faith, is the end of the confirmation
of the Covenant; whence it follows necessarily, that the confirmation of the
Covenant cannot be the primary end of the seals, and confirmation of our faith
their secondary end, as M. H. would have it.

M. H. p. 226. Let me help him out here, There is the end of the Ordainer, and
the end of the Ordinance. It may be true, that the Churches edification is
primarily the intention of the Ordainer: But the primary end of the Ordinance
must be that which goes into the institution, and the secondary that which
flows from it: Now the end that is thus express in the institution is, for to
be a memorial of Christ's death, and so outwardly to seal, solemnize or confirm
the Covenant, and then the confirming a man's faith (as begetting it in others)
is plainly a consequent effect, result or concomitant thereof. By this one
passage well considered, you may have a guess at the man.

Answ. In the former branch of his answer, M. H. is pleased to make himself and
his Reader merry with me; with the rehearsal whereof I shall not waste and
defile paper, but give him leave to make up in frothy wit, what he falls short
of in solid argument. Now he profers to make amends by helping me (rather
himself) but I fear his help will prove as unserviceable, as his jesting is
unsavory.

1. Therefore, its false that an effect or consequent of another end, is not,
or cannot be a primary end; yea on the contrary, its most certain, that the
last effect or consequent is the first, primary or highest end, and so by
proportion, this being a sure maxim in morality, Finis, ut in executione
ultimus est, ita in intention primus.

2. Its likewise untrue, that the primary end must go into the institution of a
Sacrament (I mean expressly, for at that Mr. H. drives) as is evident (to go no
further) by the Passover, of which Christ and salvation by him was the primary
end, yet not so much as mentioned in the institution thereof, Exodus 12.

3. Supposing his rule were true, that the primary end of the Sacrament, must
go expressly into the institution;

Then 1. The confirmation of the Covenant (by Mr. H. his own rule) is not the
primary end of the Lords Supper, since the confirmation of the Covenant is not
expressly mentioned in the institution, though the Covenant it self be.

Or 2. The confirmation of our faith is as evidently mentioned, as the
confirmation of the Covenant, and therefore (by M. H. his rule, though against
his dictate) may be a primary end of the Sacrament. For proof compare Matthew.
26. 28. This is the blood of the Covenant which is shed for many for the
remission of sins, Luke 23. 20. This cup is the New Testament in my blood,
which is shed for you, 1 Cor. 11. 24. This is my body which is broken for you.
Those words for you, and for many, evidence that Christ in the Institution as
expressly minded the confirmation of his peoples faith, as the confirmation of
the Covenant which is subservient thereunto; and that therefore by M. H. his
rule it may be a primary end of the Sacrament. That, compared with the
Confirmation of the Covenant, it is a primary end, has been formerly proved;
which is also more evident by the words of institution in the fore-quoted
places. Should I now for a close return M. H. his Epiphonema upon himself, and
say, By this one passage well considered, you may have a guess at the man, I
suppose the Reader could not blame me. But I forbear.

In the same page M. H. mentions some exceptitions I make from page 171. to
page 175. of my Bar, and confutes them with a dash or two of his pen, saying,
That I carp, snarl, my exceptions are not worth any further answer, what
pitiful things are they, as if I envyed him a bare expression, etc.

Answ. 1. The Reader cannot expect I should spend time in vindicating those
five passages which M. H. does not answer, but only vilifies with reproachful
terms. If this be to answer and confute, the Ladies of Billinsgate are
excellent Disputants. We have had too much heat already on both sides, I had
rather bring water, than fuel to this fire. I beseech you, Sir, think not that
I envy you any expression; I think too many of your expressions, and of mine
also, deserve rather pity than envy. Can we not seek the light of truth,
without the heat of passion?

Page 227. He presents his Jury of Arguments, to prove the Lords Supper a
Converting-Ordinance. His first Argument is,

Argument 1.

It is the duty of every intelligent member to frequent the Sacrament: But
officium est propter beneficium; ergo.

Answ. 1. I deny the major, if by frequenting the Sacrament, he mean actual
receiving, otherwise it militates nothing against us, who grant universal
presence.

2. Supposing some benefit did accrue to all receivers, must that benefit needs
be initial Conversion? Studying to know by the Creation, is a duty required of
Heathen, and no doubt but it was eo nomine, beneficial to them; but does it
thence follow, they were converted by this study of nature? or were the Sun,
Moon, and Stars their Gospel? This for the minor.

3. He asserts untruly, That man's benefit is not the ground of duty. He had as
good say, The Promises are no ground of obedience. Shall Self be no ground of
duty, because it is not the sole or principal ground?

M. H. ib. A thing is not good, and our duty, and therefore God wills it: But
God wills it, and therefore it is good, and our duty.

Answ. I assent fully to the latter, but question the former branch, if
universally understood. Some things are essentially good, and therefore
necessarily our duty, as rational Creatures; instance in the duty of Loving
God, this is good, and our duty, though there had been no positive command to
enjoin it. Other things are our duty, merely because required by a positive
Law; instance in Sacrifices, Sacraments, etc. Hence the distinction of natural
and instituted worship, with which latter God often dispenses, not so with the
former.

M. H. ib. That the Sacrament can do an unregenerate man good, I have formerly
proved.

Answ. And that proof has been formerly answered, which therefore I pass.
Hence it follows, That no unregenerate man is bound to eat and drink his own
damnation, because he is not bound to eat and drink the Sacramental elements. I
have given M. H. more than one Text to prove, that persons Evangelically
unworthy, must not receive; and have also proved, That every natural man is
Evangelically unworthy. I hope therefore M. H. will be as good as his word in
this place, in yielding to me, That receiving is not the natural man's daty; as
eating the Passover was not the unclean man's duty.

M. H. p. 227, and 228. Let the pious Reader underst and this point, and that
is, through man's impotency, to make void Gods Authority.

Answ. When a duty in thesi, is therefore every man's duty in hypothesi, then M.
H. speaks somewhat to purpose. Are there not many duties? which bind not all
persons in every state, but this or that person, as his state and relation
varies; instance in the fifth Commandment, and in duties of institured-worship,
of which nature is the Sacrament. That may be a married man's duty, which is not
a single man's duty; and that a godly man's duty, which is not a natural man's
duty. I hope here is no intrenching upon Gods Authority, but only an
explication how Divine Authority applies it self to bind one man, where it
does not bind another.

Argument 2.

Page 228. M. H. his second Argument, All Gods Ordinances within the Church,
are means of grace, whether first or second, to beget or increase it; ergo.

Ans. The Antecedent is true in sensu diviso, not in sensu composito. Among all
Gods Ordinances, some are means to beget grace, others to increase grace; but
the thing to be proved is, That every Ordmance, yea, every part of an
Ordinance, is a means both to beget, and to increase grace; nor can M. H.
prove, that the act of receiving is a way God would have natural men to walk
in. He that says, Receiving is a Converting-Ordinance, must produce, 1. A
command for all natural men within the Church to receive. 2. A promise of
Conversion annexed to that command.

M. H. ib. You must produce some Text where converting grace is denied
peculiarly to this means. If any say, This is a negative, which ought not to be
proved: I answer, though it be so in the words, yet materially in the thing it
is an affirmative; for he that excepts out of a general, affirms a limitation,
and must prove it.

Answ. Here M. H. his Logic fails him. Himself as Opponent in this place,
undertakes to prove, That receiving is a Converting-Ordinance. I as Respondent,
deny his Antecedent (That every Ordinance is Converting, and particularly those
Ordinances which have no promise of Conversion annexed to them) does it not
apparently concern M. H. to prove (if he will make good his minor or
Antecedent) that all Ordinances have a promise of Conversion annexed to them?
It lies indeed upon the Respondent, to grant a true Proposition, to deny a
false one, to distinguish a doubtful one; but it lies only upon the Opponent
to prove what he undertakes, unless he mean to yield up his cause; which in my
poor judgment would be more for M. H. his comfort and honor. Suppose M. H.
would prove the Sun, Moon and Stars to be means of Conversion, because they
discover to us much of God, etc. I as Respondent answer, That is not proof
sufficient, but he must produce a promise of Conversion annexed to the
observation of those Heavenly Bodies, if he will make it out, that they are a
Converting-Ordinance. Were it now a reasonable demand on M. H. his part, to bid
me produce any one Text of Scripture, where Converting grace is denied to the
Contemplation of the Heavenly Bodies? The case is here much alike; nor is every
means of Edification, a means of Conversion. True, the Respondent denying an
universal Proposition, and so by consequence affirming a limitation, is bound
to give an instance for that limitation; but it lies not upon him to prove that
instance, but upon the Opponent to disprove it. For example, I deny M. H. his
universal (that all Ordinances are Converting) in this denial, by consequence I
affirm a limitation, and give instance of those Ordinances which have no
promise of Conversion annexed to them. Does it not here lie upon M. H. to
prove, that every Ordinance has a promise of Conversion annexed to it, if he
mean to fortify his Universal? Will any fair Opponent here require of me to
produce some Text, where Converting-grace is denied to any Ordinance?

Argument 3.

M. H. p. 229. There is but a peradventure for the Conversion of any in the use
of all means besides, because there is no special promise of grace in the best
use of mere naturals: But there is, an it may be granted by our Opposites, to
the Sacrament.

Answ. There is a wide difference between the first and second it may be; the
first it may be, or peradventure, flowing from Gods ordinate power, as declared
by his revealed will, that it shall concur with some Ordinances for the
Conversion of his: the second it may be, flowing only from his absolute power,
which is a poor ground of encouragement to expect Conversion from any standing
Ordinance, to which God has annexed no promise of Conversion. Its possible, by
Gods absolute power, the damned may be saved through the satisfaction of
Christ; but by Gods ordinate power, its possible only for the Living to be
saved. The former it may be, speaks no comfort to the Damned, but the latter it
may be, speaks much comfort to the living, especially those under the means of
grace. Why? Because the efficacy of Christ's satisfaction, is by promise annexed
to diverse of the living, but to none of the damned. In like manner, its
possible, by Gods absolute power, receiving may convert, not so by Gods
ordinate power, unless a promise can be produced which annexes conversion to
actual receiving. There is a wide difference, I hope, between these two it may
bees. It may be God may convert me occasionally by my sin (as he did diverse of
the Crucifiers of Christ) but it were madness thence to conclude that sin is a
means of conversion. By saying therefore, that actual receiving cannot convert
any; I do not limit the Spirit of God, but only declare that the Spirit is
pleased to limit himself not to convert any by receiving, and that because he
wills not to convert any by it: And that God wills not to convert any by this,
as well as by other Ordinances, I conclude, because God has not revealed his
will to convert any by this, as by other Ordinances. Let it appear, that God
wills to convert any by receiving, and I shall easily be of M. H. his
judgment, That actual receiving is a converting Ordinance.

For his amplification, ib. by a distinction of an half promise, and a full
promise.

Answ. These half promises are made to none but such as attend upon God, in,
and under the means of conversion; and that actual receiving is a means of
conversion, is the Question to be proved.

Argument 4.

Mr. H. p. 230: If the Sacrament be converting as it is a visible word, then it
must be converting as it is a gustable, tactible word, etc.

Answ. 1. Its not granted that the Lords Supper converts as a visible word. See
my Bar, p. 155. and 156, but that the word reed', opened, and applied at the
Sacrament, is, and may be a means of conversion.

2. We desire Mr. H. to produce one promise that the Sacramental elements,
either as seen, touched, or tasted, are a means of conversion.

Argument 5. ib.

The precepts of God are lively and operative, and the offers of grace are the
means and conveyances of that power we have not in our selves to receive it:
But here is this most sweet and gracious offer and command, Take and eat. Ergo:

Answ. The precepts of God are lively and operative in order to the ends, for
which he appoints them, and the offers of grace are means to convey unto the
heirs of grace that grace which God offers by them; but that in the Sacrament
God commands us to receive in order to conversion, or that he offers converting
grace in tendering the Sacramental elements, is still the (...).

Argument 6. ib.

The reclayming of a man from some particular vice, or vices, is a good step
forwards toward repentance and conversion: But the Sacrament is a constant
experiment hereof. Ergo.

Answ. 1. There is a wide difference between a step toward repentance
materially, and repentance it self. In the Devils and damned, there are some
steps toward repentance, as conviction, fear, etc. Yet they, I hope, are far
enough from repentance.

2. A man may turn from one sin to another, from prodigality to covetousness,
is this a step toward repentance or conversion?

3. That receiving the Sacrament reclaims a natural man from any sin is still
the Question begged. Mr. H. pretends constant experience, but names here no
experiment. We are sure, upon his own principle, we can show him an experiment
to the contrary. Supposing (as he will have it) Judas did receive, I pray what
vice or vices was he reclaimed from by his receiving? does not the very
Liturgy hold him forth as a warning unto natural men not to venture in that
estate upon the holy Sacrament?

He supposes indeed a drunkard coming to the Sacrament with a resolution
against drunkenness, taking the Sacrament upon it, and proving ever after a
sober man.

Answ. 1. This resolution of his is either against drunkenness alone, which is
purely carnal, upon carnal principles, and is often justly plagued with
returning to the vomit; or it is against all other sins too; and this either a
velleity and faint resolution, made by the strength of natural free will; or
real and sincere: the former is but a good mood, or turning upon the hinges,
Prove. 26. 14. exposing him to a more dangerous fall; the latter is true
repentance begun, and such a one comes not a natural man to the Sacrament, but
is converted before receiving.

Argument 7.

Mr. H. 231. The acting or exercise of common grace, and endeavoring to do
what a man can, is another good step forward toward conversion: But the
Sacrament is the means to exercise common grace in the unregenerate. Ergo.

Answ. 1. It has formerly been showed, that a step toward repentance may be
far enough from repentance.

2. If this be warrant enough for receiving because the Sacrament is a means to
exercise common grace, then why should not persons jure excommunicate be
admitted in order to the exercise of common grace, and that thereby they may
get a step nearer repentance?

3. Common grace may be exercised by presence, and I am not against free
presence, but against free receiving. For his half or comparative acceptance,
ibid. I believe he sins less in diverse cases who performs the matter of a duty,
than he that profanely omits both matter and manner; yet on the other hand its
as true, that better omit the duty altogether, than venture upon it in an
unwarrantable way, witness the sad fate of Nadab, Abihu, and Vzza, Levit. 10.
2. and 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. and of the unworthy guest, Matthew. 22. 12, 13.

Argument 8.

M. H. ib. The solemn engagement of the soul to Christ upon his terms, and. is
a means of full and effectual closing with him, if Gods Spirit shall be pleased
to act with it. But actual receiving is such a means, etc. ergo,

Answ. 1. Then let persons jure excommunicate be thus engaged.

2. An engagement will bind poorly where its not understood, which is the case
of grossly ignorant persons who know neither the nature of the Sacrament, nor of
such a solemn engagement.

3. He that comes to engage with no resolution to keep that engagement, yea
with a resolution against it (which is the case more or less of all natural
men) will be no more tied by those engagements than Sampson was with cords and
withs, or the Legion was with chains and fetters. Nor can any expect the
Spirits acting out of the way and road of the Spirit. A penny earnest would
bind no more than a promise were it not for the coactive power of the Law; and
there is no compulsion of elicite, but only of imperate acts. Not but that
natural men ought to engage against sin, and to duty, which engagement may be
also very useful and beneficial, but that may be done otherwise, and with less
danger than by receiving.


Argument 9.

M. H. p. 232. That which can beget more degrees of the same grace, can beget
the first grace, unless these degrees are begotten some other way than that is.
But all grace (first and second) is begotten alike, by propounding the object,
by illumination, and by a touch upon the will; which object is showed forth in
the Sacrament, as in the Word, etc.

Answ. 1. M. H. answers himself by his own limitation, since the first grace is
ever begot by supernatural infusion; not so always the second, but may be got
by exercise of the first grace, the Holy Ghost concurring to excite, and act
the principle received, but not always insusing new grace, as God first powered
down fire from heaven, which afterward was preserved and increased by the
Priests applying fuel, etc. Lev. 6. 12. This truth is held forth by the
Parables of the Talents and Pounds, which were at first given by the Lord, but
improved and increased by the servants industry. As moral habits are
strengthened by moral acts, so spiritual habits are strengthened by spiritual
acts. Light may be intended by reflection or refraction, but cannot at first be
generated without a direct beam; Such is the first grace darted into the soul
by the Holy Ghost, but afterward intended by exercise, and multiplied acts as
so many reflections and refractions, though withal the Holy Ghost may at
pleasure dart in fresh beams of grace, as the Lord did oftentimes cause fire
to fall from heaven.

2. The external propounding of the object, either by the Word or Sacrament,
can no more work saving grace than the setting of an object before a blind man,
or one that is in the dark can work upon him before the medium and organ be
illuminated. Now the Holy Ghost is that light which illuminates the faculty
savingly; and that he conveyes the first illumination by actual receiving is
the question to be proved.

M. H. ib. It is a mistake to think that the second grace is exhibited by way
of obsignation, but it is wrought (I say) through the Spirit of God by the way
of moral operation only; as the first and second grace, both are begotten in
reading and hearing, etc.

Answ. 1. We believe that separation, tender, obsignation, and exhibition are
distinct acts in the Sacrament; nor do we think that that Sacramental action
which does the one does formally perform the other, which yet it may do
virtually; and why grace received should not be confirmed by the sealing virtue
of the Sacrament (which is really, though not formally, the exhibition of the
second grace) as well as by Gods oath and promise laid hold on by faith, I see
no solid reason.

2. That the first grace is wrought by way of moral operation only, as M. H.
seems more than to hint in (...) ^aragraph, is a Pelagian, and a dangerous
(...); nor did Pelagius himself deny the grace or concourse of the Spirit; but
what that grace of his was, is too well known, namely natural reason, common
illumination, propounding the object, moral swasion, etc. I will not here
charge M. H. in the same kind, but wish he had explained himself, that the
world might know his meaning whether he really think that the first grace is
infused, or whether it be wrought (as moral habits are) by moral swasion, by
strong and iterated acts which are both the seed and fruit of moral habits.

Argument 10.

M. H. p. 232. The sad Consequence of this Tenet, that the Sacrament belongs
only to the effectually converted, is sorely against it, and that both for the
giver and receiver. For the Receiver, this will cut off every poor doubtful
Christian from the Sacrament. For 1. If I am bound to receive when I am
regenerate, and bound to forbear if I am unregenerate, then I must be persuaded
in my Conscience that I am regenerate, or else I cannot eat in faith; and he
that eats and doubts is damned if he eat. I desire this may be tonderly
weighed.

Answ. In general. This Argument has more accidental than natural strengt^ ^d
is more plausible than powerful; as pretending much respect to tender
consciences, and charging our principles with the contrary. I shall therefore
endeavor to weigh it tenderly in the balance of the Sanctuary, that thereby I
may satisfy tender consciences; and if it may be, my Antagonist also. Instance
in the opposite tenets about the time of Easter, which so merly vexed the
church etc.


1. Therefore I lay this down as a foundation, That a sad Consequent is no
solid Argument against any Tenet, unless first it be a proper and natural
effect of such a Tenet. And,

2. Unless it be a moral evil. Or,

3. That Tenet be so trivial, that the least afflictive evil is too much to
suffer for it. And otherwise, if all sad Consequents should be Argumentative in
M. H. his sense, we might by a like Argument conclude against Christ and
Religion, the sad consequents whereof are troubles, divisions, temptations,
persecutions, etc. But to descend from the Thesis to the Hypothesis, what sad
consequents follow as to the Receiver, from our Tenet, That only the
regenerate ought to receive.

M. H. tells us, 1. This will cut off every poor doubting Christian from the
Sacrament. Why, I pray? Because he cannot eat in faith, being under a doubt of
his regenerate estate.

Answ. 1. No more can he abstain in faith, if this argument were good; since,
as he is bound to abstain, if he be unregenerate, so he is bound to receive if
regenerate (I mean, unless warrantably detained by some just occasion; for
affirmative Precepts do not bind ad semper)

You will say, This makes more against us, and for M. H. since it hereby
appears, that a doubting Christian, is in a snare, whether he receive or not.

Answ. 1. No more then a doubting Jew was in a snare in order to his eating of
the Passover (the rule being, that no unclean person should eat, Numb. 9. 13.
compare 2 Chronicles. 30. 18.) Suppose now Caleb doubting whether he were clean or
no, yet without any folid ground; but it may be, I have touched, or have been
touched by an unclean person, or thing, etc. think you this groundless scruple
had been sufficient to detain him from the Passover?

2. The best way under such scruples, is to consult with God, and to discover
their ground (either real or apparent) to some faithful friend or Minister;
whereby, through mercy, their consciences would soon come to some settlement,
far better than by M. H. his Doctrine of admitting all pell-mell.

3. If yet his scruple still remain, its wisdom to take the better part, which
is the affirmative. He that doubted whether he were clean or no, might cat the
Passover; and he that doubts whether he be regenerate or no, having faithfully
used Gods way of discovery, by self-examination, advice with others, and
prayer, I believe both may and ought to come to the Sacrament, though he cannot
yet attain full satisfaction of his scruples. That scruple which cannot exclude
me out of the state of grace, sure cannot suspend me from the Sacrament; for
then who shall receive? The best are not without scruples about their estate;
which scruples may weaken, but cannot abolish evidence. As faith, so evidence
is gradual, ebbing and flowing upon several occasions. Nay, the Sacrament is
especially instituted for doubting Saints.

Page 233. M. H. his second sad Consequent, as to the Receiver is, That upon
this account every one that comes, professes himself converted; and if any man
be but doubtful that he is not yet converted, he cannot come, but he acts a
lie, and is a public hypocrite, etc. thus shall every humble, tender Christian
keep away, and the self-justitiary harden to death.

Ans. 1. Its a mistake, That upon this account every one that comes professes
himself converted. This only follows upon our principle, That every one who
receives, does virtually profess he apprehends or thinks himself converted; as
every Jew that came to the Passover; professed only that he believed himself to
be clean, which belief yet might stand with some doubt or scruple. Hence it
follows indeed, That he who knows himself to be in the state of nature, and yet
comes to receive, acts a lie, and plays the gross hypocrite; which
consideration well weighed, may be bar sufficient to a generation of Receivers,
who will dare before God, Angels and men, to profess they believe themselves to
be real Saints, when their own consciences, and diverse of their neighbors, can
groundedly evidence against them as profance persons, and scorners of holiness.
But what is this to a poor doubting Saint, who has solid evidence of grace,
yet somewhat shaken by scruples, to whom Gods Messengers and people can and
ought cordially to give the right hand of fellowship, and persuade, yea, charge
hi^ (...) receive, and not be afraid to close with his be^ friend in the
Sacrament. We assert, That none but real Saints ought to receive, and that all
real Saints, with due provision, must receive: But many doubting Saints are
real Saints, and therefore by our assertion ought to receive. Contra,
hypocrites, whether doubting or confident, ought not to receive; and if they
receive, they do so at their own peril: And should Christ ask any of them,
Friend, how came thou in hither? he would be as speechless as was the
presumptuous guest, who for all the general invitation, was bound hand and
foot, etc. because he came without the wedding garment, Matthew. 22. v.9, 10, 11,
12, 13. Yet further, if a consident hypocritereceive, his danger is the
greater, the Sacrament (through Gods rihteous judgment) building him up
accidentally in a damnable error of false assurance: A sad Edification.

We have scanned M. H. his sad Consequents for the Receiver. Next let us view
his sad Consequents for the Giver.

Page 233. M. H. For the Giver, 1. The case will be near the same; for the
Sacrament cannot be administered according to rule, nor he (that is, the Giver)
act in faith, unless both the Receiver is regenerate, and he assured of it
(which he cannot be) if Regeneration were a qualification commanded as
necessary to receiving.

Answ. This imaginary Consequent, discovers more of M. H. his weakness than the
former. He might as well argue about the Passover, thus, If no unclean person
might eat thereof, then the Passover cannot be administered according to rule;
nor the Giver of (...) act in faith, unless both the Eater be clean, and the
Giver or Overseer be assured thereof (which he cannot be) if legal purity were
a qualification commanded, as necessary to the eating of the Passover. Think
you the Priests or other Overseers were to admit none to the Passover, but
those whom they knew to be clean? yet the rule was strict, No unclean person
shall eat thereof: Whence I infer, As the strictness of their rule obliged not
them to know certainly who were clean, who unclean; so the strictness of the
Gospel-rule (let no unregenerate man receive) obliges not Church Officers to
know certainly, who are regenerate, who not; but only to take care, that no
persons visibly unclean in an Evangelical sense, be admitted to the Sacrament.
Will it follow, That because none but regenerate persons must receive,
therefore none but such must be admitted? The latitude of Admission is as far
beyond the latitude of Receiving, as the latitude of visibility, not
contradicted by gross ignorance and scandal, is beyond the latitude of true
Grace.

M. H. ib. Secondly, men will be ready to think themselves converted, when they
are admitted, and the formal Christian rest in his estate, when he should come
hither to repent of it.

Answ. 1. Carnal persons are apt to conclude their estate good, by catching at
any evidence that seems to favor them; as, because they are Church Members,
attend upon the Ordinances, have the good word and opinion of eminent
Professors, etc. yea, some people abuse right evidences; must Ministers
therefore forbear to preach evidences and trials of grace?

2. Though we hold, that none but visible Saints must be admitted; yet withal
we teach, that few visible Saints are real Saints, and that therefore admission
to the Sacrament is no evidence of true grace, though it be a strong obligation
to grace. It argues indeed, that the Admitters have a good opinion of the
persons admitted; but what folly is it to infer, I must needs have true grace,
because Gods people give me the right hand of fellowship, and hope well of me?

M. H. ib. Thirdly, the best Minister must fall infinitely short in the
discharge of his trial, were any at all required upon this ground.

Answ. No more than the Priests and Levites, who were not bound to know
certainly who were clean or unclean, but upon suspicion, might and ought to
bring the case to issue by the parties confession, or sufficient testimony. Or
no more than a Judge is bound to know certainly, whether the person suspected
be a Felon or not, but must endeavor to seek out the truth by the persons
confession, or legal evidence; which being done, the Judge is innocent, however
eventually a guilty person may be cleared, and so enjoy the privileges of an
honost man, and contra.

However therefore in the close of this Argument, M. H. is pleased to judge.
That the first touches of Conscience, before mature deliberation, have inclined
pious persons to plead for trial of others in order to the Sacrament; yet the
serious debates both in the Assembly and Parliament about this particular,
before it was ratified by the Civil Sanction; as also the constant practice of
our own and other Churches before these times, may persuade M. H. that his
judgment is not infallible. If Self-examination exclude Church-examination,
then pari ratione, Self-judging exclude Church-judging, and Self-teaching
Church-teaching.

Argument 11.

M. H. 234. his 11 Argument, The Sacrament is a means to confirm faith of
Assent: Ergo, Its a means of Conversion.

Answ. 1. This Argument proves indeed, the Sacrament is a means to confirm
Conversion, by confirming assent in those who are regenerate.

2. That it may confirm a common assent in any that understands it: But the
great question is, Whether actual receiving can beget a saving assent, and so
work initial Conversion. His testimony out of Calvin, proves Gods orderly and
gradual proceeding about the work of Conversion, first by the word, then by the
Sacrament, yea, afterward by both together, but that by the Sacrament God
opens a passage for initial Conversion, is M. H. his gloss, not M. Calvin's
text. Besides, by the word, God teaches not only convincingly, but also
effectually; and so far as the word teaches, the Sacrament may confirm, either
in relation to degrees of Conviction, or of Conversion; in order to both of
which, the Spirit is a necessary Agent.

Argument 12.

M. H. his 12. Argument, ib. The solemn application of the Covenant to a man's
self, according to his estate, etc. is the very only way whereby the Spirit
usually works Conviction, and sincere Conversion: But actual receiving is a
solemn means of such an application, Ergo.

Answ. 1. I deny the minor, as to the second branch about sincere Conversion.
M. H. his Prossyllogisms drawn from Legal-conviction, and selfjudging, will not
help him, till he can prove, that an instantaneous act of Legal-Conviction,
with a like instantaneous and hypocritical act of Self-judging (if produced at
all by the unworthy Communicant) in the act of receiving, are effectual means
of converting such an obdurate sinner, who resists all the grace of the
Sacrament, till he come to the last act of receiving.

2. The forementioned application may be made (with less danger of guilt) by
presence without receiving.

Mr. H. p. 236. and 237. He that is willing to go on in his sins, and refuse
Jesus Christ, I will not gratify him so far, to say he must stay away. This
were doctrine after the fleshes own heart.

Answ. 1. How comes it then to pass, that the most fleshly men are usual most
eager for the Sacrament, and think themselves most wronged when kept away? Ask
the worst in every Parish, Whether the Minister gratify them most by
suspension, or by admission?

Yet 2. By suspension we affect not simply either to gratify or displeasure
any, unless care and endeavor to prevent their sin, and bring them to saving
knowledge and grace be a gratification or displeasure; and I hope every godly
man should be willing to gratify all, nor afraid to displease any by endeavor
to prevent their sin, and to work in them real conversion.

What ever therefore M. H. is pleased to insinuate, p. 237. be not deceived as
if by abstention, or suspension, thou either gave up thy self, or were given
up as lost; Or that any unworthy receiver can make so good use of the
Sacrament, or of the blood of Christ as to wash away any one stain of sin. Such
conceits may puzzle and trouble, but will never convert or edify thee. If the
guilt of Christ's body and blood can bring thee nearer heaven, then may unworthy
receiving bring thee thither. Study well those two Texts, 1 Cor. 11. v.27, 29.
and thou will easily perceive, that M. H. is better at Rhetoric than spiritual
Logic. Attend upon the word which undoubtedly is a means, and has clear
promises of coversion: And upon true, though weak discoveries of grace, come to
the Sacrament as Gods second Chariot that will carry thee apace to heaven.

Page 239-240. M. H. endeavors to back all his twelve Arguments by an instance
or example; before which he inserts these words, Whereas Mr. Drake is ready to
cite me before the great Tribunal, I may appeal thither to those many Saints in
heaven, together with this party, etc.

Answ. 1. Sir, Had you noted the place where I cite you before the great
Tribunal, you had done me a favor. I do not remember such expressions, and
should censure my self for rashness if I uttered such words without a very
weighty ground.

2. In appealing thither to the Saints departed, how ever your meaning may be
good, the expressions are not very suitable to Protestant principles. But I let
it pass as a superfluity of Rhetoric, and come to scan the instance and
example, I doubt not but Mr. Fairclough reported faithfully and heartily
according to what he apprehended by information and observation: which
testimony Mr. H. presents to public view, p. 240. I hope verbatim without
addition or detraction. Only here I entreat the Reader to note three
particulars, so I have done with this Section.

1. By this testimony its evident Mr. F. differed from Mr. H. his opinion about
free Admission.

2. That Thomasin Budde said not, That her receiving the Sacrament was the
first thing which by the power of the Holy Ghost, brought over her will to the
acceptance of our Lord Jesus Christ. But that it was the first thing which she
sensibly perceived brought over her will, etc. whence it follows, she had her
first sensible evidence at the Sacrament in receiving; but whether she were not
really converted till that instant is still in dispute.

3. Mr. F. confesses, That before her admission she had some slight motions
and conviction wrought upon her. Who can say, but these slight motions (in
man's judgment) might be converting motions. That may be real and glorious with
God which is but slight with man, and contra, Luke 16. 15. Hence I may
(without injury to that pious woman) conclude that this example affords no
solid bottom to prove actual receiving a converting Ordinance.

SECT. VII.
THe seventh Objection is, Judas received not the Sacrament because he went
out, John 13. 30.

This Objection is considerable as overthrowing Mr. H. his foundation, That
Judas did receive. But whether he received or not, its not very material to us.

Mr. H. p. 241. My answer was, That this Supper of John was before the Feast of
the Passover, and that very likely two nights. Unto this, all Mr. D. answers
(p. 176.) is Mr. H. in two leaves takes some pains to small purpose. I pray
note it, while I allege Scripture to prove that this Supper in John, and the
Passover were two different Suppers, and in two different pl^es; he tells us
this is to small purpose, as if the alleging Judas went out to agree with the
Highpriests from a Supper two nights before the Sacrament, wa^ sufficient
proof that therefore he went out at the Sacrament.

Answ. 1. Sure those words are not all Mr. Drakes answer, as is evident to any
that will but cast an eye upon what I say, p. 176. and 177. of my Bar: though
withal I must confess I wonder at my self upon what account I should let pass
so memorable a place as that of John 13. untouched in my answer, and am
beholding to Mr. H. for minding me here of it. 2. Therefore now, what in me
lies to make up that defect; I shall first coap with Mr. H. in his humble
vindication; and then proceed to what he adds is his Rejoinder.

Mr. H. p. 64. and 65. of his Vindication, There was a Supper a little before
the Passover, where St. John relates a washing of the disciples feet, and
other things, that were not to be done at the solemnity of the Passover; but
the feet were to be shod then, and the like gestures quite contrary.

Answ. 1. To this Mr. H. cites his own answer, p. 65. in these words, Some say,
those passages which noted their ^aste out of Egypt were not obligatory when
they came to the land of rest.

2. Yet suppose they were then obligatory, why might they not have their feet
washed just before the Passover, and then put on their shoes, etc. and eat
the Passover with observation of the original rites? If you say, This washing
was a servile work, and therefore prohibited at that holy time, Exodus 12. 16.

Answ. 1. All servile works were not forbid upon such holy Convocations, and
particularly washing, anointing, dressing of meat, which served to cheer and
refresh them, as the Rabbis note. Mr. Goodwin in his Jewish Antiq. notes L. 3
c. 2. and 4. That at al feasts, especially at the Passover, washing of the
feet was an usual ceremony.


2. This work, though servile in form, was holy in use, and in Christ's design;
and holy works, though bonily, are no profaning of an holy day.

Mr. H. ib. So large a circumstance as is here mentioned of John, to be
introduced of Christ at this time is not probable, Joh. 12. 1.

Answ. 1. I hope all those circumstances mentioned, Joh. 12. might easily fall
out in six days. 2. For the circumstances of washing and giving the Sop,
suppose they took up half an hour between the common supper, and the Passover
(the celebration whereof, as also of the Lords Supper, is not recorded by John
as being sufficiently handled by the other Evangelists) I pray what absurdity
follows? May not the Lord of time borrow a little time to testify his great
love and humility, and to uncase an hypocrite?

Mr. H. ib. and p. 66. About two nights before the Passover, when it drew
near, Satan entered into Judas, etc. compare Matthew. 26. 2.14. and Mark. 14.
1.11. So that it could not be at the time supposed, that is manifest.

Answ. Grant, that two nights before the Passover Satan entered into Judas,
does not John take particular notice of that circumstance as a thing past, by
expressing it in the participle of the preterperfect tense, (...), John 13. 2.
though upon other occasions Satan got further entrance, verse. 27. The
circumstance of time then is not against us, unless Mr. H. his bare assertion
be a demonstration: With the same confidence he affirms, ib. That Judas was
present till the Lords Supper, and all was done, for which he quotes Lukes
Hystor^ogie, Luke 22. 21. and has been formerly answered. Also, that Judas
stole away when Christ was going with his disciples to Mount Olivet, etc. But
1. where is his Scripture Proof for this particular? 2. That the discovery of
Judas by the Sop, and by dipping in the dish, was a twofold discovery, and at
two several times seems not probable. What need they suspect every man himself
on the Passover Even, if Mr. H. his assertion be true, that but two days
before the Traitor was so particularly discovered by the Sop given unto him?
Its more probable therefore, that Christ at one and the same time, and that
before the Sacrament, did discover Judas in general by his dipping in the dish;
and in particular by the Sop given him, John 13. 26. and by word of mouth also,
Matthew. 26. 25. Upon which he immediately went out, John 13. 30. and (as some
think) neither received the Passover, nor the Lords Supper: Its enough for our
purpose if he received not the Lords Supper

Mr. H. p. 67. Johus Sop was before the bargain, Matthews dipping was at the
very time of accomplishing it.

Answ. 1. How will Mr. H. make it out that John's Sop was before the bargain? If
he urge, John 13. 1. Now before the Feast of the Passover, etc. is not
immediately before, as truly before as two days before? If Christ washed his
Disciples feet, etc. between the common supper, and the Passover, I hope it
was as truly done before the Passover as if he had washed them two days
before the Passover; and the Sop being given at that time, it seems consonant
to reason, and not against Scripture, that Judas went away before the
Passover, much more before the Lords Supper, to acquaint the Priests with that
fair opportunity of taking our Savior in the Garden that very night if they
would furnish him with a sufficient number to attach him; compare John 18. v.
2. 3. with Joh. 13. 30. which, if so, aggravates Judas his malice, who out of
design to kill the true Passover, 1 Cor. 5. 7. forsook and slighted the
typical Passover.

If he argue from the same expression used, Luke 22. 3. and John 13. 27.

Answ. 1. Why might not Satan have a double entrance by tempting Judas, first
to strike the bargain two days before, and next by tempting him to complear it
two days after.

Yet 2. The adverb of time ((...)) is not mentioned by Luke in the original,
but only inserted by the Translators, which makes it probable enough that Luke
observed not so much the order of time, as the truth of the narrative here, as
elsewhere. Luke tells you that Satan entered, John specifies the time,
immediately after the Sop given; which Sop, I proved a little above, was given
on the Passover even, after the common supper. Yea, page 67. of his
Vindication Mr. H. acknowledges that many learned men think there were three
Suppers on the Passover Even, which though he is pleased to term conjectures,
yet we need not be afraid to balance his conjecture with their conjectures.
His pronouncing (tanquam e tripode) that they have erred, and are not to be
built upon, I hope is no oracle: Nor well his Argument hold against them though
Judas were at the Table (which was first a common table, then a Passover
table, and lastly the Lords Table) unless he can prove that Judas was present
at all the three Suppers upon the same Table. Only I must confess his last
Argument, ib. is wonderful, as being drawn from John's silence; thus, John says
nothing of this Supper at all; Ergo, Judas received the Lords Supper. Should we
now imitate Mr. H. and argue, John says nothing of the Lords Supper; Ergo,
Judas did not receive; might not the Reader from such profound arguments
conclude (with a smile) that both of us were rare Logicians? Nor will it follow
(with M. H. his good leave) that because Christ offers grace to all, therefore
the signs of grace must be tendered to all, or received by all. This for his
Vindication; I come now to his Rejoinder.

Mr. H. page 241. notes well, That there are many difficulties about the
Passover; which may warn us not to be too assertory. Page 242. He endeavors
to prove that this Supper of John was before he Evening of the 14. of Nisan,
and so before the institution of the Lords Supper which immediately followed
the Passover, thus,

The evening of the 14. day of Nisan, and the morning of the 15. was the Feast
of the Passover ( so called (...)) but John's Supper he tells us expressly was
before the Feast of the Passover; Ergo, It was before the 14. day of Nisan,
and the time Christ instituted his Supper.

Answ. 1. I deny his major, which confounds the Passover day, and the Feast of
the Passover together. The Passover day was the fourteenth day of Nisan or
Abib, on which the Paschal Lamb was killed, and its blood sprinkled etc. about
three of the clock in the afternoon. The Feast of the Passover was the 15.
day, which began precisely at Sunset, till which time they were roasting the
Passover in their several houses, which being an whole Lamb of a year old
might well be roasting and dressing till about six at night (at which time the
15. day began, it being then Equinoctial) Thus our Savior probably sent two of
his Disciples about the noon of the 14. day to prepare the Passover, Mark 14.
12, 13. But himself with the rest did not eat it till about six at night,
Matthew. 26. 20. the Evangelist notes expressly (...) etc. Now (...) and (...) was
the first watch of the night, beginning at six, and ending at nine of the clock
at night, Mark. 13. 35. Therefore the Learned distinguish well between the two
Evenings, whereof one was vespera declinationis called (...) Luke 24. 29. the
other vespera occasus, called (...) or (...), after the Sun was set, Mark 1.
32. In the former evening, which ended the 14. day, they killed the Passover; in
the latter evening, which began the 15. day they are it, which therefore was
very properly called the Feast of the Passover, and was not part of the 14.
and part of the 15. day, but precisely the 15. day, beginning at Sunset; on
which day also they did eat other Passover-offerings of the herd, as well as
the Paschal-Lamb, Deuteronomy. 16. 2. compare 2 Chronicles. 35. v.7, 8,9, where Oxen are
called Pesach and Pesachim, as well as the lesser cattle; which may be of good
use to reconcile that difficulty, John 18. 14. 28. Passover there being meant,
not of the Paschal-Lamb, but of the Oxen, etc. that were for
Passover-offerings, which they ate on the fifteenth day about noon (on which
day our Savior suffered) yea, all the seven days of the feast, as the Learned
Broughton notes.

2. Granting therefore M. H. his minor, That John's supper was before the feast
of the Passover, let us examine his Conclusion; ergo, It was before the evening
of the fourteenth day of Nisan, and the time Christ instituted his Supper. The
major failing, this Conclusion must needs be lame. Yet further to clear my self
about this particular, we must know, That (as every day, so) the fourteenth of
Nisan had a double evening: 1. The evening that began it, at the Sunset of the
thirteenth day. 2. The evening that concluded it, holding from twelve at noon,
to six of the clock at night; or at least, from three to six, which made the
fourth and last great hour of the day. After which began the fifteenth day,
whose first evening extended from Sunset, to nine at night, and was the first
watch of the night, Mark 13. 35. That by the Learned is called Vespera
declinationis, this Vespera occasus. Now John's Supper was on the second evening
of the fourteenth of Nisan, between three and six of the clock, happily about
five of the clock, which began the twelfth and last hour of the artificial day
of the 14 of Nisan, After which, between six and nine the first great hour, or
watch of the fifteenth of Nisan, the Passover was eaten; of which also possibly
Judas might partake (for about that I must (...)) and being discovered, as some
think, by the sop dipped in the Chatosheth or Sauce of bitter herbs, went out in
a pet to get a band of Soldiers or Officers for the Attatchment of our Savior.

I doubt not but M. H. here will soon cry out, a Contradiction, a
Contradiction. Did you not lately say, That Christ came and sat down (...):
compare Mark 14. 17. and Mat. 26. 20. and did you not teach us, that (...), the
even, began at Sunset? If Christ came not till the Sun was set, then he could
not begin the common Supder, till the Sun was set; at which time the fifteenth
day of Nisan beginning, is it not evident by your own principles, that Christ
ate not the common Supper till the fifteenth of Nisan, which was properly the
feast of the Passover? And is not this in terms contradictory both to our
selves, and to the Apostle, who tells us, John 13. 1. that that Supper (which
we term the common Supper) was before the feast of the Passover?

Answ. This is easily salved with a distinction of (...), which in strict terms
noted the first watch of the night; as also did (...) Mark 13. 35. beginning
the natural day with the Jews, and is called Vespera occasus. But in a large
sense its extended also to the evening that terminated the day foregoing, at
least, from three in the afternoon to six of the clock at night, called Vespera
declinationis. Take one place for proof, Mark 15. 42. its evident there, that
(...) was the evening that ended the fifteenth day: 1. Because its called the
Preparation, 2. The day before the Sabbath, which was the sixteenth day of
Nisan, and began just at Sunset. This evening was between three and six; about
three in the afternoon of the fifteenth of Nisan our Savior dyed, between it
and the Sabbath, beginning at six, Joseph begged his body, and together with
Nicodemus, wrapped it in linen with spices, John 19. verse. 38. to 42. but they
could not perfectly imbalm it, because the Sabbath beginning at six, came so
fast upon them, compare Luke 23. 56. and 24. 1. Our Savior then might eat the
common Supper on the evening that terminated the fourteenth day, which is our
Thursday, coming happily to Jerusalem between four and five in the afternoon, and
the Passover on the evening which began the fifteenth day, which we call
Thursday night, but began their Friday, or sixth day of the week, and was
properly the feast of the Passover. And thus without contradiction, the common
Supper might be before the feast of the Passover, and I neither contradict S.
John nor my self. For Christ might well eat the common Supper after five, and
the Passover after six, the common Supper at the end of the fourteenth day, and
the Passover at the beginning of the fifteenth day of Nisan, the fourteenth day
ending, and the fifteenth day beginning precisely at sixth of the clock at even.

M. H. p. 242. As for those other reasons, M. D. repeats against Judas
receiving, and are answered before, I count them only as so many Ciphers, etc.
And yet there is one passage he has very remarkable, and not to be forgotten,
that is, Christ excluded Judas in particular in these words, Luke 12. 21. But
behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is at the Table.

Answ. A very probable argument; Judas was excluded from the Sacroment, because
Christ says expressly he was present at it.

Answ. 1. Suppose my Reasons, or rather Answers, were but Ciphers (as M. H.
calls them) yet Cyphets with a Figure, himself grants are powerful. You must
conceive his figurative answers have turned them into Ciphers. I confess he is
good at Figures, and can play the Rhetorician well; but M. H. should consider,
that Logic is fitter for a Disputant than Rhetoric. I shall not say my
Arguments are Figures, nor should M. H. say they are Ciphers, till he can
prove, and not barely speak them to be so; we being parties, its not fit we
should be Judges in our own case. Let us leave that work to the indifferent and
judicious Reader.

2. In his remarkable observation, he quotes not my text heartily; my words
page 176. of my Bar are these, It seems probable that Christ excluded Judas
particularly in those words, etc. M. H. brings me in affirming downright, That
Christ excluded Judas, etc. whereas I spoke doubtfully, 1. It seems so. 2. It
seems probable. This is not fair dealing.

3. For the thing it self, 1. Where does Christ say expressly, Judas was present
at the Sacrament? He says indeed, The hand of the Traitor was at the Table. But
might not that be at the common Supper, or at the Passover? Has he forgot
Lukes hystorologie? 2. Suppose he were present when Christ was ready to
institute the Lords Supper, might not Christ by that sharp reproof virtually
bid him be gone; as asking him, What has a Traitor to do at the Lords Table
amongst Christ's faithful Disciples? Upon which, and the following discovery by
the Sop, etc. Judas might probably go away in a pet; as the Master virtually
turned away the presumptuous Guest, by those words, Friend, how came thou in
hither? etc. Matthew. 22 12. and with us, when persons attempt to receive before
approbation, the Minister or Elders deal with them upon the place, either by
Interrogation, or otherwise to forbear at present. This for the substance of
his answer, his flouting and feigned instance, I leave to them who need some of
M. H. his mirth.

SECT. VIII.
THe eighth Objection was, Those that receive unworthily, eat their own
Damnation.

Page 243. M. H. answers, 1. On the Churches part. 2. On the receivers part. On
the Churches part, I judge this cannot be made to concern them whom Mr. D.
excepts, p. 178. the Apostle commanding us to examine our selves, but not
others to examine us, 1 Cor. 11. 28.

Dr. D. The Apostles words are not to be understood restrictively.

M. H. p. 243. Belike then by Mr. D. the Apostles (...) must be thus
interpreted, Let a man examine himself, (...), and so, the Presbytery having
examined him, Let him eat.

Answ. Let M. H. take heed, lest by straightning the word, he attempt also to
straighten the Spirit of God, Micha 2. 6, 7. The word (...) (used in the Text)
signifies in Scripturephrase, not only to examine, but also to approve, Romans
1. 28. Phil. 1. 10. and 1 Cor. 16. 3. and particularly notes an approbation
upon trial, 1 Timothy 3. 10. and 2 Cor. 13. 5. the primary end of examination
being approbation, which he will attain unto sooner or later, who is constant
and conscientious in this duty. By proportion, (...), notes not only
self-tryal, but also self-approbation, which must be not only to my own
conscience, but also (what in me lies, upon just occasion) to the consciences
of others. See a like phrase, 2 Cor. 4. 2. and 6, 4. And this must especially
be done to those who are over us in the Lord. Now I approve my self to others,
either by an holy conversation, or by a good confession, when called to it, by
divine providence, as in persecution; or by the entreaty of equals, or
authority of superiors, upon just occasion; which suppose for the particular
and special season it may be prudential, yet in the general it is a moral
precept, and tends much to edification. Now if the word (...) have this
latitude in Scripture; upon what account will M. H. straighten it here? Is it
neither contrary to the analogy of faith, nor to good manners, to teach, that
(...) signifies to approve ones self to God and his own conscience always, and
to man, as just occasion requires: And shall M. H. be sole Judge of the
justness or fitness of such occasions? what absurdity is there in this
Paraphrase? Let a man approve himself to God, to his own conscience, and upon
just occasion to man, and so let him eat, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 28.

For his third answer, I grant it with Limitation; namely, that those who admit
persons visibly unworthy (when they have power to keep such away) had need
pray, Lord forgive us our othermens sins. And this I apprehend consonant both
to Truth, and to our principles.

Mr. D. Its absurd by an affirmative, to exclude a negative, etc.

Mr. H. ib. Let Mr. D. see the same absurdity in himself (who goes wholly on
this ground) for if affirmative Propositions are not exclusive (which is his
meaning) then how can he still argue and impose on us, that because the Apostle
says, Let a man so eat, therefore a man must not eat, unless so?

Answ. I see I am like to be absurd enough, if Mr. H. must be my Expositor: his
candor appears here, as well as in other places, I say, An affirmative does not
exclude a negative; this is a particular proposition. M. H. tells the Reader my
meaning is, that Affirmative propositions are not exclusive; this is a general
proposition. I mean its particular, if compared to the following proposition
that says, affirmative propositions are not exclusive at all. That exclusion
which excludes all propositions, persons and things, sure is more general, than
that which excludes only a negative proposition.
Does not he excellently open my meaning, who tells the world, that by a
particular I mean a general? Let the affirmative be, Let a man so eat: This
affirmative, I say, does not exclude the negative, Let not a man eat, unless
so, but rather includes it; as, Let a person circumcised and clean, eat the
Passover, does not exclude, but include, Let not a person eat, if he be
uncircumcised or unclean. But M. H. his unhandsome (I will not say witting)
mistake is, that he applies that to a person, which is to be applied to a
proposition. An affirmative precept, I hope, does not exclude a negative
precept; but it may, yea often does exclude a person from an Ordinance, as is
evident in the former Propositions.

Mr. H. ib. 2. If this be absurd in Divinity and Logic, it may be demanded,
How then will Mr. D. make good, therefore an other must examine me?

Answ. 1. By the same rule in proportion, 1. That one affirmative includes
another; and that either by way of subordination, or by way of analogy, Romans 4.
23. 24. If I must do good to my self, I must also do good to my neighbor as
God offers just occasion.

2. And more particularly by that rule which binds me to endeavor the
salvation of another, as well as my own salvation, Jam. 2. 18. Show me thy
faith, and I will show thee my faith, etc.

For his Rhetorical flout in the close of this Paragraph, it proclaims him more
witty than wise, and may tickle them who are taken more with fancy than
reason. Therefore I leave it for them to make merry withal.

For the Simile of poison, I grant, as I must give a man his food, so I must
give him the Sacrament; but I must not give a feverish man, etc. that
wholesome food, which will hurt him in statu quo, nor must I give a person
visibly unworthy the wholesome food of the Sacrament that will hurt him in
statu quo; yea, should an antipathy against the wholesomest food continue in
any durante vita, I ought not to give him that food so long as he lives.

Mr. H. p. 244 So that he must belike give them a little poison to try them etc.

Answ. I give not any man poison in the Sacrament to try him, but the Childrens
bread to them, whom I am bound in charity to think, or to hope they are
Children; Nor do I judge the Sacrament is poison to any by the effects only,
but also by the causes that make it so, namely visible ignorance and
prophanness, which last symptom (drawn from the causes) Mr. H. lets pass in
deep silence, though not fairly.

Dr. D. " All may see and be present, not eat, etc.

M.H. ib. This is but a kind of spice of secret Popery with which Mr. Dr.
would sweeten the bitterness of his book, etc.

Answ. 1. I ask Mr. H. whether the Lords Supper be a public Ordinance, or not?
If he say, It is not, let him show why: If he grant it is, will he then make it
a spice of Popery for all to be present at a public Ordinance? Is there no
difference between a Mass, where none but the Priest must receive (of which M.
Fox, and M. Bradford are to be understood) and a Communion, where every
intelligent Churchmember that is visibly worthy has liberty and encouragement
to receive in both kinds; and those who are visibly unworthy are for the
present only denied receiving, but not presence at the Ordinance?

Mr. D. How absurdly does Mr. H. make that the principal duty, which is the
carcass and form only?

M. H. p. 245. Me thinks Mr. D. should not speak so lightly of Christ's own
words, who does not know. Do this, includes matter and manner, etc?

Answ. I speak not lightly of Christ's words, about which we both agree that
they include both matter and manner; but I blame Mr. H. who makes the bare act
of receiving, abstracted from the right manner, a principal duty, and
selfexamination or preparation for right receiving the accessory. For evincing
whereof, consult his Vindication, page 70 in these words.

If a man fails in the one, and is not sufficiently prepared, I dare not say,
that he must keep away ( I am sure it will not excuse; but by your leave, Sir,
it may suspend) him from the other. Two or three lines above in the same page
M. H. has these expressions, For the receivers part, there is a double duty, a
principal, do this, what is this, but Receive? An accessory, Let a man examine
himself. No question, but we are bound to come worthily; but the question is
whether I be bound to receive when unworthy, unexamined by my self, and
unprepared? Mr. H. thinks you are, for self-examination is the accessory, I
pray then what is receiving in him that cannot receive rightly? that must be
either principal or accessory, for he makes no other branch of distinction; the
accessory he makes to be only self-examination, what then can the principal be
here but the act of receiving abstracted from preparation, which is unworthy
receiving? His similitude for illustration is lame, since even in Civil society
a Feast is not the principal, no nor feeding upon the Feast, but the
nourishment and confirmation of love between the Feast-maker and the Guests,
and between the Guests mutually, else a dinner of green herbs is better than a
stalled ox, Prove. 13. 17. But how can he that is destitute of faith and love,
either feed upon Christ, or bear love to him or his members as such. True, the
preparation of the Sacramental elements is but accessory to the feeding upon
them; but right preparation for the Sacrament is better, I hope, than a bare
receiving of the outward elements, and therefore cannot be accessory to that
receiving, but the principal. If Mr. H. judge otherwise, the Lord give me the
accessory of right preparation, though without the principal of the bare
elements (supposing I must be denied one of them) I shall not envy Mr. H. or
any, that principal of the bare elements, but shall rather pity them.

For his charging me here to cast up mire and dirt, let but the Reader peruse
my words, p. 122. of my Bar, and then judge, whether Mr. H. his fancy be not
foul and turbid, and so mis-represents seasonable and suitable reproof as mire
and dirt. A black sight makes white objects show black like it self.

Mr. H. ib. A Churchmember is as absolutely bound to come to the Sacrament
(understand here by coming. receiving) as to pray and hear.

Answ. A person jure excommunicate is a Churchmember till actually cut off. Is
such a one as much bound to receive, as to pray, and hear? Yea a person
actually excommunicated, I hope, is bound to pray, nor will Mr. H. deny it; Is
it not evident then, that the duty of prayer is more obligatory than the duty
of receiving?

Mr. H. p. 246. Where does the Scripture say any where, Let a man not eat, or
not drink?

Answ. 1. Where does the Scripture say expressly, Let not an heathen, or
excommunicated person eat or drink?

2. By just consequence, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and 10 21. say, Let a man not eat, or
not drink; But of this formerly.

I am glad that in this page Mr. H. with some caution agrees with me, That
unpreparedness will excuse a man from receiving. I cannot but like his caution
well for its substance, and, I pray, let the world here take notice, that as
wide as we seem to differ, yet we agree in this, That as unpreparedness may
excuse a man from receiving at present, so this abstinence must humble him, and
put him upon greater care to prepare for next Sacrament. Let me add, This is
the very end of suspension, be it negative, or positive: were passion and
prejudice laid aside, we should soon agree; The Lord cast these devils out of
us all, for man cannot.

M. H. p. 247. If Mr. D. cannot really sever hearing and unworthy hearing, etc.
How can he make it a means of grace?

Answ. Just as he can make unworthy preaching a means of grace; who knows how
many Judas converted? yet he preached unworthily. The evil doing of that work
(as to spiritual rectitude) which is materially good, may be a cause of death
to me, when the matter of the duty performed may be a cause of life to another,
as is evident in that Minister who preaches orthodoxly, plainly, and powerfully
(all which he may do by a common gift) yet is acted by, and under the dominion
of pride and self-seeking, etc.

For his five Premises, and three Inferences, page 247. and 248. whereby he
would make the world believe. That I press men to do evil, or to sin, that good
may come of it.

Answ. 1. I abhor such damnable doctrine, nor has Mr. H. the least solid
ground to infer it from my principles.

2. It being a received Scripture-maxim (which M. H. cannot deny) that all the
actions of a natural man have not only sin in them, but also are sins, being
(as the Father notes well) but splendida peccata; I shall make bold to retort
M. H. his Conclusion (against me) upon himself. Thus, A wicked man's prayer is
sin; A wicked man is bound to pray, ergo, He is bound to sin. Absurd, and
abominable! You may well say he is necessitated to sin (hypothetically) in
every action considering his state, etc. but he is bound to pray, and
graciously too, which yet he cannot do in statu quo; and for which he must
thank himself, but cannot blame God, or his Law, much less the Gospel. True,
all duties of a natural man are sins in him; yet its a greater sin for him (
caeter is paribus) to neglect or reject his duty.

You will say, then a natural man must receive (as well as pray) for that's his
duty.

Answ. 1. Let Mr. H. prove that receiving is a natural man's duty in statu quo,
and then I shall easily grant he is bound to receive, as well as to pray,
though both praying and receiving be sin in him. This for his first Query.

For the second Query. Mr. D. Unworthy receiving is otherwise damnable, than
unworthy praying, or hearing; 1. Because its not on universal duty; 2. Because
not converting.

Mr. H. p. 248. The first is vain, and inconsequent; for there are some duties
belong only to men in such and such relations; is the neglect hereof ever the
less damnable because they are not universal?

Answ. Sir, Let me crave leave to tell you that here you are clean besides the
Cushion, we are not now speaking of the neglect of a duty, but of presuming to
act out of my place, and relation. Unworthy receiving is not simply an
omission, but a commission, and a presumptuous act of him that will venture to
receive when prohibited; upon which account it is more damnable than unworthy
praying, etc. since no man in what estate soever, is prohibited to pray.

Mr. H. ib. Again, a natural man cannot convert himself by his moral works, are
his sins therefore ever the less sinful?

Answ. They are, or are not according to the nature of the moral work. He that
does a work naturally moral, yet unworthily ( caeteris paribus) sins less than
he that does a work moral by institution unworthily, though he can convert
himself by neither. The reason is, because all men are commanded works really
moral, and therefore in doing them a wicked man sins only in the manner; but
diverse persons are prohibited some parts of instituted worship, who therefore
by venturing upon them, sin both for matter and manner: Of this nature was the
Passover, and now is the Lords Supper as received. And for a person to venture
upon a prohibited work which in statu quo cannot convert, but hurt him, I think
is an aggravation. And so unworthy receiving is more damnable than unworthy
praying, or hearing.

3. Query. Whether an unregenerate person must never come to the Sacrament for
fear of eating damnation?

Mr. H. his answer (upon my assent) was, That upon the same ground he must
abstain from hearing etc.

Mr. D. " Not so, unless it can be proved the Sacrament is a converting
Ordinance.

Mr. H. p. 244. To undermine me here, he flies to all the duties of the Law, as
if upon this account a natural man must forbear them all, because they are not
converting.

Answ. But he overshoots himself, 1. By not considering the difference between
natural and instituted worship (of which above) natural duties are required of
all by the Law of nature, whether they be converting or no; not so instituted
duties, unless they be converting, or particularly imposed as was Aarons
sacrificing, Christ's Baptism etc.

2. By not putting a difference between absolute and relative duties, the
former must be done by all, not so the latter. Its as great homage to omit
where God forbids, as to perform where God commands. This saves me the labor
of answering a leaf.

Mr. H. p. 250. Where did Mr. D. learn a man must hear the word, though he hear
unworthily upon this ground, because its a means of conversion?

Answ. A strange question, as if he that commanded me to convert, did not in
that very command charge me to attend upon all the means of conversion. What he
adds for confirmation, is as frothy, as his question is uncouth, and has
formerly been answered. Every duty of a natural man is turned into sin by
reason of his state, must he not therefore do his duty? As we must not do a
thing materially evil that good may come of it, so I must do that which is
good for the matter (though it be evilly done for the manner, and ever will be
so in natural men) that good may come of it.

Mr. H. p. 251. Mr. D. his distinction of abstainers and refusers cannot be
applied here, because a man cannot always forbear an Ordinance, but his
omission makes him a refuser, or neglecter: And my question is, Whether an
unregenerate man must never receive?

Answ. What if the ground of abstaining for a time hold always? Is there not
still the same reason of abstinence? No unclean person was to eat the
Passover. Now I ask Mr. H. whether leprous Vzziah was not suspended, and bound
to abstain all his life long from the Passover, and why not ( pari ratione) a
spiritual Leper from the Lords Supper, if his leprosy hold him to his dying
day? I hope Uzziahs abstinence was no refusal.

In the same page Mr. H. charges me with a malicious aspersion for saying, Its
an apparent falsity that the same thing is sealed to all in the Sacrament. My
assertion I proved, because damnation is sealed to one, salvation to another;
and these are not the same.

M. H. p. 251. That which is sealed is the Covenant, and that is the same I
hope.

Answ. But I hope, Sir, the same branches of the Covenant are not sealed to
all. Its not enough to say two things are the same, because they agree in
genere proximo vel remoto; for then flesh and Spirit, fire and water, man and
beast, yea, the very Covenant of works and of grace should be the same; which
how absurd in common acception?

M. H. p. 252. The Sacrament can convert him that has common grace, because it
can confirm him in common grace.

Answ. Then the Sun, Moon and Stars may convert him, because they can confirm
him in common grace. But, I pray, where is the promise of Conversion by
receiving the Sacrament.

M. H. ib. first charges me as saying, The Receiver seals as necessarily to the
condition of the Covenant in esse, as in fieri. And then spends half a side in
disputing against me.

Answ. He sets up a Puppet of my Text, corrupted by his own gross omission, and
then fights against it.

My words p. 188. of my Bar, are these, The Receiver seals as necessarily (in
point of duty) to the condition in esse as in infieri. But those words, in
point of duty, he omits, and thereby makes my sense absurd. His opposite
instance of Children in Baptism is impertinent, since he knows we are now
speaking of intelligent persons.

Mr. D. By the very act of receiving he seals to faith in esse, or de praesenti
in point of profession. The very language of his receiving the Elements is, I
receive Christ signified and offered to me in particular by them; and therefore
he that receives the Elements, and does not act faith at the same instant, he
plays the hypocrite woefully, etc. and so does every unworthy receiver.

The sum of M. H. his answer to this in three pages is,

1. That he has true historical faith, and therefore plays not the hypocrite.

2. That the case is the same at all Ordinances.

3. That Christ is given to him, and received by him, so far as he is in Christ.

4. He is engaged to receive sincerely.

5. That he may receive Christ, as the Minister tenders Christ, that is
conditionally.

6. Mr. H. tells us in effect, page 225. That by receiving, he professes not
saving faith, or that he is converted, for he holds the Sacrament a means of
conversion. What else he inserts is in effect the same with these heads, or
has formerly been answered.

Answ. 1. By receiving, he professes not only historical faith, or faith of
assent (that he may profess by bare presence, though bare presence is not
always a profession) but also faith of adherence, or that faith which receives
Christ, as his hand receives the Elements, etc. which is an act of the will, an
act of election; But the natural man does not so receive Christ, when he
receives the Elements, and therefore in that act dissembles.

To the second. The case is not the same in all Ordinances: A person coming to
hear, does not simply by that act profess faith in Christ; instance, 1 Cor. 14.
24. Besides, the Word and Prayer are parts of natural worship, to which all are
bound, be they dissemblers or not. But the Sacrament, as such; is purely
instituted.

To the third. If by giving, M. H. mean tendering (which he must mean, or he
writes a tautology) his assertion is false, since whole Christ is tendered to
him, but not so received by him; and so Christ is further tendered to a carnal
receiver, than Christ is in a carnal receiver: for Christ is tendered to him
sincerely, and completely, but Christ is not in him sincerely and completely.

To the fourth. Is my engaging to receive Christ sincerely, a salvo for, or
rather is it not an aggravation of, my receiving Christ hypocritically?

To the fifth. I pray what is the condition of the Covenant, but the receiving
of Christ? and so belike a natural man receives Christ, upon condition that he
receives Christ.

To the sixth, page 255. this, 1. Contradicts his second answer, That
attendance upon every Ordinance, is a signified profession that we will obey
the mind of God, when revealed; and he that does not heartily resolve this,
when he hears, mocks God, by playing the hypocrite. 2. Contradicts the known
and acknowledged sense of receiving. As the Minister tenders not only the bare
Elements, but Christ himself really and sincerely, so the Communicant professes
by that very act, that he receives not only the Elements, but also Christ
himself, as he is tendered; which no natural man does, and therefore by
receiving he plays the hypocrite. 3. Its a mere flam for any to say, I receive
Christ, in order to saving faith and conversion, when at the same time he hates
saving faith and conversion. Can any really make that to be his end, which he
hates and detests?

M. D. Assurance is not absolutely requisite, as a means to receiving.

M. H. p. 256. If regeneration be necessarily required before receiving, then
assurance is absolutely required as a means; for that which is not of faith is
sin, Romans 14. 23.

Answ. By faith, understand the faith of persuasion, to which the doubting
there mentioned is opposite, compare Verse 22.

Now 1: Doubting does not make an act of duty unlawful (for then prayer should
be unlawful, to him that doubts whether he should pray) but it makes an
indifferent action (of which the Apostle speaks) unlawful.

2. Every doubt does not overthrow persuasion, and by proportion it does not
overthrow assurance, which is not perfect in this life, but more or less
opposed by doubting. No real Saints assurance is utterly overthrown by
doubting, though his assurance may often times not be so sensible, as to break
out into a clear flame, Matthew. 12. 20.

3. As a Jew being clean might eat the Passover, though he were not certainly
assured of his cleanness; so a Christian being clean, may, yea, ought to eat
the Lords Supper, though he be not certain of his Gospel-cleanness. But of this
formerly.

Page 256, 257. M. H. says truly, That the actings of Gods Spirit are very
secret, and that a Christian should still endeavor to blow up all good motions;
but seems to hesitate, whether common grace differ from special grace gradually
or specifically: By which it appears, that I was not much out in saying, that
he did not sibi constare.

Answ. If common and saving grace differ only gradually, then they are one and
the same grace specifically; and if so, then common grace is saving grace in a
lower degree, and saving grace is but common grace in an higher degree; and
what then follows?

1. Where is the distinction between Babes, Young men, and Fathers? 1 John 2.
verse. 12, 13, 14.

2. How does the Apostle prove, that diverse professors had not true grace,
because they turned Apostates? 1 John 2. 19. Then men not only may, but
usually do apostatize from saying grace, if this Doctrine be true.

3. How will this turn us back to Arminianism, and subvert the very foundation
of weak Christians comfort, if this be true Doctrine, that their weak
beginnings are but common grace, in which many reprobates have gone far beyond
them? yea, how shall strong Christians now their common grace is rooted enough
to make saving grace; how shall they value their gold, when for ought they know
it may be but copper?

For what he adds in the close of page 257. let the Reader judge by comparing
our texts, whether I wrong him or no. I perceive the man is distempered, which
makes him so apt upon the least occasion, to change me with frowardness,
Therefore I shall not rub the sore, but pass on.

M. H. must pardon me, if I be not of his mind, page 259. That an unregenerate
man can heartily for the present, engage himself to the terms of Christ; yea,
his very premisal, ibid. That he does this but Legally (in my poor judgment)
overthrows that Conclusion. Can a Legal and Servile spirit act cordially
toward Christ? withal, let me entreat him, not to call those terms harsh, and
the opinions of others, which are either the Apostles express terms, or his
sense; and owned in that sense, not by few, or contemptible persons, both
Calvinists, Lutherans, and Papists. Let me but transcribe two or three
testimonies in meeter, that the Sacrament is poison to the wicked.

Sumunt boni, sumunt mali,
Sort tamen inaequali
Vitae and interitus.
Mors est malis, vita bonis:
Vide paris sumsionis
Quam sit dispar exitus.
Vita pits erit, atque eadem mors sontibus, esca;
Vno eodemque salus fluit atque ex font venenum.
Gratus odor cerebro est quem mollis Amaracus edit.
Sed necat immundas illius aura sues.
I trust we shall be as tender of Christ's Lambs as M. H. is, though we dare not
own all for Lambs, that have the Lambs clothing.

SECT. IX.
THe ninth Objection is, The Ordinances are polluted if all be admitted.

M. H. page 260. Unto the unworthy receivers it may be said defiled, as Tit. 1.
15, etc. but not to others.

Unto this Mr. D. consents, and therefore he might have dealt more ingenuously
to have joined with me in strengthening the weak, rather than to vilify the
succors that I brought them; Page 261
but like a troublesome bryar, there is nothing can pass him without catching,
renting and tearing, while he brings his nettles to possess our pleasant
places, and thorns our Tabernacles, etc.

Answ. This I must confess is a short answer to page 192, 193. and part of page
194. of my Bar: In which three pages,

1. I grant, that the actual receiving of a wicked man, does not simply defile
either the Sacrament or the Communicants; but sinful Connivance.

2. I vindicate one or two places of Scripture misapplyed by M. H.

3. I retort his own professed principle upon himself.

4. I entreat him to walk by the light of his own caution, given page 78. of
his Vindication. Let the Reader peruse those three passages in my Bar, and then
judge, whether I deserve such liberal language as M. H. is here pleased to
afford me. Is it probable, that he who falls so foulely upon a weak Brother,
can be so zealous (as is pretended) to strengthen weak Brethren? Or can I not
possibly strengthen weak Brethren, unless I be just of M. H. his latitude?

M. H. p. 261. and 262. I cannot wholly free Mr. D. for I think there is a
deadly wound made upon tender Christians, while he involves every soul under
the guilt of participation with the Receiver, if they do not their best to
hinder him from receiving, which yet is not simply a duty (where still lies
this sad fallacy) but only secundum quid, in reference to the parties
amendment, as the end, and excommunication as the means, whereby a man being
cast out of Christian Communion in general, is consequently debarred the
Sacrament; and otherwise to keep him from it is amiss, as going upon this false
ground, that unfitness to the Sacrament is the formal cause of excommunication:
and I fear sinful, because it is simply our duty to exhort (and in our places
to prepare) all our fellow members, both to come, and to come worthily unto it.

Answ. 1. Where do I say, that its simply a sin to partake at the Sacrament
with visibly unworthy Receivers? nay, is not the contrary Tenet my professed
judgment? Let my own words speak for me, page 196, of my Bar, Particular
persons sin not in communicating with persons visibly unworthy, but only in
connivance at their visible unworthiness. 2. This connivance (I there show)
consists either in neglect of Brotherly admonition, or (if that will not do) of
complaining to the Church, in order to their Reformation; or (if that cannot be
effected) in order to their suspension: And lastly, their dismembring; which is
M. H. his excommunication. This carriage of ours M. H. calls doing ones best to
hinder a person visibly unworthy from receiving; whereas indeed by private
admonition, etc. I do my best to prevent his suspension and excommunication,
and withal, deliver my own soul from the guilt of sinful connivance. To root up
this cavil, let me turn a little from M. H. to tender Christians.

Dear Brethren, will you justify M. H. in this Allegation of his? Is it a
wound to your consciences to admonish an offending Brother, and (if upon
private admonition he reform not) to tell the Church, according to your Masters
rule? Mat, 18. ver. 15, 16, 17.

Object. We scruple not the thing, but the doing of it in order to suspension.

Answ. If you scruple Suspension, will you therefore neglect your duty, because
of the Consequence which you allow not? When you complain to Church Officers,
can you not tell them you seek not the Suspension, but the reformation or
Excommunication of the offending Brother? I wish we had more scruplers of
suspension, provided, that in love and humility Church Members would make
conscience of the forementioned duties. But this is our misery, and one great
bar to Reformation, that private Christians make little conscience either of
fraternal correption, or of telling the Church when private admonition will not
do. His very words are p. 262. if they do not their best to hinder him from
receiving, which yet is not simply a duty, but only secundum quid, in
reference to the parties amendment as the end, and excommunication as the
means, etc. Does he not here grant, that its our duty secundum quid, to
endeavor to hinder an intelligent Churchmember from the Sacrament, in
reference to excommunication? mark it, he says, not to hinder him from
receiving by excommunication, but in reference to excommunication; and what is
this, I pray, but by suspension to make way for excommunication? a doctrine
very agreeable to our principles in sundry cases.


3. (To return to my Antagonist) let the Reader judge, if here M. H. yield not
up his cause, by granting. That in reference to excommunication, and the
parties amendment, it is my duty to do my best to hinder a person visibly
unworthy from receiving.

Hindering from the Sacrament here, cannot be excommunication in M. H. his
sense, since his own text tells us, that this hindering from the Sacrament is in
reference to excommunication; and so it seems to explain his doctrine about the
suspension of persons ipso jure excommunicate: And though he say, ib. This
hindering is in reference to excommunication, as the means, and in reference to
amendment as the end, that will not help him, since we easily grant, that
suspension may be, yea sometimes ought to be, in reference to excommunication,
as a sharp means, but both must always be, in reference to reformation, as the
end.

4. We renounce, as well as himself, that false ground (Thas unfitness to the
Sacrament, is the formal cause of excommunication) and judge it a very harsh
doctrine. Gross ignorance makes a man unfit for the Sacrament, which yet is not
simpliciter, the formal or just cause of excommunication in the rigor,
whatever affected ignorance may be.

5. If it be our duty to exhort (and in our places to prepare) all our
fellow members to come worthily (I know no duty incumbent to exhort any to come
absolutely) to the Lord's Supper; sure Church Officers act not out of their
place, by endeavoring to prepare Church Members for the Sacrament, by previous
trial, counsel, and exhortation. I pray, Sir, do not discourage Church Officers
from that which here you cannot but acknowledge is their duty.

I hope, Sir, you are not of opinion, that the Elders or private Christians
must turn public Preachers to prepare their fellow members for receiving
(that's the Ministers work) it must then be done more privately by Christian
converse in a way of trial, counsel, and exhortation. Persuade the people to
this, and you will be a better friend to reformation than by pleading for your
free admission. I mean not, that public preaching is so the Ministers work as
to excuse him from private converse with his flock. See Act. 20. 20


Mr. H. p. 262. Suppose a regenerate man deserves to be excommunicate, and I do
not complain of him; he comes, and receives in faith. Now if I must partake of
a man's receiving unworthily, when I should endeavor his excommunication, and
do not, then I must partake in this man's receiving worthily, and so my not
endeavoring their excommunication shall be good in the one, and sin in the
other. It is apparent therefore, that this sin is to be singled by it self; I
am never the more or the less guilty whether he come or not come, receives
worthily, or not worthily; that is (...), but this is one only continued guilt
in me, that I do not my duty in admonishing, and telling the Church of him,
supposing the case so, that it is my duty.

Grant Mr. H. His supposition may be true, what then?

Mr. H. Then by my not endeavoring his excommunication, I must partake of his
receiving worthily.

Answ. No such matter, for his worthy receiving (upon the supposition) is but
accidental unto your neglect of duty; and as a sin following accidentally in
another upon my duty performed toward him shall not be imputed to me (as
suppose upon my admonition my Brother grow worse) so a moral good following
upon the neglect of my duty, shall not be imputed to me, who omitted that duty;
but contra, the neglect of my duty shall be charged upon me. God measures not a
sin or duty by its accidental events, but first by its nature and
circumstances; and secondly, by its natural and proper consequents. He that
omits good that good may come thereby (by good understand my duty, that I am
hic and nunc obliged to) sins, as well as he that does evil that good may come,
Romans 3. 8.

What next? Mr. H. And so my not endeavoring their excommunication, shall be
good in the one and a sin in the other.

Answ. This is as wild as the former, and supposes that an omission of duty is
warranted by a moral good following casually thereupon.

I shall therefore answer this supposition with another. Suppose, I am
dangerously sick of a fever; the Physician forbids me wine: a careless Nurse
(contrary to the Physicians prohibition) upon my importunity lets me drink Sack
liberally, upon which I fall a sleep for diverse hours together, and recover:
Will Mr. H. say the Nurses carelessness was morally good because it was
eventually good? Pilates not rescuing of Christ was eventually good, was it
therefore morally good? In like manner, Suppose a godly man deserving
excommunication receive worthily; his worthy receiving is accidental to my
neglect of telling the Church; wherefore by omission of that my duty I am
guilty as if he had received unworthily; that, and not his worthy receiving
being the natural and proper fruit of my omission.

Yet further; Who ever will seriously weigh and compare the supposition and
inference, may observe that Mr. H. is no very cordial friend to
excommunication, how ever he may cry it up, to cry down suspension.

With all, lest I should seem to be over rigid, I must add. That if this godly
man deserved excommunication for some foul crime known only to me, or some
few, and upon reproof humbled himself, etc. I dare not say its my duty (in that
case) to tell the Church, since the principal end of excommunicating this
person is attained by private reproof, Matthew. 18. 15. But in case this godly
man do obstinately persist, and deny, or defend the crime that is evident,
there is little hope that in such a condition, he will receive worthily; yet
suppose he should, that will not excuse my neglect to tell the Church upon his
pertinacy after admonition first by my self, and then with two or three more
according to the rule. Matthew. 18. 17. By all has been said, its apparent, my
sin of omission is not to be singled by it self (as Mr. H. would have it) and
that I am more guilty if that godly man receive unworthily, than if he had not
received at all; since my telling the Church (in case he be obstinate) might
have prevented his great sin of unworthy receiving, to which I am accessory by
not hindering it when I might, and should; but his unworthy receiving will not
excuse my neglect to tell the Church, since his worthy receiving (upon the
supposition) is not the proper, but accidental consequent of that my neglect
and omission.

To what Mr. H. adds in the same page, I answer, We say not its absolutely a
duty to keep from the Sacrament persons visibly unworthy (this act being
limitable by several cautions) but that it concerns Church Members, by private
admonition, or telling the Church, to seek the reformation of such a person;
which regularly done frees private Christians from guilt. Nor is there the same
reason for keeping any from the Word and Prayer, as from the Sacrament. But of
this formerly. As in some cases excommunication it self may be forborne of which
formerly in the Parable of the Tares; so it may fall out in the matter of
positive Suspension which is very rare with us, Church-governors ordinarily
acting rather by way of entreaty to forbear, than by any juridical censure. As
for the Ministers suspending his own act of giving the Sacrament to one he
knows to be unworthy; if Mr. H. judge it a weakness in such a Minister, I hope
how ever he will not force a weak brother to act against his conscience.


For his instance (in the close of this Section) of the Churches admitting
Infants to receive in the days of Augustine, he is not ignorant of the ground
thereof, which upon better inspection was found weak. Yet withal, I must be
bold to tell him, that if he will keep to his own bottom of Church Membership,
he cannot turn Infants, or the distracted out of his society, who have better
right to the Lords Supper than many he pleads for. But I pass this as formerly
handled.

SECT. X.
THe last Objection is, from the several Texts alleged for separation from
wicked persons.

Mr. H. No Scripture allows a separation from any of Gods public Ordinances.

A great part of my answer to this exception, Mr. H. passes, Page 265.
with telling the Reader, He has already satisfied those things, only he
leaves two notes. And 1. where I say his excommunication is a cruel censure, as
cutting men off from all Ordinances.

Mr. H. answers, I am persuaded Mr. D. will be of another mind when he comes
to understand me better, how I take this, that is, relatively, wherein I think
I am near the truth.

Answ. By relative cutting off from Church Communion in general, Mr. H. means
(to my best understanding) That a person thus censured has no relative right
to any Church-Ordinance; yet by the Churches indulgence may be admitted to any,
though not as a Churchmember. Whence it follows, That he who is no
Churchmember (such is his excommunicated person) may by the Churches
indulgence be admitted to any Ordinance; which if true (I know no scriptum est
for such indulgence) then not only persons dismembered, but also heathen may be
admitted to receive the Lords Supper, though not as Church Members; a great
latitude indeed. But I pray, Sir (upon the supposition) may the Church indulge
me a real enjoyment of the Sacrament, to which (if excommunicated) I have no
relative right, and may it not indulge me a relative right to the Sacrament,
though at present it see good reason to deny me the real enjoyment thereof? Of
this formerly, therefore I pass it.

Mr. H. ib. Not every slight occasion, but notorious crimes, must serve for
Church-censure. If we allow any censure less than casting out of the Church,
Church Censures are like to become ordinary, and soon contemned, etc.

1. By concession of the first branch; yea, though the crime be heinous (so it
be not notorious and public) I do not think it must come presently to a
Church-censure, till private admonition be slighted, Matthew. 18. v. 15, 16, 17.

2. Yet that may possibly be slight to some, which is very foul in it self,
whether you respect its substance or circumstances: And such is affected
ignorance.

3. If there be no censure less than casting out of the Church, then belike
public reproof is no Church-censure. Sure the Apostle was not of Mr. H. his
mind, 1 Timothy 5. 20.

4. If the causes of Church Censures be ordinary, Church Censures (caeteris
paribus) must be as ordinary. That frequency makes them contemptible is too
true through our innate corruption, which inclines us to contemn Christ, the
choysest Ordinances and mercies, because they are ordinary. But thence to argue
it were better such mercies and Ordinances were less frequent, is
antiscriptural and irrational.

For his personal reflections, page 267-269. I shall only say thus much; I He
takes too much upon him to charge me so highly, especially with malice. I
confess I hare his free Admission, but love his person.

2. What I speak in thesi, and still apprehend to be a truth, he first applies
in hypothesi, and then exaggerates, to make it seem more odious.

3. Had I applied it personally to Mr. H. I only noted what God might justly
do, as himself confesses, p. 268. and withal acknowledge as much against my
self, That God justly might deal with me as a weed, for cherishing and
tolerating of weeds.

His four Queries propounded page 269. have formerly been answered, therefore I
shall not trouble my Reader with Repetitions.

Mr. H. p. 269. And now if Mr. Drake shall have need to write again; as I
believe nature will work, and his spirit cannot hold: I shall desire him, if he
will go to vent that superfluity of maliciousness, etc. to take along with him
that Text, Deuteronomy. 23. 13.

Answ. How true is that saying of the Wiseman, Prove. 27. 19. As in water face
answers to face? so, etc. Mr. H. has set me so fair a copy in his Rejoinder,
that he might well expect (considering both our hearts have the same inherent
principles of naughtiness) I would undoubtedly write after his copy. But I hope
I have not so learned Christ. As in placing the Bar (if I know my own heart) I
was not acted by malice; so now in fixing the Bar, I have, by the grace of God,
endeavored to avoid the appearance of malice, and shall beshrew my self, if
any passage have slipped from my Pen, which may favor of that hellish leaven. I
would not only seek Truth, but also follow after Charity, especially with Mr.
Humphrey.

Page 270. Mr. H. He concludes with a scruple to the Reader, and tells us, he
has done with Mr. Humphrey. Thus Hiram has finished the work he had to do,
the Pots and the Shovels, etc.

Answ. See a like close of his first part, page 135, 136. I will not dispute
how pertinent those applications of Scripture are; I am sure they are not very
pious. Pray, Sir, If you shall see cause of writing again, however you may
trample upon Mr. Drake, do not abuse the holy Scripture. Its ill jesting with
such Edge-tools. The Word of Salvation deserves better at our hands than to be
made either an Object, or Instrument of derision.

Soli Deo Gloria.
A TABLE OF THE Most remarkable Passages handled in the several Sections, There
being twelve Sections in the First Part, and ten in the Second Part.
PART. I.
SECT. II.
ALL put for many, and the number twelve, by roundness of number, put for an
inferior number. Ib, Luke, neither in terms, nor by necessary Consequence,
affirms, that Judas was present at, or received the Lords Supper. Ib. Supposing
Judas did receive, it makes not for Mr. Humphrey. Ib. That scandal wiped away,
That we give more power to the Presbytery, than to Jesus Christ. Ib.
Church-tryal of any, warrantable upon an holy jealousy about their knowledge
and piety. Ib. We go not about, by Suspension, to punish any for a future sin.
Ib. His Quotation out of Dr. Hamond, makes not against us, who deny not but
Christian Professors, whose hearts are full of villainy, may be admitted, in
case that villainy be not visible.
SECT. III.
Diverse middle things between a visible Covenant Relation, and truth of grace,
which may be a just bar to admission. Ib. Mr. H. allows the Suspension of
persons ipso jure excommunicate. How grace may be wrought in Infants by the
Ordinances, or promoted. Infants are naturally incapable of understanding what
is done in Baptism, as well as in the Lords Supper. Suspension owned both by
the ancient and modern Church.
SECT. IV.
MR. H. acknowledges a signified Profession, and what it is. A word for tender
Consciences, who through scruple stand off from the Sacrament. 1 Cor. 11. About
the Lords Supper, and our address to it, opened. What it is to be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. How any is bound to apply Damnation to himself at
the Sacrament. The distinction between eating and sealing damnation. Comfort to
trembling Souls about this particular. Whether Moral instruments cannot Convey
a thing that is real.
SECT. V.
MOral, as well as Levitical uncleanness, was a bar to the Passover. All
unclean persons must be kept from those holy things which cannot convert, but
prejudice them in statu quo. Niddui a Bar to the Passover. The Parallel between
the Passover and the Lords Supper. How far the Corinthians scandals were a bar
to the Sacrament. All not put for an absolute universal, nor for all of a
kind. 1 Cor. 10. 21. opened and vindicated. 1 Cor. 10. v. 3, 4, 5. vindicated.
The right way of settling tender Consciences. The Parable of the Feast, Mat.
22. and Luke 14 vindicated. Mat. 3. about John's Baptism, vindicated, Acts 2.
41, 42, 46. vindicated. Who are federally holy, or not. Revel. 22. 17.
vindicated. How the Covenant by the Sacrament is sealed to all the world. How
far men may be compelled to trial, and that trial about the truth of men's
profession, rightly managed, is no entering upon the throne or secrets of God.
SECT. VI.
THe latitude of the Covenant tender is no solid ground for free Admission to
the Sacrament, as received. In what sense, and upon what account a Minister may
say to a Receiver of the Sacrament, Christ is thine, etc. A Churchmember may
be visibly in the state of Nature. The Minister does not seal to a lie, by
giving the Sacrament to those who are visibly worthy, yet really unworthy. Mr.
H. acknowledges presence at the Sacrament to be freer than actual receiving.
Romans 2. 3. vindicated. How the word is a sealed word to Heathen, etc. All may
be present at the Lords Supper, but all may not receive. In what cases a
Minister may admit or suspend from the Sacrament.
SECT. VII
SAcraments not essential notes of a visible Church. Mr. H. allows a negative
Suspension upon prudential grounds. The Parable of the Tares opened, 134
SECT. VIII.
ARguments to prove Suspension is a Divine Institution, backed with Humane
Testimony.
SECT. IX.
ITs neither vain, nor impossible to select a people for the Sacrament. Visible
Worthiness, as distinct from Church Membership, warranted by Scripture.
SECT. X.
ADmission to the Passover, no warrant for Mr. Humphrey his Free Admission.
Mat. 5, verse. 23, and 25. vindicated. Doubting Christians in what cases they
may and must receive, though unregenerate persons ought not to receive. Mr.
Humphrey his stating of the Controversy, for himself, and for us, examined.
SECT. XI.
Mr. Humphrey his innocence, in admitting all Intelligent Church Members,
tried.
SECT. XII.
THe Command, Drink you all of it, no Argument to prove Mr. H. his free
Admission.
PART. II.
SECT. I.
MAt. 7. 6. opened and vindicated.
SECT. II.
SAcramental trial not so burdensome as diverse make it. Suspension far milder
than the greater excommunication.
SECT. III.
WHat Mr. H. means by visible Saint, and what we mean thereby.
SECT. IV.
MR. H. holds none are visible blanks within the Church. How faith is sealed in
the Sacrament. Mr. H. Holds, that God by the Sacrament ingaegs not to give a
man faith. Rejoinder, page 71. whence it follows, that the Sacrament does not
convert. How the Sacraments confirm faith formally, and consequentially. The
Sacraments are seals, though they do not confirm every Receiver. Historical and
particular assent are often divided in the Regenerate. In the Sacrament God
seals to the Regenerate the condition, as well as the benefits following upon
the condition. The difference between Gods and the Ministers sealing to a
visible Blank. Mr. H. is not for the admission of all Church Members de facto,
unless they be also Church Members de jure. This Jus is the very foundation of
Church Membership; and what it is. The Sacrament ^eals to the inward, as well
as to the outward Covenant. How the Sacrament is a tropical, yet a proper seal.
Mr. Calvin very zealous against Mr. H. his free Admission. How the Sacraments
are Gods Seals, faiths Seals, and the Covenants Seals. Faith is given by virtue
of the Covenant made with man. The conditionality of the Covenant of grace is
no bar to its absoluteness. How the Assumption and Conclusion of the Syllogism
of Assurance are in Scripture by Consequence. One and the same thing may be an
object both of faith and sense. In what he must be lost who will be a worthy
Receiver. How the Sacrament is a Seal of faith, subjectively.
SECT. V.
We agree all Church Members must be admitted without a known Bar, but differ
about this known Bar.
SECT. VI.
THe confirmation of faith, a primary end of the Lords Supper. The Lords Supper
no Converting Ordinance. Mr. H. his twelve Arguments to prove it a Converting
Ordinance answered; and one example.
SECT. VII.
John 13. 1. opened.
SECT. VIII.
WHat is meant by Self-examination, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Mr. H. hesitates, whether
common grace differ gradually or specifically from saving grace. Its no harsh
expression to say, the Sacrament is poison to the unworthy Receiver.
SECT. IX.
A Digression to tender Consciences. Not the accidental good effects of sin, or
bad effects of duty, but the natural, shall be imputed.
SECT. X.
MR. H. his relative cutting off from Ordinances, examined.
FINIS.
ERRATA in the first part.
Page 22. in the Margin, read page 22. p. 60. l. 9. for six r. ten, p. 67. l.
9. for Pouls r. Paul's, p. 80. l. 15. for he r. the, p. 85 l. 19. r. Adultis, p
105. l. 13. r. Mr. H. p 155. l. 31. for own r. one, p. 131. l. 10. for
principle r. principal. p. 103. l. 27. del. in, and the Comma. p. 96. l. 27.
for to so r. so to, p. 205. l. 13. r Bar. ib. l. 26. for thus r. this. p. 214.
l. 13. r. unintelligent, p. 220. l. 11. for there r. therefore, p 221. l. 32.
for is grace, r grace is.

ERRATA in the second part.
PAge 353 line 13. for si r. is, p. 389. line 22. read medius, p. 420. l. 24.
r. Baptizing, p. 463. l. 18. for is r. in, p. 468. l. 22. r. (...), p. 472. l.
2. for 12. r. 22.

WHereas page 22. toward the latter end, I say, there is no mention of
Excommunication jure or facto, in the 24 page of Mr. Humphrey his Vindication;
nor, to my remembrance, in any part of his Vindication: I perceive now, upon
better information, that those terms are used page 4. of Mr. H. his
Vindication; but the page being misquoted by his Printer, occasioned my
mistake; which therefore I thought my self bound here to give notice of.


