depiction of the king in council with several clergymen, with the Angel of
Death, bearing sickle and hourglass, in attendance Time brings all to light.


The eye of heaven sees all.


1589
(?)depiction of the English Armada, in which the English were defeated by the
Spanish 1605
(?)depiction of Guy Fawkes entering Parliament (in connection with the
Gunpowder Plot) 1639
(?) depiction of the Battle of the Downs, in which the Spanish were defeated
in English waters



A CONSPIRACY DISCOVERED OR THE EPORT OF A COMMITTEE To the House of Commons in
Parliament, of the Examination of diverse of the Conspirators and others in the
late Treason, June the 17. 1641.

1. Concerning the Tower. 2. Wherein the French are concerned in this
^^nspiracy. 3. Of provoking the Army against the Parlia^ent, by false Reports.
Printed in the year 1641.

A CONSPIRACY DISCOVERED: OR, The Report of the Committee to the House of
Commons in Parliament, of the examination of diverse of the Conspirators and
others in the late Treason, June the 17, 1641.
Mr. Fynes made Report to the House of Commons of three Heads. 1. Concerning
the Tower. 2. Wherein the French are concerned in the Conspiracy. 3. Of
provoking the Army against the Parliament by false reports.


Captain Billingsleyes Examination was reported by Mr. Hambden, who says, he
had no hand in the Conspiracy, only that Sir John Suckling invited him to the
employment in the Army.

Also, one Nuts Examination reported, who deposed that the Earl of Straffords
escape was practiced.

Then the Lieutenant of the Towers Examination was reported, who says
clearly, that the Earl of Strafford endeavored an Escape, promising 20000.
pound to marry his Son to his Daughter, and to have made her one of the
greatest Marriages in the Kingdom.

Concerning the Army Lieutenant Colonel Ballards Examination was reported by
Sir Phillip Stapleton, which shows that Captain Childley had brought down to
the Army many instrnctions.

And that Colonel Goring should be Lieutenant General of the Army, and the
Prince, and the Lord of Newcastle to meet them in Nottinghamshire, with one
thousand Horse.

All which propositions came from Mr. Henry Iermin, and were dispersed by
Sergeant Major Wallis, and Captain Chidley.

Sergeant Major Wallis upon his Examination, says that the French would assist
them, and the Clergy* would at their own charge send a thousand horse.

Colonel Goring upon his Examination says, he was tied up by an Oath of
secrecy, and therefore durst not answer to all the Interrogatories, which Oath
he says was given him by M. Piercy in his Chamber at White Hall in presence of
Mr. Wilmot, Colonel Ashburnham, Captain Pollard and others, who said they had
all of them taken this Oath, and that he was the last of the company that was
to take it.

Mistress Plumw^ll says that a French man, a Carver to the Queen, brought
Arms to her house, and desired her to keep them, for that the house of
Commons had made an order, that no Papists should have Arms in their custody,
and then fetched them back again, about the time the Earl of Straffords
escape was practiced.

There was also a report of a Letter from Mr. Iermin to Mr. Mountague, which
was intercepted, wherein he writ, that he hoped that the horse Leeches would
be starved for want of food.

Also, of another Letter from Mr. Mountague to Master Iermin, which showed,
they expected the Lord of Strafford shortly with them.

Also Mr. Bland upon his examination, says, that Mr. Iermin much endeavored
to get Portsmouth into his hands.

And that there was two letters from one Roberts a Priest, to the Bishop of
Chalcedon in recommendation of two English Priests.

FINIS.

