THE DISCOVERY Of a Swarm of Seperatists, OR, A Leathersellers SERMON.

Being a most true and exact Relation of the tumultuous combustion in
Fleet Street last Sabbath day being the 29. of December. truly describing how
Burboon a Letherseller had a Conventicle of Brownists met at his house that day
about the number of an hundred and fifty, who preached there himself about
five hours in the afternoon.

Showing likewise how they were discovered, and what means, as also how the
Constable scattered their Nest, and of the great tumult in the Street.

With another Relation of a Sermon, that Prophet Hunt preached in St. Pulchers
Church the same day aforesaid, making another combustion in the said Parish,
with a description of that Sermon, which he preached in Westminster Hall not
long since, with a Relation also of that, which he would have preached in the
Old Exchange.

LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 16^1.

A Nest of Brownists discovered.
THe various Factions, which the Brownists do daily induce among us, and the
distracted divisions, which they intruce against the glorious sincerity of our
Christian Church are so numerous, that I need not to relate each particular
herein, least J should overload your patience with too long Battologismes.
Wherefore J will in no regard digress from my intended Subject, but proceed
with all celerity herein.

At the lower end of Fleetstreet near Fetterlane, one Burboone a Letherseller
entertained a whole swarm of Brownists in his house (as by credible
information about the number of an hundred and fifty) who last Sabbath day
being the 19. of December preached himself (I suppose) as the Spirit moved him
to his Brownisticall Congregation. But he yelped so loud with an horrid
exclamation, that diverse men passing by gave some audience thereunto, and
immediately conceiving that they were some Nest of Schismatics, they stayed
longer, and longer, in expectation to hear some of his too-erroneous Doctrine
(as was afterward declared to sufficient men) and as they still waited in
anticular captation, so their number increased, and at length they came to a
full head. And being impatient of the aforesaid Leather-Sellers Sermons, which
was full of Heretical opinions, they began to make a combustion therabouts and
on a sudden broke down all the glass windowe^, and withal striving to
break down the door: thus they continued in this diffusive hurly-burly from
five of the clock in the afternoon, until past seven, then the Constable of
that Ward commanded the door of the said Conventicle house to be opened, while
they sent them all away, there was a tumultuous clamor among the Popular
conflux of the vulgar, and some of the said Brownists being obstinate, and
desperate, were committed some to Bridewell, and others to to the Counters, yet
notwithstanding there was still an acclamation among the Apprentices and
others, who would have pulled down the house, had not the Constable come
again, and mitigated them with his guard: yet still their raging fury could
not be abated in a perfect tranquillity, and pacification, but they broke the
sign of the said Leather-Sellers house, having a various distraction, and
great mutiny among them.

The said, Burboone preached very nigh five houre^, crying diverse times, as was
audibly heard, Hell and Damnation, telling them they were all damned, he did
speak likewise much against the Book of Common Prayer, against the Bishops
and many others, but the flexibility of his voice was so various, that we could
hear no perfect sentence of his Sermon, but only some fragments thereof,
sometimes casting an aspersion on the Bishops, and sometimes detraction on the
Book of common Prayer. O horrid Blasphemy! That Book which the pious,
undaunted and religious Martyrs sealed with their blood, and when as they came
to the stake, they held it, their chiefest ambition to die with this divine
service Book Sealed to their breasts, intimating that their whole hearts was
therein: and therefore dyed in the maintenance thereof, I say this Book is now
despicable and contemned of these Amsterdam whelps and tubbish of the world.

Oh that we had a Cicero alive, to cry out, O tempora, O mores, or rather the
Boonerges or Sons of thunder, to tell them of their aspiring Heresy. But it is
in vain to speak to stones, or such flinty-hearted men, whose obstinacy is
grown to so high a degree, that they will neither hear, nor admit of any that
shall either confute them by apparent reason, or contradict them by the
exemplary word of God, and his holy Gospel: yea rather then they will have any
opposers, they say those are all damned, that speak against them; Thus the
aforementioned Letherseller houled out his new-coined Doctrine to his
new-minted Auditors, who of late have all surreptitiously crept in among us.
There was as many women as men, and if the Constable had not came seasonably,
as he did, there had been great murder among them, for the Apprentices were
fully resolved to break open the doors immediately, therefore in the debate
that there was, many o^ the said Brownists crauled over the Tyles, and houses,
escaping some one way, and some another. But at length they caught one of them
alone, but they kicked him so vehemently, as if they meant to beat him into a
jelly: It is ambiguous whither they have killed him or no: but for a certainty
they did knock him, as if they meant to pull him in pieces. J confess, it had
been no matter, if they had beaten their whole Tribe in the like manner.

But to omit these superliminary circumstances, J will describe the breaking up
of their Conventicle: For whereas they supposed they should be taken either by
the Constable, or the said confluxe of the people, they did break down the
backe-walles, and some escaped that way, and others crawled over the houses,
till at length the Constable entered, and took many of them, who were
apprehended, and the Letherseller with his whole swarm answered last Monday
for these troublesome distractions, and co^fused disturbances in the street.

A Relation of Prophet Hunts Sermon, Preached at St. Pulchers Church the 19. of
December.
THe Sermon being ended at St. Pulchers Church, this Hunt a Prophet, who have
been very troublesome in this City heretofore, and once before committed to the
Counter for a Sermon, which he preached at Christs-Church before, have been
dehorted diverse times: Yet notwithstanding his sick-brain'd obstinacy would not
be retracted, but rather extended farther; For (as it appears) he raised a
combustion at this Parish, and standing up cried with a full voice, Mon and
Brethren J pray give ear unto my text, which is taken out of the 7 chap. of
the Revel. v. 3. then he began to bawle so loud, concerning fire and water with
such peremptory confidence, that there did arise a great tumultuous murmur
among the Parishioners, and without much prolixity of words he was pulled down
by the Constables and others: Yet he was very confident of himself, for he
said, that he was sent a messenger from God, and therefore without their
contradiction he would deliver his Message: but immediately they haled him
before the Lord Mayor, a great multitude of People following him: who yet was
very peremptory before his Honnour, wher-upon the Lord Mayor perceiving his
arrogant protervitie, propounded many interrogations unto him, asking him
whether he had the Spirit or no, or how he dare presume to preach having no
warrant for the Ministerial function, his reply was that he had sufficient
warrant from God, for he knew that he was his Messenger, and as for the Spirit
he was confident that he had that, which he said they apparently might conceive
by the fruits thereof But for my part I do verilye believe, that if he has
any Spirit it is the Spirit of error, rather then the Spirit of truth.

Yet it would be to tedious for us to describe each circumstance, that the Lord
Mayor had with him, when ^fore he at length perspicuosly perceiving his
erroneous and Schismatic obstinacy, he committed him to the Counter, where
I will leave him, and all his consederates.

This Prophet Hunt preached a Sermon once in Westminster Hall, but his Auditors
then seeing the weak madness of his giddy-braine, derided and abused him there
extremely. Another time he preached in the old Exchange, but he was there
almost pulled in pieces, he have likewise diverse times put himself forward in
many Churches, for which he had great rebuke. Yet withstanding he proceeded
daily in his former errors, so long as he was at liberty, and I fuppose he
expected better success in this Church, then he have had heretofore in other,
but I wish, that his whole Sect may find no better, then he had in his last
enterprise.

FINIS.

