A DISCOVERY OF THE New Creation.

IN A Sermon Preached at the Headquarters at Putney Sept. 29. 1647.

By Thomas Collier.

2 Pet. 3. 13. Nevertheless we look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold
at the Black-spred-Eagle at the West End of Paul's, 1647.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
THE new Creation, the Kingdom of Heaven in the Saints, is that great Mystery
God is now revealing in them: I having both opportunity and freeness, (at the
head Quarters) spoke something, according to that measure of light God has
communicated unto me, concerning this new Creation in the Saints; this truth
being by some owned, yet by others privately opposed, and contradicted.

I therefore at the desire of some, who judge themselves one with and in this
truth; as also for satisfaction of the contrary minded, have published that
which was in weakness, yet in power then delivered: Although its true, thou
may not here read verbatim what was then delivered, yet thou have here the
heads and substance of it. God making thy spirit one in, and with any truth
that thou find here, let him have the glory, and he who is thine, and the
Truths servant has his end, and utmost desires.

T. C.

Isai. 65. 17. Behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth.
THis Scripture propounded, is a satisfying reason of some prophetical
Gospel Truths, formerly discovered. Wherein we may take notice, First, of the
grace of the Gospel, verse 1. I was found of them that sought me not, etc.
Wherein you may note, that persons not seeking after grace, are made partakers
of grace; or that persons seek and find grace, from their being sought out and
found by grace.

Men participate of Gospel grace, not because there is either desert or desire
in themselves, but from the everlasting love and free bounty of a gracious God,
who is the fountain of Grace and Love; see this testified, Jer. 31. 3. I have
loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore in loving kindness have I
drawn thee. As this was a truth to the natural Israel, much more is it a truth
to the spiritual Israel. Whence was it that God showed mercy to Mary, out of
whom was cast seven Devils (that is, a perfection of wickedness was in her)
but Free Grace and Love? see Luke 7. latter end, with Chap. 8. 2. with those,
Acts 2. who were the betrayers and murderers of Christ, made partakers of Grace
by Christ. Saul, Acts 9. 1, 2, 3. who persecuted Christ, received mercy by
Christ.

Use 1. How might this encourage sinners, yea, and the worst of sinners too, to
expect not only the Declarations, but the Communications of Grace from the
Almighty? Have been a filthy polluted creature? so was Mary: have been an enemy
to Christ, a persecutor of christians? so were those, Acts ^, and Saul, Chap.
9. Yet he obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14. And this is written for thy
encouragement, that thou likewise may expect mercy.

Use 2. To raise up the spirits of Persons made partakers of Grace, to admire
God who is the fountain, and to cry Grace, Grace, unto it.

Secondly, here is the disposition of man naturally, verse 2. which is to
oppose Grace; notwithstanding, God spreads forth his hand unto them in the
tenders of mercy, yet they walk after their own thoughts.

A second Gospel Truth by the Prophet discovered, is Gods exaltation of his own
Name and People in the latter days, ver. 9. with the ruin of all enemies,
both within them, and likewise without them: within them that ignorance and
darkness in the things of God, that carnalnesse and fleshlinesse that
naturally dwells in them, that unsatisfiednesse at all times and in all
conditions, with the will of God* all enemies without must be spiritually
slain, verse 12. See what the slaughter is, verse 13. Therefore thus says the
Lord God, Behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my
servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: that is, my servants who live
in me, shall dwell on high. Isa. 33. 1. Bread shall be given them to eat, their
waters shall be sure, they shall feed on that feast made of fat things. Isat.
25. which is, God in the spirit; when Formallists and Legallists, who live on
things without them, shall be hungry and thirsty, nothing to feed on, when the
glorious appearance of truth, discovers the emptiness, and destroys the
being of that wherein they lived. Behold my servants shall rejoice, but ye
shall be ashamed; behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall
cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit; they shall be
ashamed, because that wherein they trusted, their spiritual life and
livelihood, is taken from them: but ye (to wit the Saints who live in the
spirit) shall rejoice, shall sing for joy of heart. Isai. 35. 10. Then shall
the redeemed of the Lord return and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy
upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away. This shall be, and is the life of Saints who live in the
fountain, or rather in whom the fountain lives.

In a word, these two things are here presented, First, The rejection, or
rather the subjection under feet of the enemies of God. Secondly, The
exaltation, glory and joy of the Saints. ver. 15. Ye shall leave your name for
a curse to my chosen: for the Lord God will slay thee, and call his people by
another name. That is, whereas the name (viz.) the power of the wicked has
been exceeding high, the Lord will slay that name, bring down their power and
glory, and lay it in the dust, make it a reproach: but he will call his
servants by another name, whereas formerly they had a name of reproach,
accounted the offscouring of all things, a reproach and proverb amongst men;
and so that word of truth has been verified, behold, I and the children whom
God has given me, are set for signs and wonders in Israel. Oh beloved! How
have the Saints been set for signs and wonders, even amongst those who pretend
themselves to be the Lords Israel? Its true, in this and other Nations called
Christian, it is looked upon as an exceeding contemptible thing, not to be a
Christian, to be a Heathen, an Infidel, this is an evil thing: But 2. It Is
accounted a far more contemptible thing, to be a Christian indeed; not to be a
Christian in form and profession, is a co^temptible thing, but to be a
Christian indeed, is a more contemptible thing; a sad word indeed, and it
behooves those who are the causers of it to look about themselves, for the
leaders of my people cause them to err, and God is now casting reproach upon
them, but he will call his people by another name.

Object. But how shall this be effected may some say, it is exceeding unlikely;
wickedness prevails both within and without, in high and low, it seems to be
very unlikely?

Answ. Nay, says the Lord, I will effect it, rather then this great work shall
be left undone, I will make a new Creation. Behold, I Create new heavens and a
new earth. verse 17.

This Ecce, behold, notes the excellency of the thing to be beheld.

Doctr. But the general truth which I shall at present commend unto you, is
this,

That the great work which God has to effect (in the world and in the Saints)
in these latter days of the Gospel, is to set up a new Creation, viz. New
heavens and a new earth.

In the prosecution of this truth, I shall first open the terms unto you, what
is meant by the new heavens and the new earth, in the unfolding of which. I
shall confirm the truth propounded.

First, For the word Heaven it has different acceptations in Scripture,
sometimes its taken for the Aerie Firmament, in which the fowls fly; sometimes
for the Starry Firmament, Genesis 1. 8. Sometimes for the Preaching of the Gospel,
which is the word of the Kingdom yet called the Kingdom of Heaven, The
Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from you, etc. Sometimes for the Church, Rev.
18. 20. Sometimes for the Saints Union with God, and spiritual enjoyment of
him: now I understand Heaven in this place, according to the two last
acceptations (viz.) the Saints with their enjoyment of God in the spirit. It is
true, there are different apprehensions in many concerning this Scripture; some
apprehending that it relates to the destruction of this material form and
frame of heaven and earth, and the creation of a new, from that in 2 Pet. 3.
13. Because, say they, that the destruction of this material frame and form is
only minded in that Chap. Now although I shall not deny that which is from
hence concluded, yet I believe that there is much mystery in that Chapter; and
shall be made good within the Saints in the Spirit, as well as without them
according to the Letter, and that of the new heavens, is wholly mystical,
according to what light I have received, not that I desire to argue forth the
thing at present but with much tenderness to pass it by.

Secondly, some apprehend, that Christ shall come and reign personally,
subduing his enemies, and exalting his people, and that this is the new heaven
and the new earth; but this is not my apprehension: but that Christ will come
in the Spirit, and have a glorious Kingdom in the spirits of his people, and
they shall by the power of Christ in them, reign over the world, and this is
the new heavens and the new earth.

First, He will have a glorious Kingdom in the Saints, The kingdom of God is
within you; heaven is the kingdom of God, and this kingdom is within the
Saints, and this is the new Creation, the new heaven, the Kingdom of heaven
that is in the Saints. It Is true, we have had, and still have exceeding low and
carnal thoughts of heaven, looking on it as a glorious place above the
Firmament, out of sight, and not to be enjoyed till after this life: but God
himself is the Saints kingdom, their enjoyment, their glory; where God is
manifesting himself* there is his and the Saints kingdom, and that is in the
Saints. Here lies the great and hidden mystery of the Gospel, this new
creation in the Saints.

Querie. Wherein lies the nature and glory of this new Creation?

Answ. The nature and glory of it lies in that renovation or renewing of the
mind: an internal and spiritual change, a transformation out of the nature
of the first, into the nature of the second Adam. This I shall for your
satisfaction, confirm unto you from Scripture, although I trust I shall
deliver nothing unto you but experimental truth. See 2 Cor. 5. 17. He that is
in Christ, is a new Creature; old things are past away, behold all things are
become new. Here is this new Creation within, a new creature, a mind renewed
by the Spirit, this is that new man* mentioned Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. which after
God, is Created in righteousness and true holiness; note, it is Created and
that after God; now what this Creation or new man is, according to what I
understand, no farther I dare to speak, it is that Union which the Divine
nature the Spirit, has with and in our spirits, by which Union it transforms
our spirits into its own glory, and shall in conclusion, wholly swallow up the
Saints in that spiritual glory, which will be their eternal perfection, their
heaven, their kingdom, their glory. This is the first part of both the nature
and glory of this new Creation.

Querie. Why is it called new heavens in this Scripture, as if it were some
more then ordinary glory? this mentioned is that which God works ordinarily in
every Saint, this new birth or spiritual renewing.

Answ. First, It Is true, that this new spiritual work of God in the spirits of
men is effected in the spirit of every Christian, but this new Creation minded
in my Text, is a more then ordinary degree of this spiritual glory; for I do
not understand by the new heavens, a new thing contrary to what has been
formerly, but a higher measure or manifestation of one and the same glory: as
the covenant of grace was called a new covenant, not because it was not in
being formerly, but because it should be more gloriously manifested then
formerly* it should bring forth more glorious effects in the Saints then
formerly*

For my more clear proceeding in, and your better understanding of the glory
of this new Creation, I should mind one thing unto you by the way, and that is
this,

I mind the dispensations of God to the world, or rather the Saints in the
world, to be answerable to his dispensations in the spirit of every Saint, I
mind it thus:

That as God proceeds gradually in the manifesting of himself in the spirits of
his people, the first, second, and third heaven, as Paul 2 Cor. 12. or
children, young men, old men, as John has it, 1 John 2. 11, 1^. so he makes
known himself unto his Saints in the world, gradually, the first, second, and
third heaven, or dispensation of heavenly light and glory, or rather a
different manifestation of one and the same dispensation of light and glory.

As first, in the times of the Law, God made himself known to his people under
dark shadows, and types; there was a glory, but it was such a glory which made
them exceedingly to quake and tremble.

Secondly, in the days Christ, who put an end to those shadows, there was a
higher manifestation of light and glory, wherein was more clearness of light
and joy, which was the young, or middle age.

But thirdly, in this last time, or third dispensation of God to, and in his
people, will be much more glorious, much more in the spirit, and therefore
called a new heaven; it shall be the light of the same dispensation began in
the Law, see this confirmed Rev. 21. 1. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Isa. 66. 22.

Querie. Wherein does the glory of this new heaven consist more then ordinary?

Answ. First, in the abundance of knowledge, Isa. 11. 9. The knowledge of God
shall cover the face of the earth, as the waters cover the sea, you may read
from ver. 6. That the Lion and the Lamb, etc. shall lie down together: I shall
declare by the way what I understand to be the truth intended, not that I limit
it from any farther truth that any may see in it.

1. There are all these things within us in that old Creation, the Lion, and
the Woolf, etc. which opposes and prevents the Saints joy, and spiritual
enjoyment of God; now these shall be so over-powred by the glorious appearances
of light, that they shall no more hurt, or destroy the Saints peace in their
holy mountain, their enjoyment of God in the Spirit, which is the Saints
mountain; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of God; the glorious
appearings of light in the spirits of Christians will so cover that earth which
is within them, that they shall be in a great measure freed from those
corruptions, those distractions which formerly were prevalent in them.

2. God will take away the nature of wicked men, that although they remain
Wolves, Lions, and brutes still, yet they shall not hurt nor destroy in all the
holy mountain of God, that is, the Church; and that through the abundance of
light that shall be communicated, even unto natural men; for the earth, that
is, earthly men must give glory to the God of heaven, so Hab. 2. 14. The
knowledge of the Lord shall cover the face of the earth, as the waters cover
the sea, for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of God:
there shall not be only the knowledge of God, that there is a God, but the
knowledge of his glory shall be much more abundantly manifested.

And the truth is, that herein lies one principal part of the glory of this
new Creation, in the knowledge of God.

As ignorance is the grand cause of so much corruption* so many mistakes in the
things of God* for always the will and affection follows the understanding,
whether enlightened or blinded; so it is the knowledge of God, the breakings
forth of light in the spirit, that delivers souls from that corruption and
darkness.

This truth Paul manifests in his prayer for the Ephesians, Chap. 1. 17, 18. in
his desire for himself, Phil. 3. 10. That I might know him, etc.

Querie. Wherein shall the knowledge of the Saints increase?

Answ. Amongst many I shall instance in these particulars following,

First, In the knowledge of the mystery of God, and that as he is in them, for
God is a mystery; Col. 2. 2. And it is by the appearance of God in us, we come
to know God who is a mystery. The truth is that we have had, and still have,
low and carnal thoughts of God, judging him to be a God afar off, and not a
God nigh at hand, this is that Antichrist which denies Christ to be come in the
flesh; this is that mystery of which we are exceeding ignorant, God manifest
in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3, 16. we have had very narrow apprehensions of Christ,
and the manifestation of the glory of Christ, limitting it to that one man,
when the truth is, that Christ and all the Saints makes up but one Christ, 1
Cor. 12. 12. And God as truly manifests himself in the flesh of all his, as he
did in Christ, although the measure of that manifestation is different. This is
a mystery which God is revealing in the spirits of his people, and is indeed
the glory of this new Creation; this being in some measure manifested in the
spirits of christians, produces in the second place,

Secondly, A knowledge of their spiritual liberty in Christ.

1. Spiritual liberty and justification from all spiritual enemies, sin, law,
condemnation; whatever opposes the souls peace, in this new heaven its all done
away. Ioh. 8. 36. If the Son shall make you free, then you are free indeed.
Saints shall now come to see that they are free indeed by Christ, Acts 13. 39
By him all that believe are justified from all things, from which they could
not be justified by the Law of Moses. Gal. 5. 1. Thus Saints shall know their
liberty, and stand fast in it too, For the Inhabitant shall not say I am sick,
they that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. Isai. 33. last. That
is, they shall live in the knowledge of their liberty from sin, although
formerly through ignorance we have not so much looked after it. This has been
accounted the highest measure of Christianity, to see our selves justified, to
enjoy the full assurance of justification by Christ; a desire of Faith was a
high measure of Faith, and well if the soul get assurance while it has a
being in this body, and thus many a precious soul has lived low under legal
bondage through ignorance; whereas justification from sin by Christ, is the
first step in Christianity, and that which gives us the denomination of
children. 1 John 2. 11, 12. I write unto you little children, because your sins
are forgiven you for his names sake. Persons enjoying the forgiveness of sin,
are but little children, babes in the school of Christ. Now this liberty from
sin is, that the Saints shall live fully in the knowledge of it, as likewise in
the knowledge of their liberty from legal bondage, and so from legal actings,
Romans 1. 2. which I pass in this place.

2. In the knowledge of their liberty from men, 1 Corinthians 7. 23. Ye are
bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men? That is not to be subject
to men in the things of God, in matters of conscience, that belongs only to God
himself, it is his proper peculiar right to rule in the spirits of his people,
although its true that there has been, and still is, through ignorance, a
principle in man, not only to usurp authority to rule in and over the
conscience of others, but a principle in us also out of conscience, to submit
to man in such cases, now God is discovering, and likewise delivering his
people from this spiritual bondage unto men in the things of God, and that
from the knowledge of their liberty in the spirit.

3. There is a liberty in knowledge, 1 Ioh. 2. 20. Ye have an Unction from the
holy one and ye know all things: that is all things that the Spirit makes
known. They are not tied to other men's approbation, but walk in that light the
Spirit makes known in them, see 1 Cor. 2. 15.

Secondly, The glory of this new Creation consists in the Saints knowledge of
their peace, and union with God.

First, Peace, and that first, peace with God, this is enjoyed by faith, Ephesians.
2. 13. Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. Every man
naturally is at a distance from God, but by Jesus Christ they come to enjoy
reconciliation.

But Secondly, They enjoy not only peace with God, but peace with the Saints;
it is only the glorious light of this New Creation that will put an end to
these divisions amongst Christians, it is not Magisteriall power, setting up
Uniformity, but that one Spirit of light and truth that must bring the Saints
into this unity; I question not, but many of you have read what Zephaniah
writes, Chap. 3. 9. I will turn to the people a pure language, and they shall
serve me with one consent, or with one shoulder. This pure language is the
language of the spirit, and the truth is, that nothing else will be able to put
an end to these divisions but this spiritual dispensation, this new creation
of God in the spirits of his people, and this is and shall be the glory of this
heaven, unity, and peace amongst Saints, see Isa. 11. 13. The envy of Ephraim
shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off, Ephraim shall not
envy Judah, neither shall Judah vex Ephraim. Whence is it that there is so much
envy in the spirits of christians, but from their fleshlinesse, vexing each
other, when they should rather be a comfort each to other? but this shall
depart, and be gone in this new Creation; this kingdom of God, it shall be a
kingdom of peace, not only internal with God, with the Saints, Isa. 66. 12.
but,

Secondly, With men, and amongst men of the earth; this new creation will put
an end to all those wars and confusions in the world. See Isa. 2. 4.

When once the Saints mountain comes to be established in the top of all
mountains; when they shall live in God who is their mountain, this light and
glory shall go forth so far amongst the wicked, as that they shall embrace
peace, it will put a period to wars and commotions that are amongst the men of
the earth.

Secondly, There is the knowledge, not only of their peace with, but of their
union in God: here still lies the great mystery of the Gospel, the Saints
union in the Spirit, the knowledge of it is exceeding glorious, that this is a
truth, see Ioh. 17. 21. There is a union of spirits, 1 Cor. 6. 17. A union in
the power, wisdom, and glory of the Father, but I forbear the enlarging of
these at present.

2. The glory of this new Creation consists not only in knowledge, but in
spiritual enjoyment likewise; there is the abundance of spiritual enjoyment,
it does not only see and know, but it injoyes what it sees, it sees liberty and
peace, and injoyes it, and lives in it; it sees God in the Spirit, and lives in
him; it not only sees a union, but injoyes a union, both in spirit, wisdom,
power and glory of the Father, and thus Saints that live in that abundance of
life that is in God. John 10. 10. I am come that ye might have life, and that
ye might have it more abundantly. O the abundance of spiritual enjoyment, of
spiritual communion, Saints in this heaven enjoy; hence it is the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 3. 23. All is yours, etc. And truly friends if all be the Saints,
when they see it and enjoy it, it will be enough to fill them with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory.

3. The glory of this new Creation consists not only in being delivered from
legal and fleshly actings, but likewise lives in the power of heavenly and
spiritual actings, and that first, to God in spiritual prayer and praisings;
but secondly, from God, not only in the whole conversation, but likewise in
acts of righteousness and justice unto men, but likewise in preachings and
praisings, all shall be done in the wisdom and power of the Spirit, that so
grace may be communicated to the hearers. This is the third part of the glory
of this new Creation, and enjoyed by those who live in it.

4. And finally, the glory of this new Creation brings forth joy and gladness
in the spirits of those who live in it, perpetual singing of new songs of
praise unto the Lord; see Rev. 21. 4. with Isa. 25. 7. I shall instance more
particularly Rev. 19. 1. where you shall find, after the fall of Babylon,
which is effected as well within us, as without us, there was a voice of
thunderings, saying, Hallelujah, and ver. 6. For the Lord God Omnipotent
reigns: This is that will minister occasion to souls to sing praises, when
they can say truly, The Lord God omnipotent reigns, that is, reigns over
flesh, and corruptions, and the powers of darkness are vanquished and subdued,
Chap. 15. 3. They sing the song of Moses the servant of the Lord; but who sung
this song? those who had gone through this sea of glass, and gotten the
victory over spiritual enemies, who had gone through this fiery sea, and
overcome, they sing this song of Moses; its called the song of Moses, because
when Moses could look back, and see his enemies dead in the red sea, then he
could sing; so when souls see themselves spiritually delivered, all their
spiritual enemies lie dead before them, then they can sing; this is that new
song mentioned Rev. 14. 3. That none could learn but those who were redeemed
from the earth; it is called a new song, in opposition to the old, carnal, and
formal singings of the world, it is such a song, that none can learn, but
those who are redeemed from the earth; what is that? why it is to be delivered
from that earthlinesse, and fleshlinesse that possesses souls: when once souls
are delivered from this earth; as they shall in this new heaven, then they can
sing new songs, and not till then; see one Scripture in the old Testament,
amongst many, answering this truth, Zac. 8. 19. Thus says the Lord, The fast
of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh,
and the fast of the tenth shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and
cheerful feasts: therefore love the truth and peace. This, its true, relates
to the Jews in the Letter, concerning their Babylonish captivity, but it
principally relates unto our coming forth of mystical Babylon, as its clear
in the verses to the end of the Chapter; all those days of fastings shall be
turned into days of feastings. I remember in the Gospel, when the Pharisees
queried of Christ, what the reason was that John's disciples fasted, and Christ's
fasted not, his answer was, the children of the Bridegroom cannot fast so long
as the Bridegroom is with them, but the time will come, when the Bridegroom
shall be taken away, and then shall they fast: beloved, it is an argument that
the Bridegroom has been gone from us a long time, and that is the cause of
those fastings and mournings, but when the Bridegroom is come, those days of
fastings and mournings shall be ended, and shall be turned into feastings, and
spiritual praisings. This is that Paul minds in the Primitive times, Col. 3.
16. Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
songs. And truly, when we come into these new heavens, we shall then know what
it is thus to teach one another. Thus amongst many, have I branched forth these
few particulars, wherein the nature and glory of this new heaven consists.

Use 1. As to discover the ignorance of those who would retain men still in the
old heavens, under carnal and fleshly forms, so

2. To encourage Saints, who have yet but low apprehensions of this glory, to
press forwards, as Paul, Phil. 3. forgetting those things which are behind,
pressing forward to the mark, that is, the perfection of Christ, who is the
mark, the prize run for. It is a low and carnal principle, for to set men a
looking back after what once the soul enjoyed, not that I shall deny, but that
God may communicate comfort to souls in this low condition, but that this is
the temper of a Gospel spirit enlightened in the mystery of truth, to see the
greatest glory to be before, and that darkness which is behind, and so it
forgets that which is past, from the glory of that which is before; truly, a
soul taught of God in this spiritual mystery of the new Creation, cannot rest
it self satisfied, that is, so satisfied, as not to press forward, short of
glory, of that perfection which he sees in Christ; this is the end of all
Gospel ministrations, thereby to work up souls into that unity of faith, and
knowledge of the son of God* God working in it, it shall be accomplished.

2. To speak more externally, by new heavens I understand to be meant, a new
Church estate, and that in opposition unto the old; its said to be new:

First, in respect of matter, or members. The old heavens were all carnal and
profane creatures, people for the most part without the knowledge of God, such
was the matter of the carnal Church; but the matter of this spiritual Church,
this new heavens, shall be the Saints, such as are all taught of God, Thy
children shall be all righteousness. Isa. 60. 21. Rev. 21. ult.

2. New, in opposition to the old manners, and old conversation. The members of
the old Church were perhaps ignorant, profane, having a form of godliness,
without the power of it; but the members of this new heaven shall so walk with
God, as to honor his name, God will so gloriously appear in them, as that the
world shall be convinced by their godly conversation, The remnant that are left
shall do no iniquity. etc.

3. They shall be new, in respect of form, compacted together by the Spirit,
not literal forms and ordinances. The old heaven, or Church-constitution has
been formed up with external compactings, the wisdom and power of the flesh
knit together by things without them, not by the bands of the Spirit, the
principle and power of love, which is an everlasting band, which will occasion
Saints communion to be sweet and spiritual.

4. They shall be new, in respect of ministry, not in the Letter, but in the
Spirit, not fetched out of the bottomless pit of creature-wisdom, and humane
abilities, but the single ministration of the Spirit; pray in the Spirit,
preach and prophecy in the Spirit, praise in the Spirit, that is, in the
wisdom and power of that law in the Spirit, which will deliver Saints from
fleshly actings, into the glorious liberty of spiritual actings, that they
shall no more act from a legal principle, to a law without them, but from a
principle of light, life, liberty, and power within them. Thus God will create
a new heaven, a new Church estate in the Spirit, which will produce spiritual
communion, spiritual joy and gladness amongst the Saints, who live in this
light and glory.

This that mentioned Zac. 4. 2. The candlestick all of gold, which notes unto
us the purity of the Church, not only in their coming forth of litterall
Babylon, but principally of our coming forth of mystical Babylon in these
latter days; so likewise the woman clothed with the sun, Rev. 12. having the
moon under her feet; that is, the Church clothed with Christ the sun of
righteousness, But unto you that fear my name, shall the sun of righteousness
arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. with the Moon under her feet; all
things be low and short of Christ, under feet, low in esteem with the
spiritual soul, she being with child, travailing, pained to be delivered,
that is, to bring forth Christ in the spirit.

This informs us of the vanity and ignorance of those, who seek so much to keep
up the old Heavens, the old Church for matter and Members, that will turn the
world into Church by a human power, they are those that must be spiritually
slain. Isa. 65. 11, 12. But ye are they that forsake the Lrod, and forget my
holy mountain, that prepare a table for the troop, and furnish a drink
offering unto that number; therefore I will number you to the sword, and ye
shall all bow down to the slaughter, etc. Here is the vanity of such persons
that seek to uphold forms, fleshly actings, and fleshly compactings, the old
Ministry fetched out of humane abilities, the wisdom of the flesh limiting the
spirit to those humane qualifications where he appears least, all these, both
persons and things must bow down to the slaughter. Now I come to the second
part of my text (and a new earth) in this new Creation, there is not only new
heavens, but a new earth.

What this new earth is, it is to be looked upon, either more mystically or more
literally, as the new heavens. 1. Mystically, there is an earth in the heart
of every man, nay, of every christian, flesh and fleshly corruptions, fleshly
conclusions which prevents the joy of Saints; now the Lord will make a new
earth, he will subject that old earth that is in his Saints, that it shall not
so prevail in them, he will be a fire in them, Mal. 3. 3. burning up and
consuming this old earth and flesh. O beloved there is much ignorance, even
amongst Christians, of Christ's appearing powerfully within, as a fire to burn
up and consume the deeds of darkness, this is that John minds, when he says
he shall baptize you with the holy Spirit and with fire; and Christ himself, I
am come to set fire in the earth, and what will ye if it be already kindled;
truly friends it is the work of Christ to set fire in the earth, that is, that
earth which is within you, as well as without you. 1. There shall not be such
earthly actings, actings after the flesh, either the lusts of the flesh, or the
righteousness of the flesh.

2. There shall not be such earthly distractings, which flow from those
corrupt motions and actings, but this earth being covered with the knowledge of
the glory of God, and delivered from this earthlinesse and fleshlinesse into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God, shall act to God more purely in the
Spirit, being delivered both from fleshly actings, and fleshly distractings.

Those vialls of wrath mentioned in the Revelations, are not only to be poured
out upon earthly persons and things without the Saints, but likewise upon this
earth within them, this is that minded Rev. 10 2. The Angel which is Christ,
sets his right foot on the sea, and his left foot upon the earth, and cried
with aloud voice, and verse 4. Seven thunders utter their voices, that is, the
Lord speaks a perfection of terror and dread to the earth and sea, that is
within the Saints, as well as without them.

A Glorious word for poor Christians who wait for deliverance, the vision is
for an appointed time, it will speak and not lie, it will come and not, tarry,
thy vile body shall be changed, thou shall appear with him in glory, thou shall
see the death of that body of sin, thou shall pass through that sea of glass
mingled with fire, and see all thy sins, thy earthlinesse left behind, lying
dead before thee, which will occasion thee to sing new songs of praise unto the
Almighty etc. Comfort your selves with these things, wait, earnestly pressing
on unto this enjoyment.

Secondly, By earth, I understand to be meant 1. The powers of the earth, or
the Magisterial power, the rule and government of this earth, It shall be an
earth wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 13.

Querie. In what respect may the earthly Magistracy, or earthly powers be said
to be made new.

Answ. First, In respect of the persons ruling, they shall be such as are
acquainted with, and have an interest in the righteous God; that as formerly
God has many times set up wicked men to rule and govern, see Dan. 4. 17. The
most High rules over the children of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will,
and sets up over it the basest of men, now as God has many times given the
government of Nations into the hands of the basest of men; So he will give it
into the hands of the Saints.

I question not but that you have heard of the personal reign of Christ, that
he shall come personally and subdue his enemies, and so rule over the world,
but this will be the glory of Christ's kingdom, 1. He will have a glorious
kingdom in the spirits of his people, and this is the new heavens. And 2. He
will in and by his Saints rule the world.

That this is a truth, I shall confirm unto you from Scripture. Dan. 8. 27. And
the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high, whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him.
What more mystical truth may be in this Scripture concerning the Kingdom in
the Spirit, I shall not question, but this I believe to be a truth that the
nations shall become the nations of Christ, and the government shall be in the
hands of the Saints, Isa. 60 12. The Nations and Kingdoms that will not serve
thee (to wit Christ in the Saints) shall perish; yea, those nations shall
utterly be wasted. See verse 17, 18. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron
I will bring silver, and for wood, brass, and for stones, iron, Here is the
new Creation, all new: and I will make thine officers peace, and thine exactors
righteousness, violence shall no more be heard in thy streets, wasting and
destruction within thy borders. Jer. 30 20. Your Nobles shall be of your
selves, and your Governors shall proceed out of the midst of you. God will
raise up men of singular spirits and principles to govern the Nations. Thus, in
respect of the persons governing there shall be a new earth, for by earth is
meant the earthly powers, Rev. 12. the earth helped the woman, that is the
powers of the earth.

Secondly, It shall be a new earth in relation to the manner of the persons
ruling, it is a new earth, in which shall dwell righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13.
this is the great work that God has to effect in the latter days of the
Gospel, to reduce Magisteriall power to its primitive institution, that you may
see Rom 13. 1. There is no power but is ordained of God, and it is ordained for
the punishment of them that do evil, but for the praise of them that do well.
Although this end has been a long time loosed, yet now God will reduce it to
this institution. This is the great work right honorable that God calls for at
your hands, whom he has raised up for that end. See Isaiah 58. 4. Behold ye
fast for strife and debate, etc. verse 6. Is not this the Fast that I have
chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to let
the oppressed go free, to break every yoke? this is a Gospel-Fast, and that
which God calls for at your hands, it is not to hang down the head for a day
like a Bull-rush, that so with more applause there may be a smiting with the
fist of wickedness; no, no beloved, it is the execution of righteousness,
justice and mercy, without respect of persons, it is to undo every yoke, and
this being the great work in hand, and that which God calls for, and will
effect; give me leave to present amongst many national grievances, some few
unto you.

First, Spiritual oppressions in matters of conscience. You know that a long
time man has assumed this power to himself, to rule over the consciences of
their brethren, a great oppression, and that which cannot be born in souls who
live in light, and that from which God will deliver his people and punish all
that oppressed them.

Secondly, In temporal oppressions I shall mind some few.

1. Tyranicall and oppressing laws, and courts of Justice; hence it comes to
pass many times, that to seek a Remedy, proves destructive, the cure proves
worse then the disease; many an honest man choosing rather to suffer loss, then
by the use of means to seek his right, suits at law being so dangerous and
hazerdous to the States of men; the end of law, and courts of justice should be
for the righting of men, in case of damage, and not undoing, better no cure,
then such a cure.

2 Oppression or grievance is in writing our laws in an unknown tongue, that
the most part of our National inhabitants cannot understand their own laws,
that the French should be better read in our English laws, then those to whom
they pertain: what oppression comes to the Commons of England by this means, I
need not mention, its not unknown how many by this means are maintained by
other men's losses.

A 3d Oppression the kingdom groans under, is a slavery to the wills of men,
although its that which has been always declared against since this was
began, yet we never were so volved up into it as now, there is an affection to
Arbitrarinesse in the wills of almost all men, from highest to lowest, men act
according to their wills, whether with or against law, a burden exceeding
oppressive to this Kingdom.

A 4th Oppression is, that of Tithes; and it is that the Kingdom, in almost
all parts is sensible of it, and groans under it, with Petitions for
deliverance; note,

First, That it is an oppression, the taking away by force not only the tenth
part of men's estate, but the tenth part of the increase, which is more then the
fifth part of the Estate: Its that likewise which was never enjoined to be paid
by any Magisteriall power, either in Law or Gospel, but by God, and that not
under a penalty neither, this was only to the Tribe of Levi, and to be paid in
no land, but the land of Canaan by command.

Secondly, The people groan under it as an oppression, with an expectation of
deliverance, witness the many Petitions from many parts of the Kingdom.

Thirdly, Many Saints groaning under it as a cafe of conscience to them, yet
suting so near with the Jewish constitution, carrying such a face with it, as
the denying of Christ to be come in the flesh.

A Fifth oppression, and burden of the Kingdom, is free-quartering of
soldiers; much need there is of provision for soldiers pay, lest the cure
seem more heavy then the disease; lest the work be either obstructed, or else
carried on with the more difficulty.

Sixthly, And finally I say unto you as Paul in another case, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are of good report etc. think on those things,
that so justice and righteousness may flow down abundantly without respect of
persons; whatsoever bears but the face of oppression in it, let it be removed.

Use If this be the new earth, and the great interest to be followed, in a word
then to conclude, how should this carry on those whom it concerns, who are
called of God unto it, to the accomplishment of this great work, to help
forwards this great work and design of God, in and by you? Note,

First, Policy calls for it at your hands, Right Honorable, is it not time for
you to do something for the Kingdom that may engage their hearts unto you? is
there not much division and confusion amongst us, much expectation of taking
away of burdens, do not the people in their Petitions call for it daily? truly
prudent policy calls for righteousness, and undoing of burdens, that the
hearts of the people may be engaged unto you in these times of danger and
distraction.

Secondly, Piety calls for it, it is the great design of God at present to
exalt righteousness, and certainly God calls for it at your hands, Do justice,
love mercy, walk humbly with thy God, Micah 6. 8. This the Lord requires of
you.

Thirdly, Peace and safety calls for it, your own peace and the Kindomes peace,
what is likely to produce peace in the Kingdom, if not the flowing down of
righteousness and justice from you, the undoing of heavy burdens, and
breaking of every yoke of oppression? your own peace and safety consists in it;
believe it, there is no safety to be expected, if once you derogate from this
great interest of God the public good; you may read in Scripture, how God
poures contempt upon Princes. Psalm. 107. 46. He pours contempt upon Princes,
and causes them to wander in the wilderness, where there is no way. Has not
God poured contempt upon many princes already, when once they derogate from
that public interest undertaken by them, seeking their own ends? does not God
pour contempt upon them? and be you assured whom God has called to this great
work, if once you turn aside from the public to your own private interests,
God will pour contempt upon you. This being a truth of God, I shall at present
conclude with that Scripture Isa. 58. the 6 and the 8 verses. If you loose the
bands of wickedness, and undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go
free, and break every yoke, Then verse 8. Shall thy light break forth as the
morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness
shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be thy rearward. Here is
light, here is peace, here is safety: thy righteousness shall go before thee,
that is, God in Christ, and the same glory shall be your rear-ward. So much for
present.

FINIS.

