A Catechism FOR Soldiers; to save Souls and prevent Blood.

Showing the terms upon which the profession of a Soldier may be undertaken,
and the rules and directions whereby it is to be managed: and the great guilt
of sin and danger of Judgment that hangs over those that undertake it in an
unrighteous way.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little
Britain, 1659.

A CATECHISM for Soldiers; To save Souls, and prevent Blood
Quest. WHat are you by Profession?

Ans. A Soldier.

Q. Is that a Lawful profession?

A. Yea, if it be undertaken upon Just and Righteous terms, and managed
according to Gods directions.

Q. How prove you that it is a lawful profession?

A. First, Because God appointed his people thereunto in several places of the
holy Scripture.

Secondly. The holy Saints of God were exercised therein, as, Abraham, Joshua,
David, Cornelius, and others.

Thirdly, because God gave directions for the managing of War, whereas he
gives no directions for the exercise of sin.

Fourthly, Because John the Baptist, when the Question was proposed to him by
Soldiers, what they should do, Luke 3.14. did not discharge them from their
Office, but required them to manage it righteously, viz. That they should do
Violence to no man, and be content with their wages.

Q. What are the terms and directions that are to be observed, that the work
of a Soldier may be lawfully performed?

A. They are of diverse sorts.

Q. What is the first?

A. The first is that the War be Just and undertaken upon a Righteous cause,
and not for the carrying on of Violence and Oppression.

Q. What is the second?

A. The second is, that the War be necessary upon a matter of weight and
public concernment, after the attempt of all fair and just means for the
composure of the difference, and for the preventing of blood.

Q. What is the third?

A. That the Commission for the action of War be derived from God, who is the
Lord of Hosts; by the power and Authority of those who are his Substitutes for
that purpose, unto whom he has committed the power of the Sword; as are the
Supreme, and the Lawful Magistrates.

Q. What is the fourth?

A. The fourth is, that the just cause of the War be manifested and
published, for the conviction of the opposite party; and for the satisfaction
of those that are to be engaged in it, and for the directions of the
consciences of all the people, where they are to give their assistance in it.

Q. What is the fifth?

A. That the War be undertaken against such a person as is liable to such a
violent opposition, which cannot be the Supreme Magistrate lawfully
established, in regard of those that are his Subjects, and under his
Government, Romans 13.1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.

Q. What is the sixth?

A. That the War be undertaken and managed to a righteous end, and such as is
proportionable to the business of a War, viz. That it be undertaken for the
glory of God and the Public good, and such a public good, as may be
answerable for the hazards, and the mischiefs of a War: For private
inconveniences are to be suffered rather than the public peace disturbed, and
small inconveniences, though public, are rather to be born, than the great
mischiefs of a War should be hazarded.

Q. What is the seventh?

A. That the War be carried on with righteous and moderate affections, not
delighting in the work of destruction, and ruin of any, but seeking the
reduction of Offenders, the preservation of the Innocent, and the righteous
establishment of all things; by no means aiming to advance our selves, by the
ruins and ^ammages of others, nor at private ^evenge, nor yet to force the
consci^nces of any in matters of Religion, contrary to the settled state of
things of that nature, without satisfaction offered.

Q. What is the eighth.

A. That they that are engaged in the War make use of none but lawful and
righteous means, for the obtaining of their just and righteous ends, not
plundering the Innocent, nor doing hurt unto any, more than is necessary or
apparently requisite for the procurement of a just Conclusion of the War; for
God has no need of the Devil, nor has he made Virtue an imperfect thing, that
it should stand in need of Vice to be its fellow. Soldier, or to join with it
for the procurement of its righteous purposes.

Q. What is the Nineth?

A. That all faithfulness be used in Treaties and Agreements.

Q. What is the Tenth?

A. That nothing be done against Oaths and Covenants, 9 of Joshua compared
with 1 Samuel ^^.

Q. What is the Eleventh?

A. The Eleventh is, that other things being rectified, as aforesaid, the
action be managed with religious courage, waiting upon God with patience and
submission in all Defeats, wherewith the enterprises shall be encountered;
receiving them either as chastisements for sin, or as trials of our Faith and
Constancy in Gods Work, not as discharges from the pursuance of that Duty,
which God has called and enabled unto, Judge. 20. v. 18, 19, 20, 21, and v. 24,
25, 28. and looking constantly to God, and depending upon him for all success
and Victory.

Q. What is the Twelfth?

A. That a strict obedience be performed unto the Command of Superiors, though
never so hazardous, where they appear not contradictory to the rules of God, or
of any authority that is Superior unto them.

Q. What is the last?

A. That God be acknowledged with thankfulness in all successes and Victories;
and mercy used to subdued enemies, where it may be done without public
mischief, 2 Chronicles. 20.26. 2 Kings 6.21, 22. 2 Chrou. 28. from the 11. to the 16.

Q. What is the danger of the undertaking of an unjust War?

A. The danger is very great upon several accounts; First, because you should
fight against God, who is the Protector of all righteousness, and of the
Authority of the lawful Magistrate, and of all the just Rights of his People.

Secondly, Because he that fights in an unjust War, is a Murderer of every man
that he destroys, and a Thief in every thing that he plunders; especially,
when he knows it to be unjust, or is not enabled by a right Commission.

3. Because, though God may suffer a man to prosper in such a War, for the
correction of others; or for those ends that are best known unto him: yet no
man can have any assurance that God will be with him in such an Action; but
that he may be left unto destruction and damnation in every attempt that he
shall adventure upon.

Fourthly, because he that acts in such a War, is not only guilty of all the
mischiefs by himself committed, but of all the Murders, Rapines, and
Violences, that are committed by any other in the whole War; which are
encouraged by his consent and assistance; and is answerable to God for all the
blood that is spilt; and bound to restitution for all injuries that are done; a
load sufficient to sink him to the depth of hell.

Q. Is it necessary that every soldier should be satisfied of the Justness of
the Cause of a War?

A. All Volunteers are answerable for the Justness of the Cause; and therefore
ought to be satisfied of it in their Consciences; but they that serve upon
Command, under their lawful Prince, are not bound always perfectly to know
it; but it concerns them to see that there be nothing manifest to the contrary.

Q. May the Sword then be used in no case without the Commission of the Supreme
Magistrate.

A. Yes, In case of Necessity for private defense against private violence,
where there is not opportunity of appeal to the Magistrate for his Protection;
and also in case where the power of the supreme Magistrate is obstructed by
violence, or rendered useless by absence, in such cases sometimes the Law may
give a Commission, and sometimes Commissions may proceed from a delegated
Authority.

Psalm 50.22. Now consider this ye that forget God, least he tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you.


FINIS.

