Die Jovis, 25 November. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Major general Brown, do
from this House give thanks to Mr Kentish for the great pains he took in the
Sermon he preached yesterday before the House of Commons at Margarets
Westminster (it being a day of public humiliation) and that he do desire him
to print his Sermon, wherein he is to have the like privilege in printing
thereof, as others in the same kind usually have had.

H Elsinge Cler. Par. Do. Com.

I appoint Henry Overton to print my Sermon.

Richard Kentish.

A Sure Stay FOR A Sinking State, PRESENTED IN A SERMON Preached at Margarets
Westminster before the Honorable House of COMMONS at their solemn Fast, Nov.
24. 1647.

By RICHARD KENTISH, Preacher of the Gospel at Katharines, near the Tower
London.

HOSEA 141 Oh Israel return unto the Lord thy God for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity.

1 CORYNTM. 11.31. If we would judge our selves, we should not be Judged.

Poenitudo lapsis necessaria est, sicut vulneratis sunt necessaria medicamin^.

Amb ad Virg. Lap cap 8. Multum peccasti, jam desiste, in contr^rium revert^re

Chrysostom. ad P%p. Antioch. Hom 80. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Henry Overton,
and are to sold at his Shop entering into Popes head-Alley out of Lumber-street.
1648.

TO THE Honorable House of COMMONS assembled in Parliament at Westminster.
Renowned worthies,
THe sense of mine own weakness forbid me being ambitious, Potentum
petitiones sunt quodammode imperia Pet. Mar. in Reg.
either of preaching at Westminster, or of appearing in print till a
Parliamentary request (which is equivalent to a command) calls first for the
one, afterward for the other; whereupon I consulted not with flesh and blood,
but resolved to yield to both; being willing, rather to be censured of the
world for weakness then of you for disrespect. The sermon is but plain and
shalow: what else can be expected from him, who savours neither of delicacy nor
depth; Sala. praes in lib. de guber.
Besides my aim was Vtilia magis quam plausibilia sectari, rather to be
profitable then plausible; conceiving that on fasting days it is not so suitable
to inform the judgment or tickle the ears: as to move the affection, and touch
the heart.

The subject seems very pertinent to the present season. It is a declining age,
we all are fallen. You (honored worthies) are fallen so low, that few do so
esteem or stand in awe of you as they ought. Your clemency (which among men of
ingenuous spirits makes you the more honorable) among those that have been
delinquents make you the more contemptible; They say your Ordinances, are
charged only with powder and paper, they are but words or wind, they fear them
not: I beseech you if they regard not your rods, let them know you have
scorpions.

The people of this land are generally so fallen, that many question whether
they will over be able to rise again. There is astrange change in some
prosessours, they that were wont to strain at Gnats, can now swallow camels.
And many long more now, after old superstition then they did formerly for
reformation. This made me think I should scarce discharge a good conscience, if
I did not cry out, Let Us remember from whence we are fallen, and not rest
there, but let us repent; which will not appear, unless we reform and do the
first works. This is the substance of that which was lately proclaimed in your
ears, and is now presented to your eyes. And that it may be planted in all our
hearts, and practiced in our lives, is, and shall be, the prayer of,

Your most willing, though most unworthy, servant in the Lord, RICHARD KENTISH.
From my obscure study at Katherines near the Tower London. December. 1^ 1647.
A Sure Stay FOR A Sinking State.
REVEL. 2.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy
Candlestick out of his place except thou repent.


THis Book is very mysterious; which made Jerome say, that it has as many
mysteries, Hierom ad aulin Tot babet Sacrament^ quot verba. Aug. de Civ. Dei,
lib. 20. cap. 17.
as there be words in it, and Augustine said That it would exercere mentes
legentium; set their wits to work, that set themselves to read it. But what is
said of Scriptures in general, may also be said of this Scripture in
particular. Though there be many floods, yet there are some foords; though
there be many depths where the great Elephant may swim, Scriptura sacra flavi^^
est in quo ag^^^ a^ (...) eleph^^ (...) queat.
yet there be some shalows wherein the little lamb may walk. In some places the
Holy Spirit is soaring aloft above the reach of the highest; In other places,
he is stooping low, even, to the capacity of the meanest: And thus does he
stoop in the Text.

Here are no floods, but foords: no depths, but shalows: no difficulties to
puzzle us; but plain things. to be practiced by us. Oh that we could this day
begin, to Remember from whence we are fallen, and repent. etc.

This text is a part of the Epistle written to the Angel, or minister of the
Church of Ephesus; Non ad solun E^iscop^^^sed a lipsam quoque Ecclesia^ spectat
Epistola Pav. in loc.
and it concerns not the Angel only; but together with him the whole Church:
and not the church of Ephesus only, but all other Churches also, as appears,
verse. 7. of this chapt. He that has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says
unto the Churches; not to the Church in the singular number, but to the
Churches in the plural, including all other Churches: Neither do I think that
it is so restrained to Churches, as excluding Commonwealths, unless
Common-wealths-members, be excluded from being Church members.

The whole Epistle, besides the (...) and (...), the prologue and the Epilogue,
consists of three principal parts.

First; 1 Laudat laudanda
(...) A Commendation of them for their labor and patience, and unwillingnesse
to suffer evil, v. 2.3.

Secondly, 2 Carpit car. penda,
(...), A Reprehension, wherein they are blamed and for their declining, for
leaving their first love. verse. 4.

Thirdly, 3 Vrget urgenda.
(...), An Admonition or exhortation to things of great concernment, in the
text, Remember from whence thou art fallen. etc.

Which words are partly Monitory. Minatory.


1. The Monitory part in these words, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do the first works.

2. The Minatory part in these words, or else I will come unto thee quickly.
etc.

In the former of these, the Monitory part, there are three things they are
pressed to.

1. A sight of sin, Remember from whence thou art fallen. 2. Repentance for
sin, and repent. 3. Reformation of life, and do the first works.
In the latter of these the minatory part, there are three arguments they are
pressed with, which are taken, 1. From Christ's coming, or else I will come unto
thee, or against thee. Adversamte, Biza and Piscat.
2. From the time of his coming, quickly. 3. From the end of his coming, and
will remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.


Now before we come to handle these particulars, there is something arising
from the text in general, not to be altogether passed by without observing.

These people of Ephesus were much degenerated, they did once show more love to
God, to Christ, to Gospel, then now they do; therefore Christ might now have
come in judgment, without an^ more ado, he might have put out their light,
removed their Candlestick, and never have spoke of it till he had done it, and
who could have said, why have thou done so? but you see Christ takes not so
severe a course, but comes first and gives them fair warning, where note,

That Christ does not use to surprise men at unawares, he does admonish, before
he chastise; warn before he smite; summon farly, before he storm furiously;
discharge warning pieces, before he give fire to his murdering pieces.

Thus the Lord dealt with the old world; an end of all flesh was like to come,
because the earth was filled with violence, but first Noah must be warned, Heb.
11.7. Noah being warned of God. Now God having warned him, he warns the world
by building the ark, every sound of the saw, every chop with the axe, every
stroke with the hammer about the building, was as a watchword to the people.
Thus the Lord dealt wilt Nineveh: Before destruction come, Jonah must go and
preach (though he have little mind to it) yet forty days, and Nineveh shall
be destroyed. Jon. 3.4.

loath sin, yet is he loath to destroy the sinner. Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live says
the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, where we have not only
Gods word for it, but if that will not serve, we have his oath too, which makes
it manifest, that he had rather men should reverter^ return, then that he
should evertere overturn.

For application of this point briefly.

goodness and patience of God, Goodness, he is loath to strike though we give
him provocations too many: Patience, that though he be resolved, his spirit
shall not always strive, yet he will give fair warning before he strike:
Bu^inger in les.
Oh Let Us consider, Quam suavis sit Dominus, quam placide suos ad cognitionem
peccati rev^cet, how sweet is the Lord? how gently does he deal with poor
sinners, to bring them to the knowledge of their sin?

if we make God wait too long, we shall find him very angry. -- Peri^^^ti^
laesa fit sur^^.
If destruction should come, where should we look for comfort? God will be
clear when he judges; Psalm. 51.4. If we shall think to say, why are we thus?
-- absque reprehensione vel accusatione. Molle^. in loc.
God will answer us as Reuben did his brethren, Genesis 12.22. Spoke I not unto
you saying, do not sin against the child: and ye would not hear? So may the
Lord say, spoke I not unto you? did not I tell you of this long since? but you
would not hear me; you would not be warned by me; my messengers that I sent to
you, seemed to be but as those that mocked; that will be but cold comfort, in a
day of affliction, Oh therefore let us take Gods warning.

But to proceed to the particulars in the text, 1. For the Monitory part.
And first of the first particular in the Monitory part, which is the sight and
remembrance of their sin, 1. Particular.
Remember from whence thou art fallen.

These words are spoken to the Ephesians, who were a company of people
professing religion, a famous Church in the Apostle Paul's daie^, but now they
had left their first love, and therefore are advised, to Remember from whence
they are fallen.

Two observations arise hence.

First, That a people professing religion may fall.

Secondly, That fallen professors should Remember from whence they are fallen.



In the prosecution of this point, I shall endeavor to say something to these
two questions.

1. How far may a people professing religion fall. 2. What may be the ground or
reason of their falling?


That the answer to this may be the clearer.

1. of professors. 2. of falling.


1. Professors may be considered 1. Sigillatim singly. 2. Conjunctim
conjoynedly.


First Sigillatim, singly, for particular persons professing religion, and
these are of two sorts.

1. Such as have not only a form, but also the power of godliness, such as
have not only lamps, but also oil with their lamps, sincere-hearted
professors, true Nathaneels in whom there is no guile, Such were the Saints of
God of old, as David, Josias, Peter, and Paul.

2. Such as have a form only, no power of godliness, such as have lamps only,
but no oil, hypocrites, that are not what they seem to be, such a Judas,
Hymenaeus, and Alexander spoken of. 1. Tim. 1.20

Secondly, Consider Professors Conjunctim, conjoynedly, many of them being
joined together, and these may be considered first, nationally; secondly,
congregationally.

First, Nationally, when a nation or the generality of a nation, are a people
professing religion, such were the Jews of old, and England and Scotland now.

Secondly, Congregationally, when a company of professors, are congregated
into a particular visible Church, as the Corinthians, Galatians, and these
Ephesians in the text.

This is the first distinction.

Secondly, We must distinguish about falling.

Men may fall either 1. partialiter and pro tempore. 2. totaliter and finaliter.


First, Men may fall partially, and for a season, when there is not an
amission, or utter loss of grace, but only an Omission, forbearance, or
abatement of some of the acts or degrees of grace for a season, as the trees
yield not their leaves or fruit in the winter, but in the spring they put forth
again. Thus when Peter denied his master, Loquitur Christ^^ non de amissionesed
de omissione, (...) remissione pristini zeli and fervor^. Geo. Grossiu in loc.
he had not utterly lost his faith and love, but there was some abatement of
their degrees, and a forbearance to act as before. And this was the case of
Ephesus here, as it is conceived: she had not utterly lost her love, only the
heat of it was abated.

Secondly, men may fall totally and finally, when there is an utter loss of
all that good that once they seemed to have, not so much as any seed remaining
in them, is in Hymeneus and Alexander who made shipwreck of faith, 1 Timothy
1.19.20. And this is the case of those, that sin against the Holy Spirit, and
of these seven Asian Churches, and of Rome at this day, where Christ had once a
Church now has Antichrist his seat.

Now then for answer to the question thus.

1. Particular professors, that are sincere-hearted, Nemo potest esse
tamprudent, tam circumspectus, ut non altquando labatur. Lact. ^ lib. 6. cap.
24.
that have true saving grace in them, even such as these may fall but not
totally, not finally; but partially, and for aseason: these may want the heat
of their love, and the strength of their faith, and exercise of their graces,
but they shall not loose the truth of them, 1 John 3.9. their seed remains in
them, Habitus non amittitur, actus intermittitur, Dr. Slater in 1 Tues. 5.15.
gradus remittitur, though for a season they may want the use, or some of the
measure, yet they shall never be without the habit of grace, as in sleep we
lose not the faculty, but the use of sense; or as a man in drink, or in a
violent passion, loses not the faculty, but the use of reason: so a Christian
in temptation, may sometimes lose not his grace, but the exercise of it. Thus
David in the matter of Vriah, lost not the gift, but the exercise of his grace.
Charitat is in ^o facta est quaedam quasi seperatio non tamen abelitio. Bern.


2. But for such particular professors, as have nothing but form, no power of
godliness; such hypocrites as Judas, who notwithstanding all his preaching,
notwithstanding his pretense of love to the poor, yet he loved coin, more then
Christ, silver more then a Savior, the purse more then the poor; Such as he,
may fall, and that not partially, and for a season only, but totally, and for
ever.

3. And for conjoined professors, whether national or Congregationall, these
may so fall as that they may cease to be a nation or congregation, professing
godliness, a particular visible Church, Ecclesia particularis prorsus deficere
and perire potest Alsted Reg. Theol. loc. 16, 4. para. 4.
may be unchurched (though those particular members among them that are truly
godly shall never perish, Christ's sheep shall never be plucked out of his hand,
Joh. 10.28.) Where is the Jewish nation? Where are all those famous Churches,
spoken of in the New Testament, as Corinth, Galatia, Thessalonica, and these
seven Churches of Asia, are they not all fallen? though I question not but many
members that were among them are safe enough.

This is the answer to the first question.





would do good, evillwill be present, Romans 7.19. so that they cannot but do the
evil they would not.

stony ground, Luke 8.13. for a time believes, but in time of temptation falls
away. Notwithstanding Peter's confidence, when he is put to the trial he is not
able to stand: So proud Pendleton in Q. Mary's days, could not endure the
fiery trial, notwithstanding the great boast he made before of frying his fat
for the Gospel. Fox. Mar. vol. 3 page 140.


run well, but the love of the world has let them: how many are choked
with cares and riches and pleasures of this life, so that they bring forth no
fruit to perfection? Luke 8.14.

This was it that gave Demas such a down fall. 2 Timothy 4. ^0. Demas has
forsaken me, having loved this world, says Paul. As a bird flying upwards with
a stone or weight tied to the leg, is forced to fall down again, thus it is with
many professors whose hearts are linked to the world: It is said. 1. Tim. 6.9.
they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and in o many foolish
and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition: The love of
the world, does so ensnare and entangle men, that they can hardly discharge the
trust that is reposed in them (Honored Worthies think on this) it is too often
sound true, Vix possibile est ut avarue su^ ^uneri and ^rae satisfaciat.
that men that have been publikly and actively spirited, when once taken in the
worlds limetwigs, have been able to act no more.

because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved for
this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a
lie, that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.

The only use that we shall make of this point shall be for admonition. Use of
Admonition.
First, To the Land in general. This is a nation that holds out a general
profession, let not us be too confident and say, we have the temple of the
Lord, the temple of the Lord: we have Ordinances and the Gospel among us,
therefore all shall be well with us, ala, we may fall low enough for all this; a
Church may be unchurched (as was said before) they that were exalted as high as
Heaven, may fall as low as hell. Mat. 11.23.

2. Let all particular Christians look to it, we think we stand fast, and are
apt to say, tush, we shall never be removed, our hill stands strong, Oh but
what says the Apostle. 1. Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands, take
heed lest he fall. We stand in slippery places, and are slippery shod, it is easy
to fall, though the fall prove hard: The Devil is strong and subtle, the
world is pleasing and alluring, the flesh is weak and yielding, had we not need
to take heed.

Especially you (Honored Worthies) who are set on high. The highest Houses are
subject to the sturdiest storms. Your businesses are many, and not a business
but there is a temptation in it. This is for my friend, if I help not him, I
lose him; That Is for my self, either profit or preferment, if I act not there,
I miss it. This, will please the people; That, will engage forain states, Oh
what need have you to take heed that you fall not from your steadfastness!

To keep up, Stays to keep from falling.
give me leave to lay before you a few props or stays for your support.

First, Labor for humility, None stumble sooner then they that eye the stars
in the skey: none walk surer then they that eye the stones in the street. Prove.
16.18. pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.
What threw the Angels down from heaven? what cast Adam out of Paradise? what
drove Nebuchadnezzar from his Princely throne, and made him take up his
habitation among the beasts of the field, was it not pride? Oh then labor for
humility.

Secondly, Get good store of the fear of God in your hearts, he that walks
fearfully, walks safely, and we know that none fall sooner then they that run
without regard. It is said, Jer. 32, 40. I will put my fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me: The fear of God is the Saints support. This
will keep from falling, from being biassed by any thing: A man fearing God,
will not fall from promoting the public good for his own profit sake, Neh.
6.15. The former Governors were chargeable to the people, laid taxes upon
them, and put money into their own purses, but so did not I, because of the
fear of God, the fear of God made him deny himself, for the public good. Nor
interest in states or people, or self, or any thing will make a man fearing
God, fall from his principles.

Thirdly, Take heed of the least trips, frequent tripping usually ends in
downright stumbling. Little sins make way for greater: as little thieves open
doors or windows to let bigger in: he that trips often upon sinal oaths, No^
solu^ qu^d o^r se, and man ^este ma dum est e^^tandum, sedah^^^ni eo qued
speciem aliqua^ mali halet ab. stinendum. Z^^h. in 2 These. 5.22.
will in time grow a great swearer: therefore the Apostle gives us counsel to
abstain from all appearance of evil, a These. 5.22. not only from every thing,
that is evil in it self, or apparently evil, but from every thing that has
in it but a show or appearance of evil.

Fourthly, Look to your footing, be sure your foundation be good, build not
upon the sandy foundation of other men's judgments, they that stand upon such
tottering foundations, will be swayed and shaken, with every storm, and will
vote and un-vote, as the times turn, hold this opinion, and that opinion, which
their company holds. But place your hope in God, Psalm. 105.1. They that trust
in the Lord, shall be as mount Zion, b Vide Godw. Mos. Aar lib 5. c. 4. and
Weens. Christ. Syn. lib. 1. c. 6. Sect. 8. para. 2. Diatr. 1.
that cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever. Labor to be settled upon
the rock Christ, and then the gates of hell, that is, neither the power nor
policy of Satan, shall be able to prevail against you.

Fifthly, Pray to the Lord to uphold: they whom he keeps, are safely kept: when
the Nurse holds the child by the arms or strings, though it be weak and apt to
fall, yet it is kept up: Deuteronomy. 32.10.
so if God lead, we may walk safely. The Israelites were in the wast howling
wilderness, where were stumbling blocks enough; but God led them, and they
were kept safely; Oh pray to the Lord, to uphold you with his right hand,
according to his gracious promise, Isa. 41.10. I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my rightcousnesse. Christ prayed for Peter, that his faith might
not fail. Luk 22.32. so pray you for your selves, that your faith may not fail,
that you may not fall.

Sixthly, If you have declined, though it have, been but a little, take notice
of it, and bewail it; he that would stand futurely, let him repent of his salls
formerly, and thus we are let to the next point.

That fallen professors should Remember from whence they are fallen.

It is said, Eze. 16.61. Thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed. The
Lord had done great matters for the Jews, as he shows in the beginning of this
chapter, Admonet propheta ut incipiant agnoscere quam turpiter obnegaverint
fidem datam. Calv. in loc.
but they fell foully to whoredom ver. 15. and the Lord tells these fallen
people, that they shall Remember their ways.

The Reasons of this point which we shall mention are only these three.

Remember from whence thou art fallen: This is the injunction of the Lord
Jesus, and is not this enough? he that is Jesus a Savior, which shows his
love, and he that is the Lord, which shows he has power and authority enough:
it is he that commands this, and is not this tie enough? when the Lord would
have Joshua courageous, he uses this as an argument to persuade him to it,
Josh. 1.9. have not I commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage: So has
not God commanded them, that have fallen, to Remember from whence they are
fallen? is not this a sufficient reason?

Non agnitum, non d^le^ neque corrigitur. Parcus. in text.
What the eye sees not, the heart grieves not for: If a man consider not of his
backsliding, he will scarce ever repent of it. Psa. 119.19. I thought on my ways,
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, there is no turning till we bethink
our selves what we have done, and therefore the Lord complains of the
impenitency of the Jews, Ad paenitenti am requir^tur, ut peceator se^psum ad
rationem vocet. Nunquam ^o mines possunt ad (...) adduci, nesi ubi sibi ante
oculo proponant mala sua Calv in loc. Note. Nemo tangitur resipis^ed ^^ quino^
reputat quali^ erat. Calv. thid.
under this notion of not calling to mind what they had done. Jer. 8.6. I
hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? Consider here, God hearkens and hears,
but what hears he? truly little to the purpose, for says the text, they spoke
not aright, they were not dumb, they spoke, but as good never a whit, as never
the better, they spoke not aright: how does that appear? thus, no man repented
him of his wickedness (Note, we never speak to purpose, except we have
repented, confession of sin and prayer is to no purpose unless we have
repented) But how does it appear that they repented not? because they never
remembered their miscarriages, saying, What have we done? so then they that are
fallen, must Remember whence they are fallen, else they cannot repent,

Calv, in Rzek, 16.61. Because if men Remember not whence they are fallen, God
will remember: If we Remember God forgets, but if we forget God remembers; If
we remember God forgets, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins (which we can
never do unless we remember them) he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins: when God forgives sin he is said to forget sin, Heb. 8.12. I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness; and their sins and iniquiti es will I
remember no more: by which it appears that when men remember their backslidings
to purpose, God forgets them. But if men forget them God will remember them:
and that will be a sad remembrance: For when God remembers sin, she uses to
punish the sinner. Jer. 14.10. They have loved to wander, they have not
refrained their fret, therefore the Lord does not accept them, he will now
remember their iniquity, and visit their sins: they have loved to run away from
God, and would not remember so as to return, but God will Remember their
transgressions and visit their sin, that is, will visit them in anger for sin,
Psalm 89.32. I will visit their transgressions with a red, and their sin with
stripes: thus does God visit, when he remembers backsliding, he then visits
with a rod. Consider then if there be not reason that they that are fallen,
should Remember from whence they are fallen.

The first use of this point serves to inform us, Use 1. Of information.
That it is good for Ministers to cause the people to Remember whence they are
fallen, how far they are declined. It is said 2 Pet. 1.12.13. I will not be
negligent to put you in remembrance -- and again, I think it meet as long as I
am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance. This the
Apostle Peter resolves upon, so should we, Isa. 58.1. Concionater sit tuba, non
tibia. Calap. in loc.
The command is Cry aloud and spare not, any though never so high in place:
Lift up thy voice like a trumpet. Ministers must not be tibiae but tubae, not
pipes for pleasure, but trumpets for terror. Show my people their
transgressions, and the house of David their sins; Yea and they are to mind
them of this sin in particular, 1 Timothy 4.6. If thou put the Brethren in
remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good minister of Jesus Christ:
Note here, Note.
it is the Ministers duty to be the peoples Remembrancer, else he is not a good
Minister of Jesus Christ. But what must he mind them of? Of these things,
says the text, What are they? among other things, ver. 1. that some shall
depart from the faith: and not only that some shall fall, but they must
endeavor to help them up again, Gal. 6.1. If a manbe fallen, ye which are
spiritual, such are or at least should all Ministers be, restore such a man:
how can such a man be restored if he be not put in remembrance of his fall? And
it is plain in the verse before my text, by order from Christ John the Divine
tells the Angel, that he may tell the Church of Ephesus, thou have left thy
first love. Oh that Ministers would do this part of their duty! Oh that people
would be willing to be minded of their backsliding. It is my duty at this time
(though I am one of the meanest of all the sons of the Prophets to be a
remembrancer to you (Noble Worthies and to the rest beloved) I beseech you
therefore to give me leave to exhort you, to Remember from whence you are
fallen: And so I pass to a second use which is,

Of exhortation, Use 2. Of exhorcation.
And Oh that the Lord would afford me such a Rhetorical faculty, that I might
be able to persuade Magistrates, Ministers and people, to Remember from whence
they are fallen.

And first to begin with the Magistrates, 1. To the Parliament.
Here (Noble Senators) I must apply my self to you who are the supreme
Magistrates of the Kingdom: And I do lolemnly profess I intend not to lay a
charge against any one, but only to propound some considerations to you all,
which when you have weighed, I shall entreat you, if you see cause, to Remember
from whence you are fallen.

1. Consider whether Gods cause be promoted among you as it ought, or whether
religion be not cast behind the door, while other matters of far less moment
are called in, and set at the upper end of the table.

2. Again, Consider whether Delinquents have not (at least) so much connivance,
as gives occasion to your most cordial friends (that have stuck to you, when
you were at the lowest ebb) to grow Jealous?

3. Again, Consider whether delinquent. Friests, are not ready to thrust some
of your diligent Preachers out of the places (they have been lawfully called to
long since) and yet they escape without Co^tr^^^le.

4. Again, Consider whether some godly Ministers or others, have not had dirt
thrown in their faces, by some of your members in some of your Committees.

5. Again, Consider whether justice run with the Dromedary: or whether it does
not rather creep with the Snail; so that the poor were as good lose their right
as look after it, or petition for it.

6. Again, Consider whether you be not grown so lowspirited, that you will vote
and unvote for fear of this, or for favor of the other.

7. Again, Consider whether public faith be not almost ready to break, so that
her poor creditours, that trusted her with all they had, would be glad to take
an Angel or Noble per pound; In the mean while her rich Creditours that trusted
her but with a little of their superfluities, are like to recover their own
with advantage.

8. Again, Consider whether some of your members or faithful friends, have not
been committed or put under restraint, for an error in judgment and so remain
without calling to trial.

9. And lastly, Consider whether some of you be not more for your selves, then
the Stare; and whether you do not as Caesar once, who though he acknowledged
Casstus his cause to be more just, Plut. in vit. Bruti.
yet said Brutus must be first preferred.

Now as I said before, so I say again, I go not to charge these things upon
any, but desire they may be considered by you all, and when you have well
weighed them, if you find cause, then I most humbly and earnestly beseech you,
to Remember from whence you are fallen.

Secondly, 2 To Preachers
And now my reverend Brethren of the Ministry, Let me speak a few words to you:
I trust a brotherly admonition or exhortation (though from one of the meanest
and most unworthy of your tribe) shall not be rejected. Oh that you would
Remember from whence you are fallen.

I will draw up no charge against you, but would entreat you to consider a few
things.

1. Whether some of you that were wont to preach Christ more sweetly, do not
now preach controversies most bitterly?

2. Again Consider whether since you have enjoyed great livings, some of you be
not more Lukewarm then you were when Lecturers?

3. Again Consider whether some of you do not Procrastes like, Plut, in vit.
These.
labor to wrack some and cut others, that men might be all of your own stature?

4. Again Consider whether some of you do not look more after tithe, then after
judgment, mercy, and faith?

5. And lastly, Consider whether some of you be not more proud, more covetuous,
more cold, more careless then you were wont to be?

If any of you should be found faulty in any of these particulars, or in any
other, I would earnestly beseech you, My Reverend Brethren, to Remember from
whence you are fallen?

Thirdly, 3. To the People.
And now I am come to the people of the land, in General; Oh that the Lord
would persuade the people of England, to Remember from whence they are fallen.

1. The people of England, once loved the Saints, and honored those that
feared the Lord, but now they loath them. They once longed for a Parliament,
petitioned for a Parliament, honored a Parliament: thought they could not be
happy without a Parliament, But now how is the Parliament slighted! their
orders and ordinances contemned: Luke 8.37.
and how many are there that say to the Parliament, as the Gadarens to Christ,
Oh that it would depart out of our coasts. Oh how is England fallen?

2. The people of England once desired Reformation: Petitioned for Reformation;
covenanted for Reformation, but now they do hate to be reformed: they are like
Israel of old in their travail toward the promised land; Numb. 11.5.
they preferred the Garlic and Onyons of Egypt: before the milk and honey of
Canaan: so now a prelaticall Priest, with a superstitious service book, is more
desired and would be better welcome to the generality of England, then the most
learned laborious conscientious Preacher, whether Presbyterian or Independent:
Oh how is England fallen?

3. Again; About six years since: Sin began to be ashamed, to creep into
corners, to be out of fashion: but now sin, is grown brazen-faced, walks in
the open streets, is come into great request again. Sabbaths are profaned,
ordinances slighted, Swearing is accounted gainful: Drunkenness goes
unpunished, and whoredom the people are apt to think lawful now, because
since the Bishops Courts went down, we have scarce any law against it.

Now here (by the way) I do most earnestly beseech you (Honored Worthies of
Parliament) If you have not been acting that way already, to hasten out some
order for the punishment of that heinous sin of adultery. We read in Gods law,
Lev. 20.10. that he that commits adultery with his neighbors wife, the
adulterer and the adulteress, shall surely be put to death. Was it to be
punished with death then, and shall it go unpunished now? I beseech, Let some
course be taken that such kind of transgressors may be made to smart.

4. Again, Oh how is England fallen: Time was when we rejoiced that we had
days of fasting, we looked upon them as none of our least mercyes; but now we
are ready to say with those Amos. 8.5. When will the new moon be gone that we
may sell corn? and the Sabbath that we may ser forth wheat? so say our people,
when shall we have an ned of these fasting days? that we may follow our
callings, look to our shops; and our other occasions. And these poor simple
creatures are mad alter superstitious festivalls, after unholy holy days?
Alas! why should we be weary of well-doing? Are Englands dangers all over? Is
not Irelands case as bad as it was? and shall we give over seeking of God? O
that we would Remember from whence we are fallen.

5, Yet it were some what tolerable; if there were such a declining only among
the generality of England, if it were only among the Riffe-Raffs of the people,
But alas! How are Englands professors fallen from hot to cold, Quantum mutati
ab illis, Virg. Ipsi sunt sibi dissimiles facti. Par.
from better to worse! they are not like the people they were. Do they not
neglect Sabbaths? slight sermons? grow weary of Manna? Is not their love to
Christ, to Christians, grown cold? Do they not love the world better then they
were wont? Are they not grown more foolish and fashionable? more contentious
and complementall then formerly? You cannot know a professor from a prodigal,
a Christian from a Carrouser now adays; Oh how are Englands professors
fallen! Oh that England, that the people of England, both highand low, rich and
poor, one and other, from Dan to Beersheba, would this day begin, to Remember
from whence they are fallen, And Repent.

We have done with the first particular, 2. Parti^.
Remember from whence thou art fallen: And we come to the second thing exhorted
to, And Repent.

The Doctrine is this,

That fallen Professors must be Repenting Professors.

Here we must enquire after two things.

First, What it is to Repent?

Secondly, Why must fallen Professors Repent?



(...) Lact. lib. 6. c. 24.
The Greek word signifyes Mentis mutationem in melius, a change of the mind
from better to worse: Repedtance has its sear within; to Repent then, is to
have the heart turned from evil to good, from sin to sincerity, from Satan to
God: Fallen professors must have their hearts turned from their aberrations
and backslidings, to the Lord; and it was said of the Thessalonians, when they
repented, they turned to God from their Idols: 1 These. 1.9. where true
Repentance is, there may be miscarriages, but their heart is turned against
them.

That I may avoid prolixity, there are four things in Repentance.

1. There is a mourning for sin, because it is offensive to God, Ahab may mourn
for sin, because it brings sorrow: but true Repentance mourns for sin because
it displeases God, Zac. 12.10. they shall look upon me whom they have pierced,
and they shall mourn etc. Every Repentant sinner shall mourn greatly to think
how he has grieved Jesus Christ by sin: thus David 2 Samuel 12.13. I have sinned
against the Lord: that he had sinned against Vriah, question-lesse troubled
him, but that cuts him most, to think that he had sinned against the Lord.

2. In true Repentance the heart is set against all sin, Ezekiel. 18.11. Cast away
from you all your transgressions, The Prophet does not say deponite lay them
aside, but abijcite cast them away, as the stomach does such things as are
noisome and offensive to it. In Repentance we must deal by all sin, as the
Repenting Jews must deal by their Idols, Isa 30.22. thou shall cast them away
as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence; there is a
casting away of sin, with scorn, the Apostle gives this rule, (...) plus est
(...) quam (...) Beza. Pas. Lexi.
Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil. The word signifies to loath with
detestation, it is more then to hate, the Radix of the word is (...) or Styx,
which is sometimes rendered hell; we must hate sin as bad as we would hate hell:
and not only some sin but all sin, not only Malum opus the evil deed; but
malum operis the evil of our deed, Isa. 1.16. put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes.

3. In true Repentance the heart must he set for God, so that it must still
drive at the advancement of his glory, good actions will not serve turn, to
fast, weep, and make an external show of mourning, is not sufficient, but the
heart must be turned, Joel. 2.12. Turn you unto me (says the Lord) with all
your hearts; true Repentance sets the heart aright toward God.

4. The whole heart, not a piece of it only must be turned; God loves no
heart-division: he will have all, or none at all, Joel. 2.12. Turn you unto me
with all your hearts, Dimidia paenitentia a Deo non probatur. Calv. in Ezekiel
18.30. Quest. 2. Ans. Reas. 1.
If he have but half the heart; it is but half Repentance, which is worth nothing.

But why must fallen Professors Repent?

The Reasons briefly are they.

1. Because they are commanded to Repent, Act. 17; 30. Now he commands all
men every where to Repent. If all men, then surely such as are fallen: but more
plain is that, Hos. 14.1. Oh Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have
fallen by thine iniquity. Israel has fallen, but Israel is exhorted to return
to the Lord. Now there is no other way of returning to the Lord, but by
repentance.



Return oh backsliding Israel (says the Lord) and I will not cause mine anger
to fall upon you, for I am merfifull. Here God invites a back sliding people to
return to him, because he is merciful. Indeed nothing will so soon persuade a
poor soul to turn to God as this. Who that has run away from God would return,
but upon hopes of mercy? so ver. 14. Turn O backsliding children, says the
Lord, for I am married to you, sover. 22. Return and I will heal your
backslidings: they have been backsliders, yet they are called children, and the
Lord says he is married to them, and promises to heal them. Is there not
great reason then that back sliders should return to the Lord? whither should
the child return but to his father? whither should they that are hurt with
falling go, but to him that will heal them? this the Lord promises to do,
therefore they that are fallen should return to the Lord, by repenting.

Yet we would not have men think that it is in any man's power to Repent when he
will: but we are thus commanded and persuaded to Repent, 1. Not so much to show
our power as our duty; we ought to do many things that we cannot do, Deui jubet
quae non possumus, ut noverimus quid ab co pere re debe amus. Aug.
and because of our selves we cannot do them, we must go to God for help. 2.
Gods commands are not bare empty words, but words of power, not only commanding
but enabling to do the things commanded: Dum 'Dominus jubet cor renovare simu
boc ipsum donat quod a nobis requirit. Osiand, in Eze. 18.32.
as when Christ bid Thomas he should not be faithless, but believing; this
word was a powerful word, It enabled him to say, Thou art My Lord and My God,
Joh. 20.27.28. 3. This Command in the text (and many others of this nature
elsewhere) are spoken to a Church or Churches wherein are many Saints, in whom
Christ had wrought this grace before: so that now he does but exhort to stir up
the gift or grace that is already in them. 2 Timothy 1.6.



The first Use is to inform us: 1. Use 1. Of Information.
That Repentance is a Gospel grace, you see here the Lord Christ presses it
upon a Church under the Gospel: What pity it is, that it is so little preached,
so little practiced? What pity it is that any should cry down this grace as a
legal duty? Alas! the law knows no saving repentance. The law is pure vinegar,
the Gospel is suppling oil, the law like an hammer, may break the heart, but it
is the Gospel like fire that melts it, softens it, and brings it to Repentance.
2. This informs us, That those that have Repented, may and must when occasion
requires, repent again: Do you think those to whom this Epistle is written
never repented before? Certainly they did. Does not the fifth petition in the
Lords Prayer, Assidue pecca^tibus assidua poenitent to est nessaria. Aug.
[which was given to Christ's Disciples as a Platform to pray by] import so
much? We may well then say, as he, they that sin every day, had need repent
every day.


And now let me exhort you to this duty: Use 2. Of Exhortation.
Oh that England would repent, that our Honorable Parliament, that our
Reverend Preachers, and that all the people of the Land would repent: We have
all sinned, we have all fallen, oh that we all could and would repent: And that
we would set upon this work, 1. Speedily. 2. Resolvedly.


First, Speedily, without delay: Heb. 3.13. Joel 2.12. Non satis est recte
facere, nisi etiam matures quod facis, Amb. lib. 1. de Abr. cap. 5. Remedia
conversiones ad Deum nullis cunctationibus sunt disserende ne tempus
correctionis pereat. Aug. Luke 19.41, 42.
To day while it is called to day, says the Apostle: Yea, Now says the Lord
(by the Prophet) turn you unto me with all your heart. The time of repentance
is the present time: It is not enough to do well, unless you do well
speedily: Jerusalem for want of speed lost her day, and what a woeful thing did
it prove? it made Christ to weep over her, Luke 19.41, 42. he drew near the
city, and beholding it wept over it, saying, -- If thou had known, even thou,
at least in this thy day -- but now it is too late, the time was past, the
opportunity was gone; so it may prove to us unless we repent speedily.

Secondly, Let us set upon this work Resolvedly: When we undertake this task,
we must look for lets and rubs abundance; the devil will throw blocks in our
way, the world will oppose the work; and corrupt nature cannot away with it; so
that we shall never repent, if we do not set upon it resolvedly.

Now to further this, Let us first know that repentance is Gods gift, Act.
5.31. to give repentance: and therefore we must go to God for it.

And then let us think seriously of our fallings, of our defections; yea let us
think upon them with these two aggravating considerations.

First, We have declined, while we were under Gods afflicting hand; God has
been correcting for former fallings, and before he has laid down his rod,
before he has sheathed his sword, we fall again: we have been like the people
spoken of in Isa. 9.13. The people turns not unto him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord of hosts. And that may be applied to us that is
spoken of, Jer. 5.3. God has stricken us but we have not grieved, God has
consumed us, but we have refused to receive correction, we have made our faces
harder then a rock, and have refused to return: What? shall the child grow
worse while the father is correcting? We grow worse while God is afflicting; we
are worse now, then we were before the sword came among us: What a sad case is
this? Oh that we would lay it to heart.

Secondly, A second aggravating consideration is this, We have declined after
mercies were conferred upon us. Sins against mercy are heinous sins, if we had
sinned only against judgment, mercy would have pleaded for us, but having
sinned against mercy, what shall intercede now? We have sinned against,
general special
mercies.

1. We have sinned against general mercies: Some have died by the samine,
while we have had our tables full: Many have died of the plague, yet it has
not come near many of our dwellings: Thousands have been slain by the sword,
they have fallen some on our right hand, and some on or left, but our lives
have been given us for a prey: We have seen our adversaries laid low, we can
set our feet on the necks of our enemies. The Lord has not dealt so with every
Nation; Germany cannot say as we can; Ireland cannot say as we may: and what?
shall we sin after all this? Oh what an aggravation of sin is this! See
what Ezra speaks, Ezra 9.13, 14. Seeing that thou our God have punished us
less then our iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this;
should we again break thy commandments? Would thou not be angry with us till
thou had consumed us? so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? God
has given us, deliverances with an Emphasis, Such deliverances as These,
Wonderful, unspeakable deliverances: and yet do we fall back, decline, wax
worse and worse, sinning against God, against his mercies, certainly this must
needs provoke him exceedingly; Oh th^^ we would so consider of it, that we
might be affected with it.

2. We have sinned not only against general, but also against special
mercies, against Gospel mercies: Never had nation better Gospel-preaching then
England: Never had England better Preaching then since this Honorable
Parliament. Never had Parliament so many powerful, soul searching Sermons
preached to them, as this Parliament has had: What, and yet do we decline?
Yet do we wax worse and worse? God has long waited on us; Christ has been
long woeing of us: We have had the sufferings of Christ for poor sinners set
before us in the Gospel; and yet are we declining? What a sad thing is this?
This falling does wound Christ; this apostatizing does crucify Christ afresh,
and puts him again to open shame: Beloved should we see the drops of blood
trickling down Christ's precious temples; should we see his side pierced, and
the blood gush out there; should we see his hands and feet nailed, and withal
hear him cry out, Oh ye poor sinners of England, these things have your sins
brought upon me, Certainly it would move us, it would melt us: Why all this we
have in effect spoken to us and set before us in the Gospel (for the preaching
of the Gospel is nothing else but the preaching of Christ crucified, 1 Cor.
1.23.) Oh that this might prick us at the heart, Act. 2.37. 2 Cor. 7.10.
and bring us unto such godly sorrow, as may work in us repentance to salvation
never to be repented of.

This shall suffice for that particular. 3 Particular.


The third particular follows, which is Reformation, in these words, and do
the first works. Here note,

That repentance, though it begin in the heart, yet it does not end there: Mr
Perkins in lo.
It never perishes in the heart, but always breaks out into action in this
life.

they have ungodly committed; but we see no such matter in their lives. A
repenting heart and an unreformed life, do not usually go together. A good
tree brings forth good fruit, and a bad tree brings forth bad fruit, a good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit. Therefore let us take heed we do not deceive our selves.

But to come to another point. Mat. 7.17.18
Which is this,

That fallen professors must do the first works.

This they are exhorted to in the text: And this was the thing the Lord would
bring Israel to, Hos. 2.7. Then shall she say, I will go and return to my
first husband; See Mr Buroughs in Hos. 2.7.
she had played the harlot, she had apostatized, but now she shall say, I will
return to my first husband, and do my first works. To this the Prodigal is
brought at last, though it were long first, Luke 13.18. I will arise and go to
my father; from thence he came at first, and though he has played the
prodigal, and run rambling abroad, now he will return to his first place, to
his fathers house.

Hos. 2.7. I will return to my first husband, for then it was better with me
then now; and the prodigal found it better being at his fathers house then any
where else, there was bread enough and to spare, but elsewhere he must perish
for hunger, Luke 15.17. So in doing our first works there is far more comfort
and benefit, then in apostatizing.

See here what a sad case all those are in, Use 1. Of terror.
that have declined, but are not returned, that did run well, but have been
let, and have not since begun to do their first works; What, will they
begin in the spirit and end in the flesh? will they set their hands to the
plough, and look back, and continue so to do? Let the Apostle tell them their
state, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. If after they have escaped the pollutions of the world,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome, the later end is worse with them then the
beginning, for it had been be^ter for, them not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered unto them. This is a woeful conclusion to be worst at last. Oh that
such persons had hearts to lament this condition. Use 2 Of Exhortation.


If those that are fallen must do the first works, this may serve to exhort,

First, all Christians that have a little declined, to do their first works.
Labor (oh backsliding Christians) for such a love to Christ, to his
ordinances, as you had when God first began to work upon you: Be as frequent in
duties as once you were: Time was, when you could not let a day pass, but you
must have some converse with Christ, not only in family, but also in closet
performances, oh let it be so again. Time was, when you had more love one
toward another then now you show, you could rejoice to see the face of such a
Minister or professor, oh let it be so again: Time was when Christians could
meet together for edification, and not for such unprofitable disputation as
now, oh let it be so again: Time was when Christians were not so divided in
affection as they are now (because one last will not fit every shoe,) oh let it
be so again.

And here let me speak a word to those that differ in judgment, So far as
you agree together, I would to God you would walk together; and not set up
party against party to the prejudice of all, as the manner of some is. It was a
good saying of the King of Navarre. When he entertained George Gluchus the
Danish Ambassador at a banquet: Navarraeus dixit, Luthe^^^ and Calvi^^^ in 40.
articulis a papa (...) nuviter disse^tire: in ^^^e in 39. articulis consentire,
unum contraver su^ restare: dandam o^eram ut mutuis animis and virthas in papam
fingule parts u^r^^que prtmum triuerent; uti papa oppress^, tum de contraverse
illo articulo componendo und cogitaretur Com. de star Rel. and Reip. Gal. page
1. lib. 2.
he bid the Ambassador tell his Master, that he hoped by that time a year were
expired, the Gospel should be freely preached throughout all France: The
Ambassador desired him to promote Luthers doctrine rather then Calvin's, as the
Kings of Denmark and Sweden, and other Princes had done; to whom the King of
Navarre answered, Luther and Calvin differ from the Pope in forty points, and
agree among themselves in nine and thirty; so that there is but one point of
differe^^^ (...) them. Let therefore both (...) forces against the Pope, and
when he is subdued, see if they can fairly compose that one point of difference
among themselves. So say I to our differing parties in the Kingdom, perhaps it is
but in one point about an appeal that you differ; in other things you agree: Oh
that you would join together against the common adversaries, and those being
subdued, see if you can fairly discuss that one point, and if it be possible
at last to agree.

Secondly, be ye exhorted (Noble Worthies) to do the first works. More
especially.

1, Labor to exalt Christ, this is a work of some worth, God has exalted
Christ, Let me entreat you to exalt him. 1. Exalt him in your own hearts, let
Christ have the highest seat in your souls: Exalt him in all his offices; Let
him be your King, your Priest. your Prophet, the chiefest among ten thousand;
2. Exalt Christ in the nation, let him be Englands King, Let him have all his
ordinances set forth and set up in their full power and purity among us, Do
this first work.

2. Labor to promote an able Conscientious Ministry, this is a work you have
been about, Go on, and the Lord make you to prosper in it.

First, Let Conscientious Ministers be countenanced by you; they are your
horsemen and chariots. Let not men of malignant spirits, have power to molest
them, though in some minus principalibus, they do differ from some others.

Secondly, Let them not want competent maintenance (I plead not for tithes) by
Bishops land, or some other ways a competency may be had. But if you leave
them to the alms of the people, many Ministers in many places must feed upon
short commons, for charity grows very cold.

Thirdly, I beseech you labor to do justice, you are the supreme Magistrates
of the Kingdom, If justice come not to us from you, whence shall we have it?

1. I beseech you judge for the poor, Psa. 82.3, 4. Defend the poor and
fatherless, do justice to the afflicted and needy, Deliver the poor and needy,
rid them out of the hand of the wicked: Many a poor Minister is miserably
afflicted by some wicked rich men in his parish, because he dares not give them
the Sacrament which would be as a cup of poison to their souls, and many a poor
widow suffers much at the hands of the mighty, I beseech you let the cause of
the poor innocent be heard.

2. I beseech you be impartial in justice: Do not let the great flies break
through the web, while little gnats are entangled. Inven. Sat 2.
Dat veniam corvis, vexat Cens^ra columbas. To spare the great birds, and
destroy the small, not so hurtful, is no good justice. There are many wonder
there are no more delinquents called to the bar; Take heed you spare not
Brother Benhadad, Dum M^g^s^^at^^ reos absolvunt gravissimorun ^^i^inum,
pecca^^^ecrum sese obligant. P. Nar^. in 1. Reg, ^0.42.
least you and the Kingdom fare the worse for it, as the Prophet told Ahab 1
Kin. 20, 42. Because thou have let go a man whom I had appointed to utter
destruction, thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. I
beseech you think of this, and be impartial.

3. I beseech you do justice speedily, let not men wait for justice, norly long
before they come to trial. Justice should run; You have many of your
delinquents grow exceeding bold, because they see Justice is not speedily
executed, Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men, is sully set in them to do
evil: which may as well be applied to man's delay, Vide C^a Lap. and Tho. Cart.
in loc.
as to Gods delay in punishing offenders; And the truth is, delays in
executing justice, may prove of as dangerous consequence as delays in war, Oh
therefore do justice speedily.

4. Be persuaded to do justice freely; Among the Jews the Judges sat in the
gates, men might have as free recourse to the Judges, as to their Cities; I am
confident this honorable Parliament scorns to judge for rewards, yet some say
it costs vijs and modis, much money, as well as much waiting, to have an Order
upon a Petition, I beseech you let Justice be more free.

Fourthly, There is one work more which I would beseech you to do, And that is
to let Ireland be remembered. Ah poor Ireland, how art thou forgotten? If we
hasten not help, before it be too late, we may happily wish-would we had made
more have, we were more active for them once then now we are, Oh that we would
do that first work.

I shall use no other motives to press home these things, 2 For the Minatory
part of the text.
then the particulars which lie in the Minatory part of the text.

The first whereof is Christ's coming, 1 Particular.
Or else I will come unto thee. But why should here be mention made of Christ's
Coming, was he not at Ephesus before? does he not walk in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks, ver. 1. yes, he does walk there as a defender,
Bright man in lee.
but not as a revenger: when he says he will come, he means to punish, when he
comes, Propter te puniendu^ Gorran. in loc.
and when he comes for such a purpose as this, he takes up (as it were) another
person, he comes as a stranger to do a strange act, for so he calls his
Judgments, Isa 28.21. That he may do his work, his strange work, that he may
bring to pass his act, his strange act; Now when Christ shall come to
judgment, would you have him find you in an apostatizing state? in a
backsliding condition? worse then you were at first? Christ's last works toward
his people shall be his best works, Eze, 36.1. I will do better to you, then at
your beginning. And would you have him find you doing worse at your latter
end, then at your beginning? Let then the consideration of Christ's coming, move
you to do your first works.

The Second Argument to press home these things, 2 Particular.
is taken from the consideration of the speediness of Christ's coming, His(...)
not (...)
I come unto thee quickly. In the Original it is, I come, in the present
tense, not I will come, in the future: Intimating, that Christ is coming
already, besides it is further said, I come quickly, very swiftly, with much
speed, and suddenness. You may perhaps think as he in Mat. 24.48. My Lord
delays his coming, and so may venture on things not convenie^t; but take heed
least you be surprised: The Lord may come this night against some of you; And
would it not be a sad thing to be found worse then you were seven years ago?
to have the Lord say, you are grown worse since you were Parliament men, then
you were before? worse Christians not so zealous? worse Commonwealths-men, not
so actively nor publicly spirited as heretofore? would not this be sad? Let me
tell you, God has not bestowed the honor of being Parliament men upon you
(for such ends as Caesar bestowed favors on Brutus, Not so much to honor his
virtues, Plutarch invita Bruti.
as to weaken his constant mind) but God has bestowed this high honor on
you, that you and the Kingdom might be the better. Oh therefore look to it,
and labor to do your first works.

The third Argument is taken from the end of Christ's coming, 3 Particular.
which is to Remove thy Candlestick out of his place: Though Christ will not
break his Candlestick, yet he will remove it, not leave so much as any quality,
title, or property of a Church: he will unchurch a Church, Diodats annos. in
loc.
if he see cause, as he has done by Ephesus. Would you then have England loose
the Gospel? would you have Paganism or Popery come in again? I am confident
you would not: It would be a sad day with England, if God should take away the
Gospel; when the Gospel goes from a place, God goes; when the Gospel goes,
Christ goes; when the Gospel goes, all true prosperity goes: so that if Christ
should take away his Gospel, we should be extremely woeful every way; I beseech
you therefore if you have any love to God, any love to Christ, any love to the
Gospel, any love to the Kingdom, or any love to your selves, Remember from
whence you are fallen, and Repent, And do your first works again, etc.

FINIS.

