THE JOVIALL TINKER OF ENGLAND: Willing To Hammer the Covenant and Scots
Commissioners into English.

AND To mend the breaches, and stop the holes of the Crown of England,
(miserably torn and bruised, both within and without) with the best Mettle he
can get. And at a very reasonable Rate.

PROVIDED, He be not compelled to take the Scots Sense upon the COVENANT. He
will rather walk about the Countries, and cry: Have you any work for a Joviall
Tinker.

By BORIALIS Guard.

LONDON, Printed for John Hickman, 1648.

THE Covenant, and Scotch Commissioners, translated into English, for better
understanding.
ENGLAND is unhappily become the Tennis-ball of misfortune, betwixt a Scottish
King, and the Kingdom of Scots, Epitomized in those State-Merchants their
Commissioners. The one striving for an absolute separate interest, the other
for a joint. A design in practice ever since King James first set foot over
Tweed. wherewith he traveld all his life, but wanting the Midwisery of a
Covenant, to bring it to pass; but now we are shared out by the Meerestones of
mutual agreement betwixt His Majesty and His Native Subjects, who formerly
promised them three Counties, but that not contenting them, he has now
undertaken for the whole kingdom, to let them play the best of their Game, and
they to him for the Crown to make it Independent (whereas the Identity and
self-samenesse of interest ought to be 'twixt him and his People, as betwixt
the head and body natural) and certainly the cards play fair for them, by the
Cavaliers on the one side, and the Londoners on the other, the one sworn slaves
to Prerogative, and the other (for the most part) to the Scotch gloss upon the
English Covenant, who long to feast the Mayor of Edenborough at Guild Hall. For
the Scots finding the waters troubled, and humors stirring, they think now is
the best fishing, and the fittest time to work their ends, and therefore Print
their papers in spite of the Parliament (in hope thereby to set England on fire
that they may come to warm their hands at it) a practice never known in use by
any Ministers of State but these, nor by them in no place in the world but
here, because their warpe is weaving in our Looms. They find the Round heads a
stiff people not easily bent, but resolved to the death, to maintain entire
both the freedom and interest of England without mixture or thraldom, therefore,
Acheronta movebunt, they now renounce brotherhood, and contrary to Covenant
fawn upon the Principles of the Cavaliers, face about to the common Enemy,
toward whom throughout all these wars they carried themselves very
inoffensively, doing them no more hurt than what necessarily conduced to their
own particular advantage, in taking a few northern frontier Garrisons, and
knowing them to be mostly profane Esaus, a people not much considerate of
their own concernments, they hope to buy out their birthrights with a mess
of pottage, and yet the Cavaliers hate a Round head, he cannot lightly love a
Blew-cap, so that they may perchance find it prove the only stay, to part two
fighting Mastiffes is to turn a Bear loose upon them both. And as for the
Londoners, they are so confident of them, as already they call London (where
their Papers of the disposal of the Kings person was printed) Edenbrough, upon
the frontispiece thereof, nor is it improper for the Metropolis to change her
name, when the Kingdom changes her interest.

And which is the worst part of machiavell they make religion even The solemn
League and Covenant to father all their bastards, for my own part I am one
that have taken it, and wish all did so that will make conscience to keep it,
but cursed be that Englishman that takes it with the Scotch corrupt paraphrase
of a joint interest, which ipso facto renders him perjured as to the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, inhibiting all Englishmen to betray or communicate
their public interest (especially legislative) to foreign States, and
better it were the Covenant were neither given nor taken, then pressed in
policy as it is by the Scots, to hand-fast English men in a joint interest and
propriety, or taken with perjury, as it is by the Cavaliers, who make no
conscience in swearing, nor for-swearing. But we now plainly see what were our
brethrens ends in their first propounding this Covenant, not Religion and
Conscience, but Design and Incroachment. I dare not judge so undivinely of
their Divines who I am confident had honester purposes, but whatsoever was
their divinity in it, their equity is stark naught, the Commander in chief
whereof in his transactions here in England has carried himself extreme
immorally, to the scandal of Presbytery and meriting the stool of repentance,
and yet it cannot be denied but that what he has done, has been equitable,
for the King raising him, by I know not what mystery of State, from his deep
displeasure, to that height of Honor, can he do too much for such a Master?
that not only forgave him, but gave him; Who is their main pillar of policy,
and strikes the greatest stroke in this masterpiece of transmigration of
interest, and like Chancery Bills, affirms any thing, but proves nothing in his
papers, knowing that a bad cause is better maintained by a brazen face, (bold
assertions) than iron arguments. Therefore they never offer to reply, save with
a deaf ear to the House of Commons Answer to their papers, touching the
disposal of the King in England, whereby is made evident, that neither as to
that particular, nor any thing else, either in, or relating to the Covenant,
they have any right or interest to order or dispose thereof by any joint or
united property.

The words of the Covenant being express and clear to the contrary, in every
Article of it, engaging both each Nation and each person, To endeavor (both one
thing and other) in our several places and callings -- in our several
Vocations -- and according to our places and interests. So that though the
Covenant by these definit expressions purposely provide against confusion of
Interests, that England and Scotland being several distinct kingdoms, and
each one only to act in his several place; Vocation, calling and interest,
yet without replying to these reasons brought against their indirect quoting
the Covenant in abstract Positions thereby to compass their end of joint
interest; they still persist from this Covenant to entitle themselves to the
right of exercising a joint power, not only of disposing the King, but the
kingdom also, though the Covenant be contrary to the exercise of any joint
power which was several and distinct, before the making thereof; and although
the joint exercise of such power be a breach of Covenant; both of us
respectively being thereby obliged in our several Vocations mutually to
preserve the rights, privileges, and Liberties of each Parliament and kingdom,
and the exercise of such a joint power, which gives a negative voice to either
Nation toward other, is a manifest breach of those Privileges and Liberties,
so Covenanted to be entirely preserved, and consequently of the Covenant it
self. And whereas both in their Printed papers to the people, and their
dissent to the Propositions sent lately to the King at the Isle of Wight, this
joint propriety is so much stood upon, yet neither is the word jointly nor any
other expression which will bear that interpretation so much as mentioned in
the Covenant, but the direct contrary, in those words Bach one in his several
Vocation; Calling; Place, and Interest, which runs through the whole Covenant,
and which would have cleared the meaning of it, but therefore they cunningly
leave it out, and break off in the midst of a sentence, to dective the people,
who they find too apt to take upon trust, and to suspect strangers less than
there is cause.

For per fas and nefas, the design if it will not go, it must be driven, and
so it is, from one stage to another; for whereas formerly the dispose of the
Kings person was only pretended to, now they are mounted to a higher staire and
step of encroachment, the empowring of the Crown; and whereas the Covenant
runs thus: The preservation and defense of the Kings person, and authority in
the preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom.

They notwithstanding make a stop at Authority, and thus our English sentences
are read with Scotch comma's and periods, and the Covenant made to speak what
it never meant, and Covenanters to undertake absolutely what they promise but
conditionally, by these Scotch Artificers, who make it a nose of wax, and here
in England takes upon them to tell you, That the King and Crown shall have the
negative voice, the regal Militia, yea and Court of Wards too, or as good,
whether it stand with the preservation and defense of true Religion, and the
Kingdoms liberties or not, further then which the Covenant binds not; nay
though they see apparently all is lost, if it be so, the King being as firm to
his principles both Ecclesiastical and Civil, as ever, yea and for our better
security, they will have the Army disbanded in hope the Parliament cannot easily
raise another, and so they may command in chief in the North, the Londoners in
the South, and the Cavalliers East and West; and then their own flesh and
blood, the eleven Members may return in freedom, honor, and safety, and put
Mr. Pellam in the chair again. Thus they do by us as the Philistims did by
Sampson, been use they cannot bind us, they put out our eyes, and make us
(...) round in a Mil, leave us as they found us and worse, besides the expense
of so much blood and money since, with our hands in our pockets; that so their
new brotherhood the Cavalliers may rise and cut our throats, with whom they
are confident of a joint interest both in King and Kingdom.

When they were pleased to say, It was prejudicial to both Kingdoms, (for
there lies the Emphasis) for the King, (because they had no mind to him) to
go into Scotland, (...) were content they should leave him in England, where
also they will dispose of him, and have him come to London, in ^^^^dome honor
and safety (which are comprehensive terms; before any peace be concluded or
propositions granted, and that too, as the safest for the Kingdom (I should
say both Kingdoms) under penalty of breach of Covenant, which they use now as
the Pope in old time was wont to do his excommunications, to compass
Kingdoms. And for his coming to London they bring a weighty reason of suitable
sophistry to the rest of their transactions. viz. Because the Parliament
invited him to come thither before the wars break out, as being then the
only means to prevent them (and now to renew them) that therefore after so
much blood and treasure spilt and spent, upon that reason he must come without
condition or satisfaction, at his own election, and be restored before His
Kingdom be repaired; this is brotherly love and kind dealing indeed. What will
posterity think of such Covenanters, brethren, and Auxiliaries, who doubtless
are out of our pay and have forfeited their arreares that thus in their late
Papers alarm the whole Kingdom, and set their Pay-masters at defiance, and
would now sell their party to their Prince, as they did their Prince to their
Party. Besides that, to pay them were to arm them, till they retract their
book: Nor do men use to give wages to those they hire, for going up and down
the house from room to room and rid no work, when work is to be done, as
the Scots did here in perambulation from Country to Country, and during the
wars neither fought battle nor stormed Town but Newcastle, but now they
make an amends for their idleness by turning busybodies, they kept their skins
whole, and their Army entire to begin, it seems, when we had made an end, but
begin when they will, they will find work for Tinkers; all England is not of
one mind, their Papers are too long for all to read them, and too false to be
believed by all that do read them, and more there are that side with them for
faction, then that will side with them in fighting against their Countries
interest, But they give you reasons, (or at least would see me to do so) why
the Militia must be inherent in the Crown, and the negative voice in the
King. The reason of the Militia is because of the protection, the Crown must
afford to the people, so says the King when he means nothing less, and
further tell us, That for the Crown to be divested of all power and right of
the Militia is different from their judgments, a strong reason, and
imparatively spoken, enough to have been uttered by the Kings negative voice,
and for the regal protection they speak of against enemies, we have found,
and they have seen it turned to destruction (as still its like to be) and an
oath broken on one part, sets the other at liberty, our government being
pactionall, and our Allegiance according to the nature of but Government, not
of slaves and vassalls, but of Freemen. As the King is made for the people, and
not the people for the King, so is he first bound to the people, and then they
to him. But we have now more need of protection against false brethren then
open enemies, which we cannot expect from the King their Countryman, and
therefore its better to have the Militia in the power of the Parliament,
Englands abstract. And as they tell you what their judgment is not, so also
what it is, viz. That they think the King in his message from Caresbrooke
Castle, has offered that which should be very satisfactory in the point of the
Militia. I wonder not that it contents them, being I am confident a child of
their own brame instilled into him at Hampton Court (when they went to see how
he did) for its perfectly like them, a consent like the Covenant (as they make
it) merely an aliquid nihil. But what if other men be of other minds, and have
not we cause to be so, and to think it unsatisfactory: for is not the Prince
in his capacity as bad as the King? principled by father and mother to begin
where he leaves; is not the Parliament put in trust by the people to provide
for their security; and shall they be so base as to expose posterity, had our
forefathers been so selfish, the Freemen of England might have been like the
bondmen in Scotland, where the common people speak broken French.

The reason of the negative voice is, as they affirm, because regal power and
authority is chiefly in making and enacting Laws, and therefore object, That
the new preface takes away the Kings negative voice, and cuts off all royal
power and right in Law-making, wherein by the way they play the Sophysters
(being excellent School men in State matters) for when they speak of the
Militia, which is less concerned in terminis in the Coronation oath, which
principally respects Civil matters, yet they bring it for a proof as to that,
saying, That all Kings are obliged by their Coronation oath to protect their
Subjects, but as to his negative voice, the exclusion whereof is both the
substance of that oath, and this preamble, they blanch it, taking and leaving
as makes for their turns in Oaths and Covenants, and making at best that oath
as to the Laws, speak but the language of the Cavalliers, whose
interpretation of only protecting the Laws, they take up, and decline that of
the Parliaments of confirming and making them, so fully evinced in their
Declarations to be the genuine sense thereof, and in right reason, and true
construction it must needs be so, That he swears to confirm and grant all
such Laws as his people shall choose to be observed, not has chosen: for
first, the word concedis in that oath were then unnecessary, the Laws formerly
enacted being already granted by foregoing Kings his predecessors, and so need
no more concession or confirmation, else we must conclude that all our Laws
dye with the old King, and receive their Being a new by the new Kings consent.
Secondly, hereby the first and second clause in that interrogatory, viz.
Concedis justas leges and permit (...) protegendas, are confounded, and do
but idem re^^^^^^. Thirdly, Quas vulgus elegerit, implies only the act of the
people in a dis-junctive sense from the act or consent of the King, but Laws
already made have more then Quas vulgus elegerit in them, they have also the
Royal consent too* so that that phrase cannot mean those Laws wherein the act
and consent of the King is already involved. But though the Scots Commissioners
approve not of it to be the meaning of that Oath, yet they affirm it
undeniably as a position of their own, That regal power is chiefly in making
and enacting Laws; that and protection being of the essence of Kings.

The Scots say its essential to the King to make Laws, the Preamble to the
Propositions says so too, That it is the duty of his office, yet they that
affirm that, oppose this, so that there must needs be some great
misunderstanding, for there is no difference, which is this. The Scots when
they say. It is essential to the King to make Laws, speak by a figure
incident to their dialect, that is, They speak one thing, when they mean
another (you may find the name of it in Hocus Pocus his politics) intending
thereby, That it is essential to him not to make Laws, elegantly asserting
the negative (which they contend for) in the affirmative. (For they speak all
in the plural number Kings and Kingdoms, nothing but joint interests and
equal jurisdiction, municipall laws are out of doors.) And let it be granted
that it is a principal part of even our regal authority to make and enact
Laws, for the Coronation oath says as much, That he is to confirm and grant
such Laws as his people shall present; so also says this Preamble to the
Propositions, and what get they by it? why then say they to take away the Kings
negative voice is to cut off all power and right in making Laws; nothing
less, this is a mere non sequitur, for to make him that he cannot but make
them, is that to make him that he cannot make them* There are somethings that
God himself cannot but do, (which is as well his perfection and power (not
imperfection and impotency) as those things he can choose to do) and does that
therefore imply that he cannot do what he cannot but do? Things essential are
not arbitrary but necessary, so is making Laws to the Office of a King, but so
is not his not making them: It seems by the Scots creed translated into
English, (for they are not of this faith, at least not of this practice at
home) nothing's royal but what is arbitrary, a position fitter for Turks and
Infidels to maintain, then Christians and men of erudition, that so preferres
will to reason, and the will of one man lapsed and relapsed to the reason of a
State, making that which is the worst to rule by, the sole or principal rule
of all rule and Government. They are now attained to that confidence as after
all that is done and suffered by the Parliament and Kingdom for an
establishment of liberty and safety, openly to advocate it for the King against
these, (preferring their interest which is against them, above their Covenant
which is for them) notwithstanding the profession they made to the contrary and
the money, viz. 600000. li. 100000. li. at their coming in, 200000. li. at
their going out. 250000. li. for coals at Newcastle. 50000. li. when they lay
before Hereford, are such another sum when they lay before Newarke, besides
free quarter, a^bitrary assesements, and exactions; which in computation during
their long stay to little purpose amounted to above as much more. They have had
for their seeming serviceablenesse thereunto. And now all the courtesy we must
expect is only this, for they are their own words. It is not our desire that
Monarchy should be at the absolute height of an arbitrary and tyrannical
power. Implying an allowance or content of some, yea, a great deal of
arbitrary and tyrannical Monarchical power, and for this it seems they
contend, the whilst they go about to erect these two Pillars of it in the
Crown, a Negative voice and a Regal Militia, and indeed the Crown having
them, what can hinder it of an arbitrary tyrannical power even to the height
thereof, if he that wears it be so disposed, for by the power of the one the
people can have no Laws but what heel grant them, and by the power of the
other they are never the better for them, nor surer of them when they have
them; the Militia investing the King with a negative power of undoing at
pleasure what he of courtesy has done or granted to them, and so his people
are stripped of all power or righ^, both to get or keep what is for their weal
or their posterities, and all rendered at the Kings will and mercy and that by
Law and Allegiance too, then which I do not well understand how there can be a
more absolute height of Monarchical arbitrary tyranny, then by pretended Law
and right to have it in his power to do what he will, (absolute persian) for
so his will by law gives law to all laws and the subjects benefit in his mere
beneficence.

For if the Subject desire good laws he may stop their mouths and tell them
that by Law he may deny them, or if he be in a good mind and grant them, and
after change and be desirous either to unmake them or to break them (which yet
the Medes could not do) ^s what is more changeable then the will of a King
(whether he be Englands or Isreal's Solomon) subject to alteration upon every
puff of passion, or tradewind of flattery etc. And then if the Subject take
arms for defense of their Laws he soiles them at that guard too, and and
tells them by Law the Militia is his not theirs; And if they reply but he is to
use it for the public weal, he answers them, I may choose by my negative
voice, and thus the poor Englishman by Scotch sophistry is tossed from post to
pillar void of all certainty and stability, and is merely ad placitum in
substance, though in shadow a freeman: these are no Levellers, these are
Mountainers, high landers: but how can we expect better when strangers and men
of contrary interest to us, are our Legis-lators and take upon them the highest
Office of judicatory in this Kingdom next to making Laws (which they say is
the Kings, and therefore they will not take that from him.) viz. to interpret
our Laws and Liberties, and so by a writ of alienation we are shared out
'twixt him and them, he to make, and they to interpret, and thus the English
Parliament betwixt two stools falls to the ground, and becomes a mere
nullity, and yet the Scots Commissioners (the renewers of our miseries) play
the Courtiers, and tell you in Latin instead of English, that they profess
ignorantiam facti and juris alieni, but their words and actions agree as did
their words and swords, promise much and do nothing.

Further to make good these their assertions touching the Kings Right to the
Militia, and a Negative voice, they prove it by the Scepter and Sword, which
they say are badges of those powers to be in the King, it may be so in
Scotland, but in England they signify not the power of creation (specially not
of annihilation of Laws) but of execution of civil and penal Justice, else by
this reason the Mayor of a Corporation, whose badges in proportion import the
same things, should have a Negative voice, and be a Lawmakers (or law-refuser)
who indeed is the Laws Minister, and so is the King, the fountain of Justice
not of Laws. But to show how inconsistent and irrational it is for the King of
England to have a Negative voice (for, for the impertinencies of other Nations
instanced by them, there need no other answer, but that we neither give nor
take Laws from any but our selves)t may appear by these following
considerations.

1. By the Kings not sitting in Parliament to debate and consult Laws, nor are
they at all offered him by the Parliament to consider of, but only to consent
unto, which yet are transmitted from one of the Houses to the other as well to
consult, as consent to, showing thereby that he has no share in the consultory
part of them (for that it belongs only to the people in Parliament to discern
and consult their own good) but he comes only at the time of enacting,
bringing his royal authority with him, as it were to set the seal thereof to
the Indenture already prepared by the people, for the King is head of the
Parliament (as of the people) in regard of his authority, not in regard of his
reason and judgment, as if it were opposed to the reason and judgment of both
Houses (which is the reason both of King and Kingdom) and therefore do they
as consult, so interpret Laws without him, supposing him to be a person
replenished with honor and royal authority, not skilled in Laws, nor to
receive information either of law or counsel in Parliamentary affairs from
any, saving from the supreme Court, and highest Council of the King and
Kingdom, which admits of no counterpoise, being entrusted with all, above all.

2. Either the choice of the people in Parliament, is to be the ground and rule
of the Kings assent, or nothing but his pleasure, and so all Bills though never
so necessary for public good and preservation, and after never so much pains
and consultation of both Houses may be voided, and so they made mere ciphers,
and we brought to that pass, as either to have no Laws, or such as come only
and inmediately from the King (who often is a man of pleasure, and little seen in
public affairs to be able to judge) and so the Kingdoms great Council must
be subordinated either to his mere will (and then what difference between a
free Monarchy, and an absolute, saving that the one rules without counsel, and
the other against it) or at the best but to a cabinet council, consisting
commonly ^f men of personal interests, but certainly of no public trust.

3. By the practice of requiring the royal assent even unto those very acts of
Subsidies which are granted to himself, and for his own use, which it is
supposed he will accept of, and yet Honoris gratia, his royal assent is asked
and contributed thereunto.

Lastly, from the Scots own position, which is this, That regal power and
authority is chiefly in making and enacting Laws, and in protecting and
defending their subjects, which are of the very essence and Being of all Kings.
Whence I argue, that then he has a negative power in neither no more in the
one then in the other, but as he is not to deny protection to his people, so
nor Laws, for (as aforesaid) things essential are necessary, these then being
so to the office of a King, he is not arbitrary in their dispensation, but as
he must do the one, viz protect not, destroy his people, so also the other,
viz. consent not, dissent to their Laws, for to consent is either a mere act
of his will and pleasure, and then not essential to his place, or the issue of
his duty, and then not of his mere will, as it is of a Judge to do justice,
and therefore cannot (that is ought not) to be denied, this their own
position, whereupon they would build the negative voice, quite destroys it and
concludes both against it and them.

In a word, the Fundamental Law of the Land, is a settling of Government, so as
that it may be administered, with honor and safety, and therefore the people
first consult their own safety and welfare in Parliament, and then the King,
who is to be entrusted with it, is to give an honorable confirmation to it,
and so to put an Impresse of Majesty and Royal Authority upon it. The
Legislative power in England is in the hands of the supreme Government, not
Governor, here the people like Freemen offers Laws to be enacted, does not
receive them so, nor ought to be denied them. The King is to give life to such
Acts and things as tend to public good and protection, which Acts depend not
upon his pleasure, but though they are to receive their greater vigor from
him, yet are they not to be suspended at pleasure by him, for that which at
first was intended by the Kingdoms for an honorable way of subsistence and
administration must not be wrested contrary to the nature of this polity and
Institution, insomuch as if the King in his person decline his duty, the King
in his Parliament is to perform it; Safety and Being, is to be preferred to
Honor and Well-being, and Reallities to Forms, which are useful, if not
hurtful, Good Handmaids, but bad Mistresses, being but Honorable Accidents,
not Essences, like beauty to the face, or Jewels to the Crown, which, though
they be pawned, its not essentially impaired; Civil superstition may undo us
as well as Ecclesiastical, which commonly go together, and one of them often
times is the punishment of the other; Civil dissentions, Prerogative Wars, and
Canterburian Altars began at once. The peoples hearts were not prepared, was of
old the sin of many ages, and the cause of many judgments, God grant it be not
so with Englands Israel.

FINIS.
Janua. 29. 1647.

Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot.


