A DEMVRRE TO THE BILL FOR PREVENTING THE GROWTH AND SPREADING OF HERESY.
Humbly Presented to the Honorable the House of Commons.
WE beseech you for the great love you have from the people, that you will be
cautious in determining any thing in this business of blasphemy and heresy;
and that you will resolve to do nothing therein, but what shall evidently
appear to be just and agreeable to the word of God.

Our fears are great; that those who urge you so much to suppress heresies
and blasphemies, have their own unjust ends therein, and the enslaving of the
people to their wills: To estrange their affections from you; and to make them
out of love with Parliaments.

For what is it you are urged unto; but in effect to establish a very
inquisition, to be as a curb to all those that oppose the doctrines and
oppinions of the ministers, or will not without reasonings or disputings submit
their faith, practice and purses to their wills.

It is not to be supposed but that these desires and motions, have their rise
and birth from them, whose purpose it is to make you Instruments of their
cruelty; certainly they have dug deep, and are grown confident you are fully
underminded; they judge you believe you are; and that you are so fully
captivated by their policies and stratagems, that you dare not but do what
they desire? though never so unjust or distructive to your selves.

It cannot be; they should think you so ignorant as to believe they make these
desires out of zeal to God, to Christ or his word; they are assured, you not
only doubt, but know they do it only to make you instruments, to subject the
people to their no less then popall tyrany, they know you know it to be so,
and think they have you upon such a lock as you dare not deny them.

But will you now fear the power of a Clergy, so lately raised out of the dust
by your selves; when neither the power of the Court; and a long settled Clergy
united, has been able to stand before you; there is nothing for this
Parliament now to fear but God.

The Clergy do but presume, and like the Prelates do things hastily, that
will speedily make them odious, and be their ruin.

The people already generally see through them, they have waighed them in the
balance and find them light, adelusive, coveteous* violent, bloody, imperious
sort of men, no more like the Apostles or Disciples of Christ, then Simon Magus
was; there is nothing so much in discourse as their pride and coveteousnesse:
That it is they who set Nation against Nation, and neighbor against neighbor,
and to have their will, set even all the People together by the ears; their
craft and policies are worn threed-bare, and their credits and reputations is
grown low in the Peoples esteem, and therefore do they make have unto you for
some real power.

And because they would prevail, they seem to be advocates for God, for
Christ, for his word, for the precious souls of men* transforming themselves
into this shape of angels of light, in hope to deceive the very Parliament it
self.

We beseech you to look upon them without dread, without superstition; with
open eyes, see through them to their ends, and you will see they mind only
themselves, to set themselves above you, to trample upon the People, who yet
trust you will preserve them from so great a bondage.

1. First for their desire concerning heresy: for I presume I may safely call
them theirs first: for it is not probable they know any person that do deny
and maintain there is no God, if any such were they would no doubt ere this
time have been brought to light, by these searching inquisitive Church men:
their purpose in this particular seems to be no other then to keep men in awe
and fear of affrunting them in their arguments, to have advantages against any
tha hold any set discourses, and to beget in men a superstitious belief of any
thing they say, without any examination of their grounds and reasons.

2. In case any being ignorant, maintain the contrary, can it be judged in
wisdom or justice, an equal thing that they should therefore be discharged?
Would it not far better become us to endeavor the enlightening of their
understanding, or to wait Gods leisure till he do it in his due time, rather
then by their death to make sure that it shall never be done.

3. Men are not borne with the knowledge of this more then of any other thing;
it must therefore either be infused by God, or begoten in us by discourse and
examination as other things are; if it be infused, we must wait Gods time; his
season is not the same for all, though happily one man's understanding may be
opened at the first or second hour, another may not till the eleventh or last
hour.

If by discourse and examination; then every man must have liberty to discourse
there upon; to propose doubts, to give and take satisfaction, to scruple,
argue, or do any thing that may firmly establish our minds in this prime and
fundamental truth.

4. We beseech you let not God and the truth of this being, be so excessively
disparaged as not to be judged sufficient to maintain it against all
gainsayers, without the help of earthly power to maintain it; Let Turks and
those that believe in strange gods, which are indeed no gods: make use of such
poor and infirm supporters of their supposed deities; but let the truth of
our God, the only God, the omnipotent God, be judged abundantly; able to
support it self; it is a tacit imputation of infirmnesse, to imagine it has
need of our weak and impotent assistance.

5. If there be any fear that for want of such a terror and penalty as is
desired, men will take greater liberty to be vicious; Let the strictness and
severity of law be multiplied tenfold against all manner of vice and enormity:
Let some course be taken and charge given to the public speakers, that they
spend less time about controversies and entrigate disputes; and divert the
stream of their discourses against the ugliness of vice, and let forth the
loveliness and excellency of virtue and true piety* that so all men may be
inamoured therewith, and hate whatsoever is vicious with a perfect hatred.

Concerning those that deny the unity of God: His eternity, presence or
omnipotency; the divinity of Christ the purity of his manhood: the destruction
of the two natures: the sufficiency of his death, and suffering for the
satisfaction for our sins: the Trinity: resurrection, or judgment to come: or
any other position mentioned in the former part of the desired Ordinance.

Those Miserable men I say, that through ignorance maintain* any of these
particulers: must they therefore be put to death? Is there no way to cure the
blindness of their understandings, but by taking away that and life together?
Is it not misery sufficient to these unhappy men that they are deprived of that
knowledge, which is the principle comfort of this life: a support to us in
afliction, the joy and solace of our souls?

But must they for this their infirm filicity loose their lives also? What
precept I pray have we for so doing? What command or Authority from Scripture?
Was there ever any injunction given by Christ or his Apostles for the
extirpation of the Romans or any others that denied our God; and multiplied
other feighned gods to themselves? Can we think the name of God was less
precious to Christ or his Disciples then it is to us? The Apostles way was to
make the unknown God, to be known to ignorant men; to remove error by the
sword of the Spirit and soundness of argument; not by punishment or death: If
worldly strength had been judged the best and meerest way for the implanting
the Gospel* God would with* a word have furnished his servants there with: He
could have chose to him out of the greatest and most potent upon the earth, or
have made the Apostles: which seeing he did not, it evidently shows that his
truths are not to be propagated by strength and the sword: Nay we see rather
it was his way to give all errors the advantage of worldly power, and trust
the establishment and support of truth to its own effecacy, upon assurance
whereof, he sent it abroad by messengers of mean condition, of no power in the
world, as proposing it as his end to convince, not to compel, to conquour the
understanding by the glorious and shining brightness of truth: and not subdue
it by force of arms, by fire and faggot, by the hatchet or halter: Christ and
his Disciples were frequently with the Sadduces, that denied the resurrection,
and by consequence the Judgment to come: yet we find not that they ever
Instigated the Magistrate against them: and though there were heresies in their
times, as many and as gross as there are said now to be; yet our blessed
Savior shows no zeal against them; the most that ever he expressed was against
hypocrisy: the oppression of the Pharisees, the cruelty of Herod, the pride and
imperious mastery of the Scribes and Doctors of the Law: for Matters of opinion
there was a toleration no man was molested: and it is exceedingly to the honor
of Christianity: Yet of it self notwithstanding its low beginnings and
despicable appearance at first, through the inherent and essential excellency
and power that inseperably accompanies it, it was able to erect it self, and
spread its branches about a great part of the world: let us not therefore make
use of other means then Christ used; nor flee to those poor, refuges of
civil power, which he purposely avoided* let us not now cast a blemish upon
our profession: Let us not now undervalue it, by thinking it cannot stand
without crutches, or that error unless the Magistrate assist, will be to hard
for it.

For blasphemy, if thereby be meant, a reviling or speaking evil of God, his
Christ or his word; It is but meet that some fit punishment (as the word
clearly imparts 1. Tim. 1. chap. and 20. ver. compared with 2. Pet. 2. 10.
Judge. 8. 10.) should be appointed for restraining thereof, as also for any
other evil and reproachful language, against either men or opinions: though
reason and argument is allowable and necessary for the finding out of truth,
yet reviling railing, bitter taunts, and reproaches, tends to the disturbance of
civil peace, and proceeds from a malign and a distempered mind, and are
therefore justly restrainable; But surely the punishment mentioned of burning
in the cheek with a hot Iron, is to rigorous and severe, I shall not
prescribe, but leave it to your discretion.

For the supposed errors summed up in the latter part of the desired
Ordinance, though many of them are disallowed by all, yet some of them are
esteemed truths by the Anabaptists, some by the Brownists; some by the
Independents, some by the Antinomians, and some by all of them: And such truths
as they do as really esteem themselves bound to maintain, as the
Presbyterians do any of their tenets, this Ordinance therefore is like a
insurrection of one sort of men against another, the pur port and desires
thereof in effect being that all the Independents, the Brownists, the
Antinomians, the Anabaptists that have so much courage left, as to hold fast
that which they account good, should be imprisoned till they can find two
subsity men that will be sureties for them, that they shall never profess nor
practice* what they esteem truth any more*

Have these sorts of men been invited (though indeed they needed n^ invitation)
to venture their lives and estates for their Country; and is this the reward?
What could these good men's persons have been worse* had they been conquered by
the Enemy? Since if this Ordinance takes effect, they must lead the remainder
of their lives in a prison; and after they have got the victory be cast into
bonds: I cannot persuade my self but that the Presbyters themselves, the
ingenious I mean and meekly disposed amongst them, must utterly dislike this
m^tion, as savouring not only of ingratitude and inhumanity, but of injustice;
neither can I think but that the Honorable House of Commons will show
tenderness to those sorts of men, from whom they have had real affection,
assistance protection, besides many excellent services and performances: and
express no other then a detestation of such imperious and unequal desires,
evidently tending to enslave them

Though we will not contend who has done best service for their Country, in
the time of its straites and necessities, yet the presby^ers sure themselves
will acknowledge with us, that these sorts of men have not been backward in
emptying themselves here at home, and pouring out their blood abroad, thinking
nothing to dear for their Country, and all in hope that the work being done,
they should perticipate of its peace and freedom; but the enemy being subdued,
and freedom being now expected of serving God according to conscience, as a
recompense for all the miseries and calamities Independents and Separation have
endured for their Country, and amongst others, for the Presbyters: And instead
thereof, motions are made that they may be put out of all Offices and
employment in the common wealth (and not only so, but it is further intended)
by this desired Ordinance that they may be put in prison.

1. If this dealing be just or any ways pleasing to Almighty God, let the
Presbyters themselves judge? Let it be considered first, that in matters of
Religion, no sort of men have no just power to determine for another: neither
are the Presbyters computent judges of the Independents or Anabap^ists etc. no
more then they are of the Presbyters.

2. That those tenets which are now accounted heresies, may be in the
countenanced truths of the next age; as what formerly was accounted error* is
now esteemed truth; every man is to satisfy his own conscience, the best he
can, and doing so, walking, likewise according to his light (which is now
principally wanting) it is as much as in equity can be desired; consider that
through the bondage of the Presbyters seems not to be included within this
Ordinance; yet being and settled, the Ministers having such a foundation to work
upon, they will extend it to all, and the Presbyters themselves not complying
in all things to their desires, shall by questioning, catechizing, or some
other way, be look within in the verge of its power.

4. Our brethren the Presbyterians, having no assurance that they shall not
change their minds, and therefore it may so fall out, that the rod they provide
for their discenting brethren to day, may whip them to morrow, and Mordecaies
gallows, may serve for Hamans excecution,

5. We may very well dread the tendensie of the government which in its first
desires is so rigid and bloody minded, what will it in time grow up to? what
will its corruptions arise to? We see how frequent it has been to pervert the
end of Laws, and extend them beyond the intentions of the Lawmakers: The Law
against meetings in private, was intended for the security of the Nation
against conspiracies and traitorous plottings against the State: But is wasted
by the malicious men, and made to serve their turn against the godly people,
and men best affected to the State, meeting together to worship and to serve
God. The Statute against Recusancy, was intended against Papists, but they
frequently put it in execution against the Separation: So that it is very
necessary to be provident and causi^us in making Laws of this nature: since
crafty men have devices in their brain that good men never dreams of; and
though the glory of God be the pretense at present; yet upon very good grounds
it is to be feared that the principle thing intended in these desires, is to
lay ginnes and snares to entrap men with all, to terrify men from a free and
necessary search into the grounds and original of things, and to dispose all
men to an easy and apt belief of whatsoever the Synod and learned Churchmen
shall hold forth. It cannot be, Oh ye lovers of the People, but that you
desire the People should be a judicious* knowing* and understanding people; a
people established and grounded upon solid principles, begotten by serious
meditation, and deliberate examination: You cannot but abhor that most
superstitious maxim to believe as the Church believes; O do but consider;
what the Clergy men desire; and see whether it amounts to less, then to bar
all search, enquire, or examination, and in time to believe as the Assembly
believes: atleast to profess as they profess, or not the contrary upon pain
of death, imprisonment, or other punishments*

Certainly if there be need of any ordinance concernieg the Assembly it is for
their dissolution, and that the Parliament would be pleased to take a survey of
their manifould attempts upon them, and that like subtle and bloody Simon and
Levy, in the greatest exigents and difficulties of their waightiest affairs,
as trusting rather to what necessity might enforce, then what justice would
allow. They have been goads in your sides, and thorns in your feet, hindering
by frequent and politic stratagems, your progression toward the peoples good
and wealfare; be pleased therefore in (steadof complying with them in these
vast and unreasonable desires; admonishing them to labor for humble and
contented spirits: and to yield ready obedience to the commands of Parliament,
by whom they are ordained, and whose direction they are to observe without
dispute; and that they would not spend their time, and stuff their sermons
with State affairs to beget parties, and factions to carry one their own
ambitious designs.

If the Parliament would be pleased to answer their desires thus, and to
forbear to make either Ordinances or Laws of that nature, which their
cruelty has prompted them to desire, it would manifest so great a care of the
quietness of the people as would cause them to bless their remembrance for
ever, and would be their honor to future generations: and is the most zealous
desire of all those that would gladly see the quietness and happiness of
Parliaments and People.

FINIS.

