A Brief ANSWER To SIX SYLLOGISTICAL ARGUMENTS Brought by Mr. CLARK, Minister
of Bennet-Finck, London: Against ASTROLOGERS, AND ASTROLOGY.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Speed, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

A Brief ANSWER To Six Syllogistical ARGUMENTS.
IT is a Proverb as true as ancient, That the Tale of one side may seem good,
till the Truth of the other side appear. But it is but reason in a man to
forbear his Censure, until he seriously have considered the Pleas that both
produce. For according to that of the Tragoedian of old: Qui statuit aliquid
part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit haud aequus fuit.
He that, on part unheard, a Doom did pass,
His Doom (though equal were) unequal was.


Now for the better information of the Reader, I shall insert the Arguments of
Mr. Clark at large, and then respond to them; that thereby he may understand
the occasion and nature of the Difference, and the Reasons thereof the readier.

1 Argum. That which the Word of God condemns as a grand Offense, is not to be
practiced, countenanced or tolerated. But Divining by the Stars is condemned by
Gods Word. Ergo.
Answ. I answer, by denying the Minor: My Reason hereof, is, (by adding a
Negative to the Assumption) Divining by the Stars is not condemned by Gods word.

If Divining by the Stars (to use the Phrase of our Antagonist) were condemned
by Gods Word, we should find it therein condemned. But therein it is not to be
found condemned. Ergo, it is not condemned by it at all.
That it is not condemned by it all, will most clearly appear, upon the
Examination of the Catalogue of Scriptures Mr. Clark cites in favor of his
Minor Proposition, viz.

1. He urges Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. But in this Text is not Astrology so much as
once concerned; as the learned Adye has largely and learnedly proved, in his
Candle in the dark; a Book of singular worth, and worthy the perusal of all
sorts of persons. Suppose some persons out of their hatred to Astrologers and
Astrology, have turned Megnonen, (the Hebrew word there used) Planetarius; yet
persons thereby signified are not such that lawfully study or use the Science
of Astrology, but such as abuse it. And were I now disposed, it were an easy
matter to bring Mr. Cl. within the compass of the word in that Text; yet he
would be very loath to be termed a Planetarian; although he has abused
Astrology and Astrologers, not a little.

-- Facinus, quos inquinat, Equat. A Crime makes equal, where it does pollute.
But, Abusus non tollit usum. The abuse of a thing does not abrogate or impeach
the lawful use thereof.

'Cause Epicures abuse themselves with Wine,
Shall we neglect the Virtue of the Vine?
If some persons under pretense of Divining by the Stars, abuse not only
themselves, but others, shall the honest and laudable use thereof be therefore
rejected? If an impudent ignorant fellow shall profanely pretend to Pulpit it,
and boast a gift therein above Mr. Cl. would Mr. Cl. (I wonder) judge me
reasonable, if I thereby should take occasion to blast the credit of (what my
Soul rejoices in) Divinity? If Mr. Cl. prove his Argument no better by his
other Texts in the Catologue, then he has by this, we shall easily conclude
him incapable of doing it at all.

To trip at the Threshold, is (by old Sawes) pronounced to be a bad sign, and
to bode but small good. Principiis omen inesse -- solet. Beginnings are deemed
ominous. Isidore affirms, Pel. l. 2. Epist. 229. (...). (i.) He that in the
beginning swerveth from the truth, will in his proceedings, roll further from
it, and end at last with some shameful Catastrophe or other. Mr. Cl. therefore
failing thus in the first Scripture he cites, presages or predicts (though he
be no Astrologer) how much of substantial proof we may expect to find in the
rest, that he musters up for his purpose.

The second Text he hits at the poor Astrologers head, is Lev. 20.6. which (in
truth) favors him no more then the former, unless he can prove an Astrologer
and a Witch to be all one. The Word in the Text (which he most insisteth on) is
Ariolos, which implies the imposturisme of an hollow feigned voice (and not any
thing of Astrolgie, as Mr. Clark would bear the world in hand) that Witches and
Deceivers used in their Oracling Divinations, by harring in their Throats. Vide
Adyes Candle, etc. page 77. and Plut. de Def. Orac. I hope Mr. Cl. will not
say, That any man practicing Astrology, Quatenus an Astrologer, uses any such
practice: the which unless he do, this Scripture favors him no more then the
first he brought.

The third-Text he cites is Isa. 2.6. But this no more proves the truth of his
Argument, then the worth of the Turks Alcoran. I admit that he finds
Praestigiatores in the Text, which he corruptly translates Soothsayers;
forgetting (the mean while) that the word properly interpreted, signifies
Juglers, viz. such as deceive by cunning or sleight of hand. But does not Mr.
C. add rather to the honor of Astrologers, then any way de-detract therefrom,
when he styles them Soothsayers? or does he believe that Soothsaying imports
any other thing then the speaking of truth? You see here how officious M. C.
is, to make that speak against Astrologers, which has neither tongue, nor
will, to do so.

Et si nullus erit pulvis, tamen excute nullum:
Quaelibet officio causa sit apta tuo.
And though there be no Dust, yet cast off none:
To be officious, find occasion.
The fourth Text is, Isa. 47.13, 14. where, in the Original, that, which Mr.
Cl. turns Astrologers, is, Viewers of the Heavens. But we know, that there are
others that view the Heavens beside Astrologers, viz. Astronomers, Navigators,
Natural Philosophers, Shepherds, etc. But there is in this Text another
Bugbear, that affrights Mr. Clark, viz. Monthly Prognosticators. The Hebrew
says, -- That give knowledge concerning the Months. But I would demand of Mr.
Cl. whether it be unlawful to make a Prognostication, to set down therein,
according to the common course of Nature, what is most considerable in the
whole year? It is clearly evident by this Text, that the Prophet blames not
those that view the Heavens, or study the Stars, and thence give knowledge
concerning the months; but reprehended such as were abusers of these Studies,
and those that used to exalt the Stars, etc. above, or at least endeavored to
make them equal Causes with Him, whom Divines call Causa Causarum, (and all
good Christians acknowledge Him so to be) the Cause of all Causes, even GOD
Himself. But I have before showed, that the abuse of a thing is no good
Argument to abrogate the use thereof. Is it good or reasonable to say, That the
profession of Physic is unlawful, because some Quacks, by an impudent
practicing it, do abuse and dishonor that commendable Science?

His fifth Text in Order, for the support of this halting Minor, is, Jer. 10.2.
But the learned Dr. Mayer, in his Commentary upon that Text, professes that
Astrology or Astrologers are not so much as once meant by the Prophet. It had
been therefore requisite for Mr. Cl. to have refuted that learned Divine,
before he had obtruded his own Gloss thereon, upon the world, for current and
authentic. But lest Mr. Cl. should cavil at Dr. Mayers authority (being but a
single Person) I shall instance to him in some others, who seal the same
Opinion with this learned Doctor, viz. St. Hierom, Lyra, etc. as is at large to
be seen by their Commentaries on the place it self: and for further
satisfaction of such as have not the opportunity of reading such Volumes, I
refer them to the excellent Work of that incomparably learned Knight, Sir
Christopher Heydon, viz. His Defense of Astrology, fol. 25, 26.

The sixth Text he brings to keep his Minor from falling, is, Isa. 44.25. which
friends it no more then any of the other five. For unless Mr. Cl. can prove,
that true Astrology has in it any lying Tokens, that any lying Tokens are
grounds in the said Art or Science, it serves his purpose no more then if he
had brought in the room of it, that Text in Eccl. 22.12. Seven days do men
mourn for him that is dead; but the Lamentation for the fool and ungodly should
endure all the days of their life. It was a saying of Antiphilus, -- (...),
That Confidence was a good Sea-Captain. I am sure it is an ill Logician in Mr.
Cl. unless he had more probable truth on his side.

The seventh Scripture-Text Mr. C. undersets his Minor with, is, Dan. 2.2.
which is of the same stamp for his purpose, with all the rest before cited. For
the Hebrew word, which is there rendered Astrologers, (if we may credit the
learned Shindler) signifies a Philosopher, an Astronomer and Physician. Rabbi
Abraham (as says the learned Mr. Reeve) expounds it so likewise. And Avenarius
observes, that (...), wise, agrees to the same. Now then if to be a
Philosopher, etc. be an evil, Mr. Cl. may make the more of this Text: but
surely he cannot be so weak as to offer at such a monstrous conclusion.

The eighth and last Text he hales in, to the assistance of his Position, is
Act. 19.18, 19, 20. which Scripture is as little beholding to him as any of the
rest, for their being brought to so little purpose. If Mr. Cl. cannot prove,
that among the curious Arts there mentioned, -- True Astrology was one (and
that I am sure he will never be able to do) then is his citing of this text
vain and frivolous.

Thus you see the Mountain of Scripture-proofs (which he had mustered up in a
catologue, presuming Astrology therein to be condemned) vanished in a moment:
and Divining by the Stars, we have plainly shown, is not condemned by Gods
word, (which his Minor Proposition insinuates) neither is it in it self
unlawful, notwithstanding all the pains he has taken to prove it so.

If this will not yet put him out of doubt, let him but peruse the
Church-Bible, printed Ann. 1540. where he may see (if he be not blinded with
partiality and prejudice) that there is not any the least mention made of
either the words Astrologer or Astrology; so far was the Holy Ghost from
condemning either! nay, the very words rendered Astrologers, and Astrology,
are in sundry other Translations otherwise interpreted. And so I pass from M.
Clark's first Argument. I shall be briefer in the rest, having answered his
Scriptures here already.

2 Argum. That Art whereby men assume to themselves what is peculiar unto God,
must needs be sinful, neither to be practiced, countenanced nor tolerated. But
this is done by such as take upon them to Divine of Events to Persons and
Nations by the Stars. Therefore.
Resp. I respond, by denying the Minor.

For, those that predict from the Stars, as remote and second Causes,
intermeddle not with Gods Peculiar. But Astrologers do so, and Astrology
teaches them not otherwise. Therefore.
The Major needs no proof, as carrying so full a Demonstration of Truth in the
face of it. The Minor is sufficiently proved by the writings of all
Astrologers: but in particular, I shall refer you to the learned Sir
Christopher Heydon, fol. 400. He (says this learned Knight) which seeks God
in his Glory, shall be oppressed with his Majesty. There is nothing past or to
come, with him, but all things are present unto him, as they depend upon his
divine fore-ordinance, and prescience of all things that happen in the world,
out of their causes. But as it has pleased him to govern the ordinary course
of Nature, by His SECOND CAUSES, and in THEM to reveal what he has from
Eternity appointed to effect by them; to know this, is not to enter into his
secret Judgment, (or peculiar) but more effectually to judge, admire and
contemplate the incomprehensible providence of the Almighty; that has thus
coupled the Order of Causes with his own most free and Omnipotent Will, etc. 2.
Take the Authority of Hermes, who in the beginning of his Centiloqui, affirms,
-- Sol and Luna, post Deum, Omnium viventium vita sunt. That the Sun and Moon,
next unto GOD, are the Life of all Things living. Thus you see that Astrologers
meddle not with Gods secrets; nor with the Luminaries or Stars at all, but by
giving place to the Majesty of the Almighty God in the first, and then they
consider their Natural significations as second Causes, as they are endued with
Energie from God.

3 Argum. That which draws the heart from God the Father, and Christ the Son,
from considering the Works of the One, and heeding the Words of the Other, is
an Evil not to be peactised, countenanced or tolerated. But Astrological
Predictions draw from God and Christ. Therefore, etc.
Answ. I answer, -- You plead for Truth, and yet you speak beside
The Text of Truth: your Minor is denied.
Quarls Shep. Orac.

Astrological Predictions are so far from drawing from God and Christ, that
they add very much to the honor of Both: The Heavens declare the Glory of
God, (says Holy David) Psalm. 19.1. The invisible power of the Deity is clearly
seen by the things that are made, says the holy Apostle, Romans 1.20. The
Learned Ptolomy in the beginning of his Almagest, affirms -- Hanc unam
Scientiam esse viam ac semitam, ad sciendum Deum Altissimum. This one Science
is the only Way, and Path, to know the most HIGH GOD.

Whence I argue:

If Astrology leads to the knowledge of the most High God, or declares the
power of the Deity, it certainly cannot be thought (by any but Mr. Cl.) to draw
from GOD and Christ.

That Astrology does so, is conspicuously proved, both by the Prophet,
Apostle, and Ptolomy.

The learned Mr. Caryl, is so far from branding Astrology for drawing from God
or Christ, that in Vol. 3. fol. 221. he avers, It is our Duty to study the
Heavens, and to be acquainted with the Stars. I will leave Mr. C. therefore to
repent of this Minor, and proceed.

4 Argum. That which is false, delusive and uncertain, is not to be practiced,
countenanced or tolerated. But such is foretelling things by the Stars.
Therefore, etc.
Resp. I deny the Minor, (for it is no kin to the truth at all) and argue
against it, thus:

If foretelling by the Stars were false, delusive and uncertain, the Fates of
particular Persons, the variety of Seasons, great Droughts, Sicknesses, Peace,
Wars, Plenty or Scarcity, were not to be certainly predicted. But these things
are certainly to be foretold by the Aspects and Positions of the Stars. Ergo,
foretelling by the Stars is not false, delusive, and uncertain; but certain,
real and true.
Lucius Bellantius foretold the Death of Picus Mirandula, that great Antagonist
to Astrology; who while he was writing against that Art, his own Death
concurring, evinced it to be true, without further Argument. Zonarus reports
that Julians death was foreseen to a day. Gauricus forewarned Henry the Second,
of France, of the 41 year of his age; and in the same year that Famous King
died. Spurina forewarns Caesar of the Ides of March, and Caesar was then slain
in the Senate House: upon which the Ingenious Poet, Tho. Pecke, Esquire; thus
Elegantly versifies. Viz.

-- To run that middle Race,
Caesar said in Astrologies Disgrace,
The Ides of March are come: And so they be,
Replied the Prophet; but You Will something see
Before the Ides be past. His words had grounds:
Before night, Caesar received twenty wounds.
The Emperor Vitellius assigned a day for Astrologers to depart Rome; they
assigned him another, for his pasport out of the world; as is recorded by Sir
Christ. Heydon: and he then dyed.

Then for general Things, or accidents, let it be remembered, that Thales
foretold a plenty of Olives, and enriched himself thereby. Democritus and
Sestius presaged a dearth of Olives, as is witnessed by Pliny. Regiomantanus
predicted the great Changes that happened in 1588. long before the year came.
Hippocrates foretold a Plague, by Astrology. Mr. Booker predicted the fate of
the Irish exactly in 1646. and the Bellum Episcopale that happened in England
also in 1639. and 1640. which Episcopal War, was the (...) to all our English
Miseries. Nay, I could make it appear, that not only accidents on earth may (by
Astrology) be presaged, but in Heaven also; As was the Comet, or Stella
Crinita in December. 1652. by my learned and loving Friend Mr. Joshua Childrey;
and this three Months before it happened. See his Sygiast, Instaur. 1653.

This therefore may serve for a sufficient Refutation of the Error and Prejudice
(I was about to say, Ignorance) in Mt. Clarks fourth Argument.

5. Argum. That which nourishes vain, and forbidden hopes and fears, is not to
be practiced, countenanced, or tolerated. But so do Astrological Predictions.
Therefore, etc.
Answ. I answer, by denying the Minor: For Astrological Predictions do not
nourish (or cherish) vain and forbidden hopes and fears, but rather fortisies
men's minds against them. The Text, viz. Jer. 10. which Mr. C. cites to support
his Minor, I have before proved, has nothing at all to do with, either
Astrology, or Astrological Predictions; so that you see it proves nothing of
the Minor in question. However, I Anti-Argue.

The Art which draws men to a Consideration of the wonderful works of God, does
not nourish vain or forbidden fears. But Astrology, and Astrological
Predictions, do so. Ergo, etc.
That Astrology draws men to the Consideration of the wonderful works of God,
is proved in the answer to the third Argument, both from Scripture-Authority,
and Reason. Thus much therefore may serve for a Refutation of his fifth
Argument.

6 Argum. That which most godly and learned men upon experience have renounced,
and repented of, that is neither to be practiced, countenanced or tolerated.
But godly men have renounced and repented of their study of Astrology.
Therefore, etc.
Resp. I answer by denying the Major.

If General Councils may err, then surely particular persons, though never so
godly or holy. Sed verum prius. Engo and posterius.
There is no man dare assume the Epithet of infallibility on earth; neither do
I believe that any of those whom Mr. Clark styles most godly and learned, would
have so done, had they been with him at the framing of his Argument.

The word most, in his Argument, must be understood, either as a note of
number, or of excellency, and transcendency of knowledge and ability, to
discern and distinguish. If of Number, I shall be able to out-vote him; for he
has named but three, viz. St. Augustine, Perkins, and Mr. Briggs. If of
Excellency, etc. I presume he has made as ill a choice as could be. For St.
Augustine (although a learned man) was to seek in many things, and consequently
was subject to error; witness his stiff opinion against Antipodes, (which
clearly declares him ignorant of Astrology, and his censure therefore the less
to be regarded) and (2.) his approbative relation of a Monstrous great Tooth,
proves him to be a person very credulous; and therefore the less to be heeded
in his Judicial Censures.

Mr. Perkius never understood Astrology; and is therefore no competent Judge
thereof. I grant he studied it, but never attained the excellency of it; and
that was the reason of his quarrelling thereat. The Fox in Aesop blamed the
Grapes for being too high; but the fault was in his dwarfish Stature.

Mr. Briggs was (indeed) an eminent Mathematician, and therefore the most
comperent of the three to judge of the Controversy. But a man may be a good
Mathematician, and yet no good Astrologer. I illustrate it thus: Mr. Clarke may
be a good Divine, yet no good Casuist. He may be a good Divine, yet nor
grounded in the universal point. A te, and a Scientia. Every man is not born to
one kind of inclination: if all were excellent in one thing, many things both
useful and worthy, might by that means come to be neglected. It is in
Philosophy and the Mathematics, as in Divinity; there are several parts in
them, fit for the several persons that study them. But, -- Unto our Story let
us turn our Tide,

And draw toward a Conclusion. I assert in opposition to Mr. Clarke, --

That which most godly and learned men upon experience have commended to the
world, as worthy, laudable, and useful, ought to be countenanced, practiced,
and tolerated. But most godly and learned men have so commended the Science of
Astrology. Ergo, etc.
The Major no man (that is in his senses) will offer once to deny. The Minor I
fortify thus. The Patriarchs themselves studied Astrology, and thereby
commended the same to the world as worthy. Josephus tells us that Abraham did
not only study, but taught the Egyptians this Art. Isaac is said to have
studied the Heavens, when he went into the field to meditate. Upon which the
learned Mr. Caryl says, It is good to take field-room sometimes to contemplate
the Works of GOD. Jacob (says Origin) read in the Tables of Heaven, what ever
things should in futuro, befall his Generation. Ergo, godly and learned men have
commended and studied this heavenly and praiseworthy Science.

What I here have done, I profess is out of no prejudice to Mr. Clark, either
as he is a Man, or Minister; but for a proper and plain discovery of the truth;
after which the souls of many thousands (besides his and mine) earnestly
thirst: and in this I hope some satisfaction will appear, as well to him as
others.

If God be God, let us follow him; if Baal, him; and let us be no longer
deluded. horoscope diagram for John Allen A. R. 330. d. 49. m.

J. Allen born 1628/9. March 11. 1 h. 59 m. A.M. ad.

Lat. 52.



THis ^s the Nativity of Mr John Allen, Stationer, as himself has made it
known to several: it was rectified by diverse eminent Accidents; from which I
shall excerpt one only, which I adjudge the greatest of all, viz. On Friday,
August 21. 1657. he burnt and destroyed in printed Books and Manuscripts, the
worth of one hundred pounds, and upwards: in the height of this (strange)
action, his Zeal (or Folly rather) wrought so furiously, that for have to
destroy his Books, he had nearly set a house of one of his Neighbors on fire.
When the man came to himself, (for without question he was then in: a Frenzy)
he reported that several Presbyterian Ministers excited him thereunto. Whether
that be true, I know not; but it is most certain, destroy his Books he did: and
in all probability (had not some worthy and ingenious persons of his own
profession, interposed their Moderation and Reason) he had in the heat of his
Enthusiastic Zeal, destroyed most (if not all) of his Estate.

Now to show Mr. Allen a Reason in Art for this his unhappy misfortune,
(although he cannot deny but he was forewarned of it near three full years
before it happened unto him) I shall take the boldness to acquaint him, that
then the Moon was directed to the Quartile of the Sun. And the place the
direction happened in, was the Ascendent, and that in the beginning of a
Tropical sign; perhaps one main reason of the violence of the action. Besides
this, it is remarkable, the very day of the accident, the Moon Significatrix of
the same, was in Quartile of the Sun, (whose Quartile was Promittor in the
Direction) and of Mercury also, who is the particular Patron of Books: Nay, she
was in the Quartile-places of Saturn and Mercury in the Radix. And to prove
unto him at large, that Astrology is not so vain a study as he (poor man)
conceives it, or as some ignorant Professors have made it; he had at the same
time, his part of Fortune under the Direction of the Sun his opposition. Which
Directions and Transits, if he consult but Books of Astrology, he may plainly
see portended the prejudice both of Person and Estate he then underwent.

In my opinion, the man has more reason to bless God for the happy assistance
of the benevolent Planet Jupiter, at that time upon the place of the Direction,
and Ascendent of his Radix, (for the Stars, you must know, under God, do good
to men, as by his permission, they do evil) then for the advice of those
Presbyterians, who (as himself says) counseled him to burn his Books.

Had this Natives Father been a friend or acquaintance of mine, I should never
have advised him to a put his Son to a Bookseller. For dealing in Books, seems
(by his Nativity) to be no ways profitable or fortunate to him. Mercury is in
Pisces, (his detriment and fall) in the house of Trade, and in opposition to
Saturn, Lord of the seventh, eigth, ninth and tenth Houses.

Neither would I have counseled that he should have been made a Singingman, or
been bred up to Music; because the Moon is in Square of Venus, (the proper
Significatrix thereof) which should portend him to be furnished with a more
harsh Voice or Note, then Cicera is reported by Plutarch to have had.

Nor should I have persuaded he should have been made a Husbandman, because
Saturn the Significator of Husbandry, and all things of that nature, is in the
fourth House, in opposition of his Dispositor. Nor yet a Divine, for Cauda
Draconis is in the ninth house, which sometimes denotes an Atheist; always an
uncertain person in Religion. A Statesman he should never attain to be, because
the Sun (Significantor of Dignity, Honor and Sovereignty) is in Quartile to
his Ascendent, and in Opposition of Saturn Lord of the tenth house. These
several things (and something else) he is (by the Canons of Astrology)
absolutely unfit for: for what he is fit, I leave to the Consideration and
Judgment of every ingenious Artist; but shall not tell him (because he is so
envious) without a convenient reward or satisfaction.

About the thirty ninth year of his age, (perhaps a little sooner) the
Ascendent of his Geniture by Direction, comes to the Opposition of Mars; and
the Sun to the body of the Moon, and the Pleiades. The Introductions to
Nativities, tell us what such Directions portend. In some men's Nativities, I
have known them attended with strange Effects; the kinds of which, in
tenderness I forbear to acquaint Mr. Allen with; I had rather he should read
them himself, in those Books they are to be found. But he (it may be) believes
himself to be a person of such godly prudence, (according to the Adage, Sapiens
Dominabitur Astris) as that he may with ease govern the Stars, and live above
the Energie of Celestial Influences. Which persons that are illuminated with
the Spirit of Grace and Truth, I grant may; and wish most heartily that he were
one of them.

I account it lost to trouble my self further herein; nor should I have busied
my self thus far, but for to prevent the poor man of undoing himself (if it be
possible) in printing Books against an Art he understands not, in the strength
(or weakness rather) of his reasonless Inveteracy and Hatred thereto. For I
freely profess, I take no pleasure in adding trouble or torment to a mind,
which of it self is sufficiently terrified, tortured, and confused already.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN M. Allen's Epistle to M. Clarks Arguments, he assumes the confidence to
acquaint his Reader that he was for several years together a Student in
Astrology; the better (as he supposes) to persuade with him, that his skill
was so great therein, that he might well pass for a competent Judge thereof. I
confess, Astrology has (at this day) many such ignorant Students; which, like
hasty Whelps, rend and tear out the Bowels of their Dam, to make way for the
rotten, and too hasty birth of their own Vanities and Follies.

But this I must needs acquaint the world with, that Mr. Allen's skill was so
small in the Syderal Science, that an ordinary Capacity in three days time,
might attain to more knowledge therein, then he ever could, by his many years
Study.

Nevertheless, I could easily bear with Mr. Allens weakness of this kind (were
he not so highly provocative) in consideration of the gross juggling of our
present greatest Preenders to Astrology: whose Ignorance (to say no worse) in
a sense, is a far greater blemish to that Noble Science, then any of Mr. Allens
addle-headed Detractions.

For his Additions scraped and patched up together, here and there out of
Gassendus, I refer the Learned Antagonists (but not him) to what follows, and
also to the Answer thereunto, written by the learned Morinus, late of France.
And for his other childish and unconnex'd Expressions, (which can scarcely call
sense their Dad) that his pair of Epistles are fully fraught with, I account it
beneath ingenuity to take cognizance of, as finding him (therein) within the
reach of the Poets lash against Idiots, etc.

For Fools that rave and rage, not knowing why,
A Scourge is far more fit, then a Reply.
And so I take leave of Mr. Allen, and his Simplicity; wishing him better, and
more profitable Employment, both for his Brain and Purse.
Gassendus's ARGUMENTS Against ASTROLOGY, Which the Silly ANTAGONISTS So much
boast of, Retorted and Refuted: Proving the Worth and Truth of Astrology from
his own Nativity, which himself gave to the Learned Morinus late of FRANCE.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Speed, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

horoscope diagram for Petrus Gassendus Nasc. Petrus Gassendus, 1592. Jan. 21
d. Silo Novo, 17 h. 52 m. P.M. Lat. 43 d. 52 m.



Obiit 1655. October. 24.

Lat. Plan. 4 30 M. 0 31 M. 0 38 S. 0 12 M. 5 40 M. 2 4 M.

Gassendus's Arguments Against ASTROLOGY, answered.
PAge 66. How many Apertiones Portarum, not only in every year, but also in
every week, nay, day? O foelicem Artem si desa Soli judicarent artificus! But
here Mounsieur Gassendus his Epianogass Caudo Charl. Translators showed they
were none; and not only ignorant of the Nature, but of the time and terms of
things. They knew neither what Apertiones Portarum were, nor when they happen:
they do certainly apprehend there are Floodgates and Sluices in Heaven, from
whence water is poured down by Buckets full. Thus those that say Astrologers
Axioms are Arbitrary and Imaginary, that there are no such things in Nature as
Aspects, do imagine the vainest Phantosmes and Chimaera's in the world; for I
would fain know of them, what Apertiones Portarum those are every day: but they
cannot tell. Indeed, the Astrologers tell us, what Apertiones Portarum are; the
Geometer al Positions or Distances of those Planets whose Houses are opposite,
which are not so frequent as they imagine: for besides those of the Moon and
Saturn, sometimes there happen none six weeks or two months together; and then
those of the prodigious or superior Planets, are more powerful to operate on
these Terrestrial Bodies; but those of the inferior, less considerable, as
experience does sufficiently testify to any, but those that are not to be
persuaded, though they are convinced; and though they see, will not understand.

I think no man can be so unreasonable, as to suppose that any one will be so
irrational, as to justify all the Pleas of Astrologers, that many times might
accept (like Gassendus) of some things to be Causes, that are not so; and
Gassendus himself, or his learned Translator and Transcriber, who desire that
their Cockbrain'd Disciples should always Jurare in Verba Magistra, and
justify their ridiculous impertinences in all the idle follies of this Book,
and others of their Philosophy. -- But to answer his Question by another: (Why
Mars should not rather repress and abate, then extimulate and highten Watery
Influence of the Pleiades; and the Moon, Mercury and Venus, rather excite and
increase it?) We demand why Water poured into Water, and Fire put into Fire, do
not produce more dissentaneous effects, then each other confronted with its
Antagonists? or because Gassendus his Ape is perhaps a more famous Physician
then a Philosopher, having been Leech, as he professes, to the late King (which
he may as lawfully pretend to, as any quacking Surgeon that followed any of
his ragged Regiments) we ask why twenty Grains of Diagredium does not restrain
a Diarrhaea, more then Milk, being hot and dry, the other cool and moist? So I
see no reason why Mars may not cause Showers by Antipathy and Dissimilitude of
Natures, being in Conjunction with the Pleiades, and yet not lose his own
Virtue of heat; for we see, if he meet with any considerable Aspect at that
time, he produces often Thunder, Lightning and Rain, an effect of both Natures:
for great Mutations and Disturbances of the Air, may as well be caused by
Antipathy as Sympathy; and Mars may as well cause Rain as Saturn, though not
upon the same reason, as well as a Flux proceed from Choler as Phlegm; or why
his Worship has given a Purge, that works more then his little prescience
could foresee, or perhaps his prescription prevent.

But whereas he talks, That there is variety of weather upon the same Aspects
in England and France: I answer, That the Stars operate in every Country
according to the variety and Nature of the Clymate; for the same effect is not
like to proceed from the Conjunction of Saturn and Sol in Egypt, that does in
England; for to predict Rain there, where is but little or seldom any, (from
the Nature of the Solum as well as Coelum) were ridiculous: but where there is
Conjunction of Saturn and Sol, and great store of Rain in England, I aver that
it shall be colder in Egypt, much more then ordinary, at the same time; and so
in every Country, according to its Nature, the Planets have their effects,
according to that not more trite then true saying, The Sun hardens Clay, and
softens Wax.

Page 126. But to show more and more his skill, or rather his ignorance in
Astrology, he goes on, and says, Nor are we to say such an Infant was born
infected with a foul and contageous Disease, because the sixth house was his
Horoscope, but because his Mothers lower house was impure and infectious.

Is this the famous Gassendus! the Scribbler of those Voluminous Atoms! how
many impertinences are those Volumns stuffed with, when these few Pages are
nothing else but a Dunghill of those Vanities that he has raked up to throw in
the Faces of the Astrologers, and the wind blows back into his own. Is this
that famous Astronomer, that pretends to have made so many Observations? this
very passage shows his ignorance and impudence, and makes it apparent to all
men, that he is but a mere Impostor, and goes about to delude the world with
the opinion of his general learning, and great skill in Astronomy; when as it
is more clear then the light of those glorious bodies, (whose Virtue he would
obscure) that he understands nothing in that Divine Study, but that by some
chance he stumbled upon those Observations he has published to the world as
his own: for could any man that understands the Astronomy of the Primum Mobile,
or indeed sense, say, That the sixth house was the Horoscope? Where is the
Sagacity of the Probastical Translator, that leaves out, and puts in what he
pleases? Was it possible that thou could be trappan'd by Gassendus, in
these Fooleries? could thou be overreached by one in thine own Trade? but
the truth is, there was nothing (next to their ignorance) that brought in this
gross conceit, but only that witty quibbling (as they thought it) upon the
Houses, The sixth House and the lower House; and it was a witty one indeed, and
well became the mouth of a Churchman, and the Obscenity of such an Epicure, as
the person of Quality. But to help the lame Dog over the style, we will suppose
they mean as they say, that the Stars are not causes of the Contagious Disease
of a Child, nor of their ill or good Disposition; but the Complexion of their
seed, their diet and course of life, etc. But if that were the cause, why are
many Children polluted and sickly, whose Parents are very sound; and many
Children are very healthful and strong, whose Parents are sickly? And of this
there are examples in every Family. If these things were true, that Children
were like their Parents, why was not Rehoboam as wise as Solomon; Hezekiah as
wicked as Ahaz, or Manasseh as righteous as his Father? Was ever a more
licentious Prince then K. Harry, or a more virtuous then his Son K. Edward? But
it is consentaneous with the Doctrine of Epicuro Gassendus, to ascribe more to
good Cheer, then to the Stars; and to the pleasing of his Palate, then unto the
Heavens. Now I see whence persons of quality proceed, from a polluted lower
house, which makes a corrupted upper house; and that vents all these rotten
Reasons: but yet we deny not but that many times the Child is like the Parents:
which proceeds from the similitude and harmony of Genitures, and not from the
diet. Also, that the Mothers lower house adds much thereunto, provided it is
like Madam Youngs, alias Madissons, Sir Paul's Ladies, Madam Drunkards, all the
Translators Friends and Acquaintance.

But that you may see the Reasons of the rottenness of Gassendus his upper
house and lower house, I will adjoyn his Geniture, given from himself to
Morinus.

Here you may see the Malignant Planets Saturn and Mars, have the chief
Dominion in his Scheme; Saturn is the Lord of his Horoscope, (considering his
Latitude, falling into the sixth house, though the sixth house be not his
Horoscope) Peregrine, Retrograde, in his Detriment, and unfortunate in Cancer;
which made his Lungs much oppressed with Phlegm rotten and corrupt, of an ill
habit of body, very sickly, subject to Catarrhes, etc. That for manners, Saturn
in Quartile with Mars, both in the same Aspect with the Ascendent, made him of
an evil disposition; envious, suspicious, revengeful; angry, peevish,
contentious, in jurious, frandulent; a Liar, a Calumniator, an Impostor;
covetous; a Robber of other Men's Honor; a false Friend; a pirfidious Traitor;
a notorious Hypocrite; an Atheist; and to say no worse of him than he does of
Mr. Des Carts, though unjustly, a Toad swelled with Pride and malicious
Venom, as you may see in that Book against de Carts, and others of his Works.

As he had Mercury in Sextile to Mars, and the house of Saturn; so had he a wit
apt enough for mischiefs, quarrels and contentions; sharp in disputations: as
in Quartile to the Moon, so was it turbulent enough; and had Mercury not
applied to a Sextile of Jupiter also, he had been so ill natured, that he had
not been sociable: but that good Aspect gave him so much wit, as hypocritically
to dissemble it, and cloak it under Zeal to Religion, and make that seem the
severity of his Devotion, that was the moroseness of his Nature.

But if we go further, we shall find it agree with the Accidents of his life,
as well as his Disposition.

About the time the Medium Coeli was directed to the Sextile of the Moon, we
find he had a Journey into Holland.

When the Sun was directed to the Trine of Jupiter, he was made Praepositus
Diniensis; where for the most part he was non-Resident.

During the effects of the Sun to the Trine of Venus, and the Mid-heaven to
Venus, he was made Mathematical Professor. Upon the Direction of the Moon to
the Quartile of Mars, he had an Inflammation of the Lungs. Which also returned
upon him again, when the Horoscope was directed to the body of, and after to
the Quartile of; which produced a Consumption: in which Disease his Physicians
(just such as his Translator) being over-free of his blood, at threescore and
three, brought him to that excessive weakness, that he never recovered, and
dyed whining, that his too much obsequiousness to their prescriptions, had
snatched him out of the world in viridi senectute. Take his Friend Borellus
Relation, and his own words, Obs. xi. Cent. 3. Possem hic viri semper lugendi
mortem dolorosam toti Europae, imo mundo recensere, nimio illo remedio,
sanguineo, and verba ab ejus ore deprompta refer quibus ante obitum fassus
est se nimio obsequio periisse, and cum hero suo ad inferos cum viridi adhuc
and stante senectute descendisse: by which you may perceive, that though a
Churchman, he was very unwilling to leave this Terrestrial Paradise for one
that was uncertain: And by his words indeed, I do not find he had much hopes of
it.

Another thing I must desire you take notice of, that it is as possible to be
killed as dead with a Launcet as a Poniard; and that he had some signification
of violence in his Nativity: for the Lord of his Ascendent is in Quartile to
Mars, and both behold the Ascendent with evil Aspect: and whoever has that
Position, I advise him to beware of such a Physician as Mr. Doctor.

FINIS.

