(...) Christ's most faithful Servants, who do only aim at the glory of
Christ, and Hi^ Majesty's happiness. He also prayed, That God would give Him
most real, sollid, and sound Humiliation for His own, and His Peoples most
fearful, raging, and Crying sins, their idolatry, Superstition, Profanesse,
and Blasphemies: That the Lord would humble Him for His overlong favoring and
honoring of the Enemies of Jesus Christ, that he would let him see and know
what manner of persons are about him and to discern his Friends from his Foes,
all true hearted Nehemiahs, from al^ treacherous Tobiaths and Sanballats; all
well affected Mordecaies, from all those proud insulting. Hamans, who only
seek the utter extirpation, and rooting out of al^ the people of God, and of
his precious Truth out of all his Kingdoms. That he would remove far from
him all Ahabs, false Prophets, and overpowerfull and malicious Doegs, with all
ambitious and prating Diotrephesses, against the Lords most blessed People and
Truth: together with all time serving Sycophants, all wicked, cursed, profane
Atheistical and Popish affected persons; and worldly wise Achitophels, with
all Apostaticall Demasses, that for the love of this present world forsake the
Truth, and the Cause of the dear Saints of God, which is Gods own cause; that
hereby his Throne may be established in righteonsnesse: and in the utter
confusion of the cursed and pernicious Councels of these Enemies, his Crown
might flourish upon his own, and the heads of his posterity.

Also for the Queen he prayed, That God would bring her to the knowledge of
Christ, and give her a sincere love and affection unto the Truth, with all his
holy Ordinances; to grant her an understanding and a tractable heart to all the
ways of God, and to let her know that all the ways of Antichrist are ways of
death; that she being thoroughly acquainted with all the hellish, and abhorred
practices of Popery, may utterly detest and forsake the same.

He prayed also, for the Religious, holy heavenly and happy education of their
Royal Issue, and especially of the Prince his Highness. And because whom the
Lord blesses should be blessed, and whom he curses should be cursed, he
desired The God of all blessing, with all the blessings both of heaven and
earth, to bless that most learned, wise, and Religious Assembly, the high
Court of Parliament, his Majesty's great, brave, and worthiest Council in that
most renowned Kingdom of England, in which Kingdom the Lord had bin, and it
was his prayer and his hope that he still might be worshipped in great power,
and purity, even in the beauties of holiness, notwithstanding all the cursed
conspiracies and practices of all the enemies of Reformation there. He also
earnestly prayed, That the Lord should bless all those that blessed them and
that he would curse those that curse them; to be a friend to those that are
friends to them, and an enemy to those that are their enemies; and that he
would smite through the loins of all them that rise up against them, and of
those that hate them that they arise not again.

He also prayed very affectionately and zealously, that the Lord would bless
all their Armies, both by Sea and Land; all their Officers and Commanders in
Chief, especially the Right Honorable, Gods faithful Servant, Robert Earl
of Essex, Lord General of their Forces, with all subordinate Officers employed
in that service, for the glory of God, the felicity of his Majesty and
tranquillity of the Kingdom. He prayed, That God would fight his own Battle and
maintain his cause against that cursed, deceitful, and Traiterous profession
and practice of bloody and hypocritical Roman Catholics, risen up in Arms in
dear England, and distressed Ireland, to exterminate the truth, and sincere
professors of the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh that God would
divide these cursed enemies in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, and give
glorious victory to his Servants, in either Kingdom, and render to all their
implacable enemies a recompense answerable to the work of their hands, and
give them sorrow of heart. The curse of the Lord be upon them, even to the
utter destruction of all such who do not belong to the Lords election of grace:
and if still the Sword of the Lord would not be quiet, he desired that God
would give it a charge to destroy his enemies the adverse party, those
uncircumcised Philistims, Atheists and Papists, that have banded together, and
would not have Jesus Christ to reign over them, who refuse to be guided by
the Statutes of his Kingdom, and desire not the knowledge of his holy ways.

This was the sum of that part of his prayer which occasioned exception:
besides diverse exceptions which were taken at his Sermon, which I forbear to
mention.

We are waiting for the Kings answer unto our Commissioners, and accordingly
you shall see the resolutions of this Kingdom raised, for most of our Gentry
and Comminalty, are firm unto the Parliament of England, but amonst our Court
Parasites, both Nobles and Gentry, there is nothing but unsoundnes in them, and
treachery to be expected from them: your Court Malignants there have such
influence into ours here, that had not the divine providence prevented it, we
had ere now been imbroyled in the same sufferings: but I hope God will break
their bands, and burst their cords asunder; not our bands (whom you call
Malignants) can affect, although it tends unto the ruin of their own, as well
as of your Kingdom; they will attempt it, at what price soever: upon Thursday
last, being 16. February The Earl Mon Rose and Lord Oglseby, were proclaimed
Traitors to God, their King, and Country, with the beat of a Drum, and the
sound of a Trumpet here in our City of Edinburgh, Because that contrary to
there Covenant (to the breach of the peace of both Kingdoms they) stole out of
Scotland to Newcastle an hundred and twenty horse and men, to assist the King
against the Parliament. There be two books in Print, the one is called Plain
English, the other a New Plea for the Parliament, which have done much good in
this Kingdom: But we hear that you are about a Treaty, which is much wondered
at, that contrary to former expresses it should now be concluded, and upon such
disadvantages as we hear of, and as you will find the pardoning of Delinquents
to be unto you: such a peace will lay a foundation of future misery unto your
Kingdom, and end in a more bloody war: so their treaties intend only their
own ends. The Spaniard ever gained more by their Treaties, than by their
Swords; and by their Counsels King Charles is too much acted, as all the World
can witness, and his Popish Army make no little boast thereof. And if both
Armies were disbanded (which we believe the Catholics will never yield unto,
although the King should grant unto adisbanding, (this cause concerning them so
much) are you not in statu quo prius? nay worse? can that be cordially
forgiven, which will never be forgotten? Is it not a Court principle to wait a
fit opportunity of revenge? sed Manum de tabula, your body is more corrupt and
diseased than ours: and if those Relics left in our Stare, are so active now
in wickedness, how much more operative and stirring will the humors be in
yours, when all power in their hands? We had thought our Lenity unto
Delinquents here, would have been monitory unto you there, who have been eye
witnesses of our distractions and divisions, the effects whereof are now seen
in Englands and Irelands extremities. But Oh popopuli ad servitudinem
praeparati! as said Tyberius. This we say, for we pray for your Parliament,
that if Moabs wiles do not destroy them, Balaams curse shall never hurt him:
If they keep close to God, he will preserve them from both, but if they disert
him, and forsake their first love, love to his truth, and love to Justice, he
will forsake them: And then vvoe unto them, the Lord grant that you never taste
the bitter fruits of a backsliding Parliament, and of the Treasons and
Treacheries of any of the members thereof, who for their own ends care not to
betray God, his truth and people, to make a sale of their dear Country,
friends and whatsoever is precious, with which only they are made Feoffes in
trust: Oh that your eyes may never see it, nor my ears may never hear it.

We hear it for a secret, yet as certain News, and it came from some persons
about the King, that His Majesty has vowed and sworn to pawn His Crown, for
the Prelates Miter: that he will bear out the Catholics in this their
unnatural Rebellion, upon which they are so bold as to say, That if the King
deserts them, and disbands his Forces, ere he accomplish his ends propounded to
them in raising this Army, he is never to be trusted by God or man.

We hear the Queen is landed, and has brought over besides great store of
Arms, much money, the benevolence of the Catholics beyond Sea, for the
maintenance of this War, yet our secret intelligence is, that she has
Instructions (and we hear also from whom) to mediate for a peace (and we know
for what ends, and with what reservations) but we wish your Parliament the
wisdom of God, of Angels, and of men, in this hour of temptation.

We hear also that your Lords that went to the King, and those Commons has
went alo^g with the^, have sucked in much of the corruptions of the court at
Oxford, which since has produced bad effects in the Parl. House, to the great
^iscouragme^t of the best affected Citizens of London, upon whose shoulders a
great part of the burden of this war has laid: we look upon it as a sad omen:
and fear that things have been only carried as politickly and not so piously
as was pretended hitherto: the report is, that the fear of a Reformation
surprizeth the spirits of your licentious Nobles, who had rather lose the power
and purity of the Gospel, then their Court Minions, their pride their State,
and their book of Common Prayer. We desire and hope better things: but ^here
is a whispering as if their affection to some about the King, related and
^ngaged to them has made them so cold (not to speak so broad as others do) in
this cause all along, and therefore so little has bin done by them; or by
those employed for them, and yet much must not be expected from these Lords any
longer, now they see the terms upon which the truth must be purchased: but
were you of their counsel, I would tell them one of Solomon's Proverbs, that he
that lays up deceit with him, and covers his hatred therewith, ^his
wickedness shall be discovered to the whole World, or one of Gamaliels
politics, that if this work be of man, it shall come to naught, but if it be
of God, they cannot overthrow it, least they be found fighters against God,
Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. There is a History of the
Sweathens, who when their Nobles in compliance with their Sovereign went about
to betray their liberties, the people (whom God and nature has invested with
all power primitive, it being only in the hands of others derivative as men
entrusted therewith by them, and go accountable to them) they unwilling to be
inthralled and brought into servitude, rose up for the vindication of their
just privileges, and apprehended their Nobles, and put them to death as
Traitors to their State, God in justce will suffer dishonor to stain the
glory of such who have no regard unto his honor.

We hear that you do much wonder that we in all this time have afforded you no
assistance, both States being imbarqued in one and the same cause: you shall see
what we will do shortly, but when you consider what jealousies there were of us
in your State before, who durst not trust us with the spoil of our Enemies, the
Papists (which was all the satisfaction was desired in consideration of our
vast expenses occasioned by them, or had prevented all those miseries that have
now invaded you, besides the loss of much blood which has been spilt and
moneys spent but secundae cogitationes are ever the best) you thought we came
to enrich our selves, and to impoverish you, and had we not obtained our ends
we had never departed in peace, how much more shall we be suspected now, the
same principles of jealousy still remaining in you^ and your means of
resistance being less powerful through your own divisions: if these surmises
were removed in your parts generally, and prejudice by that means, were took
off our Spirits: you should sinde us not comtemplative but active, to afford
you all Fraternall assistance; but you will say these jealousies were never
fostered in the hearts of the best affected; but of the Malignants of the
Kingdom. I wish it had been so: but beloved you shall find this no obstacle
in your spirits, do you remain fixed in your Resolutions, and you shall see a
speedy issue of our determinations upon the return of our Commissioners; But
judge with your selves if this had been reasonable, nay if it would not have
been prejudicial to you, much more to us, that an Army should have been
raised by us, to be so suddenly disbanded ere the end pretended had been
effected: your inconstancy and uncertaintie amazeth us, but let your
premises, and principles only be established, and thence you shall see
answerable conclusions deducted according, answerable to your expectatio^s, to
your desires. Today it is resolved that you will treat in no place but in
Parliament, to morrow you will in any place appointed: (which we judge not
only to be dishonorable but a breach, but a loss of the trust privilege of
Parliament.) To day it is declared that you will no more Petition His Majesty,
to morrow you will: (whereas we hold Declarations to be more suitable to the
Sovereignty of so supreme a Court, whose power is coordinate with Princes, then
Petitions. To day it is protested that you take up Arms to bring Delinquents to
Judicial trial, and to condign punishment: to morrow it is determined
otherwise, they shall be pardoned. To day it is ordered, that the ships be
sequestered for the service of the Kingdom, the Forts and strong holds secured
and maintained for the security of the Kingdom from evil insurrections, and
foreign invasions, that they be entrusted in the hands of such as the Kingdom
may conside in; to morrow it is disputeable, whether for peace sake, and upon
condition of disbanding all may not be left to the disposition of the King.
These former Votes either were the reason of the Kingdom or not, if the
Reason, then the cause still remaining, the ebuity of the reason continues in
force: and so the same care is yet to be had that was formerly, if not, why djd
you at all take Arms? how can it be justified before God and man? upon whose
heads shall all that innocent blood lie, that has hitherto been shed? Hinc
illae Lachrymae? We are astonished that so wise a Parliament should be deluded
by the Sophistry of a Jesuited faction, about the Court and in the Kingdom,
whose Counsels have been deep to contrive the ruin of Parliament and
Kingdom, and has swept away the honor of many of their Members who were in
the head, and at the first session thereof Gold, but in the feet are clay: Let
Englands Parliament, beware of Neutrality, for there is no halting before God;
the Land has already smarted for compliance with men of Antichristian spirits,
and if now they hear not the rod, the next stroke will reach unto the soul:
our earnest prayer is that they may wisely distinguish between Christ's and
Antichrists, in this their day may understand the things of their peace; for
the quarrel is whether Jesus shall be King or no. O that England may never seek
the death of crowned King Jesus! may never co^ply with dying Antichrist,
against whom in special is all Christ's quarrel in this last age of the World.
Our souls desire is that your Parliament abate nothing of their professed zeal,
and resolved integrity, least they utterly lose the heart of God, the prayers
of his people, and to procure to themselves a curse, a blot of ignominy
throughout all Kingdoms (whose eyes are fixed upon them) as shall never be
wiped out from generation to generation. Oh that the God of Wisdom would lead
you into all wisdom, for it is not in man to direct his way! if he ratifies a
peace who can procure trouble? Remove the cause, and the effect will cease:
supplant the root, and the fruits will wither and die; lop the branches only,
and your distractions vvil sprout forth again with great increase, to the utter
undoing of future Generations, if Gods mercy prevent it not by withering.
Blessed is he that has a seeing eye, a hearing ear, an understanding heart to
attend to Counsel ere repentance comes in too late. Oh let not self ends,
security, distrust of divine Providence and power, prove all your hopes
abortive, and lose you the Crown, the recompense of so many months and years
travel both from God and man! Oh let not fear, nor favor, engagements, or
prejudice forest all your Judgments, or divert your intentions from the rule
of Gods Word, or that Protestation so solemnly sworn before God, and the whole
World, least your iniquities pursue you, and your hypocrisy and Apostacy do
find you out! You have begun well, and who do let you that you should not
finish the work in the purest Reformation? he that has an ear let him hear.
Hear me in this your day that God may hear you in his Even, in the great
Judgment day.

FINIS.

