Downright Dealing, OR The despised Protestant Speaking plain English To the
Kings most Excellent Majesty The honorable houses of Parliament. The City of
London. The Army.
AND All other Peace-desiring Commons of this divided and self-destroying
Kingdom.

Written by J. H. an impartial observer of the present transactions of the
Court, City, and Camp.

A Kingdom, City, or House, divided against it self cannot stand.

Printed in the Year of Discoveries. 1647.

To the Reader.
Reader,
WHat ere thou chancest to be, I neither fear, nor care: the frown of the
mighty; the fleer of the froward, nor the censure of the severe, shall neither
distaste, nor deter me from publishing these few following pages: Only to
prevent prejudicacy, know, that these are not the fruits of discontent, nor
blessinge^ of Fact^^^ neither are they intended to kindle that fire, which
already (though seemingly smothered) blazes too fast, but rather to quench it:
It may be one will tax me of Arrogance, another of simplicity, a third of
singularity, it is no matter for that, what J have writ, I have writ, truth it
is J am sure, and more J believe then some will be willing to hear, let him
that is the most guilty be the least offended, least they make the Proverb
true, and prove his own discoverer. All J desire is that who ever shall
vouchsafe to peruse these following pages, would do it seriously and judge
impartially, and then let them praise or dispraise, frown or smile, I care not:

TO The Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Most gracious Sovereign,
LEt it not be thought a crime unpardonable, if one of the poorest of your
subjects (presuming on your clemency) does offer unto your Majesty what he has
observed to be destructive to the peace of this poor Kingdom, and dangerous
(if not speedily prevented) to undermine not only the honor and safety of
your Majesty and Royal posterity, but also the supporters thereof; (to wit)
the Law of the Kingdom, and peace of the people; in the ruin whereof your
Majesty and posterity must certainly bear the greatest share, and sustain the
greatest loss; the law of the Kingdom, and the peoples peace, being
altogether essential with the honor and kingly domination, of your Majesty,
and without which, both King and people must necessarily run into confusion,
the truth hereof your Majesty has had experimental knowledge of for these
late years, and at this day cannot want examples to demonstrate the truth of
this particular.

Now forasmuch as what is past recall, is also past cure, since what might have
been commanded cannot now be entreated, since power cannot, policy must, since
rage cannot prevail, let reason reconcile, make necessity a ve^^e, and rather
conquer by courtesy, then compel by Sovereignty.

And now most gracious and great Prince, suffer this humble but serious
capitulation* Can it consist with Wisdom* if it be according to God) to esteem
any thing to great or good to be parted withal* for the (...)ence, for the
making up so large a breath? for the stopping the torrent of such a doluge of
crimson confusions, as have already and do daily again threaten to break in
upon your kingdoms? A good sheep-heard will give his life for his sheep, a
gracious King for his people* And will not your Majesty part with a superfluous
sprig, a mere pun^^^o, or thread bare excressence of honor or power for the
saving of your poor people? What man would not lose one member to save all the
rest? Are you so far in love with the shadow that to preserve it, you will
hazard the loss, nay ruin of the substance? Are you so far in love with some
few (perhaps flatterers) if ^ot traitors) that to be merciful to them, you
will be unmercifull and unjust too, to all the kingdom; certainly most
gracious Sovereign, there may be wisdom in so doing, but it cannot proceed
from God, neither can it conduce to the good of your self, posterity of people;
surely, if your people were made for you, you were likewise made for them, one
for the good of the other, and not one to destroy another; you were made a
Sovereign that they might be Subjects, not slaves, that you might protect them,
not devour them; that you might do justice and execute judgment, to the poor
and to the rich impartially, not suffer the rich and mighty to eat up the poor
and devour the Widow: The Magistrate (that is of God) is not a terror to good
Works, but to the evil, not a persecuter of the people of God but a protector
and preserver of them, and what Magistrate* soever shall pretend to have
received a power from God, if he employ it not in all things according to Gods
end, he will certainly come to naught, he shall perish, and those whom he has
cast down and endeavored to destroy, shall rise up against him, and he shall
not be able to stand in that day, but shall ^lee^ before them*

To conclude, if your Majesty (according to your so often reiterated
expressions in your Declarations) do really intend to take all oppertunities to
save this poor kingdom in a right sense, now is the time to manifest your self
herein and by some self denying testimony effectually act for the
re-establishing the poor Commons of England in their ancient birth rights, and
securing them therein, providing for a due execution of justice, and
countenancing of godliness in your dominions, which being speedily, cordially,
and effectually done, your Majesty need not doubt but to find, your present
loss to produce a future gain, by the increase both of your power and love of
your people, which will cause such a mutual confidence betwixt you and your
subjects, as will both comfort your heart and strengthen your hands against the
secret complotments of foes at home, or public attempts of enemies abroad, and
cause all your now discontented, and distrushing people to be united, and with
one heart and assent to cry*

Long live our gracious Sovereign, etc.
To the Parliament.
Grave Senators,
AFter seven year sufferings, and tedious expectation to be delivered from our
then declared pressures and grievances, give us leave, (for loosers should have
leave to speak) to tell you, we cannot but with bitterness of Spirit declare,
That we wonder by what strange and unheard of presidents, this Parliament has
acted; there having been never before any visible rule for such actions, in or
by any Parliament. But leaving things that are past cure, let us come to
expostulate with you about future security.

Can it, think you, consist with the peace and welfare of the Kingdom,
especially considering the state and temper of the people, and the present
exigences of the State. That you who should be acting jointly for the securing
of the Kings authority, and Subjects liberty, should be divided into Factions
and acting for your own particular interests? Is this to discharge that trust
which you have in the presence of God sworn to perform? Surely so long as you
thus continue to beat and bandy one against another, to pull down one faction
to set up a second; a second to set up a third; to hang one thief that you may
make another; so long as you are thus selvish and partial in sparing men, (I
was about, nay I will say, knaves) because they will side with you in carrying
on your own designs, so long we cannot hope for any good either by you or from
you, so long we are confident (what ere you may pretend) you intend no good to
the King or kingdom, neither can any thing you do, compose or perfect that
great work which you were called to and undertook, (to wiy) to ease us of our
burdens, and establish justice with righteousness; since it is a mere
contradiction; and contrary to sense or reason for us to think that ever we can
be eased of oppression by oppression, or obtain justice by injustice: it is true
your great oppressions of late years may make us forget our former petty
sufferings, but never settle us in a true course of freedom, nor secure us for
the future from injustice.

Therefore to conclude unless you do immediately lay aside all by-respects and
your own interests, and unanimously join and act for the securing of the
kingdom, and give a speedy testimony thereof, by your walking in the parts of
justice and righteousness; unless you do immediately administer justice and
execute judgment impartially and endeavor to settle a firm and lasting peace,
whereby the King may be with due honor invested, and the Kingdom in its just
liberty secured; truly the Kingdom shall not only have been by you already
exposed to many hazzards, (besides the large expense of blood and treasure) but
shall for the future be necessitated, to curse the time that ever they
entrusted you; and be forced in justice to prosecute you as persons which had
power, but not wills to restore them to their ancient liberties, and that which
might have been an honor to you and your posterities in the generatons to
come, will be recorded as a brand of obloquie, That such a Parliament sat
seven years, to enrich themselves, enslave, the whole Nation.

To the City.
Grave Citizens,
IN whom wisdom was once chiefly resident, though now (it is to be feared) a
great stranger; how comes it to pass that such a Spirit of giddiness possesses
you? What, have you found out new ways to make your selves famous? (I fear
miserable.) you that were the glory of the Nations, the envy of your Foes, and
the admiration of strangers, are now become the amazement of your friends, the
scorn of your enemies, and a byword to all Nations* cast but an eye upon your
follies, and see into what a condition your Division, nay, your Prlde has
brought you: you that exalted your selves almost above the heavens, are now
fallen, if possible, lower than the earth; your towering pride is now buried in
the dust of Division; you have been long time in travail with joy, and now are
delivered of sorrow: I wish you could yet see in this your day the things that
belong unto your Peace; What, has the love of money, eaten up your love
toward one another? has your earnest pursuit of Religion, forced Religion to
a squat; truly you have hunted fairly, you have strove so much for Religion in
the Church that it is to be feared you have lost it in your hearts; these are
the fruits of Division, your Presbytery, and Independency, your outward forms
and formal circumstances; what, have you strove so long for the shadow that
you have lost the substance; have you forgot That it is neither Circumcisiou
nor uncircumcision that avails ought, but a new creature; have you forgot
that love is the fulfilling of the Law, and a gospel duty: surely, this
Division is of the Devil and not of God, for God is love, and his people are
carried out with a spirit of Love, and not of hatred and contention, envy and
emulation.

Therefore dear Friends and fellow Citizens, I beseech you lay your condition
to heart, examine the ground of your Division, and you will find it to be the
pride of your hearts, your self-conceitedness, etc. and cloth your selves in
self-abhorrency, let him that would be the greatest be the least among you, let
him that would or thinks himself wise, be a fool for Christ's sake, learn to
bear with one another, labor to see that you are members of one body, united
unto one head, and love one another, and administer unto the necessities one of
another, so shall your love increase and your Divisions dye, but if you shall
continue to widen the gap, confusion will enter, and what will ye do in that
day?

To the Army.
Gentlemen,
ACtions are always honorable that are compassed by just ways, and aim at
good ends, for we ought not to do evil to produce good, neither should there
be public pretenses made use of to advantage or secure private interests, I
hope the contrary now, but yet I fear the event; when the fabric is larger
then the foundation, there is great danger in the building; so when the
undertaking is greater then the power of the undertakers, truly it is to be
feared there will be more hurt then good, more detriment then advantage acrue
to the persons concerned therein.

Gentlemen, your undertakings and engagements thereupon I have seriously
observed, and impartially scanned, I find the end good, but the manner and
prosecution hitherto, has not been so good as I could wish; and the temper,
nay, necessity of the Kingdom does require: you engaged, if I mistake not, not
to give over, nor look back until you had to the utmost of your powers made
provision (not only for your selves, and own interests as Soldiers) but as
Commoners; and with your selves, all the free Commons of England, that they and
you together might be for the future protected and secured from all violence
and oppression whatsoever, and in whomsoever and that there might be a due
administration of justice and judgment, with righteousness: Now give me leave
to demand the cause of your retreat from the pursuance of this so honorable
action? How comes it to pass, I hear so many private whispers among you; That
you have nothing to do to meddle with any thing that concerns the Kingdom, but
merely what concerns your selves, and your own particular actings: was it just
or lawful for you to enter into an engagement, to perform that, which you now
seem to dis-own, as unlawful: Surely, either there wanted a serious
consideration at first, or else interests has abated your Resolutions at last;
which if either, how dishonorable it will be to your selves, how destructive
to the Kingdom, be your own Judges.

If the welfare of the people be the supreme Law, as you have sometimes
granted, yea affirmed; Then whatsoever is contrary or stands in opposition to
that, is destructive to that main end, and therefore not only to be avoided at
present, but prevented for the future. But oppression and injustice particular
interests, etc. are direct in opposition to the welfare of the people and
altogether destructive, therefore to be prevented and removed. And certainly
what cannot be repelled by policy, maybe by power, for if there be not a
sufficient means left for the attaining the end, it is altogether vain and to
no purpose.

But to every end there is a sufficient means, therefore if the welfare of the
people cannot be secured by one means, it may by another, if not by policy,
then by power according to the Parliaments ow^ language to the King, The
Kingdom must not be without a means to preserve it self. And truly if the
kingdom has a means to preserve it self against the King, being then acting
against the welfare of the Kingdom; It has a power likewise to secure it self
against the Parliament, and Army too, if they shall act, in the same way, and
shall not prosecute the main end (to wit) the peoples welfare.

How comes it to pass I beseech you that there is such sidings among you? one
great man favors another, and stomachs his opposer; and let him be never so
bad, so he will side insecuring some great persons particular interests in
power among you, he shall not only escape Scot-free, but be countenanced and
protected among you: Little thieves are hanged and great ones let go. Is this to
be single hearted? will you that have taxed the King and Parliament of
partiality, be partial too? what a blemish will this be to all your former
actions? That you should now fawn upon those for favor, who would have
rejoiced to have seen both you and the kingdom weltring in floods of blood and
confusion; and who, it is to be feared by your too great indulgence and
credulity, are plotting your destruction.

I beseech you gentlemen consider, you stand upon a sandy place, which will, if
not carefully looked to, devour you, Lay aside all interests and be what you
have pretended to be, let not your own honor or promotions be only aimed at,
but have sole respect unto the peace of the Kingdom. I have with sorrow
observed. That there are, I may say too many among you, too great in power, who
are swaid by passion not reason, who speak much against injustice in others,
but never knew what it was to be just them selves; men neither of discretion
nor religion, what ere they may pretend, who do vehemently act for to gain
applause and the favor of great men, and not for any love to the peace of the
Kingdom: now it is very unlikely that ever such a man can do (or at least
intends) a general good, unless it may advantage his own interest. I beseech
you observe and beware of such persons, you may easily find them; for such
persons in your Counsels will do you more hurt then all your other enemies, be
not deluded by pretenses though never so specious; those persons that plead so
much for delay, and argue so critically, intend no good to you, but carry on a
dangerous design against you and the whole kingdom. And you may assure your
selves the Adversary, with whom you now run a contest, could never have gained
so much time, nor brought you to such an exigency, had they not been
encouraged, nay, assisted by some that have too much power and influence in
your Council.

Gentlemen, the eyes of the Kingdom are upon you; and unless you answer their
expectations and perform your promises and engagements, and that speedily;
truly, you will stand at as great a distance in their affections as others have
done before you; lose not this opportunity, seek the peace of the Kingdom now,
and seek your selves afterward, lest while you contend so earnestly for a
shadow, you lose the substance, be for pure justice without respect of
persons, and let the kingdom see, That you will not favor or disfavour any
person for siding with or against you, or for being of this or the other
judgment. But that all persons of each party shall receive from you equal
respect, according to their merit. But if you shall appear partial to some,
and severe to others; if you shall do the works your selves, which you condemn
in others: if you shall pretend to free us from one form of slavery to involve
us in another, assure your selves, Division and Confusion will follow, and a
worm will rise from your own bowels which will certainly devour you and consume
your former glory.

Read and practice, prevent. Farewell.
To my fellow Commons which desire Peace.
MOderation in a multitude is ( Rara avis in terra) especially in England, of
late years* where rage, not reason, has had the Rule and Sovereignty; when the
reins of the bridle are thrown in the neck the unruly beast runs where he
lists; And truly such has been the practice of you my Fellow-Commons for
this seven years almost; although you have received many a curb, and often bit of
the bridle for it, yet still like a headstrong horse you are stubborn and
untamed, fearing neither Switch nor Spur; and it is to be feared you will still
persist until you are quite tired; To prevent which give me leave to
expostulate with you a little; It has been often said, that misery is a
schoolmaster to wisdom, and that wit is the best when it is dearly paid for,
and truly I believe you have paid enough for it, Has not the plundering of
your estates, the burning of your houses, the murdering of your children, the
inslaving of your persons, taught you to hate War and love Peace? How comes it
to pass then that there are so many murmurings amongst you, one part for the
King, another for the Parliament, another for the Army, another for neither;
what are you frantic? has reason given place to rage, wisdom to folly,
meekness to madness? Have you been so patient under seven years sufferings by
War, and cannot you contain your selves one year in peace; what, like children,
all at an instant or none at all? Just like a fool that because he could not be
rich in one day, would be a beggar all his life. Certainly a spirit of fury (I
may say folly) has bewirched you, and put you upon the purchase of perpetual
desolation to your selves and posterities; and you with eagerness pursue it, in
despite of those that would prevent it.

In a word; know therefore, unless you do with patience wait for the
establishing of that peace which you desire, and give limits to your unlimited
contentions, unless you lay aside your prejudicacy and censuring until you see
the event, unless you seriously apply your selves to make up the breach between
your selves and your Sovereign, the Parliament, Army, and City, and one
another, and every one in his place and relation set his hand to the reducing
of things to their proper center, unless both Magistrates and people do I say
with one accord, seek peace and establish judgment and righteousness, in vain
are and will be all these mutterings and commotions, and do what they and you
can, confusion and desolation will break in upon them and you, and then when it
is too late you may repent, but not prevent your destruction.

This is the sense of him that sees great cause to fear this will be the end of
all this division if providence do not interpose very suddenly.

Postscript.
I Beseech you labor to love one another, and to be faithful each to other.
Let Sovereigns seek the good of their Subjects, and Subjects the Honor and
Peace of their Sovereigns. Let Parliaments be faithful, and people peaceable:
Let Soldiers be valiant for Justice, but not factious for preferment; Let
King, Parliament, City, Army, and People unite and join in the bonds of love,
and leave judging, suspecting and reviling one another. Then shall you see and
enjoy a happy peace and the fruits thereof; Then shall the Lamb lie down with
the Lion; Then shall not the voice of the oppressed be heard in our streets, but
joy, peace, plenty, and the most wished delights that are, or can be
imaginable, or desired, be freely communicated unto you by the hand of Jehovah,
who is the God of Peace, and has annexed a blessing to the lovers thereof.
Farewell.

Thine, if thou studiest the Peace of England. J. H.

FINIS.

