A CHARACTER OF THE New Oxford Libeller, In answer to his CHARACTER OF London
Diurnall.

Published according to Order.

feb: 11th LONDON, Printed by M. S. for H. B. at the Castle in Cornhill. 1645.

A CHARACTER OF THE Oxford Libeller.
HE is a Gentleman grown lousie, not in the Noble way of Arms, but with singing
of Ballads: Time was, when he wore himself out at Elbows with fine clothes to
be cried up by the Women, and styled a Wit; When that would not do, he turned
Alchymist, and made projection of his Land, to give a tincture to his brain.
This wrought a little; but the chief of his Trophies is due to the Sword of
his enemy: which, had it spared the Cedar, had left him a very Shrub in the
Muses Mount, hardly a Faggot of brush wood, though now he undertakes to hedge in
victories, as the Sages of Gotham did the Cuckoo.

The main thing that confirms him in his error is, that the great Ladies are
all for the Cavaliers, to whose charms they at Oxford either give such an
observance, as the Devil does to Magicians, or keep them like Coy-ducks, or
Pigeons of Aleppo, to send hither with letters, as they used to do Footmen to
the Porters lodge.

The word Legislative he takes to be a Fiddlestring, and is always scraping
upon it, though it seemed to his brother Waller (a man, as the Muses can
testify, something sharper sighted) after a whole years study upon the point,
to be a sadder object, and rather resembling an halter.

He makes no use of religious Epithites, except it be to pin them, as Boys do
Fox-tailes, upon their backs, whom he would laugh at. He dares approach no
nearer to the sanctity of the Commonprayer book, then Hopkins and Sternhold:
but outdoes the Devil at Scripture, which he never brings out, but as the
Jews did Christ, to scorn and spit upon it; he would not be hired to use the
Legend, Talmud, or Alcaron so, because they resemble Ovids Metamorphosis. He
Christens Beasts and Men whom he imagines little better, with Scripture names,
to make them iridiculous, whilst he gives Poetical ones to his Mistresses,
not to be pronounced without adoration. And as he uses the best Book, because
it resembles not his studies, so he does the best men, because they resemble
not his companions.

If a man have zeal, like a right Bull-dogge, he flies straight at his Nose,
the old Paris-garden common place, by which you may discover the breeding of
his wit, and by a late snuffle he has got in his own, whose tender gristle
he laps up in dirty rags, raked out of the dunghill of ruined stages, is
become as very a tyrant at it, as Sir John Falsestolf.

He is so sad at the abortion of Plots, that he envies nothing so much as a
good Midwife, a skill he intends to practice against Sir Edward Hides belly
be brought to bed of Spinola's Whale. In the mean time, because Bristow's
grown a dotard, he is contented to be Nurse unto the second infancy of his
brain; but so dry a one, that he is fain to borrow Culpeppers sucking-bottle,
which, whilst the Janisaries hold the town of Bristow, is sure never to want
milk.

I had almost overseen shady Cottington, who was pitched in Spain, horned in
England, and moves ever since like Fauxe's dark Lantern: this fellow is a
Burrachio full of Spanish snuffs, risen like the spirit of Sack from the Cellar
to the Councell-table.

He would take it in foul scorn (though this puissant Knights errantry never
knew other carreer, then that which lies between a prison and an Alehouse) that
you should celebrate him by the name of Don Quixot, or say, he has a windmill
in his head; no, it is a watermill, open but the sluice of a Hogshead, and you
set Pericranium on work, like the great wheel, till his fists, the milstones,
grind you the bottles (like Miscelline) to gather with the next noddle. He is
a terrible State-engine, and had he lived in Machiavils time, would have set
his head where his heels stood: he gives his Oracles, like Sibylla, flaming:
he is the politic Barnaval; the Bacchanalia are to him but an Ash Wednesday.

My Lord George helped our Libeller with two or three of his jests; and is
absolutely, in his opinion (and his own) the hopesullest young Statesman,
whilst his neck is able to support the weight of his brain, in Europe, though
his Spanish gravitie be something miscomposed by his late Treaty with Brown;
since which time, he goes to the Council board like a Lictor, with a faggot
in his face: and it is feared, because the Fates are women, that he will be
less of their counsel for this deformity. He looks with fervent eyes upon
the Lievtnant of the Hierarchy, Doctor Steward, whose foot he hopes, will
stand its ground better then his Lord of Canterbury's head: indeed the foot is
a fine foot, and has cost something in Ribbon, to hang it for a doctrine and
use in the eye of the Ladies, for he never hangs any in their ears. He would
feign know for how long my Lord Hoptons soul has taken a lease of his body:
perhaps for some seven years longer then his honor. He is very modest; for
that is all he says of his Oxford Champions. Where Is Goring? has that wild
colt forgot the trick of trespassing upon the Commons? is the Legislative hedge
too strong for him? has he not been often enough sick of the staggers, to
forget the Pinner of Wakefield? Where Is little Porter, that came hither with a
stratagem, to provide himself of an Office, and carry away the Town-gates with
him, leaving (for your service, if you please to advance, Gentlemen) the city
as penetrable, as he found his Mistress? Where Is Gerrat^? how in quirpo, upon
the mountains of Wales, luring Domingo Gonsales his Gansas to conduct him to
the country of the Moon? For shame, Poet, lend him Pegasus; shall one of your
chief Commanders ride out of the world upon a Goose? And where is my Lord of
Loughborow? cannot Aulicus, though you confess him to be a Witch, conjure up
his spirits? are they all reduced to their subterranean mansion? or sit with
their brown bills, cawing like Dawes out of the holes of old walls? This is a
sad Chronacek, Poet, to be written upon threadbare breeches. I pray you, how
long is it since you saw a pair of new Boots? It was time to go to the Market
at Uxbridge: there is no more hope of my Lord of Norwitches frippery, believe
me, that design of his, to bring all the Nuns linen and petticoats into Sir
Balthazar Gerbiers monte di pieta, is a dangerous one; for what will become of
you, if the Whore of Babylon turn Adamite for want of a smock? Well, remember
me to Mercurius Aulicus, he must raise the next army, and pay it too. I will
make bold to borrow one of your diddles to lap a token of my love to him in.

Argus does now the Stock of Albion keep,
Whose eyes Mercurius would lay asleep:
But Mercury, new impe your heels, it stands
You much upon, Argus has Gerions hands.
And so farewell, Canis ad Nilum, with your snatches, and your ink that cures
Ringworms; would it would cure the pox, that you might pleasure your friends,
and redeem your land with your wit, as you purchased your wit with your land.

FINIS.

