Mr. Jervis Hollis speech the 26 of April 1641.
Mr. Speaker,
I have with much difficulty persuaded my self to offer any thing, my stocks
little to this Reckoning, get since I have adventured to rise, I shall take the
Liberty with your Favors to deliver my self freely; I have a blunt way in
speaking my Heart, it may be peradventure a folly in me, but it is a folly I
love so well, I will not part with it:

Sir, we are now upon the 5t Article of the Scots, which, as it was Empressed
by a Noble Ld. at the Conference, is a very pregnant, and seeming Article, it
has produced many other, and they such, as I must confess and affirm,
whatsoever Iucus or Artifice they be slighted over with, I do not like their
countenance: They may well be our younger brother Scotland, but like Jacob,
they seem to me, as if they had an aim to supplant us, and take away our
birthrighte.

Sir, There is no man that has a more charitable construction of Intentions
then I had, whilst they made their addresses in humble distance, as befilled
Subjects to their Sovereign; whilst they bounded their desires within the due
limits of their Ancient liberties, and seemed to wish nothing but the just
freedom of Subjects and Christians in their laws and Consciences my heart
went along with them, and I wished them satisfaction; But now Sr. when I see
them swell in their demands beyond all proportion, when I heard them indeare
upon their first propositions, and require things unfit for a King to grant,
and dishonorable for this Nation to suffer, I cannot but fix a mark of
danger upon them, I fear we have nourished in our bosoms those that will
sting us to death.

Here being interrupted, yet the House commanding him to go on he said as
follows.
Sir, I am sorry for this Interruption, much more sorry if I have given a
cause for it, for the clearenes of my own thoughts acquit me; I brought no
Intentions here but such as were full of Fidelity and zeal for the service of
this House, and my Country, and shall allwaies; And now if you please to
command me to express my self like an Englishman, and an honest man, I shall
proceed, otherwise I shall testify my obedience in my silence.

Then he was commanded to proceed, which was as follows.
The miseries and calamities which this poor Kingdom has thus long suffered;
have hung like weights upon my soul, and I have groaned under the oppression
for it was a great one; But these as they call them propositions, I must call
them Comands and I fear they will prove so: They threaten yet more, it is to
vnmam^e us quite and leave us in a Condition of all others most despiseable:
For these appear to me like the demands of Naash to the men of Jabesh pulling
out our right eyes.

Sir, our Ancestors have not been acquainted with so much laments as to hear
of such demands at distance, and it cannot but trouble me; that we should not
only meet them at the half way, but embrace the bearers.

Sir, we are the offspring of those Ancestors, their blood runs in our vem^s,
and I hope as yet is not all turned to water, there are the Spirits of life and
activity in us, and these will revive and Speak plain English to us what ever
Dampe or Apoplexy this Spirit of slumber has cast upon us, and I hope we
shall either yet live with Honor, or take our Honorable Farewell, and so be
honest and gallant men, betwixt these two there is not much difference.
Therefore Sr. my humble motion is this, That these Propositions may be
committed to a Select Com^ittee to consider of, which carry reason and
modesty with them that they may be presented here, as filling to be granted,
and that those which are of another Insinuation may be rejected: And if our
firm peace may be had upon honest and honorable terms, I will cherish the
thoughts of it, if not, there are but two ways left worthy the Entertainemt of
this Nation, that is, to stand or fall with honor.

God I hope and our English virtues will secure the first, if otherwise, he is
neither worthy of life, nor memory, that shall not bury himself in the ruins
of his Country.

For this Speech by Consent of the House he was expelled the House for this
Session.


