Week 1

JEREMIAH REVIVED: Though in his PRISON; or his Lamentations paralelled.

Aprils mild Showers after Marches rough storms, or Great Britans voice of
Weeping after Great Britans Vote of Loyalty.

Being a mournful representation of the KING and His KINGDOMS wretched
condition.

Seasonably dewing down in four several Showers this springing Month of
April, each Week one.

This is the first Shower.

April 6th Printed for N. P. the Author. 1648.

JEREMIAH Revived, though in His Prison.
HO, Aeolus after a discreet, though sharp and niping use of storm raising
Boreas in defense of Charlemains, I have returned him (not standing in need of
an Ordinance of Indemnity: for, though he has spoken loud, yet he has been
harmless in his March) into the vast Conclave of his strong prison; and now
for the more successful prosecution of my design, I request thee gently to
latch thy sword into the South West side of that wind pregnant mountain, and
thence let all fruitfull-shower-distilling Zephirus steal a freedom by degrees
tobreath with his humid blasts this Spring, on the Rocks of Albion and make her
stony mountains as fertile as the low laid valleys: or rather, Oblessed
Savior who command the winds and they obey thee; send forth amongst us the
* Zephirus of thy Word and promise that Grace-infusing Spirit of thy Father,
Mat. 8.27. John 3.8. Ioh. 25.26. Act. 17.25.28. 2 Samuel 21.1, 10.14.
the Lord of al our beings, and God of every blessing; who testified that he
was pacified after his fierce wrath, for the breach of a National Oath or
Covenant, by sending a seasonable rain: and who brings up the clouds from
the ends of the earth, and makes the lightnings with the rain; drawing forth
the winds out of his treasures Ps. 135.7 that he may blow up a shower of thy
precious dew of saving Charity, and diffuse the rain of the Gospel of Peace,
which distilling on the flinty hills and Rockey Mountains, the marble hearts
and obdurate souls of the Lords and Commons, and all their adherents, may make
them as fruitful of remorse for, and compassion of the sad condition and
distraction of this languishing yea gasping Kingdom, as they have been
prodigal of its blood and oppression; and that, being mollified with pity,
and melted into commiseration, three kingdoms groans may at last make such an
impression in their minds as may cause them to look seriously upon their
present desperate state, and cordially apply themselves to prevent in this their
time their utter ruin and subversion, both Pathetically presented unto them in
this mournful representation of the King and Kingdoms sad and wretched
condition.

1. How does the Eden of Europe remain solitary without her Adam? she is as a
widow: she that was once in high esteem among foreign Countries, and the
glory of the whole world for the Scepter of Judah in her, how is she force'd
to turn Issachar (though strong, yet an Ass) and tamely couches between two
burdens, Genesis 29.14
Presbitery and Independency: though great of force, yet wanting courage to
resist her enemies.

2. For this, it is true, she weeps continually, and her tears murmr in the
surrows of her cheeks, but it is by stealth, in the night; despairing of
consolation from her pretending savourers, for among such her Lovers, there is
none to comfort her: and scaring to discover her grief to those who formerly
declared themselves her Patriots; for those false friends have dealt
unfaithfully with her, and having compounded with the causers of her woe, are
become her enemies.

3. Her Lion, Genesis 49 8
to whom her Fathers sons should bow down is forct to couch under restraint and
heavy affliction, and she her self brought into great slavery by an heathen
sort of people, who now dwell in her houses: from whose cruel oppressions which
they lay upon her, she can discover no hope of freedom, nor can she yet find
rest in the midst of those troubles, distractions and unnatural wars wherein
they have involved her, her persecutors having taken her in the straits.

4. The ways to the houses of God in her land mourn, for all her solemn
Feasts are despiz'd and voted against; Psa. 42.4, 5.
all the gates of these Zions into which her David led her sons and daughters
with the voice of singing and praise, as a multitude that keeps a Feast, may
now lift up their voice in weeping and howling and lamenting, for they are
become desolate; the mouths of the Oxen that used there to tread out her corn,
are ^led, 1 Cot. 9.9.13.
her Priests are permitted neither to wait at her Altars, not to partake with
her Altars: just cause then have her Ministers to ^igh^ her tender ones to be
discomsited, and she her self to fit in heavynesse.

5. Her enemies flourish having got the better, and those who are her greatest
adversaries Oreb and Zech ( Fairfax and Grun^well) (...) the chief (the one
Captain, the other Li^ustenant Psalm. 83.
who with Zeba and Zalo^na (the Lords and Commons) have cast their heads
together with one consent, and made a League together against her, and now that
Ashur is also joined with them, they dare boldly say, Let us take for our
possession the habitation of all that is called God: White Hall, Westminster,
with all Cathedral and Parochial Churches and Chapels. And this the Lord
permits (she confesses) because he intends to humble her by afflictions, and
chastise her for the multitude of her transgressions, especially her rebellions
against, and want of a due commanded fear of God and her King: Yea because she
has willingly meddled, and readily had to do with the seditious, Pro. 24 21.
or those that were and are given to change, her children are become captives,
slaves and vassels to hers and their enemies.

6 So that now from this daughter of Zion (once flourishing England) all her
beauty is departed* her ^^wfull rulers like Hearts that find no pasture, are as
men pined away with sorrow, and bereft of all strength and courage, all power
and command, are forced to flee before the Nimrods of these days, Genesis 10 9. 2
K 9.20.
who Jehu like pursue them.

7. But what? 1 Cor. 4.8.
may not her Jerusalem triumph and rejoyce^* she lives at case and is full: Nay
even she also may e^spect a day of affliction for her rebellion: when all the
pleasant things that she enjoyed in time past shall be taken from her, then
shall she with grief of soul call to mind and remember the benefits and
commodities she had during here obedience, but lost since she has so
consentingly lost the acknowledgement of her Allegiance to her Royal
Sovereign. Nay, may we not say her misery is in part fallen on her already? look
but upon her people and power, inhabitants and Militia: did not they all in one
day fall into the hand of her enemy, and none did help here her adversaries
advanced toward, looked upon and straightway overcame her, and now mock at her
Sabbaths, all that she held sacred, her Assembly, her Classis and Directory.

8. Yea she is become the derision of other countries, Ier. 18.61.
the Deu. 28.37.
By word of neighbor Nations, and the ^ing of them from after* Ver. 19.8. Mic.
6.16.
all that heretofore hon^red her as the best Ordered most decently civiliz^d,
and purest reformed Catholick-Religion-professing City of the world, now
d^spise her and point at her, because they have s^^n her (...) schisms, yea,
her Hydra-headed bulk of errors and blasphemies.

O then that London would purge her stinking air with whole gales of
heart-breathed sighs, and cleanse her seditious streets with soul-wept tears,
out of a seriously sorrowful sense and acknowledgement that she has grievously
sinned.

9, 10, 11. But alas! Now readers, if guilty, read this if you dare without
remorse and compunction, if guiltles, hear this without amazement and
compassion, sinful London sighs indeed, but the n turns backward. All People
sigh and seek the living Bread, the pure Gospel of Jesus Christ, but find it
not, lyea, they part from their pleasant things for wholesome meat, sound Doctrine
to refresh the soul, but are seduced and deceived, for thy Prophets prophecy
lies and thine adversaries the Sectaries love to have it so: these have
destroyed Gods true Religion, Ier. 5.31.
cast his public Worship and Service out of their assemblies, rejected his
sacred Ordinances, reviled the footsteps of his Anointed, strained and laid
violent hands upon his loyal Servant their royal Sovereign the King, despised
Gods Law, despited his servants the Preachers, violated the law of Nature and
Nations, beat, imprisoned, and robbed their fellow subjects, who have not run
giddily into the same excess of Rebellion with themselves, and to make all
good that they either say or act; they have set up their Banners and spread
their Ensigns in sign of defiance, Psalm. 74.4.
and as evidences to all the World, that they resolve to justify themselves by
the Sword not the Word, by Machiavel not the Gospel, by B^ll^na not the Bible,
and confute the Arguments of all that shall oppose their Sic volo sic jubeo,
stat proratione voluntas, with distress not discourse, with a Prison not a
Pulpit, encouraging one another to cruelty, that not only Gods People might be
destroyed, but also his Religion utterly in all places suppressed, and their
own Babel of confession and Anarchy both in Church and State instead thereof
erected.

Great Britain: See, O Lord, and consider: for I am become vile.
12 What I Has a universal Lethargy overspread the whole Land? Has all the
People quaft their fills of the stupifying Waters of Leth^, has a blackness as
palpable as that of Egypt clouded their understandings and darkened their
judgments? or has a willingness to be blinded, hood-winckt, and so led
namely to their own destruction, seized on all the Inhabitants of England, that
they are generally so insensible of their present Woes and approaching
Miseries? Have ye no regard allye that pass by this way? O! thou who art
justly styled The Defender of the Faith, Do thou not consider how the Faith
of Jesus Christ so prospeously, and with Gods blessing peofessed in this Land,
is assaulted, in danger, and never stood in more need of thy defense than now?
Alas, thou do, but to the grief of thy soul can not succor it other
ways than by thy patient suffering all manner of affronts, incivilities,
inhumanities wherewith the scum of the Land; the dregs of our Nation, and the
offscouring of thy Subjects daily entertain thy person and exercise, thy
graces and virtues; for they have rebelliously usurped thy power, and violently
wrested the Sword out of thy hand, least thou should oppose the one unsheath
the other and make use of both in this so just and lawful a Defense, which
before the Throne of thy King shall make for their greater condemnation, but
thy more glorious justification. Thou would but were not admitted, nay, by
force of Arms hindered and restrained from performing this thy duty.

O ye great Clerks and learned Docto^rs, whose calling it is to tell Judah of
her trangressions and Israel of her sins; do ye not see that certain men are
crept into the Fold, Wolves in Sheeps clothing, turning the grace of our God
into wantonness, speaking lies through hypocrisy, Jude 4. 1 Timothy 4.2 2 Pet.
2.10.
walking after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, and dully, but yet
impudently despising and despiting Governments, and speaking evil of them that
are in authority? Nay, do ye not bear and see how the false Prophets and
Teachers spoken of by the Apostles of old are now (if ever) among us, and have
broacht damnable errors and heresies, 2 Pet. 2 21. Iu^e 9.
even denying the Lord that ha^h bought them, God the only Lord, and the Lord
Jesus Christ: those makers of Sects, mockers foretold of 2 P^^. 3.3. Romans
16.17, 18.
causers of divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ
which ye have learned and taught, who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own bellies; those deceiving deceivers who creep into houses, and with
fair speeches and fawning flatterings beguile the hearts of the unstable
souls; and how that many follow their insolent, wanton, licentious; yea,
damnable ways, by reason whereof the way of truth is evil spoken of? And are
ye silent, mute, and your Trumpets not heard? Though ye have knowledge, and are
established in the Truth, have ye yet need of a Peter to put ye in mind of
these things, and stir you up by retriving in your remembrance the duty
enjoined you by Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 4.2
Preach the Word; be instant in season and out of season; improve, rebuke,
exhort, with all long-suffering. Alas, the last gift they will provide ye shall
daily exercise, but at no time (by their good wills) any of the former: that
headless, heartlesse, tonguelesse Trunck of a Parliament, a generation that
strive with the Priest, Hos. 4.2.
has ordered the stopping of your mouths, or stifling of your breaths: for
the time (foretold by the Apostle) being now come, 2 Timothy 4.3
they will not suffer wholesome Doctrine, but having their ears itching, after
their own lusts get them an heap of Teachers. You are silenced: you can, but
may not.

O then, ye that only can, ye that call your selves the Patriots of the Law,
the loyal Subjects of the King, and the representative Body of the Kingdom,
express it in these two Acts, pity and period their sorrows, their sufferings
toward whom to pregnant a remorse now at last in your breasts, may these sad
showers of Lamentation be distilled into your bosoms. Great Britain, Behold
and see if ever sorrow were like my sorrow which is done unto me, and wherewith
the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath. etc. read Lamen.
verse^. 13, etc.

22. What I careless, heedlesse, remorseles^e
Cannot three Kingdoms groans make on^ impression?
Confound them Lord, retaliate their oppression.

FINIS.

