GODS GRACIOUS THOUGHTS TOWARD GREAT SINNERS.

JER. 29.11. But I know the thoughts I think toward you, says the Lord,
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.

EPHESIANS. 3.19. The love of Christ passes knowledge.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, dwelling in Aldersgate Street. 1647.

NATHANAEL HOMES, TO THE CHURCH IN FELLOWSHIP WITH HIM.
Dear Brethren and Sisters, as my compassions to some bleeding hearts among
you, did put me upon this discourse, in our more private weekly meeting; so
their unexpected importunity, for Copies, have necessitated me to print it, so
as it was, suddenly compiled, and ruggedly delivered, unpolished, and
untrimmed for public view of all abroad. But being willing you should have it,
I would rather deny mine own honor, then you of any spiritual comfort I might
hold forth to you, who am yours in the Lord by many strong obligations.

N. H.
From my study in Mary Staynings. December. 2. 1646.
GODS GRACIOUS THOUGHTS TOWARD GREAT SINNERS.
ISAIAH 55.8, 9. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways
my ways, says the Lord.

For as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your
ways, and my thoughts then your thoughts.


THe former part of this Chapter is a most glorious invitation of poor sinners
to free mercy, verse. 1. to the end of the 7th verse, in which 7th verse the
Lord tells all comers to him, that he has mercy for them, and mercy with
eminency; namely, that He will have mercy on them: And he will abundantly
pardon. Or, as it is nearer to the Hebrew, and is so expressed in the Margin of
your Bibles; He will multiply to pardon, or, Multiply pardons. The freeness,
fullness, and faithfulness of this glorious grace and favor, the Lord most
strongly demonstrates, to confute all doubtings, and chase away all fears that
are in the hearts of drooping sinners, in the verses of the Text. The
Catastrophe and upshot of all is this; That the Lord having removed their
sins, he will remove their judgments, and change their sorrows into joys,
verse. 12, 13. The substance of the verses of the Text in the sense of them, are
the matter of the Demonstration; The coherence or inference of them in the
several FORS, are the form, that form them into arguments, to remove their
doubts and feare^. As if the Lord should say; When I say, I will have mercy,
and abounding, or multiplied pardoning mercy; you ought not to doubt of it, or
fear; FOR my thoughts are not your thoughts, etc. FOR as the heavens are
higher then the earth, so are my thoughts higher then your thoughts. FOR as the
rain comes down from heaven, etc. So that one FOR backs another. And then
says the Lord, Your sins being done away, your judgments shall be removed.
Ver. 12, 13. FOR you shall go out with joy, etc. You shall by the effect of
removing of your sorrows, discern the cause, viz. the pardoning of your
sins.

Doctrine.
Out of all, for the design in hand, I pick and cull this one Doctrine; That
the incomparablenesse of Gods gracious thoughts toward poor sinners, above
and beyond their thoughts, is sufficient to stop the mouth of all objections,
and still the cries of all dejections in all their miseries.

1. Note (for explanation of this rich Doctrine) that our miseries are twofold.
Afflictions; Transgressions. Those the thread, these the needle. For these are
they that prick and sting to the quick. These the sting in the mouth or tail
of afflictions. The sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15. A confluence of all
afflictions of themselves cannot sting so, as the single essence of the sin
when God will set it on the conscience. Paul's concupiscence stings him more,
Romans 7. then his being killed all the day long, Romans ^. Afflictions whip the
body, sin the soul. The spirit of a man (says Solomon) may sustain his
infirmities; But a wounded spirit who can hear? That is, of himself without
Gods grace.

Now secondly observe, that in all these afflictions and sins, Gods thoughts
toward us poor sinners, are such as are incomparable and transcendent, above
and beyond that we can think: 1. Father with simple cogitation; That is, we
cannot think toward others in the like case of misery, as God thinks toward
us in the same case. 2. Or with reflexive comprehension, or apprehension, that
in, to conceive what those thoughts of God are toward us in our misery, just
as he thinks them. Both these seem to be clearly, in the Text. For the first,
I can, says the Lord; show mercy wheresoever there is a sense of misery,
though that misery did as well provoke me by the sin of it, as it did grieve
man with the affliction of it.

For my thoughts are not your thoughts.

For the second. If there be abundance of sins bringing abundance "of
judgments, I can (says the Lord) abundantly pardon; For my thoughts are above
your thoughts. As if the Lord should say of the first, thus; Can you have such
thoughts of mercy on misery as I can? especially where you are provoked? Do
not you usually repel violence with violence? Do you not use to render evil
for evil? Are you not usually for the punitive way? Or if you pass by a few
wrongs, can you pass by abundance? Do you not cry against multiplying of
offenses, Immedicabile vulnus, etc. cut the putrefying limb off? Do you not
after once or twice warning, fall to harming? Do not your Magistrates burn in
the hand, then hang up the neck? And you admonish, then punish. But I can
think thoughts of mercy, contrary to all these, as has been showed in the
Text.

For the second.

You (as if the Lord should say) can hardly think that I can thus think, but
I can. For my thoughts are above yours; You are men, I a God; you corrupt, I
pure, I prove it thus: Do you see the disproportion of creatures, of the
Heavens above the earth? Much more between an infinite Creator and the creature.
Can you take the just altitude of the Heavens above the Earth? Then note how
high my thoughts are above yours. Therefore these my thoughts I propound and
press to hush and stop the mouth of all objections, and still your sorrowing,
fearing, complaining-dejections.

If you object any crooked unworthy thing to disparage my thoughts, and so to
prejudice your selves in laying hold on my thoughts, let the answer be, my
thoughts not as yours. Mine in substance are all good, right, etc. As my words
are, Psalm. 19. so are my thoughts. No evil, no iniquity, no cruelty in my
thoughts. If you think any, you bring it with you, you can find none in me:
you go about to pervert the straight ways and thoughts of the Lord, Act.
13.10. But the Lords thoughts are like himself; The Lords thoughts and ways
are equal, they are yours that are unequal, Ezekiel. 18.25. As if the Lord
should say, take it for a general rule, What ever your thoughts are, if they
be not most just, good, holy, etc. they are not mine. But you may object, you
think your thoughts are so; Therefore take this for another general rule; That
whatsoever thoughts do not tend to your salvation, tend to bring you toward
me, according to the design of this Text, and word of mine, those thoughts
are not my thoughts, Ezekiel. 18. Ezekiel. 33. If you object, secondly, that ye
cannot imagine how I can have such thoughts of mercy to such sinners as you
are; The answer is, As the Heavens are distant and different from the Earth, so
are my thoughts above yours. The Heavens are so above the Earth, that the Earth
with all its Cedars, mists, clouds, fiery meteors, cannot reach it; so nor can
your thoughts in a rational way reach mine. And as the Heavens are greater, so
my thoughts, Ephesians. 3.17. And as the Heavens are bigger then the Earth, so my
thoughts are like my self, infinite. And as the Heavens are more glorious then
the Earth; so are my thoughts then yours: And as the Heavens give light, so do
my thoughts to yours. And as the Heavens shine on the bad as well as good, Mat.
5.45. so do my thoughts on sinners as well as on Saints. If you object,
thirdly, that though these are effectual expressions in themselves, able to
do much, yet they do not take, affect your souls. The answer is, that as the
operations of the Heavens, in drawing up mists, and pouring them down in
rain, do the work, the rain returns not in vain; so shall my word be,
that expresses my thoughts; If the heavens do not shine, rain, roll, raise
the Sun, etc. in vain, but cause spring, harvest, etc. then sure my thoughts
shining and dropping in my words, shall not be in vain. If as the earth waits
on the heavens; so you wait, seed-time, springtime, harvest-time will come.
My thoughts shall take hold of your thoughts, and overcome them, and transform
them into mine: your thoughts shall trust in my thoughts of truth: your
thoughts shall hope in my thoughts of mercy; your thoughts shall rejoice in my
thoughts of love; your thoughts shall rest quietly in my thoughts of peace;
that all your sins are pardoned, and so your judgments shall be done away, at
least as judgments.

Useful is this,

1. To put us upon the consideration of Gods thoughts, so far as we are able
by enlightened reason: 1. How different in kind our thoughts are from Gods
thoughts. 2. How distant and short in degree our thoughts are below Gods
thoughts, when we set about to apprehend them. Both these are in the Text, and
Doctrine, as we said; compare Jerem. 29.11.

1. For the difference in kind.

1. Our thoughts cannot be first toward God, in the business of our
salvation, our thoughts cannot be the first-mover. For naturally, our thoughts
and imaginations are only evil continually, Genesis 6.5. We are borne wild
Asses Colis, Job 11.12. We go astray as soon as we are borne: but Gods
thoughts are first in our salvation; He (says the Psalmist) understands our
thoughts afar off, or long before. Therefore his thoughts are precedent to
ours. He here in the 6, and 7th verses before the Text, makes the first motion
about our salvation; and as it is in 1 Job. 4.19. We love him, because he loved
us first; and therefore his thoughts first move ours. His love first sounds
forth; then our love is as the Echo. He first allureth, then we are drawn. A
mighty Comfort; that his thoughts being first toward us; their graciousnesse
must needs be free. Though we cannot glory in our thoughts, as preventing, or
persuasive of Gods thoughts, yet we may glory in this greater thing, that Gods
thoughts anticipate, prevent, and persuade our thoughts. Acti agimus, we in
every thought and deed act not, but as we are acted by God. Gods thoughts are
the Original, ours but the Copy.

2. Our thoughts are not kind thoughts, sweet thoughts to others; we are
selfe-lovers: the original sin of the world. See Adam. Do we think thoughts
of love to our enemies? Especially unsought unto? Much less would we prompt
them to seek unto us, that we might show them kindness. Would their misery be
our pity? Would it not be our joy rather? So uncharitable is nature, that we
rejoice in iniquity. But God has all the contrary thoughts to these.

3. Our thoughts are limited thoughts, we cannot pity or pardon (if we do
either) much or many. We say, how often, Mat. 18.21. We are ready to study an
end, before we begin. But Gods thoughts of mercy, are abounding thoughts, and
multiplying thoughts; thoughts of abounding mercy, and multiplying mercies and
pardons. He shows mercy to thousands of generations, Exodus 20. and therefore to
thousands of sins of one soul. He heales backslidings, Hos. 14. Observe the
indefinite expression. And the Psalmist speaks of a multitude of mercies, Psalm.
5.7. Psalm. 100.7. Isaiah speaks of multitudes of loving kindnesses, Isa. 63.7.
And Jeremy says, There is no failing of his mercy, so we are not confirmed.
How much and how many evils did he pardon in Manasseh, Magdalen, Saul? How
many backslidings in Peter, and much more in Solomon? I may say to a true
believer, as he does not make an end of sinning, so God cannot make an end of
pardoning. But then as his pardoning takes off our fear of sin; so it takes
off our love of sin. His good will takes off our ill wills, Romans 7.

4. Our thoughts at best have much reluctation against good, and ordinarily
much evil in them, Romans 7. But Gods thoughts are all good, altogether good,
purely and perfectly good, and concerning our good, to cure us of our evil,
and to fill us with good, Jer. 29.11. So it is said, Psalm. 119. God is good,
and does good.

5. Our thoughts, when not vile, are vain, Jer. 4.14. But Gods thoughts are
great and maine thoughts, touching the great things of our salvation.

6. Our thoughts are of contentions with men, and of transgression against God,
Isa. 55.7. But Gods are of peace and reconciliation. So argued in Text, and
Jer. 29.11. He is the God of all peace, and suitable are his thoughts.

7. Our thoughts are craving begging thoughts, we are all upon the getting
hand, of man by entreating, of God by praying; we are more in prayer then in
praise. But Gods thoughts are giving thoughts, bountiful thoughts, thoughts of
giving before our asking, and more then many times we dare ask; so before and
in the Text. And Jer. 29.11. when they are despairing, he would be giving. I am
found of them that sought me not, Isai. 65.1. God gave more to Paul then he
thought on, Acts 9. and compare 1 Timothy 1. Yea Solomon had more then he asked.
So the promise is, Seek first the kingdom of God. We ask often to believe, he
gives more, Phil. 1.29. We ask often to overcome such or such a thing, such a
sin; but in that God gives us to overcome many other sins. Thus is it most
true, that it is a more blessed thing to give then to receive. God blessed for
evermore gives. And we could not be ever asking, but that God is never weary of
giving. Many more particulars might be given of the different kinds of our
thoughts from Gods, but these are enough to enlarge our meditation.

8. When we turn about our thoughts to understand the incomparable thoughts of
God toward us, our thoughts are at a distance, fall infinitely short of
comprehending them as we should. Therefore God says in the Text, My thoughts
are above your thoughts. And Jerem. 29.11. I know my own thoughts, though you
do not as you ought, I do, that they are thoughts of peace.

As Gods thoughts are in regard of matter, namely, mercy, goodness,
pardonings, so in measure.

1. Infinite. Psalm. 92.5. O Lord, how great are thy works, thy thoughts are
very deep. Answerable to 1 Cor. 2.10. (...), The deep things of God; whereby
to shelter us from the depths of Satan, Revel. 2.24. that is, sin, sinful
temptations, stratagems, etc. Gods understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. The
Apostle makes an heavenly exclamation, Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments,
discernings or determinations, and his ways past finding out! God has
thoughts of mercy for millions of sinners, therefore sure enough for all the
sins of one sinner.

2. Continual; continued without interruption, so that as they have no
beginning, nor ending, so no breakings off in the middle, Ephesians. 1. Psalm. 89.

3. Certain, firm, established; so before the Text; The sure mercies of
David; That is, promised to David; that is made over to us in Christ, the son
of David. That as sure as Christ is in our nature, so we are one with him by
faith. Christ is the great pledge, or witness, in verse 4th before the Text,
of Gods merciful thoughts toward us poor sinners. So that if we be unlovely
in our selves, yet we are acceptable and well-pleasing to God in Christ, Mat.
3. last, Ephesians. 1.3.

4. Immutable, both in kind and degree. They cannot be otherwise, or less
then ever they have been, 2 Timothy 2.19. And James says, With him is no shadow
of change. Yea God in Christ the same for ever, Heb. 13.

5. Intuitive. God thinks all his thoughts at once. As a man's eye sees all it
sees at that look, in one twinkling of an eye, so God sees all absolutely that
ever were, are, or shall be at once. He needs not any rational intellectual
discourse to go from one thing to another in his thoughts, but he can and does
comprehend all at once.

Now upon these and the like properties of Gods thoughts, we fall very short
of and below a due apprehension of Gods thoughts; and fall to doubting, because
in opposition,

1. To the infiniteness of God thoughts, our thoughts are finite; (...) eye,
nor the Son it self can behold all the world in its complete roundnesse;
much less can our finite thoughts reach Gods infinite thoughts.

2. To the continuitie of Gods thoughts, ours are interrupted, broken off
oft-times in the middle. Many by-thoughts intervene between our most serious
thoughts, whiles they are rising up to any considerable height of apprehension
of Gods thoughts, or of any thing that is good; and so they disturb and
dissipate our conceits of mind.

3. To the certainty of his thoughts, our thoughts are most uncertain thoughts.
Sometimes they are rather conjectures then resolves, rather opinions then
judgments, rather disputings then determinations. And so (as the weakness of
our eye to behold the fixed stars at such a distance, makes us think they
twinckle, when as it is the quavering of our weak eye) our uncertainty in
thinking makes us think Gods thoughts are uncertain, when as it is the
uncertaintie and variableness of our thoughts.

4. To the immutabilitie of Gods thoughts, stands in opposition the mutabilitie
of our thoughts. Sometimes they are on God, sometimes off, and on the creature.
And when on God, sometimes stronger, sometimes weaker, sometimes almost
nothing. Sometimes they catch one thing, and let that go, and then catch
another, and so lose the series, method, and dependence of things, to find out
the excellency of Gods thoughts.

5. To the intuitivenesse of Gods thoughts, stands opposite the discursivenesse
of our thoughts. For being we are feign to know by discourse from one thing to
another, in a rational way, as from the effect to the cause, etc. And our
reason is imperfect, and our knowledge is but in part; we must needs oft-times
fall very low in apprehending ordinary things, much more in diving into
extraordinary things. We cannot always by the utmost compass of reason,
reach to the forms of some natural things; how then can our discurive, reach
Gods intuitive thoughts?

Now therefore says the Lord in the Text, when ye hear me speak of such
high things as are here mentioned; As, I will abundantly pardon, etc. you
wonder at them, but do not notwithstanding doubt of them, or dispute against
them; For my thoughts are known to me, ( Jer. 29.11.) they are not so mean
and ^ow as yours, but far above, (as in this 55. of Isaiah) and therefore
admire, but not despair. They are above your thoughts or high as the Heavens
are above the Earth. But I can tell the altitude of mine own thoughts, I think
of mercy, and of multiplying pardons.

These two places, the Text, and Jer. 29.11. hold forth these particulars.

1. (As if the Lord should say) nor you nor any man else, no nor Angels (which
are enquirers into the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.12.) can tell my thoughts so well as I
my self. Flesh and blood could not reveal to Peter the things of Christ, Mat.
16.17. And in 1 Cor. 2. The natural man receives not the things of God,
because spiritually discerned. No nor can your spiritual minds comprehend the
full of things, for ye know in part, 1 Cor. 13. As the Nations (Mich. 4.12.)
know not my thoughts, nor understand my counsel concerning you, so you may
labor to know them, but still they will pass your knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. The
loving thoughts of my heart are rather felt, then understood, Romans 5. I shed my
love into your hearts.

2. That I, even I my self do know all mine own thoughts perfectly, how high
soever they be, I comprehend them all. They are all distinctly and fairly
written in my heart, and I can read and compute, and scan every one of them to
a tittle, and settle them in an unalterable way, by an unchangeable decree.

3. That I acknowledge my thoughts, to be high thoughts of love, mercy, etc. so
as I cannot keep them to my self, but do utter them, and in order of times,
and of your necessities do explain them to you, though you cannot reach to the
utmost height of them. I make them legible to your eyes in my book; and I make
them frequently to sound in your ears in the ministry of my Word; and I give
you a representation of them in the Sacraments, to many of your senses; But
though you cannot comprehend them fully as they are in their infiniteness
every way; yet by that you apprehend, ye may admire the rest, as perfectly
infinite, and incomprehensible. As the Heavens and Earth will be seen of us
but in the Hemisphere, yet you conclude they are round.

4. That though your thoughts have many objections against my thoughts, yet I
know my thoughts will answer all the objections of your thoughts. Dispute and
try.

1. It may be you poor sinners will say, you have had such deep apprehensions
of your sins, and such long inward conflicts about them, that you say in your
hearts, and think you shall nesee good day more.

But my thoughts answer you out of these Texts, that my thoughts are thoughts
of mercy, of multiplying pardons, and that above your comprehension. Thoughts
of peace, I think peace toward you, as I am the God of peace. And I have many
thoughts about it, and great thoughts like my self. For they are my thoughts.
And though little man does assay to imagine great things, yet your thoughts are
not like my thoughts.

2. It may be, you will object again, That your thoughts think my thoughts
are not such thoughts of mercy, etc; Because my hand has been upon you to
afflict you; and perhaps the affliction, or its smart is not yet off from you;
and therefore that I still intend to have severe thoughts toward you. But my
thoughts are as in these Texts, and the Contexts that lead to and follow them,
that is; That whereas you can be always angry, and irreconcileably angry with
men; flesh and blood is prone to be unmercifull and implacable; my thoughts are
not such; for my thoughts cannot be like yours, they must be better, and above
yours, or they cannot be my thoughts; I tell you plainly in these Texts, Isai.
55. Let him that has nothing come and buy, ver. 1. That there is a time when I
will be found, ver. 6. And the present time when I offer grace and favor, is
the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2. Even as he did hear Christ Jesus, that was made
sin for us; so he hears sinners. And as there is a time when I spoke to thee
sinner, to cause thee to leave sin; so then do I intend to lay aside my wrath,
ver. 7. before the Text. So that my thoughts of anger are but for a time, but
my thoughts of mercy are everlasting, Psalm. 30.5. Psalm. 89.28. etc. He has
regard to his Oath there. He has not sworn to be angry with sinners for ever,
but has sworn to have mercy. And accordingly he does affirm, Isai. 54.7. the
next Chapter before the Text. You the sons of men cannot tell when to lay
aside your thoughts of anger, till they degenerate into malice; but I can see
my time. Yea though I afflict my people so yours, yet I can have thoughts of
peace to them at last, Jer. 29.11. Yea all that while resolve on them. Yea
whiles I am afflicting, I have thoughts of love, Heb. 12. And therefore says
the Lord, My son be not weary of the Lords chastisement, Pro. 3.11, 12. But
do as Isai. 8.17.

3. It may be you poor sinners will object, that your thoughts are not able to
bear the lying upon you of your sorrows of sins and afflictions. Therefore
you would have them removed. Therefore also my thoughts answer you thus: I
have, as in this Text, all manner and measure of mercies, to take away the
perplexity of your spirits. And besides I have entailed on my pardoning mercy,
affliction removing mercy. So ver. 12. after the Text.

4. It may be, your thoughts will object; But our perplexities and miseries
have been so many and long, that we are exceeding thirsty, our appetites are
enlarged, we think we can have never enough of God, and his presence, and
comfort. My thoughts expressed in the Text, and elsewhere, answer this
sufficiently, that I have abundance of mercy for you, multiplied mercy; Yea so
much as your thoughts cannot reach unto. And it shall satiate you, as the rain
does the earth; and not only you shall joy, but the world shall seem before
you to sing, and to be full of joy; so from the Text to verse. 13.

5. But yet may be your thoughts object, that some of you have waited a long
while for a good hour, and have not yet attained it. The Lords thoughts answer
this too. His thoughts are not as our thoughts, that is, they shall not stay
too long as we think, ere they send comfort. But as the Heavens are above the
Earth, yet in due time water it. So etc. And Jer. 29.11. you shall have your
expectation. Romans 5. Hope is not ashamed at last, yea not ashamed whiles it
waits, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, Hab. 2 3, 4.

Thus far of the first use, of putting us upon the consideration of Gods
incomparable thoughts, to see how far they prevent all objections.

2. Is to put us upon the exercise of our faith, about the unparalleld thoughts
of God; That where our best thoughts fall short, there the faith that Christ
has given us may ascend. And indeed if Gods thoughts are far above our
thoughts, then it is the proper work of faith to take the transcendency of
them into the view of it: As thus.

1. To believe the original and inuate conception of these thoughts of grace
and favor to poor sinners. They spring merely from the sweet, good, and
unspeakable excellency of Gods nature: described Exodus 34. Compare Isai. 43.25.
Psalm. 119. Thou art good, and thou do good. Therefore it supposes, he is
good, and thinks good. So notably Ephesians. 1.5. His thoughts do arise from his
(...), his most gracious disposition. As out of the evil nature of man,
proceeds all evil thoughts, Adulteries, murders, thefts, etc. So contrary.
This well applied by faith answers the objection of our unworthiness. For as
there was no good in us when God first thought of us to move him to think on
us; for either he looked on us as nothing, or as a most sinful something; to
no unworthiness, either of our nothingnesse, or sinfulness, could hinder him
from his gracious thoughts toward us. As it is said, He will have mercy on
whom he will have mercy; so he will think what be will think of grace and
favor to poor sinners, nothing can help, nothing shall hinder him. As God
cannot be otherwise in his nature then he is, so he cannot be otherwise in his
gracious thoughts, then what he will think.

Object. But God has a pure nature, and a just nature, etc. And therefore from
thence by the same proportion must arise thoughts of hating impure sin, and
of punishing unrighteous sin; with which by nature we abound.

Answ. 1. This does not contradict Gods thoughts of grace and favor to
grievous sinners, because God was pure and just, when from all eternity,
foreseeing all things, he had those thoughts of grace and favor.

2. God is pleased to propose to us his Justice, conditionally, upon our
obstinacy against mercy. So all along the Scripture. But holds forth his offer
of mercy absolutely, without any condition of ours, Isai. 55.1. Isai. 43.25.
Revel. 22.17. If at any time there be any sound of a condition, it is one of
his own making, and in-making in us, subordinate, not opposite to free grace,
Ephesians. 2.8. And he that thinks to save, thinks to give faith.

3. God is pleased to signify to us, that he loves to have his mercy rejoice
over his justice, Jam. 2.13. Grace glories. It is the glory of Gods mercy,
that it preventeth judgment.

4. In that God hates sin, and has justice to punish it, he has provided a
Savior to remove the guilt and filth of sin, 1 Cor. 1. last save one. and 2
Cor. 5. last. He made Christ (taking our nature upon him, and sanctifying it,
and making atonement in it) to be sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God. On him he laid the iniquities of us all, Isai. 53. And
on us he laid the righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5. last. The righteousness of
God, therefore good enough, to be acceptable to himself, and great enough,
being infinite, to appease him for the finite unrighteousness of man.

5. And lastly, God does love to dignifie the second Adam above the first, yea
to make Christ the plaster more sovereign then Adam the soar can be
malignant, Romans 5. 1 Cor. 15. It Is the business of those two Chapters. The
upshot of all is set down in golden Letters, Romans 5. Two last verses; Where
sin abounded, grace did much more abound. That as sin has reigned unto
death, so might grace REIGN (mark the phrase) through righteousness unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord. By which it appears, that as
heretofore sin did reign over us, so now Gods gracious favor through Christ's
righteousness should reign over our sins. And that the benefit might be
imparted to poor sinners abounding with sin, God would make his grace of
favor much more to abound. Of which see more in that glorious Scripture, 1 Timothy 1.14.

2. Exercise faith upon the birth of these thoughts of mercy; Namely, that as
they are conceived from Gods most excellent sweet nature; so they are brought
to the birth of a gracious predestination, appointment, purpose, or choosing.
Romans 8.29. Whom he did foreknow (out of those thoughts of mercy that were
conceived in his sweet nature) he did predestinate and appoint. What to do, or
be? To be made conformable to his Son Christ Jesus. They should be according
to their capacity, in no worse condition then his Son Jesus Christ. Ephesians.
1.3, 4, 5. Has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, or
things, in Christ. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation
of the world, having predestined us unto the Adoption of children by Jesus
Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. See here the
good will of God is the rise of predestination; and predestination is the rise
of choosing: of purpose, see presently. Those purposes of God are free,
unconstrained, unnecessitated, they arise out of his own free nature and good
will, Ephesians. 1.11. In whom (that is in Christ) we have obtained an
inheritance, being predetion did according to the purpose of him that works
all things according to the Counsel of his own will. Observe, he says not,
according to the Counsel of his understanding. As if he would know, find, and
consider something in us. But according to the Counsel of his own will. His
good will and sweet inclination to poor sinners, is that which puts forth
these thoughts of grace, and favor. So that as in Isai. 43.25. He assures us
that as he can love himself; so he can blot out sins; So here he does
warrant us, that as he cannot be of another nature, but (as the Angel sang)
Good will to men; he is of a sweet and merciful disposition; so he purposes
salvation to poor sinners.

2. These purposes of favor are unmovable, and unchangeable, 2 Timothy 2.19.
Nevertheless (though false-hearted Hymeneus and Philetus fall off) the
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are
his. So that against all fears of change, this becomes an assurance; that whom
he loves, he loves to the end, Joh. 13.1. With him (says James) is no shadow
of changeing. And this second particular, (the birth of Gods gracious thoughts,
with the properties) answers many objections that might arise. For God is not
unresolved to save them whom he loves in his everlasting thoughts; as a man is
unresolved often times whether to have her whom he loves. God is unmovable from
his purposes of mercy by any thing that is in us or from us.

Object. But in Gods purpose and predestination lies also his reprobation: and
that breeds doubts and fears in us.

Answ. 1. It is true, that when God electeth some, consequently he passes by
others. But this preterition, passing by, or non-election, does only leave men
to shift for themselves; it does not pass any condemnation upon them that are
omitted. For it were unjust with God, to our understanding, to purpose to
condemn his creature, without an eye, and relation to some wrong the creature
should do him. So that it is some other thought beyond that of passing by,
that reprobates, which we call predamnation, or fore-condemning. Which is,
that God foreseeing any man to sin obstinately and perpetually against the
means of grace offered to him, on him God puts forth a purpose of condemning
him. God does elect freely, because we cannot do the least imperfect good, as
all is imperfect, but from the gift and power of Gods goodness. But
reprobation is for the desert of sin, because we can (as Adam did) most
freely and fully sin of our selves. A Magistrate rewards some subjects
freely, though they have done some good. For they had their life, livelihood,
education, etc. under their good government to do that good. And the good it
self is a sufficient allurement; virtue being lovely enough in it self; and a
sufficient reward of it self, every virtue yielding at least a certain Inward
quietation of mind (as the Heathen Philosopher confesses) as also an outward
honor among Civil honest men; and therefore Honor dicitur ab honestate.
Honor has its derivation, of name, and thing, from honesty. But the
Magistrate cannot with any justice condemn or punish any Subject, nor have a
purpose so to do, but as he has an eye upon, and evidence of that man's
transgressing. By the same proportion, with infinite more exactness, God does
purpose, and elect to salvation freely, but cannot purpose to reprobate any to
condemnation, but upon sure evidence that such will sin impenitently, against
the means of grace, 2 Chronicles. 36.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Pro. 29.1. But you
will say, that Gods passing by those that are not elected, does put a
necessity that they cannot be saved. We answer, it puts a necessity in God of
infallibility, that he cannot be deceived; but not a necessity of constraint
on men to force them to sin. As the Angels full of glory, did most
voluntarily sin in Heaven, so did Adam full of goodness, most freely sin in
Paradise; and so do we now in the world. God does not reprobate, because ^ee
may be sure to sin; but because he sees we are sure to sin, therefore he
does reprobate with predamnation. And therefore notwithstanding his eternal
thoughts of predamnation, he allows every man sufficient outward means and
inward light to understand those means before he does actually damn them in
hell. So in the said 2 Chronicles. 36. Pro. 29.

Our second answer is this; That predestination is a long golden chain,
impregnable, inseparable, that not the least linck can be broken off. So Romans
8.29, 30. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6. to the end of 12. per. and 2 Timothy 2.19. So that
if we see but the least and last linck fastened to our hearts, as to sanctify
us, or to make us unfeignedly call in his Name, or sincerely desire and
endeavor to depart from iniquity; you may be sure that the other end of the
chain is fastened to God, heart, by eternal election.

Third answer, Consider in those places of Romans 8. Ephesians. 1. Gods de^^ee
relates first in order to Christ, and as it were passes through him; so that
as we look on Christ, and behave out selves toward Christ, to receive him, or
refuse him; so we may conclude of our predestination. Thus of the birth of
Gods thoughts.

3. The life and actings of those thoughts, how they move, how they form
themselves, and put forth themselves toward us, and the manifestation of them
to us.

1. They are thoughts that delightfully reflect on themselves; God takes a
great deal of pleasure in his own gracious thoughts to poor sinners. Deuteronomy.
30.9. God is said there to delight to do us good. And Micah 7.18. Who is a God
like thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by transgression? he keeps
not anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. Though mercy seems most to
concern us, yet God is joyed in his own thoughts of mercy. We may be sad at
something in the best thoughts we think, for some mixture of sin or vanity in
them: but Gods thoughts are so excellent like himself, that he rejoices in
them as in himself.

2. These thoughts delight in minding the good of poor sinners, and so
consequently take delight that poor sinners should be the better for them. So
in the said two places of Deuteronomy. 30.9. Micah 7.18. The precious stones, with the
names of the Tribes in them on Aarons breast, signify how Christ carries
sinners in the thoughts, and affections of his heart.

3. They are compassionate-relenting thoughts (if I may so say) over a poor
sinner that God has wounded in the heart for sin, and is now complaining of
his sin. Jer. 31.18. I have surely heard (says the Lord) Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus: [Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised (that is, I felt
it) Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. Surely
after that I was turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh; I was ashamed, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach
of my youth.] Thus Ephraim: Now hear the Lords compassionate relentings over
these broken, repenting, praying hearts, ver. 20. [ Is Ephraim (says the Lord)
my dear son? Is he a pleasant child? For since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still. Therefore my bowels are troubled for him. I will
surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.] O admirable soul comforting
place! God first puts these repenting thoughts into a poor sinner, and then
how does his heart melt with compassionating thoughts of mercy, resolving to
show kindness unto him?

4. They are patient opportunity waiting thoughts, to do a poor distressed
soul good. Isai. 30.18. And therefore will the Lord wait that he may be
gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted to have mercy on you. (So
in the Hebrew) For the Lord is a God of judgment or equity, and uprightness,
blessed are all they that wait for him. See, the Lord sets himself forth as
some good man, that is full of thoughts to do some worthy work, to show some
notable kindness, who stands observing, and meditating, when and how he may
take the best opportunity to do it. He sets himself like some General, in
some high eminent place, to view when he may step in to rescue and relieve
those that are in danger and distress. By which is held forth to us, that God
is thinking kind thoughts to us when he is not acting. And that he will not
defer a minute to show us mercy, when his time is come.

5. Tender caring thoughts, for and to the meek and broken heart. Isai. 66.2.
But to this man will I look, (says the Lord) even to him that is of a poor
and a contrite heart, and trembles at my Word. God will not only look on such
a one to have thoughts of pity; but he will look to him, have a care to bind
up his wounds. The poor that is despised of the world, God will look to, and
shall be blessed in his thoughts, Mat. 5. The contrite he will heal, Luke
4.18. Those that mourn for want of a sacrifice (as they think) they bring a
thing more acceptable then a sacrifice unto God, Psalm. 51. They that are
afraid because of the Word, they have here assurance that they are high in
Gods thoughts.

6. To prevent any objection, that sin might hinder good things from us, he
tells us that his thoughts are sinne-surpassing thoughts; super-abounding above
all sins. And indeed this seems sometimes in some to super-abound the Text,
that says, My thoughts are above your thoughts. For many times some poor
sinners cannot get their thoughts above their sins, but their sins do
master their thoughts; so that they cannot think but that their sins
surmount all that they can think. But now in this particular is showed that
Gods thoughts super-abound all our sins, and unworthiness, Romans 5.20. Where
sin did abound, grace did much more abound. And 1 T^^. 1.14. And the grace of
our Lord was ^ing abundant; or as it is in the Greek, did super-abound.

7. And lastly, to number no more particulars; The thoughts of God are all
(...) thoughts for them that love him. Romans 8.28. And (...) know that all
things work together for good to them that love him. How does the Apostle
prove this? This he proves from Gods thoughts, verse. 29. etc. Whom he foreknew,
th^^ (...) predestined to be confirmed to the image of his Son. Gods plot
is no other then this, That (...) poor sinner that loves him, shall fare no
worse (according to his measure) then his Son Christ Jesus. We are apt to
think we shall be made thus and thus miserable; but Christ is designed in Gods
thoughts to be the platform of our condition. We are apt to think, that the
Devil, sin, world, and our own hearts conspire our ruin. But Gods though^^
are that all, even all shall work together, shall cooperate, and combine
together, to work for our good. Whatsoever the evils of hell, and heart, and
world may intend, yet Gods thoughts have plotted to bend all to this, and to
further this method and event; That whom God did foreknow, them he
predestined, whom he predestined, them he called, whom he called, them he
justified, whom he justifies, than be glorifies. Nothing must intervene,
invert, or subvert this order.

Third use is to perform our duty to this mercy.

1. To forsake our own thoughts, ver. 7. before the Text. That is, not to
believe our own thoughts, opposing in the least Gods thoughts.

2. To be sure to think high enough, large enough of Gods thoughts of favor.
If thou can tell, or can not tell what thy sins are; be sure to think
that thy sins are but finite, Gods thoughts of mercy infinite. So in the Text.

3. To draw near to, to invocate and seek to the God of mercy, in the time of
his offer of mercy, verse. 6. Compare 2 Cor. 6.2.

4. To wait for the dispensations and manifestations of the acts of Gods
thought of mercy, so as the earth (...) on the heavens for rain, verse. 10.

5. To look to God to make the expressions of the thoughts (...) take your
hearts, and make impressions upon them; as God (...) makes the rain (...) to
the earth. In this (...) 10. verse.

6. And lastly, to take heed the mean while of (...) against and abusing mercy,
verse. 7.

GODS GRACIOUS EXPRESSIONS, Engaging himself to them that accept of his GRACE.
2 COR. 1.3, 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all Comfort; who comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.


THese words were spoken to them that not long before had been bad enough; 1
Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
Know YE not (says the Apostle to these) that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor reviles, nor
extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God. AND SVCH WERE SOME OF YOU. But
since they were washed. They are SUCH; (...) (says the Apostle) ^ee are
WASHED. They were such as had accepted of Gods gracious favor offered in Christ
(though many of them very weakly, 1 Cor. 3.) and so now the Apostle speaks to
them as to Saints, and members of the Church at Corinth, ver. 1. And the
Apostle includes himself, as ver. 3. Peace from God OUR Father. And in the
Text, OUR Lord Jesus Christ. The God of all comfort, who comfort US* to the
end to advance the converted Corinthians up into the same predicament and
degree with him and Timothy. Though Paul and Timothy be the primipi^es, the
Captains and chief sharers in that of the Text, and laid as a pattern before the
Corinthians. So that the Apostle means by US in the Text, at least such as had
received grace and favor, v. 2. were true ^ints, ver. 1. And suitable he cuts
out such large portions, as were (...) for Kings children, viz. peace, flowing
from grace. And does not only bequeath great things to them there: But here in
the Text, shows them a large firm deed of gift, of what God through Christ ^^d
bestowed upon them. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord ^^sus Christ,
etc. Who comfort us, etc. as it is in the Text.

Doct.
God is here engaged to his people by many engagements, to be unto them all
comfort.

Here are two generals to be explained.

1. The comfort that God is to his. 2. The engagements upon God, to be this
comfort.
Two things must be explained to open the first.

1. That comfort is of God. 2. What that comfort is, from God.
1. That comfort is from God. He is said in the Text to be the ^d of Comfort.
As Satan is said to be the God of this world; And ^^he Prince of the power of
the air, and the Prince of darkness; And is called (...), THE Accuser; (...),
THE Temptor; (...), THE Wicked One; As being the cause at least in part of all
mischief and misery; So in a way of contrariety and remedy, God is said ^ere
to be The God of comfort. Again as the world is said by John to be a world of
wickedness; and by Solomon's to be vanity and vexation of spirit; And by the
Saints a wilderness, (Cant. 3.6.) in which is nothing but want, and
desolatenesse, and disconsolatenesse; so in contrariety and for remedy against
all this, God is said here, to be the God of comfort. Again as death is said
to be ( Job 18.14.) The King of Terrors, which is that which often casts a
^^ddain shadow, a thick darkness upon all the glory of meer-mens worldly
enjoyments: so in contrariety, and for remedy of all, it is said here, God is
the God of comfort. On the other side, As a King is called by great titles, is
invested with great power, clothed with great honor, compassed with great
wealth, and all manner of prosperity, in importing how able he is to make his
Queen, Children, Allies, favorites, etc. outwardly happy; So in opposition
to, and transcendencie above all, God is here said to be the God of comfort,
who (elsewhere) is called the King of Kings. And because Dan. 2.37. Hos. 10, 8.
some earthly kings have proudly taken or received that title of King of kings:
therefore God in Christ is said to be the King of kings, and Lord of lords, the
only Potentate. Importing, that what ever comforts Kings and Princes may seem
to have, or hold forth to men, they had them from this King of kings, who has
infinite more to bestow, then all the kings of the earth put together; and to
give them more effectually and blessedly. For God is not only the Administerer
and Dispencer of comfort, but the Author and maker of comfort. He creates
peace, He creates joy. Yea less the matter of our comfort. Yea so, that a
glympse of his face, one beam of his Countenance is for the time, heaven upon
earth; even as his presence is the form of the glory of heaven.

Secondly, To tell you what comfort is of God, two things must be explained.

1. The Quantity. 2. The Quality of that comfort that is from God.

1. The Quantity of this comfort. 1. In number, the comforts from God are
plural, many. It is not said only in the Text, mercy in the abstract (whereas
Exodus 34. it is in the concrete God is merciful) but mercy is in the plural,
and not in the singular. So also Romans 12.1. God knowing we have many miseries,
he counterpoiseth, ballanceth all with this, that he has many mercies. As Isa.
55. He speaks of multiplying pardons, because of our many sinning; and of
loving kindnesses often in the Psalms, because of our many wants; so here of
mercies, because of our many miseries, many exigencies to need pity.

2. In kind, great in the quantity of comfort from God. It is said here, God is
the God of all comfort; therefore of all kinds of comfort that can truly be
said to be comfort. If there be any comfort in husband, wife, friend, c^ild, it
is because there is the image or impresse of God there. If there be any comfort
in an ordinance, it is because God comes in. If any comfort in creatures, it is
as it is looked upon as coming from God, and leading us to God. That as we
observe God to serve our turns in them, we likewise by them serve him As the
Sun quickening and warming the Plants, it makes them shoot up toward it self.
As there is more comfort in a friend oft-times then in his gift, and we delight
more in serving our friend with a comodity, then in keeping of it: so there is
more joy in God, and in serving him, then in all we receive, or do, or can
keep. And in a word, as the Sun is the Original of all light; so God that Sun,
Psalm. 84. verse. ult. is the original of all comfort.

3. In degrees great is the quantity of comfort that is from God. (...) he be,
as it is in the Text, The God of all comfort, then of all degrees of any
comforts whatsoever, that are or may be communicated from him to his people.
And for instance, we have a glorious Gradual of Gods comforting in the Text.

The first and lowest degree that the comfort that is from God is efficacious
and effectual comfort. Though we are in tribulation, yet (says the Apostle)
God comfort us in all. Tribulation is a soarer degree of affliction,
signifying threshing, yet God comforts us in this, yea in the all of this. All
the threshing does but beat the wheat out of the chafe, and after by strokes,
or the flooring, makes it more bright. God makes his to glory in Tribulation,
Romans 5. And it follows at the heels of the Text, verse. 5. As the sufferings of
Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ. And the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts (that is of
sorrow) within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Afflictions sometimes are the
very matter of rejoicing, Matthew. 10. When they persecute you for my Names sake,
rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your revvard. And the Apostles in
the Acts, went away rejoicing from the Council, that they were counted
vvorthie to suffer for the name of Christ. Sometimes afflictions drive us more
and more near to God in prayer; And generally God is much with his Saints in
the ordinance of chastisement. Therefore it is said, Ps. 94.12. Blessed is the
man whom thou do afflict, and teach out of thy Law. And Jam. 1. Count it
all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. This is no small comfort, whose
beams shall pierce through the thick dark cloud of our sorrows; and whose
influence shall soake through a world of trouble, to beget comfort in the midst
of the heart of this little earth, joy in sorrows, and life in death: Our
comforts shall more abound by Christ, then our sufferings for Christ; besides
all that is to come. 2 Cor. 4. God is so effectual in his comforting, that he
will comfort whom he will comfort. If the world count it a reproach to be
afflicted and persecuted; yet the spirit of glory (says Peter) shall rest
upon us the mean while. And thus effectual shall Gods comfort be in all
tribulation. God does not only comfort on the mount of temptation, but in the
valley of inward dejections; not only under the rod as Paul, and the Apostles,
but in the stocks, in the Lions den, in the fiery oven, etc. Hebr. 11. As God
gives us a stock, a soul of graces, against the body of sin, so an army of
comforts against all other discomforts. God will appear to be omnipotent in
comforting, as well as in creating and preserving.

But secondly, and higher. This comfort from God is an apprehended comfort. We
shall not only have comfort at a time, and not know it, (as Psalm. 22. The
Psalmist is dessertion yet cried my God) but we shall be comforted, and know we
are comforted. So the Text, Christ will give us of his Spirit, that we may
know the things that are given us of God. 1 Cor. 2.12. If his love passes
knowledge, Ephesians. 3. yet he will cause us to feel it. Romans 5. he will shed it
into our hearts. As we feel the comfort of the Sun oft-times, when we cannot
behold the brightness of it, so it is in the apprehension of Gods love.

Thirdly, yet higher. It is oft-times redundant comfort, superabounding
comfort; it shall be not only good measure pressed down, for our use, but
running over for others refreshment. So in the Text. We shall be able to
comfort others, our comfort shall not only fill our banks of desires, but float
the valley of saints round about us. As the Widows oil and meal, seeming but
a little, fed her, and the Prophet too. As God comforted Christ in his
sufferings, so he us, (both Heb. 5.7.9.) So we from Christ's comfort to us,
comfort one another. We shall light one another candle, and mean while have
never the less our selves. The parent comforts the elder children, and they
shall still the younger.

Fourthly, yet higher: It is experimental comfort. We shall not only
communicate our comforts to others, but we shall be able to tell the Saints
that this and this is comfort. That this and that comfort has wrought
effectually upon us, and has done the deed, in a time of distress has
supported; We have not only heard the receipt read to us, but we took it
down, and it wrought kindly. It cordialized the heart to purpose. They that
know not the consolations of God, slight them as nothing (as it is in Job.
15.11.) but we know what they are by inward feeling.

Fifthly, Higher. It is strong lasting comfort. It keeps oft-times long at an
high pitch, at least on its, or in communication to others: When the medicine
is made, it does not evaporate its spirits, and grow weak. It is not deadned by
pouring it out of one vessel, one heart into another. But the same comfort that
comforted us, comforts others. The same plaster heals many sores. The
reversion of heavenly comfort is as good at last, as at first.

The same word, spirit, and ordinances; have comforted thousands above these
4000. years.

Sixthly, Higher yet. God oft-times sends in so much comfort as to make a soul
to be in the high key of Hallelujahs: to make it magnify and bless God for
his comfort. So in the Text, Blessed be God etc. that has comforted us, etc.
God will not only give us comfort to live, but to joy in him. As the Sun gives
forth not only to make the plants grow, but to blossom. So God hatcheth up
comfort unto the blossoming of joy, ( Flores plantarum gaudia, Plin. Not.
Hist.) As flowers are the joy of Plants, so Joy the flower or blossoms of our
graces, as desires are the root. In God (faith the Psalmist) we make our boast
all the day long. God will sweetly touch the heart strings with the finger of
his Spirit, not only to make them sound with comfort, but to resound and echo
praise, and make it become a Psalmist. The world shall ring of the comfort
Moses, Deborah, Hannah, David, Elizabeth, Marie, Paul, Silas, etc. had
received. This heavenly sire will break forth. God will delight his own ear
with his own music. He will put joy and gladness into the heart till it
praise him.

Thus the quantity of comfort shall be like the manna. He that gathered little
had no want, he that gathered much had no overplus, more then was useful.

Secondly, For the quality of comfort, it is the comfort that is of God. And
Gods comfort is like himself. The Worlds comfort is a lying comfort. The Devils
comfort is a damnable flattering comfort. Yea the best comfort from things
below are mixed, if not mudded. But the comfort that is from God, is in this
like God, that as it is much, (as we have heard) so pure, and spiritual, it
reaches to the soul and spirit of a man. A dram of this powder of pearl,
aurum pota bile, this aqua Coelestis, this Christ communicated comfort, is more
worth then an hundred weight of gross sublunary comforts. A look of Christ on
Peter, makes him mourn that he loved Christ no more. One glympse of the
transfiguration of Christ, wrapps up the three disciples as into the third
heaven. A touch of this loadstone makes the heart forget all, and to move
toward it. Forgeth all lines but that which immediately tends to it. This
comfort makes David to despise come, and wine in comparison, Psalm 4. This makes
the Disciples to despise all, with It is good to be here. A word of this from
Christ to buffeted Paul stilled him. A glance of God on Moses, makes him
glorious. In other comforts, in the midst of laughter the heart is sad, But
this comfort makes glad, and adds no sorrow. Thus of comfort.

Next of Gods engagement of himself to comfort his.

We will note both the matter, and the method, of setting down these
engagements here.

1. For the engagement considered in the matter, to take them in order of the
Text; 1. He is God, as much as to say, he is good, He is the chief good; the
more good in any thing, the more communicative it is of it self. God cannot be
God but he must be good. He cannot be most good, but he must be most
communicative of his goodness; so that as soon as God was God, which was from
all eternity, God laid up the Idea or platform of us in his thoughts to do us
good: He conceived in himself the model of our being, and well being; designed
for us two worlds below, one natural for our bodies, another spiritual for
our souls, and one of Glory in the world to come, for soul and body jointly:
In this world to enjoy him mediately, by communication of himself: in that to
come, by beatificall visions. This communication of himself as he is good, is
delicately touched by the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. Thou art good, and do good: It
is the impression of Gods goodness upon all the creation; Sun, Sea, Elements
etc. that makes them communicative of comfort to man, How much more is God,
infinitely good, communicative of his comfort. Therefore, 1. It is said in the
Text, He is the God of comfort, which sets forth his goodness. 2. That he
comfort us: Here is his communicativenesse; the result of all is this. Then
God will cease to be communicative of comfort to his, when he can cease to be
God, and not before, He causes his Sun to shine upon the good and the bad,
therefore he will ray forth beams of comfort on his Saints. But are not the
Saints in want of comfort, when they often and much cry for comfort? We answer,
They want so much comfort as they desire to have, but even then they have a
saving degree of comfort, else they would despair, not pour out prayers: I^ is
some stock of comfort they turn and wind in prayer, to get more, as Psalm.
22.1. whiles he cried for Gods presence, he had this comfort, He was his God:
and vvhiles the Spouse seems to have lost Christ, she enquires after him, calls
him her reloved, Cant. 5. Thus of the first engagement.

2. He is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: Here comes in the kin: And
relations, though of the least entitie, are of the greatest efficacy: As Christ
is the last man, (as the Apostle calls him, 1 Cor. 15.) The second Adam is the
everlasting Father to all believers, Isai. 9. so God is his Father, so in the
text, yea as Christ is the representative of us all that believe, so God is our
Father in, and through Christ, being Christ's Father: Therefore it is said,
Reckon your selves as you are in him, Romans 6.11. And we are accepted in him,
Ephesians. 1.6. And Coheirs with him, Romans 8. So as that God comforts Christ as he
is the Father of Christ, Heb. 5. He heard him in that he feared, so God
comforts us in text, as younger brethren, Heb. 2. as his members, Ephesians. 4. Yea
this union between Christ and us, is set forth, to be so close, and intimate,
(Ioh. 14.20. Ioh. 17.22.) That we may boldly say, as long as God comforts
Christ, he must needs comfort us that believe in Christ. If God will maintain
his sons titles, Lord, Jesus, Christ, then he must comfort us, through him,
he must defend and succor us under his Lordship, save us under his Iesusship,
and anoint us spiritually with the spirit, by his Christship: Yea, Christ's
body now in heaven is an earnest that we shall be there too, Ioh. 14.2.3. Can
any relation be tenderer then that of a Father? Can any son be dearer to God
then Christ? Can any be nearer to Christ than we that believe, that are said,
We are so joined to the Lord, that we are one spirit? How then can it be
possible but that God should have infinite bowels of love to Christ, and so to
us in him? He has no other to love as children, he has none else to bestow
all his great estate upon.

3. Engagement. God is the Father of mercies, or as it is in the Greek, He is
the Father of bowels of mercies: Not only the Author of mercies, but the
Father of mercies; he gives all his gifts with a paternall affection. None of
his gifts to any of his, are giftlesse gifts.

And Father of bowels, does import that as a father is not a natural father,
if he loose his bowels, so God must keep his bowels of mercy, as he will keep
his relation of Father to his: And as a fathers bowels of mercies descend to
the children of his Natural bowels, so Gods compassion is to his: You see by
how many titles our tenure of mercies hold good: One while as we are servants
to God or Christ our master, Truly I am thy servant, (says David) I am thine,
save me. Another while as a Wife to Christ Hos. 2. Another while as Children to
God, and brethren to Christ: and so this Text, And add to all, that if we
should fail, so as to undeserve that God should be called the Father of us as
his children, yet this must stand firm, God is the Father of mercies, Namely,
to pity us as a Father does the child as it is Psalm. 103. And to spare us,
and bear with us, as a Father does a weak child that serves him as he can,
though as a weak child, as Malachy speaks, chap. 3. verse. 18. And he is the
Father of Mercies, in the plural, Numerosa proles, Store of mercies. As God
cannot be the Father of Christ (as Christ) alone, All believers are included in
him, and so is well pleased. It is not said, with, but in him, Matthew. 3. So he
cannot be the Father of one mercy only, but of many, to have some for all, yea,
many for every One, yet he that is rich in mercies cannot leave his children
poor.

4. Engagement, It is his style, title, description, that he is The God of all
comfort: It is here spoken, as the definition of what he is to us, therefore
as essential to him. And the like is said of him, Exodus, 34. by way of a Royal
Title, or Kingly style, The Lord, the Lord God Jehovah, merciful, gracious,
long suffering, abundant in goodness, etc. So that this of Gods comforting
us, is one of the flowers in his crown, and God must maintain his sovereign
style. How shall he be said to be God, that is (as we showed before) infinite
good, if not full with comfort, abounding toward us. And how a God of all
comfort, if his people shall have none?

2. For the method of these engagements, in a word; The God of this comfort, 1.
removes impediments that might hinder us (...) their minds from God, are not
contented with glory. And the Saints believing in Christ, whiles they have
sought what was in the creature, and not God through the creature, have found
nothing in any thing, or all things conjunctim or divisim, severally or
conjunctively. Eccles. 2.1. to the 12. verse King Solomon the great, in making
the utmost of all creature comforts, could find nothing but vanity, and
vexation. Reading is an high and intellectual delight, is, a while, a pleasure
to the mind; but unless God comes in, it furfets the understanding, and is a
weariness to the flesh. Eccles. 12.12. Music is pleasant to the ear, but
unless God comes in to cheer the heart it is nauseous to a man Psalm. 137. And
as experience tells us, being too long in the hearing may surfeit the fantasy
with too often playing the same lesson. Odours are pleasant to the smell, and
some say the food of the Spirits of the Brain; but unless God come in with
health they suffocate that sense, and cause faintings, and swownings. Food is
pleasant to the taste; but unless God give in his blessing, it surfeits the
stomach.

In the midst of laughter in all creature enjoyments (says Solomon) the heart
is sad. Yea creature-joyes with out God are mischiefs. Apparel makes more
proud then warm. Authority brings forth more tyrannicalnesse than reformation.
Honor becomes more arrogant then useful, Wine more making mad than merry. The
table is become a snare. As it is said of wisdom that all the creatures were
inquired of; a general counsel of all the world was called; the creation met
in consultation, to give in their answer every creature for himself, whither
wisdom was in this, or that, or the other: they all answered no. Job 28.12.
etc. And so it may be said of comfort; if all the world be called to its
Answer, it cannot say conjunctively or divisively that comfort is there,
without God. The Sea answers, that it is not in me, I am a devourer, and do
make many a Merchant sad. The heavens answer it is not in me. For unless God
help me, I cause barrenness, ( Hos. 2.). And the sons of men confess (if
they will speak the truth) that they are as Jobs friends, without God,
miserable comforters. They can see one miserable, and say this and that, but
without the incomes of God cannot comfort. One man is contented with a little.
why? God is there. Another is not contented with much. Why? God is not there. A
little that a righteous man has (says Solomon) is better than great revenues
of the wicked. For God is the comfort in every creature comfort, and God makes
every creature to give down his comfort.

1. God is the comfort in every creature. It is the word, command, or
institution of God, that makes bread to be means of life to us, Mat. 4.

2. He makes the creature to give down his comfort that is in him: Hos. 2.21.
etc. I will (says the Lord) in that day hear the heavens, and they shall
hear the earth, and earth shall hear the corn and the wine, and the oil,
and they shall hear Jezreel. And all this God will do for his, because he will
make a covenant with them, and betreth them to himself. ver. 18. All shall be
paid down as part of their dowry as part of that all which is theirs in
Christ Jesus 1 Cor. 3.21. Therefore why do we travel over creature comforts
without God our convoy? Yea why do we travel to creature comforts to find
them without God? Can the Be find any thing in the flower without beams and
drops of heaven first fall upon them. So vain is our endeavor to press out
and distill any spirits of comfort out of creatures, without Gods influence or
impressions first falling upon them. We think because God coming in with
creatures they sometime comfort, that therefore the creatures themselves do
comfort. But if a divine ordinance does not always quicken, but only when God
comes in, as experience tells us, much less can earthly creatures comfort
without God giving in himself, in, and through them.

Again, we lament the loss of such, and such a creature, as conceiving, that
we have much loss of comfort thereby. But I should rather think that God
taking them away, that if they were present they should not comfort, nor would
God come in through them to make them comfort, but that God is now upon another
design; namely, to give in more comfort some other way, as either by and in
providentiall dispensations of afflictions, or in instituted ordinances of Word
and Sacraments, or immediately by himself in communication of his Spirit. Just
as when an earthquake stops the springs on this side the mountain, ye may
expect them to break out in some other place.

Ob. If creatures of themselves cannot comfort without God coming in; how do
carnal men that have no interest in God rejoice in them?

A. 1. Some flatter themselves that they have God; and argue (...) from their
having worldly comforts, that therefore God loves them.

2. Others fear they have not God, and so in the midst of laughter their heart
is sad.

3. Others have neither of those apprehensions, but are Atheistical, and so
their joy is but flashes, as the crackling of ^^ornes under the pot. (As
Solomon speaks.)

Therefore still the truth stands firm, without God no comfort in creatures.
And therefore our surest way is to cross our common course; namely, instead of
going to creatures to find God, to go to God first, to have the creatures,
and to find comfort in it. To fetch every mercy warmed from the hand of God.

4. That though the Saints may need comfort, yea, and from creatures too, yet
God has reserved to himself to be the foun^^ine and dispenser of all comfort
to them through every thing to keep them in a dependence upon them. Blessed be
God (says the text) the God of all comfort, that has comforted us in all our
^^ibulations, that he may comfort us, and comfort us, that we may own him the
author of comfort, in blessing him for it; and so all our dependence on him.
God keeps the lock and key of all comforts, we must be beholding to him for
all. Elijah must pray to God to unlock the clouds that it rain. The Church
Act. 12. pray to God to unlock the prison doors to let out Peter. The Spouse
prays Cant. 1.4. that God would unlock her heart, that it might be unchained
and forced to run after him. Therefore it is a maine spiritual duty in all our
enjoyments, more to consider the motions of our hearts toward God, through all
comforts, then to look upon the movings of comforts toward us. It is good to
see the beams of divine favor to shine a glory upon all the floods of our
comforts; but better to see the streams of them to carry us afloat to the
ocean of all, God himself. This the maine of all on our part, and this the
great thing God looks after; as a father more looks at the child's affections
toward him, then upon what he lays out upon him. Therefore let us aim at
that most, that God most looks at. We see all the creation of plants manifest
their dependence on the drops and beams of heaven by shooting up toward
heaven. Grace the activest thing under God, must needs have a stronger instinct
to ascend to that from whence it came. A sure sign mercyes come from heaven,
by special dispensations of favor when they exhale and draw us up to a
tendency thitherward, when we embrace the creatures, though as God in them, we
embrace but the hand of God, we kiss his hand; but when by them we ascend up
to consider God as better then all, we stroke his face, and kiss his mouth
that bids the creatures go serve us, and smiled upon us the while. And far
greater is our sweet communion with the giver, then our possession of the gift,
we forget our letters and tokens while we embrace our divine husband
himself. Answer we then to Gods design. He has set all in a dependence on
him, as the lines and circle to a Center. Therefore for all we would have, yea
for all that already we now have, to be comforts to us: go to god for them,
and so accepta refer, to render back all to God again, in away of praise.
Bless him for all, as it is in the Text. Let a prayer and a praise as it were
hemme and compass in God, given in through the particular mercy. Take in all
our mercyes as accomodations to further us in our journey homewards toward God.
Let us delight more in parting with mercyes to serve God, our friend, then in
keeping them to serve our selves, we can do so for men, much more then let us
do so for God.

In every thing give thanks Phil. 4.6. Let God have an excise out of all.
About all things we enjoy, fetch as many errands to Court as you can, two at
least Viz, of prayer and praise concerning every particular. Mind this still,
that all that God does is to mind thee of thy dependence. When Adam wanted
nothing, God gave him a command and a threat to mind him of his dependence.
When he left his dependence on God in Paradise, he lost all. So did the very
Angels in the heaven of glory. As soon as they slacked their dependence on
God, there they fell. How much more should we mind our dependence, which is
hourly and minutely. And therefore let us conclude that when God, upon sight of
our too fond setting our hearts upon creature comforts withdrawes them from us,
it is that we might sue them out upon our dependence: that we might take a
new state from the chief Lord: and not gather them up as from the earth, as
taking our tenor from the mean Lord yea when God afflicts it is that we
should go to him to be ^ruted with comfort.

3. That comfort is given to us believers, that we might with that, comfort
others. So the text and we must be like God, that communicates that comfort
that is in him. Thus at once we can have comfort, and tell where we had it, to
draw others to go immediately to God. This does nothing diminish our own
comfort. But as a candle lighting many, shines rather more then less it self
the mean while, our comfort if truly good, is, will be communicative of it
self. It is a muddie-poole, not a quick spring, that runs not over, we are
a mystical body, therefore our spiritual blood and spirits, and warmth must
be in common.

We talk often of the sweet of communion of Saints. Feast take, feast make, and
we get by this feasting others souls with our spiritual comforts. The very
telling of the story of the manner how we were comforted, is a chewing the cud
and brings up the sweet of our comfort upon our palates afresh. But in the
application, and pressing of it upon the hearts of others, we heat and warm
our own hearts and spirits. We rub the spices and make them smell more
fragrant. Yea God is as well seen in his streams of comfort running through
the ground of our hearts, to another heart, as in running into our hearts at
first. Therefore we having the first handsale, the first fruits, let us
communicate. The wicked compass Sea and Land to make proselytes for the
Devil, therefore let us much more for God: especially considering Gods end, he
gave thee comfort for that end. Every thing is most eminent in its operations
when it is applied to its end, and utmost end. As the sun in its fullest
shining, the instrument for the fullest music. Our comfort is most glorious,
and God is most glorified, the more it comforts others as well as our selves.
Its the fame of a river that it arises at such a fountain, and runs so many
hundred miles fructifies the valleys, and adornes the country as it goes, and
then at length falls into the Ocean. As of Jordan, And Danube. So it is the
honor of spiritual comforts to do likewise in men's hearts.

4 That the excellentest comfort, and way of comforting is to comfort from
experience, God comforts with the comfort he has himself, but of himself,
therefore so should we, others from that we have from him, so the Text.
Therefore the Apostle commends experience, Romans 5 Experimental comfort is like
a medicine with a probatum est, that has been proved to be effectual.
Experimental comfort is like the Nurse warming the milk or pappe in her own
mouth, before she puts it into the child's.

This lays a great engagement upon a disconsolate soul, to argue thus with
himself, when he hears another experimental comforts: It is in the same God,
the same word, the same Spirit, the same considerations that comforted him that
now speaks to me and he was the same in every respect as I was (aut sumus aut
fuimus, vel possumus esse quod hic est) why therefore should it not comfort me
also? why should not I trust God as well as another? where or when has God
excluded me from comfort more then him? Therefore oh ye comforted Christians
draw forth your experimental comforts, and serve them in to others. It is
excellent to be an Empirick in spiritual physicking, as David speaks, Come I
will tell you what the Lord has done for my soul. Waters running through
mineralls as Brimstone. Alum, etc. have more strength in them for a physical
use: so comfort is more fitted for men of like frailty with us, and takes more
with them when they have first run through our hearts, and have been soaked
in our experience, and so communicated with a strong stream of compassions,
supplications and sympatheticall consent of spirits. Something for this lies in
our likeness with them: something in our senses and so are more feelingly
wrought upon, when spiritualls are communicated in a sensible way. Therefore
examples often work more upon us then rules, but the maine thing for it lies in
Gods Institution, and appointment, and therefore a divine blessing goes along
with it. God will also have the elder Christian to be an executor of Christ's
testament of comfort to the younger: to exercise his graces and to keep us all
inunion one with another. Thus of instructions.

5 See we be Gods people, set we be his, that we may freely take this comfort
to our selves.

The Apostle describes these to whom he writes, 1 Cor. 1.^. to be such as are
called to be saints, and sanctified in Christ Jesus. These import three things.
1 The Qualification of them that are Gods people, namely they are Saints, they
are holy; they are of unholy made holy, holy in conversation, that's their
common rode, and course of life. Titus ^.12. And holy in heart: that the
complexion and temper of their hearts. Their hearts are purified by faith. Act.
15.9.2. The isntrumental means: called to be Saints. As the Apostle says,
ye are not called to uncleanness, but to holiness. They have heard a voice
in the ear, and a voice at heart that have called them away from their former
corrupt conversation, yea called them from their corrupt selves, from their
corrupt condition, into that which is holy; from the world, to look toward
heaven; from sin, to Christ. So that they leave all rather then Christ, as the
Apostles did, at Christ's call. That is by the call of the word and holy Spirit,
they could be ready to part with all rather then to part with Christ, and so we
fall upon the third thing the principal means of their Saint-ship; namely
sanctified in Christ Jesus: not sanctified or made pure only by Christ Jesus,
by his word and Spirit, but in Christ Jesus. They are u^ed to Christ, look
upon themselves in Christ. They reckon themselves (as Romans 6.11.) dead to sin
in Christ, and alive to God in Christ. All their consideration is to be found
in him not having their own righteousness, but the righteousness, which is
through faith of Christ. They behold Christ making a glorious change, Isa. 53,
2 Cor. 5. ult. He was made sin for us, upon him the iniquities of us all were
laid, that we might be made the righteousness of God: So that those that are
thus Gods people, they live as none of their own, but as Gods for the general
of their lives. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.15. Now those that can with a good
conscience plead their sincerity in these things; though not their integrity or
perfection take ye the sweet comforts of this doctrine to your selves. God is
the fountain: so the text. The father of mercyes, Christ the Channel, so the
text, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Say not who shall ascend up to
heaven, to bring God or Christ down thence; God is with thee, united to thee,
in Christ Jesus. Be not as Hagar to pine for thirst for want of sight of a well
at hand. Be not as under Hagar, that is the Law, Gal. 4. thou art not under the
Law, but under grace: Romans 6. Thou have the God of all comfort to be thine, by
many engagements as has been cleared to thee out of the text, and doctrine.
He is the God of all comfort, it is his nature. He is the father of Christ,
who is thy savior, redeemer, and thine husband. He is the father of mercyes
therefore of pity to thee, that art one of the miserable ones: He comfort
in all tribulation; therefore he is wonted to comfort: yea till thou have
enough to overflow to others, to comfort them. Of all which we spoke in the
explication; now rub and chase this suppling Oil of gladness upon thy soar
soul.

He is God; therefore good. Fully good; infinite in goodness. Freely good
because the first good. Therefore exceedingly communicative of goodness; as in
the creation so in regeneration.

He creates peace, he creates a clean heart. He is a sun. Psalm. 84.
Therefore must communicate himself by beams.

He is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. As God is the father of mankind in
the first Adam, in a natural way. Luke 3. ult. So he is the father of
believers, in and through Christ the second Adam in a spiritual way, so the
text. The meaning is this: As sure as God is united to Christ, so he is to
believers Joh. 14 20. Joh. 17.22. As sure as God loves Christ. Mat. 3. ult. So
sure God loves those in him. Ephesians. 1.6. As sure as God loves Christ as his
sun; So Christ loves believers, called his children. Heb. 2. Joh. 15.9.

He is the father of mercies we are not so prone to be fathers of Children,
as God is to be father of mercyes. He had not suffered his to have been
miserable, but to the intent to be more glorious in his mercy. He concluded
all (says the Apostle) in unbeleife that he might have mercy upon all. And
then its presently added, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom, and
knowledge of God! Romans 11.32.33.

And he is the God of all consolation, therefore of some to some.

And he comfort us. It is his ancient wont to comfort, and he will not
loose his wont. With God is no shadow of change, no eclipsing of his beams,
and he so inlightens believers as stars, that they shine upon things below.
He will give comfort to them, and for a witness of it they shall be able to
comfort others. They shall see their own comfort was good, in that it takes
with others. Yea, so comforted, that they shall indite a praise to God for it.
Blessed be God that comfort us.

Therefore, O ye that have seen your claim to this comfort, take it to you,
grasp it; do not let every distemper, melancholy etc. baffle you of your
comfort. Do as David, Psalm. 42. ult. and Psalm. 43. ult. Why the soul, and
Wherefore the soul, examine it upon interrogatories, convince it with
Quaeries, Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within
me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God. As long as we have God, the God of all comfort to be
ours, by as good interest as others had him on earth, that are now in heaven,
why should we be cast down? What can ill us, wherein God cannot, or will not
comfort us, who is the God of all comfort, that comfort in all tribulation?
The consideration of this Text, and Doctrine, and our interest in it, is enough
to resolve, and clear all doubts. As whether we may cry to him in prayer in
times of misery?

Answ. He is the Father of mercies.

Whether we may approach near him after reciduations, and backslidings into
sin? Answ. He is the Father of mercies.

Whether we shall not sinck in any condition, for want of comfort enough? Answ.
He is the God of all comfort, that com^orteth in all tribulation.

If we fear this affliction, or that affliction; as one cries, O I do not know
how I should endure poverty: another moanes, O how shall I encounter with the
fear of death? The answer here is full to all cases. God is the God of all
comfort, Father of mercies, in the plural, and comfort his in all
tribulation.

Ob. But God is just too?

Answ. And this is a comfort to a believer, that lays hold on his free mercy,
1. Joh. 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and JUST to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It is
a RIGHTEOUS, or just thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled, rest with us, etc. So that Gods
Justice is a friend to believers, against sins and afflictions.

Ob. But God is a God of purity, that cannot endure iniquity, and of power to
crush us for it in our afflictions?

Answ. Gods goodness is the Complexion of his nature, and the perfection of
all his Attributes: and therefore as he is prone to comfort, so by reason of
his purity, he is pure in his comfort: and by reason of his power, he is
powerful in his comforts. Yea, and he hints to us, that it is more suitable to
his nature, and more answerable to his direct design, to save and comfort,
then to condemn and destroy his creature, Joh. 3.16, 17. God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his son into the
world, to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. And
Jam. 2.13. Mercy rejoices against judgment. Say thou then as Psalm. 77.16. My
flesh fails, and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever. For surely Gods design is to make his child like himself,
(in as much as he is willing to communicate himself) to make him full of
comfort, Joh. 15.11. Therefore he bids us so often to rejoice, Phil. 4 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5. etc. Therefore whereas we cry out for want of comfort, we have just
cause rather to cry out against our selves, that we receive not in that
comfort God holds out unto us. For what by passion, and what by indiscretion
we are like Rachel that wept and would not be comforted. In quietness and
confidence is our vest and safety. And the joy of the Lord shall be our
strength. If our faith of adherence does but work kindly in cleaving to Christ,
that is comfort. Every thing is in a good estate in its own center. If the Lord
keeps us from despair, and puts us in hope of comfort, that is also a comfort.

Ob. We say we have no comfort, because we feel it not within, see it not work
outwardly.

Answ. But we may be rich, though we do not always ^ight or poyse the
bags, or make them jingle, or see the money powered forth. To have them in
possession is the richness of our condition. We have life and reason when we
are (as we lay) dead asleep. To miss comfort is a sign we had comfort. And
Christ says, our joy shall remain, Joh. 15.11. though our sight and sense of
it does not always appear. It is a sign there (...) some water of joy in the
pumpe of our desires, while we ^^mpe for more.

Ob: But you will say you have no joy, and therefore you doubt whether you have
Christ.

Answ. But we say, a wife is a wife by virtue of her Covenant in marriage, even
then when she is melancholy. And joy may glorify and beautify our spirits
more; but to believe in God through Christ, when we have no actual joy, does
more glorify and honor God. This shows more pure faith, Isa. (...).10. to
trust God without the pawn of sense and feeling.

Ob. Thou say thou go mourning from day to day for comfort, and can not
attain unto it.

Answ. We tell thee, such desires of comfort, they argue grace, as mysts do
quick fountains where they are thickest, Matthew. 5. Blessed are they that
mourn, blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness. It Is more
actual comfort to be desirous of a mercy and think we have it not, then to
know we have it, and to be glutted with it, or careless of it.

Ob. But thou will say thou have waited long for comfort, and yet have it not
to thy content.

Answ. We tell thee, it will be double in measure and sweetness when it comes,
A desire fulfilled after a long deferring, is (says Solomon) a tree of life.

Qu. But thou queriest what shall thou do the while?

An. We tell thee, 1 God supports thee the while: and that is great comfort. 2
Thou shall have communion with God in s^king and waiting; and that also is a
great comfort. 3 Thou shall ^ave so much of the oil of gladness, as to glib
the wheels of thy soul to carry thee on to any heavenly journey till thou ar^
at glory. Amen.

FINIS.

