Sir Willam Balfores LETTER of March 30. 1644. TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Earl of
Essex Ld GENERAL.

It is his Excellencies pleasure that this Letter be forthwith Printed.

Jo. Baldwin Secretary to his Excellency.

LONDON, Printed for Laurance Blaiklock. 1644.

Sir Will. Balfores LETTER of March 30. 1644. To His EXCELLENCY the Earl of
Essex Lord GENERAL.
May it please Your Excellency.
BEcause of our being constrained these nights (by past) to want sleep, and
this last night Horse and Man to lie upon the heath betwixt Alford and
Winchester, and all this da^ in like manner spent upon the fields before
Winchester, (so that being drowsy for want of sleep) I shall beg leave of
your Excellency for using a short discourse, for the present to let your
Excel: know, That it has pleased Almighty God to grant us a great Victory
over our enemies, beyond all expectation; We having taken a resolution (by
reason of your Excellencies and the Committee of both Kingdoms commandments)
to be wary, and cautious to engage our selves in a fight with the enemy but
upon advantage; Yet we finding them resolved to put us to it, on Friday the 29
of this instant, by their bringing their whole Army upon us, to beat out first
some Musketeers out of the hedges a pretty distance from our quarters, and
thereafter to Allarm our quarters: I caused all our Horse to draw out in a
little Heath before our quarters, and the Foot to be drawn up in Battle in a
large spacious field within our quarters in a Heath. The enemy coming toward
us, were received with such dexterity and valor, that it pleased Almighty God
(after a long cumbate all the day long, from nine a clock in the morning to
night) to give us an unexpected great Victory, by beating both their Horse and
Foot out of the Heath before our quarters, and following the victory not only
to their quarters, but put them by Alford, and followed them within 4. miles of
Winchester; their whole body of foot which they have been so long a composing
(I assure your Excellency) totally routed, and so broken, that Hopton cannot
make up his Foot Army I am confident most part of this summer; their Foot
were so dispersed up and down through all the fields, that they swear they
will never serve again: The Lord John brother to the D. of Richmond, who
commanded their Horse, is killed for certain, with many Officers, as Col.
Butler, Col. Gray and others; Sir John Smith, Carry, with Stovell dangerously
wounded, who is also our prisoner, Col. Peard and Seamore, and 5. or 6. more
Commanders prisoners, and as many ordinary soldiers as we desired to take. Of
ours only Col. Meldrum shot in his arm, and wounded in the head, but not
dangerously or mortal; Major Bozwell also wounded in the belly that he cannot
live: So that all agrees that there was never so great a Victory; neither so
few slain men: the enemies Horse held up the Foot, and made them stand to it,
and fight by force, beating and cutting them with their swords. We are more
then obliged to our good God for so great a Victory, God make us thankful for
it.

March 30. at 2. a clock in the morning. Your Excellencies most humble Servant,
W. Balfore.

General Ruthen was in the fight and as is reported wounded.


