CRAFTY CROMWELL:

OR, OLIVER ordering our New State.

A Tragi-Comedie.

Wherein is discovered the Traiterous undertakings and proceedings of the said
NOL, and his Levelling Crew.

Written by MERCURIUS MELANCHOLICUS.

Shall Cromwell not be famous made Unto the aftertimes, Who durst a THRONE for
to invade, And Act the worst of Crimes?
Shall not his Nose DOMINICALL, In Verse be celebrated?
Shall famous HARRY MARTIN fall, And not be nominated?
Shall PRIDE the Drayman, JOICE the Tailor, And all the Holy Crew;
With HAMMOND, now K. CHARLES his Jailer, And STAINS, that Holy Jew, Be read
hereafter? (sure they shall) And if my Muse give aid, This shall be their
Memorial, THESE ROGUES THEIR KING BETRAYED.
Printed in the Year, 1648.

The PROLOGUE.
AN Ordinance from our pretended State,
Sowes up the Players mouths, they must not prate
Like Parrats what they are taught upon the Stage,
Yet we may Print the Errors of the Age:
All their projections cannot hinder so,
But if we write, the Presses needs must go,
That, that alone, heales our dejected Sense,
We can divulge our penned Intelligence:
Slight is our vein, not Clio's aid we crave,
If THALIA smile, we our sole wishes have:
Smooth PLAUTUS, ARISTOPHANES his vein
We now affect, not SOPHOCLES high streine:
Yet thus we differ, they for mirth were fixed,
But we have Joy and Dolor, both commixt.
Exit. Dramatis Personae.
CROMWELL. Two CITIZENS. The Ghost of PIMME. Colonel HAMMOND, his Majesty's
Jailer. HARRY MARTIN. PRIDE. STAINS. CHORUS. Two SOLDIERS. A SERVANT. MUTES.
To the Inslaved Commons of ENGLAND.
DEluded Vulgar, don't you yet perceive
How you are doom^d to die without reprieve,
Fallen from your Zenith, and in lieu of light,
Involoped with fumes of cloudie night?
No end of Taxes, and Excises, none,
How to get money, still is thought upon,
All things engrossed, and your State Lurdanes are
So greedy, they will shortly Tax the Air.
True Patriots suppressed, and only they
Advanced to Offices, who have the way
To grind the Land, and cut the poor man's throat,
To Level, and leave no man worth a groat.
Harpeis of the Common wealth, who prey on all,
Without distinction, most Tyrannical
Are your Trrustees, their House a sink of sin,
He Is cursed, touches the threshold entering in,
(Inevitably Damned) Treason, and Guile,
Lust, Fury, Schism, with all mischiefs vile,
There keep their Court, and dandled on the knees
Of your Apostate treacherous Trustees,
Who were in knavery Fresh-men, coming there,
Shall proceed Learned Graduates in one year.
Plato framed a Republic, and it cost
Tully much labor to write what is lost;
A Commonwealth wise Aristotle framed
His last, before their first for to be named,
"But all conclude, that Government is best,
"Where one sole Monarch governs all the rest*
Which you have by experience found most true,
And for your fickle novell wishes rue;
And truth to say, one may attempt as soon
"To cut and shape a garment for the Moon,
"Now cressent, now in the full, now in the waine,
"As satisfy your greedy foolish brain.
At first you doated on this Parliament,
With Clubs and Staves for their protection went,
The while the Seamen manned their lazy Hulkes,
Who at the Privy Stairs disgorg'd their Bulkes:
How bountifully brought you in your store
Of Coin into Guild Hall; yea, ventred more
Then was required? how did you rudely cry,
To Have Reverend Laud, and Learned Strafford dye?
The Bishops must not sit, those pious* Rites,
Which your forefathers honored, with all spite
Kicked into nothing: but what availed your ire?
But brought the all-devouring Sword and Fire,
The los^e of all your Liberties, your King
To be unto all Lands a wondering:
No marvel Aventinus dares report,
"The Roman German Emperor kept a Court
"Where Kings are Subjects, none but Coxcombs be
"Vassailes to the French King, 'cause willingly
"They be are sueh burdens, the Hesperian Lords
"Do govern men, whose Loyalty affords
"Them ample aid: a very King of Devils
"Is Englands KING, by reason of the evils
"Against their Kings, done by the Subjects hands,
"Rebellions, Dispositions, Murders, Bands.
But let the world know, Kings when once instated
Are Gods on Earth, by Heaven Consecrated;
Precious in the sight of God, and that base elfe
Whom them resists, resists even Gods himself:
Shimei may bark, Achitophel counsel give,
But how long after did those Traitors thrive?
And those who have made Charles a Prisoner,
Would coope up Jove himself did they but dare.
But you Plebeians, now have found your error,
Now those that were your Darlings are your terror.
Why sit you still, like men infatuated,
And see your Kingdom before your eyes translated?
In you it lies, to re-inthrone your King,
To right your God, your wholesome Laws to bring
Back to their pristine use: if you would sever
Your selves from sorrow, strike then now or never*
The Deplorer of your miseries and stupiditie, MERCURIUS MELANCHOLICUS.

Crafty CROMWELL: A Tragi-Comedie.
Actus Primus.
Enter two CITIZENS* 1 Citizen. ARe you for the Exchange?


2 Cit. Yes: I have appointed a Vonetian Merchant to meet him there.


1 Cit. What News is stirring?


2 Cit. None, but what Fame speaks in the nose by the Lyurnall, and the rest
of the Gazets.


1 Cit. And what speak they?


2 Cit. Why, that you and I, and all must be undone by our Machavilians, they
will not yet accept their Sovereigns proffer, nor hearken unto any name of
Peace, 'lesse that he take his Crown from off his head and place it at their
feet; and this they term the Subjects Liberty, and privilege of Parliament.


1 Cit. The name of Liberty has ever been the watchword used before
Rebellion* the idle echo of uncertaintie, that in all Ages ever has abused
the credulous multitude; but I in troth sometimes am overcome even with pity,
when I cogitate the dire events will follow these base Actions, how giddily our
Statesmen hurrie on without fear or wit, proposing this and this they will
have done, though thereby they infringe all Covenants* and violate all Law; the
King has proffered that, which six years since they durst not hope to have,
and though some of their Party boasting, say, 'twas fear constrained him to
it; first let them know the Maxim is most true, That good from Kings must not
be drawn by force; yet this his gracious proffer, freely came from an heart
truly sorry for those Ill, that lately sell, and do even now lie heavy on
his oppressed people.


2 Cit. But this the Sophies dare not to believe, it is mischief makes them
fat; like Theseus, they are in a Laberynth, but destitute of Ariadnes Clew:
they know the ills they have already done cannot be purged with sacrifice; no,
though they offered Heccatombs of Beeves, and therefore they resolve to expiate
their lesser Crimes with greater, one poison must expel another; thus while
they practice Paracelsian-like, and stanch our bleeding wounds with Gunpowder,

The Body Politic with weakness reeles,
And proud Dissension trips up Concords heels.

1 Cit. And will this City evermore be fooled, until her Batlements do Kisle
the earth?


2 Cit. Our Mayor and Council conster so the Laws,
They still agree to that is the strongest Cause;
Like Snailes they hide their heads these hideous storms,
And dare not once for to thrust forth then Horns.
Should this be told unto the aftertimes, how would it dim the glory of this
City?


1 Cit. Alas great Charles, how is thy Swords edge dulled by those that did
pretend to surbush it? O horrid change, able to strike him deaf that hears it
named? Sufficient to cleave the marble Tombs of mighty Edward and great Henry,
and make their Ashes stir with lively heat, and starting forth from their cold
Monuments, dog our Rebellious Grandees up and down, frighting them to obedience.


2 Cit. Too true it is the Tyrant Dionisius caused to be drawn the Image of a
King* when Damocles was placed in his throne, over whose head a threatening
Sword was hanged, fastened up only by an horses hair, to show the
winding-paths that Fortune treads, how she can make even Kings to know her
power.


1 Cit. But yet the Heavens strong arms do compass Kings; an host of Angels
guards the Royal Throne; witness our Royal Charles, who now bereaved of
strength and outward power, like to a Castle that is impregnable, whose basis
touch the Center of the Earth, repells the surious shock and fierce assault of
his malevolent treacherous Parliament, who puffed up with their fortunate
success, disdain for to comply.


2 Cit. The happy Issue of Conspiracy makes Treason sacred, and Rebellion
holy, they cheer themselves with thought of their great Victories, but they
remember not how dear they cost, how many widows lost their loved husbands,
and children their kind parents, the chance of War they say has made them
Kings, and they resolve to sway.


1 Cit. They would (no doubt) had they their wish, but there is a clog hangs
heavy on their heels, the supreme Council of King Oliver does emulate their
greatness; there is a pack of Ravens, which if they be debarred of their prey,
most sure will pick their eyes out.


2 Cit. To stop their clamours, and to buy their favors, they Vote them what
they ask, for you must think, 'twere simple policy, the heard of Wolves
should jarre, Lions so near; and therefore they have sent unto the City with
all speed for to levy their Arreares.


1 Cit. O foolish Cuckolds, that will suffer thus their noses to be bored* Fond
men, they long have seen the Devil in Crystal, been cheated with fair
words, how treasons takes its turns* The City first stirred up the men at
Westminster to raise a Traiterous War, they backed the City with a name of
Power, and now those men whom their Rebellion raised, hang like to Meteors over
their cursed heads, threatening new War and vengeance, just guerdon of their
cursed Treachery.


2 Cit. He that resists his dread Sovereign Lord,
Does damn his soul by Gods own very Word,
A Christian Subject should with honor due,
Obey his Sovereign though he were a Jew:
And be assured when Subjects do Rebel,
Gods wrath is kindled threatening fire of Hell.

1 Cit. It Is almost Change-time* let us away.


Exeunt. Enter CHORUS. Those that in Blood a pleasure have,
Descend still bleeding to their Grave;
Men know not what themselves will be,
When as more then themselves they see:
Lust reigning Murder follows fast,
As Leaves before the Winters blast:
Desire of Rule, 'twas that which made
Our Trustees false, our lives betrayed.
Thus the World goes its common course,
From good to bad, from bad to worse,
From worse to that is worst of all,
And then into its former fall
With Victory, Revenge should cease,
But it with us does more increase.
How can they justly Honor claim,
Slighting those should advance the same?
How can Gods worship be advanced,
Where Error still is countenanc't?
Vice mixed with Nobility,
Truth shrouded with Hypocrisy,
Learning thrust out, Ignorance in
They soothed, in their slavish sin;
N^^^ing vile Error, with as Factious Fools:
These are our mighty Men, or mighty Fools.

Exit. Actus Secundus.
Enter the Ghost of Pym. FRom the black Lake that runs round Erebus I come,
permitted by the King of Flames, to visit those that my Copartners were, when
I was clothed in flesh: I, whose projections grim and dangerous, brought a
free people into slaverie, incensing them against their gracious Prince, and
topsie-turvy turned all LAW and RIGHT; while England England wounded, Civil
broiles eat up the Natives, ravenous Mulciber devasted Houses and large
Granaries; Tumults, Sedition, Schisms, Blasphemies, like a Gangraena,
overspread the face of beauteous Britain: I, that for the same am doomed for
evermore to fry in flames, with an admired swift velocitie, proper to spirits,
and aeriall forms, now tread on English ground: pale ^ynthia mounted in her
silver Waine, now takes her progress by the milkie way, and now Aldeboran is
mounted high, above the shinie Cassiopeia's Chair, all things are hushed and
still, the world's a sleep: thou perfect Image of grim Death, whose drink is
Laethe, all-oppressing Sleep hang on his eyes, whose factious soul is charmed
with soporiferous draughts of idle ease;

While I surview his person, borne to be
His Countries Bane, the Fate of Monarchy:
See here the emblem of Democracie, the very abstract of Sedition; be bold my
Cromwell, and inexorable.

Draws a Curtain, discovers Cromwell sleeping beneath a Canopie. For such a
Will Hell does afford to thee,
Thou shall not fear to fetter Majesty.

Exit Ghost. Cromw. What ayrie Fancies does the sleepie God distill He wakes.
into my teeming Brain? Me thought I saw the gates of Hell unbarr'd, the Iron
doors unhindg'd* from whence swifter then Lightning issued out the spirit of
my Patron Pym -- Stay gentle Shade, and if Hels King give leave, let me embrace
thee in my longing arms -- Deluding Fancy, how do thou persuade, that I
should thus discourse with my own shade -- Here Is none, I did but dream; me
thinks, like Aeson, I am now renewed, my spirits are more vigorous, and of a
bolder temper then of late: Is not my Body now a walking Armor, my Ribs are
Bars of Brass, my Hands of Iron? So please ye, ye allpowerfull Destinies,
that my Heart fail not, nor my Sinews shrink till I have brought to pass
what I intend, til I have made my self Lord Paramount, and quite eradicated
all those Laws which many Ages past have been adored, till I have quite
dissolved all Monarchy, and topsi-turvey* turned all Regal Power: let my
fierce Soldiers, like the Nubians,

Go headlong on, impatient of all stay,
Through blood and horror for to make their way.
(...) ^ee^ I doubt to bring my ends to pass, since now I have new cast the
timorous State, made up my Faction all the Kingdom over, Imprisoned Charles my
King, exiled his Friends; what let us me then that I ascend a throne -- O Yes,
there is thousands do make me their curse, and I am now become a public hate,
the people staggering, stand as in amaze.

But to undo their doubts I will provide,
As Alexander Gordius, Knots unti'd.

Exit. Enter CHORUS. The world's a popular Disease, and all
Are mortal find it Epidemicall,
It Is still distempering poor anxious men.
Firing their brains till they to dust again;
One raves, as troubled with a boiling heart,
He craves the favor of the blind gods Dart,
Another lets his Oaths about to fly,
Which deafes men's ears like Joves Artillery;
He Is drencht in care, the the other frisks and sings,
This man loves study, the other Revellings;
He hugs his Gold, another spends it all,
One niggardly, the other a prodigal:
It Is sure a symptom of approaching Ill,
When dis-acquainted sense knows not the will;
What less (then fools) are they that prog and plot,
To gain their utmost wish? but being got,
They lavish out the chiefest of their care,
And in the end dye mad, or in despair.

Actus Tertius.
Enter Chirlandus, and Symancha, two Jesuits. Chirl. THe news Symancha, how
did thy project thrive? Syman. As well as our Lord God the Pope can wish; I am
elected for a constant Preacher to I* his Regiment.


Chirl. And I have so much favor gained, to morrow I receive an Institution to
be established in a wealthy Living which lately was Sequestered.


Sym. Why* then our journey has been prosperous, and thanks is due from our
most holy Concalve; what shall we pitch upon?


Chirl. Not to divulge our selves, it is dangerous, but this I propose as most
emergent; we will assay, even with our utmost power, to fan the fire of those
grand differences which do prognosticate a cruel War between those
Heretics on either side, the Independents and the Presbyterians, and so what
SPAIN, nor ROME, nor HELL could bring to pass, we shall I hope effect.


Syman. We need not seek to destroy them, although Platine, Sylvester,
Prierius, Bellarmine, Bozius, and Pezantius, do warrant the black Deed, the
Treachery and damned deluded minds of his own Subjects will ere long dispatch
him; and in the mean time to unrivet them, Fire, Murder, and Sedition we will
raise, the better to bring low the Heretics.


Chirl. To us this does belong, to this we swore by the sacred Holocaust, and
it is the duty of all Catholics, be they nere so pedantick, by Fire and
Sword, Poison and Gunpowder, and all such other Plots and Stratagems, to take
out of the way all Heretics, and so to elevate the Papal throne.


Syman. Now Christ's Vicegerent shall have Peter Pence once more paid out of
England, the English Kings shall be constrained to stoop, and prostrate to
kiss his blessed feet, to whom all things are possible, but to err.


Chirl. Sing out ye sacred Quire of Choristers, and chaunt loud Anthems in a
jocula-veine, for we have won the Goal; but think thou 'twere not good my
best Symancha, if we inquired at that BLACK ORACLE, the mouth of Pluto, what
will be the event of their Distractions, and these our undertakings?


Syman. It will be safe to do so.


Chirl. Help spread the Circle; now stand firm with me in this circumference,
let silence charm thy tongue, strength fortify thy heart, while I raise
Lucifer with my incantations, and make all Hell to tremble at my words:

They enter the Circle. Hear me, O thou Stygian God,
Who forfeitedst thy first abode,
Thou who allurd'st the inferior Stars
With Great JEHOVE to manage Wars;
While the sweet hormonious Spheres
Were Drums and Trumpets in your ears,
Yet, as the murmuring winds conspire,
With thunder, and with flashing fire
The world to fear, and make us think
Our cup is full even to the brinke, Thunder.
And when amid these angry tones,
Innumerable weighty stones
Of hail fall down, whose fragour make
The MACHIN of the world to shake,
So were thou precipict'd from Heaven,
When Michael had thy sentence given,
With thy cursed Followers, who like flies,
Hae^ omnium Doctorum opinio est quod Aeriste qui caelum and terram medius
dividens, inane vocatur plenus sit, contrariis, Fortitudinibus S. Hier. in cap
^. Epist. Ephesi.
Could we see with spiritual eyes,
As Atoms do hop up and down,
Hang over each Village and each Town,
Come, O come, without delay,
Before more powerful charms I say. Thunder.

Surgit Behemoh. Behemoh; What would Chirlandus?


Chirl. I charge thee, by the Regent of the night, the triform'd Hecate, to
tell me what will be the period of all those mighty things in Agitation which
now the State of England labor with? Will the most dreadful storm that
threatens them, shower down amain, or else be blown away?


Behem. Those secrets that are writ by Joves own hand I cannot be permitted to
scan over, yet by my conversation in that Clime, my sly intrusion into
Families, this I dare to pronounce:

When the time comes that you shall see
A headless Body Active be,
And many horrid Deeds performed
By a Trunk, without an Head adorned;
If that same Body and the Head
By Friendly Hands be soldered,
Then happy Days may chance ensue,
Or else for aye bid Peace adue.

Chirl. Shall Rome gain footing here once more? And shall we be successful,
yea, or no?


Behe. If when the two parts vanquished be,
The Third keep fixed to Hierarchy,
No hope of that, but if they fail
The Papal power may prevail.

Descendit. There Is all I dare relate.

Syman. What mystic sense his words include?


Chirl. We Will sift the sense in private.

Strange mysteries in the Book of Fate does lie,
Not legible to every common eye.

Exeunt. Enter CHORUS. Lo from our cursed Dissentions, and our Wars,
How Rome gets strength, the whore of Babylon
Does clap her hands, and laughs to see our Jarres,
Hoping ere long she us shall tread upon:
Heavens bowl of Vengeance we have quafft it up,
And shall we also cast her deadly Cup?
That Reformation cannot (sure) be good,
That craves the Sword to hew its passage out:
By Schism, Sedition, Treachery, and Blood,
Antichrist thrives* even all the world about;
When men compel their fellows good to act,
The manner of it discommends the Fact.
It Is sure, that never Rome such footing had
Since Mary fell, as she has gotten now,
That damned Jesuits.
Sect all over the Kingdom gad,
Who falsely unto Jesus make their vow:
Whose task it is for to augment Dissontion,
And for to fan the fire of our Contention.
If it be for Gods glory, to pull down
All decent Rites, and Orders, if it may be
A King should become great, high in Renown,
By being Captived, Plunged in Misery:
If that tho people by all loss may throve,
Then let us for to thank our Statesmen strive.

Exit. Actus Quartus*
Enter Col. Hammond, His Majosties Jailer, with a bunch of Keys at his girdle;
a Servant. Ham. Is the Guard placed about the Privy Chamber, and are the
Castle Gates barred sure?


Serve. They are, Sir.


Ham. On what a ticklish point I stand; and like a man walks a ridg'd
Battlement: If he digress to the right hand or the left, hazards the bruising
of his fleshly tenement, and forseiture of Soul; so I, betwixt the fealty I
owe unto my rightful King, and the commands of an all-powerfull State, am
doubly purged; the one desires me show a Subjects Duty, the other does command
a Traitors hate; If I obey the one, then I accrue my Sovereigns displeasure; If
satisfy the other, then lie I liable to Imprisonment, or if they please, to
Death. O Fear how potent art thou! The man possessed with thee, cares not to
sell his Country and his King, to Act the worst of Crimes that Hell ere
hatched, so he secure himself.

I am resolved, though LOYALTY dissent,
To Act even as't shall please the Parliament.

Exit. Enter two Soldiers drunk. 1 Sold. I Will not pay a farthing, let the
Cit-ty Cuck-olds pay it and they will --


2 Sold. Nor I by Oliver; we will find a time -- ere long to search their Mo-ney
Ba-gs: shall men -- of Clo-u^s have Gold, and men of War-re want it?


1 Sold. You are under Col. Bax-ter, the Thimble-maker.


2 Sold. Mar-ry am I.


1 Sold. I serve under the Command -- of Co-lonel Oker, Okey I mean.


2 Sold A pox upon it, wud I were amongst the Bacon-boyes again, with them my
Oaths could profit me; but here, if I but utter once an angry word, I Am snapt,
-- here is not a farthing on the pub-like Faith -- eight pence a day -- will
hardly find me Drink.


1 Sold. Hark -- I Will sing thee a Song.


2 Sold. Out with it.


1 Sol. A SONG.
1
WHat Rogues were we,
So deluded to be,
to come hither to our sorrow;
I would White Hall
To the ground might fall,
that we might be gone to morrow.
2
If here we do call,
And not pay for all,
we are sure to be soundly beaten;
As sure as our Coats,
They Will pluck out our throats,
if we pay not for what we have eaten.
3
I wish we were gone
From hence every one,
for sure we shall be all undone;
Should the Army come all,
What would them be fall?
they care not for Soldiers in London.

2 Sold. It Is time we were at our Quarters; let us away.


Exeunt. Enter CHORUS. Shall we never find our error,
but still stumble, till we fall
Into that Pit of endless Terror,
for our Crimes so capital?
Shall we still behold our God
Despised, his Priests without abode,
Our King for ever under-trod?
Shall our Laws be ever wanting,
and our own swords cut our throats?
Shall our hearts be always panting,
and nothing heard but drearie notes?
Shall a sort of Knaves still Rule us,
And a sort of Dolts still fool us?
Shall our faintness ever cool us?
England, will thy eyes nere be
with thy wrongs illuminated?
London, will thou never see,
but for ever be amated?
Let England rowze, and London rise,
Ere't be too late, if they be wise,
T'regaine their pristine Dignities.

Exit. Actus Quintus.
Enter Oliver, Harry Martin, Joice, Pride, Stains, cum multis aliis, sit round
at a Table, as in counsel. Oliv. I Will have no more Proposalls sent to the King
and so let them at Westminster be told; they are purely Iretons Issue, begotten
by the Court-influence on his brains; as, Sol and Homo generat Hominem.


Mart. No; we will at one blow break the yoke of Kings, and make our selves
sole Lords: as for the Scots, we will kick them home again, with their
Presbytery; they are not Engines fit for us to use.


Joice. I do rejoice to hear your good resolves.


Pride. And I am proud to be partaker with you.


Stories. Nor shall I count it any stain to honor, to set my helping hand.


Oliv. What Law is there, that can obstruct our hop^s now, we have conquered
our Conqueror? And if none have ^^^ue and legal ^^g^^ to the outward ben^^^ts
of this life (sage Saints) then none ought to enjoy their Sweets, BUT WE. If
any dare to repine or emulate at our greatness, is not our Army numerous and
strong, and able to stop their months with earth?


Mart. It Is true, great Sir, there is nothing visible that can retard our hopes;
but Policy persuades, to have a care of what may be hereafter: for this end,
let us send to them at Westminster, to frame an Ordinance to this effect
because the people groan under their burdens, and sigh for sorrow, when they
think, that yet more Troubles are to come, a choice Committee now selected are,
for to redress their wrongs, and hear their grievances.


Pride. Nor is this all need to be done: the people prophecy we level all,
and that the House of Peers with us are useless; now should the Lords,
incensed with their wrongs, conjure amongst their Tenants, the Devils would not
easily be laid.


Oliv. To noose those Lords yet further, since yet we have not made our best
of them, let there a Declaration be drawn up, in which we will say, that with
our utmost might we will support the Peerage of the Kingdom.


Mart. Fond fools, do they imagine, they can conserve their Honors, when
CHARLES has lost his Greatness? or, that when as our ends are served upon
them, we will not shake'em off with scorn and spite.


Oliv. It is decreed, and they shall find it so: what now remains, but that
we do proceed to make our selves FREE STATES? Which to accomplish, let no
time be lost, in voting down the KING, in sifting of his Manuscripts and
Papers, that so we may have matter for his Life:

And then, though Heaven and Earth say no such thing,
Yet spite of PATES, and MEN, I will be KING.

Exeunt. Enter CHORUS. Atlas, do thou our falling World sustain,
for we are sinking now into Abisse;
Let the Eumenides come on amain,
the high Cythaerus top, is Cromwels bliss:
But thou Maegera bring him down again,
and quench his Pride in the salt Meotis*
Or else let some brave soul for virtue stand,
And send his soul into Enio's hand.

Exit. THE END.

