QVERIES OF HIGHEST CONSIDERATION, Proposed to the five HOLLAND Ministers AND
THE Scotch Commissioners (SO CALLED.) Upon occasion of their late Printed
Apologies for themselves and their Churches. In all Humble Reverence presented
to the view of the Right Honorable the Houses of the High Court of Parliament.

LONDON, Imprinted in the year MDCX.IV.

QVERIES OF HIGHEST CONSIDERATION, Proposed to Mr. Tho. Goodwin Mr. Phillip Nigh
Mr. Will. Bridges Mr. Jer. Buroughs Mr. Sidr. Simpson.
AND To the Commissioners from the General Assembly (so called) of the Church
Of SCOTLAND; Upon occasion of their late Printed Apologies for themselves and
their Churches. In all Humble Reverence presented to the view of the Right
Honorable the Houses of the High Court of Parliament.

LONDON, Imprinted in the year MDCXLIV.

TO THE Right Honorable Both Houses of the High Court Of PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
IT is a woeful Privilege attending all great States and Personages, that they
seldom hear any other Music but what is known will please them.

Though our Music sound not sweet but harsh, yet please you first to know, it
is not fitted to your Ears, but to your Hearts, and the bleeding Heart of this
aflicted Nation.

It Is true, we have been humbly bold to presume as Ester into Ahasuerus his
presence, against your Order: For who can pass the many Locks and Bars of any
the several Licencers, appointed by you with such a Message? By such
Circumscribing and immuring of your selves by such a Guard (their Persons we
honor and esteem) it is rarely possible that any other Light, but what their
Hemispheare affoords, shall ever shine on your Honors Souls, though never so
sweet, so necessary, and though it come from God, from Heaven.

These Worthy and much esteemed Persons unto whom we Quaery, we have heard to
be Men of Conscience, of Abilities, and are in this worthy of double Honor,
that (according to their Consciences) they appear in the Front, and present
their Moulds and Patterns of Church Government, from Holland, from Scotland, to
our inquiring England.

Their mutual just Exceptions which they have already, or may further express
against each others Tenants we leave to themselves, (though we might express
them to our advantage.) We shall be humbly bold in the name of the Lord Jesus;
and the many thousand precious souls, for whom he has paid so dear a Ransom;
to present such Quaeries to your Honors view, as respect their joint Agreement
(Pardon the I hrase) like Ephraim and Manasseh (though fighting each against
other, yet) both against Christ Jesus the Lion of Iudahs Tribe; we mean so
far as they appose the Truth and Purity of his last will and Testament.

Most Renowned Patriots, You sit at Helm in as great a Storm, as ere poor
Englands Commonwealth was iost in: Yet be you pleased to remember, that
(excepting the affairs of Heaven, of Religion, of Souls, of Eternity) all
your Consultations, Conclusions, Executions, are not of the Quantity, of the
value of one poor drop of water, or the little dust of the Balance, of Elaiah
were a true Prophet, Esa. 40.15.

Yet concerning Souls, we will not (as most do) charge you with the loads of
all the Souls in England, Scotland, Ireland: We shall humbly affirm, and (by
the help of Christ) maintain, that the Bodies and Goods of the Subject is your
charge: Their Souls and yours are set on account to those that profess to be
the Lights and Guides, the Messengers and Ambassadors sent from Heaven to them.

You will please to say, We are constantly told, and we believe it, that
Religion is our first Care, and Reformation of that our greatest Task.

Right Honorable, your Wisdoms know the Fatal Miscariages of Englands
Parliaments in this point; what setting up, pulling down, what Formings,
Reformings, and again Deformings, to admiration.

Three Instances are dreadful, yet to express Seasonable.

First, The last and best of Englands changes, established Lord Bishops: they
and two more (Priests and Deacons) are by Law the established Ministers of
Englands Church: The former makes the latter, so far as concerns a lawful
external Calling. The Lord Bishops themselves, are now Voted Antichristian;
Your Wisdoms then see what Callings by Law, the other two sorts, Priests and
Deacons have all this while bin furnished with.

Secondly, if he that eats and drinks the Body and blood of Christ
unworthily, eats and drinks his own judgment, and all English souls are
bound by Law to cate that Body and Blood at sixteen, who sees not, since (as
it is confessed scarce one of a thousand, but is found ignorant, Impenitent,
Unregenerate at those years) that the Body of the People are compelled by Law,
to eat and drink at sixteen their own judgment.

Thirdly, for Nonconforming to these and other practices, the English
Masse-Booke, etc. what heavy Persecution have thousands felt, and that by Law
established?

We shall in all humble Reverence, suggest our Fears, that for the very Laws
and Statutes of Englands Parliaments concerning Religion, and happily for some
not yet suspected, the Lord Jesus has drawn this Sword, that is daily drunk
with English Blood.

It shall never be your Honor to this or future Ages, to be confined to the
Patterns of either French, Dutch, Scotch, or New-English Churches We humbly
conceive some higher Act concerning Religion, attends and becomes your
Consultations: If he whose name is, wonderful, Counselor, be consulted and
obeyed according to his last Will and Testament (as you may please in the
Quaeries to view) we are confident you shall exceed the Acts and Patterns of
all Neighbor Nations; bighly exalt the name of the Son of God; provide for the
Peace of this distressed State, engage the Souls of all that fear God, to
give Thanks and Supplicate for you; further the Salvation of thousands, and
leave the sweet perfume of your Names, precious to all succeeding Generations.

QUERIES PROPOUNDED To the five Holland Ministers, and the Scotch Commissioners.
WORTHY SIRS,
IN serious Examination of your late Apologies, we shall in all due respect and
tenderness humbly Querie:

Synod, What warrant from the Lord Jesus for the Assembly of Divines?
or Assembly of Divines, by virtue of which you may expect his presence and
assistance?

If you say (as all Popish Synods and Councels do) the Pattern is plain, Acts
15. Acts 15. examined.
We ask if two or three Brethren of one particular Congregation at Antioch,
sent to that first Mother Church at Jerusalem, where the Apostles were, who
being (immediately) inspired from God, could say, It seems good to the holy
Spirit and Us, to lay upon you no greater burden, etc. as also who had power
to make Decrees for all the Churches, Acts 16. We ask whether this be a
Pattern, A National Assembly necessarily inforceth an Assembly of the whole
world.
for a Nation or Kingdom (and so consequently for more Nations and all the
World if under one Government, as in Augustus Caesar's tax) to send their
several Priests and Deacons (for other spiritual Officers then Bishops,
Priests and Deacons you know we have not) to reform or form a Religion, etc?

We pray you to consider, Dan. 3. Daniels Image, a type of State Religions.
if the golden Image be not a type and figure of the several National and
State Religions, which all Nations set up and Ours has done, for which the
wrath of God is now upon Us?

We pray you also to answer in what part of Christ's Testament is found that
title, The Title, the Assembly of Divines examined.
The Assembly of Divines; and whether it be not in English, The Church of Godly
ones? And as we Queried your ground for such a Church, so have we also cause to
pray you to tell us, Where Christ Jesus has given you power to assume and
appropriate such a Title to your selves, which seems in Scripture to be common
to all the Children of God?

Some express it in Print and pulpit, That title, the Assembly of godly
Divines examined.
the Assembly of godly Divines; we derogate not from the worth or godliness of
any of them: yet you know the Assembly of Saints, or godly Divines, is no other
in English then the Assembly or Church of Saints, or godly godly ones. All that
will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution: We presume you will
grant others to be Saints and godly too in that sense: but Oh that that whole
Assembly or Congregation were truly resolved, (by way of Eminency) to lead all
the godly in the Land in such a Christian practice.

QUERIE II.
Whereas you both agree (though with some difference) that the Civil
Magistrate must Reform the Church, establish Religion, and so consequently must
first Judge, and Judicially Determine which is True, which is False: or else
must implicitly believe as the Assembly believes, and take it upon trust, and
so consequently is he the Head, Root and Fountain of the Supremacy of all
Spiritual power, and has the power of the Keys of opening and shutting
heaven gates, etc. Of which power upon a grudge (as it is said) about his Wife,
King Henry despoild the Pope, King Henry the 8. set down in the Popes chair.
and with consent and Act of Parliament, sat down himself in the Popes Chair
in England as since his Successors have done?

We now Querie, since the Parliament (being the representative Commonwealth)
has no other power but what the Commonweal derive unto, The Commonweal, yea
the world the head of the Church.
and betrust it with; whether it will not evidently follow, that the
Commonweal, the Nation the Kingdom, and (if it were in Augustus his time)
the whole world must rule and govern the Church, and Christ himself as the
Church is called, 1 Cor. 12.12?

Furthermore, if the Honorable Houses (the representative Commonweal) shall
erect a Spiritual Court, for the Judging of Spiritual Men and Spiritual
Causes (although a new Name be put upon it, A new High Commission.
yet) whether or no such a Court is not in the true nature and kind of it, an
High Commission? And is not this a reviving of Moses, and the sanctifying of a
new Land of Canaan, of which we hear nothing in the Testament of Christ Jesus,
nor of any other holy Nation, but the particular Church of Christ? 1 Pet. 2.9.

Is not this to subject this holy Nation, this heavenly Jerusalem, the Wife and
Spouse of Jesus, the pillar and ground of Truth, to the vain, uncertain and
changeable Mutations of this present evil world?

Who knows not in how few years the Commonweal of England has set up and
pulled down? The Parlaments of Englands wonderful changes in Religion.
The Fathers made the Children Heretics, and the Children the Fathers. How
does the Parliament in Henry the 8. his days condemn the absolute Popery in
Henry the seventh? How is in Edwards the 6. his time the Parliament of Henry the
8. condemned for their half Popery, half Protestanisme? How soon does Queen
Mary's Parliament condemn Edward for his absolute Protestanisme? The present
Parliament would have been esteemed Heretical in former times.
And Elizabeth's Parliament as soon condemn Queen Mary's for their absolute
Popery? It Is true, Queen Elizabeth made Laws against Popery and Papists, but
the Government of Bishops, the Common Prayer, the Ceremonies were then so high
in that Queen and Parlaments eye, that the Members of this present and ever
renowned Parliament, would have then been counted little less then Heretics.
And oh! since the Commonweal cannot without a spiritual rape force the
consciences of all to one Worship, oh that it may never commit that rape, in
forcing the consciences of all men to one Worship, which a stronger arm and
Sword may soon (as formerly) arise to alter.

QUERIE III.
Whether since you profess to be Builders, The only true Matter for a true
Church are living Stones.
you have not cause to fear and tremble, least you be found to reject the
Corner stone, in not fitting to him only living stones? 1 Pet. 2. Of these
living stones, (true Believers) the costly Stones of the Temple were types: and
without true matter, which (as it is in all works in the World) it is
impossible to build a spiritual House unto God?

This matter, the One of you confess and practice, the Other questions and
mingles Sheep and Goats together, contrary to the spiritual nature of the Lord
Jesus, and his true Pattern; contrary to the nature of God, who is a Spirit,
and will be Worshipped by Spiritual Worshippers; contrary to the peace and
safety of any natural Soul and conscience, hardened in a dream of Fellowship
with God, who says to the ungodly, What have thou to do to take my Covenant
into thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? Psalm. 50.

QUERIE IV.
Whether in your consciences before God, you be not persuaded (notwithstanding
your promiscuous joining with all) that few of the People of England and
Scotland, Few of the people of England or Scotland, living Stones.
and fewer of the Nobles and Gentry are such spiritual matter, living stones,
truly regenerate and converted; and therefore, Whether it be not the greatest
Courtesy in the world, which you may possibly perform unto them, to acquaint
them impartially with their conditions; and how impossible it is for a dead
Stone to have Fellowship with the living God, and for any man to enter into the
Kingdom of God, without a second Birth? John 3.

QUERIE V.
Although the fame and sound is great of Reformation, we Querie, Impossible to
reform the dead in sin, the spiritually living, are only capable of
reformation according to Christ.
Whether a dead soul is capable of any Reformation, until the first principle
of Christianity, Repentance ( Heb. 6.6.) be found in him: otherwise, as a
thousand several renewed Forms of Apparel, alters not the condition of a dead
man: or a thousand new Forms of Postures of an Army of Cavaliers cannot make
a Parliament Army: So we Querie how possible that a person or persons, visibly
in a state of nature, dead in sin, in a state of enmity and opposition
against God ( Ephesians. Definitions of ought must not be from the corruption, but
Institution of it, according to which mist be the reformation.
2. Romans 8.) can ever please God, be visibly married to God, fight for him under
the Banners of Love? etc. Allegations may be brought from the corruptions of
the Church of the Jews, and the Churches of Christ: but We do not use to
define a Man by his Diseases, nor a Garden by Weeds, nor a City by a Tumult,
or an Army by a Rout or disorder, especially when we treat upon an Institution
or Resturation.

QUERIE VI.
Although you both profess your Holiness, Diligence, Zeal, Courage,
Selfe-denyall, Patience, and the one of you the incomparable spirit of your
Fathers in the work of Reformation; yet we Querie, Excellent Witnesses of
Christ Jesus, who never proceeded to a Churchestate
Whether there has not been as Holy, Able, and Zealous Men since the
Apostacy; Men like Antipas, Rev. 2. faithful Witnesses of the Lord Jesus (in
what Light they saw) even to Death, who yet never came up to such a work of
Reformation as you speak of: Yea (without offense be it spoken) have there not
been as excellent and heavenly Reformers as your selves and Fathers, whose
professed Reformation you now dislike? Who shall outshine many of the
Waldensian Reformers for Holiness, Zeal, Excellent reformers, whose work now
seems to be beside the first Pattern, and this Age dislikes, forsakes, etc.

One of the greatest Parlaments that ever was, after all rejoicing and
triumphing in it found Gods anger for their errors, in reformation of his
worship.


patience? Where is, or has that precious man been found, who has (for
personal excellencies) outshined Luther? and who shall o'retop those glorious
Cedars Bishops, Doctors, etc. burnt for Christ Jesus in Queen Mary's days?

Yea, where the Church we grant to have been true (according to its
Instistution, for the time of it) What Assembly, what Parliament can compare
with that of David and his Captains of thousands, Captains of hundreths, and
every Leader, and all the Congregation of Israel from Shishor of Egypt, to the
entering in of Hemath assembled together to reform the Worship of God, in that
true, but National. Typical, Church estate of Israel? What rejoicing, what
playing was there of David and all Israel with Harps, Psalteries, Timbrells,
Cymballs and Trumpets, and yet how angry was God, what a Breach did he make?
for David and all Israel transgrest the due appointed Order, 1 Cron. 13. 1
Cron. 15.

QUERIE VII.
Since the Law was given by Moses, A National Covenant, and a National
Church, not found in the Doct ine of the Son of God
but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, by whom (though God spoke diverse
times and diverse ways to the Fathers) he has now revealed his council in
these last times, Heb. 1. We Quere, where you now find one footstep, Print or
Pattern in this Doctrine of the Son of God, for a National holy Covenant, and
so consequenty (though we conceive the one of you stumble at it) a National
Church? Where find you evidence of a whole Nation, Country or Kingdom converted
to the Faith and of Christ's appointing of a whole Nation or Kingdom to walk in
one way of Religion?

If you repair to Moses, Such as hold a National Church of God must needs
disclaim Christ and follow Moses.
consult with Moses and the old Covenant or Testament, we ask, are you Moses
or Christ's Followers? or do you yet expect the coming of the Son of God to set
up the Christian Israel, the holy Nation, the particular Congregation of
Christian Worshippers, in all parts of the world? 1 Pet. 2. Heb. 12. etc.

We further Quere, Whether a National Covenant, lead not (in case, If one
whole Nation, where should we stop, why may not many and the whole world? etc.
and as is practiced) unavoydably to a holy Covenant of many Nations? 2 Pet.
10.20. yea, to a holy league or Covenant (in case of Augustus his Government)
of the whole world, which should then turn the Darling and Spouse of God,
between whom and it there is such enmity, that if any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him? 1 John 2.

The Doctrine of Christ Jesus tells us that, Acts 10.35. That in every Nation
he that fears God, The nature of the true Church or Congregation of Christ
Jesus
etc. Not every Nation that fears God. Christ Jesus tells us that his Church
may come together to break bread in One place, 1 Cor. 11. which Nations and
Countries cannot possibly do: Christ Jesus tells us this his Congregation is
now the Commonweal of Israel, invested with the true Kingly power of the Lord
Jesus, to put forth every wicked person (though King or Keysar) from amongst
them.

We Querie, There cannot be 2 true kinds of Churches, no more then 2 true
Parliaments.
Whether it be possible there should be 2 true sorts or kinds of Churches, any
more then it is possible there may be 2 true Parlaments in England, though many
scores or hundreths should be called?

There are indeed 3 score Queens, and 4 score Concubines and Virgins without
number, which seem to imply (and that even in these times, as some also have
interpreted) several kinds of Congregations or Churches, Several sorts of
Churches like Brazen, Silver, and Golden Candlesticks.
and yet Christ's Dove is but one, and the only one of her motherr, Cant. 6. The
Light of much Truth may shine forth on the brazen Candlesticks of strong
National Churches, maintained and held up by the seeming strong Sword of Steel
in an Arm of Flesh etc. There may be silver Candlesticks more refined and pure
in respect of the Matter of which they are constituted, viz. godly persons,
etc. But Christ Jesus only walks in the amidst of his Golden Candlesticks,
Gathered and Governed after the Golden Institution of Christ's Word, which is
like fine Gold, Rev. 1. Psa. 19.

Again, we ask, A National Religion must rack Souls and Bodies,
Whether in the Constitution of a Natinall Church, it can possibly be framed
without a racking and tormenting of the Souls, as well as of the Bodies of
persons, for it seems not possible to fit it to every conscience: sooner shall
one suit of Apparel fit every Body, one Law president every Case, or one Size
or Last every Foot?

Lastly, The dangerous consequences of it.
Whether it be not the cause of a world of Hypocritets, he Soothing up of
people in a Formal State Worship to the ruin of their Souls; the ground of
Persecution to Christ Jesus in his Members, and sooner or later, the kindling
of the devouring flames of Civil Wars, as all Ages testify?

QUERIE VIII.
Whether, No Wars for Christ but Christian or Spiritual.
although (as is expressed) the godly in the 3 Kingdoms desire a Reformation:
yet since the Lamb of God and Prince of Peace has not in his Testament given
us a Pattern, Precept or Promise, for the undertaking of a civil War for his
sake; we Querie how with comfort to your Souls you may encourage the English
Treasure to be Exhausted, and the English Blood to be spilt for the Cause of
Christ? We readily grant the Civil Magistrate armed by God with a civil Sword
( Romans 13.) to execute vengeance against Robbers, War lawful in civil cases.
Murderers, Tyrants, etc. Yet where it merely concerns Christ, we find, when
his Disciples desire vengeance upon Offenders, Luke 9. he meekly answers, You
know not what spirit you are of, I came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save
them. Christ Jesus forbids fighting for his sake.
If ever there were cause for the servants of Christ Jesus to fight it was
then, when (not his Truth, or Servants, or Ordinances, but) his own most holy
Person was in danger, Math. 26. yet then, that Lamb of God checks Peter
beginning to fight for him, telling him, that all that take the Sword shall
perish by the Sword, for with one Request to his Father, he could have been
rescued by more then 12 Legions of Angels: The Reasons of it.
He renders the Reason of his unwillingnesse to have Fighting for his sake,
which was his Fathers good pleasure in the fullfilling of the Scripture: Unto
which also may be added, John 18.36. My Kingdom is not of this world, if my
Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight that I should not be
delivered, etc.

If it be said his Kingdom then was not of this world, but now it is, or shall
be: then was the hour of his Suffering, but now of his servants Reigning:
Christ's sufferings to be filled up by his Followers.
we Querie, What filling up of the sufferings of Christ Paul speaks of, Col. 1.
when he mentions that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ? What means
that general Rule of the Lord Jesus Luke 9. If any man will follow me, let him
take up his Cross or Gibbet: and that of Paul, 2 Timothy 4. all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution?

We Querie (if Security may be taken by the Wildome of the State for civil
Subjection,) The consciences of Idolaters not to be oppressed by the Sword,
why even the Papists themselves and their Consciences may not be permitted in
the World? For otherwise, if Englands Government were the Government of the
whole World, not only They, but a world of Idolaters of all sorts, yea the
whole World must be driven out of the World?

We Querie, Whether the Common Body of Protestants, impenitent and
unregenerate, be not further off Salvation, and lie not under a greater guilt
(like Chorazin and Bethsaida) then does the body of ignorant Papists? Ignorant
Papists not such great sinners as knowing Protestants.
And we humbly desire it may be deeply pondered what should be the kindling of
the Jealousy of God, to pour forth the Blood of so many Thousands of
Protestants, by the bloody hands of the Papists (since most just He is and
righteous in all his Judgments) whether or no the Laws inacted, and Violence
offered even to the Consciences of the Papists themselves, have not kindled
these devouring flames?

It Is true, the Prophesies are great concerning Christ and Antichrist
throughout the Prophets and the Kevelation, but can you sufficiently
demonstrate these to the consciences of men? The Prophesies of Daniel and John
not so easity demonstrated.
Are you those our blessed Prophets which can tell us how long? Psalm. 74.

Can you clear up the mysteries of Daniels 2300 days, Dan. 8. Daniels 7 weeks
and 3 score and 2 weeks, his one week, and his half week, Daniels and John's
mystical Numbers.
Dan. 9? His time, times, and half a time, his 1290 days, and 1335 days, Dan.
12?

Can you unlocke those mystical numbers of John's 42 months, 1260 days; the 3
days and a half, Rev. 11.12. the time, times, and half a time, Rev. 12. and
the thousand year, Rev. 20. with diverse others, which may establish the
Judgments and Consciences of Men, and give them Warrant whereon to venture
their Souls, and shed their Bloods, for the present destruction of Pope and
Popery (not by the breath of Christ's mouth, and the Sword of the Spirit, but)
by the breath of murdering Canons, and a flaming Sword of steel?

Otherwise, we Querie, The wonderful slaughters of Papists and Protestants in
the famous wars of the Waldensians.
Whether the blood of so many hundredth thousand Protestants, mingled with the
blood of so many hundredth thousand Papists, as was spilt some hundredth years
in the Waldensian wars, when all the Protestant party that took the Sword
perished with it, be not a warning to us their offspring?

It Is true, John tells us of Christ's great Battles against the Kings of the
Earth, The great battles of Christ Jesus yet to be fought.
against the Beast and false Prophet against Gog and Magog: but where speaks he
of other Ammunition and Artillery, used by the Saints, but what we find in
Paul's Christian Magazine Ephesians. 6? Where read we of any other Horse and Arms
but those all white? Rev. 19. And yet the Lamb shall have the Victory over the
Beast, and false Prophet, and over Gog and Magog in the appointed season. Gods
children have been successful witnesses against the Abominations etc. but
never did well in Church Reformation, which their children after them discover,
to vary from the Pattern.


QUERIE IX.
You both profess great Sufferings, etc. We Querie, Whether any of the
Sufferings of Gods Witnesses since the Apostacy, have been only right against
the dark part, the Inventions, Abominations and Usurpations of Antichrist,
according to Rev. 11? As for the light part, who sees not but to this day the
Childrens Reformations in new changes condemn their Fathers, whose Zeal and
Patience against the dark part, have hitherto exceeded the Childrens.

We Querie, Whether the finishing of the Testimony, with the slaughter of the
Witnesses, and their 3 days and half last great oppression be over and past,
that so the light part may arise in its brightness? Martyrs, that is,
Witnesses, not peculiar to those that die for Christ.
And though you commonly and only call those Martyrs, who lost their lives for
Jesus: yet we also Querie, Whether Martyrs, that is Witnesses, Rev. 11. be not
applyable to all the servants of Christ, who Witness against any part of the
Beasts Kingdom and Tyranny, although they never Witness to the Death?

QUERIE X.
Since you report your opposing and suppressing of Heresies, and glorious
success, etc. We Querie, Whether that be a demonstrative argument from the
Scriptures, for a Truth of a Church, or Government of it, since even the Church
of Rome may boast of the same against many Schisms and Heresies, and does try
umph with wonderful success, even against the Truth, and the Witnesses of it,
according to Daniel and John's Prophesies? Dan. 11. Rev. 13.

Thus it pleased God in his Providence to turn the scales of Victory (with a
relief of their Armies) to the Idolatrous Israelites and Edomites against the
Moabites, God sometimes gives great success of Victory, even to Idolaters.
2 Kings 3. and miraculously to deliver Idolatrous Apostate Israel from the
mighty Armies of the Syrians, 2 Kings 7. Thus he also rewarded hypocritical
Jehn for his temporal service in destroying Ahabs house with a temporal
Honor to the fourth generation, though himself and his continued in the
Schism, Apostacy and Idolatry of the house of Israel.

We pray you also to call to mind how it pleases God, out of the bottomless
Ocean of his Goodness, to cause his Sun to shine, and his raines to fall upon
the righteous and the wicked; and time and chance (says Solomon) happens unto
all, and one event.

It pleased the Lord to hear the Prayers of wicked Ahab, God sometimes hears
the prayers of legal cries of Idolaters, and the Dwells themselves.
and to remit his temporal Affliction upon his temporal Humiliation.

Thus the Lord Jesus heard the prayers of the Devils themselves, Luke 8. Upon
the cry of the Idolatrous Mariners God mercifully provided to answer their
prayers, and cease the Storm by the casting out of Jonah. Thus upon the
external legal Humiliation of Ninivie, it was reprieved and spared a season;
and Sodom had not been burned to ashes, but had continued until Christ's time,
upon a supposition of their legal Humiliation, Matthew. 11.

Thus although the Idolatrous Assirians feared Jehovah, Judgments taken off
from the Assyrians, upon the least shadow of Gods worship.
and served their gods (2 Kings 17.) yet we hear no more of the Lions amongst
them when the King of Assyria had taken order for one of Isreal's Idolatrous
Priests, to teach the Assyrians something of the manner of Gods service.

We Querie, Whether all these Instances amount to more then Evidences of the
infinite Mercies, Goodness and Patience of God but are not proofs of their
Worshipping of God according to his Ordinance, that their Institutions were
from him, and their Reformations according to his Appointment?

Yea, we further Querie, Whether the power of godliness, shining forth in
persons may evidence their state and Worship good? The power of godliness may
shine in some persons living in great prophanations of Gods worship.
You both confess the great profession of the power of godliness in England:
yet we believe the one of you acknowledge the Church of England as a National
Church not true; and both confess the Government, Governors, and the Common
Prayer (the Service and Worship of it) to be abominable. Yet it is confessed that
Englands false National Church, with her Bishops, Common Prayer, ceremonies
etc. had more evidence of the power of godliness in her Children, then was to be
found amongst the Scotch, French Dutch, who pretend a Reformation purer. It
seems therefore evident, that neither opposing of Heresies, nor success in
Victories Deliverances, nor power of godliness in some persons, can evidence
and prove their State and Worship to be right and pleasing unto God, according
to his Ordinance in Christ Jesus.

QUERIE XI.
Since you both seem to magnify the Seals of Baptism, and the Lords Supper,
with a difference and excellency above other Ordinances, We Querie where the
Lord Jesus appointed such a difference and distinction? And whether there was
not as full Communion practiced by the first Christians in the Word, Prayer,
and Community, as in the breaking of Bread? Acts 2.42.

Further we Querie, since Baptism is one of those Fundamentalls, Heb. 6. and
every one that will be saved is bound to prove his Faith and his Baptism true
( Mark. 16.16. he that believes and is baptized shall be saved.) We Quere, how
a Baptismes or 2 Great Seals can be true in the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, any
more then 2 Great Seals can be true in the Kingdom of England? And whether a
Christian Commission, Pattent, Pardon, Writ, can be truly sealed (as is
maintained) from Rome, any more then a civil Commission, Pattent, Pardon or
Writ can be truly Sealed at Oxford?

To insist upon a late instance: since the Bishops power and Calling is
condemned as Antichristian, how can we evidence the Seal of Baptism true,
which we have received from them?

Furthermore, since a true Baptism gives Right to all the Ordinances of
Christ Jesus, we Querie, how any Protestant or Papist, whose Baptism you
acknowledge to be true, can be denied Communion in the Supper also, according
to 1 Cor. 12.12. By one spirit are we all baptized into one body, and
consequently into the participation of the Ordinances thereof: and if so, we
Querie how far off Rome and the Pope himself is from our bosoms?

QUERIE XII.
Since you both profess to want more Light, and that a greater Light is yet to
be expected; yea, that the Church of Scotland may yet have need of a greater
Reformation, etc. we Querie, how you can profess and Swear to Persecute all
others as Schismatiques, Heretics, etc. that believe they see a further Light,
and dare not join with either of your Churches? Whether the Lambs Wife have
received any such Commission or Disposition from the Lamb her Husband, so to
practice? Whether (as King JAMES once wrote upon Re. 20.) it be not a true mark
and character of a false Church to Persecute? It being the nature only of a
Wolf to hunt the Lambs and Sheep, but impossible for a Lamb or Sheep, or a
thousand Flocks of Sheep to persecute one Wolf: we speak of spiritual Sheep
and spiritual Wolves: for other Wolves against the Civil State, We profess
it to be the Duty of the Civil State to persecute and suppress them.

And lastly, whether the States of Holland who tolerate, though not own (as
you say) the several Sects amongst them which differ from them, The States of
Holland in permitting other consciences, obey the Command of Christ of
permitting the Tares.
and are of another conscience and worishp, whether or no they com not nearer
the holy Pattern and command of the Lord Jesus, to permit the tares to have a
civil being in the field of the world, until the harvest the end of it. Mat.
13?

Whether those tares can possibly be taken for Hipocrites in the Church, or
Scandalous persons in the Common weal, but are most properly false worshippers,
and in especial, and punctually intended by the Lord Jesus Antichristians, the
Children of the wicked one, opposite to the true Christians, the Children of
the Kingdom?

Whether for this very Truth which those States profess, Noctate for the time
bath been blessed by God as that to admiration.
beyond either England or Scotland, it has not pleased the Lord to prosper the
State, above any other State in the word, for the time, since such their wise
Permission? Whether there can possibly be expected the least look of Peace, in
these fatal Distractions and Tempests raised, but by taking Council of the
great and wisest Politician that ever was, the Lord Jesus Christ, in this
particular?

We know the Allegations against this Council: the head of all is that from
Moses (not Christ) his Pattern in the typical Land of Canaan, the Kings of
Israel and Judah, etc. The danger and mischief of bringing Moses his Pattern
into Kingdoms now since Christ Jesus his coming.
We humbly desire it may be searched into, and we believe it will be found but
one of Moses shadows, vanished at the coming of the Lord Jesus: yet such a
shadow as is directly opposite to the very Testament and coming of the Lord
Jesus. Opposite to the very nature of a Christian Church, the only holy Nation
and Israel of God. Opposite to the very tender Bowels of Humanity, (how much
more of Christianity?) abhorring to pour out the blood of Men merely for their
Souls belief and worship. Opposite to the very Essentialls and Fundamentalls
of the Nature of a Civil Magistracy, a Civil Commonweal or combination of
Men, which can only respect civil things. Opposite to the Jews Conversion to
Christ, by not permitting them a civil life or being. Opposite to the civil
Peace, and the lives of Millions, slaughtered upon this ground, in mutual
persecuting each others Conscience, especially the Protestant and the Papist.
Opposite to the Souls of all Men, who by persecutions are ravished into a
dissembled Worship, which their Hearts embrace not.

Opposite to the best of Gods servants, who in all Popish and Protestant
States, have been commonly esteemed and persecuted, as the only Schismatics,
Heretics, etc. Opposite to that Light of Scripture which is expected yet to
shine, which must by that Doctrine be suppressed as a new or old Heresy or
Noveltie. All this in all Ages experience testifies, which never saw any long
lived Fruit of Peace or Righteousness to grow upon that fatal Tree.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 6. line 13. dele Peter. p. 9. l. 12. r. years since. l. 26 r. have not
been.


