Christ's Banner of Love.

Set up to call all Christians to serve in Love and Unity under it.

But especially directed to the Saints of both Kingdoms.

Walk in Love, as Christ has loved us. publisher's devicr

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 1648.

Christ's Banner of Love.
IT is never enough to be lamented, That when Christ has made Love, the very
Character and Badge of his Disciples, those that would be called Christians,
that is, the Disciples of Christ, are far from that wherein this Discipleship
does especially consist. One Apostle having named some chief Graces and
Virtues, says; But the greatest of these is love; And in another place, Above
all these things put on love, which is the bond of perfectness. And another
Apostle; Above all things have fervent love among your selves. But how comes it
to pass then, that when Christ and his Apostles set up love above all things,
we see so many things set up above love, yea, we see love destroyed for little
things, which is better than all things? Yea, when love by uniting would
mutually preserve the Saints, they by hatred and contention will destroy both
love and themselves; yet the same evil spirit that moves to this destroying by
hatred and division, preserves his own Kingdom by unity. And though his
depraved nature be contrary to true love, yet his craft so far overrules, or
at least guides his malice, that he holds unity for our ruin, and his own
preservation. But Christians, whose Divine Nature is especially made up of
love, run hastily and headily into hatred and division; and thus do they go
contrary to the Divine Nature, wherein is the virtue of the Dove, and the
wisdom commended in the Serpent. But do not those that talk of Christianity,
and thus walk contrary to it, merely turn Christianity into talking, and
make themselves but tinkling Cymballs?

Let true Christians seriously consider, that union in Christ their head, is a
stronger root of love and unity than lesser differences can be of division. It
was the great Plot of Christ by the expense of his most precious Blood, to
recapitulate and bring into unity under one Head those that lay scattered under
sundry differences; and is it not then to counter-worke against Christ's great
Plot and Mystery of Godliness, by small differences to divide those whom he
has by so dear a purchase knit together; yet (which is a high degree of this
mischief) men pretend for Christianity to hate and destroy Christians; but is
it not the same which in others has bin truly called Antichristian; for both
this and that persecutes Christ in his members, opposes Christ in his
Doctrine, and in his maine work and dispensation; let such hear Paul speaking:
Where there are divisions among you are ye not carnal, and walk as men? And
indeed, is it not carnal to hate a member of Christ for that difference which
he may have, and yet be a member of Christ? Is not he more to be loved for
being a member of Christ then to be hated for that difference? yea, if Christ
do love and forgive him, how dare thou to hate him whom Christ loves? Have
thou seen any warrant in Scripture to give thee authority to hate a member of
Christ who agrees with Christ by faith and love, but agrees not with thee in
all thy opinions? The Scripture says, We know but in part; and if so, thou
must give every Saint these grains of allowance which the Apostle gives him.
It may be the knowledge of that point wherein he differs from thee is not
within his part, and thou will have him know beyond his part, or else thou will
fall out with him; Is not this to fall, out with a Saint for impossibilities;
and which is more, is it not to fight against God in his dispensations? God is
not pleased to put this knowledge within his part, and therefore thou fall'st
out with him; and is not thy quarrel against God also, because God has not
revealed it unto him? yea, as confident as thou art, it may be that opinion for
which thou fall'st out with him is not in thy part, but that which he holds is
within his part; and then what a double madness is it to hate thy brother, for
not maintaining that opinion which thou hold, but know not to be a truth,
and for that truth which thy brother knows, and therefore maintains? But if
of ignorance he err in those things that are out of his part, bear with him
as thou would be born with, yea loved, notwithstanding that error, for this
is the Law and the Prophets. It is not to be believed, that any Saint willingly
would maintain a known error, and if he hold it of weakness, receive him
that is weak, and not for contentions and dividing disputations; bear with
him in that which is beyond his part, and he shall bear with thee in that
which is beyond thy part; for there is a great number of truths which some
Saints know, and others do not; yea many which none attain unto. We have
plain places of Scripture wherein love to all Saints is commended and
commanded, but none wherein hatred of Saints for lesser measures of knowledge
is enjoined or approved.

Again, the Body of Christ does edify it self in love, therefore no love, no
edification. But on the contrary, as love edifies, so hatred pulls down, and
tears the building into pieces. Now what says the Scripture? Who so destroys
the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. A fearful work paid with fearful
wages, Temple destruction followed with destruction of Temple destroyers.
Neither is this wholly deferred to the great day, but even in this life
division of Saints threatens destruction; for if ye bite on another, ye shall
be consumed one of another. When these lesser differences make a division, the
great Malignant puts in his wedge, and the lesser follow and serve him in this
work, and both tear Saints asunder to destroy them by dividing; yea to
destroy one Saint by another. A sad thing when Saints shall do the Devils
works, dividing and destroying. But far from Saints be the works and paths of
the destroyer. But let them much rather do the works of God, even of that God
who is Love, and his work is Salvation. Let them strive to preserve each other
by provoking one another to love and good works, and by being knit and linkt
together so fast in love, that none of these infernal Wedges and Engines may
tear them asunder. Let them walk in those saving truths which they have
attained to, with one mind, and one love; and if any thing besides be not yet
attained to, wait with mutual patience and forbearance until the same be
revealed.

I know there are errors to whose owners and maintainers the Apostle allows
not, God speed. But I speak not of those, but of such differences and
divisions as are of a lower nature. And is not the internal unity of the
Spirit a greater band of love and peace then difference in small matters or
externalls, be of hatred, division, and mutual destruction? Is not such a
destruction like unto this, that when two owners of a field of Corn cannot
agree about the fashion of the hedge, upon this disagreement they will both
agree to set the Corn on fire and destroy it? What were this but to destroy
the Corn for that very thing, whose maine, if not only use, is to preserve it?
Let Saints hear the voice and judgment of Moses (a great Saint, and who in
this voice spoke as one that was designed to be the great Judge of Israel) Why
sttive ye, since ye are brethren? Why tear ye the Body of Christ into pieces
for the cloths of the body? Is not the body better then raiment? Christ has
shed his blood for his Saints, and his Spirit into the Saints, to purchase
love, peace, and unity for them; do not rob him of his purchase by divisions,
and tearing his body asunder, least he again cry out from Heaven, Why do you
persecute me? and why do you tear me in pieces in my members? Let us not
prefer low quarrels and opinions before Christ dwelling and living in his
members; what is this but to make Idols of them, and to make our selves like
those of Canaan, who sacrificed their Sons and Daughtere to their Idols; and
what follows? Thus was the Land defiled with innocent blood.

But let every man sadly and sincerely examine the matter, both as a Christian,
and as a wise man: as a Christian, let him ask his Soul, whether it can be the
Spirit that hates and endeavors to destroy a man that has the Spirit,
certainly it is impossible, that the Spirit should hate the Spirit, or him that
has it. For the fruit of the Spirit is love, even love to all the brethren
that are borne of the same Spirit. And if it be a work of the flesh, what has
a spiritual man to do with the flesh but to kill it? and not for the flesh to
kill those that have the Spirit. Secondly as a wise man, who would by such
devision and opposition of Brethren make a gap, and open a gate for the common
enemy to come in and destroy both? wherefore (to conclude) let not lesser
faults or exceptions which may stand with brotherhood, dissolve brother hood;
much less set Brethren to destroy one another. And if it were lawful (as it
is not in Abraham's judgment, who was the Father of the faithful, and told his
Nephew Lot, Let us not strive, because we are brethren) yet first of all,
means should be used for reconciliation and satisfaction; thus did the whole
Congregation of Israel by Messengers sent to the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and
half Tribe of Manasseth, when they were suspected for setting up a new and
forbidden kind of Worship. Lastly, far be it from Brethren upon doubtful and
disputable differences, yea doubtful breaches of Covenant, to break that
plain and downright part of the Covenant; That each one of us according to
our place and interest shall endeavor, that these Kingdoms may remain
conjoined in a firm peace and union to all posterity. To break a certain and
clear part of the Covenant for uncertainties, is a most certain sin surely;
the breach of this peace and union is in it self a great Judgment upon the
Kingdoms. But how great a judgment shall he deserve, that by a breach of Oath
is a cause of this Judgment? Come not into their secret, O my Soul, for
cursed is their anger, and their wrath is cruel; divide them in Jacob, and
scatter them in Israel; for they would divide Jacob, and by dividing scatter
and destroy Israel, even our Jerusalem, compacted and knit together in both
Nations by Saintship and Covenant. But pray we for the union and peace of
Jerusalem; let us say (and endeavor what we say) peace be within thy walls,
and prosperity in thy palaces. For my Brethren and companions sake I will now
say, Peace be within thee; and let all the Brethren and Companions agree in
this, and say, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

