The humble PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council ASSEMBLED.

To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in High Court of
PARLIAMENT.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.

TO THE HONORABLE THE House of Commons ASSEMBLED In High Court of PARLIAMENT:
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common council assembled.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners do with all readiness acknowledge the High Court of
Parliament to be the supreme Power and Judicatory in this Kingdom,
constituted for the defense and contrivement of the safety and freedom of this
Nation, unto whom all other Powers and Societies of men ought to submit, and
with their utmost ability to assist and support, in whose well-being and happy
progress, the peaceable and slourishing condition of this Nation does
principally consist. The contempt and overthrow of whose power and authority,
cannot but be the woeful inlet to all Tyranny and confusion, the peoples
slavery, and the Laws subversion.

And your Petitioners do with all thankfulness acknowledge and remember the
unwearied pains, uncessant labor, and constant endeavors of this present
Parliament in the common cause of God and this Kingdom, wherein (though your
enemies have been many and great, their oppositions strong, their counsels
deep, and your discouragements not a few;) Yet (through the good hand of God
upon you) with the united assistance of our Brethren of Scotland) and the
well-affected people of this Kingdom, joined together in a solemn League and
C1ovenant, whose lives and treasure under God became your Bulwark, (among whom
this City has been by you often acknowledged to be contributers of an ample
share) Your enemies have been dispersed, their counsels broken, your
endeavors crowned with honor, and your Armies rest successful.

And though the long desired fruits of peace, of freedom and common Justice,
the easing of the peoples burdens and reforming of abuses, have been much
obstructed and retarded by the necessities of a long continued war, the sad
divisions amongst all orders and societies of men in the Kingdom, the fears
of apparent dangers and sudden changes to arise thereby; yet when your
Petitioners look upon their exemption from monopolies and other illegal
impositions, the deliverances they have had from the power and tyranny of the
Prelates and their vexatious Courts, the demolishing of the High Commission,
Star Chamber, and that unparalled benefit and freedom this Kingdom now
enjoyes in the removal of the Court of Wards, whereby the persons, the
posterities and estates of the Subjects were so much encumbered and inthral'd
(all which by many are ungratefully forgotten and cast out of mind) and which
therefore out of duty your Petitioners have imboldned themselves thus
publicly to enumerate, they cannot choose but with renewed hopes expect ere
long to see the Kingdom flourish and their troubles ended.

And when your Petitioners do consider how not many months agon, the whole
Kingdom seemed to be reduced to the obedience of the Parliament, their Brethren
of Scotland returned home with good content, the City replenished again with
Inhabitants, the exchange of moneys with foreign Nations brought into a good
Medium, Trade in a prosperous condition, the Excise and Customs increasing
thereby, a way of settlement agreed upon by the Parliaments of both Nations,
and all things looking with a face of quietness and sweet composure; They
cannot but with grief of heart remember the unhappy disagreement between the
Parliament and Army, and that late dangerous engagement, which as it was set on
foot in or about this City, without their knowledge or consent, so they do
utterly disavow and abhor it. Those many discontents and great disturbances
which accompanied the same and followed thereupon both to Parliament and City.
Those unparalleld outrages and affronts committed by Reformadoes and other
tumultuous and discontented persons upon both Houses, and the Armies advancing
toward this City; The Common Council hurried into a Declaration and into
diverse Military preparations intended by them for no other end but the safety
of Parliament and City.

Whereupon has followed the free-quartering of the Army about the City, which
has occasioned the dearnesse of Provisions, and given opportunity to evil
minded persons to soment differences and discontents both in the City and Army,
and has caused foreign Nations and others to call home and remove their
stocks to parts beyond the Seas, to the great decay of trade in this City and
Kingdom; and by the disproportion of exchange, this Kingdom is not only
deprived of foreign Bullyon, but (through the encouragement taken thereby)
have their own coin transported away.

That your Petitioners are deeply sensible of the great displeasure of the
Parliament toward this City, manifested in the limiting the extent of their
Militia, taking away the nomination of the Persons entrusted therewith, and of
the Lievtenancy of the Tower of London; the guarding of the Parliament and
Tower with Soldiers of the Army, the imprisoning of their Recorder, several
Aldermen, and other Members of this City.

Wherefore your Petitioners humbly pray, That the Honor, Power and Privileges
of Parliament may by your Wisdom and Justice be inviolably preserved; That the
Army may be so provided for, that they may be enabled to remove their Quarters
to a farther distance from the City, whereby the price of Provisions may be
abated and Trade encouraged; That Free Quarter may be prevented, and
supernumerary Forces disbanded; That a more vigorous course may be taken in
settling of the Peace and Government of the Kingdom so long desired; That the
Covenant may be duly observed; That all well-affected Persons that have adhered
to the Parliament may be effectually protected and defended; That the Recorder,
Aldermen, and other Citizens now imprisoned (so as it may stand with the Honor
and Wisdom of Parliament) may be enlarged, which your Petitioners shall esteem
a great favor to this City: And that all the late unhappy proceedings as unto
this City and Members thereof may be forgotten and obliterated; That your
Petitioners may enjoy the splendour of your former favors, and be thereby
enabled to be the more serviceable to the preservation of the Parliament and
City, and re-uniting of all that are well-affected thereunto: Which is their
most earnest and hearty desire.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
Die Mercurii, 1. Decembr'. 1647.
THE Lords have commanded me to let you know that they return you Thanks for
the acknowledgments you now make for the benefits received by this Parliament;
and for the care of the Honor and Privileges of Parliament, as the supreme
Court and Judicatory of this Kingdom: Together with those good affections
which are very largely and seasonably expressed by this your Petition.

They desire you to be assured, that they will improve their utmost endeavors
for the easing of the burdens that lie upon the Kingdom, for the procuring of
a just and safe Peace; neither will they omit any means that may restore aga in
the City of London unto a flourishing and happy condition in respect of Trade,
as a return for those great and faithful services that they have done to the
Parliament and Kingdom.

As to the other particulars in the Petition which relate to the Power of this
House, they shall take them into their consideration, and do therein what
shall be according to Honor and Justice.

Job. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Mercurij 1. Decembr. 1647.
THe House being informed that the Sheriff and diverse Aldermen, and
Common Council men were at the door desiring to prefer a Petition to the
House; They were called in, and Sheriff Bide acquainted the House that they
were commanded by the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council
assembled to prefer a Petition from them to this House; the which the
Petitioners being withdrawn was read.

Resolved, etc. Viz.

To give them thanks for the expression of their good affections to the
Parliament, that as to the desires in their Petition, in some of them order
has been taken already, some are under consideration, as that concerning free
quarter, and other; and as to their last desire touching some members of the
City that lie under restraint, the house will speedily do therein what may
consist with the justice and honor of this House.

The Citizens were again called in, and Mr. Speaker by the command of the
House gave them the substance of the aforesaid answer.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

