(...), OR, SPARKS OF THE SPIRIT, BEING, Motives to Sacred Theorems, and
Divine Meditations.

By a Reverend Father of the Church of England.

This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according to all
that is writ^en therein, etc. Josh. 1.8. London Printed for Edw. Thomas at the
Adam and Eve in little Britain without Aldersgate, 1658.

TO ALL, True Protestants, especially to the Religious Knights, Esquires
Gentlemen, and all others his loving Countrymen in the County of Glamorgan, and
to all their virtuous Ladies and Wives, A. D. wishes health and happiness, both
here and hereafter.
Honored Sr.
THe Prince of the air is assisted with no small armies of spiritual warriors,
who are for their number Legions, for their power Lions, for their feircenes
Dragons, and for their subtilty Serpents, who have made such a Pestilent
advantage in these kingdoms by our late great distractions, factions and
fractions; I mean not only those Heresies of old, which the Ebionites,
Chiliasts, Gnostics, Donatists, Eunonians, Marcionites, Nestorians,
Valentinians, Montanists, Novatians, Sabellians, Maniches, Arrians, Eutychians,
Patripassians, Jacobites, Arminians, Monothelites, etc. held, but by these late
upstart Tat-poles of our times, who go under the notion of Seekers, Shakers,
Quakers, Ranters and the like, who are of yesterday-standing, as I may say, and
know nothing, that God be merciful unto us and our times.

I fear me there were not more bodies, when Christ came, possessed with ill
spirits, than souls are now with odd ones: and yet not one but pretends he has
the spirit; but I am sure it is rather that spirit that tempted our Savior in
the Wilderness, than led him thither. Aecebolius his ghost haunts them, they
have been in religion wrong and right, and right and wrong again: it fares now
with Religion in England, as with her in Plutarch, who having many Suitors,
when every one could not have her to himself, they pulled her in pieces, that
so none might have her, using her no better than the body of that Harlot, which
was chopped in pieces, flesh and bones, and cast into all the quarters of Israel:
these men I say, dare and do call their private conceits the (Spirit): This is
the special error with which St. Augustine long ago charged this kind of men,
Tanto sunt ad seditionem faciliores, quanto sibi videntur spiritu excellere: by
so much the more prone are they (says he) to kindle schism and contention in
the Church, by how much they seem to themselves to be endued with a more
eminent measure of spirit than their Brethren. Therefore let every good soul
beware of these devilish deceivers, for they are the greatest and the most
pernicious quacksalving Juglers that ever the earth did bear, or hell hatched:
These false Prophets have Linseywolsey garments; intus linum subtilitatis,
extra lanam simplicitatis demonstrant, the subtle thread of deceit is with
inside, but the plain web of simplicity with outside; their inside is of Fox
furre, their outside of Lambs wool.

Quaenam sunt istae pelles ovium nisi nominis Christiani extrinsecus
superficies? All these Sheep clothing are nothing else but precise titles of
holiness, and outsides of Christianity: And as Satan the Prince of darkness
oftentimes transformeth himself unto an Angel of light; so these his children
quote Scripture for their practice, using fair vizards to cover their foul
faces, but yet dealing with Scriptures as Chymicks do with natural bodies,
torturing them to extract that out of them which God and nature never put in
them. Scripture is a rule which will not fit it self to the obliquity of our
conceits, but our perverse and crooked discourse must fit it self to the
straightness of that rule, but as it was in the Lacedaemonian army, all were
Captains, so it is with these, all are Doctors; and as he that bought Orpheus's
Harp, thought it would of it self make admirable melody, how unskilful soever
he touched it: so these men, suppose that Scripture will sound wonderfully
musical, if they do but strike it, with how great infelicity or incongruity
soever it be, it booteth not: let every good soul beware of their pernicious
ways; For as St. Chrysostom says, (...): new ways are no ways: Old wine and
the old way was ever held the best. Gentlemen, I am neither worthy of note nor
noted; the consideration not only of your greatness, but goodness has
emboldned me to dedicate this learned Piece to your gracious Patronage and
Protection, not doubting of your favorable acceptance: being your honored
Ladies have already vouchsafed to his eldest Brother (The Protestant's
Practice) so gracious a Patronage, it were the highest ingratitude, a most
heinous and horrid kind of unthankfulness to bury in oblivion their unmerited
favors, and to judge your honors so uncharitable to a poor Orphan and a
younger brother, so worthily descended, having so excellent a spirit, and
indu'd with a Benjamin's portion as to deny your Favor, Patronage and
Protection unto him; but being more than confident of your goodness herein, I
heartily commend you all to the Protection of the Protector of us all, and
humbly take my leave, and rest,

Your servant in all Christian commands ATHANASIUS DAVIES.

To the courteous READER.
READER,
THose that honor God, God will honor; and so will all good men do: but such
as forget him shall go into the land of forgetfulness, and shall have their
portion in that infernal lake which burns with fire and brimstone: Look
therefore in time before he on the pale horse comes, who is the child of sin,
the father of confusion, and the Pursivan^ of Hell. Consider well how often thou
have provoked thy Maker, stirred up his anger, deserved his displeasure, and a
thousand ways done evil in his si^ht, and that not ignorantly but
presumptuously, not weakly but wil^ully, and not fearfully but impudently; who
when thou erredst did reduce thee; when thou were ignorant he did instruct
thee, when thou were negligent he did correct thee when thou stumbledst he did
stay thee, when thou were fallen he did raise thee; when thou stoodst he did
strengthen thee; in all thy affairs, he did direct the^; in thy trouble he did
help ^h^e; in thy dangers he did deliver thee; waking he did enlighten thee,
sleeping he did watch thee, sinning he did suffer thee, and praying he did hear
thee; how can thou then forget him who remembers at all times, in all
places, by all means, ever, every where, and every way, in thy journeies by his
conduct, at home by his safeguard; in thy Prayers by his assistance, in thy
afflictions by his comfort, in thy board by his bounty, in thy bed by his
protection, and in all thy ways by his support: who does by outward means and
by secret inspirations invite thee unto him, beating continually at the door
of thy ears by his words, and at the door of thy heart by his spirit,
suggesting unto thee both ways the greatness of thy sins, the severity of his
justice, the shortness of this life, and the eternity of that to come.

Reader, Let me crave thy patience awhile, mark diligently my words, follow
well my Counsel, let these my words take deep impression in thy heart: by all
means walk in the strait way, but let it be the right way, beware of
superstition in Religion, to decline to the left hand, and of rash zeal to run
on the right; be to God faithful, and to lawful Authority not disloyal:
Endeavor to be what thou ought to be, though thou can not attain to that
thou should be; never presume to reform others before thou have well ordered
thy self; see at home, then look abroad: redress that which is faulty, and in
thy power to amend before thou do meddle with that which is beyond thy
reach; be not fair in public and foul in private; hate hypocrisy and avoid
vainglory; let not the badge of Religion be the bond of wickedness; receive
no opinion in Religion, but what the word of God does evidently warrant: see
unto the glass of the word by thy own sight, without other men^ Spectacles, and
hold what thou judge truth only in love of the truth: beware of by-respects,
be not high minded, and be not wise in thy own conceit, but make thy self
equal with them of the lower sort; and if it be possible have peace with all
men: avenge not thy self, but give place unto wrath, be angry but sin not: ow
nothing to any man but love, put on the new man, which after God is created in
true holiness: Cast off lying and speak the truth from thy heart; let no
corrupt communication proceed out of thy mouth; work out thy salvation with
fear and trembling; and give all diligence to make thy Calling and Election
sure; And consider had thou Sampson's hair, Milo's strength, Scanderbergs
arm, Solomon's wisdom, Absolon's beauty, Craesus his wealth, Caesar's valor,
Alexander's spirit, Tullies eloquence, Gyge's ring, Perseus's Pegasus, Gorgon's
head, and Nestor's years, yet thou can have no true content or happiness in
this world, which is but a maze or labyrinth of errors, a desert, a
wilderness, a den of thieves and cheaters, nor ever arrive at the port of rest,
without the two wings of David's Dove, Prayer and Meditation, those inseparable
twins, like those of Hypocrates's, which did feed together, joy together, weep
together, live together, and die together. Prayer disposes our souls to
meditation: meditation supplieth matter to our prayer, both give life and
strength, the one to the other: Meditation prepares our souls and makes them
fit to receive God: Prayer inviteth that glorious guest b th to entertain him*
and make him pleased to abide in them; or to speak more properly, Prayer is the
speech of the soul unto God, and Meditation is as it were the speech of God to
the soul: both make a familiar conference and conversing between God and the
soul. In this Treatise thou shall find a sweet Dialogue both of Meditation and
Prayer, the devout soul humbly praying unto God, and God graciously answering
the soul: this is Jacob's his ladder whereupon the Angels of God cease not to
ascend with our Petitions, and descend with Pardons; This is the rod of Aaron,
with which we may do wonders: this is the hair of Sampson wherein lies all the
strength of a Christian: And this is the Pathway of perfection, which will
safely bring thee to thy journey's end, where are those joys, which neither
eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man. To which
place God of his infinite mercy in Christ bring thee and all Christians: which
shall ever be the hearty prayer of the greatest of sinners, and the least of
Saints, thy unknown friend in the Lord,

Athanasius Davies.

SPARKS OF THE SPIRIT.
SECT. I. Of the holy Scripture.
LORD, The Atheists conviction.
as thou art full of Majesty and might, of command and Authority; so do thou
show thy self no where to be of greater credit and Authority than in thy Word:
For all other Books and writings to induce the Reader to give credit unto the
Authors thereof, are full of reasons, and arguments, and of natural
probations: But thy Word (good Lord) is most plain and absolute, declaring
simply and absolutely thy will, without any further Natural or Philosophical
arguments, showing thereby, that it is the Word of such an Author, who is to be
believed upon his bare word, simply and absolutely, without any further
reasoning: For we know (dear Lord) that thy holy Scriptures differ from all
men's writings, because they command and control all Princes and Potentates of
the world absolutely enjoining and forbidding vice, threatening everlasting
misery to the wicked, and assuring eternal felicity to the godly. Therefore
(Lord) we know and believe, that the holy Scriptures are thy holy and Sacred
Words, and thy undoubted books. For it belongs to no creature to be able to
inflict eternal punishments, or to bestow endless blessedness; Therefore those
Books that contain threatenings of the one, and assurance of the other, must
needs have none other but thy Majesty for their Author. For what creature can
or dare say, I will judge all men in the day of judgment, and, I will give
unto every man according to his works? Who Is of that Authority and power as to
threaten eternal pains to all men past, present, and to come, resisting his
will, but only thou most mighty God? What is he that could say, or write, That
there lights not a Sparrow on the ground without his knowledge and providence;
That he knows all the words, deeds, and thoughts of all men, but only thou
most wise and gracious Lord? Who could say, I will bring a general deluge upon
the earth, I will melt the Elements with heat, I will raise up all the dead at
the sound of a Trumpet, and judge the world, but thy Infinite power? For if any
creature had been the Author of the Scripture, he must be either good or evil:
It was not an evil creature: for the words be simply, and absolutely good,
dehorting from all evil, and exhorting unto all godliness, and to the chief
good; and therefore these words which are contained in the Scripture, could not
proceed from the nature and inclination of any evil creature. Neither could
these words properly proceed from the motion and disposition of any good
creature, because they are spoken in precepts and in commanding manner, with
great Authority, in much power, threatening punishment to such as obey it not,
as eternal happiness to such as follow it. For no good creature would presume
to take upon him such power and Authority of himself, as to threaten eternal
damnation to some, and assure eternal salvation unto others, which only is
proper to a Divine and Infinite Power, and therefore it were intolerable pride,
and presumption in any creature, to take so much Authority upon him, being a
thing so flat and contrary against the nature and will of an Almighty power.
Therefore (good Lord) we are compelled to believe and confess, that the holy
Bible is thy Book, and not the work of any creature.

phrase, and with such supernatural matters, as are above the capacity and
nature of men wholly; yea, beyond all humane knowledge, understanding, or
imagination: So that it is impossible for men to conceive or imagine such
words, much less to know or to write them of themselves, without the direction
of an all-wise God. For such words, as are written in the Bible, could never be
understood, thought upon, or so much as once imagined by the wit of man, much
less laid down in writing. For what man was able to write, conceive, or
imagine of that inscrutable mystery in the Sacred Trinity; namely, that there
be three Persons in one Godhead, really distinguished into Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and yet these three to be coequal in dignity, consubstantiall in
nature, coeternall in being; yea, all three Persons to be one and the same
simple and indivisible God, without body, parts or passion.

Moses, to Daniel, to Peter, to Paul, nor to any other man. A man might
conceive perhaps as some Philosophers have done, That God is One, Simple, and
Indivisible, but that this one God should be three distinct persons, equal in
all things, is above man's reach: Therefore he that caused this to be revealed
and written, was no less than a God that knows all things.

Thirdly, What man of not in the First or the Third? Could this be the
invention of any man's brain? Could any deep sighted Philosopher either
produce the like example in Nature, or invent the same in reason? can any
carping Atheist, of the subtilest and sharpest, conceive or imagine of himself
how this should be? therefore the Bible is the wisdom and writing of God and
not of men. For if we should admit that men might know that it was needful
that God should be united unto our manhood (though none of themselves could be
so wise) yet who was able to say that it should be so, when it should be, how,
in what place, and by what means? surely no creature, neither good nor bad
could imagine of himself. An evil creature especially could neither say nor
imagine it of himself, because it was a matter tending unto the chiefest good,
and to the highest exaltation and greatest dignity of man's nature: For now our
nature in the person of Christ is exalted above all the Angels in heaven; and
therefore an evil creature could never imagine or think of so good and so
great a benefit: Neither could any good creature of himself or his own wisdom
speak of these things; Joh. 1.
because no creature was able to know these things of himself. Luke 1.
If therefore neither a good nor a bad creature could write these of
themselves, then it must be that the Creator of all wrote them; or if at least
wise some good men wrote them, yet they first received them of God.



Fifthly, To seal up all, Adam able of himself to know that that was the sixth
day wherein he was created, except thou Lord had taught him. Who could affirm
that the floods did overflow all the tops of all the Mountains in the world,
Genesis 7:20.
and how many Cubits the waters did prevail above all Mountains, seeing Noah
and his family were in the Arc? Could he measure it wh t height it was by
Cubits, if thou (Lord) had not instructed him? Or, who could be so bold, so
fond, so foolish, and so void of sense and reason as to write, That so huge, so
firm, and so fair a building as this world is, shall be consumed with fire in
a moment, and that so suddenly the Elements should be dissolved and melt with
heat, and that the very same bodies of men that are now consumed to dust and
ashes should rise again in the twinkling of an eye? could any man know, or
imagine these things, much less write of them, but only the Spirit and power
that has made and created them? Seeing therefore (my Lord and maker) the holy
Scriptures have such Authority, such threatenings, such eternal promises, such
lofty style, such extraordinary phrases, such supernatural matters, so far
out of all creatures knowledge, so strange unto all men's conceits, and so far
above their imagination; Lastly, seeing all other Books of the same subject are
found to be erroneous, and the authors thereof disagreeing among themselves so
many ways; And seeing the holy Scriptures could never be branded with errors,
or justly charged with enlargement in any line or leaf thereof (though penned
and translated with so many sundry instruments so far asunder) who then so
blind or so blear-eyed that cannot see or acknowledge the Holy Bible to be thy
Word or work alone?

Spark 1.
O gracious God and most wise Father, seeing it is so manifest that the holy
Bible is thy Book, and of thy only making,( 2 Pet. 1.21.
) inspire into our hearts good motions, that our delight may be in thy Laws,
and that we may exercise our selves therein day and night,( Psalm. 1.2.
) grant we may ever without doubt( Act. 28.^4.
) or wavering believe it with all our heart and soul, that it may be sweeter
unto our mouths than the honey or the honeycomb;( Psalm. 90.
) and that it may be dearer unto us than thousands of gold and silver. Give us
that firm resolution to believe thy Word with out any further reasoning and
arguing. Work so in us (good Lord) that (despising( Luke 10.16.
) thy Word delivered unto us) we never seek after strange revelations. And for
as much (good Lord) as there is nothing so near and so dear unto thee as thy
Word, which proceeded( Mat. 5.
) from thy mouth. Grant that we may be in love with nothing so much as with
thee and thy Word. Grant therefore (O Lord) that we may keep thy sayings( Luke
2.
) and ponder them with blessed Mary in our hearts. Lastly, Lord, whatsoever thy
word does sound in our ears, let not our hearts be like the thorny ground, the
stony, nor the beaten high way, but like the good ground that brings forth
some forty, some fifty, some sixty, and some an hundred fold, To the glory of
thy name and our salvation, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Sect. II. Of the Honor of God.
The School of Honor.
Seeing that every creature is made and created for the honor of the Creator,
and does in his nature respect his honor and glory, in so much that the
greatest honor that the creature can have, is to be made for Gods honor, and
that the honor of God does respect the honor of all other creature^, and the
injury and dishonor of God, the injury of all other creatures: so that when the
creatures are well used to God's honor, then God is glorified; and when they
are abused, then is he dishonored. For God being honored; and God being
dishonored the Creatures are dishonored. And hence it is, that in the honor
of God, are included infinite honors, and in the dishonor of God infinite
dishonours. Therefore that man which honors God, cannot choose but honor a^l
his creatures, and especially himself being the chief of his creatures. But he
which dishonors God, dishonors all Gods creatures with him, and
especially himself, which is Lord of the creatures: So that to honor God is
for a man to honor himself; and he that dishonors God, does the greatest
wrong and dishonor to himself that may be. Hence I conclude (Lord) that for me
to prefer any creatures honor or praise before thine is a great dishonor to
thee, to my self and to all the rest of my fellow creatures. For seeing all
things ought to be for thy glory, and that thy glory is the glory of all cre
tures, then whenever we aim at our own honor, we become directly thine
enemies. For whenever we seek not thy glory directly, then of necessity we
seek our own glory, for there is no mean between them; insomuch that we are
always directly either subjects or traitors, friends or foes to our God.

O good Lord, is it fit that thou should make a creature of nothing, after
thine own image, and he to be contrary to thine own glory, being the
omnipotent Artificer? what greater foolishness, what greater dishonesty what
greater disorder, what greater blindness, and more against reason than that the
work made of nothing, should seek his own proper praise?

Spark 2.
O Lord, whether we sleep or wake sit, or lie, stand or go, we are thine:
Therefore grant that whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do else,( 1 Cor.
10.
) let all be done to the honor, glory, and praise of thy name. For seeing thou
art our Maker,( Genesis 1.
) grant we may obey thee. Seeing thou art our Master,( Mat. 1.6.
) grant we may fear thee. Seeing thou art our Father, grant we may reverence
thee; and seeing thou art one God, grant we may glorify thee. O Lord, grant us
grace to honor thee with all wherewith thou have honored and blessed us. So
shall our( Prove. 3.9
) barns be filled with abundance, and our presses shall burst with new wine.
Grant us ever to glorify thee in thy self, and in thy memb^rs; for thou have
taught us, that he, which oppresses the poor, reproves him that made him, but
he( Prove. 14.31.
) that has mercy upon the poor honors ^hee.

O loving Father, seeing that thine is glory, victory and praise, for thou art
the King( Psalm. 24.
) of Glory; Let all my( Psalm. 62.
) health and glory be in thee: let us not honor thee with our lips, but with
our lives and souls also.

For thou will not give thy glory to none other,( Isa. 42.
) let us not be desirous of( Gal. 5.
) vainglory. Therefore, not unto us, not unto us (Lord) but to thy name give
the glory, To whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

Sect. III. All in us must be to Gods glory.
The Saints Service.
FOrasmuch as man is made for Gods glory, and because whatsoever is given to
man, is given him only for the service of God, therefore we are to think, that
because we can love, we are to love God; and because we have power to know, we
are to know God; and because we can understand, we are to understand what God
is; because we can fear, we are to fear God; because we can honor, we are to
honor God; because we can worship, we are to worship God; because we can pray,
we are to pray to God; because we can obey, we are to obey God; because we can
trust, we are to trust in God; because we can hope, we are to hope in God: And
whatsoever good thing else we can do, we have power to do it, that we might
serve our Ceator in doing it.

Spark 3.
O eternal God and most merciful Father, Hallowed be thy name( Mat. 6.
) for ever. As thy intent in creating me was to frame me for thy glory, so
grant it may be my mind, and purpose, study, and whole endeavor to seek thy
glory, and to publish thy praise. For Lord, thy glory and praise will thou give
to none( Esaias 42:
) other but to thy self. Lord give us such measure of thy grace, That our
lights may so, shine before men, that they seeing our good works( Mat. 5.16
) may glorify thee our Father which art in heaven. O Lord, because we can
love, let us love( Mat. 10.37
) nothing in comparison of thee, let us desire to know nothing but thee, and
Christ Jesus thy Son crucified. Let us never fear them that can hurt the body,
but rather fear thee that can destroy both body( Mat. 10.28
) and soul together. Let our honor be to reverence thee, our prayers to
invocate thee, our obedience unto thee; our belief, faith, hope and trust in
thee, through Jesus Christ for evermore, Amen.

Sect. IV. How God must be served.
ALthough we owe all good duties generally unto God, The Paths of Piety.
because he is our Creator, and we his creatures, he our Lord and we his
servants, yet are we to perform every duty to him for particular respects: For
we ought to yield him some service in one respect, and some in another respect;
and therefore we are,

1. To love God, because he is the first good, and chief good, and only good;
for there is nothing good but by him, and therefore God is to be loved in
respect he is good, and after the same manner as he is good, so is he to be
beloved. Now, he is the first good, and therefore first to be loved: He is the
chief good, and therefore chiefly to be loved: He is the purest good, and
therefore most purely to be loved: He is an infinite good, and therefore
infinitely to be loved. And because nothing is good but thorough, and in him,
therefore nothing is to be beloved but in him.

2. God is to be feared, because he is omnipotent; and because he is chiefly
and only Almighty, therefore is he chiefly and only to be feared: And because
he is eternally Almighty, therefore he is eternally to be feared: And because
he is the only Almighty, therefore to him only belongs fear: And because he
is most truly Almighty, therefore is he most truly to be feared.

3. In respect he is our Lord, he is to be honored: And whereas he is the
chief Lord, therefore he is chiefly to be honored: And because he is
infinitely chief, therefore is he infinitely and chiefly to be honored: And
because he is the first beginning of man, therefore he is the first to be
honored of man.

4. Obedience belongs to God, because he is above all things, and because he
is only, chiefly, and eternally above all, therefore he is only, chiefly, and
eternally above all to be obeyed: And because he is only superior unto man,
therefore he is chiefly to be obeyed of man.

5. He is to be glorified and praised, in respect he is the Worker, Maker, and
Creator of all things: And because he is the chiefest, the wisest, the first
and only Creator and maker of all things, therefore he is chiefly,
principally, wisely, and only to be glorified, magnified, and praised: And
because he is the maker of man, therefore he is to be loved and glorified of
man.

6. God is to be beloved, because he is true, and truth it self and no liar:
And because he is the first truth, and most perfect truth; therefore he is
first to be beloved, and most perfectly to be beloved: because he is the chief
truth and chiefly faithful; therefore he is chiefly and most faithfully to be
beloved. To conclude, to God belongs Hope, because he is powerful and
willing; and only knows how to help and to save: and because he is the first
power, the only powerful, chiefly powerful, wise and willing; therefore he
is chiefly, principally, only wisely and willingly to be hoped in. Thus we ow
all duty to him who is Lord of all, and that particularly for particular causes.

Spark 4.
O Lord, we are thy creatures, and thou art our Creator; create in us a new
heart to love thee above all, Genesis 1. Deuteronomy. 11.
who art most good and Joel 13.
loving. And as thou art the first good, so grant we may first love thee and
seek thy kingdom Mat. 6.
. And for as much as all things do fear Amos 6.
thee, which art most fearful, let us fear thee first, and fear thee most, let
us neither love, fear or reverence any thing above thee, nor any thing before
thee, nor any thing equal with thee, nor any thing but for thy sake. And
because thou art only praiseworthy Psalm. 145:
; therefore (Lord) let all the world praise thee, and especially man. O Lord,
let our tongues be the Pen Psalm. 45.
of a ready Writer, to paint thy praise. Let us not only praise thee with the
best members that we have, but with all the members that we have, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. V. The love of God the best Gift.
OF all the gifts and blessings which the Lord bestowed upon man, The Debtors
discharge.
there is none so great, so good, so sweet and so pleasant as his love; because
whatsoever other blessings he has bestowed upon us; they were and are bestowed
upon us for his loves sake. For he first gave his love unto us with himself;
and then all things for his sake. Yet if we would desire to requite Gods
kindness, and to be thankful unto him for his blessings; there is nothing
wherein we may answer him so easily as in his love: For if God be angry with
us, we must not answer him in his anger, and be angry again; If God does judge
us, we must not judge him again; If he does teach us, we must not teach him
again; or if he does correct us and rebuke us, we must not think to do so with
him again: But when God does love us, we may love him again. For God did never
find fault with such as did seek to imitate him in his love. Adam aspiring to
be like God in knowledge, was cast out of Paradise. Lucifer aspiring to be like
God in Majesty, was cast out of heaven: The Sorcerers of Egypt, seeking to
imitate God in his Miracles and wonders, were drowned in the Sea. But for
coveting to be like God in love, none, neither man nor Angel was punished. For
seeing God does love us in the highest degree and above all degrees of
affection, we may love him again with the highest strain of our love, even with
all our heart, soul, strength and might: For God loves us, to the intent he
may be beloved of us.

Spark 5.
O Blessed Lord (the true loade-stone of love) as thou have made me after thine
own image, Genesis 1.
so repair it in me, that by loving thee again for thy love, I may be the more
like unto thee which art love it self: Let the beams of thy love so warm me,
and so beat upon my cold heart, that it may reflect unto thee again: And as
thou have loved me above all the works of thy hands; John 3:
so grant I may love thee again above Father, Mother, Wife, or children, and be
ready to forsake all and follow thee Mat. 10.
: Yea let me love nothing in comparison of thee, nor any thing but in thee and
for thy sake. Therefore, Lord, let nothing seem sweet or worthy of love in my
sight besides thee: for such as love thy name Psalm. 5.
shall be joyful in thee. Therefore as thou art love everlasting, so grant I
may love thee with an everlasting love: and as thou art all love, so grant I
may love thee with all my love; And as thou love all the works of thy hands
(and hate nothing which thou have made) but especially man above all; so
grant that for thy sake I may love all the works of thy hands, as they are thy
works, but thee above all, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. VI. Of the glory of Heaven.
The Saints Freedom.
Well might the sweet Singer and Psalmist of Israel say of that glorious
habitation of Saints, very excellent things are spoken of thee thou City of
God. Psalm. 87.
For thou, Lord, to show us the beauty and bravery of that place, call it by
the name of a City. For whereas, it is called in many places a kingdom, Mal. 5.
to show the greatness and largeness of the place; yet, left any man by that
name of a kingdom might suspect or imagine that there were in heaven many Hills
and Deserts, and such like waste places, where nothing but bruit beasts did
inhabit, as in Woods and Rocks and such like, as in this world; therefore
though it be called a kingdom, yet it is such a kingdom, as in all beauty,
civility and pleasantness, is like a city, where fair Temples, Houses,
Galleries, Gardens, Orchards and such delights are most plentiful. Neither is
it termed a city so much for the beauty of the place, as for the goodness
therein contained and practiced: For in this city, though there be diverse
Nations, of all countries and kindreds; yea, of Angels, Archangels,
Principalities and Powers an infinite company, and an innumerable multitude,
and in all likelihood, more in number than men, being of a differing kind from
man; yet they have all but one law and one language, one king and one
government, being all true citizens, having one heart and one mind, all guided
and governed by the law of perfect charity; and because charity is contrary to
hatred, envy, contention, discords, braules, and other sins, and vices;
Therefore that city and place of bliss must needs be void of all anger,
braule, strife, envy, malice, uncharitablenes and such like. For there must
reign true charity with justice, peace and joy in the holy Ghost: Romans 14.
neither is peace and amity the only felicity of this place, but perfect
liberty is also granted unto the citizens thereof; and that in many respects;
as first, a freedom from the servitude of sin. For whereas in the earthly
Paradise Adam had ability and power not to sin, a posse non peccare; in this
celestial Paradise they have non posse peccare, an impossibility to sin. Such
shall be their liberty from sin, that they shall not be able to sin at all. And
as they have this freedom and liberty from the servitude of sin, so likewise
from the servitude of death and mortality. For as in the earthly Paradise Adam
had non posse, non mori, a disability not to die; so in the city of Heaven, he
has an impossibility to die. So that, not to be able to sin, or not to be able
to die, shows a freedom from sin and death. And as they are free from sin
and death, so from all kind of necessity. For here men have need to eat,
drink, sleep, sit, stand and walk sometimes; but in Heaven the Saints of God
have no such need: for they need nothing, but enjoy the glorious liberties of
the sons of God. Romans 8.
How sweet this liberty is, the poor, the rich, and the hollest men in the
world may quickly know and perceive. For what pains do poor take; yea, how do
they toil and moile, cark and care, trot and drudge for a little meat, drink
and clothing, which they must have to supply their bodily wants; and what
great thanks do they heartily give unto those that supply their present want
and free them from this painful servitude of necessity. Yea not only poor
men feel the misery of this; but holy and sanctified persons are much molested
and cumbred with this servitude of necessity, and think it a grievous burden to
be bound to care for their own bodies necessary provision, accounting the time
they spend about such business, in a manner lost, and ill spent, or at least,
that this care in providing is a hinderance to them from better employments in
holy businesses, in so much that many Christians in the time of the Apostles
were so busied and delighted in holy meditations, Eusebius. lib. 2 Hist. c. 15.
that commonly they never took leisure to feed their bodies till after the suns
going down: yea, some forgetting to take meat and for three days together, Mar.
8.
and some for whole weeks; This bondage of necessity and corporal need was so
heavy unto some of them, that no doubt it made them cry out with St. Paul, Oh
wretched man that I am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from this body of death. And though the rich citizens of
this world seem to be little troubled with this bondage of necessity, because
their meat and drink is sweetly prepared for them, their rest in soft beds, a
kind of contented quietness, and Sabbath of rest; yet if they exceed never so
little in the use or abuse of any of these, they fill their bodies with sundry,
and perhaps incureable diseases, for the expelling of which they shall be fain
carefully to seek, and unwillingly to take many bitter potions, and to endure
many griping pains; yea, they shall be driven, will they nill they, either to
be at debate with God, and to undergo his wrath, or else to fight with their
fleshly concupiscence for temperance and sobriety, which strife is often both
dolorous and dangerous to the patient. Therefore both rich and poor, wicked
and godly are troubled and vexed in the city of the world with this servitude
of necessity: but the children of God in the city of God, are freed from the
servitude of all this misery: For they cark not, toil not, eat not, drink not,
sleep not, surfeit not, sicken not, but have perfect liberty from the bondage
of sin, of death, of necessity, and which is more from the law, because the
law is not given to the just, but to the unjust, and none are more just than
the blessed Saints which are justified in the blood of the lamb, and clothed
with his white unspotted robe, being confirmed in true justice, and unable to
do injustly; and though the just that live in this world have no threatening and
permanent law to which they are bound, because willingly and with a glad heart
they obey unto the precept of God without law or compulsion; yet they have a
directing law and rule of godliness given them of God, binding them to do what
the law commands, and to leave undone what it forbids: but the Saints in
heaven which enjoy that glorious liberty of the sons of God, need no law or
direction, who in the word and Son of God behold all righteousness, and are so
confirmed in perfect love, that they cannot decline from the will of their God.
Thus do they live and love in that holy place as crowned Kings and free
Citizens in the heavenly Jerusalem, being freed from the bondage of sin, death,
necessity, and the law, attending the service, of the everlasting God, which is
true liberty and perfect freedom forever.

Spark 6.
O Gracious God, bring me unto thy strong City Psalm. 40.
, say unto me in the worthiness of thy son, thou good and faithful servant,
enter into thy Lords joy Mat. 25.
. O God thou see how my sins have taken such hold Psalm. 40.15
upon me, that I cannot look up to thy holy place. Lord, break the chains of my
sins, and let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose me from the bondage of
sin, the fear of death, Romans 8.1.
the misery of this wretched life, and from the terror and rigor of thy law,
that I may believe and feel that there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus. Lord, grant that we maybe fellow Citizens with the Saints, and
never look for a resting place here; but let me say and sing with thy holy
Prophet, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning;
yea, If I remember thee not, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I
prefer not Jerusalem in my( Psalm. 1^^.
) mirth

Sect. VII. Of the Kingdom of Heaven.
The Kings Palace.
THe place of Joy, and the eternal rest of the Saints of God is described unto
us in the Word of God by four special names above the rest, whereby we may
guess at the happiness therein contained, namely by the name of( 2 Cor. 12.
) Paradise, of a( John 14.
) House, a( Heb. 12.
) City, and a( Mat. 5.
) Kingdom. It is called a Paradise, to show that it is as a Garden or Orchard
of all sweet pleasure and delight: But least we might imagine by the name of
Paradise, that the place of joy is but as a Garden adjoining to a backside, or
a place by some corner of a house; It is called a Princely House, or Palace,
where many mansions and chambers be, where besides a Garden, there are also
Halls, Parlers, Chambers, Galleries, Banquetting-houses, and all other Lodges
of pleasure; but because a house, though never so great, cannot contain any
great company or extraordinary multitude, whereby we might be induced to
believe that there can be but very few that can be saved for want of room in
heaven, therefore the place prepared for us is also called a City, which
contains many Houses, many Palaces, many Temples, many Orchards and such like
places fit to contain and entertain many millions of Saints and Angels, but
least we should imagine that a City may be little, and not spacious enough for
the Sons of God, and such as follow the Lamb, therefore it is not called
only a Paradise, a House, or a City, but a Kingdom, yea, the Kingdom of
Heaven, in comparison of which the whole earth is but as a point: So that the
Saints of God shall not only be ^^ a Garden or Paradise of all delight, but
also in a Palace of all pleasures, In a City of all good Government,
acquaintance and familiarity, yea, in a Kingdom of all Glory and Majesty,
where every Servant of God shall be his Son, and every Son a Citizen, and
every Citizen a crowned King to reign with the King of Kings for ever.

Spark 7.
O God, seeing there is with thee such a Paradise of pleasure,( Psalm. 84.1.
) grant that I may not love this earth nor the vain delights therein, and
seeing thy House and Palace has so many room^ and mansions,( John 14*^
) let me not delight too much in building houses here upon earth, as if I meant
to stay here for ever,( Psalm. 49:11.
) but with the Patriarchs, Heb. 11:10.
Prophets and Apostles be content with such tents and mansions, as may best put
me in mind of thy dwelling. And seeing that holy and heavenly Jerusalem is so
great and glorious,( Psalm. 84.1.
) let not me look here( Heb. 11.9.
) for any abiding City, nor greedily gape for the Kingdom and preferments of
the world; seeing such a Kingdom is prepared for me that is like a well
governed City, a strong Palace, or a Paradise of pleasure: But when I walk in
my garden, let me desire thy Paradise, when I sit in my house, let me think of
thy Palace, when I tread in the town, let me remember thy holy City; and when I
see the glory of the world, and this earthly Kingdom, let me seek thy Kingdom
and the righteousness thereof, Mat. 5.
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. VIII. We must serve God in our prime and best time.
IT is a rule most certain in Reason and Divinity, Abell's Oblation.
That man ought to yield his love and service to God as Creatures do give their
love and service unto us, who by the Ordinance of God do yield us both love and
service in the best fashion, or else man would not accept it: And therefore the
trees do not only give their fruit willingly, but such fruits as are
seasonable, sweet and delectable; otherwise if they were bitter, rotten and
unpleasant, we would not care for them. For we ought to give our love and
service to God when it is seasonable, sweet and pleasant, or else God will not
accept of it.

Spark 8.
O gracious God, as thou have made me in the best fashion Genesis 1. Psalm. ^. Col.
3.
more excellent than all other Creatures, thy holy Angels excepted; So grant I
may yield the sweeter love and more pleasant service than they, by how much my
Creation excels theirs. Let me not bear leaves Mat: ^1. Mark 11.
but fruits, and those fruits which are most sweet and pleasant in thy sight.
Let my prayer be fervent, 1 Cor. 14.
my zeal burning, Psalm. 69. and 119. 2 Kings 10.
my faith unfeigned, Mat. 9. 1 Timothy 1.
my fear filial, Psalm. 86.
my obedience child-like Luke 2.
my alms cherefull, without ostentation, and my whole life a pattern Mat. 5.1^.
for my posterity, through that true pattern of all purity, Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Sect. IX. Our love to God.
Sorrow's Antidote, or Salve.
AS sorrowfulness is the death of the body and the grief of the soul, so joy is
the life of both. For where there is no joy, there is no life; and where there
is all sadness, there is nothing but death. For as the Soul's life consists
in joy, so the death thereof in sorrow: So that he which has true joy has
life; but he which loves his God in heart unfainedly, has true joy. And
seeing this joy does arise from the love of God only and from none other;
therefore it follows that to have all our love, all our good, all our
content, and all our delight, yea, and all of life is to have the love of God.
And seeing the love of God. (I mean, our love to God) is within man, that is in
his will, heart, and affection, it follows therefore, that to seek all our
love, all our life, and all out contentment, we need not to go out of our
selves.

Spark 9.
O gracious God, teach me to have this treasure within me, namely, to love thee
with all my heart, Deuteronomy. 6.
with all my soul, and with all my strength; and because, sweet Father, I
cannot love thee 1 John 4.20.
whom I have not seen, except I love my brother whom I see daily. I beseech
thee, that I Levit. 19.
may love my neighbor as my self, and that I may love thee above my self, that
neither tribulation, Romans 8.
nor anguish, nor famine, nor nak^dnesse, nor life, nor death may be able to
separate me from the love that I have unto thee in Christ Jesus; That I may
forsake Mat. 10.81.
Father and Mother, Wife and Children, and leave all and follow thee.

Sect. X. Of Christ's Passion.
O Sweet Savior, The Patient's Pattern.
we find that most true which the Prophet Jeremy spoke in thy person, when he
said, My grief is above all grief. For all thy five senses had no small taste
of grief: As the feeling vexed with the sharp nails, wherewith thou wast
pricked. Thy hearing with the opprobrious terms wherewith thou wast
blasphemed. Thy taste with the vinegar and gall wherewith thou wast fed. Thy
smelling with the filthy spittle wherewith thou wast besmeared; and thy fight
with that wicked crew by whom thou wast abused; nay, there was not one part in
thee left untormented that might be afflicted: For thy head was grieved with
thorns, thy hands and feet with the nails, thy back with the whip, thy heart
and side with a spear, thy whole body with grief and nakedness, and thy soul
with heaviness. Thus wast thou tormented in every part for me that have
offended thee in every member; giving mine eyes to behold vanity, mine ears to
listen to folly, my tongue to speak blasph^my, my throat an open sepulcher, my
hands the instruments of wrong, my feet swift to mischief, my heart to all
wickedness, and my whole body to uncleanness.

Spark 10.
O most m rcifull Father, behold thy S^nne, who did endure this for my sake,
Isa. 53.
behold him that has suffered, and of thy goodness remember him for whom he
has suffered. Behold his humble hands, and forgive the sins which my harmefull
hands have committed: Behold his gracious eyes that never affected 1 John 2.1
vanity, and so give the wickedness that my greedy eyes have delighted in:
Behold his chaste ears that never were attentive but to goodness, and forgive my
sins in hearkening to lewdness: Behold his deep wounds in his merciful hands,
and forgive the sins of my idle hands: Behold his feet which never stood Psalm.
1.1.
in the way of sinners, and make my paths perfect in thy tract: Behold how his
side became bloody, his bowels dry, his sight dim, his countenance pale, his
arms stiff, how his feet hung, and his blood ran in streams to the ground;
O Lord, spare me for whom he has spilt his blood; O good Lord, my sins were
the thorns, the nails and the spear that wrought such a passion in him, and
shall such a passion work no compassion in me? Shall not so powerful a
passion, that wrought remorse in the Sun, in the Moon, in the Earth, in the
vail of the Temple, in the dead bodies, and in the very stones Mat. 27.51, 52,
move me to pity thy pains for whom thou have suffered; for thou diedst not
for the Sun, nor the Moon, nor the Temple, nor the Earth, nor the Stones, but
for me Man, and for my salvation thou came down from heaven, and wast made
man, crucified and buried, therefore I will praise thy name for ever with the
best member that I have.

Sect. XI. Of our Filiation.
The Affinity of the godly.
BY Grace we may not only call God our Father, because by Christ we are his
adopted sons, but because we are also his creatures and the works of his
hands: For we call them rightly fathers, which give their being to their
children; I mean, which immediat^ly are the cause that their children h^ve
substantial bodies, and they are called sons to those men of whom they
receive body and blood, being and beginning. Now as we have the substance and
original of our corruptible bodies from our earthly Fathers, so have we our
souls immediately from God, who is our heavenly Father: so that God by
creation is the Father of us all, and we his sons; and as all those are
termed brethren which receive their bodies and beginning from one man; so may
all those be well called brethren, that receive their spirit, life and soul
from one God: So that God both by Creation and Redemption is the Father of us
all, and all of us are brethren: and look how much the soul does excel the
body, so much the more far, does our heavenly Father excel our earthly
Father; and so much does our fraternity in God excel our brotherhood in man.
For without comparison God is more properly to be termed a Father in respect of
the soul, than a carnal Father is in respect of the body, because the body in
comparison of the soul is as nothing. For a man is a man in respect of his
soul, and the body has his being only for the soul; in respect therefore that
the soul is the chief thing in man, it is evident that God from whom it comes,
is the chief Father. So that every man is more the son of God than he is the
son of his carnal Father, because he receives this principal part
immediately from God. Nay, which is more, man receives from his carnal Father
but some part of his body, for he receives part from his mother; yea, both his
Father and Mother are but the isntrumental cause in generation, for God is the
principal in the generation of the body, and the only and sole cause of the
soul; for man receives his soul only from God, not in part, as his body from
his carnal Father, but wholely and entirely. Now therefore seeing we are called
sons more in respect of our souls than in respect of our bodies, it follows
that we are brethren in respect of the soul, more than in respect of the body;
for in respect of the body alone, bruit beasts have a fraternity as well as we,
but not in respect of the soul, because they have none properly. So that it
follows that we are all rather to be termed brethren, because we receive our
immortal souls immediately from one God, created after his image, than those
who but in part and imperfectly receive their bodies from one and the same
carnal Father; therefore, look how much more dear our souls are than our
bodies unto us, so much more dear ought God to be unto us than our carnal
Fathers, and our love to men as they are our brethren in God, more than as they
are our brethren in the flesh. And if we be induced to love, honor, fear,
reverence, and obey our carnal Fathers, of whom as instruments we received but
our bodies, and those but in part; then how much rather ought we to fear,
reverence, love, honor, and obey our spiritual Father, from whom only and
immediately we received wholly our Souls and principally our bodies also. And
further if we love our Father, and brother in the flesh so dear, that we can
suffer no injury to be offered unto them, no harm to be pretended toward them,
nor no word of the least disgrace to be spoken of them, and that only in
respect they are our father and brother in the flesh: How much more then ought
we to love our Father and brethren in the spirit, and to affect them so dearly,
as not to suffer any dishonor unto them, any disgrace, any injury, nor any
unseemly word at all to be uttered against them, by any, if we might help it or
hinder it.

Spark 11.
O good Lord, thou art our God and Grandfather, yea, our near and dear Father;
give us, Lord, thy spirit of grace, whereby Romans 8.
we may call and acknowledge thee our Father: Let us remember, Lord, that our
Father in heaven is one Mat. 23.^
and therefore study all to become Romans 12.
one in thee, Ephesians. 4.
for we have but one Father, one faith, one body in Christ, one Baptism
through Christ, one Lord, and one Law. Therefore, Lord, as thou art one; so
grant we may all be one in thee: Teach us, O Lord, to reverence thee as our
Lord, to love thee as our Father, to fear thee as our Judge, to obey thee as
our Maker, and to expect thee as a Savior; Grant this, O Father, for Jesus
Christ's sake, in whose name we and all thy children are bold to call thee
Father, saying as thy Son taught us Math. 6.
, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Sect. XII. Christ our only Savior.
A watch word for Jewish infidels.
AS the Scripture does promise us no other Savior but Jesus Christ: So does
Christian Faith and humane Reason persuade us, that there can be no other: For
if Jesus Christ were not that only Messiah, and true Savior, that must
satisfy Gods infinite Justice for all our sins, it were expedient and
needful, that, before this time, another Savior should be sent. But seeing
God permitted Christ Jesus alone all this while to rule in the world in his
name, suffering all people to follow him, and to believe in him, as in God the
true Savior. If Christ then were not the Messiah, it should happen that God by
suffering him should hinder himself, and be against himself, and his own
Kingdom, because he disposed his people to believe in such a one as Christ is.
For it must needs be that he which God sends for a Savior, should do as Christ
Jesus did, affirming himself to be true God and man, destroying and impugning
all sins, and this cannot be done: For if God should send another that should
do as Christ did, and say as he said, then he should in all things agree with
Christ; his Doctrine with Jesus's Doctrine, his works with Christ's works, for
greater works cannot be, but this cannot be, for then more than one could be
the Son of God, the Messiah, the Savior, and Gods anointed, which must be
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows: But if there should be
more than one, then the Savior must have an equal, but Christ has no fellow:
For he is the Archangel and chief Messenger of all. The Jews indeed for all
this do look still for God's promise to be fulfilled, and so look for Christ to
come, and the Christians believe that he is come already, and that God has
fulfilled his promise: God therefore having promised to send the Messiah to Jew
and Gentile, and to ^ll that want him; by this means he should do against
himself (were Jesus not the promised Messiah) by hindering all people to
believe a future promise, and by suffering Christ Jesus so long to rule and
reign under the name of the true Messiah, and so he should suffer all
Christian people to be deceived in his promises: But God has suffered Christ
to reign, and will, ill he has put all his enemies under his feet, till he
has delivered up the Kingdom to God the Father, 1 Cor. 15.
and has also permitted all Christians, and many Jews firmly to believe in
him, and to preach him over the world. Therefore, Lord, they that will not
believe the coming of thy Son, the true Messiah, are utterly deceived, and far
wandering from thee and thy truth.

Spark 12.
O sweet Savior, be thou over me a Savior, and grant Act. 4.12
that I may never acknowledge any other name whereby I may be saved but only
by thy sweet name Jesus. And I beseech thee, Lord, let not any thing be able to
separate me from the love of Christ, Romans 8.35.38.3^.
neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness,
nor peril, nor sword, nor death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, but grant that I may count Phil. 35.
all but dung that I may win Christ. Let me never forsake thee, Joh. 17.1.
but ever acknowledge thee to be only God and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.
For Esaias: 5.3 11.
the knowledge of thy righteous servant shall justify many. Instruct me
therefore that am unjust, that I may perfectly know him, and by knowing him
aright I may be rightly justified. Grant this Lord, for his sake that never
disobeyed thee, even thy Mat. 3.17
well pleasing Son, and my most loving Savior, Jesus Christ the righteous, to
whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost be ascribed all praise and power, government
and glory, might and majesty, rule and dominion, now and for evermore, Amen.

Sect. XIII. Of our Regeneration in Christ.
The fraternity of Christians.
WE find that there are three things requisite to make a man perfect and
complete in this world, namely, 1. A Body (or trunk of flesh.) 2. An immortal
soul. And 3. A virtuous disposition or inclination in both; namely, the
well-being and well-doing of both. Now the first man, Adam received all these
three from God (i. e.) 1: A Body, 2. A Soul, 3. The welfare and good being of
both: But because our first parents lost the well-being and good inclination of
both these, and having only these two remaining, namely, a Soul and a Body:
therefore other men begotten from Adam, received from him but only a being,
namely, a body with a soul infused of God; but not the happy being and good
disposition of both. Therefore in every man there is a double generation, the
one from Adam, the other from God. In the first generation, man receives
immediately his body and flesh from the first man, Adam. In the second
generation man receives his soul immediately from God; although indeed both
body and soul be from God, yet after diverse manners: But in a Christian man
and the child of God there is a third kind of generation, which we usually call
Regeneration. For he receives his body immediately from man, his soul
immediately from God, and the holiness and sanctity of both from Christ, God
and man: So that a Christian man has three generations, or he is thrice
begotten. First, receiving his body mediately from man: Secondly, his soul
immediately from God: and Thirdly, the holiness of both from Christ, both God
and man; And this third and last generation makes the child of God complete,
for without this we are nothing in God, though something in nature. For the
first generation is libidinous, unclean, and corrupt; and by it a man is
damnable: Because rec^iving our flesh from Adam, we receive with it the fault
of Adam, the corruption of Adam, and the punishment due to it for the same; by
which we become hateful to God, odious to good creatures, and the children of
wrath. The second generation, which is the creation and infusion of the soul by
God into our bodies, is clean and holy, as it is infused by God; but because
the body is infected and corrupted, it does presently infect the soul. But the
third generation is holy; in it we receive all the goodness, beauty, and
rectitude of soul and body, which reduces them both to the right state,
taking away the wickedness and corruption thereof, making a man, being before
Gods enemy, to become now his friend, and his child; So that we have not lost
(God be thanked) so much by our first fall and generation in Adam, as we have
gained by our regeneration and recovery in Christ. For in our first generation
Adam was the head; but in our regeneration Christ is our head. In our first
begetting Adam was espoused to Eve, but in our last begetting every Christian
is espoused to Christ. In our first generation the flesh did bear rule, in our
last generatiation the spirit does bear rule, subjecting the flesh unto his
motion. By our first generation we were altogether carnal, brutish, and
beastly, but by the last generation we become spiritual, reasonable, and
divine. By his first generation man lost the true image and similitude of God,
and got the similitude of Satan; but by this last generation we got again the
rectitude of Gods image lost, the goodness, fairness, and beauty thereof. By
our first generation in Adam we got the roots of all evil, but by our
Regener^tion in Christ we receive the roots of all goodness. So that our last
g^neration is not the least work of grace. For man by his fall was worse than
nothing, but by this last generation he is renewed, born again, and made a good
thing. And as in our first generation we have our Father and Mother, namely,
Adam and Eve; So in this generation we have our Father and Mother, our Father,
Christ God and man, and our Mother the Church which is the Spouse of Christ; so
that in our Regeneration our conception is by the spirit of God, our birth is
our Baptism, the Church our Nurse, and Mother, the breasts which we suck are
the two T^staments, our meat the pure milk thereof, our growth increase of
grace, heavenly wisdom, and everlasting life. And by this new birth in Christ
all of us Christians are brethren three ways. First, we are brethren as
concerning the flesh, having all of us Adam for our Father. Secondly, we are
brethren as concerning the soul, having all of us received our souls from one
and the same God. Thirdly, we are brethren in Christ, touching the holiness
and sanctity thereof by grace in him, which is our new birth. For wheresoever
this third kind of brotherhood is not, there all the rest are dead in deed; for
this is the fraternity of grace, and the rest but of nature; and betwixt grace
and nature, I mean, between our being in nature, and our being in grace, there
is no small difference: For there is great difference between our simply being,
and our holiness of being. For it is one thing to be, and another thing to be
well, holy, and godly, in the manner and form of our being, for being may be
without the holiness thereof. For we see by experience in our bodies, that our
members have being, and their well-being; for the heart, the liver, and the
head or brain do impart unto the rest of the members whatsoever they have; for
the liver gives all blood and gross humors unto the members, of which the
member^ are both made and nourished, and these humors are conveyed to the
members thorough the veins, and this liver may be compared to the first man in
generation, which only gives a body unto man. The second part in a man's body
is the heart, and it sends natural heat unto all the members, with vital
being; and this is conveyed from the heart to the members by the arteries; and
the heart giving this vital heat is like unto God, that gives the living soul
to the body: for as the soul does quicken the body, even so does the heart give
vital heat to the members, for without this natural heat the members were
dead; The head, which is above all, containing the brain in it, does by the
nerves give unto all the members both sense and motion; this head is like
Christ, which gives all sense and motion of grace unto us his members.
Therefore, as the members of our bodies receive blood from the liver, life from
the heart, and sense and motion from the head; so, we receive first our flesh
from man, our soul from God, and all motion and sense of grace from Christ,
both God and man. Whatsoever the liver and the heart does give to us, it is for
the being of our bodies; but whatsoever the head gives to our bodies, it is
for the perfection and well-being of the members. So that when a member in our
bodies loses sense and motion, it loses then his perfection and well-being;
though it loses not his being which it receives from the liver and the
heart: So that we see, that a member may lose his well-being and perfection,
though not his being simply. As for example, that member that is possessed with
a dead palsy, has lost his well-being and perfection, namely, sense and
motion which is receives from the brain. By this, Lord, I see thy mercy
toward thy enemies; for though they receive not the sense and motion of grace
from Christ, as from their head, yet they still receive their influence from
God, because they are preserved in their being, as touching their soul. For,
having no life of grace, they have from God the life of nature by the soul; and
as concerning their flesh and body, they receive the benefit of creatures,
namely, a preservation of their being.

O Lord, if thou do so much for such as have no life nor motion from Christ;
what will thou do to such as live in Christ? Lord, thou art full of wisdom, and
have given us these three principal parts, that we might think of our
threefold generation. For when we think of our liver, that gives blood and
substance to our members; it puts us in mind that we received our flesh
from man: when we think of our heart which gives vital and natural heat to
our members, it puts us in mind that we received our Soul from the living God.
Lastly, when we think of our head that gives sense and motion to our bodies,
it makes us remember, how that we receive in our last generation all sense and
motion of grace from our head Christ. And calling this to mind, we must
remember, that every Christian is a threefold brother unto us: First, by man,
as having all of us our flesh from one and the same man Adam. Secondly, by God,
as having all our souls infused into our bodies, by one and the self same God.
And thirdly, by our Redeemer, as having all of us that be Christians received
all grace and good motions from one and the same Christ, God and man. Therefore,
we ought to love all as brethren in the flesh; but love them the more as
brethren in Soul; but love them best of all that are brethren in grace unto us;
for whosoever is our brother in grace, must needs be our brother in soul and
body likewise: And therefore a Christian is no half brother or base bro^h^r.

Spark 13.
O Lord, That we may be perfect, grant that we may be born Joh. 3.5.
again of water and of the spirit: And because our first generation in the
flesh is foul and filthy, lustful and lawless, grant we may Romans 8.13
mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, and subdue the rebellion
thereof: O Lord, beget us again in thy Son 1 John 5.1: Joh. 3.3.
Christ, after thine own Ephesians. 4 23 24.
Image in righteousness and true holiness of life. O Lord, grant, that as the
first Adam by his flesh 1 Cor. 15.22.
corrupted all thy children; so the second Adam by his flesh may save all thy
children. Good Father, seeing we are made Genesis 1.27
by thee, and Joh. 3.3.
born again of thee; let us have no strife between us for our Fathers sake;
because we are brethren, grant us to love our brother whom we see daily, and to
love thee whom we have not seen; least otherwise we be judged of thee to remain
in death, and counted as 1 John 3.14, 15.
Murderers and manslayers. Therefore give us grace to love our Christian
brother more for his father's sake, for his own sake, for Christ's sake, and
for thy Image sake, than our brother, cosen, or kinsman in the flesh. For by
this love toward our brother, we shall be known to be thy 1 John 2.3
disciples. Grant us therefore, sweet Jesus, that we may follow thee as thy
Disciples, Ephesians. 4.11.2.
and as dear children, walking in love as thou have loved us, and given thy
life for us. Grant this, O Father, for thy son and our Saviors sake, Jesus
Christ, Amen.

Sect. XIV. Christ our chiefest felicity.
WE count him most happy, The felici^^ of the faithful.
that has all things at will, and wants nothing; then most happy are we that
are in Christ; for he is all in all unto his servants: For if we have wounds,
and would have them cured, he is the best Phisician: If we be wronged, our
Master is most just: If we be poor, our Master is Lord of Heaven and Earth, and
will not see us want: If we fear death, he is life: If we would go to heaven,
he is the way: If we be in darkness, he is the light: If we desire to be
nourished, he is our meat: If learning, he is wisdom: If strength, he is
power. No marvel then though David had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of
such a Master, than to dwell in the Palaces of Princes.

Spark 14.
O Mat. 8.20
sweet Jesus, thou wast poor 1 Cor. 1.5 Luke 1
to make me me rich: Thou wast stripped stark naked to clothe my nakedness: Thou
have spilt thy precious Mar 15.46. Math. 26.28.
blood, to make a plaster for my putrified wounds: Thou becamest a Phil. 2.^.
servant in earth among sinners, that I might be made a King in heaven among
Saints. Sweet Savior, I honor thee, and humbly embrace and kiss the wounds
of thy hands and feet; I esteem more of thy Crown of thorns, thine hysop, thy
reed, thy sponge, thy spear, thy vinegar; than of any princely Diadem. I am
more proud of thy thorns and nails, than of all Pearls and Jewels: And I
account thy Cross more splendent and glorious than any Princely Crown. Teach
us, O Lord, to know thee as we ought, for thou art the way, the truth, and the
life; without a way, men walk not, without a truth, men know not, without a
life, men live not: Be thou therefore still the way for us to walk in, the
truth for us to stick unto, the life for us to hope in. For indeed thou art the
way inviolable, the truth infallible, the right way, the chiefest truth, and
the truest life, grant we never wander from thee, never hope but in thee, nor
never learn but to know thee our only Savior, Amen.

Sect. XV. Of Christ's Passion.
O Good Lord, A Sovereign Salve.
why does not my heart bleed for my sins, to think how often my Savior bled
for them. First, being but young and tender, eight days old when he was
circumcised. Secondly, when he was condemned and scourged. Thirdly, when he was
nailed and crucified on the Cross. And Fourthly, after his death, his side was
pierced, and his very body wept water and blood for my sins. And Fifthly, in
his bloody sweat, when every member wept and melted for me.

Spark 15.
O dear Savior, make me sorry that I am no more sorrowful for my sins. For
if my tears were in quantity like the Sea; If my sighs were like the smoke
of a furnace; If my sobs could pierce the hardest Diamonds, and my wailings
like thunder: yet have I still cause to weep, sigh sob and bewail my manifold
sins. Good Lord, make my mouth to be filled with thy praise, my eyes with tears
for my offenses, and my heart to bleed with sorrow for my sins. O Lord, by thy
blood, Mat. 9.3^.
heal the bloody issue of my sins; and through thy precious blood wash and
cleanse me from all my sins; 1 John 1.7
that through the blood Rev. 7.14.
of that tender Lamb, the garments of our filthy spotted flesh may be made
white, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. XVI. Of the holy Ghost's operation.
O Blessed comforter, it was thy divine will to show thy self to thy children
in four sundry forms for our comfort and instruction. First like fire to
manifest thy love and power. Secondly, like a cloud, to manifest thy pity and
compassion. Thirdly, like a Dove, to declare thy patience and peaceableness.
Fourthly, like tongues, to show thy wisdom and eloquence. For as the fire does
heat and warm all things, and ascend upward; so does thy love warm our cold
zeal, and cause our hearts to ascend up to seek those things that he above: And
as the clouds do drop down waters, to wash the filthiness of the earth; so the
grace of thy holy spirit does cause often a cloud of sorrow for sins to arise
in our hearts, and so to dissolve into tears at our eyes. Thirdly, as the Dove
is a mild bird, void of gall; so that Dove-like spirit, the holy ghost would
have his nest in our hearts, that we might be meek as thou art meeek, Lord,
patient and peaceable like the mild Dove, void of anger and malice. Lastly, As
the tongue does exhort and persuade by the eloquence thereof; so the blessed
spirit of thee, our God by appearing in the form of tongues, would have us to
be exhorted and persuaded by the wisdom and eloquence thereof, and not to
build upon vain philosophy and humane wisdom.

Spark 16.
Gracious Father, let thy good spirit, Psalm. 143.
l^^d us into the l^nd of righteousness, let it go still before us to give us
as Exodus 13.21.
a pillar of cloud by day, and as the pill^r of fire by night. Yea, let him
still be the star of Grace, to direct us unto that blessed Savior of the
world, ^ Mat. 2.11
thy only son Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. XVII. Our souls are not begotten by men.
THat principle which denies the soul to be begotten from the parents, The
Soul's Pedigree.
needs no other proof than experience. For if the soul came from the substance
of the parents, as the body does, the soul then of one man should be some kin
to the body and soul of another man, his begetter, and so one man would love
the soul of his friend, better than his body: But we see by Experience, that
men are more careful for the body of their children than for their soul, for
the most part, and men will venture much to fetch the bodies of their friends
out of prison, or to save them from death: but for the soul, which is as it
were Gods kinsman, infused by him into us, men are less careful. And
therefore our Savior Christ careing most for the soul, which was most dear to
him, taught us ^wo petitions for the good of the soul, and but one for the
necessities of the body, which is the petition for our daily bread.

Spark 17.
Good Lord grant we may love both in our selves that which thou best love and
hate which thou hate Mat. 6.10
O good father, from th^e we have received this soul and living breath Genesis 1.
by which we breathe, we comm^nd it, Lord, into thy careful Psalm. 31.
hands; deliver it, good Lord, from the ungodly, and comfort the souls of thy
servants. And let our Luke 1.46
souls magnify thee, Lord and our spirit ever rejoice in thee, our God and
Savior. The very God of peace, sanctify us throughout, 1 These. 5.
and I pray God that our whole spirit and soul and body may be kept blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Sect. XVIII. Love admits no excuse.
IN man's reason we may find some excuse for omitting any duty but love; for
there is no excuse for our defect in love. For there is no charges, no
weariness no labor, no pain, nor no grief in loving, yea, it makes all pains
and labor to seem sweet and delightful. For the hunter for love of his game
will travel all day without weariness. And herein appears the sweetness of
God's mercy, and the greatness of his liberality toward us; which would not
tie man to that which was heavy, laborious and wearisome, bu^ to that which was
most plea^ant and ^asie.

Spark. 18
O sweet Lord, true it is, that thy Mat. 11:30.
yoke is easy, and thy burden light. Lord make us to love thee and thy truth
more than all thy creatures; yea, more than our goods, more than our friends,
Mat. 10:37.
more than our flesh, more than our selves, our souls and our bodies. And
seeing thou have given Genesis 1.28 29.
us all things for thy service, Lord give us a heart to love thee above Psalm:
119.
all, with all our hearts, with all our strength, with all our mind and with
all our soul through Jesus Christ, Deuteronomy. 6.
Amen.

Sect. XIX. The love of God and the love of Mammon.
The Soul's Solace.
There Is no proportion between the love of worldly things and the love of God.
For from the one must needs follow sorrow, and from the other continual joy.
For all things in this world are mutable and co^ruptible: Therefore, as often
as the object or the thing we set our love upon does either perish, change, or
vanish; so often must it needs be a grief unto us, to lose it that we loved ^o
well. But if God ^e the object of our love, and the thing we best affect; then
must we needs have continual joy and never sorrow. For we never sorrow much,
but for the loss of the thing we love most: Therefore, if God be the object of
our love, and mark of our affection, our joy can never decay, for God can
neither die, nor perish, nor be changed, nor be wanting; but is always present
to our wills, always sufficient to our desires, always omnipotent to our
wants, always loving, always merciful, always most good, most pleasant,
most just, most wise, and most glorious: Therefore the object of our love never
failing; our joy shall never fail. No marvel then if with God there is
everlasting joy and never dying happiness, himself being the object of our
love, and cause of our joy. For seeing all our love arises from God, and all
our joy from our love, therefore both our joy and our love will endure so long
as God endures.

Spark 19.
O Lord God the only Lover and Savior of our souls, let us not love the
world, nor the things that are therein. 1 John 2.
Good Father, thou that best know the deceitful baits of this alluring
world, let us live in the world and not love the world. If riches Psalm. 6 10.
increase, let us not set our hearts thereon. If honors be heaped upon us, let
us not be delighted therewith. If pleasures do tempt us, let us not be
enamoured therewith. Mark 10.
But let us love thee, Lord, with all our heart, with all our soul, and with
all our strength. Let us never love father, mother, brother, sister, nor
friends more than thee, lest we be not worthy of thee. Psalm. 5.12
For they that only love thy name, shall be joyful in thee, (b) and they
shall prosper that love thee. Therefore, Lord, let me love thee above all, and
love all in thee, and for thy love. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ our
sweet and only Savior, Amen.

Sect. XX. The mean is best.
Virtue's Chair,
O Lord, thou have often by thine own example encouraged us to follow the mean,
and to avoid vices, and extremes: For first, in the blessed Trinity, thy place
is in the middle room. In our Redemption thy place is a middle room; for thou
art the mean between us and thy Father. In thy Fathers congregation thou have
the middle room; for for thou art that middle Arch in Gods Church that do
couple together Jew and Gentile. The place of thy birth was a middle room, the
heart of the world: The time of thy birth about midnight: Thy passion not far
from midday: The place where thou suff^redst a middle room, between two
Thieves, one upon the right hand, and the other upon the left: Thy peaceable
abode after thy rising from death, in the midst of thy Disciples: Therefore,
Lord, there is no fitter place for thee to dwell in me than in my middle, which
is my heart, made to be thy seat, and thy holy Temple.

Spark 20.
O Lord, I beseech thee to dwell in my Ephesians. 3.17.
heart by thy holy Spirit. Let every virtue be a middle room in my heart for
thy gracious self to lodge in, and grant that I never decline from thy
Commandments either to the right hand or to the left. Prove. 4.
Let my faith, Lord, be a means to apprehend thee and thy merits, and be thou
still a mean to reconcile me unto thy Father, 2 Cor. 5. Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.
that being justified through thee, we may have peace wi h God the Father; To
whom with thee and the holy Spirit in unity of Godhead, be all praise and glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

Sect. XXI. Crosses Christians coats.
IT is partly suspicion, The Christians Coat.
that they that at no time have crosses, have at all time no Christ. For indeed
we find but few of God's children void of all trouble. For either they are
troubled in their reputation, as Susannah was, or crossed in their children, as
Ely was; or persecuted by their enemy, as David was; or wronged by their
friends, as Joseph was; or tormented in their bodies, as Job was; or restrained
in their liberty as John was. For indeed the good man is but as it were the but
of the wicked, whereat they shoot their sharpest headed Arrows.

Spark 21.
O dear Father, lay upon us any misery, so it be in thy mercy; any punishment
in thy pity, Jer. 10.24. Psalm. 6.1.
correct us O Lord, yet in thy Judgment, not in thy fury, least we should be
consumed and brought to nothing: Job 2.8.
O Lord, if it be thy will, to let us ly sick in the ashes with Job, or
imprisoned in iron with Joseph, Genesis 29.20.
or persecuted with Enemies with David, 1 Samuel 22.1.
or pinched with hunger like Luke 15.
the pr^digall son: yet Lord, be not angry with us for ever. If heaviness
endure for a night, let joy appear in the morning. Grant good Father, that we
may with patience expect and see the blessed Jubilee of thy free mercy, through
Jesus Christ our dear Savior, Amen.

Sect. XXII. A Christian the best Artist.
AN upright Christian is a Musician, A Salve for every sore.
a Physician, a Lawyer, and a Divine to himself: For, What is sweeter music
than the witness of a good conscience? What is better Physic, than abstinence
and patience? What deeper counsel in Law, than in having nothing, to possess
all things? And what sounder Divinity, than to know God and whom he has sent,
Jesus Christ?

Spark 22.
O blessed Jesus, let my music be peace Romans 14.19.
of conscience, and joy and 14.17.
in the holy Ghost. My Physic the blessed potions and restoratives of thy
precious blood. My Policy to keep thy statutes. And my Divinity to know Christ
and him crucified, and in the end with joy to behold him glorified, for the
merits of his bitter death and passion, Amen.

Sect. XXIII. Of spiritual blindness.
IT is most certain (good Lord) that spirtuall blindness is far worse than
corporal. The borne-blinde.
For to want the eyes of angels is worse than to want the eyes of beasts; for
whereas the bodily blind is led by his Servant, his Wife or his Dog; the
spiratually blind is misled by the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Yea, the
bodily blind will be sure to get a seeing guide; but the spiritually blind
follows his own lust, which is a blind guide, and so falls into the ditch.
The bodily blind feels and acknowledges his want of sight, and
imperfection; but the spiritually blind thinks no blame nor blemish in his
sight. The bodily blind supplieth his want of sight, often by feeling, as Iasac
Genesis 27.11.
did; but the spiritually blind though he feels the flashing, yet never avoids
the flame of hell fire. To conclude, the bodily blind accounts them happy which
see; but the spiritually blind despises the seers.

Spark 23.
O Lord, open our blind eyes, that we may see our wickedness, and by our
wickedness our weakness, and by them both our accursedness. For (good Lord)
thou know, that of our selves we are stark blind; For, The natural 1 Cor.
2.14.
man perceives not the things that be of God, and knows them not, because
they are spiritually discerned. Lighten our eyes (O Lord) that we sleep not in
Death. Awake thou us Ephesians. 5.14.
from sleep, and raise us up from the dead, and then give thou us light, grant
Lord, that we may John 12:35, 36.
walk while we have the light, least the darkness come upon us. Therefore Lord,
open thou the eyes of our understanding, that we may believe in the light. O
good Lord, seeing that we trust in thee that art the true light, Ephesians. 4.17, 18.
let us not walk as other Gentiles, bl^nded in vanity of mind, having their
cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them. But we being once darkness and now are made light in
thee (x) Lord, Psalm: 5.8
let us henceforth walk as the children of light, that we may see perfectly,
and attain that eternal light in the Kingdom of glory through Jesus Christ,
Amen.

Sect. XXIIII. The Drunkard the greatest Self-Enemy.
The danger of Drunkenness.
OF all men the Drunkard is the greatest Enemy to himself. A malicious man is a
murderer of himself. The Prodigal man a Thief to himself. The Voluptuous man
a Witch to himself. The Covetous man is a Devil to himself: But a Drunkard is
all these to himself: Namely, a Murderer to his body, a Thief to his purse, a
Witch to his wit, and a Devil to his Soul.

Spark 24:
O Lord, give me the spirit of Sobriety; and grant that I be not drunken with
wine wherein is Ephesians. 5.18.
excess. Lord, let me never make a god of my belly, Phil. 3.19
but ever be moderate in my diet, Prove. 23.1, 2.
vigilant in my calling, 1 Pet. 4.7.
and evermore wary; that by surfeiting and drunkenness I lose not my time, Ephesians.
5.16.
spend my wealth, Eccl. 13.
impair my health, bring infamy to my name and calling, and offend thy heavenly
Majesty. Oh spare me, and save me from this Enormity, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Sect. XXV. A true Motion.
A Violent motion is quick in the beginning, but slow in the end. For a stone
cast upward is then most weak when it is most high: But a natural motion is
slow in the beginning and quick in the end. Therefore, when a man in his first
conversion is exceeding quick, but afterward waxes every day slower and
slower, in the way of the Lord; his motion is not n^turall and kind, but
forged and forced. Otherwise the longer he lives, and the nearer he runs to
the mark, the more swiftly would he run to gain the Crown of Glory.

Spark 25:
O dear Father, most gracious and wise God, which have ordained all thy
creatures to avoid idleness, Genesis 1.
and to be always in continual motion, giving and infusing into me such a
soul as is always in motion: Grant I, (g) may ever endeavor toward that
which is before, and forget that which is behind, and follow hard toward the
mark for the high calling of our Lord Jesus Christ. And seeing thou have
promised 2 Timothy 4.8
us a crown of life, if we continue to the end, grant that we faint not Gal.
6.9.
nor be weary of well-doing, but that we may so run, that we may obtain, 1 Cor.
9.24.
through Jesus Christ our dear and only Savior, Amen.

Sect. XXVI. Of Covetousness
THere be four kinds of Creatures that live each one upon that element in
which he had his breeding. First, The miser's hunger:
The Want on the Earth. Secondly, The Herring on the water? Thirdly, The
Chamelion on the Air. And Fourthly, The Salamander on the fire: But man being
but dust of the earth, is not contented to live on the earth, the water, the
air, and the fire. For his desire and unsatiableness is such, that all these
elements cannot give him content, nor all the creatures that live thereon; but,
if it were possible, he would either go above the fire, or under the earth, to
see, if he could find another element more than God made. And therefore the
Lord did wisely consider of our greediness when he hid so many treasures in the
bottom of the sea, and the heart of the earth; least, had they been within our
view, and easy reach, we should make our goods our God, fixing our hearts unto
our treasures.

Spark 26.
O dear God, and merciful Father, seeing only with thee is all plenty and no
want, Jam. 1.17
all fullness, and no scarcity, all wealth and no poverty, all solace and no
sorrow, all pleasure and no discontent; I beseech thee, Lord, to establish my
heart with thy Psalm. 51.12.
free Spirit to accomplish my desire with thy Psalm. 145.16.
bountiful hand, and to replenish my soul with goodness of thy grace, that I
count, 1 Timothy 6:7
godliness to be the only gain, and so to be content with what thou have
given me through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. XXVII: Of Gods especial Grace.
The growth of Grace.
AS the children of the bodily, barren have been excellent pillars in Gods
Church, as Isaac of Sarah, Joseph of Rachel, Samuel of Anna, John Baptist of
Elizabeth: So also they which have been begotten from spiritual barrenness,
that is, converted from a sinful life, have proved most famous instruments of
grace, as Zacheus from the world, St. Matthew from the receipt of custom, St.
Paul from a persecutor to become an Apostle, and many heathen Infidells to
become glorious Martyrs for the cross of Christ.

Spark 27.
O heavenly Father, I confess unfainedly, that I have been hitherto barren,
bearing but green leaves of outward profession only, and no efectuall fruits
of a true faith. Therefore, Lord, I beseech thee to dig and dung about me with
thy grace, and to water me with the dew of thy blessing; that I may be like a
tree planted by the water side which in due season shall bring forth fruits of
land and praise to thy name, Amen.

Sect. XXVIII. Comforts for Women. Women's welfare.

LOrd, what though I be a weak vessel, and subject to many Infirmities, yet
have no cause to distrust thy help, or despair of thy mercy, and especially
considering how compassionate and pitiful thou have been to the weak sex of
silly women: John 8.11.
as first, to the unclean woman that was taken in adultery. Math. 15.
Secondly, to the poor afflicted Cananite, granting her request, and
commending her faith. Thirdly, Math. 9.
to the sick diseased with an issue of blood for the space of twelve years,
healing her with the hem of thy garment. Fourthly, Luke 4.39.
to Peter's wife's mother, whom thou did presently heal of a languishing
fever. Fifthly, to Mary Magdalen whom thou have freed from seven devils. And
to the two sisters Marye and Martha, at whose pitteous moan, John. 11
thou have raised up their brother Lazarus that had been four days in the
grave. Sixthly, to thine own distressed mother, by committing her, being
succourlesse to the guard and tuition of John thy beloved disciple. Seventhly,
John. 19.
to all the women that wept, when thou wentest to be crucified saying, John 19.
weep not for me. Eighthly, to the sorrowful women, that came to anoint thy
body to the grave, saying, be not afraid, you seek Jesus of Nazareth, he is
risen, he is not here. Lastly, to a poor widow weeping for the death of her
only son, to whom thou did speak comfortably, saying, weep not, and withal
did restore her son to life.

Spark 28.
O dear Savior, I am by nature in a more miserable case than all these were,
being but the unclean seed of my old seduced Grandmother Eve. Ephesians. 2.3.
My condition is worse than hers, having not only Psalm. 106.
the seed of all sin staining the womb of my soul, but also daily polluting my
whole body with all uncleanness and 2 Chro. 6.
actual transgression. Had the Adulteress, Lord, need of thy mercy, so have I.
For who Prove. 20.
can say, my heart is clean? Was the Cananite but as a Dog before thee? Alas,
good Lord, without thy mercy I shall be more vile than a Toad in thine eyes.
Was her disease, which the hem of thy garment did cure, an unclean issue of
twelve years continuance? Alas, sweet Savior, the issue of my sin did run upon
me since I came from my Mothers Psalm. 51.
womb. Ah! good Lord, thou did pity the state of Peter's mother in Law,
having but a fever, and behold I consume away for fear of thy displeasure,
Psalm. 6.
my very bones do quake for fear; yea, my sins have taken such hold upon me
that I cannot look Psalm. 40.
up. If Mary Magdalen was possessed with seven Devils; Lord, thou know that
many Devils do continually walk about, not only to seek to possess, but to
devour my 1 Pet. 5.11.
soul. And though Mary and Martha had cause of grief for the death of their
brother, whom thou did restore; yet my grief is more, John 11.
being dead in sin my self, desiring to be revived by the spirit of thy Grace.
Lord, as thou did commit thy Mother the blessed Virgin to the tuition of Joh.
19.
John: So dear Father, command thy holy Psalm. 34.7
Angels to guide and guard me from all evil. Grant also sweet Jesus, that
with the three Mary's I may seek thee early in the morning and seeking thee
find thee, and finding thee, believe in thee, and lodge thee in my heart for
ever, Amen.

Sect. XXIX. To perform Promise, needful.
IT is an old saying, An honest promise is due debt.
That an honest Promise is due debt. I have often promised to serve thee (my
good God) and yet never performed the same as I ought; and therefore the more I
promise, except thy grace help me to perform, the more I am indebted unto thee.

Spark 29.
O Lord, grant that I may promise unto thee that which thou have commanded me,
and after Deuteronomy. 23.21.
perform that which I have Psalm. 66.
promised, that I may obtain thy promise through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. XXX. Of Christ's virtues in healing, and Satan's policy in hurting.
IT is no wonder that the Devil did so much prevail against the Jews to have
Christ tormented in every member; A box of precious ointments.
as his Head with Thorns, his Hands and Feet with Nails, his Sides with the
Spear, his Eyes with Spittings, his Face with buffettings, and his Taste and
Mouth with Gall; for the Devil well perceived, that there issued out great
virtue from every member of Christ. For he healed the Leper by touching him
with his hand; he healed Peter by looking back upon him with his eye; he healed
Matthew with his mouth, by saying, come and follow me; he healed the deaf and
dumb with his fingers, by putting them into his ears; he healed Mary Magdalen
with the virtue that went from his feet, when she washed them wi^h her tears;
he healed the woman diseased with the twelve years issue, with the hem of his
garment; he healed and raised up Lazarus out of his grave with his voice,
sayin^, Lazarus come forth; he he^l^d all the souls of his children with the
blood and water that ran out of his blessed side.

Spark 30.
Heal us, O Lord, for our bones are Psalm. 6.
vexed, send out thy curing Word, and heal our wounded souls that refuse all
manner of comforts; Psalm. 107.19, 20.
say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. Psalm. 35.
O thou pitiful Savior, and sweet Samaritan, Luke 10.
leave me not thus wounded and half dead in the highway of perdition, but bind
up my wounds, and pour therein the oil of thy everlasting grace, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. XXXI. Of Avarice and Oppression.
The Worldliings Woe.
ALbeit every sin calls for eternal vengeance, yet we read in Scripture but of
four crying sins: The First is Murder and Bloodshed. Genesis 4.10.
The Second is Gluttony and Idleness, or the sin of Sodom. Genesis 18.21.
The Third is the sin of Wrong and Oppression. Exodus 3.9.
The Fourth is the detaining of the Laborers hire. Jam. 5.4.
Now three of these cry with open mouth against the Covetous wretch, as against
an open Oppressor, a secret Defrauder, both an open and secret Murderer.
Therefore the clamours of many poor Debtors in the Dungeon, of many poor
Laborers in the Field, and of many poor Neighbors crying and dying in the
street, enters into the ears of the Lord of hosts; Nay, the cry of his own
soul and body will come against him; for though he keeps his pelf with many
locks from others, yet from none does he keep them so fast as from himself: For
though he possesses them, yet has he no power to use them, as holy Records
do show, Eccles. 6.1. where the Spirit of God says, That there is an evil
under the Sun which is much used among men; A man to whom God has given
Riches, and Treasure, and Honor, and wants nothing for his soul of all that
it desires, but God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a strange man
shall eat it up; This is an evil sickness. Consider this then, thou Worldling,
that say in thy heart I shall never have enough.

Spark 31.
O blessed Trinity, that fillest every living thing with thy Psalm. 104.
blessing: Lord bless us and thy blessings, that in using them we abuse not
thee. O Sacred and All sufficient Trinity, fill thou our hearts so full, that
we may desire Ezech. 36.
nothing but thee, and thy glory; our hearts good Lord, are made Trianglewise;
a fit seat for the blessed Trinity; They are made narrow below, and shut close
to keep out worldly desires, and wide, and open above, to receive all heavenly
blessings. O Lord, as they are thy vessels, so let them be of thy filling; yea,
fitted with nothing but with thy self and thy love, Psalm. 10.17
through Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

Sect. XXXII. Nothing can satisfy God for our sins but his Son.
What is that which man can off r unto his Maker, The Acceptable Sacrifice.
to pacify his wrath against sins? If he cold give the whole world unto God,
what does he offer, but what he has received of God, and lost by his
disobedience? If man could offer himself, what offers he but un^hankfulness,
dust, and ashes, blasphemy and wickedness, which provokes Gods wrath more and
more. If the Angels would offer themselves and their service to satisfy the
wrath of the everlasting God, what were that but a thing finite in goodness to
seek to cover an infi^it evil? Therefore God himself was fain to step between
his Justice and Mercy, to reconcile us again unto him by his own merits.

Spark 32.
O Lord, from whence then comes our help? Surely our help comes of thee,
Psalm. 121.
which have made heaven and earth. There was no other water to wa^h away
Naaman's leprosy but Jordan's 2 Kings 5
No ladder that reached up to Heaven but Jacob's. Genesis 28.12.
No serpent that healed the Israelites but the brazen: Numb. 21 9.
So, there is no other Name under heaven whereby we may be saved, Acts 4.
but only by thy name and merits, sweet Jesus. O Lord, it was not our own arm
that helped us, Psalm. 44.3, 4.
but thy right hand and thy arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou
have a favor unto us, it is thou that savest us from our enemies, and put
them to confusion that hate us.

Sect. XXXIII. Christ only a fit Mediator, because God and man.
The Only Man.
NOne but Christ could be a fit Mediator between us and the Majesty of God. For,
whosoever would be a Mediator it is requisite that he be God and man: Man to be
born under the Law, God to perform the Law: Man, to serve, God, to set free:
Man, to humble himself under all, God, to exalt himself above all: Man, to
suffer, God, to overcome: Man, to dye, God, to triumph over death: Man, to be
born of a woman, God, to overcom the Devil. So that now we may see Jesus in
the Stable (there behold the man Jesus;) In the Temple disputing with the
Doctors, (there behold the Lord Jesus;) in Simon's house; washing the Disciples
feet (there behold the man Jesus;) walking on the Sea (there behold the Lord
Jesus;) calling for meat when he was hungry (there behold the man Jesus)
feeding five thousand with five loins and two fishes (there behold the Lord
Jesus) weeping over Lazarus (behold the man Jesus) but calling Lazarus out of
his grave (behold the Lord Jesus;) riding on an Ass (behold the man Jesus;) but
riding on the clouds (behold the Lord Jesus.) If therefore, sweet Jesus, we may
not with Moses behold thy face, yet we may behold with him thy hinder parts. If
thy Godhead be too terrible to behold, yet we see the terror thereof mitigated
with thy manhood. If thy humanity seem too humble, we see it again exalted by
thy Godhead. So that now, sweet Jesus, we find no cause we should too much fear
thee, because of thy glory, nor at all despise thee, because of thy humility;
but both, and for both to love and reverence thee, to believe and trust in
thee, as in a most wonderful Savior, whose name is wonderful for ever.

Spark 33.
O blessed Jesus, let thy Majesty teach us true fear, and thy manhood true
humility. In thy manhood thou have made thy self lower than thy Father, saying,
my Father is John. 20.
greater than I; lower than the Angels; Psalm. 8.
For, which of the Angels did wash the feet of sinners? Lower than men, for
thou wast counted a Ps. 22.6.
worm and no man; yea, the very scorn of men: Lower than all thy creatures by
dying and descending into hell: And therefore thou art exalted to be equal with
the Father, above Angels, above men, above all creatures: For thou have a name
above all names, for at the name of Jesus all knees shall bow, of things in
heaven of things in earth and of things under the earth. Phil. 2.10
Good Lord, grant we may follow the steps of thy humiliation, that we may be
exalted through thy mercy and merits, Amen.

Sect. XXXIV. O Humility.
The Lesson of Lowliness.
GOod Lord, thou have commanded us to learn of thee, that thou art meek and
humble. Sweet Jesus, thou have not said learn of me to make the world, to
raise the dead, to cast out Devils, to turn water into wine; but to be lowely
of heart; and this lesson thou have often commanded unto us by thine own
examples. For thou have chosen a lowly woman to be thy mother, and a poor
Carpenter to be thy reputed father; a lowly place to be thy bed of rest, which
was the manger; a lowly house, which was but a stable in an In: a lowly brast
to carry thy blessed body, which was but an Ass, lowly men to be thy disciples
and followers, being for the most part but poor fishers, a lowly exercise,
which was to w^sh thy disciples feet; and a lowly and base death which was the
detah of the cross.

Spark 34.
Good Lord, seeing thy precept is, that I should imitate thy pattern Mat. 11.29.
so far as I can in my frail nature, grant me grace to endeavor and desire to
become like unto thee, not in thy power, knowledge or miracles; but in thy
moralls: especially in true humility which is the first lesson to be learned in
thy school. Lord, when I think upon the poor Carpenter, grant I brag not of my
birth. When I think of the stable and m^nger wherein thou did lie, grant I
vaunt, not of my buildings, or be too desirous of beds of down for my ease.
When I think that thy disciples were poor fishers Mat. 4. Luke 5.
grant I may learn not to despise any poor brethren. Mat. 18.
O Savior of souls, Let Mount Calvary be my School; thy Cross my Pulpit;
thy Passion, my Meditation; thy Wounds, my Letters; thy Lashes my Comma's; thy
Nails my Full points; thy open Side my Book; and to know thee Crucified, my
whole lesson. Let me learn by thy nakedness how to adorn me, by thy vinegar
and gall how to diet me, by thy prayer for thy Murderers, how to revenge me,
by thy cry on the Cross, how to bewail my sins, and by thy bloody swe^t, to
weep for my wickedness.

Sect. XXXV. Of the fall of Adam.
The Sinners Preferment
When the Serpent had deceived our parents, God said, cursed art thou above all
beasts, upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat And presently
unto man that sinned God said, dust thou art, and into dust thou shall return.
If by the Serpent the devil be meant, and if dust must be the Serpent's meat,
and if a sinful man be but dust, and must return to dust, then a wicked
sinner is but that old Serpent the devill's meat.

Spark 35.
O Lord, that have made us for thine own glory Ephesians. 1.6.
redeemed us with thine own blood, 1 Pet. 1. Apoc. 5.
sanctified us with thine own spirit, 2 These. 2.
save us by thy own mercy, challenge what is thine in us. If our sins displease
thee, wash them away Psalm. 51.
and let satan feed upon sin which is his own, and not upon us miserable
sinners, being the works of thy hand, let it be meat and drink unto us to do
thy will Joh. 4.34.
and to feed our souls with that blessed Manna John 6.
that came down from Heaven, Amen.

Sect. XXXVI. We must imitate God in his goodness, etc.
SEeing the Lord has created heaven and earth, and brought such a glorious
world out of his secret and hidden treasure, The godly Ape.
and bestowed it upon the sons of men desiring to make others partakers of his
goodness, he does teach us, that if we have either riches, knowledge, or
counsel in store, we should most freely let it out for the good and profit of
our neighbors. But why are we so covetous, that we can part with nothing? Is
it not a wonder to see so bountiful a master as God is to have so miserable a
servant as man is? What has God bestowed on us gold, or silver, or precious
stones; yea, and a greater matter, heaven and earth, and all contained therein,
to whom gave he all this? to his children? or them of his house? or to his
friends nay, not only to them, but to all, to his enemies, to Idolaters, to
such as make a God of the gift and despise the giver. Deuteronomy. 4.
And shall we shut our compassion from men, because they are strangers, or
wicked, or offensive to us, seeing our Lord and Master gave all these to all,
and to his friends and children gave heaven's treasure, and his own dearest
Jewel which is his Son Christ blessed for ever more offering him also to all,
though all receive him not.

Spark. 36.
O blessed Lord, abundant in thy mercies, and most liberal and bountiful in
thy gifts, Psalm. 36. Psalm. 136. Psalm. 137. Prove. 2. Psalm. 26. 2 Cor. 2. Ephesians.
5. 1 These. 5. Mat. 6. 1 Kings 3.
yea more rich in mercy than we can be poor in misery; continue thy blessings
toward us so far forth as it is for our good, make us thankful for them, and
forgive us the abuse of them. Let us not want those things without the which we
cannot serve thee, and having them, give us grace to use them unto thy glory.
Give us with thy blessings a liberal heart, that by the disposing of those
blessings committed to our trust, we may be known to be thy thildren. Grant
this O Blessed Savior for thy mercy sake, Amen.

Sect. XXXVII. Of our Natural Blindness.
GReat is our weakness to be lamented, The healing of the blind,
and the corruption of our Judgment to be condemned, by which we prefer the
shadow of that which seems before the truth of that which is, and for a
momentary taste of earthly vanities depart from the hope of everlasting joys;
as being the natural sons of Adam, who lost Paradise for an Apple, and the
brethren of Esau, who sold his birthright for a mess of pottage; whereas we
cannot but know that which we daily hear of thee, O Lord, and seem to believe,
that there is no nobility to a new birth in Christ, no beauty to the beauty of
the daughter of Sion; whose beauty is all within, no honor to the service of
God which is perfect freedom; no glory to the Cross of Christ; no riches to
godliness; no treasure to that which is laid up in Heaven; no clothing to the
righteousness of Christ; no building to that which is not made with hands; no
Crown to that of Immortality; no Kingdom to the conquest of our selves; no
learning to the knowledge of Christ; no wisdom to that of the Spirit; no joy
to a good conscience, and no life to a conversation in heaven.

Spark 37.
O sweet Jesus; which art the true light that lighteneth every man that comes
into the world, John 1.5.
Psalm. 43.
lighten our darkness we beseech thee; Genesis 3.7.
And as the eyes of our first Parent's conscience were opened to see their
miseries; Psalm. 36.9.
so open the eyes of our understanding that we may behold thy mercies, and thee
the Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world; John 1.29.
give fight O Lord, unto our blind eyes, that we may see our weakness, Esa.
35.5.
and by our weakness our wickedness, and by them both our accursedness. Psalm.
115.5
Let us not be like dumb Idols, that have mouths and speak not, eyes and see
not; or like those accursed ones, that in seeing perceive not, and in hearing
understand not. Isa. 5.
Let us not call light darkness, or good evil; but put off the scales of our
understanding, that we may know a difference between good and evil; and to
ensue the one and esch w the other, through him that is able and willing to
help us, Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. XXXVIII. Against Pride.
O Man, The proud's looking-glass.
I much wonder why thou should be so proud, considering thy beginning which
is but dust, the unprofitablest earth that is: For clay is good for something,
Sand is good for something, Marle, Lime Coal, Dung and Ashes good for
something; yea, Earth, Gravel, Stones or Metals, good for something; but dust is
profitable for nothing, but hurtful many ways: Yet such is thy Almighty
power, O Lord, that thou have created light out of darkness, the world out of
nothing, and man from the dust of the ground which was nothing, making him Lord
of all creatures, and more excellent than all the works of thy hands.

Spark 38.
Judge. 9
Good Lord, there was never proud person that pleased thee; Let me that am but
dust have no proud thought or high look, but with Mary humble my self before
thee; Luk 1.48. Genesis 18 27. Mat. 15.
with Abraham acknowledge my base beginning; with the Canaanite woman, my
unworthiness; with David my vileness; with Job my misery, and with Paul my
Infirmity, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. XXXIX. The condition of the godly of in this world is not of the best.
LOrd, The Godli's Lot.
we find it true that the state of thy children is not always of the best,
neither in outward account with the world, nor yet in their own feeling: For
sometimes, the spirit of wisdom calls them the afflicted ones; Prove. 15.15
Math. 5. Esaias. 41. Luke 12. Psalm. 41.
sometimes the hungry and thirty; sometims little worms, as the little worm
Jacob; sometimes a little flock; sometimes the poor and needy: And yet they
are in account with the Lord; for the afflicted shall have a continual feast,
the hungry shall be filled with good things, the little worm Jacob shall be
written upon the palm of thine hand, the poor shall be relieved and helped, and
the needy raised up out of the dust.

Spark 39.
O Lord, let my estate be what thou will, So I may be thine, Romans 8.35. Luke
15.29
make me as one of thy hired servants, and feed me, if not with thy dainties,
Math. 15.27.
yet with the crumbs that fall from thy table. If I must taste of thy vinegar
and gall for a while in this world, yet if in the end I shall be fed at thy
table with Manna, I shall digest it with a good stomach, and look after it with
a cheerful countenance, as Daniel did, Romans 8.31.
for if thou, Lord, be with me, what can hurt me?

Sect. XL. Christ's Passion, the soul's best salve.
GOod Lord, Sin's remedy.
we have often seen those men that have been delivered from some dangerous and
desperate sickness to be ever delighted with the very name of that medicine
that helped and healed them, prescribing it unto their friends for a chief and
present remedy in all such desperate cases; and now we have found by the
pacification of our own conscience that thy merits are the best medicine for
our Sickness.

Spark 40.
Esaias. 53.5.
O Lord, it is by thy stripes that we are healed of all our sins. Thy blood is
the only plaster, whereby our wounds may be cured. John. 1.7.
Therefore, let us ever be delighted with this salve, let us by thy grace
prescribe it unto others. O Lord, pour the oil of thy mercy into our festred
wounds, thy blood, has helped many of thy Saints, Luke 10.34.
and it is not yet dry, but fresh and powerful to heal me.

Sect. XLI. God is Mercy it self.
O Lord, The woeful man's joy. 2 Timothy 2.13
thou have caugh us by thy Apostle Paul that thou art most faithful, and can
not deny thy self. If we desire wealth thou may deny us, for it is not thy
self. If we desire revenge, thou may deny us, for it is not thy self. If we
desire worldly pomp and preferments, thou may deny us, for it is not thy
self. If we desire gold and silver, thou may deny us, for it is not thy
self; But if we desire mercy thou can not deny us, for it is thy self, for
thou can not deny thy self. Thou art not only merciful, but mercy it self:
For thou did pray for thine enemies, give thy life for thy friends, and
never did deny their just petitions unto thy Servants.

Spark 41.
O Lord, I want nothing but thy mercy, Romans 8.^2. 1 Cor. 15. Psalm. 67. and 109.
and 51.
which is thy self. For having thee I have all, because thou art all in all,
show us therefore the light of thy Countenance and be merciful unto us. O
Lord, I am poor and needy, but thy mercy may lift me up. Therefore, in the
multitude of thy mercies do away my Offenses; O Lord, thy mercy being thy self,
is above all thy works, much more above the works of Satan which are my sins,
mercy therefore good Lord, mercy I crave, it is the total Sum; for mercy, Lord,
is all my suite, Lord let thy mercy come, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect XLII. Of Prayer.
O Eternal and Infinite Power, The Saints post-messenger.
seeing thou art the King of Glory, the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord
might in battle; whose Palace is in the highest heaven, and we thy poor
creatures, being thy foes by our own follies, and therefore in thy sight more
base than the vilest worm on earth; seeing, I say, there is such distance of
place between us, as is between heaven and earth; such difference in qualities,
thou so glorious in Majesty, and we so grievous in misery; such odds in
quantity, we as it were nothing, and thou all things, and all in all: When thou
art offended with us, or when need compells us, what messenger shall we presume
to send unto thee, either for peace and pardon, or to inform thee of our
necessities, or rather to entreat thee for to supply our wants, for thou
need no informer. If we send our merits unto thee, they are in too base a
habit, being like a menstruous and stained clout: The stars in heaven will
disdain it, that we which dwell at the footstool of God should presume so
far, when the purest creatures in heaven are impure in his sight. If we send
up our fear and distrustfulnesse, the length of the way will tire and weary
them out; for being as heavy as lead, they will sink to the ground before they
come half the way to the seat of Salvation and the throne of Grace. If we send
up Blasphemies and Curses, all the creatures betwixt heaven and earth will band
themselves against us: The Sun and Moon will rain down burning Coals upon us:
The Air will throw thunderbolts upon our heads. If we send up pride, then we
and our messenger shall be thrown down to the Dungeon of the deepest Hell: For
thou resistest the proud: what messenger then shall we presume to send up unto
thee, thou King of Glory? Even that which thou have commanded us to send, and
which thou acceptest being sent, servent prayer from a faithful and unfeigned
heart; which neither the tediousness of the way, nor the difficulty of the
passage can hinder from passing unto thee: Who being quick of speed, faithful
for trustiness, happy for success, and is able to pierce the Clouds, and to
mount above the Eagles of the Sky into the heaven of heavens, and there to
enter boldly into the Chamber of Presence, and to ^he Throne of Grace before
thee, the great King of Glory.

Spark 42.
O Lord, give us grace to send up our prayers unto thee, and to call upon thee
in the days of our necessities and trouble. Hear the voice of our prayers
betimes in the morning: Let us cry out of the deep of our miseries, unto the
bottomless depth of thy mercies. And because our nature is such as we know not
how to ask, as we should, Romans 8.26. Ephesians. 3.20.
and thou alone both wisely do know, and effectually can grant, not only
what we desire, but a great deal more than we can think upon; Pour upon us the
spirit of grace and prayer, which may with unspeakeable groanings make
intercession for us. Give us grace (good Father, Math. 11.24: Math. 6.
) to persuade our selves, that whatsoever we shall ask at thy hand through
faith, we shall obtain the same. And grant that in all places we may pray,
lifting up pure hands without wrath or doubting making with deep fighs and
zealous minds continual supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks for all men through Jesus Christ, our Lord, 1 Timothy 2.1.
Amen.

Sect. XLIII. Of the Authority of Gods Word, etc.
THough faith be the eye of the soul, and the hand that apphehends the soul's
Savior, yet if faith should tell me that God is three and one together; or if
faith should say, believe that the son of God is the son of a Virgin, that
Christ is risen again the third day from the dead, to die no more: that I
should believe all this to be true, because Peter, Paul, and John; Isay, Jeremy
and Ezekiel have said so. I would doubt and not believe such matters difficult,
fo far above reason and beyond the reach of man's apprehension, and seeing they
were spoken but of men as I am, I durst not believe them, because it is
written, every man's a liars which makes us require so many oaths, Psalm. 11.5.
and so many witnesses before we can credit the report of men in many things.
But when faith tells me that God has revealed these things, and that neither
Peter, Paul, nor John, nor the rest of the Apostles and Prophets have taught
these things of themselves, but were first taught of God, and that they have
preached not their own word, but the word of God; then my heart yields, and
is ready to believe it, especially seeing the same God that spoke by the
Prophets and Apostles confirmed his sayings with so many fignes and wonders.
Therefore as Paul says, How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?
which at the first began to be preached of the Lord, and was confirmed unto us
by them that heard it, Mark. 16.20.
God bearing witness thereto both with signs and wonders also, and with diverse
powers and gifts of the Holy Ghost according to his own will.

Spark 43.
O Holy Father, I believe, help my unbelief; and though an Angel from Heaven
should teach and preach contrary to that which thou by thy holy Prophets and
Apostles have taught, let me not believe him, but hold him accursed. Let me
never doubt of the verity of the Scripture, because it is thy word; For as thou
have commanded us not to believe every spirit; 2 Ioh. 4.
so are we forbidden to doubt of that Truth which proceeds from the spirit of
Truth, Which cannot deceive nor dissemble. Let us therefore never gainsay what
thou do affirm, never doubt what thou do promise; never mistrust what thou
have spoken; nor call into question what thou have verified.

Sect. XLIV. How to purchase Heaven.
LOrd, A great purchase.
thou have taught us that there be four kinds of men which by four kind of
means come to Heaven. For some buy it at a rate, at it were, and bestow all
their temporal goods for the better compassing thereof: Some catch it by
violence, and they forsake Father and Mother, land and living, trade and
traffic, and all that they have for the possession of it: Some steal it and do
their good deeds secretly, and they are rewarded openly: And some are enforced
to take it, and by continual affliction made to fall to a liking thereof.

Spark 44.
O dear Savior, thy Kingdom is such a Pearl, that all I have cannot buy it:
For I have nothing to give thee, but that which came from thee and is thine
own. Therefore teach me to obtain thy Kingdom by what means thou will, so that
I may enjoy It. Let not my care be for the things of this world, but give me
grace, first to care for that one thing necessary, namely, the seeking of thy
Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, and all temporal blessings shall be
added thereto, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. 45. God in his Glory will be All in All to his Elect.
IF we consider the right use of a Temple, An End of man's Ministry.
we shall easily perceive the reason why John having seen the Order and
Ornaments of the heavenly Jerusalem saw no Temple therein. For Temples here on
earth, had by the Lord's Commandments but five uses or ends.







Fourthly, To offer

the Prophet Jeremiah. Ierem. 31.
The use of the Sacraments likewise have an end; which being but signs and
seals of true things themselves, serve no longer, seeing the things signified
by them are perfectly seen and enjoyed. And as for Prayers and Praises to God,
there needs no Temple erected in Heaven to perform them, for they shall see
God as he is seen openly, face to face; and he shall be easily heard of all
men, for he himself will be their Church, Temple, and House of Devotion.

Spark 45:
O Gracious Father, build the Kingdom of grace here upon earth, and hasten the
Kingdom of Glory. Let us visit thy holy Temple often here upon earth, to
worship thy name, that at last thou may bring us to that place that needs no
Temple, to Jerusalem than is above, that is the free Mother of us all, where
thou art our Temple for ever. Let us dwell in thee by faith and love while we
are on earth, that hereafter we may by an inward reverence and humility be so
nearly joined unto thee, that thou may be our Temple to sing Hal-le-lu-jah
to thy name for ever, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Sect. XLVI. Of God's Fore-warnings.
ALthough the sword of our God is ever ready drawn and burnished, Gods Covenant
to his people.
his bow bent, his arrows prepared, his Instruments of death made ready, his
cup mingled, yet, he seldom powers down his plagues, but a shower of mercy
goes before them, to make us the more heedy, before his wrath be kindld to
consume in's sore displeasure: for, peace be to this house, was so indeed to
every house where the Apostles entered: but if that house was not worthy of
peace, then war followed, and their peace returned back unto them. Virtues were
wrought at Chorazin and Bethsaida before the woe took hold upon them Noah was
sent to the old World; Messengers to the Hirers of the Vineyard; Moses and Aron
to the Egyptians; Prophets from time to time to the Children of Israel; John
Baptist and Christ, and the Apostles together, with signs in the host of
heaven, and tokens in the Elements to Jerusalem before it was destroyed: Yea,
many signs of warning foretold us, before that fearful and final day of
Judgment; as the Preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, the revealing of
Antichrist, a departing from the faith, corruption in manners, great
tribulations, a deadly security, and the conversion of the Jews, which is the
last sign and warning we must expect for, saving the sign of the Son of man.

Spark 46.
O Dear Father, let thy pity prevent my punishments, and the greatness of thy
mercy supply the grievousness of my misery, for thou Lord, wilt not the death
of a sinner, but rather he should convert and live. Therefore, let me know that
my salvation is nearer than when I believed. Let me not despise the riches of
thy bountifulness, and patience, and long suffering; but let me know that thy
bountifulness leads me to repentance, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Rom 2.4.
Amen.

Sect. XLVII. The Titles of the Damned.
IF we observe the Scripture, Satan's bag.
we shall find that the Devil has no name given him, which the wicked are not
branded with. For he is called a Liar, so are they: He if called a Tempter, and
they are called Tempters: He is called an Enemy, and they are called Enemies:
He is called a Murderer, and they are called Murderers. He is called a
Slanderer, and they are called Slanderers: He is called a Viper, and they are
called Vipers: Thus God willed that they which should be damned should bear the
name of him that is damned.

Spark 47.
O Lord Jesus, grant me grace to differ from the damned in nature, as the godly
do in name. Lord, do thou give me of thy hid Manna to eat, and a white stone,
and in that stone a new name written, which no man knows but he that has it.
Grant this, O Father, for our dear Savior's sake, who has a name above all
names, to whom all things shall bow in heaven, in earth, and under earth, Amen.

Sect. XLVIII. God is the best Master.
IT is counted mere folly for any man to serve three kind of Masters, Choice
of Masters.
to wit, his Enemy, his Equal, and his Servant: He which serves the Devil,
serves his Enemy: He which serves his Flesh, serves his Equal: And he which
serves the World, serves his Servant. Therefore of all service it is the
basest service to serve the world, because such a one like Cham shall be but
the servant of servants: and to serve the Devil is but an unthankful office,
for such one is sure to have no better payment than death for his stipend: And
for to serve the flesh, it is but to seek to please a chollerick, brittle, and
unconstant master. Therefore, to serve God is the best service, for he is the b
st master. For if we be poor, he only can enrich us. If we be sick, he is the
best Physician. If we be wronged, he can right us. If we be weak, he is most
strong. If ignorant, he can best instruct us. And if discontented, he only can
please and prefer us.

Spark 48.
O Dear Father, make us to be of thy hired servants, Luke 15.
let us desire to be rather door-keepers in thy house, than to remain in the
pleasant Palaces of Princes. Psalm. 84.
Good Lord, thou have taught us that no man can serve two masters, but either
he shall hate the one and love the other, or cleave to the one and leave the
other. Therefore, Lord, let our choice be with thy Disciples, to forsake all
and follow thee: Josh. 22.5.
And grant we may serve thee with all our heart, and with all our soul, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. XLIX. God the Teacher of true Wisdom only.
O Lord, I am ignorant and want instructions in true wisdom. The Well of
Wisdom.
To whom shall I repair to learn it? shall I go to the world? Alas no; for all
the world lies in Wickedness. Shall I go to the flesh? That be far from me,
for the flesh doteth and lusts against the spirit. Shall I go to the Devil?
God forbid; For he is a Liar, a Tempter and a Seducer of the Brethren: To whom
then shall I go? To mortal men? Alas no; for all men are liars; the children of
men are set on fire, their teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a
sharp sword, there is none that understands and seeks after God. To whom
then shall I go to learn wisdom? Shall I go to the Law of Moses? No neither; For
the Law it self is but a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. Shall I go to the
Angels for true wisdom? I must not do so; for they themselves learn of Christ
and adore him. Shall I come to the Lord, without Christ? No that must I never
do. For it is a horrible thing to think of thee without thy son Christ, to
whom therefore shall I go but unto thee, my blessed Savior, which have the
word of wisdom and eternal life. Thou art a King to rule me, a Priest to pray
for me, and a Prophet to teach and instruct me. Joh. 6.


Spark 49.
O God the fountain of wisdom and knowledge, give me understanding and I shall
live, for through thee I shall be wiser than the aged, and have more
understanding than my teachers. Psalm. 90. and 143.
Teach me therefore, good Lord, in thy Statutes, and to do the thing which
pleases thee; and for the first lesson, learn me the fear which is the
beginning of wisdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. L. The least sin deserves death.
The Devils Diminutive
O Good Lord; I see that the World is grown to that pass that men make not so
much account of small fins as of old shots. A mote in the sun is but a small
thing, and yet enough to hinder the fight, to pain the eye, and to trouble the
whole body: A hair but a small thing, and yet enough to choke the strongest
man: The Flies of Egypt were but little things, yet none of the least plagues;
yea, the lice were less than the flies, and yet one of the greatest plagues
that came into Egypt. Like unto these be our sins, which we call little sins,
or the men of this world call venial, and to be washed with their holy waters;
but how little account soever the world makes of them now, the time will come,
when we shall wish we had never offended in the least diminutive evil. For
what smaller offense, in our sight, than a thought of pride? yet the Angels
were punished in everlasting, chains for it. What lesser fault than to bite of
an apple? yet Adam and Eve, when there were no more men in the world, were
banished Paradise for it, and made to everlasting misery without Christ's
mercy. Lot's wife for once looking back (a small offense one would think) was
turned into a fearful Monument for all posterity to look upon.

Spark. 50.
O dear Father, seeing thou art most pure, and so pure that the stars of heaven
are not clean in thy sight, Job. 25.
cleanse us from our secret sins; Psalm. 19.12. and 51. and
let us think no sin a small offense that offends thee which art infinite. For
we are no sooner born but become forlorn creatures without thy great mercy,
and no sooner conceived but damned, if thou dealest in the rigor of Justice
with us, Therefore enter not into judgment with us thy servants, for no flesh
is righteous in thy sight; but spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed with thy precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.

Sect. LI. The shadows of sin.
IT is strange to think that so many things should point out unto us the cursed
nature of sin, and yet we cannot avoid it. It is like to leaven, a little
whereof will sower the whole lump of dough: It is like fire, a spark whereof
is able to burn a whole City. It is that Jewish Leprosy that infected every
thing that came nigh unto it. It is like a tetter or a ringworm, which though
it have but a small beginning, yet being not stopped, will run over the whole
body. It is like that dead sea that kills all that swimmeth in it. Or like
the quicksands which suddenly let a man sink over head and ears, if he stand
still in it never so little. It is like Jezabell (that painted Harlot) whose
very skull of the head with the palms of the hands must be buried, lest they
infect the very air.

Spark 51.
O dear Father, if all thy creatures be not able to show us the ugliness and
deformity of this foul monster, and to make us loath it, grant that we may
have a daily recourse unto thy law, Romans 7.
the glass whereof will plainly show unto us both the name and nature,
property and proportion of this hellish leprosy, and so seeing it we may be
sorry, and being sorry may loath it, and loathing it may avoid it; and so come
the nerer unto thee in perfection, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. LII. The Lords Royalty.
THough the Lord shares so liberally with man, that of all his Creatures he
reserved but the least part to himself; yet in most things he will have us to
acknowledge him for our chief Lord, and of every thing to pay him something as
his chief rent and royalty; As of our time the seventh day; of the trees of
Paradise the tree of knowledge of good and evil; of all our increase, the
tenth; of our generation, the first born; of our Corn, the first fruits; of his
people Israel, the tribe of Levi; of all Cities, Jerusalem; of all mountains,
Mount Sion; of all the sons of Ishai, little David; of all women, the blessed
Virgin; and of all the members of our bodies, the heart.

Spark 52.
O King of Glory how liberal do thou deal with us, and how niggard are we
in repaying thee? For how many a thousand thoughts have we conceived and not
one of them in remembrance of thy goodness? How many thousand words have we
spoke, and not one of them to the praise of thy name? How many thousand deeds
have we done, and not one of them for the setting-forth of thy glory? Good
Lord, as thou have given me all things saving thy glory, so for thy glory, give
me of thy grace, that I may acknowledge thee. Let my heart be always inditing
of a good matter that my tongue may be the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45:
and my hand diligent in well doing, and open unto the needy, through Jesus
Christ, Prove. 12.30
Amen.

Sect. LIII. The earthly Planet.
AS the Bridegroom, the bright Son of happiness and Lord of life is often
compared to the Sun of heaven; so his Spouse the Church does often resemble the
Moon: For as the Moon has all her light from the Sun; so the Church from
Christ. And as the shadow of the earth does sometimes hinder and Eclipse the
Moon, that she cannot show the light of the Sun, the which she received; so our
sins like earthly shadows do hinder and debar us oftentimes from giving thanks
and glory to God for what we received, and to show the same to others, giving
him the glory from whom they proceed. But as that good Planet the sun fails
not to give light continually unto the body of the Moon, and to all inferior
bodies, though sometimes it seems to be eclipsed in regard of us: so the
glorious Sun of Righteousness does never fail to give light unto his Church,
and his Elect here on earth, though by reason of the black cloud of our sins,
he seems sometimes for a while to be absent from us; And as the Moon will not
utterly fail, by any Eclipse that can happen, though to our sight is be almost
quite darkened; so the Church of God can never fail, nor fall clean away, but
shall ever be a Church world without end being grounded upon a sure Rock, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner Stone.

Spark 53.
O most glorious Sun of Righteousness, and the bright Day Star of grace and
glory, vouchsafe we beseech thee to lighten our darkness by thy holy Spirit,
and to show us the pure light of thy countenance, by shining in our hearts and
souls: Let thy holy word be a lanthorn to our feet, and a light unto our paths;
disperse all the black clouds of ignorance and errors, that may Eclipse the
light of thy holy Spirit from us; be thou always with us unto the end of the
world; and pray unto the Father for us, that our Faith may not fail: Marry us
unto thy self for ever, that though we seem sometimes to have a fail, yet we
may never fall finally from thee, which art the way, the life, and light for
ever.

Sect. LIVE. The Sympathy of Christ's Passion.
O Sweet Savior, work in me that pity of thy paint, that the Creatures had at
thy Passion: For then the Sun was darkened, the earth quaked, the temple rented,
the stones cleaved, and the graves opened. And yet thou did not suffer for
the sun, nor the earth; for the graves, the temple, nor the stones, but for us
men and our salvation. Shall these be amazed at the pungs, and we not moved at
thy pains?

Spark 54:
O Lord, let the wounds of thy hands cause a wound in my heart; The nails of
thy feet prick my conscience; Thy Vinegar and Gall draw tears from mine eyes;
Thy bloody side cause me a bleeding Soul; And thy pains cause in me sorrow and
passions:

Sect. LV. The eyes Imperfection.
SOme can see a mote in their brothers eye, and not so much as a beam in their
own; such was the Pharisee that prayed with the Publican. Some again can see a
mote in their brother's eye, and a beam in their own, such was Peter, when he
denied Christ and wept: And Paul, who counted himself not worthy to be called
an Apostle. There be also some that epsy beams both in their own eyes and in
every bodies else; such are they that know themselves in conscience to be bad,
and therefore think every body else to be so; Such was Pharaoh that thought
God's people to be idle, because he was idle himself. Some again see no mote
neither in their own eyes nor in others; such are blind Atheists and loose
Liberties that think that every man may do what he will. Some again can see two
beams in their own eyes and a beam in others; such was Judas and Cain, and
such as see their own sin so great that they despair of Gods mercy: For though
they judge others to be great sinners, yet they think their own unpardonable.

Spark 55.
O Lord, bless me from such a sight. For (Lord) if I offend thy Justice by
transgression, yet let me not offend thy mercy by disperation. And yet give me
grace always to see the beam in mine own eye, and to take it away; that then I
may the better see the mote in my brothers eye.

Sect. LVI. Our Credit once Cracked, etc.
WE have need to have Gods Grace to guide us every minute in all our actions.
For we may commit in an hour such a fault as will be a blemish to us in a
whole age. Noab was but once drunk yet is ever spoken off. David but once in
Adulterer, yet his fact never forgotten. Adam but once tasting of an apple, yet
his posterity smart for it to the worlds end. Lot once committing incest with
his Daughters, yet his fin is notorious for ever. Lots wife turning but once
back to Sodom, yet an example for ever. Peter but once fallen, yet his
weakness perpetually noted.

Spark 56.
O Lord, let thy Angels guard me, thy grace guide me, thy word direct me, and
thy spirit preserve me, that I neither stir, nor nor start, waver nor wander
out of thy path. Lord keep me as the apple of thine eye, and as the fignet on
thy right hand; that all my thoughts may be of thy goodness, all my words to
thy praise, and all my works to thy glory; to whom be all glory and goodness,
might and majesty, both now and for evermore, Amen.

Sect. LVII. Trust not unto a rotten stick.
HE that trusts to his own strength, leans on a rotten stick. For we see
the skilfullest Wrastler sometimes have a fall; the cunningest Fencer to have
the foil; the stoutest Cantain killed; the best Rider under his horses feet;
the nimblest Swimmer sunk under the water; the best wits perish, and the wisest
men err.

Spark 57.
O Lord God, let me acknowledge my weakness and not presume on my strength.
For it is better to trust in thee, than to put any confidence in Princes. O
Lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded, Amen.

Sect. LVIII. The best increase.
THe Husbandman's field does bring him for every grain, sometimes thirty,
sometimes forty, sometimes sixty, and sometimes an hundred sold. If God so
bless our bodily labor: How much more will he bless the labor of our souls.
If therefore we sow in tears, we shall reap in joy. If we sow in the Spirit, we
shall reap of the Spirit life everlasting. For he that first seeks the
Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, shall have all other things
added unto it.

Spark 58.
O Lord, give me grace to labor in the Spirit, to seek thy Kingdom, to lay up
treasure in Heaven, that when the general harvest shall come, my eyes may be
waking, my lamp light, and my self as a sheaf of wheat gathered into thy farne,
through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Sect. LIX. The Servant's access to his Lord.
MAny a man is sain to travel far to see a great man, and to suffer many
dangers, and perhaps when he comes to his journeys end, he shall find either
his Lord from home, or not at leisure, perhaps dead, or if alive not willing to
pleasure him. It is not so with God: For if I come once to Heaven, to see my
Lord and Master, my dear Father and best Friend; as Mary and Joseph after their
journey found him in the Temple amongst the Doctors, so shall I be sure to
find him in his holy Temple amongst the Angels; yea, I shall be sure of such
kind entertainment, that I shall never think of my pains and labor in
coming, or once dream to return.

Spark 59.
Lord, give me grace to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, for as much as I know that my labor is not in vain in the Lord.
Lord, I will come unto thee, and seek thee whilst thou may be found. I will
knock and ^^ll at midnight at thy mercy, and though I have no friends either to
plead my cause, or to prefer my petition unto earthly Lords; yet (dear
Father) I have an advocate in thy Court that will both plead my cause, and
pity my case, even thy Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Sect. LX. Soon ripe soon rotten.
THere is no flower that will not fade, no fruit that will not corrupt, no
garment that will not wear, no beauty which will not wither; no strength which
will not weaken; and no time so long but at last will pass. I cannot see these
vanish, and not say that my self must pass. The flower of my youth is gone
already, my best fruits are corrupt, my time passes while I speak of it.

Spark 60.
Lord, teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart to wisdom, and
have understanding in the way of godliness. For the longer time thou give me
the more I have to answer. Lord, make me ready at thy call, and sweet Jesus pay
my debts for me.

Sect. LXI. The best Pattern.
O Lord, I need no better Master to teach me than he that is my Savior. For by
his nakedness on the Cross I may learn to clothe me. By his Crown of thorns how
to adorn me. By his Vinegar and Gall, how to diet me. By his prayer for his
Murderers, how to revenge me, and by his whole passion for me, how to suffer
for him.

Spark 61.
Lord, give me grace in all my actions to learn of thee to be merciful, as
thou art merciful; meek, as thou art meek; holy, as thou art holy; true, as
thou art true; and faithful, as thou art faithful. Let me honor thee as a
Creator, love thee as a Redeemer, and expect thee as a Savior: And in the mean
while, let me rest in thy peace, that I may rise in thy power.

Sect. LXII. Take heed how you walk.
LOving Father, what time so ever I bestow out of thy service, I bestow it on
my self, and am a Thief, because I rob thee of thy due. And if I be more
enamoured with any of thy blessings than with thee, I commit Adultery, and take
another God before thee. And if I spend good hours in evil actions to bad
purpose, then I commit Treason against thy Majesty.

Spark 62.
Give me grace (most loving Father) to serve thee in righteousness and
holiness all the days of my life; to love thee with all my heart, with all my
strength, and with all my soul; and to do, say, nor think either in merriment
or soberness, but those things which may please thee, and advance thy glory.

Sect LXIII. The last Enemy.
THere is no Enemy which a man cannot avoid either by flying forward, retyring
backward, or standing still, hidden or disguised, or at the least by prayer,
but death. For if we go forward, we meet death; if backward it meets us; If we
stand still, it is coming upon us: Yea, whether we sleep, or wake, go or stand;
all is one, we must needs meet death. Therefore, we must be resolute and
prepare our selves for this last enemy, from whom we cannot fly. It is but a
bugbear, it has lost his sting, we need not fear.

Spark 63.
O Lord, prepare thy servant to die. Grant I may live the life of the godly,
that I may die the death of the righteous. For what man lives and shall not
see death: O Lord, how precious in thy sight is the death of thy Saints? for
they sleep in thee, and cease from their labor: Grant (Lord) that I may put my
house in order and joy that I must dye.

Sect. LXIV. The insatiable Worm.
I See that all the Creatures and worms of the earth can live only upon some
kind of food, that comes from the earth either upon grass, hay, or corn, or
upon some fruits of trees or herbs. But man is from the earth, and yet all the
Creatures of the earth will not suffice him; but he must go to the Fowls of
the air, and the fishes of the sea for dainty; and all too little to satisfy
his appetite: So that if he had as many dishes as he lived days, he would both
desire and invent novelties.

Spark 64.
O Lord, let me not pamper my body daily with delicates; but prepare my soul
with dutiful obedience to feed on the heavenly Manna of thy word. That having
meat and drink to suffice nature I may learn therewith to be content. Let his
diet that was but a loaf and a fish with a cup of cold water, teach me to be
content with the least of his blessings, and to give him thanks, knowing that
man lives not by meat only, but by every word that proceeds from thy mouth,
through Jesus Christ our Savior.

Sect. LXV. Good Neighbors
THe child of God has some comfort in adversity above all others, because all
his neighbors are his father's tenants at will, and hold both life and land of
him during his pleasure. Therefore he that is God's child shall find some
that love the Lord of their life and land, and will be ready to yield relief
and comfort unto his son. David was not unmindfull of this, when he said, I
have been young and now am old, yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor
their seed begging their bread. Nay, if all men should forsake Gods elect, the
bruit creatures would succor him at need: for rather then Elias shall starve
the ravens will feed him: rather than Jonas should be drowned, the Whale will
preserve him: rather than Daniel should perish, the Lions will comfort him.

Spark 65.
O Lord, Thou art my Father, I am thy child, but (good Father) I have sinned
against heaven and against thee, I am not worthy to be called thy son; O make
me as one of thy hired servants: let me not want the thing without which I
cannot serve thee. For Lord, in thee is my trust, let me never be confounded
Amen.

Sect. LXVI. The sickness of the Soul.
THe diseases of the body, as the Ague, the Stone, the Pox, the Palsy, the
Plague, Impostumes, etc. Are cured either by Physic, tract of Time, or ended
by Death: But the diseases of the soul, as Pride, Envy, Malice, etc. are cured
neither by Time, Physic, nor Death; but only by the blood of Jesus Christ:
therefore, seeing the diseases of the soul be so incurable, and the Physic so
precious, we had need to be watchful of our selves, that though we have a sick
body, yet a sound soul.

Spark 66.
O Lord, my soul is sick with diverse diseases, my wounds great, and my Malady
grievous, heal m^ therefore, O Lord, for my bones are vexed, yea, heal my soul,
for I have sinned against thee; speak the word Lord, and thy servant shall be
healed.

Sect. LXVII. Paul's desire.
THey that live most honestly, will die most willingly. For willingly does the
traveller question about his Inn. Often casts the Apprentice when his years
will expire. Many times will the woman that has conceived wish her delivery.
And he that knows his life to be away to death, and his death the door to joy,
will often covet to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

Spark 67.
O Lord, while we breath here, grant that we may live in thee; and departing
hence we may live with thee for ever, being sound in faith, and strong in hope,
looking with chearfullness for the day of our departure, and the joyful
appeareing of thy Son Jesus Christ our Redeemer; and in the hour of death;
Lord, let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.
Grant this, O Lord, for thy son and my Savior, thy Lamb and my loving
advocate Jesus Christ the righteous, Amen.

Sect LXVIII. The Sinner's Wound.
EVery worldling sometime or other is sorry for the vices he follows, as the
drunkard for his drunkenness, the whoremonger for his uncleanness, etc. But
the godly man never repents him of any virtuous action. For when did any man
repent that he did relieve the poor? who was sorry that he kept himself chaste?
who ever had cause of grief because he did not rob or steal? who ever repented
him for being patient, humble, merciful? sober, honest, and faithful? But
sinful actions leave a sting behind them, which hardly can be cured; whereas
Godly deeds, how bitter soever they seem in the doing, yet being done, instead
of leaving a sting behind them, they minister a sweet comfort unto the doer.

Spark 68.
My blessed God, give me evermore grace to avoid evil and to do good, to hate
the works of darkness, which causes nothing but shame, grief and repentance,
and to put on the Armor of light, that may shield me with comfort, and save me
from confusion.

Sect. LXIX. The Christian's Primer-Book.
HE that will be a Scholar in Christianity may take Mount Calvarie for his
school, the Cross for his meditation, Christ's wounds for his letters, his
stripes for his comma's, his nails for his full points, his open fide for his
book, and to know Christ and him crucified for his lesson.

Spark 69.
Lord, open mine eyes that I may know thy son Jesus Christ and him crucified.
Grant I may enter into life through theneer and living way, which thou have
prepared, that is, through thy blood and passion; so that no tribulation, nor
anguish, nor persecution, neither hunger, nor nakedness, neither peril nor
sword, neither death nor life may separate us from thee, to whom be praise and
glory both now and ever more, Amen.

Sect. LXX. The Courtier's walk.
COurtiers, desirous by following Prince's Court to benefit themselves and to
raise their house for them and their posterity, ought to be careful to know
the right way by which they may be exalted, being but earthly men, seeing there
are but four ways ordinarily whereby all heavy things here below may be
promoted; first, By art, at the water that of it self is heavy, and by nature
runs downward, is by skill and knowledge not only drawn up as high as the
fountain from whence it first sprang, but far higher. Secondly, by nature's
ordinary course in things here below, as in trees and plants, whose tops do
mount up so much the higher above the earth, by how much their roots are lower
and deeper in the earth. Thirdly, by virtue and power of the celestial bodies,
as those vapors that are exhaled up by force and virtue of the Sunbeams.
Lastly, by force and violence used here below to drive things upward, as when
an arrow is shot up from a strong bow, a stone from a sling, or a bullet from a
piece; by which violence things suddenly mount up, but do as suddenly fall
again. In like manner are men exalted here upon earth: Some by art, learning
and industry exalt themselves and their houses, not only as high as the
fountain of their blood and linaege, but far above them as Moses, Solomon, etc.
have done: some again by their humble service to God and their Prince do root
themselves to low in the earth, that their fair boughs and branches of their
name and posterity grow extraordinarily in height above others, and by reason
of their sure and sound rooting continue longer before they either fall or
decay; And so did Christ and his Apostles exalt themselves: some like the
vapors are immediately drawn up on high by the celestial power and pleasure
of God, by his extraordinary mercies to try them, as Lucifer, Saul Herod,
Nabuchadnezzar etc. who, if they be earthly, watery, and impure vapors, are
cast down again after a while like thunderbolts, or at least dissolved into
water; but if they be pure, fine and dry, they will be set on fire and burn
with zeal to God in their exaltation as David, Elias, etc. L^stly, There be
some that leek to exalt themselves by violence and indirect means, as by
treason, oppression, Tyrany, bribery and extortion; these as by their violence
they mount up suddenly, so do they soon fall fearfully, as Saul, Balthazar,
Haman, Herod, Gehezi, and Judas did.

Spark 70.
O Lord, we are all in thy view, and often tread within thy great chamber of
presence, grant that we may learn to be wiser unto Salvation, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
that we may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth and
length, depth and height and to know the love of Christ which passes all
knowledge, that we may be filled with all fullness of God. Let us after the
example of our Savior be so rooted in charity, so grounded in humility, and so
humble in our own conceit before thee, that we may acknowledge with Abraham
that we are but dust and ashes; with Jacob that we are less than the least of
thy mercies: with the Centurion that we are not worthy that thou should come
under our roof; and with the Prodigal child confess, that we be no more
worthy to be called thy sons. For he that humbles himself shall be exalted of
thee, O King of Heaven; and he that exalts himself shall be brought low. Good
Father, if it please thee to exalt us suddenly in thy mercy, as thou did
David from the sheepfold, Mordeicai from the gate, Joseph from the dungeon,
and Daniel from the Den; let us not be puffed up, but still say with David, I
will be more humble yet: let us with David cry out in the Court of the Lords
house, The zeal of thine house has eaten me up; and with Elias mount up in a
fiery Chariot of fervent zeal. And if at any time thou please to correct us for
our pride and presumption, good Lord, cast us not down suddenly like a
thunderbolt, as thou did Lucifer and Balthazar; but give us grace and space
to repent with Nebuchadnezzar; that at last like a watery vapor we may melt in
sorrow with Mary Magdalen, and dissolve into tears with Peter through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. LXXI. The Creature's Call.
THe little birds when the day appears do in th^^^ kind seem to be thankful
for their rest; and in the evening likewise with chirping notes they praise God
for the light that they enjoyed, and so take their rest again. Shall we hear
these to sing melody unto God, and not sing the base with them to make up a
perfect harmony and a full concent?

Spark 71.
Lord teach me to praise thee betimes in the morning, Psalm. 55.
and let the lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice unto thee, for
Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Sect. LXXII. The quick buried.
When we begin to be men, we begin to be sinners; and when we begin to be
sinners, we begin to be dead; and when we begin to be dead, we begin to be
buried; first, in our mothers womb, th^n in the cradle, afterward in our beds,
and at last in our graves.

Spark 72.
Grant (O Lord) Psalm. 39. Romans 8.
that remembering my end I may live in thy fear and die in thy favor, Amen.

Sect. LXXIII. Sinners visage.
EVery sin seems fair before the action, sweet in the action, and poison
after the action. For three things follow after the committing of every sin, to
wit fear, shame, and guilt: the fear of hell, shame of men, and guilt of
conscience.

Spark 73
Lord, if these will not make me loath sin, Exodus 20.6.
yet let thy love make me leave it, and thy mercy forsake it.

Sect. LXXIV. The Covetousness of the Godly.
IF I be rich, I may want: If I be strong I may be overcomed. If I be learned I
may be deceived: But if I be wise, I shall be perfect. For the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom, and a good beginning makes a good ending. This
made Solomon to pray for wisdom, Moses to study for wisdom, and the Queen of
Sheba to travail for wisdom.

Spark 74.
Grant (O Lord) that I may learn, to fear thee, that I may begin to be wise;
Prove. 1. Psalm. 111.
and keep thy laws that I may have understanding.

Sect. LXXV. Too much of one thing is good for nothing.
IT has been said always that the mean is best, and that the middle way is
the golden way. But we see by experience that extremity bears rule in this
world: For every Virtue there are two Vices; we will be either too curious or
too careless: Either we cry Hosanna, or Crucify. Either Christ must not wash
our feet, or else he must wash our feet and bodies together. Either we say,
taste not, touch not, for it is unclean; or else we say, let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall die. If we love, we over love, If we be fearful, we are
too fearful, If angry, we are too angry.

Spark 75.
Lord, give me grace to fear, but not to despair, Eccles. 2. Psalm. 4. Ephesians. 4.
Prove. 4.
to be angry, and not to sin; to decline from thy Statutes neither to the right
hand nor to the left, Amen.

Sect. LXXVI. The Flatterer's Gesture.
ON the Stage of wickedness the Flatterer plays his part best: For he is
like a shadow, which does imitate the gesture of the body: For it stands when
you stand, walks when you walk, sits when you sit, and rises when you rise. So
the Flatterer will praise, when you praise, reprove, when you reprove, smile,
when you smile, and frown when you frown; till the Sun of his hope is set, and
then no shadow, no Flatterer.

Spark 76.
Prove. 13.
Deliver me (O Lord) from a flattering tongue, and from the net that he
spreads for my steps.

Sect. LXXVII. The abused Creature's Grave.
THe Glutton and the Covetous man never cease to bury Gods Creatures, until
themselves be buried; for the one burieth them unlawfully in his belly, and the
other, miserably in his chest. Therefore, at the general resurrection, these
Creatures will rise in judgment against these men.

Spark 77.
Keep me, O Lord, from surfeiting and excess, and from coveting any thing but
thy Grace.

Sect. LXXVIII. The Careless Christian.
I See that every man, saving a Christian, studies to be perfect in his
vocation, and careful to know and observe his grounds. As the Grammarian, his
Rules: The Philosopher, his Axioms: The Lawyer, his Maxims: The Physician, his
Aphorisms: The Musician, his Keys and Measures. These observe their grounds,
though they be many in number. But the Christian has but few Principles, and
yet can keep few or none of them; for all the Principles of Religion are, to
love God with all our heart, and our Neighbor as our self.

Spark 78.
Most loving Father, grant me perfect love, and then I shall fulfill thy Law,
Rom 13. Gal. 5. 1 Cor. 15.
and be skil^ul in the rules of Christianity, through that loadstone of love
Jesus Christ, Am^

Sect. LXXIX The House-holder's Office.
EVery man in his House, should bear the same Office as Christ does in his
Genesis 32.
Church, who is King, Priest, and Prophet: So most that good man be, a King to
rule his Family and to correct his Children, so did Jacob: A Priest to pray for
his Children, Job 1. 1 Kings 2.2
so did Job: And a Prophet to teach and instruct them, so did David.

Spark 79.
Grant (O Lord) that I may correct my Children: For, Prove. 13.
The sparing of the rod is the spoiling of the Child. Teach me to instruct
them in their youth, that they may it, when they are old. Teach me how to pray
both for me and them: Mat. 7.
For to him that knocks it shall be opened.

Sect. LXXX. A Medicine well tempered.
THough God's blessings be sweet always in themselves, yet he makes them
often times seem more sweet to us by the manner of giving them; as when he
sends a calm after a great tempest; perfect health after long sickness; free
liberty after close Imprisonment; a bright day after a dark night; a blessing
to Jacob after long wrestling; the Land of Canaan to Israel after long War;
riches to Job after great poverty; light to Paul after long darkness; Sorrow
for a night to his Children, but joy in the morning.

Spark 80.
O Lord, If thy blessings taste not sweet enough in the mouth of my sickly and
sinful soul, feed me sometimes with ^hy tart benefi^s, that thy sweet
bl^ssings may be the more welcome to me, and my self more thankful unto thee;
that I may say with David, ^er. 10, 24.
It is good for me that I have been in trouble, for before I was troubled I
went wrong.

Sect. LXXXI. Sin's port-way.
IF a man will take his journey toward Hell, he need not fear to be out of his
way, for that way is both common and plain, where he shall overtake many to
bear him company; but none coming back to bring him commendation to his
friends. But he that will resolve to take his voyage toward H^aven, shall have
much ado to find the way; for it is a troublesome path frequented but by few,
and therefore we had need to set forwards betimes, if we will come to the end
of our journey. But the best is, though we travail^ hard to come to it, yet
when we come, we shall be sure of a good lodging, where we may be joyful and
merry, and rest for ever without any more pain; banqueting and feasting, like
glad children in our elder brother's house.

Spark 81.
Psalm. 5. Psalm. 139. Psalm. 143.10: Luke 16. Mat. 4. Exodus 23, 20
Teach me (O Lord) thy way, and let thy holy spirit direct me, thy Word conduct
me, and the blessed Angels attend me, that I neither wander, fall, nor stumble
until I arrive at the haven of happiness to dwell with thee forever more, Amen.

Sect. LXXXII. The chiefest Trade.
When men are about to bind their children to any Trade, they will commonly be
careful to know that profession wherein they may be admitted with less charge,
where the Professor is of good name and credit, the calling honest, and
gainful, and whereby in the end, they shall be sure to come to great
preferment. Christianity is the best profession of all; and such a calling that
the poorest man may be admitted unto without charge. Who is of greater credit
than God? And who can choose a better mast^r to serve than his Maker? The
calling is most honest and gainful: For what greater honesty, than to do unto
all men, as I would they should do unto me? And what greater gain than
godliness? Lastly, having served out the time, what greater freedom can any
have, than to be a freeman of Heaven? and what greater preferment can any
wish, than to have a Crown of glory, and life everlasting?

Spark 82.
O Lord, this is only my profession; I am bound to it since I was a child:
Howbeit, I have a thousaand times broken my Indentures, and run away from thee,
and thou have still brought me back again and forgiven me. I am ashamed (Lord)
I have so often displeased so gentle a Master. Good Lord, forgive me for Jesus
Christ's sake, Amen.

Sect. LXXXIII. The best conception.
SOme have bin for a time barren in body, but fruitful in soul, so was Sarah,
Rebecca, and Elizabeth. Some have been fruitful in body, but barren in soul,
so were Lot's Daughters, that so readily conceived of their Father. Some again
are fruitful both in body and soul, and so was the blessed Virgin, for she
conceived Christ in her womb, and pondered all his sayings in her heart.

Spark 83.
Lord, grant that how barren soever our bodies be in multiplication, yet our
souls may be always bringing forth fruit in due season, conceiving a good faith
in thee, and bringing forth good works to thy praise and glory.

Sect. LXXXIV. Welcome God's Will.
SOme men have many children, and have no inheritance for them; some have
inheritance and no children; some have both children and inheritance; some
neither children, nor inheritance, etc.

Spark 84.
Lord, if it please thee to send me many Children without inheritance, make
them thine by adoption; and then they shall be inheritors of thy Kingdom. If
thou send me children and inheritance, make me the more thankful unto thee,
and let me not esteem them above thee. If I have neither children nor
inheritance, then give me a lively faith in Christ to purchase Heaven for my
patrimony, and to become a child my self, that I may have thee for my Father.
But if it please thee to send me wealth without children, Lord, give me grace
to bestow it upon my poor brethren, which are thy children, and my spiritual
kinsmen; for in so doing I do but lend unto thee of thine own, and thou will
be sure to pay me the best interest.

Sect. LXXXV. For us men and for our salvation he -- came down from heaven.
When I view the earth, and see that of her own accord she brings forth both
herbs and fodder and food sufficient for all creatures, save man, wi^h^ut
labor or tillage, and that only man must till and labor for his food; then I
well perceive (Lord) that it is man only that has and do h daily offend, and
not the bruit creature.

Spark 85.
Good Lord, forgive me my sins both original and actual, that I with all thy
elect may evermore praise thee, that the earth may bring forth her increase,
and that God, even our own God, may give us his blessing, etc.

Sect. LXXXVI. The Kings Court.
IF it pleased such as attend the Court to see the difference between the Court
of Princes here on earth and the Court of the King of Glory in heaven; they
would quickly forsake all the Profits of the one to attain unto the pleasurs
of the other. For First, He that will be a Courtier here, must often forsake
his own Country where he lived at ease, the place where he was known and
beloved, the neighbors of whom he was visited, the goods wherewith he was
maintained, his wife and children of whom he was comforted; yea, often be ^ain
to remove when the Court removes, trusse up his baggage, and load his horses,
seek him a newlodging. But he that will mind to be of the great King's Court,
shall not go out of his Country, but come into his Country, not go from his
neighbors that loved him, but to such neighbors as will ever love him, he shall
not there forsake his parents but meet them; not lose his goods but find them;
not miss his comfort but receive it; not often remove, but for ever be at rest
and most sure of a pleasant lodging Secondly, In following earthly Courts a man
shall hear many discontented persons about the Court, that, if he be good,
shall offend him much; such as are rejected and favourlesse Courtiers meeting
together murmuring at their Prince, backbyting his councelors and Offic^rs,
c^ntemning his Laws, envyng his liberality, grudging at others favors; some
perhaps blaspheming the divine providence for ei h r placing or suff ring such
to be in credit, and themselves to be discarded. But in the supreme Court of
heaven every one shall hear his King glorified, and his maker praised, not
envying but all rejoicing at the preferment and glory of their fellows as at
their own. Thirdly, when perchance in these earthly Courts a m^n may be crept
into his Prince's favor to day, as Haman was, he may be out to morrow, and
while he continues in favor he fears every hour to fall; and if ever he be
once out of favor and in disgrace, he commonly despaireth of regaining his
former credit. But it is not so with such as wait upon the Lord; For whom the
Lord loves he loves him unto the end; he writes him in his Book called Vade
mecum, and from thence he shall never be blotted out, though the earth be
moved, and though the hills thereof be cast into the midst of the sea. Psalm.
46.2.
Fourthly, In the Court of earthly Princes men must be fearful to move their
Prince, and to speak unto him, and most commonly use their means that be most
in favor to speak for them: But in the high Court of heaven every Saint and
Subject of the great King may boldly approach to the throne of grace, and speak
to his Sovereign as to his kind and loving Father. Fifthly, Men commonly to
win the favor of earthly Princes must spend much time and endure much toil,
and the least dislike will oftentimes put them out of favor again; and if they
forgive the fault, yet he should want their favor: But God upon our
willingness to do him service presently accepts of us as he did of the
prodigal child, and if we do offend him, he is the slowest to conceive
displeasure, and the readiest to forgive. This made the good King of Israel to
say, that he had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of the Lord, than to
dwell in the Palaces of Princes.

Spark 86.
O most Mighty, Magnificent, and most Glorious King, though we be unworthy to
take the name of so high a Monarch in our mouths, or to lift up our sinful
eyes unto the heavenly throne of thy glorious Majesty, trusting in our own
worth and worthiness; Yet having thy Word for our warrant, thy Spirit for our
guide, and thy Son for our advocate, we are imboldend to approach thy palace,
and through the blood of thy Son and by his merits and obedience we see by the
eye of Faith thy golden Scepter of favor and free access stretched out unto
us. Therefore we will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies;
Psalm. 84 2.84.10 65.
for most amiable are thy dw^llings, O Lord God of hosts! my soul has a desire
and a longing to enter into thy Courts; For one day in thy Court is better than
a thousand. O Lord, blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receivest unto
thee; he shall dwell in thy Court, and shall be sat^sfi^d with the pl^asures of
thy House Good Lord, give me grace to love thee above all things, and the place
where thin^ honor dwells. O Lord, gra t that I may dwell in thy house for
^ver; and during the time of my pilgrimage here, in thy House of Grace; grant I
may lead an incorrupt life, do the thing that is right, speak the truth from
my heart, neither doing evil to my neighbor, nor slandering him, nor setting
by my self, but to be lowly in mine own eyes, making always much of them that
fear thee, having always a regard to keep both my oath and my promise with God
and man, hating all oppression, bribery, and usury; that when the time of my
removing shall come, I may be sure to be transl ted from thy Court of Grace
into the Kingdom of Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. LXXXVII. The Sea-mans Card.
DAvid said not without great reason, that those that go down to the Sea in
Ships, and occupy their business in great waters, see the works of the Lord,
and his wonders in the deep: For indeed, those that be often at Sea behold so
many wonders and such diverse godly observations, that they never want there
either a Sermon or a Preacher, for every thing about them preaches unto them:
First, those Creatures that are in the Sea, are great in quantity and
innumerable, exceeding far the number of land-Creatures, and yet they all
multiply without any lustful copulation; whereby we see that there is no
encre^se like unto that which is void of sin and carnal lust; such as the
fruit of Zachariah and Elizabeth was; or of Abraham and Sarah. Again, ^he
condition of the Sea does b^st describe unto us the condition of the world: For
as the Sea is in continua^l motion and never quiet, but som^times toss^d up to
the heavens, and suddenly falling down again, to the terror of the beho^ders;
So in this world, some are one while like proud surging waves hoysed up unto
the highest sphere of honor, and in a moment again thrust down, into the
lowest Down and Den of disgrace. Secondly, as the Sea is always unquiet until
it cast up his dead; So the world is ever roaring and uneasy until it cast
out of it such as are dead unto the world, and live unto God; such the world is
ready to vomit up and to surfeit upon. Thirdly, as in the Sea the greater fish
do devour the lesser, and small ones; So do the potent in this world eat and
swallow up the poor. Fourthly, as the Sea is full of dangers, as Rocks, Sands
and Sirens, etc. So is the world full of tri^lls and travells, deceit and
trouble, perils without and terrors within (as the Apostle says) casting Job
into the Dunghill, Daniell to the Den, and Joseph to the Dungeon. Fifthly, as
often times in the midst of greatest calms there arises at Sea the soarest
tempest; So oftentimes in the midst of the worlds solace arises the greatest
sorrow. Sixthly, the Sea is no certain place of abode, but serves only to
bring men to some surer haven or harbor: No more is this world any certain
place of dwelling for us, but a mean to bring us to that City which we expect
for. Seventhly, as a man on the Sea cannot sail whither he would, but whither
the wind drives him; So is it not in the power of man in this world to do
what he will, or to go whither he will, but only as the Spirit of God guides
him. Eighthly, as the water of the Sea is brinish and bitter, and the
extremest holes and end thereof but sand; So is the world bitter and
distasteful, and the end thereof but sand, dust, and ashes: And as upon the Sea
Ships do always sail; So on the Sea of this world, the Church of God like
Noah's Ark does continually abide, whose Mainmast is the Cross of Christ, her
Sails the holy Scriptures, her Anchor true Faith, her Pilate the Spirit of God,
he Calls Christian Hope, and Gods gracious Promises, her chief Master and
Governor, Christ himself. This Ship is often tossed and troubled with the
tumults of our Enemies, which are like uno four tempestuous winds; the
Atheist, the Turk, the Papist, and the Puritan. The Atheist acknowledges not
the Ship-Master, the Turk would hew down her Mainmast, the Papist would take
away her Anchor-hold, and the Puritan would break her Stern of Government, and
cast away her Ordnances: But God still these winds. Yet those that are at Sea
se^ by their Card that in the midst of tempestuous weather the needle of their
Compass remains always unmovable, and stays upon one point, because it
governs it self by the Pole. In like sort the soul of a faithful Christian in
the midst of all these unruly winds, and sturdy storms, will stand quiet, and
enjoy a most assured peace, because his love and affection, like the needle
point, aims at Heaven, and stays it self upon Gods Promise, which is the
true Pole and Object of our love.

Spark 87.
O sweet Jesus, sleep not in the Ship of thy Church, still and stay all
tempests and unruly storms that may arise to terrify us. Lord, look upon us
in these dangerous times, wherein we are well nigh covered with wicked waves.
Lord, save us least we perish, and rebuke these winds and waves that trouble
thy poor Mariners. Mat. 8.23, 24, 25, 26.
Good Lord, walk thou with us upon the Sea of this world, that if the Sea cast
us up as dead, thou may receive us. Hinder the great Leviathan to devour us,
and the mighty Nimrods of the world to hunt after us, and let the needle of our
affection remain always steadfast to the Pole of thy Promises. Be with us on
the Sea as thou wast with Jonah, and on the Land as thou wast with Joseph; that
if we be cast to the Whale's belly with the one, or into the Prisons profundity
with the other, yet do thou never forsake us. But till our Cause be known, let
us still out of the deep call upon thee; that the deep of thy mercy may help
the deep of our misery, and so one deep may call upon another.

Sect. LXXXVIII. Good Service.
IT is the common custom of many men to use their servants as they do their
apparel, that is to cast them away, when they are worn out, and can serve them
no longer as before. Happy are they therefore that serve such a Master in
youth, that will be sure not to forsake them in age, and for a little sorrow on
earth, will give them continual, solace in Heaven.

Spark 88.
Grant Lord, that I bestow both life and Limb, time and talent to thy glory;
that now being by Christ delivered from the hands of mine Enemies, I may serve
thee without fear all the days of my life.

Sect: LXXXIX. Christ's Rest.
O My Savior, thy first lodging was a new womb, wherein never man before was
conceived: Thy second lodging a new tomb, wherein never man before was buried:
And thy third lodging must be in a new heart that must never be defi^ed.

Spark 89.
Grant Lord, that as thy Mother conceived thee in her womb, so I may conceive
thee in my heart. Lord, let my heart be thy grave, thy stable and manger, thy
Tem le, and thy dwelling House, that I may dwell in th^e and thou in me for
evermore, Amen.

Sect. XC. Hopes Confirmation.
When I see the earth to bring forth all things that are committed unto it, my
hope is confirmed, and my joy increased, because I know it must one day r^store
our bodies committed in trust unto it, and then the year of the great Jubilee
will come, when such as groan under their burden and all the lands Prisoners
shall be set at liberty: For the just in Christ (says David) shall flourish as
the Palm tree, which though it have many weights at the top, and many snakes at
the root; yet is it still neither oppr^ssed with the weights, distressed with
the snakes: so though the earth oppress us, and the worms devour us, when our
Salvation draws near at hand, we shall lift up our heads again, and shall no
more die, but death and corruption shall die in us. Then may ev^ry one of us
sing with David, I laid me down and sl^pt, and rose up again, for the Lord
sustained me: O my God, how many things have thou ordained to strengthen my
faith? and to confirm my hope herein? For the sun sets and is closed up in
darkness, and yet rises again the next moring. The moon waneth every month,
and becomes small or nothing to our sight; yet it grows again to her
glorious and former light. The trees in winter are as dead before us, and all
their beautiful leaves withered, wasted and fallen away; yet when the spring
comes they revive again, and are gorgeously clothed as before. The Lion
being too long ere he find his prey, when he comme^h home he finds his
whelps dead, and with his very roaring reviveth them again. The Pelican by her
blood reviveth her young ones. The Phoenix from her dead ashes receives life.
The Serpent being cut in twain by lying a while in the dung, knitteth her self
and reviveth again. Many small birds for the Winter lie in fens, holes and
caves and trees, as buried and dead; yet rise again in Spring and sing
melodiously. Lastly, what is our bed but the Image of our graves? the clothes
that covers us of the dust and earth cast upon us? The little flea that biteth
us, of the worms that shall consume us? The Co^k that croweth, of the last
Trumpet. Therefore, as I rise up lustily when sluggish sleep is past; so I hope
to ris^ Joyfully to Judgment at the last.

Spark 90.
G^^nt me, O Lord a lively faith, 1 Cor. 15.
not to sorrow for my brethren that sleep in thee, Mat. 24.
as one without hope; but rath^r to watch for the day of my redemption and the
glorious coming of my savior to deliver me from thy body of sin; Rm. 9.7.
that my vile body may be made like his gl^rious body, and that in the mean
time whether I sl^ep or wake, I may continually hear the sound of thy Trumpe in
mine ear, saying, Arise ye dead and come unto judgment; Phil. 3.21.
and at last be ravished with the sweet sentence of my Savior, Venite
Benedicti, etc.

Sect. XCI. The fruitful Valley.
I See always the highest hills to be most barren, and the low valleys
fruitful; therefore the higher I exalt my self like a mountain, the more
barren I shall be before God; And the lower I humble my self, the more
fruitful I am to others by good and wholesome examples.

Spark 91.
O Lord, teach me to learn meekness of thee that art meek, and to humble my
self, that I may be exalted, Amen.

Sect XCII. The Scorner's Chair.
IT is noted for no small disdain in Pharaoh to say, Who is the Lord, that I
should obey him? Such as those Oaks of Basan, and those tall Cedars of Lebanon
in the height of their pride, as being too wise to be moved with ordinary
judgments. If we have the honor to be Gods among men, or the power to work
mighty things in the world; Hab. 1.16.
We sacrifice to our own nets, and burn incense to our yarn; and say, if not
in our mouth, yet in our heart, There is no God. Psalm. 14.1.
If our evil counsels have good success, and when we rebelliously transgress,
we prosper in our wickedness; we spare not to say, Tush, Ezekiel. 9.9.
the Lord sees not. If when we multiply sin upon sin, and by the cords of
vanity draw on the cartropes of iniquity, and add thirst unto drunkenness, we
be not plagued like other men, we presume to say, Tush, Zeph. 1.12.
the Lord cares not, he will do neither good nor evil. If God forbear us, we
think his hand shortened, and if we do not feel his rod, we make a question of
his power; yea, the irreligiousnesse of this profane age is such, and grown
to that impudency, as to dispute of principles and grounds of faith; to call,
not only God, and his holy Word the Scripture, but Heaven, Hell, Angels,
Devils, the Resurrection of the body and the Immortality of the soul into
question; so that if he will find any faith among such, he had need come with
new miracles, and more than miracles, least our searching wits should find the
reason of them, or otherwise conclude them to be but our ignorance of the
cause. For whatsoever exception either vain Philosophy, Exodus 3.2.
or profane Gentility took against the wonderful works of God in elder times;
as that the burning and not consuming Bush was but a Meteor; and 14.12.
that the passage of Israel through the Red Sea upon dry ground, and 16.15:
was but the advantage of an Ebbe-tide; that the Manna which God rained in the
Wilderness, was but the Mildew of the Country; Josh. 6.20,
that the fall of the walls of Jerico at the sound of the Trumpets, was but an
Earthquake; that our Savior himself did no Miracles, but by the help of
Beelzebub; Yea, that and worse than that do the scorners and licentious wits of
our times object against the power of God, and to make God and his power either
nothing at all, or tie him unto second causes; as if the world did run upon the
constant wheels of everlasting motions, which is not in his power, so much as
in the power of a Clock-keeper, either to break or to alter.

Spark 92.
O thou wonderful, and powerful Essence, whose strength is seen in our
weakness, we beseech thee to give us grace to humble our selves under thy
Almighty hands, Psalm. 1.1.
that we neither walk in the Counsel of the ungodly, stand in the way of
sinners, and 10.
nor sit in the seat of the Scornful. and 20.9.
Arise, O Lord God, and lift up thy hand, forget not the poor, put them in
fear, O Lord, that the Heathen may know themselves to be but men, for the
ungodly walk on every side, 12.9.
when they are exalted the children of men are put to rebuke. O Lord, thou
can do whatsoever thou will both in heaven and earth; For heaven is thy seat,
and the earth is but thy footstool; Yea, the earth is thine and all that
therein is; the compass of the world, and they that dwell therein. O Lord,
Psalm. 24.1.
by thy Word were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the breath of
thy mouth, etc, Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength, so shall we sing
and praise thy power for ever and ever, Amen.

Sect. XCIII. The Gospell's Law.
Well might our Savior say, that he came not to destroy but to fulfill the
Law: For the Gospel of Grace is so far from taking away the obedience of the
Law, as that it adds to our obedience, and is severe against the affections,
as the Law against the actions of evil, making it theft to covet our
N^ighbours goods, and murder to be angry with our Brother, and adultery to
look upon a Woman to lust after her; Mat. 5.22. Ecl. 12.20.
and Treason to curse the King, though but in thought: 1 These 5.22 Esaias. 2.18.
Math. 12.
restraining not only from evil but from all appearance of evil; condemning
not only the Cartropes of sin, but the cords of vanity; taking a strict
account not only of every wicked, but idle word; nay our wandering thoughts
also.

Spark 93.
O dear Father, thy law is a perfect law converting the soul. It is no
eye-service that can please thee, but thou requirest truth in the inward parts.
Good Lord, as thy Gospel is a new law adding perfection unto perfection: So
create in me a new heart, and put a right spirit within me; that my thoughts
being undefiled may please thee; my words being seasoned with grace may praise
thee, and my actions being sanctified by thy spirit, and proceeding from the
holy motions thereof, may glorify thee. To whom be all honor praise and glory
for ever, Amen.

Sect. XCIV. Virtue is in action.
GOd infused not the soul of man into a lump, or block, or such a body, as was
unfit for motion, but into such a body, as had legs, arms, hands, feet, eyes and
ears, to show that we must not be idle, but work with our hands, labor with
our feet, instruct with our tongues, and mark with our eyes.

Spark 94.
Lord, let me not be given to idleness, but be diligent in my place, and
painful in my calling, getting my living either by the sweat of my brows, or
my brains, that thou may not find me idle all the day long, but working
either in thy field or thy vineyard, and doing always that which is just and
acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Sect. XCV. -- Pass the time of your dwelling here in fear.
AS we must give an account of every idle word which we speak; so we must give
an account of every idle hour which we spend. Therefore when we see the glass
run, or hear the clock strike, or the sun pass in the Dial, let us think that
there is now another hour come whereof we are to yield a reckoning, and so
endeavor to sp^nd one hour better than another.

Spark 95.
O Lord, let me rejoice in thee evermore, pray continually, and in all things
give thanks, redeeming the time because the days are evil: let me pass no
minute idly, but while I have the light, walk in the light; for the night
will come wherein I can work no more.

Sect. XCVI. The Merchant's gain.
SAint Paul, the vessel of honor, does teach that Godliness is great and true
gain: Let us therefore seek and search, hunger and thirst for this gain. Let
the love of godliness (not of money) break our sleep, possess our thoughts in
the night; let us mind it first in the morning, and meditate on it most in the
day time. And as the Merchants for his gains, makes long voyages, hazards
life and health, sequesters himself from his wife and children: So let us for
the Kingdom of God endure troubles without, and terrors within, leave wife and
children, and with a valourous mind pass all the seas and storms of this
world: and as the covetous Merchant, the elder he waxes the more greedy he is
to gather; so the elder we are, let us make the more careful provision of
faith and good works. If we be Merchants, let us exchange our commodities for
better; let us leave our avarice, that we may receive content; refuse sin that
we may receive our Savior. One soul is more precious than the whole world, let
us then sell the world to save our souls. The Kingdom of Heaven is a Pearl
that cannot be purchased except we part with all we have. If we be merchants,
let us venture for it. Who would not with the poor fishermen leave an old net
to follow Christ? Math. 4.
Who would not with the woman of Samaria change a cup of well water for the
water of the fountain of life? Luke 19.
Who would not with Zacheus do away half his goods to obtain a Kingdom? Who
would not with the penitent thief bestow a broken heart, and a short prayer for
a Crown of glory? Luke 21.
Who would not with the poor widow forgo a mite to receive a million? Who
would not with Christ and his holy Martyrs endure the Cross, that he may enjoy
the Crown? Who would not with the wise men exchange gold, frankincense and
myrrh to obtain Grace, truth, and mercy?

Spark 96.
O God, thou art my God, my goods are nothing unto thee. Whom have I in heaven
but thee, and whom shall I desire on earth in comparison of thee? O Lord, thou
did with thy blood arrest heaven for me, when thou wast circumcised, thou
have paid the whole, when thou wast crucified? then did thou take our sins,
and gave us thy salvation. I am a poor banquerupt; I can offer thee nothing
that is of worth, accept of my mite of devotion, my cold water of alms, my
grain of faith, my desire of sorrow, my sighs of satisfaction, and my purpose
to praise thee. Alas, sweet Jesus, I cannot give thee thy own goods to gain my
own glory. I have nothing left me but the name of Merchant: Satan, the man of
War, has taken away the gold of my faith: I have exchanged thy graces for the
worlds vanity, and I have so long listened to the sirens of my own
concupiscence, that I have made a shipwreck of all thy blessings. Sweet Jesus,
pardon my doings, and pay thou my debts: Give me that life which thou have
purchased for me, and forgive me that death which I have purchased for my self
by my sins, Amen.

Sect. XCVII. A Christian Salutation.
WHen a man first comes to a house, we use to say, you are welcome, when he is
parting away, God speed you, or fare you well; when we meet with him on the
high way, God save you: So when we see a man born, we may say, you are welcome;
for he is but newly come* When we see one under forty, God keep you for he is
at the best: but if past forty, God speed you, or, fare you well; for he is
going out of the world.

Spark 97.
Lord, I am always going out of the world: therefore, grant me a prosperous
journey, and a happy arrival; teach me betimes to take my leave of all, and to
follow thee; let me never look back to the Sodom of sin, till I come to the
mountain of happy felicity, through him and by him who is the way, the truth
and the life.

Sect. XCVIII. The way to preferment.
HE that will be joyful must weep; he that will be satisfied must hunger and
fast; he that will be rich, must give; and he that will bear rule, must obey.

Spark 98.
Lord give me grace to hunger for thee, that I may be filled, to weep for my
sins that I may be comforted; to give, that it may be given to me; to be
merciful, that I may obtain mercy, to obey and be humble, that I may be
exalted.

Sect. XCIX. The lukewarm Professor.
HE is like the twilight, neither day nor night; like the Autumn, neither
fair nor foul; like one sick of an ague, one day well another day ill; or
like the Mary-gold, that opens and shuts with the sun; having on eye
toward Sodom, and another toward Zoar or like the butterfly on the glass
window, that will neither backward nor forward. If he puts his hand once to the
plough, he is presently ready to look back: he is but almost a Christian like
Agrippa: he is one while minded to be fellow servants with Paul, another while
resolved to leave him and to follow Demas; embracing this present world; whose
unconstant honor is so offensive and so loathsome to God, that he threatens to
spew him out of his mouth. Rev. 3 16.
He is earnest in nothing; runs both with the hound and with the hare: worships
God and Baal; wears garments of linen and woollen; serves two masters, God and
Mamon: he is as well for Romish Babylon as for English Sion: he can be con^ent
with as many religions, as he has honors and vain affections. Whereas one
heaven held not Michael and the Dragon in peace: nor one house the Arc and
Dagon; nor one womb Jacob and Esau, nor one Temple prayer and merchandising;
nor one Camp the clean and leprous; nor one Bath John and Cerinthus, nor one
tongue God and Milchom; nor one conscience true Religion and false
superstition: yet the lukewarm man's heart is a seat for all these, and yet not
const^nt and z^alous in any of these. It is enough with such a one to be
outwardly religious. I^ he has but a show and shadow of religion he cares not
for the substance.

Spark 99.
O dear Father, that art one God, true and constant in all thy ways, and
unchangeable, yea, a jealous God and a consuming fire, grant that I may be true
and constant in all my ways, not having a show of godliness, and denying the
power thereof: let me not become half a christian like Agrippa; but grant unto
me the love of thy servant John; the heart and constancy of David; the zeal of
Phineas; the boldness of Peter; the resolution of Paul; the patience of Job;
the perseverance of Joseph; the courage of Joshua; the earnestness of Moses,
and the constancy and integrity of my Savior: That so I may run the way of thy
commandments, and count it my meat and drink to do thy will. Good Lord, make me
every day more fervent of thy glory, more faithful in thy service, more
fearful of thy judgments, and more sorrowful for my sins, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. C. The death of his Saints is dear in the Lords sight.
IT is not without great reason that murder is so hateful unto God; that the
blood of the slain cries in his ears for revenge. For if we respect the
majesty of Goh himself, what can be more odious to him than to see his own
image defaced in his own presence? or what can be more contemptuous, than to
kill one in his view which he loved so dear, that he gave his only son to die
for him? Nay, what more wicked than wilfully to deprive him of life, of whose
life and safety God was so careful, that he numbered the hairs of his head,
least one of them should perish?

Spark 100.
O Lord, keep me from blood thirsty men, give me grace to love thy image for
thy sake, and not to destroy that which thy hands have made, and for whom thy
son died.

Sect. CI. The beastly Man.
IT was not for nothing that the Poets did feign men to be transformed into the
shape of some beasts; for indeed we are worse in some things than beasts. The
drunkard is more filthy than the swine; the murderer more cruel than the
tiger; the wordling more subtle than the Serpent; the choleric more angry
than the Wasp; the covetous more greedy than the Wolf, the adulterer more
leacherous than the Goat. Yea, many beasts have exceeded us in virtue, but we
exceed all in vice.

Spark 101.
O Lord renew thy image in us, and repair our defects: let us not any more
with the Swine wallow in the mire of our filthiness. Instruct thou us, Lord,
and let us not be like horse, and mule that have no understanding, but keep us
in thy ways, that we walk in thy wisdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. CII. The Foolish Worldling and the wise Christian.
BOth will yield honor to man, but diversely, the one honors him that has
the richest garment, and other external ornaments glorious to the eye: the
other honors him most who is richly adorned within, with wisdom and good
qualities. For as the world respects the outward man; so do the chil- of the
world: And as God respects the inward man; so do the children of God. For if a
man be vain outwardly, he is like unto the world, and therefore the worldlings
will honor him; but if he be good inwardly, he is like God; and therefore the
godly will reverence him.

Spark 102.
O Lord, grant I may give tribute to whom tribute, honor to whom honor,
worship to whom worship, and fear to whom fear is due, through Jesus Christ,
Amen.

Sect. CIII. Faith's feeding
Some Creatures by the providence of God are said to live in the air, as the
Chamaeleon, and some in the water, as Fishes etc. some in the earth, as Wants
and Worms etc. and some in the fire, as Salamanders etc: but hope is such a
creature, that is not tied to any one Element, but has free liberty to comfort
and refresh her self upon all these: As first, upon the air and light of
heaven: For how can we see the sun and the rest of those glorious Planets, to
set and rise every day, and not be confirmed in our hope of our own
resurrection? Secondly, upon the fire, which we see covered and buried at night
in the ashes, like our bodies in the dust, and in the morning to be kindled
with a little dry straw, which may assure us, that though now the dust does
cover our bodies, (as it were for a night) yet the joyful morning of our
resurrection will come, when our bodies shall be quickened and lightened again
with the candle of our soul through the power of our Savior, and the fiery
force of the holy spirit, that we may shine as bright lamps in his house for
ever. Thirdly, is not our hope much sustained by the water, which now we see to
decrease and ebb, and within few hours after to flow and fill again all those
empty chinkes and channels which of late were dried up, and so to revive them
with a new flood and fresh current: and shall not those empty veins of our
bodies, and those holy arteries of our flesh at the springtide of the
resurrection by the powerful blowing of the Southern wind of Gods spirit, be
filled again with blood, and the spirit of life? Fourthly, shall we observe the
earth to bring forth all things committed unto her and not hope (without doubt)
that she will one day likewise deliver up our bodies committed to their trust,
and that much more glorious than she does any corn or seeds which she keep but
for less than a year. Let us not think it therefore unlikely for our vile
bodies to be made glorious, seeing that fine paper is made of foul rags, and
pure glass of the ashes of fern, yea, of a heap of, dry bones, fair and
strong bodies, and life given unto them with a blast of wind. Ezekiel. 37*
For could God create all things of nothing and can he not work his own will in
his own creatures? could he fetch light out of darkness, as it were out of a
grave? can he in the womb of a woman of a little blood frame a body
distinguished with so many and sundry instruments, as that it may go for a
little world, and within the space of some few days add lif^ unto it? And can
he not restore the body that has been so, to what it was? Can he quicken us in
the womb of our mother, and can he not receive us in the womb of the earth? Can
we fetch fire out of the flint, and cannot he fetch us out of the earth? 1
King. 17.23. 2 King. 4 32 Acts 9.40. and 23.10.
Could Eliah and Elisha raise the widow of Zareptha, and the Shunamites
children? Could Peter raise Tabitha, and Paul Eutychus? and cannot God their
Lord and ours raise both them and us?

Spark 103.
O dear Father, 1 Pet. 1.
which by thy great mercy have regenerated us to a lively hope by the
resurrection of Jesus Chrst from the dead, 1 Timothy 3.
Romans 5.
to the end that being justified by his grace we should be made heirs according
to the hope of eternal life, which hope makes us not ashamed; I humbly
beseech thy Fatherly goodness to illuminate the eyes of my soul, that I may
clearly see what the hope of those is, Whom thou have called to the
incorruptible inheritance of thy glory. And as thou have in many of thy works
printed the true character of our resurrection; so fix and fasten the same for
ever in the heart and soul of thy servant, that I be not as a man without hope,
either of my own glorification or of theirs that sleep in thee; 1 Cor. 15.
that in the end this body of mine being renewed, and to my soul in far more
glorious manner reunited, I may in the society of Angels, being coheir with
the glorified Spirits, shine as the Sun in glory, and be fully united unto
Christ the true Son of righteousness, and the first fruits of the resurrection.
And let this holy meditation, and the hope to enjoy that full and perfect
contentation so possess my soul and senses, that it may be my thought, my
pleasure, delight, labor and care to attain to that perfection through Jesus
Christ, Amen.

Sect. CIV. God's ways are not our ways.
THere is a Speech of Socrates greatly commended by St. Augustine, De consens.
Evang. l. 1. c. 18.
Vnumquemque sic c^li oportere quomodo ipsum colendum praeceperat: that is,
Every god was to be honored as he himself had given in Commandment; which
shows by the judgment of a Heathen, that no man must serve his God after his
own lust, but after Gods Law; not after our own reason, but after God's
direction: Least otherwise the Lord cry out upon us, saying, Who has required
this service at your hands? For is it reason that we should serve an earthly
Master after his own will, and not serve God after his own Law. Therefore
certain it is that our good meanings in Gods service makes not always our
doings good; neither is our Zeal a rule whereby we may measure out either our
faith or good works, but only the known will and pleasure of God. There wanted
not a good intent or meaning either in the Isralites when they made a golden
Calfe; Exodus 3.24.
or in Nadab or Abihu, when they offered strange fire; or in Saul, when he
spared King Agag; or in Vzza, when he put his hand to hold the Arc; or in
Jehu, Levit. 10.
when he would needs join the worshipping of Jeroboam's goldens calves with the
worship of the true God of Israel.

Spark 104.
O gracious Father, as in our godly endeavors, we intend thy service and not
our own; so grant (good Lord) that in the doing thereof, we may always have
thy will for our warrant, thy law for our level, and thy commandments for our
direction. Give us grace (dear Father) to shun and avoid all those things (be
they never so good in man's sight) which thou either hate or have no pleasure
in: And that we be not blind servers of thee, running after our own
inventions: grant us true understanding and knowledge of thy word, which is the
glass of thy will; that seeing therein both thy will and our own weakness, we
desire thy grace to perform that which thou have commanded us, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. CV. A Caveat for the Demas's of our days.
THat Caveat of our Savior to his Disciples should be his Saints care, namely,
to endure to the end that we may be saved; Mat. 10.22
and so to run that we may obtain; and not to look back with Lots Wife; or to
faint in our journey, or be weary of well doing. For to what purpose is it that
the Mariner sayls prosperously, and obtaines a rich prize, if he sink or
suffer Shipwreck before he arrives at the haven of his own home. That a
Christian be laden with many Craces; and obtain the rich pearl of the Gospel,
and be fairly embarked for heaven, if afterward he suffer Shipwreck of his
faith? What avails it a Captain to march hotly with Jehu, to fight manfully
with Jonathan, if he turn his back with Ephraim before the end of the battle?
For us to encounter Satan, if we suffer him to s^yle and conquer us? If the
Soldier shall fly forth of the field, revolt from his Captain, forsake his
colors, run from his company, and turn to the enemy; he disgraceth his
profession, disableth himself for the Trophies of honor, and meriteth condign
punishment O Lord, we are thy soldiers, the Church is our field, Christ Jesus
our Captain, thy word and Sacraments are our colors, the communion of Saints
our company: he that shall fly forth of this field, revolt from this Captain,
forsake these colors, run from this company, and be found fighting under
Satan's conduct; dishonors his christian profession, depriveth himself of
the Crown of glory, and incurreth the danger of God's heavy Judgment. For if
we have given our names to Christ, served in his camp, 2 Timothy 4 9. and 2.17.
taken pay in his wars, and yet play the carnal Apostates with Demas the
Heretical, with Hymeneus and Philetus, the scornful with Julian the Emperor,
the spightfull with Alexander the Copper-smith; their remains small hope of
receiving any comfort by the blood of the Lamb, and Christ's eternal
Sacrific^; but rather extreme terror in the expectation of his fearful
sentence; small probability of being cleansed in his precious blood, but rather
a sore possibility of being devoured by a violent fire. For he only that
fights the good fight, finishes his course, 2 Timothy 4.7.
and keeps the faith, can expect the Crown of righteousness.

Spark 105.
O most mighty and merciful God, which art able to give more than we can
deserve or desire, for thy tender mercies sake keep me poor weakling and
unconstant waverer from the shame of backsliding, and defend me from the
dreadful sin of Apostasy. Keep me by thy power that I fall not, restore me
by thy mercy when I am fallen, preserve me by thy grace that I never finally
fall away; take not thy holy spirit from me, but establish me with thy free
spirit, that I may be settled and confirmed in thy truth; that being
effectually sanctified in thy Kingdom of Grace, I may be eternally blessed in
the Kingdom of Glory: Through the merits and mercy of thy sweet Son and my
sole Savior Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. CVI. The Christian Weathercock.
Psalm. 65.7.
THe wavering Professor is not unfitly compared unto the waves of the sea: Esaias.
17.12
It is the Lord that stilleth the raging of the sea, and the madness of the
people. So delighted with novel ies, so full of alterations is the fickle
faith, and the temporizing profession of the palsy shaking members of the
Church, that there be no waves so restless, no wind so mutable, Acts 28.
no creature so changable: while the Viper hung upon Paul's hand he was a
Murderer, but in the turning of a hand, when the Viper was shaken off, he was
counted a god. c. 3. v. 12.
In Ezra the people wept because they had no Temple; but after, when the Temple
was builded, they wept as fast again, because the glory of the second was not
like the first. 3.7.
In Exodus the people groan and cry to be delivered from the tyranny of Pharaoh
and their intolerable troubles; 14.11.
but the same people again cry out against Moses and Aaron for bringing them
from Egypt, wishing to be there again. In Exodus 20.19. the people entreat that
Moses may be their Ruler and Spokes-man; but in Numb. 16.3. the same people
refuse Moses and tax him for an intermedler that takes too much upon him. In
Exodus 16.3. the people cry out for bread, and having bread from Heaven they
gather it greedily, as if they should never have enough of it: But in Numb.
11.6. the same people despise and loath the same bread when they had it. In 1 Samuel 8.5. the people are very impatient and in a rage because they had not a
King: But in 1 Samuel 12.19. they are very sorry and much displeased because they
sought a King and had him. In Matthew, on Palme-Sunday the people cried all
unto our Savior, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord;
spreading their garments in the way, and cutting down branches of trees: But
within a se'night after, the same people instead of Hosanna, cry out Crucifige;
and instead of casting their garments in his way, they rob him of his garments;
instead of cutting down branches of trees they hang him upon a tree. In the
time of Constantius the Father of Constantine the Great, the people at the
beginning were glad to embrace the faith of Christ, and to offer the Sacrifice
of praise unto him; but in a little while after the same people in hopes of
preferment by the Emperor's favor, become very ready and willing to offer
Sacrifice unto Devils. In the time of Queen Mary there was lamentation and
crying out, that Idolatry was set up, the Church polluted, the light obscured,
and the Gospel taken away; But afterward, when by the mercy of God the light
was restored, and the Gospel advanced; they murmured and cried out as fast
again, that we had no Church, no Ministry, that truth was wrapped up in
Ceremonies, and that all was Popish and Antichristian. In Acts 19. Demetrius
and other subtle heads of the Tradesmen of Ephesus merely for their own gain,
raised a great tumult, and cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: But
presently the people were carried with such a tempest of fury, that the City
was all in an uprore, and every man run and rushed whither he list in great
conf^sion, and after much violence offered ( verse 32.) the most-part knew not
wherefore they were come together. For, as a weak and feeble brain follows
the waxing and waining of the Moon: So the brainsick humor of many lukewarm
Christians is subject and pliable to every change and revolution. Like the
standing corn that shakes and bows here and there as the wind blows, or
like the weathercock that turns with every blast; or the Urchin that alters
his door as the wind turns; or like the Amphibia that will play one while
upon the land, another while upon the water; or like the Israelites that spoke
both Ashdod and Hebrew. These are but half Christians, neither true Believers
nor mere infidells, they halt between two opinions, sometimes for the Ark and
sometimes for Dagen; now for Jehovah and presently for Baal: Not resolving what
Religion to profess, or what God to worship: Like Tully among the Romans, who
could not resolve, whether he should take Caesar or Pompey's part; or like
Tidides amongst the Graecians, who could not determine whether he should join
himself with Achilles or with Hector. These men are all for the time and
nothing for the truth; like Ecebolius, who suited his profession to every
Emperor's Religion; They with one breath call for fire from heaven with the
Disciples, and say with Peter, Master, look to thy self.

Spark 106.
O Almighty God that art ever immutable and for ever one and the same, with
whom there is no variableness or shadow of change, settle my heart in thy
truth, and knit my soul unto thy Testimonies; that I may say as Elizeus said to
Elias, as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee. Give
me grace not only to promise with thy servant Peter, but also to perform,
that though all the world forsake thee, yet I may never leave thee; but be so
linked in affection unto thee, the Savior of our souls, and to thy truth, that
neither tribute, nor anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor
peril, nor sword, nor death, nor life, nor Ang^ls, nor Principaliti s, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be ever able to separate me from thy love in Jesus Christ.
But as thou (Lord) have made me for thine own self; so let my heart be always
unquiet while it is from thee, Romans 8.35.
and never at quiet till it comes unto thee, no more than the needle in the
mariner's compass till it turns to the North star; or the Dove till it come to
the Arc, or the child till it comes to the breast; or the be till it comes to
the hi v. But be thou always the center of my soul, the circumference of my
thoughts, the star of my desire, the arc of my content, the loadstone of my
love, the breast of my comfort, and the lodge of my affections; that I may ever
believe in thee without wavering, profess thee without fearing, serve thee
without diss^mbling, and love thee and thy word perfectly, purely, and
perpetually, through Jesus Christ my Savior and redeemer Amen.

THE END.

