A Whip for the present House of Lords, OR The Levellers Levelled. In an
Epistle writ to Mr. Frost, Secretary to the Committee of State, that sits at
Darby House, in answer to a lying book said to be his called a declaratio, etc.
By L.C. Io. Lilburne, Prerogative Prisoner in the Tower of London, Feb. 27.
1647.
Into which is inserted his speech against the House of Lords Legislative and
Iudicative power, made at the bar of the House of Commons, the 19. of
January, 1647. In which is punctually proved, both by reason, and the
Parliaments own Declarations, that though the present House of Lords, (de
facto) exercise a law making, and a law judging power, yet (de jure) they have
no right to either, being mere prerogative Usurpers, and that the House of
Lords, exercising their pretended Legislative power, is destructive to the
Liberty and Freedoms of England, it alone having been the chief cause of all
the late wars and blood shed in England, for which as the Bishops were, they
deserve to be pulled up by the Roots. In which is also a lash for L. G. Cromwell
and Mr. Masterson, the lying Shepherd of Shoreditch near London.
Mr. Frost.
I Took occasion the 14. of this present to write a few lines unto you, which
before I can go any further, I am necessitated here to insert.

Mr. Frost.
I Have looked upon you formerly as an honest English man (though full of
fears, and a spirit possessed with two much compliance with unrighteousness.)
But a book coming this day to my hands, called A Declaration of some
proceedings of Lievt. Col. John Lilburne, published by authority, but yet
without an Authors name to own it, (makes me a little in my thoughts to
stagger) for upon reading of a few pages of it, in my own thoughts, I judged
the book to be of Mr. Nathaniell Fines his penning, or of your own, and as I
was musing who should be the Author of it, I had word brought me from
Westminster, that possitively it was yours. But being desirous, (if possible I
can,) to know certainly whether it be yours or no, (before I direct my lines,
in answer to it, to you.) For I cannot but acquaint you, that by Gods
assistance, I do intend to answer it to the purpose, and therefore cannot but
entreat you to prevent me from wronging of you, and that if my information do
deceive me, I entreat you by this bearer to send me two lines under your hand,
that it is not yours, for without such a disavowing, I shall take you (as in it
you say the Lords took me, pro confesso) and make in due time further addresses
to Mr. Walter Frost, from his friend John Lilburne.

But Mr. Frost, having not to this hour received one word of answer, or one
line from you, either to own or disavow the foresaid malicious, fallacious, and
lying book, I do therefore in good earnest take it to be yours (though in the
first reading of the 10. page, one would take it to be compiled by the House of
Lords themselves) and accordingly shall direct my present lines to you as the
Author of it* though it may be supposed, you had more fingers in it then your
own.

And at present, I shall only principally meddle with that part of it that
concerns the House of Lords, but of neccessitie, I must sum up the substance
of your discourse that antesedes that, and if I mistake you not, the drift of
your pen is to vernish over the reputation of the present swaying tyrants, the
Grandees in the Army, and their confederates in the two Houses, and to
bespatter and level with the ground upon which they tread, all those that they
or you conceive may stand in their way, in keeping them from attaining to the
full possession of their ultimate or final desires, viz. to set up themselves
in the full throne of the exercising of an unlimitted, unquestionable,
arbitrary, and tyrannical power and domination over the lives, liberties, and
proprieties of the free men of England: Which I will maintain it, they have
already, de facto, levelled with the corrupt rule of their own factious, and
arbitrary wills, and have already s^^ ordered the business; that no man in
England can justly or rationally say, that his life liberty, or estate that he
possesses is his own, or that it is possible to enjoy it any longer, then
during their tyrannical wills and pleasures, which already is become the sole
and only present safe rule to walk by in England.

You spend your 1, 2, and 3. pages, with laying a good round load upon the
King, and the mischievousnesse of his evil government.

And then in the last end of your third page, and in your 4, 5, 6. pages you
insinuate, that there are a generation of men, under specious pretenses, that
have not been professedly of the Kings party that yet drive on his designs. And
in the beginning of your 5. page you intimate, that the Levellers perfectly
play the Kings game. And truly I must tell you, I do absolutely believe you,
and tell you, that you and your tyrannical Lords, and masters, Cromwell and
Jreton, and the rest of their confederat, Grandees of the Army, and in both
Houses (the names of the principallest of which you may read in the 57, 67.
pages of my late book, called the peoples prerogative, and privileges
vindicated, etc.) are the true and perfect Levellers that are in being in the
Land of England, having already filled up all the ditches, and pulled down all
the hedges that should be as ^fence to preserve our lives, liberties, and
proprieties, and have already de facto, levelled them, and all our just laws
to their tyrann^call wills, which I have punctually and particularly pr^^^d
(...) my (...) book, as you may read in the last page of the proeme: and in the
40. 41. pages of the book it self, to the last end, but read especially the
last half sheet, and argumentall answer it, which I challenge from you, or any
other of the Grandees pentioners.

But in the third place, in the conclusion of your 5. page you declare, who the
Levellers are, viz. the promoters of the dividing distructive Agreement of the
people.

Truly Sir, I now know who you mean by the Levellers, and that is a company of
honest men, that both in the Bishops time labored against, and opposed tyranny
in all they meet with it in, to the apparent hazard of their lives, and at the
beginning of this Parliament and ever since, has done the very self same
thing, and I will maintain it by particulars upon my life, have been to the
utmost of their powers, constantly and continually, (ye in the Parliaments
greatest strait,) the truest friends to the universal, common and true
interest of England, and the just interest of Parliament, that the kingdom of
England has afforded, and never changed their principles to this day, and have
been the truest and constantest asserters of liberty and propriety (which are
quite opposite to community and Levelling) that have been in the whole land
besides. And I challenge you (in their behalf) and all your copartners in
England, to instance, or lay unto their charge) any the least particulars
acted, writ, said, or done by the body of them, or those that you count the
ring leaders of them, that in the eyes of any rational men in the world, does
in the least tend to the destruction of liberty and propriety, or to the
setting up of Levelling by universal Community, or any thing really and truly
like it.

A less poor men, their great and real crime is this: and nothing else, that
they will not be ride and inslaved by your masters, Cromwell and Ireton, and
their confederates in the Houses, viz. Earl of Northumber and Earl of
Solisbury, Lord Say Lord Wharton, Mr. Lenthall Speaker, the two Sir Henry
Vains, Sir Arthor Hasterige, Sir John Eveling Junior, Mr. Recrepoint, Col
Natth. Eines, coveteous and ambitious Solicitor S. John, Commissary Genesis
Stains, Scout Master General Watson and Col. Rich, the greatest part of
which, put altogether, has not so much true volour in them, as will half fill
a Sempsters Thimble, nor so much honesty as will ever make them fit for any
thing but Tyrants. And indeed and good earnest, Mr. Frost, if diverse of the
forementioned honest men, which you call Levellers, would have been soft wax,
wether cocks, Creatures, every thing and nothing, but to serve great men's ends:
I am very confident of it, they should not have had your pen so deeply dipped in
gall and vinegar against them, as in that most desperate, malicious, lying book
it is, (but in doing what there you do, you do really without a mask or
vizard, show your self what you are, viz. a Secretary more fit for the Great
Turk, then for a Committee of that Parliament, that in the years, 1640. and
1641. did so many just, gallant, and excellent things,) nor have incurred so
much bloody hatred, and destroying indignation from your last forementioned
Grandees, Lords, and Masters, as they have done, but I am confident of it, some
of them might easily at this day have been in as great repute, esteemation, and
place, as your self, having as much brains and parts, (and a little more
resolution) as your self.

But hinc ille lacrimae, heers their sorrow, heers their treason, been their
rebellion, faction, sedition, stirring up, and dividing the people, and here is
their Annarchicall Levelling, (as you call it) that they will endure tyranny,
oppression and injustice no more in apostatised Cromwell and Ireton, and their
forementioned confederates, then in Mr. Hollis, Sir Pillip Stapleton, etc. nor
then in the Earl of Ess^x, Earl of Manchester, etc. nor in the King and his
Cavieleers, nor in the Council Board, Star Chamber, High Commission, etc. but
desire that all alike may be Levelled to, and bound by the Law: and so far I
ingeniously confess I am with them a Leveller, and this Mr. Frost without any
vernishing or colution, is their only and alone crime in the blood-shot eyes of
you and your new Lords and Masters.

And besides, if in the phrases of men I may speak to you, the forementioned
honest men, and their principles, have been the Creators to set up Cromwell,
his preservers to support him in his straits, which have not been a few, his
Sanctifiers, by their praises and fightings, to sanctify him, and to make him
amiable and lovely in the peoples eyes, his Redeemers, to redeem him from
destruction, by Hollis and Stapleton, etc. even at that time, when I am
confident he gave himself up in a manner, for a lost and undone man, and to
requite them for all their faithfulness to him, and hazzards for him, he has
visibly and apparently made it his study and work, to crush and dash them to
pieces like a cuber of Glasses, with such violence as though he designed and
intended they should never be g^ude or sodered together any more: O monstrous,
unnatural, ignoble and horrible ingratitude, and yet even this in its hight,
has been acted and done by him unto them, as is undeniably demonstrated, in
that notable book called Putney projects; and an other book called the Grand
design, and a book in answer to his lying champion Mr. Masterson, called A
lash for a Liar. And therefore from all that has been said, I again christen
your forementioned tribe, the true and real Levellers, and those that you nick
name Levellers, the supporters and defenders of liberty and propriety, or Anti
Grandees, Anti Jmposters, Anti-Monopollsts, Anti-Apostates, Anti-Arbitrarians,
and Anti-Levellers.

And further in your six page you say, that the foresaid (honest) men are
grown to that hight, both by making combinations, printing and dispearsing all
manner of false and scandalous Pamphlets, and papers against the Parliament, to
deb^uch the rest of the people, gathering moneys, and making treasures and
representers of themselves, that the Parliament can no longer suffer them in
these seditious ways without deserting their trust in preserving the peace of
the Kingdom, and the freedom and propriety of peaceable men. For printing and
dispearsing all manner of false and scandalous Pamphlets, I retort that upon
you, and the rest of the mercianary pentioners of your Grandees; lying
Dia^nolls and Pamphlets being one of the chief means to support their rotten
reputation, and new attaind unto sovereignty, but I am sure you and they, have
almost locked up the presses as close as the Great Turk^ in Turkey does, Tyrants
very well knowing, nothing is so likely to destroy their tyrany, and procure
liberty to the people, as knowledge is, which they very well know is procured
by printing, and dispearsing rational discourses. But your Grandees have been
very gross in their setting up their new tyranny, for at their first rising at
one blow, and with one ordinance, they lock up the press clooser then ever the
Bishops did in all their tyranny or then Mr. Hallis and his faction (againw
whom for tyranny and injustice (your Grandees in their declaration) so much
crid out upon) did al^ those years they bore the sway.

And J am sure it was the maxim of the chief of your Grandees, the beginning
of this Parliament, that always in time of Parliament, [it being a time of
liberty and freedome] the printing press should be open and free, and J am
sure this was their answer to the Bishops the beginning of this Parliament, when
they solicited the House of Commons to stop the presses; and for my particular
I shall give you my consent to an Ordenance or law, to make it death for any to
print or publish any book unless the author, to the printer or bookseller,
enter into some engagement, to maintain with his life the truth of his book
provided the Presses may be free for all that will so do.

And as for gathering money to promote popular Petitions, and all the rest of
your charges upon them they may easily justify them out of the Parliaments own
premitive declarations: and for a little taste of the proof of it, I desire you
to read the first part book of Decl. page 44, 95, 150. 201. 202. 207, 209. 382.
4^2. 5^9, 532, 533. 548. 557. 637, 690. 720. And for the Parliaments lenity or
gentleness which you talk of, I for my part crave none at their hands, but
for any thing that any particular man, or any faction of men amongst them has
to say to me, the same defiance I bid to Levt. Genesis Cromwell in the 57, 58
pages of my last published book, I bid to them.

And as for their disserting their trust, if they do not punish us, I answer,
the generallity of them has does it so often, that they have now forgot to be
sensible of the dishonor of doing it again, and I do not think that ever any
generation of men breathed in the world, that ever disserted their trust more
then they have done, or else they would never have given so many 10000. l.
amongst themselves.

But in the sam^ sixth page you go on and name me to be the chief of all those
men, that have under specious pretenses served the Kings ends and designs. And
in the 7. page you carrectarise me to be a man known to the world, by those
Heaps of Scandalous books and papers that I have either written or owned
against the House of Peers, and ^uch as have done him greatest courtesies,
filled with fashood, bitterness, and ingratitude, whereby he has
distinguished himself (say you) from a man walking after the rules of
sobriety, and the just department of a Christian, and also in the same 7. page
to make me as odious for an Apostate, as your grand master Lievt. Genesis Cromwell
too justly deserves to be: you brand me to be a Cavialeer, for you say that
some that know me have well observed, that I brought not the same affections
from Oxford, that J was carried thither prisoner withal.

To the last of which I answer first, and challenge thee Frost, and all thy
associats in England, grounddedly and perticularly to instance the least
particular, for this 11. years together, when I have in the least apostatised
from my declared principles, though I have had as many thundering shakings,
pearceing trials, as I do confidently believe would have shaken the very
foundation, of the tallest and stoutest cedars among your grandees, and I am
confident in Oxford, I behaved my self with more resolution in my imprisonment
there, then all the Gentlemen prisoners, that there were officers did, and run
more hazards, and underwent more tormenting cruelties, then any of them, and
maintained openly and publicly more discourses with the Kings party, to
justify the Parliaments authority, and the justice of their proceedings,
insomuch that it was grown to common saying, with the Mashal and his officers,
when they had got a fat and timorous Prisoner, of whom they intended to make a
prey of, keep him out of the Castle from Lilburne, for if he come to discourse
with him, he will seduce him from all his allegience, from taking the Kings
Covenant, or forsaking the Parliaments principles, and when the King by four
Lords complemented with me, and proffered me no small things, I deliberately and
resolvedly, bid them ^ell the King from me, I scorned his pardon, and
maintained the Parliaments proceedings with them, by dint of argument, and
reason for above an hour together, and told them I would part with my heart
blood, before I would resede from my present engagement or principals, and when
I was arraigned for high treason therefore, I told the Judge in the open
Guildhall at Oxford when he pressed me to save my self: that I was seduced by no
flesh alive to take up arms against the King, and his party to defend my
liberties, and that ^ girded my sword to my thigh in judgment and conscience
to fight for my liberties, with a resolution to spend the last drop of the
blood in my vains therefore; and pressed the Judge to go o^ with his tyall,
telling him a scorned to beg or crave longer time at his hand, protesting unto
him, that I was as ready and willing that day to loose my life by a halter, as
ever J was by a sword or a bullet ^elling I feared not death in the least,
having by the assistance of God for above seven years before, always ^arried
my life in my hand, ready every moment to lay it down, and besides my purse
and pains to re^ieve and help the poor sick starving prisoners, was as free
and as ready as any man's in the House, and (...) do verily believe in the two
last particulars, I was as serviceable to the Prisoners as the richest in ^he
house; and some of them had about 1000. l. land per annum, and I had never a
farthing per annum; nay I defy a or any of the Prisoners that ever were there
face to face, to lay to my charge the least ^emonstration of fraging or denying
my p^inciples, from the first day of my going in to the last hour of ^^y
staying there.

And I am sure when I come home, I was not a little praised, and made much of by
those that are ^ow my professed adversaries, and proffered the choice of diverse
places, all of which I absolutely re^ised, and expressly told my wife, when I was
pressed by her to stay at home, that J sconrd to be so base, ^s to fit down in
a whole skin, to make my self rich, while the liberties and freedoms of the
Kingdom was in danger by the sword to be destroyed, and rather then I would
take a place at present of ^00. l. per annum, to lay down my sword; I would
fight for a groat a day; and my zeal carried me to Manchester, and Cromwell
(after upon my enlargement, I had several ways, been more really obliged ^y
the Earl of Essex, then ever I was before or since, by all the great men of
England, put them all in ^ne) choosing them merely for their honesty, I then
judged then to be in them; and there I fought and behaved my self in all my
engagements like a man of resolutions till I had spent some hundreds ^f pounds
of my own money, and lost all my principles of fighting, by reason of
Manchesters vis^ble and ^alpable treachery, which went unpunished after he had
apparently bought, Sold, and betrayed us al to the King, being impeached as a
Traitor therefore by Cromwell himself, and for prosecuting of him. etc. ^or
his treasons, al my present miseries and sufferings are come upon me, and your
Idol Cromwell who set ^e a work is now joined hand in hand with him, like a
base unworthy fellow to destroy me therefore, and because I will not turn a
wethercock, an Apostate, and an enemy to the liberties of England, as ^e has
done.

But it is very strange that you in your book should Carracterise me for a
Cavilere, when but the other day the Grandees (that I believe now set you at
work) at the head quarters endeavored to destroy me for secretly designing,
basly and unworthily (as they said) to have murdered the King, and upon that
very pretense, got him into their Moustrap in the Jsle of weight, but Cromwells
basnesse with Paul Hobsons and their third confederate about that very
particular, I shall have a fit opportunity in the second part hereof to
^^otamise, and thus when one thing will not serve your and their turn to
murder me, by robbing me of my reputation (after your Grandees have cast me
into prison, of purpose to starve me, for they keep above 2000. l. of my own
from me, and allow me nothing to live upon but the stone walls) you and the
rest of the Grandees, many hundred mercionary, pentionary En^s^ries ^n City and
Country, take up any thing that you think will undo me, and with your and
their notorious lies and falsehoods labor nothing more then to rob me of my
reputation and credit, knowing right well, that if you could do that, I must
of necessity peris^^ and therefore you and they make it your work with your
groundless reproaches, to bespatter me, and make me as black as a chimny
sweeper, and render we as a man not fit to live in civell or morrall society,
and yet to my face dare not bid the trial of particulars, but shun and abher
all such honest and just dealing as that, though to Cromwell etc. I have often
proferred to come face to face, to the Test of all differences betwixt us, yea
to make his General Vmpire betwixt us, as you may read in my printed epistles
to him, etc. which he never durst embrace, but avoid and shun, yea if you
please to speak with Mr. Hugh Peter's, he will tell you that the last week
again and again, I made the same proffers in effect to him, and w^sht him to
tell both the General, Cromwell and Ireton of it, and I say their long and
continual refusing, fairly face to face, to have the differences betwixt us
debated, before friends or enemies, is a clear demonstration, that they have
guilty consciences within them, and that nothing will satisfy their
tyrannical malice, but my dearest blood, and the total destraction of my
wife and little Children, for upon Cromwell and Ireton principally, I lay all
my present sorrows, miseries, and cruel sufferings, out of which I had long
since been delivered had it not been for them.

But Mr. Frost, I would feign know of you, wherein the Parliament has been
mindful (as you in your 7. page say they have been) of my sufferings and
services, any otherwise then to require me evil for good, and to seek my
destruction by making orders to arraign me, and tossing and tumbling me from
one Jail to another, to starve and murder me. And for those several sums
of money (you say) they have given me, truly I do not remember them, and would
have you to name them if you can. And as for the report from the Committee of
accounts, that you hit me in the teeth with, I refer you to my answer to it
at large, in the last end of my book called, the Resolved man's resolution, page
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 And so I come to your maine charge laid upon me, which
as I find it in your 8, 9, 10, 11. pages amounts to thus much, that my
contemptuous carriage and language, to the dignit^e and authority of the House
of Lords, with so little loss (or punishment) unto my self, was a maine
encouragement to that general assault and force upon both Houses, upon the 26.
of July last, by that rabble of Reformadoes, and of the Aprentices, set on and
encouraged, by the known malignant then ruling party of the City. This carriage
of his (say you) might seem sufficient to discover the man, and being known
might warn every well tempored and peaceable disposition, to take heed of
engaging in any design, that may be the conception of such a spirit, the birth
whereof can portend nothing but destraction and confusion.

I thank you kindly Mr. Frost; for your badge, but I doubt not but in handling
of this particular, I shall cudgel your coat soundly: and not yours alone, but
also the House of Lords, and make it as evident, as the Sun when it shines,
that reason, law, truth, and justice, is clearly on my side, and all and every
of these against the Lords, in the present contest betwixt us, and if so, then
by the truth of your last fore recited calumniations, I desire all rational
Englishmen may judge of the truth of all the rest.

And therefore Sir, if you please to read my book, called the Free man's
freedom vindicated, you shall there find a true relation under my own hand, of
the ground and reason of my contest with the Lords, and that in my first
appearing before them, I gave them more honor and respect then by law was
their due, in that I obeyed their warrant, and appeared at their bar, which
was more then by law I was bound to do, and at my first appearing before them,
I put of my hat to them, and demeaned my self with all respect before them, and
modestly and smoothly delivered in my plea against their jurisdiction over me,
and appealed therein to the House of Commons for protection, against their
usurpations, for which they committed me, upon which commitment, I sent my
for^^ all appeal to the House of Commons, whereupon the Lords sent for me
again, and I refused to go, and forced the Keepers of Newgate to break my
wall upon me, (which they easily did, because J wanted weapons to hinder them)
and by force and violence to compel me to go, and when I came before the
Lords, I put of my hat, but did refuse to kneel (and would sooner be hanged
then to have done it, neither was I bound thereunto in the least by law) for
which they committed me close prisoner to Newgate, without access of friends,
wife or children, or the use of pen and ink, and about three weeks after, sent
a warrant to the Sheriff of London, with a guard to force me up the third
time, and when I came there, I made them force me into the house, and its true,
I then marched in with my hat on, in contempt and disdain of their usurpations,
when I see no reason would satisfy them and I did again refuse to kneel, and
stopped my ears, and refused to hear their scrowles or papers read to me, and
in this I did not in the least misbehave my self, neither did my carriage cast
any legal contempt upon them, for it was their own did it, in that they meddled
with that they have no jurisdiction of, and therefore my carriage was
abundantly more justifiable then theirs, in that J played the part of a
faithful Englishman, in maintaining and justifying my liberties and freedoms,
and sticking close to the law of the land, and they the parts of usurping
tyrants, and destroyers of law and liberty.

For though by law I grant the House of Lords to be a Court of justice, and to
have cognizance o^^er delays of justice yet in my case (as I said in my grand
plea before Mr Maynard of the House of Commons, page 13. so I say still) their
Court was no Court to me, having not the least jurisdiction in ^he world by law
of the cause, and therefore my affronting, contemning, abusive carriage toward
them (...) as you are pleased to call it) was no violation of the Law, and
therefore not punishable, in regard they ^e^led with that they had no power by
law to meddle with, for if a Court of Sessions questions me for my ^ree-hold,
and I refuse to answer them, and give them contemptious words for meddling with
that, which ^y law they have no jurisdiction of, they may by law, bind me to my
good behavior, but cannot fin^ or ^^pr^son me, much less disfranchise me of
all the privileges of an Englishman, as the Lords have most ^^^e^ally done to
me, (as appears by their sentence printed in that notable book called Vo^
pl^bis) the ^^me holds good in the Court of commmon Pleas, who if they go
about to hold Plea of murder before them, if the party refuse to answer, it is
no contempt of the Court, because by Law they have no jurisdiction ^ver such
cases; and pertinent to this purpose is Baggs case in the 11. part Cooks
reports, who being ^^mmoned before the Mayor of Plimoth, in open Court called
him cousening knave, and said unto him come ^^sse my arse etc. for which the
Mayor disfranchised him, and it was by law resolved that the disfran^hisement
was illegal, because it was not according to law, for the Mayor in law had no
power to ^o it, and at most could have only bound him to his good behavior,
the same holds good with the ^ords in reference to me, (...) that they have no
jurisdiction over me in the case in controversy (nor over any Commoner of
England in criminal cases) I have undeniably proved in my Plea, before Mr.
Mar^n of the house of Commons) of the 6. of November 1646. now in print, and
called an Anatomy of ^he Lords Tyranny, and in my Grand Plea, before Mr.
Maynard of the 20. October 1647. And in ^y wifs large petition delivered to the
House of Commons the 23. Sept. 1646. and printed in the ^^ 72 73. 74. 75. 76.
77. pages of Reg^ll Tyranny, and the 65. 66. etc. pages of my own book called
^ondons liberty in Chains and in the 20. 21. etc. pages of my book called the
Outcry of oppressed com^ons, but a colorable Answer to the Arguments therein
contained I could, yet never see, ^^ough I have extraordinarily longed to see
what rationally and legally could be said in Answer (...) them.

and that I have never declined a fair ishew of my controversy with Lords the,
before my competent ^udges, the house of Commons that I have appealled to,
clearly appears b^ my constant uninterupted ^^licitations of them, to hear
it, and finally adiudge it, and this also fully appears, by my Additional plea,
^nt to Mr. Maynard the 38. Octo. 1647. and printed at the last end of the
second edition of my grand ^lea where I wholly put my self upon the final
judgment of the house of Commons, though suffici^ntly corrupted,

But that I may fully make it evident to all the world, that J have offered the
Lords all the fair play ^n the earth, to come to a final issue with them; J
shall here insert my proposition of the 2, October ^647. the original Copy of
which I sent to the House of Commons which was there read and debat^d, and
after that I printed and published some thousands of them in single papers, and
after that reprinted it in the 16. page of the second impression of my Grand
plea, and now of late have reprinted (...) the third time, in the 70. page of
my last book called The peoples perogative or privileges asserted etc. which
thus follows verbatim

The Proposition of Liev. Col. John Lilburne Prerogative Prisoner ^n the Tower
of London, made unto the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, and to the
whole Kingdom of England October 2. 1647.
I Grant the House of Lords, according to the stattute of the 14. of Ed. 3.
chap. 5, Which statute ver^atim you may read ^n the 9 page of my last
forementioned book withal the rest of the princpalest statutes made for the
Peoples liberty since Magna Charta.
to have in law a jurisdiction for redressing of grievances, either upon
illegal delays or illegal judgments given in any of the Courts at
Westminster Hall, provided they have the Kings particular Commission therefore,
and all other the legal punctillos contained in that Statute, which
jurisdiction, and no other seems to me to be confirmed by the Statutes of the
27. Eliz. chap. 8. and 31. Eliz. chap. 1.

But J positively deny, that the House of Lords, by the known and declared Law
of England, have any original jurisdiction over any Commoner of England
whatsoever, either for life, limb, liberty or estate; which is the only and
alone thing in controversy betwixt them and me. And this position I will in a
public assembly, or before both Houses in Law d^bate with any 40. Lawyers in
England, that are practisers of the Law, and I will be content the LORDS shall
choose them every man, and if after I have said for myself what J can, that any
three of these forty Lawyers sworn to deliver their judgments according to the
known law of England, give it under their hands against me, (...) will give
over my present contest with the Lords, and surrender my self up to the
punishment and sentence of the present Lords and Commons.

Provided at this debate, J may have six or ten of my own friends present, to
take in writing all that passes thereupon.

Witness my hand and Seal, in the presence of diverse witnesses in the Tower
of London, this 2. of October, 1647. John Lilburne.

Now I oppeale to all the rational men in England, whether any man under
heaven can offer the Lords farer then here I have done, to which I now again,
to you declare, that I am willing to stand to, yea and now again dare them to
enter the lift of the dispute upon that very proposition.

But seeing just in the very nick of time, as I was writing these lines, there
is brought in unto me a brandished weapon of another petty fogging Champion of
the Lords, viz William Prinn, who stile^ his book the Levellers Levelled to the
very ground, who pretends to be a Champion for the House of Lords, but has not
so much parts, abilities, courage and mettell in him, as to dare to meddle with
either of the maine things in controversy betwixt the Lords, and those in his
2. page he styles Lilburnist^ and Leyellers.

And that is first, their right to their Legislative or law making power.

Secondly, Their right by Law to their Iudicative power over Commoners in
crimimall causes.

But he only answers a mere falacie, which is none of my tenent (nor desire)
to have the Lords ((...) Lords) to come and sit with the House of Commons, and
vote as one House, the endeavoring of which (...) more abhor, then to have
them sit as they are; but this I acknowledge, that if they will put themselves
upon the affections of the people, to be chosen for Knights of the shire, etc.
[And if they be legally chosen) I think then they will have as good a right to
sit and vote in the House of Common^ as any that sits there, and if they would
do this, I should never be angry at the continuance of their titles of honor
to their posterity for ever, and to their enjoying their large estates as
their real proprieties, and not in the least to be taken from them, but by
their own free consent, either general or particular, provided they be subject
to the law as other men are, in paying their debts, etc.

But seeing the man would feign be doing the Lords some service, or else he
would never have framed a fixion of his own brain, and then go fight with it,
just li^^ a Coward that in the dark draws his sword against and upon a gates
post, and falls a beating and sl^shing it, and then raises up his courage to a
great hight, as though it were some body indeed, because it stands still and
does not (not b^ is sure will not) fall again upon him.

And truly he that contests without a real adversary to encounter him may
easily be a Conqueror, and yet as attant an Ignoram i^ and Coward as any is in
the world, and therefore Mr. Frost, that you and Mr. Prinn may have something
(of new) in reallitie to lay your heads together, to study how to ^udge^, that
so your mettell may battled indeed, I shall there insert for your special
perusal, what I delivered in my speech at the House of Commons bar (as I
have already pend it) upon the 19 January, 1647. against the House Lords but in
regard it was spoken about the middle of my second speech that day, I shall
make a little introduction to it thus, that upon the 18. of January, 1647. I
had information, that one Mr. Masterson the Priest of Shareditch, had accused
me, and Mr. John Wildman (who has already published his defense, and called it
Truths triumph, or Treachery anatomised) to the Parliament of plotting
dangerous things against them: of which being in London informed, I went
immediately to Westminster, and freely promised the Sergeant at Arms, without
any warrant being served upon me, the next morning to be at the House of
Commons door, and accordingly the next morning preparing for the journey I
arrived with other of my friends at Westminster, and being not long at the
House door (Where was many of my friends come down from London and Southwarke,
to bear and see how things went) J addressed my self to the Serieant of the
House, to let him know J was there to tend upon the houses pleasure, and he
immediately came out with his Mace, and called for Mr. Masterson, the lying,
malicious Judas Priest, and my self, so in we went: and also the Lieutenant of
the Tower as my Guardian, and having given them that due respect that I
conceived is due unto their just and true authority, (though I owe little or
none unto the persons that sat th^^e, by reason of their abusing and most
abominable m^sexecuting of their righteous authority) the things that passed,
so near as my memory to the utmost punctillo will serve me, I shall faithfully
relate unto you, (rather adding then detracting.) Upon our coming to the
bar, where both my lying and false accuser and my self stood; the Speaker
stepped up in his Chair, and commanded Mr. Masterson in the name of the House of
Commons, to give them again, a narrative of what he yesterday he declared to
them.

So he very formerly begun, and spoke as freely as if he had learned his lesson
without book, and truly J could not but stand amazed at the man's impudence,
that he durst with so much confidence tell and belcsh out so many lies as he
did, but giving not much regard to his accusation, to treasure it up in my
memory; being resolved before hand to take no cognizance of his verbal
impeachment; which in law was nothing, J fixed my mind very seriously upon the
Lord Jehovah, and was a wrestling with him for the incomes of his own self,
that so J might speak freely and boldly in his might and power, (if it were
possible) to the amazement and terror of his enemies amongst those that should
hear me, diverse of whom I was confident would lay in wait to catch and entrap
me.

And now and then (the House (in my apprehension) being very full) J cast my
eye about me, to look upon the countenances of the Members, and to observe
their behavours, most commonly fixing my eye steadfastly upon the Speaker in the
Chair: who as soon as he perceived Mr. Masterson had done, beckned his hand
unto me, as J conceived, to have me answer the Priest, but I stood still and
took no notice of his beck, at last he wished me to say what I could for my
self unto it, whereupon pausing a little after a Congee made unto him, I
openned my mouth to this effect.

Mr. Speaker, J desire in the first place to premise this; That I look upon and
own this honorable House in its constitution and power, as the best,
legallest, and iustest interest and authority that it established in this
Kingdom: or that all the Commons of England visibly has for the preservation
of their Lives, Liberties and Estates: And I doubt not but so to speak unto
you this present day, as clearly to demonstrate to you, that I am an honourer,
an owner and a priser of this greatest english authority and interest, in which
as a free Commoner of England J have a little share. And therefore if this
honorable house please to afford me Paul's priveledge which he inioyed amongst
the Heathen and Pagan Roman Governors or Magistrates, which was, to hear him
speak freely for himself before they would condemn him, which liberty and
privilege J freely and largely inioyed at the hands of the Cavialeer Judges at
Oxford, when I was arraigned m^i^ons before the Lord chief Justice Heath, and
Sir Thomas Gardner late Recorder of London, for drawing my sword, and a your
command adventuring my life, for the great interest of the Kingdom involved
and singly represented in this honorable house, in the destruction of which it
perishes, who before all the City and Country then assembled at Guild Hall in
Oxford, gave me free liberty without the least interruption, ^o say what I
pleased, and to plead for my life in the best manner that all th^se abilities
God had given me would enable me to do.

And if you please to grant me (...) privilege which is my natural right, J
shall speak freely, with this protestation and S^vo^, that I do not speak nor
answer out of any duty or tie that lies upon m^ by law, for all charges in law
ought to be in writing under the hand, or hands of him or them that charge;
And in that form that the Law requires, and proceeded in according to the
form of the Law of the land, expressed in the 29. chap. of the Great Charter,
and those laws which expound it, which are mentioned and nominated in the
Pet^ion of Right Which you may may at large read in my Plea before M Corbet,
etc. recorded in the 8 9 10. pages of my book, called the resolved man's
resolution, and in Mr. John W^ldmans late defense called tou^hs triumph.
, which this pretended verbal charge is not in the least. And indeed Mr.
Speaker, in law it is no charge at all, neither in the way this informer is in,
can I well have any remedy against him in case he abuse me, for as I
understand, if he tell twenty lies against me, I cannot punish him, but if he
maliciously swear one against me, I have his ears at my mercy, etc. See Sir
Edward Cooks 3. part instituts fol.


And a betrayer of my libertys J should be, if I should look upon it as any
charge at all. And in that consideration return an answer to it, and therefore
again saving unto me the rights and privileges,
of an English man, which is to be tried by no other rules or methods, for any
real or pretended crime whatsoever, then what is expressly declared by the
known, established, and declared laws of England, nor by, nor before any other
authority or magestracy, then what the Law has authorized to be the executors
of it Which I am sure the House of Commons are not in the least, their proper
work being to repeal and make Laws, and to leave the execution of them to
the Judges and Justices of peace, etc. see the peoples prerogative, p 40, 41,
72, 7. and M. ^eldmans truths triumph p 17, 18, 19.
, J say saving as before I have expressed.

J shall out of that ingenuity of spirit, and candidnesse and integrity of
heart that dwells within me, and out of that high and honorable respect I
bear to the interest and just athority of this House, give you if you please,
a free, voluntary, full and perfect relation of all the most materialest
actions passages and speeches, that have past from me, about this Petition,
since it was first begun, to our conclusion of our late meeting at W^^p^^.

And I shall the rather at present ^^y aside the punctillo^s of my liberty,
which is nor to answer to any interrogatries, or confess any thing against my
self, till it be legally and punctually proved; because I have longed for such
an oportuity as this, and my silence at this time might in the prejudised
opinions of some among you, (against me) argue in their spirits, my guiltiness
of all their lies* laid unto my charge; and thereby might in their own hearts,
take me pro confesso; and conclude me guilty from my silence, but without a
grant of free liberty, from this house to speak my mind freely without any
interruption, I shall not say one word more, but remain in perfect silence, so
the Speaker commanded us to withdraw, which we did.

And about a quarter of an hours time after the Sargeant at Arms came with
his Mace, and ushered us in again, and having placed our selves at the Bar, Mr
Speaker having a paper in his hand looked upon it, and said to this effect, Mr.
Masterson the House conceives that you have nothing high given them so full a
relation, of this business to day, to Mr. Lilburns face, as you did yesterday;
when you were single And I am sure this relation that he has ^ven in under his
hand to the Comittee ^f Darby house, and printed by him in is answer to Mr.
Wildmans book, and re^rinted in Mr. Frosts for mentioned book, (...) not one
half of what he said at the Horse of Commons b^r, and yet their are ^es enough
for all that, as appears by an ^nswer to it, called a lash for a Liar.
therefore I am commanded to ask you what you say to such and such a thing, and
mentioned as I remember about 6. or 7. perticulars, the substance of all his
accusation, so nere as that little heed that I gave unto it, would enable me to
Collect was to this effect.

That there was a design (especially by me declared at the foresaid meeting)
contrived by me, etc. to destroy or cut of both houses of Parliament, and that
we could not be far form the intention of executing of it, in regard I had
appointed blew ribons to be worn in the hats of all those that should be saved
alive; and that though we did now draw a Petition to the House, yet it was no
more but a Cloak, or Color to raise the people by, that so we might the more
covertly make our selves strong enough ^o destroy them,

But after he had done, the Speaker told me the house had given me free liberty
to say what I pleas^d, at which I made a Congy, and mightily raised up my heart
to God, with an earnest inward Cry up ^o Heaven now to come in (if ever) with
power, strength, wisdom, resolution and utterance accord^^^ to his wonted
goodness, and praised be his name he heard my inward sight and eyes unto him,
and ^ut as it were a new heart and burning fire into all the blood in my vains,
and raised up my spirit high be^ond its ordinary temper, and with a little pause
I begun and said after this manner with a soft ^oyce.

Mr. Speaker I take it for no small honor, to be admited this day, to this
great (though just) privi^edge, to have free liberty to speak my mind freely
and boldly, without interruption, and having again ^remised what is before
premised, and protested again what is before protested, with a loud and
mighty voice (though with an easy and senceable command over my self) I went
punctual on (with ^ut the least interruption) and extempory said.

Mr. Speaker, I do here freely and voluntarily confess it that I had a band
or a finger in drawing the (...) Petition, with ^arge marginall notes fixed to
it, and that I also had a hand in putting it to the ^rinting gross, and paying
for it, and went on, giving the House the grounds and reasons of my so do^ng,
acquainting them with all the pains I had taken to promote that gallant
Petition in City and Country, telling them that I durst at their bar with
confidence aver it, that there is never a man in England, that dare or can
justly speak against the body, or scope of that just, necessary, and righteous
Petition, unless it be those that have guilty consciences within them, or
those that are of, and allied unto, some of those corrupt interests that are
there struck at.

I also acquainted them truly with the real causes of our late meeting at
Wapping, that Masterson ^omplained of: and after I had given them the substance
of the beginning of our discourse there, I ^cquainted them, that it was
objected by some in the Company, that the people all over the Kingdom, ^ere
generally very ignorant and malignant, and hated the Parliament (and us, whom
they called Round ^eads, Independents, etc. for our Cordial adhering to them)
under whom they groaned under greater op^ressions and burdens then before the
Parliament. And for all their expenses and fightings, were never (...) whit the
fre^r, either at present or in future grounded hopes, and therefore for us,
(that were for the ^oresaid reasons so hateful to the generollity of the
people) to act in this Petition, they would but con^emn it for our sakes, and
be provoked to rise up against us.

Unto which Mr. Speaker, my self, etc. answered to this effect, the people are
generally malignant, and more for the King then for the Parliament, but what is
the reason? but because their burdens are greater now then before, and are
likely to continue without any redress, or any visible, valuable
consideration, holden out unto them, for all the blood and treasure they had
spent for their liberties and freedoms. And the reason why they were so
ignorant, and did so little enquire after their liberties and freedoms, was Mr.
Speaker, because that though the Parliament had declared in general, that they
engaged to fight for their liberties, yet they never particularly told them
what they were, nor never distinctly h^ forth the glory and splendour of them,
to make them in love with them, and to study how to pres (...) them, and for
want of a clear declaring what was the particulars of the Kings rights, and
the natu^ of his office, and what was the Parliaments particular privileges,
power, and duty, to the people of (...) Kengdome, that chosed and betrusted
them, and what particularly was the peoples rights and freedom^ they were
hereby left in blindness and ignorance, and by reason of their oppressions,
because the^ knew no better, doted implicitly upon the King, as the fountain
of peace, justice, and righteousness without whom nothing that was good, could
have a being in this kingdom; And I told them (...) Speaker, it was no
marvel, that the poor people in this particular were in foggs, mists,
wildernesse^ and darkness; considering that this House in their Declarations
has so played at fast and loose w^^ them, for though Mr. Speaker, this house
voted to the effect See the Votes of May 20. 1642. 1. part book decl. page 259,
260. compared with page 499. 508, 509 574. 576. 580. 584, 587. 617. 618. 632.
640. 722. 914.
, that the King being seduced by evil Council, h^ made war against the
Parliament and people, and that the are trayters that assisted him: And further
declared, the he had set up his Standard against the Parliament an^ people, and
thereby put the whole Kingdom out of his protection; contrary to the trust
reposed in him, contrary to (...) oath, dissolving government thereby. And that
he in his own person marched up in the head of o^ Army, by force of Arms, to
conquer and distroy the Parliament, and in them the whole kingdom, the laws
and liberties.

And yet Mr. Speaker with the same breath declared, the King is the fountain
of justice See 1 part book decla. p. 199. 304.
, and that he can do^ no wrong, and forced the people to take oaths and
Covenants, to preserve his person, and yet at the same time gave the Earl of
Essex and all those under hi^ Commission, to fight with, kill and slay all that
opposed them, and declared, the King in his own person marched in the head of
an Army to oppose and destroy them, and yet gave them Commission to fight for
King and Parliament, so that Mr. Speaker, here was riddle upon riddle, and
mystery upon mystery which did even confound and amaze the people, and put them
into Woods, and Wildernesses, that they could not see or know where they are,
or what to think of themselves, or of the Parliament, or o^ the King, only this
they very well know that their burdens are greater now then ever they were
before, and that they have been made fools, in pretendingly to fight for
liberty, which has brought them into bondage, and that though it was formerly
declared the King had no negative voice, or legislative power, but is bound by
oath to pass all such laws as the people, folk or Commons shall choose; yet
no^ the Parliament sends unto him again, and again, for his concurrence to
their Acts, as though the giving of life, soul and power to their actings,
were undisputably and inseparably inherent in him, and as though now there
consciences told them, they must crave pardon of him, for all the actions they
have done without him, and against him; O ridles and unfathomable mysteries,
sufficiently able to make the people desirous to be ignorant of their liberties
and freedoms forever, and never to hear of them more, especially considering
they have paid so dear pretendedly for the enioyment of them, and yo^ after 5.
years fighting for them, know not where to find one of them.

But Mr. Speaker, they were told that in this Petition the people had clearly
held out unto them, and that upon the undeniable principles of reason and
justice, the Kings rights, the Parliaments and their own; and that the two
former, were, and of right always ought to be, subservient to the good of the
latter: and they were told, it was not so much persons as things that the
people doated upon; and therefore undoubtedly those that should really hold out
justice and righteousness unto them, were those that they would be in love
with, and therefore in mercy to our selves, and in love and compassion to our
native Country, it was pressed, that every man that desired to fulfill his end
in coming into the world, and to be like unto his master in doing good, should
vigorously promote and further this just and gallant Petition, as the princeple
means to procure safety, peace, justice and prosperity, to ^he land of our
nativitie, and knit the hearts and spirits of our divided Country men in love
again each unto other, and in love unto us, which they could not choose but
afford, when they should visibly ^ee we endeavored their good as well, and as
much as our own, there being all the principle founda^ions of freedom and
justice that our hearts could desire and long after, in this very Petition; And
if our greatest end were not accomplished in our prosecuting of this Petition,
viz. the Parliaments establishing the things therein desired, yet the promoting
of it would beg it understanding and knowledge ^n the people, when they should
hear it and read it, and discourse upon it, and if nothing but that were
effected, our labor would not be totally lost, for nothing did more instate
Tyrants in the secure possession of Tyranny, then ignorance and blindness in
the people. And therefore for the begitting of knowledge, it was requisite it
should be promoted. And also for the healing of the divisions amongst the
people, and knitting them together in love, that so their minds might be
diverted from studying the ^uin each of other, to study the destruction of
Tyrants that would in time destroy them all; whose fundamental maxim ^t is,
that they must by policies and tr^cks, divide the people amongst themselves, or
else they can never safely tyrannise over them. And therefore of all dangerous
kind of cattle that ever were; have a care of the Lawyers, whose interest it
is to set up and promote tyranny, that so thereby divisions and discords enough
may be begot, without which they cannot live and grow rich and great, and
therefore take this for an infallible rule, that if at any time there be any
thing promoting for healing the divisions of the people, and securing their
liberties and proprieties, the mercinary hackney Lawyers, are principally the
men that bend all their might and strength to oppose it and crush it, and
therefore I say again look upon them with an evil eye, as the vermin, plagues
and pests of a Common wealth, there being so many of them in England, as is
able to set a thousand peaceable Kingdoms together by the ears, therefore say
I to the people, never fit still till you have got your Laws abreviated, with
all their entryes and proceedings in English, that so you may understand them,
and plead your causes your selves, and so let the Lawyers go shake their
cares; till which you will never enjoy peace and quietness.


And Mr. Speaker, there was one in the Company that made a motion to this
effect, that he did conceiveit was more requisite at present, speedily to
second the Armies Declaration with a petition to encourage this House
vigorously to go on to prosecute their last Gallant Votes (for so they were
called) to which was answered to this effect.

That in this petition was contained more then was in all them Votes, for it
struck at the very root of all that tyranny that had enslaved and would inslave
us, viz. the Negative voice in King and Lords both, which the Votes did not in
the least. And it was impossible that there could be an active member in the
House of Commons, but knew that this petition was promoting all over the
Kingdom: which abundantly declares greater encouragement to all those Members
of the House, that really intended good to the Commonwealth, then possible
could be in a single complementall Petition, signed with 4, or 500. hands, such
a petition being rather fit to puff them up, and thereby divert them from
fully intending the peoples good, then upon real ground to strengthen and
encourage them therein, and there was never a member of the House, whose design
in the largest extent of it was no more, then the pulling down of the King,
that so he might be a King himself, but of necessity he must receive more
satisfaction and encouragement from the knowledge of the promoting this
gallant, unparaleld petition (which is a clear demonstration to the
Parliament, that those that promote it, clearly understand, that the King and
the Lords tyranny, and their liberties are inconsistent) then he could do from
a bare complementall petition, which would also be dangerous to our selves, in
quashing the vigorous prosecuting of this, that contained the utmost of our
desires: and the sum of all those things that in this world we desired to make
us happy.

But Mr. Speaker, it was again objected, that seeing the Petition struck so
much at the House of Lords as it did, who lately it was said had concurred with
this House in their Gallant Votes against the King, it was dangerous to the
Kingdoms safety in this iuncture of time, to promote it, loast is might
occasion a clashing betwixt the two Houses, which would now be very dangerous.

U^ to which Mr Speaker, my self, etc. answered to this effect, that if the
Lords had so concurred in these Votes, that they had declared it had been their
duty, without dispute ^o have concurred to all such Votes as the House of
Commons had passes, there had been some ground to have pleaded for a respect
(...) from us. But seeing they so passed the Votes, as in the passing of them,
they declared it to be their right, to give their denial to any Votes the
House of Commons shall hereafter pass, that does not please them: We are
thereby engaged the rather to go on with our Petition to pluck up their
destructive interest by the roots, that had brought all our miseries and woe^
upon us.

For Mr. Speaker, if the Lords be considered in their indicative power, we
shall find them as guilty of treason in subverting our fundamental laws and
liberties, as ever the Lord of Strafford was, for which he lost his head See
his Bill of Attainder (by virtue of which he lost his head) printed in the 29.
page of the Peoples prerogative, read also the ^6. 47. 55. pages thereof, read
also his charge, printed at large in a book called speeches and passages,
mentioned in the 28 page of my book above mentioned.
, who in his impeachment of high treason by this House was accused it* tho 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9. articles, that he had treache^ously subverted the fundamental
laws and liberties of England and Ireland, and introduced an arbitrary
tyrannical government beyond and above law: in that he had upon paper
petitions, and verbal complaints, without any due course, process or shadow
of Law (but merely by the Law of his own will) outed diverse of the free men
thereof, out of their liberties, proprieties, and freeholds: to the ruin and
destruction of many of their families.

And truly Mr. Speaker, I must aver it, and do aver it before this House, that
the present House of Lords are as guilty of this traiterous subverting of our
fundamental laws and liberties, and introducing and exercising an arbitrary
and tyrannical government above and beyond all law and justice; as he was. And
by the law of their own wills, without any due course or process of law, (or
the least shadow of law) have outed, diverse free men of England, out of there
liberties, properties and free holds, See amongst many other of their
transcendent acts of injustice, the lamentable case of John Pointz, alias
Morris, Esquire, and Isabel Smith, etc. which you may read at the last end of
this Epistle.
they themselves being Complainants, Prosecuters, Parties, Witnesses, Jury, and
Judges, have passed most barbarous and tyrannical censures, upon them, to the
apparent ruin of them and their families; yea and upon me have passed so
barbarous, and transcendent an illegal sentence, that I am confident the like
of it in all circumstances, is not to be paraleld in all the Earl of
Straffords tyranny, for which he lost his head.

And Mr. Speaker, let me freely tell you, that unless this House do execute
upon the present tyrannical House of Lords, or the mischievous and law
distroying ring leaders amongst them, the Earl of Straffords punishment, I
shall never justify you for righteous and impartial Judges, or think that you
have discharged your duty either to God or the Common wealth.

And then Mr. Speaker, in the second place, as for the Lords Legislative power:
I told my friends to this effect, that the Lords usurpations in that
particular, had been the cause of all the late wars, and blood shed in England.

And Mr. Speaker, I illustrate it unto you thus, that before this Parliament
was called, there were certain great and wicked men in England, that had in a
manner totally destroyed and subverted all our laws and liberties ( For the
Judges in the judgment of Ship money alone had given up to the King at one
blow, all our properties, and by consequence all our lives, and all that was
dear unto us And these with many others had de facto, set up an arbitrary
tyrannical power, beyond and above all law, (which is well set forth in your
first Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom) which had like to have
destroyed this whole Nation; and the King being of necessity compeld to call
this Parliament, this House in its verginitie and purity, according to the
great trust reposed in them, endeavored to execute justice and judgment upon
the forementioned tyrannical law and liberty destroyers, whose power and
interest, by reason of those many great places and command they possessed in
the Kingdom: and by reason of the length of time, they had continued in their
wickedness, had so fastly routed and revited them in the bowels of the Common
wealth: That the endeavoring to pluck them up occasioned the fear of a
dreadful Earthquake in the Kingdom, and therefore that this House might in
security go on effectually to discharge their trust and duty to the kingdom,
they were therefore as to me appears, necessi^ated to new mould the Militia of
the Kingdom, and to put the strength of the nation into more confiding hands
then it was before, which desires of theirs they sent up to the Lords, for
their concurrance, who refused to concur, not once, nor twice, but many times
See 1 part book dec. pa. 289, 364. 365. 398. 548. 557.
, and procrastinated time so long by their delay, that the Kingdom was thereby
in danger of ruin, which necessitated this house to send up Mr. Hollis (a
quandum Patron of the peoples liberties) to the Lords bar, with a message to
this effect, to demand the names of all those Lords that would not concur
with this House in saving the Kingdom, that so they might be the object of
their justice and punishment.

And truly if the Lords had had a rea^^ and true right and title to their
Negative voice, to deny concurring with this House in what they pleased, this
message was no better, then by fear and compulsion to ravish them out of their
judgments and consciences; and so by force to rob them of their rights. And
upon this message Mr. Speaker, when the House of Lords see this House was in
good earnest, being pricked up thereunto by diverse transcendent high Petitions
of the people, after they had delayed their concurrance so long, as they could
or durst, the most of them fled, and the remnant or less part concurred, who
at the best, if they had a right to deny or grant it their wills and pleasures,
can be styled no better then a House under force, and by the same argument it
^ill follow, they have so continued ever since, and so all their acts
eversince, are null and void in law and reason both; being the act of force,
and therefore of necessity it must either be granted, that the Lords pretended
right to their law making power, is a mere usurpation, or else that the House
of Commons committed the Apprentices late treason enforcing the Parliament.

But Mr. Speaker, I said and still do say, that the Lords so long standing
out, and refusing to concur with this house to settle the Militia of the
Kingdom, gave the King an oppertunitie to withdraw from the Parliament, and to
lay his design for a War, yea and to gather his forces together, whereas if
they at the first desire, had concurred with this house in settling the Militia,
the King had never had an oppertunitie to have withdrawn himself from the
Parliament, or to have gathered 300. men together, much less an Army, and so
there could have been no War and blood shed in the Kingdom.

And therefore Mr. Speaker, as I old amongst my friends so I do here again lay
the guilt of all the blood that has been spilt in England in the late war:
(which I do believe amounts to the number of 100000. men, that have lost their
lives in it) at the House of Lords door, and this House, (Mr. Speaker) in my
apprehension, can never in justice (either before God or man) acquit them
selves as just men, if at their hands they do not require, and upon their
heads requite the guilt in shedding all this innocent blood.

And as for their right to their pretended Legislative power, I told my friends
Mr. Speaker, I would maintain it upon my life against all the Proctors the
Lords had in England: that they had no truer right to their Legislative or Law
making power, then what they could derive from the sword of that Tyrant,
Will^am the Conqueror, and his successors, and therefore it was that in their
joint Declaration with this House, published to the view of the Kingdom, they
do not style themselves, the chosen Trustees, or Representatives, of the
Kingdom, but the Heriditary Councellers of the kingdom See 1. part book decl.
page 324. 508. and Vox Plebis, page 43, 44, 45, 86. 92. 93. 94. in which pages
the Lords are soundly paid, but especially in the last, the strength of which
is taken out of Will. Prinns part of the sovereign power of Parliaments and
kingdoms. page 42, 43. 44. where he has (if my judgment serve me) levelled
the Lords as sow, as ever any of those he calls Levellers in England did, and
therefore his new book needs no other answer but his own words in his
forementioned book, so his own hand is against himself.
, that is to say men imposed upon the Kingdom^ for their lawmakers and Rulers,
by the ficious omnipotenc^ will of the King to be their law makers and
governour^. Who in his answer to the 19. propositions, has no better plea for
the Lords Legistive power, but that they ha^^ their right thereunto by blood.
And Mr. Speaker, I said unto them, and now aver it with confidence unto you,
tha^ for them to take upon them the title of Legislators of England, they have
no more right so to do, then a Rogue, Th^eefe, and Robber that robs me upon
the high way, and by force and violence takes my purse from me, had or has, to
call my money when he has so done, his own true and proper goods.

Or Mr. Speaker for them to plead, that because they have exercised this power
for some 100. of years together, that therefore now without all dispute, it is
their right and due, I told them it was no better an argument then for a Knave to
aver, such an honest rich woman, was his wife, and her riches his propriety,
because by force and violence he had committed a rape upon her verginity, and
by force and violence had taken possession of her goods, and forced and
compelled her for fear of having her throat cut to hold her peace. Now Mr.
Speaker, from the act of force and violence committed upon such an honest
woman, to draw this argument or conclusion, that therefore he that did commit
it, because he used her (or lay with her) is her lawful and true husband, or
that all her goods are his, because by force he has taken them from her, and
by force keep^ them and uses them as his own, is no found argument, and yet as
strong a one, as for the ^or as by force of Arms, to join with the Kings of
England to rob us of our native and undoubted liberties and rights, (which is
to choose and empower all out lawmakers, and to be bound by n^ law imposed upon
us, by those that never were chosen and be trusted by us, to make no laws,)
and then usurp them to themselves, and by force and violence is keep them from
us, and then to plead because they have possessed them so ^ong, that therefore
they have a true undoubted and natural right unto them.

Besides Mr. Speaker, I told my friends, that if ever the Lords had any right
at all to their pretended Legislative or law making power, (which utterly deny
that ever they had,) yet they have since this Parliament with their own pens
and tongues given it away. And that I did, and do prove thus, the Lords
themselves never claimed their power by any other right, then what they derived
from the King, by his letters, paten^^, writ in a piece of Parchment with a
seal to i^* Now if the King have no Legislative power, inherent in himself,
without all controversy in the world, he can give or derive none unto the
Lords, for it is impossible, that that should flow or come from a thing, that
is not originally inherent i^ the thing it self.

But the King has no legislative or law making power inherent in himself, and
therefore can give or derive none unto the Lords And that the King has no
legislative power inherent in himself, J prove out of the Lords own words, in
their joint declarations with this house, of the ^6 May 1642. and of the 2.
November, 1642. 1. part book declarat. page 268, 269, 270. 7^6, 707, 708, 709,
710, 711, 712, 713, 714, 715 Where they spend many leaves to prove, that the
King is of duty bound by his Coronation Oath, to pass all such Laws as the
FOLK, PEOPLE, or COMMONS shall choose, and if so then he has no Negative voice,
and if no Negative voice, then he has no Legislative power, and so cannot
possibly give any to them, and that he has no Negative voice, or Law-making
power, their own words and arguments fully prove in the forementioned
declarations.

Nay Mr. Speaker, it was further declared to this effect, that if this house
did instate the people of the Kingdom in all the rest of their liberties, and
left this pretended Legislative power of the Lords unro^ted up, they were but
slaves, by that one particular alone, and that was illustrated in this manner.

All Legislative power in its own nature, is merely arbitrary, and to place an
arbitrary power in any ^rt of persons whatsoever for life, (considering the
corruption and deceitfullnesse of man's heart, yea ^^e best of men) was the
greatest of slavery; but the claim of the Lords is not only to have an
arbi^^ary power inherent in themselves, for life, but also to have it
hereditary to their sons, and sons ^^nnes, for ever, be they Knaves or
Fools: which is the highest vassalage in the World. And herefore Mr. Speaker,
J must freely tell this House, that I shall never believe they really and in
good earnest ^^tend to make the Kingdom free, till I see them plucked up by the
roots, this grand tyranny of the ^ords, though for my part, I am not against
their enioyment of their titular dignitys, nor the in^eriting of their great
estates, always provided they be made sublect to the Law as other men in
pay^ng their debts, etc. And if for this rigidnesse against the King and the
Lords Negative voice, I be called (...) State Heritique, I answer for my self,
that the Parliaments own Declarations, has made me so and that if I be deluded
and deceived, they are the men that have done it.*

The rest of my narrative at the bat, about the business of apostatised Lievt.
Genesis Cromwell Com-Gen. Jreton, I desire the Reader to read my large A^ologie
formerly made in this kind, which ^e shall find in the 24, 25. pages of my ^ook
called the Resolved man's resoluti^n, in which book the treachery and ^navery of
my bloody and tyrannical ^tar Chamber Judges, old Sir Henry Vain, ^s lively
carrectarised.
the second Felton, and my Lord Wharton, etc. up about half an hour, and
contain^ so much manner in my own head 4, or 5. sheets of paper, which I must
scipover and remit to another time, but because I judge my conclusion to be very
pertinent to my present business and sufferings, I shall give it you verbatim,
as I have many days ago writ it, which thus follows.

And now Mr. Speaker, I shall draw toward a conclusion, having dealt
ingeniously with you, and freely of my ^wn accord, (not with the least relation
to this notorious lying, illegal Charger or Informer) given you a full
relation of all the material discourses at the Meeting, etc. so fat as my
present memory will enable me, and this I am sure of Mr. Speaker, that I have
not timerously or falsely hid any thing from you, or in one tittle minsed the
business, having rather given you more then less, humbly submiting my self, my
present relation, and all my actions relating thereunto, unto this House to
refer me and them, (if they shall be judged offensive) wholly and solesy to
be justified or condemned at the Common law, by a trial before one ordinary
Judge, the true and proper executor of the Law; and a Jury of my Equals,
according to the known and declared law and just custom of England, which is
my Birth right and inheritance, which instates me into the capacity, that J am
not in my present condition, to be tried, judged or condemned by this house or
any other power in England, but according to the known and declared Laws of
England, the Executors of which in the least I ever this House are not Which is
very well and fully proved in the 2, 3, 4, 5. pages of Englands Birthright, and
the last sheet of Mr. John Wildmans defense against Mr. Masterson, called
Truths triumph, or treachery anotamised. and Sir John Mayna protest del^vered
to the Lords the 14 Feb. 1647.
nor ought not to be.

And therefore Mr. Speaker, before I totally conclude in preventing this house,
to conclude their ill begun opinion of me; I shall humbly desire a little
further liberty to propound three things unto your consideration, and in them I
shall be brief.

The first of which is, that when Paul stood before the Heathen and Pagan Roman
Governors, and the Jewish Scribes and Pharisees, Pressed hard against him, to
have him destroyed, as this English Pharisee does now against me at this bar,
yet they had so much righteousness and justice in them, by the light of
nature, that they would not condemn him for all that, tell they had given him
the benefit, which the very law of nature gives to any man, and which the law
and custom of the Romans gave unto him, which was to hear him make the best
defense for, himself that he could, the which when he had done, the Governor
was convinced, that his accusation was ^eer malice, and that he had done
nothing worthy of death or bonds, Acts 23.29. and 24.25.26.

And Mr. Speaker, as Paul amongst the Heathens inioyed the benefit of a Roman,
viz. the privileges of the Laws of his Country, so let but me from this house
enjoy but the privileges of an Englishman, viz the benefit of the known and
declared Laws of my native Country: and I doubt not but to make it as evident
as the Sun when it shines in its glory, that I have done nothing that deserves
either death or bonds, and that this information is a mere malicious bundle of
lies, and that if the Informer dare but to swear on^ quarter of that which now
with confidence he affirms, that he forfeits his ears. And to punish me before
this be granted me, I must over is the hight of injustice, and the actors in it
less morrall then the pagans and Romans were.

Secondly Mr. Speaker I desire to acquaint this House that upon the third of
May in the year 1641. one Littleson servant to Prince Charles that now is,
informed the King himself (with a great confidence) that I had said if we could
not have Justice against the Earl of Str^fford, we would pull the King out of
White Hall, and without any more ado I was apprehended as a Traitor, and clapped
up close in the messengers hands, and the next morning I was brought to White
Hall as a Traitor, (and the King sent Mr. Nicholas (then as I remember) Clarke
of the Council to the House of Lords to impeach me of High treason, and the
said Littelton swore the words point blank against me, and unto the B^nch I was
called, where I had a kind of an arraignment of High treason, before almost a
100. Lords then siting unto which I stooped, knowing my liberties no better,
and the Lords giving me leave to speak for my self what I could, I dealt as
ingeniously with them then, as now I have done with this House, and told them
freely and boldly the whole truth of the matter, and I being withdrawn one Mr.
Andrews a Counselor of Lincolns Inn was called in, as a witness of
confirmation to Mr. Litleton not knowing well what I had said nor what he had
sworn, and he was put upon his Oath to declare the truth of my discourse, and
Jumped point blank upon what I had ingeniously related to them, so by examining
the truth to the bottom, my life was saved, and my body honorably delivered
(by order of that honorable House) from my present bonds, and Mr. Litleton
like a rogue, for his own preservation was fain to sneak away, but Mr. Speaker
that which I here observe, is this, that if the House of Lords (then possessed
with indignation enough against me) had been so credilous and unjust, to have
believed a single informer then upon his oath, (which yet is more then this
informer is) for any thing I know, J had died for it, and I hope this house
will not fall short of the house of Lords (yea and of the house of Lords when
it was fullest of arbitrary courtiers in doing justice in condemning me to any
the least punishment in the world, upon the bare virball information of a
single informer, not upon his oath) especially having so long and large
experience of my unspoted integrity, to the real and just interest of this
House, that now with my pen I dare aver it with confidence, never any man in
England ever gave greater or larger, for all the rusling, buslings or confident
lies of any rotten apostatised or corrupt members therein.

Thirdly and lastly Mr. Speaker, I desire to acquaint this House, with some
hard measure in this very particular I have had from this House it self, and
truly M. Speaker J intended at my coming in freely and boldly to have grated
upon some unpleasant string, and loudly to have sounded a harsh and unpleasant
base upon them, but truly Mr. Speaker, J must ingeniously confess, I am
overcome by that honouourable respect I have this day found from this House, in
that you have heard me with so much patience speak my mind so largely, with
freeness and boldness without the least interuption in the world; that I do
in good earnest canfesse, I take it for a greater obligation and ty unto my
spirit, then all the favors that ever I received from this House fom the first
day of their siting to this present day; but Mr. Speaker I beseech you, let me
not be misinterprited, as though J said this to collogue and flatter with you,
and thereby to insinuate into you, lesten your just indignation, unto me for my
crimes, no Mr. Speaker I hate and abhore the thoughts of any such thing, and
do before you all with detestation protest against it: assuring you that if my
naked integrity and sincerity, in the just and strictest eye of the law, will
not bear me out in whatsoever can justly and legally be laid unto my charge, J
am resolved to perish.

But I go on with your favor Mr. Speaker, to say what J intend, with the
greatest respect to this House that possibly the businese will bear, and Mr.
Speaker, you your self may remember, that I brought post letters of glad
tidings in July 1645. from the Army in the West, of their routing General
Goring at Lampart, and being waiting at the House door upon the 19. of July
1645. there was ^me kind of false information given into this House against
me, by whom J then did not know, nor ^o not legally know to this day, but the
informers were never called into the House, to testefie the least ^^me in the
world against me, and with those that (since I understand) were the informers (
viz ^r. ^ast^ick and Col. Edward King) I had not for many months before to my
knowledge changed so much as ^^e word with, and yet notwithstanding my best
requital, for my hazardus posting from the Army to (...) House upon my own
charges with the foresaid glad tidings, was to be voted by the house about 8.
Clerk at night to be clapped by the heels, without to this day expressing any
pretended or real crime or cause therefore, without eversomuch as calling me
(though then at the door to speak one word for my self; a harsh piece of
justice Mr. Speaker, but yet this was not all for the causlesse indignation of
this House And I must and will now say here in ^he margent, that Mr. William
Lenthall ^he speaker was the principalest man that ^en sought to murder and
destroy me, for ^y Innocence, and the powerful fountain from whence all my then
miseries and sufferings did come, although I meddled nor made not with him
before he had got me clapped by the heels,, only he having (...) guilty
conscience in him, made him smite any that he apprehended stood in his way, but
this let me ^w tell him, that I am very confident of it, if Mr. Laurance
Whittaker, Mr. Corbet and the rest of ^he Committee of Examinations, had
performed the duty of righteous Judges, and not have made a most false and
lying report to the House of Commons, Mr. Speaker had been proved a Traitor
according to their own Ordinances, but read Englands birth right.
burnt so hot against me, that upon the 9. of August following, they caused me
to be sent from the Sargeant at Arms his messengers house to Newgate, and by
all the means I could use in the world, could neither get this House not its,
Committees, before whom I was, to tell me in the least the cause wherefore they
were angry with me, and yet your causeless indignation rested not here, but
when I was in Newgate, this House made several Orders for Mr. Bradshaw, Mr.
Steel, and Mr. Walker, to prosecute me for my ^ife (as J conceived) at the
Sessions in the Old Bailey, and a Jury was also (as I was informed) panneld
upon me, and hundreds of my friends gave me over for a dead man; and many times
pressed me to seek ^he favor of this house, which I always absolutely
refused and trusted to the protection of God, my ^nnocency and my pen: and in
conclusion this House sent me 100. l. to help to bear my charges and the 14.
October. 1645. by Vote of this house, as a just and innocent person, against whom
no crim ^nformation or charge had or could be laid, released me.

So that Mr. Speaker, you see that this very house upon false and ungrounded
information, By or from your self Mr. Speaker, Dr. Bastwick, and Col. Edward
King,
(which causlesly heated and inflamed their indignation against me,) had like
to imbrued their hands formerly in my innocent blood, and yet in conclusion
were necessitated to release me, as an innocent, just, and righteous man, and
Mr. Speaker, I could tell this House the name of those in this House, that were
the principal prosecuters of me in this unjust and unrighteous manner, but for
that ingenious and honorable respect that I have this day enjoyed from this
house, I am at present in that particular silent, only I must acquaint this
house that I was no sooner at liberty, then the agents of your brother Sir John
Lenthall, Mr, Speaker, went up and down the city, declaring that I and my
confederates had a plot in hand by force of A^mes to destroy this Parliament
And Mr William Prinn was authorized by authority, being the common divulger of
Lies, to print it, see his book called the Liar confounded, page 27, and my
answer to it called Innocence and Truth justified, page 4, 5, 6. 34, 35. where
I prove, that in eight lines, he has told thirteen or foureteen Lies.
, of which when I heard, I went to Alderman Atkins, now a Member of this House,
and then Lord Mayor of London, before whom some of Sir John's Agents,
Complotters, and Knights of the post, were brought, and desired him to do me
justice upon them, by taking such a legal course, that they might be put upon
the effectual proof of (...) conspiracy, and treasons which they accused me
of, or examplary justice done upon them for the false accusations and
combinations to take away my life, But truly Mr. Speaker, I must clearly
declare to this house, that I clearly apprehend, these persons were set on by
men of such power, that (...) then Lord Mayor of London (now a member of this
House) neither durst, nor would do me one dra^ of Justice And who those men of
power are, you may find named in Englands Birth right, and my book called
Innocence and truth justified, in which two books you may read the whole
history of all that desperate combat,
, And Mr. Speaker, I look upon this very accusation given against me, as a
designed, plou^ melicious and false a thing, as any of these formentioned and
do hope to find so much honor and justice now at t^ hands of this Honorable
house, especially considering that now I have in some good measure give^ them
to understand, how maliciously formerly I have been dealt with, that they will
not in the lea^ condemn or punish me upon this verbal suggestion, nor have
the least evil thoughts of me, till the^ see the business fully debated
according to law and common justice.

And now to conclud all, Mr, Speaker I shall humbly crave the patience of this
house, to hear me tw^ or three words about my own particular business, that
has hung so long in this house,

And what I have to say in this particular, I shall be very brief in.

And in the first place Mr. Speaker, as for my appeal to this house, which
has hung here almo^^ two years without your judgment or final determination
post upon it, although I for my part Mr* Speaker ( have used all the ways and
means I can to procure it, but as yet Mr. Speaker I can not obtain it I
therefore make it my humble suit unto this Honorable House, that if yet they
be not satisfied, in the legally of my protest against the Lords usurping
jurisdiction over me, that then thi^ house Mr. Speaker, will be pleased to
appoint a day in the open house to hear me openly, when As all pleadings or
trials in all Courts of justice ever ought to be. See 2. part inst. fo. 103.
104, and regal tyranny, p. 81, 82. 83. And the Royal quarrel. p. 8. and S.
Io. Maynards case truly stated.
now Mr Speaker I solemnly offer, singly and alone (...) this bar, to maintain
and justify the legallitie of my proceedings against the Lords, against all
the procters they have in England, to send to this bar to plead their caus^ for
them face to face, yea Mr. Speaker; I shall be willing they shall take in the
help of all the Agents they have (...) this House, And the help of their
Creatures in the House, I the rather proferred them, because I was certainly
informed, that Mr. Sam. Brown, Mr. Pridix, and Mr. Hill, (all Lawyers (had
proctered for them in the open House, against^ me a little before of whom face
to face in that particular, in their own profession, I dare engage my head to
make Novices and liars of.
provided I may be suffered my self to answe^ their objections, and when the
discourse is done I shall readily, and cheerfully submit to the final
determination and judgment of this House in it, or if I cannot obtain this at
your hands.

Then in the second place Mr. Speaker I most humbly entreat this honorable
House, that they will be pleased to appoint a day, to read over my Plea J made
for my self before Mr. John Maynard etc. Who I do aver dealt most unworthily,
trecherously and not like a righteous judge nor a^just English man with me, who
though the House had expressly ordered him and the rest of the Committee, not
only to hear and examine my business, but also to conclude their opinions
upon it, and report their results to the House, yet notwithstanding Mr Maynard
being then in the Chair (as some of the Committee told me) would not upon any
terms suffer them to do it, by means of which he rob^ me of my real
benefit of that Committee which the House intended me, and has done like a
treacherous man as much as in him lies, to destroy me and my liberties, and the
liberties of all the Commons of England, the Lords being encouraged thereby to
deal since as illegally with Sir John Maynard, and other Commons of England,
as they have done with me; see Sir John, pleas of the 5 and 14, Feb. 1647.
and which since I have printed (and delivered some hundreds of them to the
members of this House) and upon the reading of it to proceed to give a final
Judgment in it, that so I may after almost 2. years waiting know what to trust
to, and not be kept everlastingly in Prison, in a condition worse then death it
self for truly, Mr Speaker, my pressing and unsupportable necessities compels
me to deal ingeniously with this House, and t^uly to acquaint you, that I have
not (being a younger Brother) one foot of land in the whole world, nor a penny
of any rents coming in to maintain me, my wife and little Children, nor any
trade agoing to bring me in one farthing, nor a penny allowed me by those that
uniustly imprisoned me to buy me bread, and all these things considered with my
11 years (in a manner constant) sufferings laid unto them, I cannot apprehend
how this house can rationally conceive (how without maricle) I should live or
subsist especially seeing I am necessitated to contest for my own preservation,
with all the corrupt grand interests in England, and therefore in the second
place I humbly entreat this honorable house, to let me have something at the
present out of my Arreares (to keep me alive) which I dare with confidence Mr
Speaker avere before this House, Justly amounts to the greatest part of a
Thousand pounds.

And in the third place; Mr. Speaker, I humbly entreat this Honorable House,
seriously to consider and pass my Ordinance, (that long has laid dormant
here) for my 2000. l. reparations against my cruel Star Chamber Judges, and
that I may speedily and effectually by you, he put into a certain way where to
receive my money, and not be sent unto those for it, where it is impossible for
me to get it, The names of those my unrighteous and barbarous High Commission
and Star Chamber Judges are, Dr. Lamb, Dr. Gwin, and Dr. Alylet, whose hands
were to my first commitment, and yet never see my face, and these that past my
first bloody whipping sentence upon me, etc. were Lord Coventry, Earl of
Manchester, Lord Newburgh, old Sir Henry Vain, Lord Chief Justice Bramstone,
and Judge Jones, and those that past my second most barbarous sentence to starve
me etc. were Canterbury, Coventry, London, Manchester, Arundell, Salisbury,
Cottington, Secretary Cook, and Windebank, the several sentences you may read
at large in the 1, 2, 3, 4. pages of my printed relation before the Lords, of
the 13. Feb. 1645. and from the fattest and ablest of these, I expect my
reparations, viz. from old Sir Henry Vain, and the Earl of Salisburys, whose
greatness alone in both Houses, I have cause to judge has kept me all this
while from my reparations, and therefore O all true hearted English men help me
to grapple with their lawless greatness.
without the loss of a great deal of time, and the expense of a great deal
of money (if ever I get it at all) which I have not now to spend, having I dare
with confidence aver it, spent above 1000. l one way and another, in following
this House, etc. for it, and so Mr. Speaker I have done with what I have to say
to you at present, whereupon I was commanded to withdraw, which I did.

And immediately upon it, Mr, JOHN WILDMAN was called in a several times, and
myself having sent in word to Mr. Speaker, that I earnestly desired to come to
the Bar again, to speak two or three words more to the House, and accordingly
I was called in, and coming to the Bar very hoarse, (by reason of my straining
my self to speak audably in my former speeches, one of which lasted above an
hour and half) I said with a mild voice, Mr. Speaker, a Prison by the law of
this Land, is appointed not for the punishment or distuction of the Prisoner
but for the secure and salf-keeping of him, for a speedy trial at the next
Assizes, Sessions or Goal del^very; And truly Mr, Speaker J have now been many
assizes, Sessions and Goal deliveries in Prison, and never called out to have
any crime in the world laid legally unto my charge being committed by those,
that J must and do aver with confidence before this house, have no more power
or authority by the law of England, to commit me, then so many Turks or
Tertors; and this House was lately pleased to do me so much Justice and right,
as to give liberty day by day to go obroad to follow my business, and
yesterday I understand they have taken of that order, and left me a Prisoner
under the power of the Lords, by reason of this information of Mr. Mastersons,
which I aver is a most malicious lying one, truly Mr. Speaks my necessities
are such and I count it no disgrace to repeat it over again to this House
(especially considering my eleven year^ hard and constant chargeable sufferings
for the liberties of my native Country) that I have neither Lands, houses, nor
tade ^going to bring me in a penny to buy me bread, to preserve alive my wife
and little children; and I never die any action in my life, but I was always
willing, and still am ready to answer for it, at the touchstone of the Law, and
by it to justify it at my perrill, without ever craving, o^ now desiring, the
least dram or courtefie in the world at the hands of any flesh alive, but
merely what the Law of my native Country will allow me, and truly Mr. Speaker,
I have borrowed many scores of pounds, to preserve me alive in my necessities,
and truly Sir I must needs tell this House, that in all likelihood I might have
perished in my straits, if I had not had a little credit to have borrowed some
money to supply my wants, but truly sin, when money is borrowed, it must be
paid again, and if I break my word, I loose my credit, and when that is lost,
J must of necessity per^sh, and therefore Mr. Speaker, I beseech this
honorable House that they would no more subject me to the Lords lawless
murdering wills, by sending me again to prison, there to starve, (for while I
am at liberty, J can a little help my self amongst my friends and acquaintance)
wherefore J humbly beseech this honorable house, to judge my cause, and grant
me my absolute liberty, which is my due and right by law, or at least at
present continue your former Order, that I may day by day go abroad to follow
my business, tell this House have finished, and fully determined it,
protesting Mr. Speaker, unto this honounourable house, that I had rather this
house would order their guard of Halbeteers at the door, to knock my brains
out, or with their Swords to run me through, then send me again to prison,
there to remain during the Lords, unconscionable wills and pleasure, there to
be murdered and starved.

But Mr. Speaker, if my just, lamentable, and pitrifull complaint, cannot enter
the ears, nor pier^^ the hearts of the Members of this house, but that of
necessity I must be compeld to go to prison again then I humbly entreat this
honorable house speedily to assign, (and give me my own (which Mr. Speaker,
is almost three thousand pounds that I justly expect from and by the means of
this House) to live upon, that so in my captivity J may live in some contented
silence and patience, and not fill your ears with any more necessitated
clamours, and just outcryes, which J must of necessity do, unless you either
give me my own money to live upon, or a reasonable proportion of yours, but if
at present I cannot enjoy neither of these, then in the third place, J crave
and challenge from the bands of this House, the benefit of the law of England,
and the custom of the Tower, where I am to go. And first by the declared law
of the Kingdom, I am svre all prisoners whatsoever, that have not of their own
whereof to live, ought to be maintained in their imprisonment out of the
public treasure, in what prison soever they be in See my Epistle to Col.
West, late Liev. of the Tower, called the Oppressed man's oppressions declared.
page 2, 3. 4. and Vox Pleb^s. page 43, 44 45. and the late complaint or true
relation of the cruel sufferings of the Knights and Gentlemen prisoners in the
tower of London. pa. 3, 4, 5, 7, 10.
. And I am sure by the custom of the Tower, J ought to be maintained out of
the public treasure, and to be allowed such an allowance, as is suitable to my
quality. And sure J am Mr. Speaker, I have there seen copies of diverse
Records, of some hundreds years of age, to justify this, and this J am sure
of, that when Mr Hollis, Mr. Long, and other Members of this House were
prisoners there in the third of the King, the King allowed them maintenance out
of the Exchequer according to their qualities, when they inioyed the ini^re
profits of their own great estates. And Mr. Long, lately in the Tower confessed
he sp^nt the King 1500. l. And truly Mr Speaker, I hope you will not be more
unjust to me, in allowing me maintenance according to my quality, now I demand
it as my right; then the King was to your rich Members, against whom you have
proclaimed so many out cries of oppression and injustice See their last
Declaration against the King, of the 11. ^f February, 1647.
and so with a Congee, two or three, I took my leave of the House, and withdrew.

And being withdrawn, the House fell into a hot debate for some hours together
about the business, and my greatest, and fearcest enemy (that I could hear
of) at the debate was Mr. William Peerpoint, the Earl of Kingstones brother,
(...) man of a vast estate, and so full of zeal and mettell to the Parliaments
cause, that at the begininning of these troubles, he would fame (as I am from
very good hands informed) have run away, and did ask leave to go over into
France, but it would not be granted to him, and yet he has attained so much
Majesty as to be one of the superlative form of Grandees, and although he
never ventured his life for the Parliament that J could heat of, yet they have
largely requited him for sitting still, and given him seven thousand, 500. l.
for his pretended losses out of his brothers Composition, and it is strongly
reported besides, that he saved his brother a great deal (above as much more)
in his Composition, and therefore, no wonder Mr. William Peerpoint was such a
grand enemy to me, and Mr. John Wildman, for promoting such a Petition, as
desired to know what was become of all the public treasure of the kingdom,
which the Parliament men has in a manner solely monopolized unto their own use
(to buy Bishops lands of themselves, etc. with) as well as all the great and
rich places of the Kingdom, and truly I am very much afraid, that if the
people do not the speedier look into all their cheets, if not robberies (for
no better do I account all the many hundred thousand pounds of the ^eoples
money that they have given each to other, it being possitively and absolutely
against the law of this ^and, for Feffes in trust, (and they are no more at
most) to give a penny amongst themselves) they will shortly go make an
Ordinance to set up the Great Turks law, viz. that the Parliament men, shall
be Heirs and Executers of all the rich men in England, and therefore if ever
the people think to get any good from this present Parliament (who do nothing
in a manner, but buy and sell each others Votes, to serve the faction and
coviteousnesse each of other) then let them first resolve without any denial,
to effect these two just things.

First, That all Parliament men whatsoever (while they fit in Parliament, and
continue Members thereof,) he incapable to possess or execute any place
whatsoever, either in Military or Civell affairs.

Secondly, That the people be put into aiust and rational capacity, to
inquire into those many millions of money that have been raised upon them, etc,
(which I am confident since the wars begun, is above twelve pence for every
penny that has justly been spent that can be justly accounted for) and then
have at you, and your letter Monopoly, etc. Mr. Pridiox, and you and your Horse
Cosing, etc. Sir Arthur Hasterig, for I must of necessity have a fling at you
both; for your late zeal manifested ^or me, to make me be a Comrade with Judge
^enkins to Tyburne. no other place in your judgment so well becoming him and
me then that, though truly I am very confident it would better become your
selves.

But upon the debate in the House, after Candles was lighted, news was brought
out that Mr. Wildman was committed to the Fleet, and my self to the Tower, for
treasonable and seditious practices against the State, but for all that I
stirred not, but staid with my Com^ade in the Loby at the House of Commons
door, and after the House was rise, Mr. Bicket the Sergeant ac Arms come to
us, and told us what was done, and J told him at present I would not dispute
the power of the House in commiting me, but if the Warrant were not legal, I
was resolved to loose my life upon the place before I would go willingly to
prison without a legaall warrant, containing the particular cause, and having a
legal conclusion, viz. and him safely to keep until he be delivered by due
course of Law, but Mr. Serieant brought me a copy of the Warrant, and it was to
remain in prison during pleasure, which I told him I would have my brains
beat out, before I would willingly obey, and stoop to it, so the people that
stayed, being about 100. cried ovt unto us to go away with them for to prison
they would not suffer us to go without a legal Warrant, telling Mr. Sergeant,
that if the warrant were legal, if we would not go, they would help him to
c^rry us, so Mr. Serieant went into the Clerks office, and mende^ the form of
the Warrant, but wanted Mr. Speakers hand unto it, who was then gone home, so
we gave him our Perrowls to appear there betimes the next morning, and
accordingly we did, and tha^ evening reading Sir Edward Cooks Commentary upon
the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta, and his Exp^sition of the 1. Edward 2. which
treats upon breaking of prison, in his 2 part institutes. I find in the last,
fol 590, 591. he expressly declares, it is not enough to express the cause in
general, but it m^^ be in particular, and if for Treason, for what particular
Act of Treason, and if for Felony, For whi^^ particular act of Felony; whose
words at large you may read in the 74, 75 pages of The People^ Prerogative. And
in the 5, 6. and 10. pages of Sir John Maynards case truly stated.

And being at the House of Commons door the next morning, Mr. Serieant showed
me my warran^ the Copy of which verbatim thus follows.

BY virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, these are to require you to
receive from the Serieant at Arms, or his Deputy, the body of Lievt. Col. John
Lilbu^ne into the Tower of London, and him there to detain in safe Custody as
your Prisoner, in order to his trial according to Law, he being committed for
treasonable and seditious practices against the State, and for so doing this
shall be your Warrant.

Dated 19. January. 1647. To the Lieutenant of the Tower of London. William
Lenthall, Speaker.

Upon reading of which, we both desired to speak two or three words with Mr.
Speaker, (and the House being not sat) we accordingly did, and I told him I
very much desired his favor to be called again to the bar, to speak two or
three words to the Legallity of the warrant, for as it was ( I told him) we
might remain in prison ad infinitum, before the Judges durst or would grant us
a Habeas Corpus to bring us up to the bar of justice, to receive a legal
trial, or our liberty according to Law: And having Sir Edward Cooks 2. part
inst. in my hand, published by their own Order for good law, I desired to show
him his judgment to declare the Warrant illegal, but when the House sat we
could not prevail to be called in, but Mr. Serieant came to me, and pressed me
to be willing to go to prison upon the Warrant already made, or else the House
had ordered him to force me, but I told him I would loose my life before I
would be a traitor to the liberties of England, which I must do, ( J told him)
if I obeyed that illegal Warrant. And when I had so done, I fell of preaching
law and justice out of Sir Edward Cooks institutes, (then in my hands) and the
Parliaments own declarations to the Soldiers that guarded the House, telling
them, that they were raised to fight to preserve the liberties and freedoms of
England, but not to destroy them which they must of necessity do if they laid
violent hands upon me to force me to prison upon the Houses illegal Warrant,
and in making me a slave, they subjected themselves to slavery, and manifest
themselves to be a pack of arrant mercinarys, by destroying their own
declarations, being it was possible my case to day, might be theirs to morrow,
I further told them, that a general charge of treason in Law was no charge at
all, by the Houses own Declarations, and J instanced the case of the five
Members, and the Lord Kimbilton, and the same is declared in the case of
Alderman Pennington, when he was Lord Mayor of London, And Alderman Folks, Col.
Ven, and Col. Manwering, whose cases you may read in the first part book
declarations, page 38, 39. 77, 201. 278. 660. 845.

I also instanced the cases of Mr, Hollis and the rest of the eleven Members,
where the House vote, a general charge was no charge.

And I also told them it was no contempt of authority, (by the Parliaments own
Declarations) to refuse obedience to illegal commands, for in their
declaration of the 19 May, 1642. 3. part book dec. page 101. they look upon the
Attorney generals impeachment of the 5. Members, and the Lord Kimbo^ton as
upon a heinous crime against the Law of nature, against the rules of justice,
that innocent men should be charged with so great an offense as treason, in the
face of the highest Iudicatory of the Kingdom, whereby their lives and
estates, their blood and honor are endangered without witness, without
evidence, without all possibility of reparation in a legal course, yet a
crime (mark it very well) of such a nature, that his Majesty's command can no
more warrant, then it can any other act of injustice; It is true (say they)
that those things which are evil in their own nature, such as a false
testimony, or false accusation, cannot be the subject of any command, or induce
any obligation of obedience upon any man by any authority whatsoever, therefore
the Attorney in this case, was bound to refuse to execute such a command. And
page 150. If a General attempt or command to turn the mouths of his own
Cannons against his own Soldiers, it does ipso ^ac^^, estate the Army in a
right of disobedience, because the General has gone against the nature of his
trust and place. See also page 266, 267. 269. 276, 277. 3^4 361. 382. 494. 696,
700. 716. 721 726. But that my Warrant is illegal, I evince it in those four
particulars.

First, because it is signed by the Speaker of the House of Commons, who as
Speaker, in law has no power at all in the case in controversy, to commit me
to prison, for the House it self, is chosen and betrusted to make and repeal
Laws, but is not in the least by law or reason empowered to execute the Law.

Secondly, my warrant had no seal to it, as by law it ought to have, as is
fully proved by the fore recited places: but neither of these were the things I
stood upon, though I might justly have done i^ in Law.

Thirdly, my Warrant has no legal cause expressed in it, and therefore
illegal, because it only runs in general, but does not express in Particular
the treason they lay to my charge, and therefore not in law to be obeyed,
either by me or by the Lieutenant of the Tower, or any other, against all the
executers of which in Law. I have my action of false imprisonment, if there
were any justice to be had, which now I must and will say, is destroyed by Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and his mercionary Ianisaries under his command. As is clearly
evident in their late condemning W. l. Thomson by Martial Law, who is a mere
Commoner.

Fourthly, it wanted a legal conclusion, viz. and him safely to keep, until
he be delivered by due course of Law, which two last things I stood upon, and
ground enough I had so to do, because for want of them I was eternally
co^^mitted to pris^n, without any legal crime laid unto my charge. And
therefore me^cinary, Ianisary Col Baxster, might as well and as legally
commanded his Soldiers to have cut my throat, as to have commanded them to
have drawn their swords upon me, and to have dragd ^ee away by force of Arms,
by virtue of an illegal warrant. F^r if my warrant had been legal, I could
with a Hab^a^ Corpus have brought up my self to the Kings Bench bat the last
term and there according to law, have forced my imprisoners to a legal
trial, either for my justification o^ condemna^^^^, whereas now by the
illegallity of my warrant, I am deprived of all means to bring my self in a
^^st trial at Law (although J desire it as much at to eat when I am a hungry)
and so now must either starve or rot in prison, or troop unto the wills of
Tyrants to cry them p^ccavie, to get my liberty, to the traterous betraying of
the laws and liberties of England, the which rather then J would willingly
do, I would by Gods assistance be cut in a thousand pieces.

But expostulating with the Officers and Soldiers that commanded the guard,
the Serieant at Arms could not get one of them to lay hand upon me, and at last
it at mercionary, cowardly, unworthy, base fellow, Col Baxster (came up with a
freshguard) who has not the least spark of a true br^d English man in him,
(as I shall be ready when time serves to testify to his nose) and I begun to
expostulate in law and reason with him, but he like a professe^ Mercionary,
Turkish Ianisarie told me to this effect. It was his office and place, not to
dispute Orders or Commands, but to put them in execution, and therefore J must
talk no more to him, for to prison he would carry me; and most imperiously
commanded to clear the Lobby of all my friends, and not knowing but (...)
intention was to murder me at the House of Commons door, in such a manner,
that there should be none of my friends by to bear witness of his blood
guiltiness: I gave my books, staff^, and gloves to my friends being resolved
(of p^ssi^le I could) to seize upon the very wind pipe of him that first laid
hands upon me, and to deal with him as a bloody fellow, that came to murder
and distroy me, but the crou^ going out of the door J strove to go with them:
and as soon as I was out upon the top of the stai^^ he himself laid hands upon
me, but the crowd was so strong, that my very arms was ^^nnioned, tha^ I could
do no more but attempt the throwing him down the stairs, but the crowd became
his pro^ and safeguard, and all of a sudden, abundance of swords were drawn
about my cares, and I so crowded up, that I was necessi^ated to have patience
perforce, although I was resolved if I could have go^ any elboe room, to have
lost my life upon the place like a man, rather then to have been robbed of my
l^gall and natural liberties standing upon my feet; but some of the Soldiers
were extremely desperate, and mad upon me, upon which I cried out murder,
murder, murder, as loud as ever I could cry, whereupon followed a fearful cry
of the people in the same tone, and Baxsters new Soldiers that he brought up
with him, that had heard none of my discourse, laid about them like mad men,
upon a company of naked men, and knocked down some of my friends with the but
ends of their Muskets, and others run several times a tilt at me, with their
drawn swords, and had undoubtedly dispatched me, had not my wife stood betwixt
me and them, and one young fellow especially I took notice of, who run several
times fearcely a tilt at me, and had undoubtedly distroyed me, but for the
ingenuitie of the Lieutenant belonging to the Captain of the guard, which
fellow upon inquiry, I found to be the Ensign to the Captain of the guard,
and as I was led away, I found my old acquaintance, Captain Groom very active
against me, and to set up Slavery and Tyranny, veryfying that proverb, that set
a beggar on horseback, and he will gallop, and drive more furiously then he
that is acccustomed to riding.

So being necessitated to yield up at present, the liberties and freedoms of
England, to the tyranny of that House of Commons, and the Soldiers of that
General, who raised and commanded an Army pretendedly to fight for and
preserve the liberties of England, and in diverse of their Declarations have
imprecated the wrath and vengeance of Heaven and earth to fall upon them when
they cease so to do, And truly did J not consider there is a just, righteous,
and powerful God in Heaven, that is able to perform upon these men's heads,
their own prayers, J should even be overwhelmed with sorrow and grief at their
unrighteous, blood thirsty, and cruel dealings with me. And being with a guard
of Soldiers by water, brought to the Tower, and discoursing with Col.
Titchburne the present Lieutenant of the Tower, I became engaged upon my
perrowle, to be a true prisoner, and he became engaged to use me with all
civilitie and respect, which truly from himself I have at this bout no cause to
complain of, but yet notwithstanding ever since by his Warders at the gate, my
friends have bin contrary to the laws and liberties of England, very much
restrained for coming to me, and have often bin forced to stay an hour or two
at the gate before they could get a Keeper to come up with them to me, and
diverse have had from them very base and provoking language, and others have
been forced to go away without acces^ unto me, so that I am in some sense in
the nature of a close prisoner, robbed by men in greatest authority of my estate
and propriety, robbed of my liberty, and of the free access of my friends unto
me, in my great and almost unsupportable captivity, so that if it be not
immediately mended, I must be necessitated and compeld whether I will or no,
to cry out in the next to all the free men of England, as loud as I did in the
Bishops time, in my Epistle to the Apprentices of London of the 10. May 1647.
(which I caused on there play day to be thrown in Moorfields amongst them)
Murder, Murder, and Murder, and provoke every English man that has the spirit
of a man in him, to importune (with loud cries) the Parliament to do me
justice and right, so far as I have Law and justice on my side, and to punish
or distroy me without mercy, so far as by law and justice I have deserved it,
which is all the courtesy I crave at the hands of all the men in England, and
resolved I am by Gods assistance, never to sit down in silence so long as they
so murderinly and tyrannically (as they do) tyrannise over me, let the issue
be what it will, I value it not, having long since through the goodness of God
learned to dye, hoping and strongly believing, that that God has been my God
in six troubles, and in seven has ^ot left me, will be a loving and careful
husband and father unto my poor wife and children, if I should be taken from
them, in that distressed mean and low condition they are now in. And therefor
M^. Frost, I shall draw toward a conclusion, and according to my promise in
the foregoing lines, ^ive you a short breviate of Mr. John Morris his case, as
I find it drawn up to his Excellency Sir Tho^as Fairfax, by diverse of the late
Agents, which thus follows.

May it please your Excellency.
BEing deeply oppressed in our spirits, and overburthened in ourselves, at the
manifold doleful outcryes and complaints of the people in all parts of our
quarte^s where we come, uttered against the daily pressures and inroads that
are made by prerogative and arbitrary violence upon their Common rights, and in
particular the cry and miserable moan of certain oppressed Commoners, to wit
of John Poyntz, alias Morris, Esquire, Isabella Smith, John Harris, and Leanord
Darby, coming unto our ^ates, that we could not, but (as in duty we are bound)
deeply represent their miserable condition, as fellow feelers of their
oppressions, and persons liable (when we come into their single capacity of
Commons) to the said mischief, and therefore conceiving it our duty to
contribute our utmost endeavors for the remedy of the same, we could not but
unburthen in some measure our spirits unto your Excellency in their behalfes,
who in such a horrid and barbarous manner have been abused and supplanted of
their common rights, by acts of violence and force, committed by John Brown,
Clarke unto the House of Lords, and his accomplicies, under the color of
several Orders surruptuously by misinformations gained from the said House, to
the high usurpation and abuse of the name and authority of Parliament, in
permitting the image thereof upon his own prerogative outrage and violence, to
the total ^uine and supplantation of the just freedoms and birthright,
inheritance of the said persons, as the several papers thereunto subioyned for
the full information of your Excellency do demonstrate. And for more certain
confirmation of our premises, represented by the same, be pleased to consider,
that whereas the abovesaid persons, are accused, condemned, and sentenced by
the Lords (supprised by Browns misrepresentations and delusions) to pay 2500.
l. fine, and suffer imprisonment, contrary to the regular course of the Laws,
during the pleasure of the said House, for forging and framing a copy of an Act
of Parliament, touching the estate of the said John Poyntz, alias Morris,
pretended to be taken out of the Office of the said John Brown with his hand
thereunto, no such original Record as Brown pretends to be found in his
office, that since the said accusation, another original Record of the said
Act of Parliament with other writings and evidences for the said estate, is
found in the Court of Wards, and they have gained copyes thereof, examined and
subscribed by the Master of the said Court and his Clerks, the which with
their hands thereunto are herewith presented, and concerning the truth thereof,
three of us can also give it upon oath, that the wife of one Godfrey Cade, now
prisoner in the Fleet, did declare unto us, that the said John Brown went to
the Fleet unto her husband, and gave him 25. shillings in hand, and promised
him 5. l. more, and his enlargement, to swear at the Lords Bar, that he forged
the copy of the said Act of Parliament, and counterfeited the Clerks hand unto
it, and the sai^ Cade did also confess the same.

Wherefore we humbly implore that your Excellency would be pleased to grant the
said distressed persons your letter of request, unto the Parliament according
to their Petition herewith directed to your Excellency, that the said persons
and their adversaries, may be left to the free course and trial at common law,
and that in the mean time till the controversy concerning the estate be
decided at Law, the said persons may enjoy their enlargement upon Bail,
without any further trouble or durance, and the execution of their severe
sentence be suspended, and the said Poyntz, alias Morris enjoy peaceable
possession of the said estate, like as all his ancestors from the days of
Queen Elizabeth have done before him, which request is so reasonable and just,
and their condition so miserable, desperate, and dangerous, and of such
concernment to the whole Common wealth, that no man, if such exhorbit^ces be
not stop and ^^rbd, can have any security in his estate of liberty, that we
cannot but promise our selves your Excel^encies con^se^^^^^n of their
condition, and readily assent unto their just s^ Thus we humbly take our leave,
beseeching your favorable construction upon our boldness a^ remain

Your Excellencies most humble Servants and Soldiers, Lievt. Genesis R. Robert
Everard. George Sadler.
Com. Genesis R. George Garret. Thomas Beverly.
Col. Whalys Matthew Wealy. William Russell. Will. Sampson. Richard Daley.
Col. Riches. Will. Hudso^ John Dober.
Col. Fleetwood. William Priar. William Bryan.



Now Mr. Frost to conclude all at the present, I shall desire you to ask your
grand Senior Cra^well, whether he intends forthwith, to become an absolute
brother to the great Turk, and to set up amongst us in England his absolute
tyranny, and the reason why J desire you to do it, is because hear he lately
near the Parliament, met with on William Thomson, a mere Commoner and no
Sou^dier, and without any affront given him by the breath of his mouth,
committed him prisoner to (...) Mercinary lanisaries at Whitehall, and have
since passed a sentence upon him, at a Council of War^ to be shot to death,
over whom he has no more jurisdiction then the great Turk has, and now kee^
him close prisoner in Whitehall, without use of pen, ink, and paper, where it
is said he intends th^ly to murder him, for no other crime in the world, but
only because he has more honestly in his li^ finger, then Cromwell has in all
his body. So being in have, letting you know I intend to visit yo^ again, and
your silly Comrade William Prinn shortly, for writing his late silly book for
the supporta^on of the Lords rotten and illegal jurisdiction, and so I rest.

Your Antagonest, John Lilburne.

FINIS.

