The Marquess of ORMOND'S LETTER TO HIS MAJESTY, Concerning the late Fight
betwixt the Forces under his Command, and the Garrison of Dublin.

The Copy whereof was taken out of His Majesty's Letter, and sent from S.
Germain en Lay, bearing date the 25. of this instant, (new style) to an
Eminent Person of this Kingdom.

Together with the most considerable Occurrences in relation to the appeasing
of that Kingdom, and embracing the Princes Interest.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

The Marquess of ORMONDS Letter to His MAJESTY, etc.
May it please your Majesty,
THe Rebels are possessed with such an admirable dexterity of spreading abroad
petty defeats, for Glorious Victories, and use such an extraordinary vigilance
to Intercept, and Bury, all those Letters which may present the Truth without
disguise: That though the last Action upon August the second, be scarcely worth
the Royal notice, yet their swelling Relations may convey it to your Majesty's
knowledge in such a multiplying Glass, as to deliver a Camisadoe for a
Battle, and the trifling success of it for a memorably complete Victory.

I shall therefore deliver your Majesty a most exact account of that days
emergencies, in which I had rather exceed to the Rebels advantage, then by an
unseasonable flattering your Majesty with a pretended Prosperity, divert your
Princely thoughts and care, from strengthening our hands with such Foreign
strength as may be procured to your Majesty's Service: It being an undoubted
Maxim, that the securing this Kingdom, will (by Gods blessing) speedily reduce
the other two out of the Jaws of those Barbarous Rebels, to your most Just,
and natural Obedience.

On Wednesday at night, August the first, it was Resolved by a Council of
War, (the Results whereof, Sir Robert Welsh is to present your Majesty in
Duplicate) That Baggohrath should immediately be Possessed, and Fortified. The
accomplishment whereof, could not but extremely strengthen the Rebels in their
Provision, who, though by the Addition of Force out of England, they were
grown something Numerous; yet in our apprehensions, were become capable of
hastening the Famine to its full grows amongst them. Nor did their number so
much add to our fears, as it wasted from their own Provision: To the
acceleration of which wast, the possession of this place would have been
considerable; since (by thus Pin-folding them up) their Horse, and Cattle,
must have been totally deprived of all imaginable subsistence.

The consequents arising from the Fortifying of this place, the Rebels
apprehended to be of no less danger to them, then we decreed it of advantage
to us; and therefore Sallyed out with all the strength of Horse and Foot they
could possibly make to beat us thence: To facilitate the which, and the more to
amuse us, a Report was spread in my Army, (through their artifice) That
Cromwell himself, was Landed in the Night, and that the whole English Power of
the transported Rebels would that day be upon our Shoulders: Which, though I
looked upon as a Lie, (and a leisure to have searched, would quickly have
discovered the Author:) yet I could not undeceive the Soldiery, who were
wholly possessed with it: more especially, those I had sent to Baggohrath, upon
the eruption of the necessitated Rebel, did conclude it for a Truth
indisputable.

This proposition of their Minds being extreme prejudicial upon the instant
of Engagement, the better part of the Army Commanded to other places, or not
come up. The Lord Inchiquin himself, being gone into Munster with a
considerable Body of the Horse, and twelve thousand I expected from
Clanrickard; and the Lord of Ards not yet come up, I resolved to call those
Commanded Forces off from Baggohrath; and in order thereunto, gave Command to
the Earl of Fingall, Sir William Vaughan, and my Brother, to bring them off
without engaging at all the Enemy.

But the Rebels advancing with an extraordinary expedition, (enforced by
necessity, and now encouraged by our declining the engagement) fell with a
confident speed upon our Rear, where Sir William Vaughan, and Sir Edmund
Varney, making a vigorous resistance, had the honor to Sacrifice their Lives
in your Majesty's Quarrel: My Lord of Fingall, and my Brother
(over-venturously voluntiering it) after some Wounds, were enforced to become
their Prisoners; the rest of the Commanded Party full of amazement and
prepossession, defended themselves rather out of despair of Life, then hope of
Victory; which being perceived by the Rebel, (highly animated with a
prosperous beginning) all, or most of the Commanded Foot, being in number about
twelve hundred, were either slain, or taken. The Horse, with inconsiderable
loss, drew off to their advancing seconds.

This was performed with such speed, that the Seconds I had sent forth after
necessity of Engagement, were not able to come up to their Relief; and the
Violent Rebel was so flushed with this Victory, that (growing eager to pursue
his Fortune) he would needs charge those succors: which by the signal Valor,
and Bravery of the two Lords, Castle-haven and Taffe, turned so little to their
advantage, that about 500. of their Horse left their triumphant Riders upon the
place, and the rest making a swift Retreat with their Foot into the City, of my
200. Men before taken Prisoners were recovered: which, with eight of their
Horse-Colours taken, may very well serve to bring the Victory to a new Dispute,
what ever they may hereupon write to the contrary, to haule Cromwells unwilling
Soldiery to the relief of their loud Necessities.

At the present, Sir, We will not any more commit any thing to Fortune, by
attempting to Block them up, (otherwise then on this side) till a full
conjuncture with the Forces which Clanrickard, Inchiquin, and Ards, are
Marching up with toward us: which we resolve upon so much the rather, as
resting assuredly confident, that Providence has designed this particular
place for the seat of War in this Kingdom, in regard Cromwell, with the
remaining division of his Army, (the treacherously intended delivery of Cork
being happily prevented) cannot be of any considerable power to Land in any
other part to our disadvantage.

In this Paper, Sir, I have given your Majesty an entire, and exact account of
every thing worth your Princely knowledge, which may have passed in the late
Action of August the second. Of which, though the Rebels, who reckon
Deliveries for Conquest, may, peradventure, unseasonably triumph in the Gazets:
They have no other true Ground then what is included in this Narration. The
Bearer whereof, Sir Robert Welsh, has in Commission to satisfy all such
Scruples as may appear justly questionable: who furthermore, is to assure your
Majesty, that the Army under my Command, has recovered so much Spirit, and
Ardour against the most Barbarous Rebel, That Cromwell at his arrival, will
find an Enemy fully possessed with a generous desire of Revenge, Honor, and
Liberty, of a more high, and noble Courage, then his mercenary Soldiery can
ever be Principled into, whose Conscience clogged with a guilty violation of
all Laws, both Divine and Humane, must at one instant drive him into a
Cowardly despair, and infuse a glorious confidence of Victory into all the
honest Souls of your Majesty's Party in General. And particularly, Sir, into
the Bosom of

Your Majesty's most obedient Subject, and obliged Servant, ORMOND.
Finglai, August the 4. 1649.
The indorsment was to HIS MAJESTY.
Resolved in a Council of War held at Finglasie, AUGUST 1. 1649.
REsolved, That a Party of twelve hundred Foot, and five hundred Horse be drawn
out of His Excellencies Army, to possess themselves of Baggohrath, and
Fortify it.

Resolved, That eight hundred of the prepared Pioneers be commanded to attend
the said Party, that the place may be Fortified with all Expedition.

Resolved, That the Foot of this Party be commanded by Adjutant General
Searle, and the Horse by Col: Matthewes, who are to attend His Excellency for
Orders.

Resolved, That the Earl of Castle-haven, and the Lord Taff, draw out two
thousand selected Horse with Lieu. Colonel Gerards Fuiseers of His
Excellencies Lifeguard, to second the said Party, in case the Rebels attempt
to interrupt them.

Resolved, That (the Castle being made good) a running Trench be drawn from
thence to the Waterside to disturb all future Landing.

Resolved, That the running Trench being perfected, a Fort shall be raised at
the end thereof, and six Pieces of Ordnance mounted thereupon, to Command the
water passages.

Resolved, That a Copy of these Results be recommended to his Highness Prince
Rupert, who is Humbly desired by the Council of War to furnish out two of
the nimblest sort of his Frigots, which may serve for Avisoes and give
seasonable Intelligence to his Excllency accordingly of the Rebels Course upon
the Marine.

Jo: Percivall, Secretary to His Excel. and Council of War.
This is an exact Copy.



My Lord,
THe Gentleman who has vouchsafed the delivery of this Letter to your Hands,
Professes himself a great Servant of your Lordships and highly addicted to
the advance of the Royal Interest; and though his unfortunate weakness
heretofore had made him so clouded to the eyes of his understanding, as to
render him Incapable of perceiving those artifices by which the Grandees of the
Present Faction have ascended to their Noone of Greatness, yet (that Philme
being at Present taken off, he with great detestation abhors the very Memory of
their actions, and to show himself willing to satisfy for former mistakes)
offers to undeergoe any Hazard to testify the sincerity of his Conversion.

By him therefore as by a Person less abnoxious to suspicion, I have chosen to
send you my Lord of Ormonds Letter to his Majesty about the Late fight betwixt
Colonel Jones and him, and take leave to assure your Lordship that it is a most
Perfect Copy.

August the 22 stylo novo. Sir Robert Welih came to Saint Germins from his
Excellency, with an exact Narrative of that action: and since that Time
several expresses are come to his Majesty and other Great ones of the Court,
from the Earl of Castle-Haven, the Lord Tasse, and the Lord Byron, all which
render his Excellencies relation so full of exactness truth, and Ingenuity,
That his Majesty is so absolutely confirmed in the relation, That all the
Tempests of your Pamphlets, and Thunder of Thanksgiving cannot shake us from an
acquiescence in that Narrative.

The French Kings magnificent reception into Paris, has I doubt not more
filled your gazets, then the return of Provence to his most Christian
Majesty's obedience, or the Possibility of an utter Ruin to the Rebels of
Bordeaux by the Gallant D'Espernon, Or the hopeful spring of a Peace at
Cambray (easily to be collected from the Duke de Longevills this Letters) That
which more Particulary acceeds to the English Interest is the Visit of the Lord
de Hante-Rive from his Eminency Da Mazarini. The substance of whose Message
(though all be here Buried in a deep gulf of silence, yet by observing a more
then usual Gayetie in the aspects of the Greatest Privadoes) gives (us of the
next Orb) just occasion to hope that a Tempest is preparing here which may in
no long series of time humble all your Grandees at Westminster, and make your
counsel of State apprehend White Hall subject to Earthquakes.

One thing I am obliged to tell you, though something our of order of time,
which is, when the Prince de Conde came to Present his Baise-mains to his
Majesty, my curiosity (drawing nearer, unperceived, then their Privacies might
have allowed me) gave me the opportunity of hearing these words at their
departure fall from the Prince of Conde to his Majesty: Sire Consolez vous,
^^^royez pour chose asseuree, que quant a vos enemis nous leur Marcherons sur
le Ventre tous deuz ensemble, ilsne nous eschapperent pas Le Roy l'a dit, son
Altisse Royale l'a Promis.

Sir, Comfort your self, and believe it for a thing assured, that for what
concerns your Enemies, we two together will March over their Bellies: they
shall not escape us, the King has said it, His Royal Highness has promised it.

Whether Montrosse is designed to strengthen Ormond in Ireland, or to fall upon
the North of Scotland, is not known: Counsels are more obscure here then at
Westminster. But by an express dated the first of August, from Lubeck we are
Certified, That eighteen hundred of his Horse are shipped at Lubeck, the Foot
are to be Received from Denmark, in number Ten thousand, I shall give your
Lordship a more particular account with the next Convenience.

His Majesty has expressed himself very favorable in the Reception of Mr.
G. and Mr. Ar. upon your Recommendation, and omits no opportunity to testify
what high esteem you retain in his Opinion. Your Lordship will be Pleased to
Pardon my abrupt ending, I am at the instant called away, and have only the
Leisure to Tell your Lordship that I am in all numbers of gratitude,

My Lord, The Faithfullest, and most Humble of your Servants
St. Germain en Lay, Aug. 28. 18. 1649.
FINIS.

