Numb. 2.

A CONTINVATION OF THE NARRATIVE BEING The third and fourth days Proceedings OF
THE High Court of Justice Sitting in Westminster Hall Jan. 23.

CONCERNING the TRIAL OF THE KING: With the several Speeches of the King, Lord
President, and Solicitor General.

Published by Authority to prevent false and impertinent Relations.

TO these Proceedings of the Trial of the King, I say, Imprimatur, GIL^^RT
MA^^O^.

London, Printed for John Playford, and are to be sold at his shop in the Inner
Temple, Jan. 25. 1648.

At the High Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall, Tuesday, Jan. 23.
1648.
O Yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called. Seventy three persons present.

The King comes in with his Guard, looks with an austere countenance upon the
Court and sits down.

The second O Yes made, and silence commanded.

Mr Cook Solicitor General. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President.

This is now the third time, that by the great grace and favor of this High
Court the Prisoner has been brought to the Bar before any issue joined in the
cause. My Lord, I did at the first Court exhibit a Charge against him,
containing the highest Treason that ever was wrought upon the Theater of
England, That a King of England, trusted to keep the Law, that had taken an
Oath so to do, that had tribute paid him for that end, should be guilty of a
wicked design, subvert and destroy our Laws, and introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government, in the defense of the Parliament and their Authority,
set up his Standard for War against his Parliament and People; and I did humbly
pray, in the behalf of the People of England, that he might speedily be
required to make an Answer to the Charge.

But my Lord, instead of making any answer, he did then dispute the Authority
of this High Court; Your Lordship was pleased to give him a further day to
consider and to put in his Answer, which day being yesterday, I did humbly
move, that he might be required to give a direct and positive Answer, either by
denying or confes^^on of it; but (my Lord) he was then pleased for to demurre
to the Jurisdiction of the Court, which the Court did then overruled, and
command him to give a direct and positive Answer. My Lord, Besides this great
delay of Justice, I shall now humbly move your Lordship for speedy Judgment
against him. My Lord, I might press your Lordship upon the whole, that
according to the known Rules of the Law of the Land, That if a Prisoner shall
stand as contumacious in contempt, and shall not put in an issuable Plea,
guilty or not guilty of the Charge given against him, whereby he may come to a
fair Trial; That as by an implicit Confession, it may be taken pro confesso,
as it has been done to those who have deserved more favor then the Prisoner at
the Bar has done: But besides, my Lord, I shall humbly press your Lordship upon
the whole fact; The House of Commons, the supreme Authority and Jurisdiction of
the Kingdom, they have declared, That it is notorious, That the matter of the
Charge is true, as it is in truth (my Lord) as clear as crystal, and as the
Sun that shines at noon day, which if your Lordship and the Court be not
satisfied in, I have notwithstanding, on the People of Englands behalf, several
witnesses to produce: And therefore I do humbly pray, and yet I must confess it
is not so much I as the innocent blood that has been shed, the Cry whereof is
very great for Justice and Judgment; and therefore I do humbly pray, that
speedy Judgment be pronounced against the Prisoner at the Bar.


Lord President. Sir, You have heard what is moved by the Council on the behalf
of the Kingdom against you. Sir, You may well remember, and if you do not, the
Court cannot forget what delatory dealings the Court has found at your hands,
you were pleased to propound some Questions, you have had your Resolution upon
them. You were told over and over again, That the Court did affirm their own
Jurisdiction, tha^ it was not for you, nor any other man to dispute the
Jurisdiction of the supreme and highest Authority of England, from which there
is no Appeal, and touching which there must be no dispute; yet you did persist
in such carriage, as you gave no manner of obedience, nor did you acknowledge
any Authority in them, nor the high Court, that constituted this Court of
Justice.

Sir, I must let you know from the Court, that they are very sensible of these
delays of yours, and that they ought not, being thus authorized by the supreme
Court of England, be thus trifled withal, and that they might in Justice, if
they pleased, and according to the Rules of Justice, take advantage of these
delays, and proceed to pronounce Judgment against you, yet nevertheles they are
pleased to give direction; and on their behalfs I do require you, That you make
a possitive Answer unto this Charge that is against you Sir, in plain terms,
for Justice knows no respect of persons; you are to give your positive and
final Answer in plain English, whether you be guilty or not guilty of these
Treasons laid to your Charge.


The King after a little pause, said, When I was here yesterday I did desire to
speak for the Liberties of the People of England; I was interrupted: I desire
to know yet whether I may speak freely or not?


Lord President. Sir, You have had the Resolution of the Court upon the like
Question the last day, and you were told, that having such Charge of so high a
Nature against you, and your Work was, that you ought to acknowledge the
JURISDICTION of the COURT, and to answer to your CHARGE. Sir, If you answer to
your Charge, which the Court gives you leave now to do, though they might have
taken the advantage of your contempt; yet if you be able to answer to your
Charge, when you have once answered, you shall be heard at large, make the best
Defense you can. But Sir I must let you know from the Court, as their commands,
that you are not to be permitted to issue out into any other discourses, till
such time as you have given a positive answer concerning the matter that is
charged upon you.


The King. For the Charge, I value it not a rush, it is the Liberty of the
People of England that I stand for; for me to acknowledge a new Court that I
never heard of before, I that am your King, that should be an example to all
the people of England for to uphold Justice, to maintain the old Laws; indeed
I do not know how to do it; you spoke very well the first day that I came here,
(on Saturday) of the obligations that I had laid upon me by God, to the
maintenance of the Liberties of my People: the same Obligation you spoke of, I
do acknowledge to God that I owe to him, and to my People, to defend as much as
in me lies the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, therefore until that I may know
that this is not against the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by your favor
I can put in no particular This is as the King expressed, but I supposed he
meant Answer.
Charge: If you will give me time, I will show you my reasons why I cannot do
it, and this --

Here being interrupted, he said, By your favor, you ought not to interrupt
me; how I came here I know not, there is no Law for it to make your King your
prisoner: I was in a Treaty upon the public Faith of the Kingdom, that was
the known -- two Houses of Parliament that was the Representative of the
Kingdom, and when that I had almost made an end of the Treaty, then I was
hurried away and brought hither, and therefore --


Here the Lord President said; Sir, You must know the pleasure of the Court.


The King. By your favor Sir:


Lord President. Nay Sir, by your favor, you may not be permitted to fall into
those discourses; you appear as a Delinquent, you have not acknowledged the
authority of the Court, the Court craves it not of you, but once more, they
command you to give your positive Answer --


Clark. Do your duty.


The King. Duty Sir!


The Clark reads: Charles Stuart King of England, you are accused in the
behalf of the Commons of England of diverse high crimes and Treasons, which
Charge has been read unto you, the Court now requires you to give your
positive and final answer by way of confession or denial of the Charge.


The King. Sir, I say again to you, so that I might give satisfaction to the
people of England of the cleernesse of my proceeding, not by way of answer, not
in this way, but to satisfy them that I have done nothing against that Trust
that has been committed to me, I would do it; but to acknowledge a new Court
against their privileges, to alter the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, Sir
you must excuse me.


Lord President. Sir, this is the third time that you have publicly disowned
this Court, and put an affront upon it, how far you have preserved Privileges
of the people your actions have spoke it; but truly Sir, men's intentions ought
to be known by their actions, you have written your meaning in bloody
Characters throughout the whole Kingdom; but Sir you understand the pleasure
of the Court, -- Clerk record the default, -- and Gentlemen you that took
charge of the Prisoner, take him back again.


The King. I will only say this one word more to you, if it were only my own
particular I would not say any more nor interrupt you.


Lord President. Sir, You have heard the pleasure of the Court, and you are
(notwithstanding you will not understand it) to find that you are before a
Court of Justice.

Then the King went forth with his Guard, and Proclamation was made, that all
persons which had then appeared, and had further to do at the Court, might
depart into the painted Chamber, to which place the Court did forthwith
adjourne, and intended to meet in Westminster Hall by ten of the clock ^ext
morning.


Crier. God bless the Kingdom of England.


Wednesday January 24. 1648.
THis day it was expected the high Court of Justice would have met in
Westminster Hall, about ten of the clock, but at the time appointed one of the
Ushers by direction of the Court (then sitting in the Painted Chamber) gave
notice to the People there assembled, That in regard the Court was then upon
the examination of Witnesses in relation to present affairs, in the Painted
Chamber, they could not sit there, but all persons appointed to be there, were
to appear upon further Summons.

FINIS.

