A Discovery of Faith; Wherein is laid down The Ground of True Faith, Which
Sanctifies and Purifieth the heart, and works out the Carnal part.

SHOWING The Way that leads to Salvation: WITH The Difference betwixt the two
Seeds, the one of Mount Sinai, which tends to Bondage; and the other, which
is the immortal Seed of God, begotten by the immortal word, which lives and
abides for ever.

Being as Isaac was, the child of the Promise, and of Jerusalem which is from
above, which is the mother of us all that are of the immortal Birth, begotten
not by the will of man, but by the will of God; and born again of Water and the
Spirit, baptized into one body, and made to drink into one Spirit, having
Fellowship with the Father and the Son, all springing from one root, and
growing into one Body, a habitation for God through the Spirit.

The difference betwixt The Living WORD and the LETTER.

1 John 4. 6. We are of God; he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of
God, hears not us; hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of
Error.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread Eagle at the west end
of Paul's. 1653.

An Epistle to the READER.
Christian Friend.
THis ensuing Treatise was not written for swine to snuffle upon, and so cast
dirt upon it with their dirty noses, but from the flowings of love to tender
desires, that they may mind what begets the desire to Righteousness, and so
comeout of all men's Words and Writings that does arise out of the corrupt
nature; for they are filthy and unclean, the heart of man being deceitful, and
that above measure, and all words and writings that arise out of the first
nature are corrupt and earthly, and there is no life in them, but for the dead
mind that is carnal, which knows not the things of God, therefore do they
not know those that are begotten to a lively faith in God, which purifieth
their hearts, and works out the carnal part, that did delight in the unclean
conversation of the world, in conforming to the customs and fashions of the
world, in Capping and Cringing, Bending and Bowing to men of corrupt hearts,
and unpure minds, all being earthly and brutish, following the imaginations of
their hearts; idolizing the creatures, falling down to worship men more then
God, fearing to displease men of Corrupt hearts, and unclean conversation, for
some self end or other, not regarding the command of Jesus Christ, who says
Fashion not your selves like unto the world, for the fashion of the world
paseth away, and again says he, be not conformed like unto the world, but be
ye transformed, by the renewing of your minds; neither be ye men pleasers, for
he that is a man pleaser, he is no longer the servant of Jesus Christ, who did
not seek to please men, but did the will of his father, in reproving sin and
evil, and testifying against the deceits of the world, and that was the reason
why he was hated of the world, not for any evil, but because says he, I
testify against the world, that the deeds thereof are evil therefore do the
world hate me; and the fair sayers then came to him and tempting him, saying,
Master we know that thou teach the way of God truly, and that thou carest
for no man's person; and the subtle serpent in the Pharisees lay at catch, and
laid snares for the innocent, to betray him into the hand of sinners, that they
might have to accuse him to put him to death, and the Pharisees with the chief
Priests, they sought out false witness to put him to death, because he did
testify against their deceitfulness, hypocrisies and dissimulations; and the
blessed Spirit in him seeing the envy, subtilty and venom that lodged in their
hearts, and covered over with fine words, and fair pretenses, being wise to do
evil; he said to all that are of the seed of Abraham after the Spirit, born
again of the same Spirit, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy; for, says he, the children of the world are wiser in their
generation, then the children of the light; therefore be ye wise as serpents,
and harmless as doves; but beware of the leaven of the Pharisees: now they are
alive, the same seed of evil doers to persecute, and lies in wait to destroy
the simple ones, who are guided by the pure Wisdom of God, and are Redeemed
from their vain conversation, and walks in obedience to the Commands of Jesus
Christ, being guided by the same Spirit: God sending the Spirit of his Son into
their hearts, crying Abba Father; and says the blessed Spirit of truth, Have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them,
Ephesians. 5. 11. but he that departs from iniquity, makes himself a prey; and
because that there is not a Running with them into the same excess of Riot,
therefore speak they evil of them, as of evil doers, calling them Quakers, or
what they can invent, to make them odious in the eyes of the world; but it is
nothing but the seed of the serpent that does so, and it is known by the Spirit
of the living God, where Jesus Christ is made manifest in Spirit, having
destroyed the works of the devil, the Spirit of truth and righteousness living
in them, it lets them see, how the seed of the serpent lies upon the earth, and
grows in the earthly delights; and is covered over with an earthly Profession,
and brings forth nothing but weeds and tares, which is for the fire, and must
be burnt up by the Lord God Almighty, who is the heart searcher and tryer. Now
friend, if thou do but with a single eye, read this little ensuing Treatise,
thou will not find any gilded expressions in it, that does arise from the
wisdom of the flesh, for they do but feed the fleshly mind, which must be
destroyed with a sore destruction; let me entreat thee, that when thou read,
thou may first return into thy own spirit, and see how thou stand in the
fear of the Lord, which is to lay aside all evil; and see that thy
understanding be kept open as thou read, and thy mind free from all hard
thoughts, and opinions of men, which arises out of the dark nature, stand free
out of all men's words, that does arise out of the corrupt nature, and give thy
deligence and attention to what thou read as well within as without, and it
will show thee the way that leads to salvatien, and the true guide which it
is written from, that thou may have union with him in the life and substance
of it without all question or doubt, to live in the life and power of the truth
it self; for as the lightning comes out of the east, and shines into the
west, so shall the coming of the Son of man be; wait wholly within, and sink
down into the eternal love, and thou will see me and the rest, that we are in
the unity of that one Spirit, where love is head, the daily bread, where the
souls refreshment is for to be had, which makes the heart exceeding glad. Thine
in the Vine,

Rich: Farnworh.

A Discovery of FAITH: WHEREIN Is laid down the ground of true Faith, which
sanctifies and purifieth the heart, and works out the carnal part.
FAith purifieth the heart; 1 John 3. 3. Gal. 3. 7. Genesis 12. 21. 1 John 3. 3.
Gal. 3. 27, 28. Mat. 15. 19. Ephe. 4. 20. Iam. 3. 14, 15.
All who are of faith, are of Abraham, they are of one seed, come out of their
native Country, Kingdom and Fathers house; they are of one Faith, all of one
Faith, if ten thousand, all Faith in God, which purifies the heart, is one Seed
if ten thousand: the Letter is not the Faith, nor the Letter is not the Seed:
many profess the Letter, but are not all of one Faith, and this is because they
have not the true Faith, which purifies the heart; but it is a formed Faith, so
your hearts are full of deceits, passion, envy, crookedness, corrupt, vain
Conversation and strife; and thou that art there have not learned Christ: To
profess all the Scriptures, and have them in thy notion, wit and memory, yet
have not Faith, but the wisdom of the world, which is carnal, sensual and
earthly, and the earthly mind, applying the earthly letter to the earthly
mind, and the devilish nature lodges within, killing and devouring the just,
where it is risen within; and men and women are brutish, and heathenish, and
heathens know not God, and all you that know not God at this present are
heathens: So examine whether you have Faith or no; 1 John 5. 4. Eccles. 3. 11.
1 Cor. 1. 21.
Faith gives the victory over the world, and then he comes to the end of the
world: now you must see the world to be set in your hearts, and the world by
their wisdom, which is earthly and carnal, knows not God; for God is pure, and
cannot behold iniquity: Now thou that Genesis 32. 30. Exodus 33. 11. Gal. 3. 7.
says thou have wisdom, see if thou know God, or have seen him face to face:
Jacob saw him face to face, Moses saw him face to face; and thou that say
thou have Faith, art thou of Abraham? for they that have Faith, are of Abraham;
see if thou can witness the Scripture: for thee to apply the Prophets
inheritance, the Apostles inheritance, or Abraham's inheritance to thy self, and
to thy condition, thou thief, the Lord is against thee that steals the word
from thy neighbor; Behold, Ier. 23 30, 31.
says the Lord, I am against them that says, He says, and uses their
tongues, and I have never spoke to them, says the Lord. And do not all the
worlds Teachers, and people, all apply the Scriptures, and say he says, and
calls the Letter the Word, John 1. 1.
and so live in hearsay, and deceive your selves and others: When as the Letter
says, God is the Word; and the Letter says, The Word is sharper then a two
edged sword, and it divides asunder; but it does not say, that the Heb. 4. 12.
Letter is sharper then a two edged sword, and you are clean through the Word,
but not through the Letter; and the Letter says, The Word is a hammer, but it
does not say the Letter is a hammer; and John 15. 3.
the Letter says, The Wood is a fire, but does not say, the Letter is as a
fire: O hear you outside faiths, and you outside minds, whose Ier. 23. 29.
faith is without God, formed and imagined in thy mind; you have the nature of
the Devil, to murder; and the nature of the heathen, to rage; the nature of
the manslayer, to envy; and you take the Letter for a cloak, and say you
believe in Christ, in the Lord Jesus. O Hypocrite and Dissembler, awake, awake!
O you blind guides, Psalm. 2. 1.
which have lain long covered, but now the Lord is uncovering you, Isa. 3. 18.
19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
now he will strip you of your mantles, of your vails, of your broidered atire;
now your bracelets, and your bonets, and of your nose-gaises; and now thou
scarlet colored harlot that is covered, mincing with thy eyes, and tinckling
with thy feet, and thy broidered Isa. 3. 16.
hair, now thou have time to repent, repent, turn to the Lord; but thy own ways
thou have chosen, and the vain imaginations of thy own heart thou followest; so
thy own delusions and fear, the Lord will bring upon thee: and all you that say
you have faith, you gather a great company together, and you profess Christ,
and you have been a long time taught, some thirty years, some forty, some
fifty, some sixty, some fourscore, but how many of you have one Faith, and one
Seed and Witness: examine your selves, and deceive not your own souls; and you
that do profess you have faith, you say the Letter is the light, and the
Scripture Letter is the Word, and the Steple-house is the Church, and the
sprinkling of Infants is the baptism which you baptize them into, and you have
a Teacher, and he teaches you these things, and he is called of Men Master,
which Christ cried woe against, and has the chiefest place in the Assemblies;
but all this while, see how many of you are of one faith, and how many of you
would lay down your life one for another, and to let your yea, be Mat 23. 27, 26
yea, and your nay, nay in all things; that which purifies the heart, comes
from one, and draws to one, if they be ten thousand, they are one.

But these are them who are purified: now you shall see a difference between
your says, as you call it, and the Saints faith; for the Saints said, their
light was Christ, and it was within them, and the Saints 1 John 2. 20. 27 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 12. 13. John 1 9 John 1. 1. Mat. 23. 6, 7, 8. Gal. 6 7. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
Light, and the Saints Word was God, and their Teacher was the Anointing, and
their Church was in God, and that was their Baptism with one Spirit, into one
body, and Jesus Christ the substance of the Prophets, the end of them and of
Moses: them that were called of men Masters, and was got up into the chiefest
place in the Assemblies, he cried against such, and such you hold up: And are
not all your Teachers called of men Masters? do you think God will be mocked
with your words? though you may take him for your cloak a while, Mat. 2. 1, 2,
3, 4
he will come with flames of fire, and will recompense upon all you: he that
follows him obeys him, and he that does obey him, does not hold up that which
he cried out against: Herod's hard heart exalted, he gathered all the chief
Priests, to know of them where Christ should be born and they said, in
Bethlehem of Judea, it is written, so says the Prophet; here they could tell
by the Letter where he should be born, and when he was come, they had no faith
in him: and all you now that tell by the Letter, where Jesus Christ was born,
where he was crucified, at Jerusalem, and to say he has dyed for all; yet here
is no faith in Christ, though you may know all this by the Letter except that
you can witness the life that you live is by the faith of Gal. 2. 20.
Christ, and there the Apostle speaks his life, and you take his words: now
every one in particular, who comes to witness Jesus Christ, must witness him
born in them; and Christ is not the Letter, for the Letter is death, it is a
declaration of Christ, and all who have Christ made manifest, the works of the
Devil destroyed, and if thou John 5. 29. 40. 1 John 3. 8.
can not witness the works of the Devil destroyed, Jesus Christ is not yet
made manifest, therefore what thou do profess, a thing without thee, and thy
heart is full of deceit, and no faith at all, no not so much as a grain of
mustard seed, and a grain of mustard seed is but a little thing to the outward
eye; but thou art proud Lucifer, Matt 17. 20. Gal. 3. 7. 2 Cor. 3 2.
who art mounted up with thy knowledge, when thou art thrown down, thou shall
see that thou have no faith: For all who are of Faith, are of Abraham, they are
one Seed, one Heart, yea, written in one another hearts; therefore all you who
follow this customary teaching of the world, see how many of you are of one
heart and one soul: now you shall see your selves without this faith, perverse
one to another, fighting and brawling, and devouring one another, sporting and
living in wantonness, fullness, gluttony, and abundance of idleness, devouring
the just, and the Creation: see that these be the sins of Sodom, just Lot vexed
his righteous soul, with all their ungodly 2 Pet. 2. 7.
deeds: now where souls are raised up by the same power, are grieved with you,
the same generation and nature as was in them, and you envying one another,
quarrelling with one another for the creatures, yea for old hedges, old houses,
going to Law one with another: and here you show Priests and people, that your
affections are 1 Cor. 6. 5. Pail. 3. 20. Col. 3 1.
in the earth: now your Teachers who are examples, go to Law, so do the people
go to Law one with another, which shows that there is not a wise man amongst
you: and so your conversation is in the earth, our conversation is in heaven:
and thy affections that are in the earth, thou have nothing to do to profess
the Saints conditions, for thy mind is earthly, lusting after earthly things,
which passes away, and so evil conceivings lodges in thy mind: therefore all
men 1 Pet. 4. 20.
and women, profess no more then you do possess: For no man in England that
holds up that which Christ speaks against, has says in Christ, neither People
nor Priest, for who had faith in Jesus, denied the Priests, which were true
types of him, and who has faith now denies all the blind Priests, who are
types of nothing, but are Antichrists, and them has God never sent.

ALL people weigh and try your selves, where you are, whether you be in the
state of Ishmael. Ishmael was the first birth, and he was a scoffer, an Archer,
his hand was against every man, and all you, who are in the first birth, are
Ishmaels, scoffers, mockers, and wild as Genesis 21. 9. Gal 4. 29. Genesis 16. 11, 12
Ishmael was, who was a wild man, whose hand was against every man. Isaac was
not so, the second birth, he was the seed, in him was none of the first nature;
so all who are of the same Seed witnesses him, and Genesis 21. 12.
witnesses the other; and Esau was the first birth, and he was a profane
person, a cunning hunter, having the fat of the earth, bearing the sword, Genesis
25. 25. Genesis 25 27. Genesis 27. 40. Isa. 49. 17. John 3. 3.
who was a place for Dragons, a wilderness, and desolate, whose portion was
Mount Scir: and all you who are in the first birth, are as he was, are ye not
seeking after the fat of the earth, bearing the Sword, and a Wilderness,
devouring one another, cunning hunters, hunting up and down, whose portion is
in Mount Seir, all striving for it; but Jacob his portion was not such, he was
a plain man and perfect, dwelling in Genesis 25. 27.
Tent, God saw no iniquity in him. O Man and Woman, art thou here, art thou
plain? art thou perfect? do thou dwell in Te^ts? A standing place, does God
see no iniquity in thee? this was Jacob the second birth. 2 Cor. 5. 17.


Now all people, slatter not your selves, read your selves whether you be in the
first or second birth; there is a light within you, will tell you harkening unto
it, which will condemn you to God if you lie: therefore be just and fear the
Lord, for dreadful is he, and terrible to the Wicked; for the fear of the Lord
keeps the heart clean; and Cain was John 1. 5. John 1 9. Mal. 4. 1. Genesis 4. 5.
Gen 4. 8. Isa. 1. 11.
the first, and Eve was deceived in her first birth, and Cains sacrifice God
did not accept, he was in envy, a murderer: And all you who are in the first
birth, you are in envy, and God does not accept your Sacrifices; Read your
selves, and honestly consider, while you have envy in you, you are Cains,
while you are in the first birth you are Cains, and your sacrifice God does not
accept. Abel, the second, was not so, he was not a manslayer, he did not
envy, he was a righteous man, and his Sacrifice God did accept: so all who are
come into the second Genesis 4. 4. Mal. 4. 3, 4. 1 John 5. 6.
birth, to offer up a sacrifice according to the Scripture, in righteousness to
God, God does accept them as its his own. All holy praises be unto thee, O God
for ever, who art righteous, and delightst in righteousness; who are holy, and
delightst in holiness; who are pure, and can not behold iniquity; for the
workers of iniquity must depart into cursing. Thou may say thou are redeemed
by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, but they that are redeemed, are redeemed
from their vain Mat. 25. 41.
conversation; now can thou witness this, that thou are redeemed from thy
vain conversation, by the precious blood of Jesus Christ: All 1 Pkt. 1. 18, 19.
who read these things, read your selves, and see if you can witness these
things, read them not without you, but within; Things have bin long put afar
off, the Apostle told of an Esau amongst them then, the Prophets Romans 9 13.
Amos 1. 11. Mal. 1. 2. Genesis 3. 15. 1 John 2. 11. 1 John 1. 7. Mat. 2. 16. Gal.
5. 19, 20, 22.
told of an Esau then, and the Apostle told of a Cain amongst the Saints, and
the same nature that was is, the first birth, the second birth is, they that
come to witness it, know it; there is but two Seeds, two Ways, read your
selves, light and darkness: see whether you are in; he that walks in darkness
the fruit of darkness shows it; he that walks in the light, the fruits of the
light make it manifest, Let your light so shine before men, as that you may
glorify your heavenly Father, which is in heaven; He that walks in the flesh,
the fruits of the flesh makes it manifest, and shows it forth; and he that
walks in the Spirit, the fruits of the Spirit shows it forth: so deceive not
your selves, God will not be mocked with words, and do not take him for a
cleak, making a profession, and live in deceit; for woe unto him that is
covered, and not with the Spirit of the Lord: therefore stay your selves and
see, and Gal 6. 7. Isa. 3 1.
be not hasty, nor rash, nor fierce, but honestly stay your selves on the Lord,
and see your selves the Prodigal, when he saw himself what he had done, went
home unto his Fathers house; and thou have read of a Prodigal in the Scripture
that fed among Swine, but do thou see thy self to be the Prodigal feeding
among the Swine, feeding on Luke 15. 20, 16
Husks: Is this opened unto thee? do thou know what this Husk is, thou must
not read this Parable without knowing it, but within thee; when thou see thy
self, thou will witness this thing with me, when thou are come to thy Fathers
house, thou will rejoice with me, and see that thou have bin seeding among the
Swine, the Letter, the outside which profits not.

To all that love the Lord Jesus Christ, and turns away from Fables, light
Speeches, filthy talking, cursed Speaking, idle Jesting, and walks in
cleanness of life, who have Families, Children, and Servants, I charge you by
the Lord be paterns and examples to them, and all in Wisdom and gravity, in
holiness and righteousness, teaching Children humbleness, meekness and
tenderness, which leads to the fear of the Lord, and let no corrupt
communication come out of your mouth, left children and Servants learn it, and
there thou are a pattern of evil: Nor no filthy jesting, nor light Talk* lest
thou be an example of evil, for one teaches and learns of another; and while
the evil cunning deceit lodges, its hatehing and inventing evil, and so
others learns of it, and so who are wicked, learns wickedness, and grows up in
it. Therefore all you who are lovers of Jesus Christ. shun the occasion of
such, and have no fellowship with such, for they be unfruitful workers, but
rather reprove them: And you which be Servants fear the Lord, and be diligent,
serving the Lord, who have Dames, Masters and Mistresses, as they call them,
which live in rioting, drunkenness and pride, excess and lying, oaths,
foolish songs and jesting, shun the occasion of such, for they are evil
examples, and practice not such things, but wait upon the Lord; and whatsoever
ye do, do it as unto the Lord, but to you that have Families, that love the
Lord Jesus Christ, and all his Saints, real in power, love and mercy will be
multiplied among you, and you that be Servants, labor in love as unto the Lord,
and children walk in love and soberness, so God is, the head who is love,
amongst you all to be a family of Love; and all the creation is the Lords; and
all that you do, do it as unto the Lord, not with compulsion, rigor and
hardness, for that is the sloathful Servant that lives in the earth without the
fear of the Lord.

Thou that have applied all the Promises, Redemption and Salvation, thou shall
see to thy self is due nothing but curses, woe, misery, and condemnation, and
destruction for that nature, and self is out of the truth, and is not
reconciled to any thing; he that is reconciled to God, is reconciled to all
things, he is come out of death, which has past over all, he is not of this
world, he sees all the world passes away, he is escaped from the pollutions,
he has put off the body of sin, with the filth of the flesh, it is he by whom
all things were made in the beginning, and who were with him when all things
were made: Who are of the world, knows him not, but is a preserver, and it is
he that rejoices in the heavens, which the world cannot contain; it is he,
whose words are the words of life; he is a savior, but they are destroyers:
Thou that can contain this, have laid hold upon eternal life; thou that
hear his voice have life; he that hears the voice of the Son of God shall
live.

The death which has past over all men, is but one, and Christ Jesus took upon
him not the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. which the death have
past over; now thou that have not the same Spirit that raised up: Jesus Christ
from the death, is none of his, and all the promises is to the seed, which seed
is but one, which is Christ in you; who are of Faith are of Abraham, called out
of the heathenish nature and worships, and out of their native Country, as
Abraham was, and are of Abraham, and thousands do witness it, one Faith, one
seed.

The difference betwixt the Word of God and Letter.
IN the beginning was the Word, and none knows this Word, but who are come into
the beginning; now all people and Priests who can witness this? who are come
hither? into the beginning, what our hands have handled, what our eyes have
seen, what was from the beginning, the Word of life, this declare we unto you,
who knovvs this Word is pure, and are made clean through the Word, are washed
by it, are sanctified by it, are cut in pieces by it, and are divided asunder
by it: This Word is a Hammer beating down every thing, that the seed of God may
rise up, and all who know this Word may come to the beginning, it is as a fire
burning up all corruptions, and this is the Word that is nigh thee, in thy
heart; And this is the Word which all the Prophets spoke from; and this is the
Word that became Flesh, and dwelt amongst us says the Saints; and this is the
Word of life which the Apostles preached, the substance of all figures, types
and shadows; and this is the Word which makes all the Saints one, that
reconciles their hearts together to the Lord; this is the Word by which all
things stands and remains, and are upheld, by his Word and power; and this is
the Word which does endure for ever, all who are born again of the immortal
seed witness this Word with me: And now the Word is made manifest, the same as
ever was, which gathers together the hearts of all people, which divides
asunder the precious and vile, and of twain has made one; and this is the
Word that lets see, that flesh is grass; and this is the Word which was
before any Letter was written, and all who have not this Word, puts the Letter
for the Word, and are in Cains nature, envying and murdering, running on
swiftly; and Cains sacrifice God does not accept, and all the Preaching, and
all the Praying, and all your Reading, and all your Singing, and all your
Expounding, and all your Churches, and all your Worships, and all your
Teachers, and all your Baptismes, which are invented from the Letter, the
carnal mind invents them; all this is for the fire, your profession must be
gathered together in bundles, and cast into the fire, for they are the works of
the flesh, proceeding from the first nature, and not knowing the Word of God,
but only the Letter, ye crucify the just, and ye get up in the justs place,
quenching the light within you, the deceit transforms in his place, as Cain
did when he slew his brothen Abell, he gets up into his brothers place, and
said, Am I my Brothers keeper? so all you who crucify the just, ye are as Cain,
for it is the righteous that God does accept, the second birth; As you read
Cains sacrifice God did not accept, but Abel the second God did accept, for he
was righteous. And Cain slew Abel, because Abels works were righteous and Cains
were evil: now all you who are in the first birth are Cain, in envy,
manslayers, and your sacrifice God does not accept: see whether you be in envy
or no, now all that come to the Word, come before Cain was; All the Prophets of
the Lord spoke from this Word, and then the false Prophets got the true
Prophets form of words, but had not the Word: then the Lord sent his Prophets
which had his Word, to cry against the Prophets that spoke a Divination of
their own brain, and steal my Word from their Neighbor, and use their tongue,
and say, the Lord says, when the Lord has not spoken unto them: and as it was
then, so it is now, all the Teachers of the World speak a Divination of their
own brain, and not from the mouth of the Lord, the Lord is against them now, I
witness it by the same Word as ever was, and so they draw people unto the
Letter, and tells them it is the Word, and to hearken to them, who speak their
vain imaginations of it, so they bear rule by their means over the poor
people, which the Lord was ever against, for God is free and he will have his
people so; and his Gospel is a free Gospel, and his mercies are free, and his
Grace is free; his Gospel is free to every Creature, and his Grace is free to
every Creature; his Grace is not the letter, the Gospel is not the letter, his
glad tidings is not the letter, for many poor troubled Souls may lie in death
and condemnation, and have the Letter: And these Teachers of the Letter, and
there lay wounded, but no peace till Jesus Christ come, the glad tidings, the
free Gospel, then will you witness with me, That the Gospel is a free Gospel,
and not to be bought and sold for money, and the grace of God is free; Ho, every
one that thirsts, come to the water of life; he that has no money, come buy
wine and milk without money and without price; And hearken diligently that your
souls may live, And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David. So all people consider, and see if you can witness your Souls
are raised out of death, and you brought into this everlasting Covenant; for
who can witness their Souls brought out of death, are come into the beginning;
but thou that have nothing but the Letter, and are spending thy money and thy
labor, and not satisfied, spending thy money for that which is not bread, thou
art following the greedy dumb Dogs, which never have enough: Baals priests,
which have forsaken the right way, going after the error of Baalam, running
after the way of Cain, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, who ever slew
the just in the particular, despises the birthright, Cain like slaying the
righteous, and who says it in the particular, the same nature slayes it in the
general, where the righteous Seed guides and rules, and is the head; so the
generation of Cain is but one, which is the first birth: Now loving the light,
it will guide you to God from all men, that you need never look at man more.

That the Ministers of Christ, many of them, were Tradesmen, and no Masters.
TO all who are ignorant and blind people, who a long time have been deceived
by blind guides, who have told you that Learned men and Scholars must open the
Scriptures, which is a thing contrary to the Scripture, and crosses the
Scriptures to say so; for there was not many of them learned in the Letter, and
spoke forth the life of the Scriptures which made learned men to wonder. Paul
was a learned man, but while he was in that condition, he was an enemy to
Christ, and that hinderd, but he was a strict Pharisee and a Persecuter; and
when he knew Jesus Christ he denied all his learning, and then he spoke forth
the Scriptures. He was a Tentmaker; Amos a Herdsman, a keeper of carrell; and
the Apostles many of them Fishermen: These gave forth the Scriptures; these
were the Ministers of God, made by God not by man: David, Moses, and Jacob were
keepers of sheep, and such as these spoke forth the Scriptures. They were plain
men, keepers of cattle; Elisha was a ploughman; these were plain men, and those
were an abomination to the Egiptians; would it not be an abominable thing, and
abomination to you who are Egiptians, and in the Egiptian-wisdom to see a
shepherd or a Tent-maker come and preach, or a Fisherman to come and preach,
which was not learned; or a Herdsman come among you and preach in the Kings
Chapel, as Amos did, and they would not let him, and yet ye will make a trade
of his words; or to see a man come from the Plough, or a Thresher preach; such
kind of men as these gave forth the Scriptures, taught of God, not brought up
and taught and learned by the will of man, for by that learning no man knows
God, but that knowledge lifts up in pride, and makes them Masters, and lord it
over people and creatures; but who are made ministers by the will of God, and
not by the will of man, are Servants to all. Now here is a distinction between
the Ministers of the world, and the Ministers of God, the one is Masters over
all, the other is Servants to all; and they who are in their own will set up,
the Ministers made by the will of man, and denies them who are made Ministers
by the will of God; and they who are made Ministers by the will of man, say
that the Letter which is carnal is the light; and that the Letter is the Word,
the Steeple-house the Church, the 4. Books Matthew, Mark, Luke and John the
Gospel; Hebrew, Greek and Latin these are the tongues; Oxford and Cambridge two
well heads of Divinity; and the Letter and the Spirit insoparable; and the
Spirit is in the Letter, and that learned men must raise it out: Now they who
are made Ministers by the will of God, their Word is God, their light is
Christ, their Church is in God, their record is the Spirit, their original is
the Word, which was before all tongues, which opens tongues; their Gospel is
Jesus Christ the lamb of God, prepared before the world was, which was before
the World was, salvation is in God, the Spirit is within them, and they are the
sons of God that are guided by his Spirit: The Spirit is not in the Letter, but
it is within, as it was in them that spoke forth the Scriptures. So all people
weigh and try your Teachers, and let the Scriptures be your rule, which you do
profess in words, the life of the Scriptures is the Saints rule and guide
within them; the World professes the Letter to be their rule, yet walk
contrary to it; the Saints baptism is with one Spirit into one body, the
worlds baptism is in sprinkling a little Water, which they say they baptize
into the Church withal; there is not one example among the Saints for them to
practice such a thing, yet professing the Letter to be the rule, they act
contrary to it: Oh blind Hypocrites! the blind leads the blind, so both fall
into the ditch: The bread the Saints break is the body of Christ, and the Cup
they drink is the blood of Christ, and are all made to drink into one Spirit;
and the Cup the World take is a little Bread and Wine, and they call that a
Sacrament, which there is no Scripture for, and so show forth the spirit of
error; who has an ear to hear, may hear, and who can reach to these things,
may receive them; the Ministers made by the will of God, their fountain is God.

A Letter of James Nayler to several Friends about Wakefield.
JAmes a prisoner of Jesus Christ,
unto all that love the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ every where, grace
and peace be multiplied from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ;
My dear hearts, you whom the Lord has manifested so much love unto, as to
call you out of sin and death, and the world, all the delights and pleasures of
the world, which fades away, up to himself, where is joy unspeakable, pleasures
and riches that endure for evermore, Dear friends, watch and be sober, that you
may hear the voice of your beloved when he calls, and let not the precious
proffers of the love of God be tendered in vain; while you have an ear open to
the world, you cannot hear the voice of God, so that you have bin made to groan
under it: how long have you been deceived by it all your time, promising peace,
fullness, and satisfaction, but have bin brought to cry out of oppression and
deceit, and your cries are come before the Lord of Sabbaths, who is your rest,
and he is now appeared to deliver you, and set you free from bondage, that you
may serve him alone. And now take heed of consulting with your old master; has
the Lord been so merciful unto you, as that he has set your faces out of
Sodom and Egypt toward the promised land, O take heed of looking back, left
you be taken captive, and led back again, and so you come short of redemption,
and your faith fail you, and so you come short of the promise, for unbelief
cannot enter into the rest; but you, Dear friends, put on resolution, put on
strength, be valiant for your freedom, cast off every weight, follow your
Captain the Lord Jesus Christ, who for the joy set before him, endured the
cross, despised the shame, and so entered into rest and glory. Take heed of
halting between God and the World; what agreement can there be or what peace,
while you are married to the world? Your thoughts turn in thither, and you are
adulterated from God, who gives you all good things, as so many tokens of his
love; hereby is the broken language brought forth, and you cannot speak the
pure language of the land of rest. And while you give way to that in you, which
leads you to look back to what is behind you; you keep your selves in the
wilderness and darkness, and lose your way, and know not where you are,
grieving the holy Spirit of the Lord which has appeared unto you to guide you
to but (O friends!) mind your guide, and follow him; Arise, shine, your light
is come, and the glory of the Lord is come upon you, the night is far spent,
the day is at hand, even the day of Sions deliverance; Arise, come away all you
that love her, come off from the World and worldly things, come into the life,
lie no longer in death and dead things. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up
from the dead, that Christ may give thee light: Come forth, come forth of all
created things, witness your redemption to all the world, that you are redeemed
from the earth upto God, out of all kindreds, tongues, people, and nations, to
reign as Kings and Priests for ever, above the world, sin and death. triumphing
and treading upon all that would take you captive: This is the day of your
deliverance, own it with the loss of all fading pleasures, make it appear to
all the world, this is the day you waited for, even the day of your joy, but of
the worlds sorrow: A day of blackness and gloominess, a day of fear and trouble
to them that oppress you; a day wherein the Kingdom of Jesus Christ shall be
exalted, and all the kingdoms and powers of the earth shaken; a day wherein the
Lord will avenge the power of him that is too strong for him: Rejoice, rejoice
ye meek of the earth, shout for joy ye poor despised ones, whom your Brethren
have trodden upon, and have cast you out, and you have been made their
mocking-stocks for the truths sake, Sing and rejoice, the voice of a King is
amongst you, and he will marry you to himself in righteousness, purity, and
holiness, and will rejoice over you, as a bridegroom over the bride, and you
shall be for a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord; and a royal Diadem in
the hand of your God. O my dear hearts, my desire to God for you all is, that
you might come to see what unspeakable riches is laid up for you in Jesus
Christ, which is hid from all flesh, neither can you see it while you live in
the flesh; and while you continue your love to the world and worldly things,
you keep out the manifestation of the Fathers love, for your hearts cannot
receive both, Now show your selves wise men, choose that which is eternal, here
is light and life tendered you in Jesus Christ, freely out of the Fathers love,
freely receive life and love, and show forth life and love to God again, by
giving up to him all you have and all you are for Christ's sake, that so you may
come to receive all again with Christ, who is the fullness of the Fathers love,
and in him are all good things needful for this life, and that which is to
come, even the earnest of your inheritance which none can take from you, which
once being received, you shall never hunger more, having a well spring within
even the witness of eternal life and love; and as Christ appears, who is our
life and love, so shall life and love appear, spring, blossom, and bring forth
fruit toward God and man; that so being raised with him from death and dead
works, you may henceforth live unto God, and being brought into oneness with
him, and purity, and holiness, you may be one amongst your selves, of one heart
and one mind, speaking one and the self same thing, and having the same care
one for another, as for your selves. And take heed that there be not in any of
you a principle of self-love, which once having, will lead to separation and
division, casting a stumbling block in the way of the simple; and so they that
are weak being defiled and turned back into the world. And I beseech you
brethren that you mark them that once set their faces toward Sion, but not
being willing to deny the world, and take up the Cross, have consulted with
flesh and blood, and turned back into Egypt again, of such take heed, knowing
that the same spirit that has wrought in them deceitfully, will not cease to
work by them to deceive others to maintain its own Kingdom; but you standing
fast in the pure light of Christ, you shall see whither these return, and the
cause of their returnings, and that the end of such is worse then the
beginning; but there must be such, that they who are approved may be made
manifest. But you my Brethren, be ye so far from following such, that their
falling away may cause you to watch and search by what power you stand, and so
a pure fear may be preserved in you, by which you may be kept in the way that
leads to the Crown which is immortal: for it is he that overcomes that must
wear the Crown, wherefore faint not, nor think any thing hard, the Lord calls
unto you, nothing must suffer but that which is to die, that your souls may
live: O your light affliction works for you a far more exceeding weight of
glory, while you keep your eye to that which is invisible; wherefore give up
your selves to his will in all things, Stand in the will of God in your present
condition, you are my joy in the Lord; let ny benelste refreshed to hear of
your stedfas^ness and growth in the Truth: Take heed of propounding ends to
your selves in any thing, for that leads out of the way of God, and gives way
to your own wisdom; and so you seek to preserve that alive which is appointed
for death, and so you maintain war against God, and knows not; and in this
condition you can have no peace, while the enemies are in arms against your
peace. O, dear Friends, you are in my heart, my prayer to God for you is, that
you may be kept blameless to the ceming of our Lord Jesus Christ, blessed for
ever. My fellow prisoner, and dear companion in the Lord salutes you all: Cease
not to pray for us, that we may be kept to his praise, who has counted us
worthy to suffer for his Name, we are well, and in great peace, kept in our
Fathers love; above all, we are often brought to stand and wonder how we are
kept in the midst of the fire, and yet not consumed; and the more that the
enemy rages, the more are we kept in peace within: Here are strange Devices
used to ensnare us, to get ought against us (true or false) but all is Ordered
by a power the World knows not, God is our strength; Rejoice with us all, dear
Friends, and praise his Name for evermore, for he is worthy, for his Mercy
endures for ever.

JAMES NAYLER. A Prisoner at Appleby in Westmorland for the Truths sake.

FINIS.

