A Brief REVIEW Of the most material Parliamentary Proceedings OF THIS Present
Parliament, and their Armies, in their Civil and Martial Affairs. Which
Parliament began the third of November, 1640. And the remarkable Transactions
are continued until the ACT OF OBLIVION, February 24. 1652.

Published as a Breviary, leading all along successively, as they fell out in
their several years: So that if any man will be informed of any remarkable
passage, he may turn to the year, and so see in some measure, in what Month
thereof it was accomplished.

And for Information of such as are altogether ignorant of the rise and
progress of these times, which things are brought to pass, that former Ages
have not heard of, and after Ages will admire.

A Work worthy to be kept in Record, and communicated to Posterity.

Hosea 14. 9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and
he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall
walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein. LONDON: Printed by M.
S. for Tho: Jenner, at the South-entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1652.

1 IN the first year of King Charles his Reign, a Parliament being called at
Oxford, two subsidies were granted, no grievances removed, but the said
Parliament soon dissolved.

2 The sad effects which the dissolution of this Parliament produced, were the
loss of Rochell, by the unhappy help of Englands Ships.

3 The diversion of a most facile and hopeful war from the West Indies, to a
most expensive and succelesse attempt on Cales.

4 The attempt on the Isle of Ree, and thereby a precipitate breach of peace
with France, to our great loss.

5 A peace concluded with Spain, without consent of Parliament, contrary to a
promise formerly made to the Kingdom by King James, a little before his death;
whereby the cause of the Palatinate was altogether most shamefully deserted by
us.

6 The Kingdom suddenly billetted with Soldiers, and a concomitant project set
on foot, for Germane Horses, to force men by fear, to fall before arbitrary and
tyrannical taxations continually to be laid upon them.

2 Parliament.
7 The dissolution of a second Parliament at Westminster, in the second year
after a declarative grant of no less then five Subsidies, and the sad issues
that flowed to the Kingdom thereupon.

8 As first, the violent exacting from the people that mighty sum of the 5
Subsidies, or a sum equal to it by a Commission for a Royal Loan.

9 Many worthy Gentlemen imprisoned and vexed, that refused to pay it.

10 Great sums extorted by Privy Seals and Excises, and the most hopeful
Petition of Right blasted.

3 Parliament.
11 A third Parliament called, and quickly broken in the fourteenth year of the
King, the best Members clapped up close prisoners, denied all ordinary and
extraordinary comforts of life; and so that Paliament was dissolved.

12 Opprobrious Declarations published to asperse the proceedings of the last
Parliament, yea Proclamations set out to those effects, thereby extremely to
dis-hearten the Subjects, yea, and plainly forbidding them once to name a
Parliament, or to desire them any more.

13 Whence immediately gushed out the violent inundations of mighty sums of
money, got by that strange project of Knighthood, yet under a color of Law.

14 The most burdensome Book of Rates, the unheard of Taxation of Ship Money;
the enlargement of Forests contrary to Magna Charta; the injurious taxation of
Coat and Conduct money; the forcible taking away of the Trained-Bands Arms;
Engrossing Gunpowder into their hands in the Tower of London.

15 The destruction of the Forest of Dean, which was sold to Papists, whence
we had all our Timber for Shipping.

16 Monopolies of Soap, Salt, Wine, Leather, and Sea-Coal; yea, almost of all
things in the Kingdom of most necessary and common use.

17 Restraint in Trades and Habitations; for refusal of which foresaid heavy
pressures, many were vexed with long and languishing suits; some fined and
confined to prisons, to the loss of health in many, of life in some; some
having their houses broken open, their goods seized on, their studies or
closets searched for writings, books, and papers, to undo them; some
interrupted also in their Sea-Voyages, and their Ships taken from them.

18 The crushing cruelties of the Star Chamber Court, and Council Table, where
the Recorder of Salisbury was greatly fined for demolishing the Picture of the
first person in the Trinity, in their great Cathedral.

19 Thus far for the miseries of the Commonwealth; Popish Ceremonies, Romish
Innovations, and such like other outrages of the Arch Prelate of Canterbury,
and his Prelaticall Agents and Instruments, over the whole Kingdom, in matters
of Religion, divine worship, and spiritual cases of conscience.

20 Additions in the Oath administered to the King, at his first Inauguration to
the Crown, by the Archbishop.

21 Fines, imprisonments, stigmatizings, mutilations, whippings, pillories,
gagget, confinements, and banishments; yea, and that into perpetual close
imprisonments, in the most desolate, remote, and (as they hoped and intended)
remotest parts of the Kingdom. Mr* Burton, Mr Bastwick, Mr Prin.

22 The ruinating of the Feoffees for buying in of Impropriations, and the
advancing to Ecclesiastical Livings Arminians, silencing with deprivations,
degradations, and excommunications, almost all the most pious Pastors over the
Land, whom they could catch in their snares, and all this under a pretense of
peace, unity, and conformity.

23 Printing Presses set open for the Printing and publishing of all Popish and
Arminian Tenets, but shut up and restrained from Printing sound Doctrines.

24 Nay, not only thus lamentably molested in England, but attempted the like
in Scotland, endeavoring to impose upon them New Liturgy, and a Book of
Canons.

25 They refusing of them, were called and counted Rebels and Traitors; yea,
so proclaimed in all Churches in England, and an Army was also raised to
oppress and suppress them.

26 A mighty and tumultuous rising of Apprentices and young men, The
Arch-Prelate of St Andrews in Scotland reading the new Service-booke in his
pontificaliby assaulted by men and Women, with Cricketts stools Sticks and
Stones.

The rising of Prentises and Seamen on Southwark-side to assault the
Archbishops of Canterburys House at Lambeth.

in Southwarke and Lambeth side, with clubs and other weapons, especially at
the Archbishops house; which put him in such a fright, as made him fly to
Croyden, to convey himself to some more private and remote place: and although
Pharoah's Magicians were so honest, that at the sight of the dust of the earth
turned into lice, they cried out, it was the finger of God; but he grew more
and more outrageous, and caused one to be hanged and quartered, and his head
set on London Bridge; who said at his Execution, he came there by accident, and
he must dye.

27 Scotland raising an Army in their own just defense, and by force of Arms,
enforcing their own peace.

28 A first pacification being then made by the King, and some of his Nobility,
and ratified under hand and Seal, 'twixt them and the Scots, yet was it shortly
after quite broken off by the Arch-Prelat of Canterbury, and the E. of
Strafford, and burnt by the Hangman at the Exchange.

4 Parliament.
29 A fourth Parliament was thereupon shortly after called again, by those
complotters means, but to a very ill intent, and another Parliament summoned
also at the same time by the Earl of Strafford in Ireland, both of them only to
levy and procure moneys to raise another Army, and wage a new War against the
Scots.

30 The Ships and Goods of Scotland, were in all parts and ports of this Land,
and of Ireland also, surprised and seized on for the King; their Commissioners
denied audience to make their just defense to the King, and the whole Kingdom
of Scotland and England too, hereupon much distracted and distempered with
leavying of moneys, and imprisoning all amongst us that refused the same.

31 This Parliament also refusing to comply with the King, Canterbury and
Strafford, in this Episcopal War against the Scots, was soon dissolved and
broken up by them, and thereupon they returned to their former ways of wast
and confusion, and the very next day after the dissolution thereof, some
eminent members of both Houses had their Chambers, and Studies, yea, their
Cabinets, and very pockets of their wearing clothes (betimes in the morning,
before they were out of their beds) searched for Letters and Writings, and some
of them imprisoned, and a false and most scandalous Declaration was published
against the House of Commons in the Kings Name.

32 A forced Loan of money was attempted in the City of London, to be made a
President (if it prevailed there) for the whole Kingdom, but some Aldermen
refusing, were sorely threatened and imprisoned.

33 In which interim, the Clergies convocation continuing (notwithstanding the
dissolution of the Parliament) new conscience-opprissing-Canons were forged,
and a strange Oath with a etc. in it was framed for the establishing of the
Bishops Hierarchy, with severe punishments on the refusers to take it. The Oath,

That I A. B. do swear that I do approve the Doctrine and Discipline or
Government established in the Church of England, as containing all things
necessary to Salvation. And that I will not endeavor by my self or any other,
directly or indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine, contrary to that which
is so established: Nor will I ever give my consent to alter the Government of
this Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons, etc. as it
stands now established, and as by right it ought to stand. Nor yet ever to
subject it to the usurpations and superstitions of the Sea of Rome. And all
these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to
the plain and common sense, and understanding of the same words, without any
equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. And this I
do heartily, willingly, and truly upon the faith of a Christian. So help me
God in Jesus Christ.

34 In this Convocation sore Taxations were also imposed upon the whole
Clergy, even no less than six Subsidies, besides a bountiful contribution to
forward that intended War against Scotland.

35 For the advancing of which said sums for this War, the Popish were most
free and forward; yea, and a solemn prayer was composed and imposed by the
Bishops on their Ministers every where, to be used and read in all Churches
against the Scots, as rebels and traitors.

36 The Papists also in a high measure enjoyed even almost a total toleration,
and a Popes Nuncio suffered amongst us to act and govern all Romish affairs,
yea a kind of private Popish Parliament kept in the Kingdom, and Popish
Jurisdictions erected among them.

37 Commissioners were also (secretly) issued out for some great and eminent
Papists, for martial Commands, for levying of Soldiers, and strengthening
their party with Arms and Ammunition of all sorts, and in great plenty.

38 His Majesty's treasure was by these means so extremely exhausted, and his
revenues so anticipated, that he was forced to compel (as it were) his own
servants, Judges, and Officers of all sorts, to lend him great sums of money,
and prisons filled with refusers of these and the other illegal payments; yea,
many High-Sheriffs summoned in the Star Chamber, and to the Councel-board, and
some of them imprisoned for not being quick enough in levying of Ship Money,
and such like intolerable taxations.

39 In sum, the whole Land was now brought into a lamentble and languishing
condition of being most miserably bought and sold to any that could give and
contribute most of might and malice against us, and no hope of humane help, but
dolor, desperation, and destruction, to be the portion of all.

40 In which interim, the Scots being entered our Kingdom for their own
defense, the King had advanced his Royal-Standard at York, where the cream of
the Kingdom, Nobles, and Gentry being assembled, and a Treaty betwixt the prime
of both Armies had at Rippon, for a fair and peaceable accommodation, the King
was, at last, enforced to take his Nobles council, and in the first place, a
cessation of Arms agreed on, and then this 5th present Parliament (the
Parliament of Parliaments) was necessitously resolved on to begin, November 3.
1640.

5 Parliament, Anno 1640. November. 3.
41 But behold a desperate plot and design was herein also immediately set on
foot to spoil or poison it in the very Embrio and constitution of it, in the
first choice of the members thereof, by Letters from the King, Queen, Malignant
and Popish Earls, Lords, Knights, and Gentry, posts into all parts of the
Kingdom, to make a strong party for them, but by admirable divine providence,
this their plot was counterplotted and frustrated, and the Parliament most
hopefully congregated and settled.

42 Shortly after, a very formidable Spanish-Fleet, or Armado, appeared on our
English narrow Seas, in sight of Dover, and was coming in (as was on very
strong grounds more then probably conjectured) as a third party, to help to
destroy us; the Spaniards hoping, that by this time, we and the Scots were
together by the ears, but they were by Gods mercy, beaten off from us by our
Neighbors of Holland. And we fighting against them, fought against our friends.

43 The Soldiers in their passage to York turn reformers, pull down Popish
Pictures, break down rails, turn altars into tables, and those Popish
Commanders, that were to command them, they forced to eat flesh on Fridays,
thrusting it down their throats, and some they slew.

44 In the time of ours, and the Scots Armies residing in the North, which was
in June, 1641. the Malignant Lords and Prelates, fearing the effects of this
present Parliament, complotted together to dissaffect that our English Army
against the Parliament, and endeavored to bring it out of the North,
Southward, and so to London, to compel the Parliament to such limits and rules
as they thought fit. Whereupon the Parliament entered upon this Protestation.

At the beginning of the Parliament (July 1641) there was a diligent
inquisition after oppressions and oppressors, and first upon the Petition of
Mistress Bastwick and M^^^^s Burton, two widowed wives, and a Petition exhibited
in the behalf of Mr Pryn, Dr Laighton, Mr Smart, Mr Walker, Mr Foxley, Mr
Lilburn, and many others, set at liberty, some being banished, and all close
Prisoners, others fast fettered in irons, and their wives debarred from coming
to them.

45 The Earl of Strafford then Prisoner in the Tower, attempted an escape,
promising to Sir William Belfore then Lieutenant of the Tower, twenty thousand
pounds, and the marriage of his Daughter to Sir Williams Son, if he would but
consent, but Sir William hated such Bribes.

46 Then they attempted by false scandals on the Parliament, to entice the Army
of the Scots (then still in the North) to a Neutrality, whiles our English Army
acted.

Die Veneris 30 July, 1641.
WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in Parliament,
finding to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests,
Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more boldly
and frequently put in practice than formerly, to the undermining and danger of
the ruin of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, in his Majesty's Dominions
established: And finding also that they have been and having just cause to
suspect that there are still even during this sitting in Parliament, endeavors
to subv^rt the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce the
exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most pernicious and
wicked counsels, practices, plots, and conspiracies: And that the long
intermission and unhappy breach of Parliaments, has occasioned many illegal
Taxations, whereupon the subject has been prosecuted and grieved: And that
diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church,
multitudes driven out of his Majesty's Dominions, jealousies raised and
fomented betwixt the King and his people, a Popish Army l^vyed in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the bowels of his Kingdom, to the hazard of his
Majesty's Royal person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown and
Treasure of his Kingdom: And lastly, finding great cause of jealousy that
endeavors have been, and are used to bring the English Army into a mis
understanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army with force to
bring to pass those wicked Councels, Have therefore thought good to join our
selves in a Declaration of our united affections and resolutions, and to make
this ensuing Protestation.

The Protestation.
I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest to
maintain and defend, is far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and state,
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against Popery and Popish Innovations, within this Realm, contrary
to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, his Majesty's
Royal Person, Honor, and Estate, as also the power and privileges of
Parliament, the lawful rights and liberties of the Subject, and every person
that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do, in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor, to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by force, practice, councels, plots,
conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and
honorable ways endeavor to preserve the union and peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

The Earl of Straffords Speech on the Scaffold, May 12. 1641.
MY Lord Primate of Ireland (and my Lords, and the rest of these Gentlemen) it
is a very great comfort to me, to have your Lordship by me this day, in regard
I have been known to you a long time, I should be glad to obtain so much
silence, as to be heard a few words, but doubt I shall not; my Lord, I come
hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, to pay the last debt I
owe to sin, which is death, and by the blessing of that God to rise again
through the mercies of Christ Jesus to eternal glory; I wish I had been
private, that I might have been heard; My Lord, if I might be so much beholding
to you, that I might use a few words, I should take it for a very great
courtesy; My Lord, I come hither to submit to that judgment which has past
against me, I do it with a very quiet and contented mind, I do freely forgive
all the world, a forgiveness that is not spoken from the teeth outward (as they
say) but from my heart; I speak it in the presence of Almighty God, before whom
I stand, that these is not so much as a displeasing thought in me, arising to
any creature; I thank God I may say truly, and my conscience bears me witness,
that in all my services since I have had the honor to serve his Majesty, in
any employment, I never had any thing in my heart, but the joint and
individual prosperity of King and people; if it has been my hap to be
misconstrued, it is the common portion of us all while we are in this life, the
righteous judgment is hereafter, here we are subject to error, and apt to be
mis-judged one of another, there is one thing I desire to clear my self of, and
I am very confident, I speak it with so much clearness, that I hope I shall
have your Christian charity in the belief of it; I did always think that the
Parliaments of England, were the happiest constitutions that any Kingdom or
any Nation lived under, and under God the means of making King and people
happy, so far have I been from being against Parliaments; for my death, I here
acquit all the world, and pray God heartily to forgive them; and in particular,
my Lord Primate, I am very glad that his Majesty is pleased to conceive me not
mericing so severe and heavy a punishment as the utmost execution of this
sentence; I am very glad, and infinitely rejoice in this mercy of his, and
beseech God to turn it to him, and that he may find mercy when he has most
need of it; I wish the Kingdom all the prosperity and happiness in the world; I
did it living, and now dying it is my wish. I do now profess it from my heart,
and do most humbly recommend it to every man here, and wish every man to lay
his hand upon his heart, and consider seriously whether the beginning of the
happiness of a people should be writ in letters of blood; I fear you are in a
wrong way, and I desire Almighty God, that not one drop of my blood may rise up
in judgment against you. (My Lord) I profess my self a true and obedidient Son
to the Church of England, to the Church wherein I was born, and wherein I was
bred; prosperity and happiness be ever to it: and whereas it has been said,
that I have inclined to Popery, if it be an objection worth answering, let me
say truly, that from the time since I was twenty one years of age, till this
hour, now going upon forty nine, I never had thought in my heart, to doubt of
the truth of my Religion in England; and never any had the boldness to suggest
to me contrary to the best of my remembrance; and so being reconciled to the
mercies of Christ Jesus my Savior, into whose bosom I hope shortly to be
gathered to that eternal happiness that shall never have end, I desire
heartily the forgiveness of every man, both for any rash or unadvised word, or
deed, and desire your prays: And so my Lord farewell, farewell all the things of
this world: Lord strengthen my faith, give me confidence and assurance in the
merits of Jesus Christ. I desire you, that you would be silent and join in
prayers with me, and I trust in God that we shall all meet, and live eternally
in heaven, there to receive the accomplishment of all happiness, where every
tear shall be wiped from our eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts: And
so God bless this Kingdom, and Jesus have mercy upon my Soul. Amen.

The Earl of Strafford for treasonable practices beheaded on the Tower Hill

Anno 1641. October. 23.



47 About this time that inhumane bloody Rebellion, and monstrous massacring of
almost 200000 innocent English Protestants, men, women, and children, brake out
in Ireland, namely, about October 23. 1641. having had their principal
encouragements from the Court of England, and of purpose to have made England
the chief seat of the war.

48 The Design now went on chiefly against the City of London, for which
purpose, the Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir William Belford was displaced, and
Cottington made Constable of the Tower; but he was soon displaced, and C.
Lunsford was made Lieutenant of the Tower; but he also was displaced, and Sir
John Byron was made Lieutenant of the Tower in Lunsfords stead; but he also
with much ado removed, and Sir John Conyers was put in his place.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers now Assembled in
Parliament. The Humble Petition and Protestation of all the Bishops and Prelates
now called by his M^j^st^^^ Writs to attend the Parliament, and present about
London and Westminster for that Service.
THat whereas the Petitioners are called up by several and respective Writs
and under great penalties to attend the Parliament, and have a clear and
indubitable right to vote in Bills, and other matters whatsoever debatable in
Parliament, by the ancient Customs* Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, and
ought to be protected by your Majesty quietly to attem^ and prosecute that
great Service. They humbly Remonstrate and Protest before God, your Majesty,
and the Noble Lords and Peers now assembled in Parliament, that as they have an
indu^^^ate right ^o Sit and Vote in the House of Lords; so are they (if they
may be protected from force and violence) most ready and wil^i^g to perform
their duties accordingly And that they do abominate all actions or opinions
tending to Popery, and the maintenance thereof; as also all propension and
inclination to any Malignant party, or any other side or party whatsoever, to
the which their own reasons and conscience shall not move them to adhere. But,
whereas they have been at several times violently menaced, affronted and
assaulted by multitudes of people, in their coming to perform their services in
that Honorable House, and lately chased away, and put in danger of their
lives, and can find no redress or protection, upon sundry complaints made to
both Houses in these particulars. They likewise humbly Protest before your
Majesty, and the Noble House of Peers, that saving unto themselves all their
Rights and Interests of Sitting and Voting in that House at other times, they
dare not Sit or Vote in the House of Peers, until your Majesty shall further
secure them from all affronts, indignities, and dangers in the premises.
Lastly, whereas their fears are not built upon fantasies and conceits, but upon
such grounds and objects as may well terrific men of good resolutions, and much
constancy. They do in all duty and humility protest before your Majesty, and
the Peers of that most honorable House of Parliament, against all Laws,
Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and Determinations, as in themselves null, and of
none effect, which in their absence since the 27th of this instant month of
December, 1641. have already passed; as likewise against all such as shall
hereafter pass in that most Honorable House, during the time of this their
forced and violent absence from the said most Honorable House; not denying but
if their absenting of themselves were wilful and voluntary, that most
Honorable House might proceed in all their premises* their absence, or this
Protestation notwithstanding. And humbly beseeching your most Excellent
Majesty, to command the Clerk of the House of Peers to enter this their
Petition and Protestation among their Records.

They will ever pray to God to bless, etc. Jo. Ebor. Th Dures. Rob. Co. Lich Jo
Norw Jo. Asa. Gul Ba. and Wells. Geo. Heref. Rob. Ox. Ma. Ely. Godf. Glouc. Io.
Peterb. Morr. Landaff.




The High Commission-Court and Starr-Chamber voted down, and pluralities and
non residencies damned by Parliament.



The Bishops had a plot about this time, to subvert the Parliament, by
endeavoring to get the King to protest against their proceedings in it; but 12
of them were impeached of high treason, and 10 imprisoned in the Tower, and
afterward all disabled from ever sitting in the Parliament.

Bishops Voted down root and branch, Nullo contradicente: The Citizens of
London the same night made bonefires, and had ringing of Bells. The Parliament
published an Ordinance, injoyning all Popish Recusants inhabiting in and about
the City, all disaffected persons, and such as being able men, would not lend
any money for the defense of the Commonwealth, should forthwith confine
themselves to their own houses, and not to go f^rth without special license.

An Ordinance to apprehend disaffected persons in the City, whereof were four
Aldermen put in safe custody, in Crosby house, and some in Gressam College.

A Letter sent to Mr Pym.
Mr Pym, Do not think that a guard of men can protect you, if you persist in
your traiterous courses and wicked designs: I have sent a paper-messenger to
you, and if this does not touch your heart, a Dagger shall, so soon as I am
recovered of my Plague Sore. In the mean time you may be forborne, because no
better man may be endangered for you:

Repent Traitor.



50 After this the King himself violently rushed into the House of Commons
accused five of their most eminent members of Treason, demanded their persons
to be delivered up unto him, intending to destroy all that resisted him
therein, but crossed by the happy absence of the Gentlemen. This plot was
attempted Jan. 4. 1641.

Col. Lunsford assaulted the Londoners at Westminster Hall, with a great rout
of ruffanly Cavaliers.

The Queen when she went over beyond Seas, one of her Ships wherein she had
great Treasure, sprung a leak, and much was lost and spoiled; and when she
returned for England, she had a mighty storm at Sea, which brake the Mast of
Van Trom's ship, and after eight days boisterous turmoyl, she was driven back
again. There was broke and lost 3 Ships of Ammunition, and they that were
driven back were almost starved.

Anno 1642.
51 Binion a Silk-man of London, and the Kentish Malignants, wherein Sir Edw.
Deering had a principal hand, framed Petitions against the proceedings of
Parliament; but both were rejected, and they fined and imprisoned.

52 The King forsakes the Parliament, and getting the Prince to him, leaves
London, and posts into the North, and there attempts to get Hull into his hands.

53 Sir Francis Windebancke, Sir John Finch, the Lord Digby, Jermyn, etc. fly
for their lives beyond Sea.

54 The King interdicts the Militia, but the Messenger was hanged at the
Exchange.

55 The Lords and Gentry of Ireland and Scotland, petition the King to return
to his Parliament; yea and the Gentry and Commons of Yorkshire do the like,
but are all rejected.

56 The King set on foot a Commission of Array.

57 Three letters were intercepted, discovering a plot against the Parl. by
Wilmot, Digby, Jermyn, Cro^ts, and others, which came to nothing; but we by
taking some of their Ships were advantaged.

58 Sir Rich. Gurney Lord Mayor and an Array man, was clapped up in the Tower.

59 Proclamations and Declarations against the Parliament, read in all Churches
and Chapels within the Kings power.

60 Sir John Pennington displaced, and the Earl of Warwick put in his place.

61 Hull besieged by the Marquess of Newcastle, and in that interim, Beckwith a
Papist, plotted to betray it by firing it in 4 several places.

The Citizens of London proffer their service to attend and guard the Parl. by
land to Westminster, to secure them from danger.

By Water also the stout Ship-masters and Mariners made ready a great number
of long-boats furnished with Ordnance, Muskets, and other Sea-warlike
instruments, their Vessels gallantly adorned with Flags and Streamers, together
with martial music, Drums and Trumpets; when they came to White Hall and
understood that the Parliament were safely arrived, the Trained Bands by Land,
and the Seamen by Water, let fly their thundering shot both small and great,
their Trumpets sounding, and their drums beating in a tryumphing and
congratulatory manner, was a singular testimony of their cordial affections.

The same day Buckingham-shire men, both Gentlemen, Ministers, and others of
that Country on hors-back, with their protestations in their hats, for
Reformation of evils in Church and State, and to assure their best services and
assistance to the Parliament, on all just occasions; and out of Essex,
Hartford, Bark-shire, Surrey, and other Counties of the Kingdom, came one
after another.

62 The Earl of Essex was ordained Lord General over all the Parl. Forces,
which he faithfully managed, as Edgehill, Newbury, and other places can
abundantly witness.

63 At Edgehill 16 pieces of Canon shot against 80 of the Earl of Essex Life
guard, and not one man hurt: and those 80 brake in upon 1600 of the Kings; four
of the Parl. Regiments ran away, and sixteen Troops of Horse, so we were 6000
and they 18000, yet we took their Standard, and cleft Sir Edw. Varney
Standard Bearer in the head, and slew the Lord Lindsey General of the field.

63 A plot to have blown up all the Lord Generals Magacine of powder, and
another at Beverley in Yorkshire, to have slain Sir John Hotham, both intended
by one David Alexander, and hired thereunto, but both timely prevented.

64 Commissioners granted to Popish Recusants to leavy men and arms against the
Parliament.

65 The King received the most bloody Irish Rebels Petition, and permitted
their persons with great favor and allowance about him, calling and counting
them good Catholic Subjects; but utterly rejecting the Petition (exhibited by
the Lord General) desiring peace and reconciliation with him.

66 A Treaty of peace was really intended by the Parliament, but merely
pretended by the King for a while, in which interim, that most bloody bickering
at Brainford, was committed by the Kings party, the City of London mightily
preserved.

67 New High-Sheriffs, for the better collecting of the 400000 li. Subsidies,
intended to have been confirmed to the King in a former Parliament, crossed; and
an O^dinance set on foot for the successful association of Counties for
mutual defense one of another.

68 A design of the Royalists at Oxford, and elsewhere, to proceed against the
prisoners as Traitors, and so put them to death, by which Dr Bastwicke, Captain
Lilburn, were to have been tried for their lives, but preserved by an Ordinance
for execution of a Lex talionis, and so of executing the royal prisoners among
us.

Anno 1643.
69 A notable plot against the City of London, immediately upon the Cities
preferring a Petition to the King, by the hands of two Aldermen, and four
Commoners of the said City, in reply to which Petition, the King sending as his
messenger, one Captain Hern to the City, and the whole body of the City
assembling at a Common-Hal, this Hern desires Fair play above board of them,
but the business being found to be a notable design of the Malignant Citizens
against the Parl. and the (then) Lord Mayor of London, and the Government of
their City, the major part cry out in the Hearing of Hern, they would live and
dye with the Parl. and so sent Hern away with a flea in his ear.

70 A letter sent to all the Freemen, Journeymen, and Apprentices of City, to
assemble at their several Hals; and there the Masters and Wardens of all
Companies to read the Kings Letter to them, and to persuade them to yield to
all the Kings commands against the City. This Letter was voted scandalous.

71 A plot to betray Bristol, but discovered, two principal conspirators were
by Martial Law condemned and hanged.

The 2 of May, 1643.ye Cross in Cheapeside was pulled down* a Troop of Horse
and 2 Companies of foot waited to guard it and at ye fall of ye tope Cross
dromes beat trupets blew and multitudes of Capes wayre thrown in ye Air and a
great Shoute of People with joy, ye 2 of May the Almanake says was ye
invention of the Cross, and 6 day at night was the Leaden Popes burnt* in the
place where it stood with ringinge of Bells, and a great Acclamation and no
hurt done in all these actions.



72 Mr Pryn sent to search Canterburies Chamber and Study: found the original
Scotch Service Book with his own handwriting, the cause of all the Scots wars.

73 London to have been betrayed under a pretense of peace, by Mr Waller, a
Member of Parl. Mr Tomkins, Mr Challenor, and others; but Waller fined 10000.
l. and perpetual banishment; Tomkins and Challenor hanged, the one at the
Exchange, and the other in Holborn.

74 Sir John Hotham attempted the betraying of Hull unto the Queen.

An Order sent down to the Churchwardens, to demolish Altars, to remove the
Communion Table from the East end, and to take away all Tapers, Candlesticks,
and Basins; and to demolish all Crucifixes, Crosses, and all Pictures and
Images of the Trinity and Virgin Mary, both within and without all Churches and
Chapels.

75 A plot for betraying of Lincoln by the two Purfries, but preserved.

76 Gloucester admirably freed by the City Regiments.

77 A rebellion by the Kentish malignants about Tunbridge.

78 A Ship bound from Denmark to the King, of about 300 Tun, richly laden with
Arms and Ammunition; another Ship bound from Newcastle to Holland, laden with
Sea-coale, but in the midst thereof was found between 3 or 4000l. hid in the
coals, sent to buy arms for the King; a third great Ship called the Fellowship,
of at least 400 Tun, carrying 24 pieces of Ordnance, taken by the Parliament.

79 Scotland with an Army of at least 20000 Horse and Foot, invited thereunto
by the Parl. in the bitter depth of winter, when they marched up to the middle
in snow, and were forced to bring their Artillery over the Ice of the frozen
River of Tyne; and the Citizens of London lent the Parl. a 100000. l. for the
Scots first pay, to encourage their advance to help us against the Kings Forces.

May 23. 1643. Voted the Queen Pawning the Jewels of the Crown in Holland, and
therewith buying Arms to assist the War against the Parl. and her own actual
performances with her Popish Army in the North, was high Treason, and
transmitted to the Lords. Images, Crucifixes, Papistical Books in Somerset and
Jameses were burnt, and five Capuchin Friars sent away.

May 1643. An Ordinance for the making of Forts, Trenches, and Bulwarks about
the City. July 1. 43. The Assembly of Divines met, Dr Twiss Prolocutor, 120 the
total.

The Bishop of Canterburies first prayer on the Scaffold, Jan. 10. 1644.
O Eternal God, and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches
and fullness of all thy mercies, look upon me, but not till thou have nailed my
sins to the Cross of Christ: look upon me, but not till thou have bathed me in
the blood of Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ, that
so the punishment that is due to my sins may pass away, and go over me, and
since thou art pleased to try me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee, give
me (...) in this great instant, full patience, proportionable comfort, a heart
ready to dye for thine honor, and the Kings happiness, and this Churches
preservation; and my zeal to these, far from arrogance be it spoken, is all
the sin, humane frailty excepted, and all incidents thereunto, which is yet
known of me in this particular, for which I now come to suffer. I say in this
particular of Treason, but otherwise my sins are many and great, Lord pardon
them all, and those especially whatsoeever they be, which have drawn this
present judgment upon me, and when thou have given me strength to bear it,
then do with me as seems best in thine own eyes, and carry me through death,
that I may look upon it in what visage soever it shall appear to me; and that
there may be a stop of this issue of blood in this more then miserable
Kingdom; I shall desire that I may pray for the people too, as well as for my
self: O Lord, I beseech thee give grace of repentance to all people that Sr
Alexander Carew, Sr. John Hotham, Captin Hotham and the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, be headed on Iowerhill for Ireason against ye Parliament 1645.

have a thirst for blood, but if they will not repent, then scatter their
devices so, and such as are or shall be contrary to the glory of thy great
name, the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the King, and
his posterity after him, in their just rights and privileges, the honor and
conservation of Parl. in their ancient and just power, the preservation of this
poor Church in her turth, peace, and patrimony, and the settlement of this
distracted and distressed people, under the ancient laws, and in their native
liberties; and when thou have done all this in mercy for them, O Lord fill
their hearts with thank fullness, and with religious dutiful obedience to thee
and thy Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord Jesus, and I beseech thee
receive my soul to mercy. Our Father, etc.

The Bishop of Canterburies last Prayer on the Scaffold.
Lord I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass through the shadow of
death before I can come to see thee, but it is but umbra mortis, a mere shadow
of death, a little darkness upon nature, but thou by thy merits and passion
have broke through the jaws of death; so, Lord receive my soul and have mercy
on me, and bless this Kingdom with peace and plenty, and with brotherly love
and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood amongst
them, for Jesus Christ his sake, if it be thy will. And when he said Lord
receive my soul, which was his sign, the Executioner did his Office.

80 A design to starve the City, by breaking into Surrey, Sussex, Kent, but
disappointed by S. W. Waller, with the help of the City Regiments.

81 The King granted a cessation of arms with the bloody Rebels of Ireland, but
it was observed he never prospered after that.

82 A Solemn League and Covenant taken by the Lords and Commons in Parl. and by
the City of London, and all parts of the Kingdom, in the Parl. power.

83 Nottingham Town and Castle to have been betrayed, but prevented by Col.
Hutchinson.

A Ship from Denmark of 300 Tuns laden for the most part with Roundheads, they
were half Pike-staves, with a great knob at the end of it, full of iron
spikes, sent to the King, and great treasure; but that year the Swedes fell
into Denmark, and took away half his Country from him, 1643.

84 A plot against the City of London, by Sir Basil Brook, Col. Read, Mr
Ripley, and Vilot, 2 Citizens of London, and others, but prevented.

1644.
85 Two desperate plots for the betraying of Ailsbury, and one against
Southampton, but all three prevented.

86 Mr Edward Stanford, plotted with Cap. Backhouse for the betraying of the
City of Gloucester, and proferred 5000l. for a reward, 300l. whereof was paid
to the said Captain, but the plot was frustrated.

87 Our Army in Cornwall preserved, with the loss of our Artillery.

88 A peace pretended at Vxbridge, and a treacherous Petition framed by the
Malignants of Buckingham-shire, wherein one Sir John Lawrence of that Country
was a great stickler, but frustrated.

89 Melcomb Regis, to have been betrayed, wherein diverse of the Malignant
Townsmen had a principal hand, and Col. Goring, and Sir Lewis Dives, were
agents therein, the Town and Forts recovered, and two Ships with rich prizes
from Rhoan in France were seized on to make amends for their trouble.

The Service Book Voted down.

90 Earls and Lords from Oxford, submitted themselves to the Parl. The famous
Victory of Naisby over the Kings Forces, 5000 prisoners taken. A Jewel of 500l.
sent to Genesis Leven by the Parl. All the Kings Commissioners taken at
Shaftsbury. Basing-house taken and burnt.

91 A plot in the West against the Parl. by the Glubmen.

92 A sudden p^ot upon Scotland, which was almost overrun by Montross, but as
suddenly recovered again, by General David Lesley, and Montross discomfied and
beaten away into the mountains.

93 A Treaty with the Parl. for a well-grounded peace, and yet at that time the
Earl of Glamorgan, had a Commission to the ruin of all the Protestants in
Ireland, and consequently in England also.

94 The Great Seal broken before the Lords and Commons, on Tuesday the 11 of
August, 1646.

The Negative Oath.
I A. B. Do swear from my heart, that I will not directly, nor indirectly
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this war, or in this Cause against
the Parl. And I do likewise swear that my coming and submitting my self under
the power and protection of the Parl* is without any manner of design
whatsoever, to the prejudice of the proceedings of the two Houses of this Parl.
and without the direction, privity, and advice of the King, or any of his
Council, or Officers, other then what I have now made known. So help me God,
and the Contents of this Book.

1646

The King Escapes out of Oxford in a disguised manner



Ordered, That whosoever conceals the Kings person, shall be a Traitor.

A Letter concerning the Kings coming to the Scots Army, May 5. 1646.
RIght Honorable, the discharging of our selves of the duty we owe to the
Kingdom of Engl: to you as Commissioners from the same, moves us to acquaint
you with the Kings coming in to our Army this morning, which having overtaken
us unexpectedly, has filled us with amazement, and made us like men that
dream; we cannot think that he could have been so unadvised in his resolutions,
as to have cast himself on us, without a real intention to give full
satisfaction to both Kingdoms, in all their just and reasonable demands, in all
those things that concern Religion and Righteousness; whatsoever be his
dispositions or resolutions, you may be assured, that we shall never entertain
any thought, nor correspondency with any purpose, or countenance any endeavors
that may in any circumstance incroach upon our League and Covenant, or weaken
the union or confidence betwixt the Nations, that union to our Kingdom was the
matter of many prayers, and as nothing was more joyful unto us then to have it
set on foot, so hitherto have we thought nothing too dear to maintain it, and
we trust to walk with such faithfulness and truth in this particular, that as
we have the testimony of a good conscience within our selves, so you, and all
the world shall see, that we mind your interest with as much integrity and care
as our own, being confident you will entertain no other thought of us.

Signed May 5. 1646. LOTHIAN.




A Remonstrance exhibited in the name of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Counsel of the City of London, to the High Court of Parl. 1 That some
strict and speedy course may be taken for the suppressing of all private and
separate Congregrations. 2 That all Anabaptists, Brownists, Heretics,
Schismatics, Blasphemers, and all such Sectaries as conform not to the
public discipline established, or to be established by the Parliament, may
fully be declared against, and some effectual course settled for proceeding
against such persons. 3 That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdom, so all may
be equally required to yield obedience to the Government either set, or to be
set forth. 4 That no person disaffected to the Presbyterian Government, set, or
to be set forth by the Parliament, may be employed in any place of public
trust.

The King gave speedy order to several Officers for the surrender of the Towns,
Castles, and Forts, which then were in the hands of the Kings Commanders, viz.
Oxford, Worcester, Litch field, and Wallingford. A Petition delivered to his
Excellency from the Officers and Soldiers in the Army, touching their
faithfulness in the Parl. service, doing Summer service in the Winter season,
etc. Further presented several desires of theirs.

1 That an Ordinance of indemnity with the Royal assent be desired.

2 That satisfaction may be given to the Petitioners for their arrears, both in
their former service, and in this Army before it is disbanded. 3 That those who
have voluntarily served the Parliament, may not be pressed to serve in another
Kingdom, etc. 4 That those who have lost lives, limbs, or estates, may be
provided for, and relieved.

1647.
The Apology in answer to his Excellencies letter, relating their sense of a
second storm hanging over their heads, by the malice of a secret enemy, worse
then the former now vanquished, expressing their sorrow that they cannot desire
their own security without hazard to his Excellency, etc.

Concerning the abuse to diverse well-affected to the Army by imprisonment, to
the ruin of their estates, and loss of their lives.

And for their candid intentions and endeavors declared no less then
troublers, and enemies to the state and Kingdom, resolving rather to dye like
men, then to be enslaved and hanged like dogs, etc.

A Letter from his Excellency to the Earl of Manchester, concerning the Votes
of both Houses, as also his grief of heart for the distractions between the
Parliament and Army, desiring that all things may be determined in love, etc.

That the Soldiers of Holdenby, with the Kings consent, brought him away from
thence, etc. That his Majesty was unwilling to return back again to Holdenby,
etc. And that the removal of his Majesty from Holdenby, was no design,
knowledge, or privity on his part, etc.

A particular charge against the 11 Members impeached by the Army. 1 That Mr
Denzil Hollis being one of the special Commissioners for the Parl. to present
Propositions to the King at Oxford, made private addresses to the Kings party
then in arms against the Parl. and did secretly plot and advise them against
the Parl. etc. 2 That the said Mr. Denzil Hollis, and Sir Phillip Stapleton,
during the late war, when the Earl of Lindsey went from the Tower to Oxford,
sent several messages of intelligence to the Earl of Dorset, etc. 3 That the
said Mr Hollis, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir Will. Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir
Will. Waller, Sir John Maynard, Maj. Genesis Massy, Mr Glyn, Mr Long, Col. Edward
Harley, and Anthony Nicholas, in the months of March, April, May, and June
last, in prosecution of their evil designs, met in diverse places with persons
disaffected to the State, for holding correspondency with the Queen of England
now in France, and encouraged her party there. 4 And endeavored to bring in
Foreign forces, and listed diverse Commanders and Soldiers there, to raise and
leavy a new war. 5 And affronted diverse Petitioners that came in a peaceable
manner, boysterously assaulting them, etc. 6 Imprisoned some Members of the
Army, and to dis-oblige the Army from the Parl.

The solemn Engagement of the Citizens, Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers,
etc.

This was the Treasonable Engagement.
WE do solemnly engage our selves, and vow unto Almighty God, That we will to
the utmost of our power, cordially endeavor that his Majesty may speedily come
to his Houses of Parliament, with honor, safety, and freedom, and that
without the nearer approach of the Army, there to confirm such things as he
has granted the Twelfth of May last, in answer to the Propositions of both
Kingdoms, and that with a Personal Treaty with his two Houses of Parliament,
and the Commissioners of Scotland, such things as are yet in difference may be
speedily settled, and a firm and lasting peace established.

The Army Marching toward the City, orders were given to the Trained bands to
go to the works. The Auxilaries are raised to defend the City. A Proclamation
by beat of drum for all that are able to bear Arms, and are not listed to come
to receive them. The House of Commons, and the Lords likewise, met according to
the Order of adjournment, July 30. but neither of the Speakers.

At length they proceeded to a new election, and Voted Mr Pelham a Counselor,
and Member of the Commons House, Speaker pro tempore.

The Lords made choice of the Lord Gray to be Speaker of their House pro
tempore. The Sergeant at Arms being absent with the Mace when the Commons chose
their Speaker, had the City Mace, and chose Mr Norfolk Sergeant at Arms. After
which, proceeding to debate the great affairs to ching the City and Kingdom,
they voted as follows:

1 Tha the King come to London. 2 That the Militia of the City shall have full
power to raise what Forces they shall think fit to the same. 3 That they may
make choice of a Commander in chief to be approved of by the House, and such
Commander to present other Officers to be approved of by the Militia. The
Common Council made choice of Major General Massey to command in chief all
the City Forces.

Ordered by the Militia that all Reformadoes and other officers should the next
day at two of the Clock be listed in St. Jamses fields, where was a great
appearance. Order given for staying of Horses in the City, and many listed.
Most of the eleven Members sat in the House, and in the afternoon M. Genesis
Massey, Sir William Waller, and Col. Genesis Poyntz, were at list^ng the
Reformadoes. Declaration of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common council.

A brief of which that his Majesty was surprised at Holmby, and no place for
his Majesty's residence allowed by the Army nearer then their Quarters;
therefore to sattle peace, and establish true Religion, ease the Kingdoms
burden, establish his Majesty's just rights, maintain the Parl* privileges,
and relieve bleeding Ireland, they profess the main^ their enterprise, etc. A
Petition in the names of many thousands welaffected Citizens for some way of
composure, etc.

At which time Col. Genesis Poyniz and other officers of the new list, attending
for their Orders upon the Militia, came into Guild-hall-yard, and most cruelly
h^ckt and hewed many of the aforesaid Petitioners, diverse whereof were mortally
wound^d, whereof some since dyed.

Lord Say, Lord Magresie, other Lords, with many of the House of Commons, came
to the Head quarters, desiring the Generals protection.

Six Aldermen and twelve Common Counsel men sent with a letter to the General,
declaring their unwillingnesse to a new War. A letter from Southwarke, relating
their withstanding the design of raising a new War, desiring protection, Massey
sends Scouts, but near Brainford thirty chased by ten, and took four of Massies.

Col. Rainsborough, Col. Hewson, Col. Pride, and Col. Thistlwet, marched into
Southwarke; the Fort yielded without opposition.

The Members forced away return. The Houses being sat with their old Speakers,
Thomas Lord Fairfax, made high Constable of the Tower.

His Excellency marches through the City from 11 until 8 at night.

A Letter from Lieu. Genesis Cromwell, that his Majesty had withdrawn himself at 9
the last night, having left his cloak and some letters.

His Majesty's last Letter, Hampton Court, Nov. 11. 1645.
LIberty being that which in all times has been, but especially now is the
condition, the aim and desire of all men, common reason shows that Kings less
then any should endure captivity; yet I call God to witness with what patience I
have endured a tedious restraint, which so long as I had any hopes that this
sort of my suffering might conduce to the peace of these 3 Kingdoms, or the
hindering of more effusion of blood, I did willingly undergo, but now finding by
too certain proofs, that this my continued patience would not only turn to my
personal ruin, but likewise be of much more prejudice to the furtherance of
the public good, I thought I was bound as well by natural as political
obligations, to seek my safety, by retiring my self for some time from public
view both of my friends and enemies, and I appeal to all indifferent men to
judge, if I have not cause to free my self from the hands of those who change
their principles with their condition, and who are not ashamed, openly to
intend the destruction of the Nobility, by taking away their negative voice,
and with whom the Levellers doctrine is rather countenanced then punished; and
as for their intentions to my person, their changing and putting more strict
guards upon me, with the discharging most of all the servants of mine, who
formerly they admitted to wait upon me, do sufficiently declare: nor would I
have this my retirement mis-interpreted, for I shall earnestly and uncessantly
endeavor the settling of a safe and well-grounded peace, where ever I am or
shall be, and that (as much as may be) without the effusion of more Christian
blood, for which how many times have I pressed to be heard, and yet no ear given
to me; and can any reasonable man think (according to the ordinary course of
affairs, there can be a settled peace without it, or that God will bless those
that refuse to hear their own King? surely no; I must further add that (besides
what concerns my self) unless all other chief interests have not only a
hearing, but likewise just satisfaction given to them (to wit, the
Presbyterians, Independents, Army, those who have adhered to me, and even the
Scots) I say there cannot (I speak not of miracles, it being in my opinion a
sinful presumption in such cases to expect or trust to them) be a safe and
lasting peace: now as I cannot deny but that my personal security is the urgent
cause of this my retirement, so I take God to witness, the public peace is no
less before mine eyes, and I can find no better way to express this my
profession (I know not what a wiser man may do) then by desiring and urging
that all chief Interests may be heard, to the end each may have just
satisfaction; as for example, the Army (for the rest, though necessary, yet I
suppose are not difficult to consent) ought (in my judgment) to enjoy the
liberty of their conscience, and have an Act of Oblivion or Indemnity (which
should extend to the rest of all my subjects) and that all their Arrears should
be speedily and duly paid, which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard, and
that I be not hindered from using such lawful and honest means as I shall choose.
To conclude, let me be heard with freedom, honor, and safety, and I shall
instantly break through this cloud of retirement, and shall show my self to be
Pater Patriae,

C. R.


A great tumult, insurrection, and mutiny in London, breaking open diverse
houses, and magazines of Arms and Ammunition, breaking open diverse houses,
seizing on the Drums, Gates, Chains, and Watches of the City, assaulted and
shot into the L. Majors house, and killed one of his Guard, etc.

1648.
MAy 16. Surrey Petitioners came to Westminster, and made a great shout, and
cried, Hey for King Charles; We will pull the Members out by the Ear^s. disarmed
two Sentinels, knocked them down, one Sentinel refusing to be disarmed, the
Petitioners got within his Arms, one of them drew his sword and run him
through, and the Petitioners drew their swords on the Troopers, and said, fall
on for King Charles, now or never; but a party of 500 Foot did take some: of the
Petitioners were slain four or five, of the soldiers two.

The old L. Goring proclaimed General at the head of the Kentish Army upon the
Hill near Alisford, consisted of 8000 besides those in Maidstone, there were
near 300 slain, and about 2300 prisoners, many of them taken in the Woods,
Hop-yards, and fields; also Gentlemen of good quality, there were about 500
Horse, 3000 Arms, 9 foot Colors, and 8 pieces of Canon, with store of
Ammunition taken: Their word at the engagement was King and Kent, Ours Truth:
They being routed marched over Rochester Bridge toward Black Heath, with about
3000 Horse and Foot, most Cavaliers Prentises and Watermen, and fled over the
water into Essex, by Woollidge and Greenwich.

The Duke of Buckingham, L. Francis, E. of Holland, L. Andrew, L. Cambden, and
others, rose in Surrey, and made Proclamation that they expected the Parl.
would have settled the Kingdom, but because they have not, they would fetch the
King, and live and dye with him to settle it.

July 11. 1648. was the surrender of Pembroke Castle.

The Scots Army of 21000. Invaded England Duke -- Hambletons Standard had motto
Date Cesari, Foot Standard for Covenant, Religion, King and Kingdoms;

Riseing in Kent, Revosting of the Navy, Redusing Colchester, And Quelling the
insurection in Pembroke shire -- all in 1648:



The Scots entering the Kingdom, July 11. 1648. Maj. Genesis Lambert sent this
Letter to Duke Hammilton.

MY Lord, Having received Information that some Forces of Horse and Foot are
marched out of Scotland into this Kingdom, under your Excellencies Command, I
have sent this Bearer unto you, desiring to know the truth and intent thereof,
and whether they are come in opposition to the Forces in these parts, raised by
the Authority of the Parl. of England, and now in prosecution of their
Commands, I desire your Lordships speedy answer, and rest

Your Excellencies humble servant, J. Lambert.


Duke Hammiltons Answer.
NOble Sir, I received yours of the 11 of this instant, in answer whereunto I
shall only say, the informa^ion you received is true, for according to the
Commands of the Committee of Estates of the Parl. of Scotland, there are Forces
both of Horse and Foot come into this Kingdom, under my conduct for
prosecution of the ends mentioned in my Letter of the 6. to which I refer you,
intending to oppose any that are or shall be in Arms for the obstructing those
pious, loyal, and just ends, and so remain

Hambleton.


The Town of Colchester delivered up, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir Geo: Lisle shot
to death. L. Col. Lilburn revolted at Newcastle, declared for the King, Sir
Arthur Has^erigge stormed the Castle, Lilburns head was set upon a pole.

June 5. The L. of Warwick went to Portsmouth, to bring into obedience the
mutinous Seamen; there was with the L. of Warwick, the Phoenix, Mary, Rose,
Robert, Nonesuch, Lilly, Lion, Bonadventure, Antilope, Swift-sure, Hector, and
Fellowship.

A short Abridgement of the Engagement made by the Common Council, Commanders,
Soldiers, and Commission officers in London.
WE decla^e to engage as much as in us l^es, to defend the King and Parl* from
all violence, and to the end we may be enabled to perform the same, We humbly
offer, that the Forces in the line may be one entire Militia, and no Forces may
be raised, but by Authority of the said Militia, by consent of the Common
Council, We desire no Forces in Arms might come within thirty miles of London,
during the Treaty, and for those within, what persons soever shall make any
tumu't, shall be put to death. O dered, that the Common Council men and
Commanders shall within their several Precincts go from house to house, to
receive concurrence to the said Engagement.

December. 1648. The House having notice of the Kings carrying to Hurst Cast^e,
voted, That the seizing his person was without their advice or consent.

Dec. 5. The House Voted, That his Majesty's concessions to their Proposals,
was ground sufficient to settle the Peace of the Kingdom.

Dec. 6. Col. Rich, and Col. Prides Reg. guarded the Parl. and seized some
Members.

Maj. Genesis Brown Sheriff of London, was apprehended, December. 12.

Dec 13. The House Voted, That the Lords and Commons, declare they will make no
further Addresses to the King, nor none shall be by any person whatsoever
without leave of he Parl. and if any make breach of this Order, they shall
incur the Penalty of High Treason, and that they will receive no more any
Message from the King, to both or either Houses of Parl.

An Ordinance sent to the Lords for the Trial of the King, but they rejected
the Commission, and adjourned 8 days, after that they never sat more.

^er. D^n^y Serj. at Arms to the Commissioners, rode into Westminster- Hall,
with the Mace belonging to the House of Commons on his shoulder, and some
Officers attending him all bare, and six Trumpeters on Horseback, a guard of
Horse and Foot attending in the Palace yard, and Proclamation was made, All
that had any thing for matter of Fact against Charles Stuart, King of England,
to bring it in to the Commissioners.

Jan. 19. 1648. That this present Seal of England should be broken in pieces,
and a new one forthwith made, and ordered that the Arms of England and Ireland,
should be Ingra^en on the one side, on the other side a Map of the Parl. with
these words in it, The first year of Freedom by Gods blessing restored, 1648.

The Charge of the Commons of England, against Charles Stuart King of England.
That the said Ch Stuart being admitted King of England, and therein trusted
with a limited power, to govern by, and according to the Laws of the L^nd,
and not otherwise; and by his Truth, Oath, and Office, being obliged to use the
power committed to him, For the good and benefit of the people, and for the
preservation of their Rights and Liberties; yet nevertheless out of a wicked
design, to erect and uphold in himself an unlimited and Tyrannical power, to
rule, according to his will; and to overthrow the Rights and Liberties of the
People; yea, to take away, and make void the foundations thereof, and of all
redress, and remedy of mis-government, which by the fundamental Constitutions
of this Kingdom, were reserved on the Peoples behalf, in the Right and Power
of frequent and successive Parl. or National meetings in Councels; He, the sad
Chapter Stuart, for the accomplishment of such his Designs, and for the protecting
of himself and his adherents, in His and Their wicked practices to the same
Ends, has traitorously and maliciously levied War against the present Parl.
and the people therein Represented. Particularly, upon or about the 30 day of
June, in the year of our Lord, 1642. At Beverley in the County of York, and
upon or about the 30 day of July, in the year aforesaid, in the County of the
City of York; and upon, or about the 24 day of August, in the same year at the
County of the Town of Nottingham (when and where he sat up His Standard of
War;) and also on, or about the 23 day of October, in the same year, at Edge
Hill, and Keintonfield, in the County of Warwick; and upon, or about the 30 day
of Nov. in the same year, at Brainford in the County of Middlesex; and upon or
about the 30 day of August, in the year of our Lord, 1643. at Cavesham Bridge
near Redding in the County of Berks; And upon, or about the 30 day of October. in
the year last mentioned, at or near the City of Gloucester; and upon or about
the 30 day of Nov. in the year last mentioned, at Newberry in the County of
Berks; and upon, or about the 31 day of July, in the year of our Lord 1644. at
Cropredy Bridge in the County of Oxon; and upon, or about the 30 day of Sep. in
the year last mentioned, at Bodmin, and other places near adjacent, in the
County of Cornwall; and upon about the 30 day of Nov. in the year last
mentioned, at Newbery aforesaid; and upon or about the 8 day of June, in the
year of our Lord, 1645. at the Town of Leicester; and also upon the 14 day of
the same Month, in the same year, at Naseby field, in the County of
Northampton. At which several times and places, or most of them, and at many
other places in this Land, at several other times, within the years before
mentioned. And in the year of our Lord, 1646. He the said Chapter Stuart, has
caused and procured many thousands of the free people of the Nation to be
slain; and by divisions, parties, and insurrections within this Land, by
Invasion: from foreign parts, endeavored and procured by him, and by many
other evil ways andmeans, He the said C. Stuart, has not only maintained and
carried on the said War, both by Land and Sea, during the years before
mentioned; but also has renewed, or caused to be renewed the said War against
the Parliament, and good people of this Nation, in this present year 1648, in
the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey, Sussex, Middlesex, and many other
Countries and places in England and Wales, and also by Sea; and particularly,
He the said Chapter Stuart has for that purpose given Commissions to his Son the
Prince and others; whereby, Besides multitudes of other persons, many such, as
were by the Parl. entrusted and employed for the Nation, being by him or his
Agents, corrupted to the betraying of their trust, and revolting from the Parl.
have had entertainment and Commission for the continuing and renewing of War
and Hostility against the said Parl. and people, as aforesaid. By which cruel
and unnatural Wars by him the said Charles Stuart, continued and renewed as
aforesaid, much innocent blood of the Free-people of this Nation has been
spilt; many Families have been undone, the Public Treasury wasted and
exhausted, trade obstructed, and miserably decayed; vast expense and damage to
the Nation incurred, and many parts of the Land spoiled, some of them even to
desolation.

And for farther prosecution of his said evil Designs, He, the said Ch:
Stuart, does still continue his Commission to the said Prince, and other Rebels
and Revolters, both English and Foreigners, and to the E. of Ormond, and to
the Irish Rebels and Revolters associated with him, from whom further Invasions
are threatened, upon the procurement, and on the behalf of the said Charles
Stuart.

All which wicked Designs, Wars, and evil practices of him the said Charles
Stuart, have been and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding of the
personal interest of will and Power, and pretended Prerogative to himself and
his Family against the Public Interest, Common Right, Liberty, Justice, and
Peace Of the people of this Nation, by, and for whom he was entrusted as
aforesaid.

By all which it appears, That He, the said Ch: Stuart has been, and is the
Occasioner, Author, and Contriver of the said Unnatural, cruel, and bloody
Wars; and therein guilty of all the Treasons, Murders, Rapines, Burnings,
Desolations, Damage, and mischief to this Nation, acted or committed in the
said Wars, or occasioned thereby.

And the said John Cook, by Protestation (save on the behalf of the people of
England, the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other charge
against the said Ch: Stuart, and also of replying to the answers which the said
Chapter Stuart shall make to the premises, or any charge that shall be so
exhibited) does, for the said Treasons and Crimes, on the behalf of the said
People of England, Impeach the said Ch: Stuart as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer,
and a public and implacable enemy to the Commonwealth of England; and pray,
That the said Ch Stuart King of England, may be put to answer all and every the
Premises; that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, Sentence, and
Judgment, may be thereupon had, as shall be agreeable to Justice.

The Kings last Speech made upon the Scaffold.
King. I Shall be very little heard of any body here, I shall therefore speak a
word unto you here; indeed I could hold my peace very well if I did not think
that holding my peace would make some men think that I did submit to the guilt,
as well as to the punishment; but I think it is my duty to God first, and to my
Country, for to clear my self both as an honest man and a good Christian; I
shall begin first with my Innocence, in troth I think it not very needful for
me to insist long upon this, for all the wo^ld knows I never did begin a War
with the two Houses of Parliament, and I call God to wi^nesse, to whom I must
shortly make an Account, that I never did interd for to incroach upon their
Privileges, they began upon me, it is the Militia they began upon, they
confessed that the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit for to have it from
me; and to be short, if any body will look to the dates of Commissions, of
their Commissions and mine, and likewise to the Declarations, will see clearly
that they began these unhappy troubles, not I; so that as for the guilt of
these enormous crimes that are laid against me, I hope in God that God will
clear me of it, I will not, I am in charity; God forbid that I should lay it
upon the two Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope they
are free of this guilt; for I do believe that ill instruments between them and
me, has been the cause of all this blood shed; so that by way of speaking, as
I find my self, clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too: yet for
all this, God forbid that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say that
Gods judgments are just upon me: many times he does pay justice by an unjust
sentence, that is ordinary; I will only say this, That an unjust Sentence that
I suffered to take effect, is punished now by an unjust Sentence upon me; that
is, so far I have said, to show you that I am an innocent man.

Now for to show you that I am a good Christian, I hope there is a good man
(pointing to Dr Iuckson) that will bear me witness, that I have forgiven all
the world; and those in particular that have been the chief causers of my
death; who they are God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive
them. But this is not all, my charity must go farther, I wish that they may
repent, for indeed they have committed a great sin in that particular, I pray
God with St Stephen, that this be not laid to their charge; nay, not only so,
but that they may take the right way to the peace of the Kingdom: So (Sirs) I
do wish with all my soul, and I do hope (there is some here will carry it
further) that they may endeavor the peace of the Kingdom. Now (Sirs) I must
show you how you are out of the way, and will put you in a way; first, you are
out of the way, for certainly all the way you ever have had yet as I could find
by any thing, is in the way of Conquest; certainly this is in an ill way, for
Conquest (Sir) in my opinion is never just, except there be a good just Cause,
either for matter of wrong, or just Title, and then if you go beyond it, that
makes it unjust at the end that was just at first: But if it be only matter of
Conquest, then it is a great Robbery; as a Pirate said to Alexander, that He
was the Great Robber, he was but a petty Robber; and so, Sirs, I do think the
way that you are in, is much out of the way. Now Sir, for to put you in the
way, believe it you will never do right, nor God will never prosper you,
until you give God his due, the King his due, (that is, my Successors) and the
people their due; I am as much for them as any of you: You must give God his
due, by regulating rightly his Church (according to his Scriptures) which is
now out of order: For to set you in a way particularly now I cannot, but only
this, A National Synod freely called, freely debating among themselves, must
settle this; when that every Opinion is freely and clearly heard.

For the King indeed I will not, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct
you for that; therefore, because it concerns my own particular, I only give you
a touch of it.

For the people, and truly I desire their Liberty and Freedom, as much as any
body whomsoever; but I must tell you, that their Liberty and their Freedom,
consists in having of Government; those Laws, by which their life and their
goods may be most their own. It is not for having share in Government (Sir)
that is nothing pertaining to them. A Subject and a Sovereign, are clean
different things; and therefore until they do that, I mean, that you do put
the people in that Liberty as I say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves.

Sirs, it was for this that now I am come here: If I would have given way to an
Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power of the
Sword, I needed not to have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray God
it be not laid to your charge) that I am the Martyr of the people.

In Troth Sirs, I shall not trouble you much longer; for I will only say this
to you, that intruth, I could have desired some little time longer, because
that I would have put this that I have said in a little more order, and a
little better digested then I have done, and therefore I hope you will excuse
Me.

I have delivered my Conscience, I pray God, that you do take those courses
that are best for the good of the Kingdom, and your own Salvation.

The Bishop of London minding him to say something concerning his Religion.

King. I thank you very heartily (my Lord) for that, I had almost forgotten it
In Troth Sirs, my Conscience in Religion, I think, is very well known to all the
World; and therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian,
according to the profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by
my Father; and this honest man I think will witness it* Then turning to the
Officers said, Sirs, excuse me for this same, I have a good cause, and I have a
gracious God; I will say no more. Then turning to Col Hacker he said, Take care
that they do not put me to pain, and Sir, this and it please you. But then a
Gentleman coming near the Ax, the King said, take heed of the Ax* pray take
heed of the Ax Then the King speaking to the Executioner, said, I shall say but
very short Prayers, and when I thrust out my hands -- Then the King called to D
Iuxon for his night cap, and having put it on, he said to the Executioner, does
my heir trouble you, who desired him to put it all under his Cap, which the
King did accordingly, by the help of the Executioner and the Bishop, then the
King turning to Dr Iuxon, said, I have a good cause, and a gracious God on my
side.

Dr Iuxon. There is but one stage more, this stage is turbulent and
troublesome, it is a short one, but you may consider it will soon carry you a
very great way, it will carry you from Earth to Heaven, and there you shall
find a great deal of cordial joy and comsort.

King I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where no disturbance
can be.

Doct. You are exchanged from a temporal to an eternal Crown, a good exchange.

Then the King took off his Cloak and his George, giving his George to Dr
Iuxon, saying, Remember; it is thought for the Prince, and some other small
Ceremonies past, after which, the King stooping down, laid his neck upon the
block, after a very little pause, st^etched forth his hands, the Executioner at
one blow severed his head from his Body, his Body was put in a Coffin, covered
with black velvet, and removed to his lodging Chamber at White hall.

An Act prohibiting the Proclaiming of any person to be King of England, etc.
WHereas Charles Stuart King of England, being for the notorious Treasons,
Tyrannies, and Murders, committed by him in the late unnatural and cruel
Wars condemned to death; Whereupon, after Execution of the same, several
pretenses may be made, and Title set on scot unto the Kingly Office, to the
apparent hazard of the Public Peace. For the prevention thereof, Be it
Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the
same, That no person or persons whatsoever do presume to Proclaim, Declare,
Publish, or any way promote Charles Stuart, Son of the said Charles, commonly
called Prince of Wales, or any other Person to be King or chief Magistrate of
England, or of Ireland, or of any the Dominions belonging to them, or any of
them* by color of Inheritance, Succession, Election, or any other claim
whatsoever, without the free consent of the people in Parliament first had, and
signified by a particular Act or Ordinance for that purpose, any Statute, Law,
usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted and
Ordained and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained, that whatsoever shall contrary
to this Act, Proclaim, Declare, Publish, or any way promote the said Charles
Stuart the Son, or any other person to be King* or chief Magistrate of
England, or of Ireland, or of any the Dominions belonging to them, or to either
of them, without the said consent in Parliament signified as aforesaid shall be
deemed and adjudged a Traitor to the Commonwealth, and shall suffer the pains
of death, and such other punishments as belong to the Crime of High Treason And
all Officers, as well Civil as Military, and all other well affected persons,
are hereby authorized and required forthwith to apprehend all such offenders,
and to bring them in safe custody to the next Justice of the Peace, that they
be proceeded against accordingly.

H. Scobel Cler. Parl. D Com.
Imprimatur Theodore Iennings.

The several speeches of Duke Hamilton Earl of Cambridge, Henry Earl of
Holland, and Arthur Lord Capel.
Spoken upon the Scaffold immediately before their Execution, on Friday the
ninth of March, 1649.
I Think it is truly not very necessary for me to speak much, there are many
Gentlemen and Soldiers there that see me, but my voice truly is so weak, so
low, that they connot hear me, neither truly was I ever at any time so much in
love with speaking, or with any thing I had to express, that I took delight
in it; yet this being the last time that I am to do so, by a Divine Providence
of Almighty God, who has brought me to this end justly for my sins; I shall to
you Sir, Master Sheriff, declare thus much, as to the matter that I am now to
suffer for, which is as being a Traitor to the Kingdom of England: Truly Sir,
It was a Country that I equally loved with my own, I made no difference, I
never intended either the generality of its prejudice, or any particular man's
in it; what I did was by the command of the Parliament of the Country where I
was borne, whose command I could not disobey, without running into the same
hazard there, of that condition that I now am in.

It pleased God so to dispose that Army under my command, as it was ruined; and
I, as their General, clothed with a commission, stand here, now ready to dye;
I shall not trouble you with repeating of my plea, what I said in my own
Defense at the Court of JUSTICE, my self being satisfied with the commands
that is laid upon me, and they satisfied with the justness of their Procedure,
according to the Laws of this Land. God is just, and howsoever I shall not say
any thing as to the matter of the sentence, but that I do willingly submit to
his Divine Providence, and acknowledge that very many ways I deserve even a
worldly punishment, as well as hereafter, for we are all sinful, Sir, and I a
great one; yet for my comfort, I know there is a God in Heaven that is
exceeding merciful; I know my Redeemer fits at his right hand, and am
confident (clapping his hand on his breast) is mediating for me at this
instant, I am hopeful through his free grace and all-sufficient merits, to be
pardoned of my sins, and to be received into his mercy, upon that I rely,
trusting to nothing but the free grace of God through Jesus Christ, I have not
been tainted in my Religion I thank God for it* since my Infancy it has been
such as has been professed in the Land, and established, and now it is not this
Religion, or that Religion, nor this or that fancy of men that is to be built
upon, it is but one that is right, one that is sure, and that comes from God,
Sir, and in the free grace of our Savior. Sir, there is truly somewhat that
(he then observing the Writers said,) had I thought my speech would have been
thus taken, I would have digested it into some better method then now I can,
and shall desire these Gentlemen that do write it, that they will not wrong me
in it, and that it may not in this manner be published to my disadvantage, for
truly I did not intend to have spoken thus when I came here.

There are, Sirs, terrible aspersions that has been laid upon my self; truly
such as, I thank God, I am very free from; as if my actions and intentions had
not been such as they were pretended for; but that notwithstanding what I
pretended it was for the King, there was nothing less intended then to serve
him in it. I was bred with him for many years, I was his domestique servant,
and there was nothing declared by the Parliament that was not really intended
by me; and truly, in it I ventured my life one way, and now I lose it another
way: and that was one of the ends, as to the King; I speak only of that,
because the rest has many particulars; and to clear my self from so horrid an
aspersion as is laid upon me: neither was there any other design known to me
by the in coming of that Army, then what is really in the Declaration
published. His person, I do profess, I had reason to love, as he was my King,
and as he had been my Master: It has pleased God now to dispose of him, so as
it cannot be thought flattery to have said this, or any end in me for the
saying of it, but to free my self from that Calumny which lay upon me: I cannot
gain by it, yet Truth is that which we shall gain by for ever.

There has been much spoken, Sir, of an invitation into this Kingdom: it is
mentioned in that Declaration, and truly to that I did and do remit my self:
and I have been very much labored for discoveries of these inviters, It Is no
time to dissemble, How willing I was to have served this Nation in any thing
that was in my power, is known to very many honest, pious and religious men;
and how ready I would have been to have done what I could to have served them,
if it had pleased them to have preserved my life, in whose hands there was a
power: They have not thought it fit, and so I am become unusefull in that which
willingly I would have done. As I said at first (Sir) so I say now concerning
that point; I wish the Kingdom happiness, I wish it peace; and truly Sir, I
wish that this blood of mine may be the last that is drawn: and howsoever I may
perhaps have some reluctancie with my self as to the matter of my suffering,
for my fact, yet I freely forgive all; Sir, I carry no ranc^^ along with me to
my grave: His will be done that has created both (...)and earth, and me a poor
miserable sinful creature now speaking before (...)* For me to speak, Sir, to
you of State-businesse, and the Government of (...) Kingdom, or my opinion in
that, or for any thing in that nature, Truly it is (...) no end, it contributes
nothing: My own inclination has been to peace, from the beginning; and it is
known to many, that I never was an ill instrument betwixt the King and his
people; I never acted to the prejudice of the Parliament; I bore no Arms, I
meddled not with it; I was not wanting by my Prayers to God Almighty for the
happiness of the King; and truly I shall pray still, that God may so direct
him as that may be done which shall tend to his glory, and the peace and
happiness of the Kingdom.

For my Religion, that which I said was the established Religion, and that
which I have practiced in my own Kingdom where I was borne and bred; my
Tenets they need not to be expressed, they are known to all, and I am not of a
rigid opinion; many godly men there are that may have scruples which do not
concern me at all at no time; they may differ in opinion, and more now then at
any time; differing in opinion does not move me (nor any man's) my own is
clear: Sir, the Lord forgive me my sins, and I forgive freely all those that
even I might as a worldly man, have the greatest animosity against; We are
bidden to forgive; Sir, it is a command laid upon us (and there mentioned)
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Then the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, shall I put on another cap,
must this hair be turned up from my neck, there are three of my servants to
give satisfaction; he also asked him which way he would have him lie.

The Executioner pointing to the front of the Scaffold, the Earl replied, What,
my head this way?

After a little discourse in private with some of his servants, he kneeled
down by the side of the Scaffold and prayed a while to himself.

Then with a cheerful and smiling countenance, (embracing Dr. Sibbalds,) he
said, Truly Sir, I do take you in mine arms, and truly I bless God for it, I
do not fear, I have an assurance that is grounded here (laying his hand upon
his heart) now that gives me more true joy then ever I had, I pass out of a
miserable world to go into an eternal and glorious Kingdom; and Sir, though I
have bin a most sinful creature, yet Gods mercy I know is infinite, and I
bless my God for it, I go with so clear a conscience, that I know not the man
that I have personally injured.

Then embracing those his servants which were there present, said to each of
them, You have been very faithful to me and the Lord bless you.

And so turning himself to the Executioner, he said, I shall say a very short
prayer unto my God, while I lie down there; and when I stretch out my hand,
(my right hand) then sir, do your duty; and I do freely forgive you, and so I
do all the world.

Then the E. of Cambridge said to the Executioner, Must I lie all along? he
answered, Yes, and't please your Lordship. Then he said, When I stretch out my
hands -- but I will fit my head, first tell me if I be right, and how you would
have me lie. And being told he must lie a little lower; he said:

Well, stay then till I give you the sign. And so having lain a short space
devoutly praying to himself, he stretched out his right hand, whereupon the
Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body, which was received by
two of his servants then kneeling by him, into a Crimson Taffery Scarf, and
that with the body immediately put into a Coffin brought upon the Scaffold for
that purpose: and from thence conveyed to the house that was Sir John Hamiltons
at the Mews, where it now remains.

Dk. Hambleton, E: of Cambridg, E: of Holland, and Lord Capell be headed mar:
9. 1649 And their speeches on the scaffold



The speech of the Earl of Holland upon the Scaffold.
IT is to no purpose (I think) to speak any thing here, Which way must I
speak? And then being directed to the front of the Scaffold, he (leaning over
the rail.) said, I think it is fit to say something, since God has called me
to this place. The first thing which I must profess, is, what concerns my
Religion, and my breeding, which has been in a good Family, that has been
ever faithful to the true Protestant Religion, in the which I have been bred,
in the which I have lived, and in the which by Gods grace and mercy I shall
dye. I have not lived according to that education I had in that Family where I
was borne and bred: I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive that
it is very much his pleasure to bring me to this place for the sins that I have
committed. The cause that has brought me hither, I believe by many has been
much mistaken, They have conceived that I have had ill designs to the State,
and to the Kingdom: Truly I look upon it as a Judgment, and a just judgment
of God; not but I have offended so much the State and the Kingdom, and the
Parliament, as that I have had an extreme vanity in serving them very
extraordinarily. For those actions that I have done, I think it is known they
have been ever very faithful to the public, and very particularly to
Parliaments, My affections have been ever expressed truly and clearly to them.
The dispositions of affairs now have put things in another posture then they
were when I was engaged with the Parliament: I have never gone off from those
Principles that ever I have professed: I have lived in them, and by Gods grace
will dye in them* There may be alterations and changes that may carry them
further then I thought reasonable, and there I left them: But there has been
nothing that I have said, or done, or professed either by Covenant, or
Declaration, which has not bin very constant, and very clear upon the
principles that I ever have gone upon, which was to serve the King the
Parliament, Religion (I should have said in the first place) the Commonwealth,
and to seek the peace of the Kingdom: That made me think it no improper time,
being pressed out by accidents and circumstances, to seek the Peace of the
Kingdom, which I thought was proper, since there was something then in
agitation, but nothing agreed on for sending Propositions to the King; that was
the furthest aim that I had, and truly beyond that I had no intention, none at
all* And God be praised, although my blood comes to be shed here, there was I
think scarcely a drop of blood shed in that action that I was engaged in. For
the present affairs, as they are, I cannot tell how to judge of them: and truly
they are in such a condition, as (I conceive) no body can make a judgment of
them: and therefore I must make use of my prayers, rather then of my opinion,
which are, that God would bless this Kingdom, this Nation, this State; that
he would settle it in a way agreeable to what this Kingdom has been happily
governed under; by a King, by the Lords, by the Commons, a Government that (I
conceive) it has flourished much under, and I pray God the change of it bring
not rather a prejudice, a disorder, and a confusion then the contrary. I look
upon the Posterity of the King* and truly my conscience directs me to it, to
desire, that if God be pleased that these people may look upon them with that
affection that they owe, that they may be called in again, and they may be, not
through blood, nor through disorder, admitted again into that power, and to
that glory that God has in their birth intended to them I shall pray with all
my Soul for the happiness of this State, of this Nation, that the blood which
is here spilt, may be even the last which may fall among us, and truly I should
lay down my life with as much cheerfulness as ever person did, if I conceived
that there would no more blood follow us; for a State, or affairs that are
built upon blood, is a foundation for the most part that does not prosper.

After the blessing that I give to the Nation, to the Kingdom, and truly to the
Parliament, I do wish with all my heart, happiness, and a blessing to all
those that have been authors in this business; and truly that have been
authors in this very work that brings us hither: I do not only forgive them,
but I pray heartily and really for them; as God will forgive my sins, so I
desire God may forgive them.

I have a particular relation, as I am Chancellor of Cambridge, and truly I
must here, since it is the last of my prayers, pray to God that that University
may go on in that happy way which it is in, that God may make it a Nursery to
plant those persons that may be distributed to the Kingdom, that the souls of
the people may receive a great benefit, and a great advantage by them, and (I
hope) God will reward them for their kindness, and their affections that I
have found from them. (Looking toward Mr. Bolton) I have said what Religion I
have been bred in, what Religion I have been born in, what Religion I have
practiced; I began with it, and I must end with it. I told you that my actions
and my life have not been agreeable to my breeding, I have told you likewise
that the Family where I was bred has been an exemplary Family (I may say so I
hope without vanity) of much affection to Religion, and of much faithfulness
to this Kingdom, and to this State. I have endeavored to do those actions
that have become an honest man, and which became a good Englishman, and which
became a good Christian. I have been willing to oblige those that have been in
trouble, those that have been in persecution, and truly I find a great reward
of it, for I have found their prayers and their kindness now in this
distress, and in this condition I am in, and I think it a great reward, and I
pray God reward them for it.

I am a great sinner, and I hope God will be pleased to hear my prayers, to
give me faith to trust in him, that as he has called me to death at this
place, he will make it but a passage to an eternal life through Jesus Christ,
which I trust to; which I rely upon, and which I expect by the mercy of God.
And so I pray God bless you all, and send that you may see this to be the last
execution, and the last blood that is likely to be spilt among you. And then
turning to the side rail, he prayed for a god space of time.

God has given me (speaking to M. Bolton) long time in this world; he has
carried me through many great accidents of Fortune; he has at last brought me
down into a condition, where I find my self brought to an end, for a
dis-affection to this State, to this Parliament, (that as I said before) I did
believe no body in the world more unlikely to have expected to suffer for that
Cause. I look upon it as a great judgment of God for my sins. And truly Sir,
since that the death is violent, I am the less troubled with it, because of
those violent deaths that I have seen before; Principally my Savior that has
showed us the way, how and in what manner he has done it, and for what cause,
I am the more comforted, I am the more rejoiced. It is not long since the King
my Master passed in the same manner; and truly I hope that his purposes and
intentions were such, as a man may not be ashamed not only to follow him in
the way that was taken with him, but likewise not ashamed of his purposes, if
God had given him life. I have often disputed with him concerning many things
of this kind, and I conceive his sufferings, and his better knowledge and
better understanding, (if God had spared him life) might have made him a Prince
very happy toward himself, and very happy toward this Kingdom. I have seen
and known that those blessed souls in heaven have passed thither by the gate of
sorrow, and many by the gate of violence: And since it is Gods pleasure to
dispose me this way, I submit my soul to him, with all comfort, and with all
hope, that he has made this my end, and this my conclusion, that though I be
low in death, yet nevertheless this lowness shall raise me to the highest
glory for ever.

Truly, I have not said much in public to the people concerning the particular
actions that I conceive I have done by my Counsels in this Kingdom; I conceive
they are well known, it were something of vanity (me thinks) to take notice of
them here; I Will rather dye with them, with the comfort of them in mine own
bosom; and that I never intended in this action, or any action that ever I did
in my life, either malice, or bloodshed, or prejudice to any creature that
lives. For that which concerns my Religion, I made my profession before of it,
how I was bred, and in what manner I was bred, in a Family that was looked upon
to be no little notorious in opposition to some liberties, that they conceived,
then to be taken; and truly there was some mark upon me, as if I had some
taint of it, even throughout the whole ways that I have taken: every body knows
what my affections have been to many that have suffered, to many that have been
in troubles in this Kingdom, I endeavored to oblige them, I thought I was tied
so by my conscience, I thought it by my charity, and truly very much by my
breeding; God has now brought me to the last instant of my time, all that I
can say, and all that I can adhere unto is this; That as I am a great sinner so
I have a great Savior, that as he has given me here a fortune to come
publicly in a show of shame in the way of this suffering, (truly I understand
it not to be so) I understand it to be glory, a glory, when I consider who has
gone before me, and a glory when I consider I had no end in it, but what I
conceive to be the service of God, the King and the Kingdom, and therefore my
heart is not charged much with any thing in that particular, since I conceive
God will accept of the intention, whatsoever the action seem to be. I am going
to dye, and the Lord receive my soul; I have no reliance but upon Christ, for
my self, I do acknowledge that I am the unworthiest of sinners, my life has
been a vanity, and a continued sin, and God may justly bring me to this end,
for the sins I have committed against him, and were there nothing else but the
iniquities that I have committed in the way of my life, I look upon this as a
great justice of God to bring me to this suffering, and to bring me to this
punishment, and those hands that have been most active in it, if any such there
have been, I pray God forgive them, I pray God that there may not be many such
Trophies of their Victory, but that this may be as I said before, the last show
that this people shall see, of the blood of persons of Condition, of persons of
honor. I might say something of the way of our Trial, which I think has been
as extraordinary, as any thing I think has ever been seen in this Kingdom, but
because I would not seem as if I made some complaint, I will not so much as
mention it, because no body shall believe I rep^ne at their actions or my own
fortune; it is the will of God, it is the hand of God under whom I fall, I take
it entirely from him, I submit my self to him, I shall desire to roll my self
into the Arms of my blessed Savior, and when I come to this place, (Pointing
to the block.) when I bow down my self there, I hope God will raise me up,
and when I bid farewell, as I must now to Hope and to Faith, that Love will
abide, I know nothing to accompany the Soul out of this World but Love, and I
hope that Love will bring me to the fountain of glory in Heaven, through the
Arms, Mediation, and the Mercy of my Savior Jesus Christ, in whom I believe, O
Lord help my unbelief.

I shall make as much have as I can to come to that glory, and the Lord of
Heaven and Earth take my soul: I look upon my self entirely in him, and hope
to find mercy through him, I expect it, and through that fountain that is
opened for sin, and for uncleanness my soul must receive it, for did I rest in
any thing else, I have nothing but sin and corruption in me; I have nothing but
that, which instead of being carried up into the arms of God and Glory, I have
nothing but may throw me down into Hell.

And here is the place where I lie down before him, from whence I hope he will
raise me to an eternal Glory through my Savior, upon whom I rely, from whom
only I can expect mercy: into his arms I commend my spirit, into his bleeding
arms, that when I leave this bleeding body that must lie upon this place, he
will receive that soul that arises out of it, and receive it into his eternal
mercy, through the merits, through the worthiness, through the mediation of
Christ that has purchased it with his own most precious blood.

Christ Jesus receive my soul, my soul hungers and thirsts after him; clouds
are gathering, and I trust in God through all my heaviness: and I hope through
all impediments, he will settle my interest in him, and throw off all the claim
that Satan can make unto it, and that he will carry my soul in despite of
all the calumnies, and all that the Devil, and Satan can invent, will carry
it into eternal mercy, there to receive the blessedness of his presence to
all Eternity.

That Lamb of God, into his hands I commit my soul: and that Lamb of God that
sits upon the Throne to Judge those 24 that fall down before him, I hope he
will be pleased to look downward, and Judge me with mercy that fall down
before him, and that worship him, and that adore him, that only trusts upon
his mercy for his compassion, and that as he has purchased me, he would lay
his claim unto me now, and receive me.

Indeed if Christ justify, no body can condemn, and I trust in God, in his
justification, though there is confusion here without us, and though there are
wonders and staring that now disquiet, yet I trust that I shall be carried into
that mercy, that God will receive my soul.

Then the Earl of Holland looking over among the people, pointing to a
Soldier, said, This honest man took me prisoner, you little thought I should
have been brought to this, when I delivered my self to you upon conditions, and
espying Capt. Watson on horseback putting off his hat said to him, God be with
you Sir, God reward you Sir.

Here must now be my Anchor, a great Storm make the finds my anchor and but in
storms no body trust to their anchor, and therefore I must trust upon my anchor
(Upon that God, said Mr. Bolton, upon whom your Anchor trusts) yea, God, I
hope, will anchor my Soul fast upon Christ Jesus: and if I dye not with that
clearness and heartinesse that you speak of, truly, I will trust in God,
though he kill me, I will rely upon him, and the mercy of my Savior.

Then the Earl of Holland embraced Lieut. Col. Beecher, and took his leave of
him: After which, he came to Mr. Bolton, and having embraced him, and returned
him many thanks for his great pains and affections to his soul, desiring God to
reward him, and return his love into his bosom. Mr. Bolton said to him, The
Lord God support you, and be seen in this great extremity, The Lord reveal and
discover himself to you, and make your death the passage unto eternal life.
Then the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, Here my friend, let my clothes
and my body alone, there is ten pounds for thee, that is better then my
clothes, I am sure of it. Executioner, Will your Lordship please to give me a
sign when I shall strike? And his Lordship said, you have room enough here,
have you not? and the Executioner said, Yes.

Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Exeuctioner, said, Friend, do you
hear me, if you take up my head, do not take off my Cap. Then turning to his
servants he said to one, Fare you well, thou art an honest fellow, and to
another, God be with thee, thou art an honest man, and then said, Stay, I will
kneel down and ask God forgiveness, and then prayed for a pretty space, with
seeming earnestnesses. Then speaking to the Executioner, he said,

Which is the way of lying? (which they showed him) And then going to the Front
of the Scaffold, he said to the People, God bless you all, and God deliver you
from any such accident as may bring you to any such death as is violent, either
by war or by these accidents, but that there may be peace among you, and you
may find that these accidents, that have happened to us, may be the last that
may happen in this Kingdom; It is that I desire, it is that I beg of God, next
the saving of my Soul: I pray God give all happiness to this Kingdom, to this
people, and this Nation: and then turning to the Executioner, said, How must I
lie? I know not.

Executioner, Lie down flat upon your belly: and then having laid himself
down, he said, Must I lie closer? Executioner, yes, and backwarder.

I will tell you when you shall strike; and then as he lay, seemed to pray with
much affection for a short space, and then lifting up his head, said, Where is
the man? and seeing the Executioner by him, he said, Stay while I give the
Sign; and presently after stretching out his hand, and the Executioner being
not fully ready, he said; Now, now, and just as the words were coming out of
his mouth, the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body.

The Speech of the Lord Capel.
THe conclusion that I made with those that sent me hither, and are the cause
of this violent death of mine, shalll be the beginning of what I shall say to
you: When I made an Address to them (which was the last) I told them with much
sincerity, That I would pray to the God of all mercies, that they might be
partakers of his inestimable and boundles mercy in Jesus Christ, and truly, I
still pray that prayer; and I beseech the God of Heaven, forgive any injury
they have done to me, from my soul I wish it. And truly, this I tell you, as a
Christian, to let you see I am a Christian; but it is necessary I should tell
you somewhat more, That I am a Protestant, and truly I am a Protestant, and very
much in love with the prossifeon of it, after the manner as it was established
in England by the thirty nine Articles; a blessed way of profession, and such a
one, as truly, I never knew none so good: I am so far from being a Papist,
which some body have (truly) very unworthily at some time charged me withal,
that truly I profes to you, that though I love good Works, and commend good
Works, yet I hold, They have nothing at all to do in the matter of Salvation;
my Anchor hold is this, That Christ loved me, and gave himself for me, that is
that, that I rest upon And truly, something I shall say, to you, as a Citizen
of the whole World, and in that consideration I am here condemned to dye:
truly, contrary to the Law that governs all the World, that is, The Law of the
Sword, I had the protection of that for my life, and the honor of it; but
truly, I will not trouble you much with that, because in another place I have
spoken very largely and liberally about it, I believe you will hear by other
means what Arguments I used in that case: But truly, that that is stranger, you
that are English men, behold here an English man now before you, and
acknowledged a Peer, not condemned to dye by any Law of England, not by any Law
of England; Nay shall I tell you more (which is strangest of all) contrary to
all the Laws of England that I know of. And truly I will tell you, in the matter
of the civil part of my death, and the Cause I have maintained, I die (I take
it) for maintaining the fifth Commandment, enjoined by God himself, which
enjoins reverence and obedience to Parents: All Divines on all hands, though
they contradict one another in many several Opinions, yet all Divines on all
hands, do acknowledge that here is intended Magistracy and Order, and certainly
I have obeyed that Magistracy and the Order under which I have lived, which I
was bound to obey; and truly, I do say very confidently, that I do dye here for
keeping, for obeying that fifth Commandment given by God himself, and written
with his own finger. And now Gentlemen, I will take this opportunity to tell
you, That I cannot imitate a better nor a greater ingenuity then his, that said
of himself, For suffering an unjust judgment upon another, himself was brought
to suffer by an unjust judgment. Truly Gentlemen, that God may be glorified,
that all men that are concerned in it may take the occasion of it, of humble
repentance to God Almighty for it, I do here profes to you, that truly I did
give my Vote to that Bill of the E. of Strafford, I doubt not but God Almighty
has washed that away with a more precious blood, and that is, with the blood
of his own Son, and my dear Savior Jesus Christ, and I hope he will wash it
away from all those that are guilty of it: truly this I may say, I had not the
least part nor the least degree of malice in the doing of it: but I must confess
again to Gods glory, and the accusation of mine own frailty, and the frailty of
my Nature, that truly it was an unworthy Cowardice, not to resist so great a
torrent as carried that business at that time. And truly, this I think I am most
guilty of, of not courage enough in it, but malice I had none; but whatsoever
it was, God I am sure has pardoned it, has given me the assurance of it, that
Christ Jesus his blood has washed it away; and truly, I do from my soul wish,
that all men that have any stain by it, may seriously repent and receive a
remission and pardon from God for it. And now Gentlemen, we have had an
occasion by this intimation to remember his Majesty, our King that last was,
and I cannot speak of him, nor think of it, but truly I must needs say, that in
my opinion that have had time to consider all the Images of all the greatest
and vertuousest Princes in the world; and truly, in my opinion there was not a
more virtuous, and more sufficient Prince known in the world, then our gracious
King Charles that dyed last: God Almighty preserve our King that now is, his
Son, God send him more fortunate, and longer days; God Almighty so assist him,
that he may exceed both the virtues and sufficiencies of his Father: For
certainly, I that have been a Counselor to him, and have lived long with him,
and in a time when discovery is easily enough made, for he was young (he was
about thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen years of age) those years I was
with him, truly I never saw greater hopes of virtue in any young person, then
in him; great Judgment, great Understanding, great Apprehension, much Honor
in his Nature, and truly, a very perfect Englishman in his inclination; and I
pray God restore him to this Kingdom, and unite the Kingdoms one unto another,
and send a happiness both to you and to him, that he may long live and Reign
among you, and that that Family may Reign till thy Kingdom come, that is,
while all Temporal Power is consummated: I beseech God of his mercy, give much
happiness to this your King, and to you that in it shall be his Subjects by the
grace of Jesus Christ.

Truly, I like my beginning so well, that I will make my conclusion with it,
that is, That God Almighty would confer of his infinite and inestimable grace
and mercy, to those that are the causers of my coming hither, I pray God give
them as much mercy as their own hearts can wish; and truly for my part, I will
not accuse any of them of malice, truly I will not, nay, I will not think there
was any malice in them; what other ends there is, I know not, nor I will not
examine, but let it be what it will, from my very soul I forgive them every
one: And so, the Lord of Heaven bless you all, God Almighty be infinite in
goodness and mercy to you, and direct you in those ways of obedience to his
commands to his Majesty, that this Kingdom may be a happy and glorious Nation
again, and that your King may be a happy King in so good and so obedient
people. God Almighty keep you all, God Almighty preserve this Kingdom, God
Almighty preserve you all.

Then turning about, and looking for the Executioner (who was gone off the
Scaffold) said, Which is the Gentleman? which is the man? Answer was made, he
is a coming, he then said, stay, I must pull off my Doublet first, and my
Wastcoat: And then the Executioner being come upon the Scaffold, the Lord Capel
said, O friend, prithee come hither: Then the Executioner kneeling down, the
Lord Capel said, I forgive thee from my soul, and not only forgive thee, but I
shall pray to God to give thee all grace for a better life: There is five
pounds for thee; and truly for my clothes and those things, if there be any
thing due to you for it, you shall be very fully recompensed; but I desire my
body may not be stripped here, and no body to take notice of my body but my own
servants: Look you friend, this I shall desire of you, that when I lie down,
that you would give me a time for a particular short prayer.

Then Lieut. Col. Beecher. Said, Make your own sign, my Lord.

Capel. Stay a little, Which side do you stand upon? (speaking to the
Executioner) Stay, I think I should lay my hands forward that way (pointing
foreright) and answer being made, Yes, he stood still a little while, and then
said, God Almighty bless all this people. God Almighty stench this blood, God
Almighty, stench, stench, stench, this issue of blood; this will not do the
business, God Almighty find out another way to do it. And then turning to one
of his servants, said, Baldwin, I cannot see any thing that belongs to my wife:
but I must desire thee to beseech her to rest wholly upon Jesus Christ, and be
contented and fully satisfied: and then speaking to his servants, he said, God
keep you; and Gentlemen, let me now do a business quickly, privately, and
pray let me have your prayers at the moment of death, that God would receive my
soul.

Capel. Pray at the moment of striking, join your prayers, but make no noise
(turning to his servants) that is inconvenient at this time.

Servant, My Lord, put on your Cap.

Capel. Shoul I, What will that do me good? Stay a little, is it well as it is
now? And then turning to the Executioner, he said, Honest man, I have forgiven
thee, therefore strike boldly; from my soul I do it.

Then a Gentleman speaking to him, he said, Nay, prithee be contented, be quiet
good M -- be quiet.

Then turning to the Executioner, he said, Well, you are ready when I am ready,
are you not? and stretching out his hands, he said, Then pray stand off
Gentlemen, then going to the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People,
Gentlemen, though I doubt not of it, yet I think it convenient to ask it of
you, That you would all join in prayers with me, That God would mercifully
receive my soul, and that for his alone mercies in Christ Jesus, God Almighty
keep you all.

Executioner, My Lord, Shall I put up your hair?

Capel. I, I, prithee do; and then as he stood, lifting up his hands and eyes,
he said, O God, I do with a perfect and a willing heart submit to thy will: O
God, I do most willingly humble my self: then kneeling down, said, I will try
first how I can lie; and laying his head over the block, said, Am I well now?

Execu. Yes.

And then as he lay with both his hands stretched out, he said to the
Executioner, Here lie both my hands out, when I lift up my hand thus, then you
may strike.

And then after he had said a short prayer, he lifted up his right hand, and
the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body, which was taken up
by his servants and put (with his body) into a Coffin, as the former.

March 19. 1648.
An Act for abolishing of the House of Peers.
THe Commons of England assembled in Parliament, finding by too long experience
that the House of Lords is useless and dangerous to the People of England to
be continued, have thought fit to Ordain and Enact, and be it Ordained and
Enacted by the present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That from
henceforth the House of Lords in Parliament, shall be, and is hereby wholly
abolished and taken away; and that the Lords shall not from henceforth meet or
sit in the said House of Lords; nor shall Sit, Vote, Advise, Adjudge or
Determine of any matter or thing whatsoever, as a House of Lords in Parliament:
Nevertheless it is hereby declared, That neither such Lords as have demeaned
themselves with Honor, Courage and Fidelity to the Commonwealth, their
Posterities who shall continue so, shall not be excluded from the Public
Councels of the Nation, but shall be admitted thereunto, and have their free
Vote in Parliament, if they shall be thereunto elected, as other persons of
Interest elected and qualified thereunto ought to have: And be it further
Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Peer of this Land, not
being Elected, Qualified, and fitting in Parliament as aforesaid, shall claim,
have, or make use of any Privilege of Parliament, either in relation to his
Person, Quality, or Estate, any Law, Usage, or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Hen. Scobel Cler. Parliamenti.

ON Thursday July 25. the General and Army marched from Mordington to
Coppersmith, Col. Hackers Regiment being drawn up in the way; His Excellency
made a speech to satisfy them concerning Cap. Ogles Troop, being sent back
into Northumberland, in regard of his interest in that County: and that Capt.
Greenwoods Troop appointed for Berwick should march with the Regiment in the
stead thereof, which gave great satisfaction. Col. Brights Regiment being drawn
up, Maj. Genesis Lambert appointed Colonel thereof, coming to the head of the
Regiment, was received with great acclamations.

A List of the Regiments of Horse and Foot Randezvouzed and marched with the L.
Genesis Cromwell into Scotland.
Eight Regiments of Horse.
THe L. Generals in number 663 Maj. Genesis in number 663 Col. Fleetwoods in
number 663 Col. Whalies in number 663 Col. Twisden in number 663 Col, Lilburne
in number 663 Col. Hackers in number 663 Col. Okey in number 774 Consisting
with Officers, in all 5450
Ten Regiments of Foot.
THe L. Generals in number 1307 Col. Pride 1307 Col. Bright 1307 Col. Maliveryr
1307 Col. Chapter Fairfax 1307 Col. Cocks 1307 Col. Dunell 1307 Col. Sir Ar.
Hasterigs 5. Comp. 550 Col. Fenwicks five Companies 550 Consisting with
Officers in all 10249
The Train, six hundred and ninety.

The whole thus, The Train six hundred and ninety.

The Horse five thousand four hundred and fifteen.

The Foot ten thousand two hundred forty nine.

The Total, Sixteen thousand three hundred fifty four.

A Letter from Lieut. Genesis David Lesly, to the L. G. Cromwell.
My Lord.
I Am Commanded by the Committee of Estates of this Kingdom, and desired by the
Commissioners of the General Assembly, to send unto your Excellency this
enclosed Declaration, as that which contains the state of the Quarrel;
wherein we are resolved, by the Lords assistance, to fight your Army, when the
Lord shall please to call us thereunto. And as you have professed you will not
conceal any of our Papers, I do desire that this Declaration may be made known
to all the Officers of your Army; and so I rest,

Bruchton, 13. Aug. 1650. Your Excellency's most humble Servant, DAVID LESLEY.

For his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell.
The Declaration of the Commissioners of the General Assembly of Scotland, as
follows.
THe Commission of the Generall-Assembly considering, That there may be just
ground of stumbling, from the Kings Majesty's refusing to subscribe and emit
the Declaration offered unto him by the Committee of Estates, and Commissioners
of the General Assembly, concerning his former carriage, and Resolutions for
the future, in reference to the Cause of God, and the enemies and friends
thereof; Does therefore Declare, That this Kirk and Kingdom do not own nor
espouse any Malignant Party, or Quarrel, or Interest, but that they fight
merely upon their former Grounds and Principles, and in defense of the Cause of
God, and of the Kingdom, as they have done these twelve years past And
therefore as they do disclaim all the sin and guilt of the King and of his
House; so they will not own him, nor his Interest, otherwise then with a
subordination to God, and so far as he ownes and prosecutes the cause of God,
and disclaims his, and his Fathers opposition to the work of God, and to the
Covenant, and likewise all the enemies thereof. And that they will with
convenient speed take in consideration the Papers lately sent unto them from
Oliver Cromwell, and vindicate themselves from all the falsehoods contained
therein, especially in these things, wherein the quarrel betwixt us and that
party is mis-stated, as if we owned the late Kings proceedings, and were
resolved to prosecute and maintain his present Majesty's Interest, before and
without acknowledgement of the sins of his house and former ways, and
satisfaction to Gods people in both Kingdoms.

West Kirk, 13. August, 1650. A. Ker.
13. August, 1650.

THe Committee of Estates having seen and considered a Declaration of the
Commission of the General Assembly, anent the stating of the Quarrel, whereon
the Army is to fight, Do approve the same, and heartily concur therein.


Tho: Henderson.

The Lord Generals Answer to the former, as follows.
I Received yours of the thirteenth instant, with the paper you mentioned
therein enclosed, which I caused to be read in the presence of so many Officers
as could well be gotten together, to which your Trumpet can witness, we return
you this Answer, by which I hope in the Lord it will appear, That we continue
the same we have professed our selves to the honest people of Scotland, wishing
to them as to our own souls, it being no part of our business to hinder any of
them from worshipping God in that way they are satisfied in their Consciences
by the Word of God they ought (though different from us) but shall therein be
ready to perform what obligations lie upon us by the Covenant; but that under
the pretense of the Covenant mistaken, and wrested from the most native intent
and equity thereof, a King should be taken in by you, to be imposed upon us,
and this called The Cause of God and the Kingdom, and this done upon the
satisfaction of Gods people in both Nations, as is alleged, together with a
disowning of Malignants, although he who is the head of them, in whom all their
hope of comfort lies, be received; who at this very instant has a Popish party
fighting for and under him in Ireland, has P. Rupert (a man who has had his
hand deep in the blood of many innocent men of England) now in the head of our
Ships stolen from us upon a Malignant account; has the French and Irish ships
daily making Depredations upon our Coasts: strong combinations by the
Malignants in England, to raise Arms in our Bowels, by virtue of his
Commissions, who having of late issued out very many to that purpose, and how
the interest you pretend you have received him upon, and the Malignant interest
in the ends and consequences entering in this man, can be secured, we cannot
discern; and how we should believe, that whilst known and notorious Malignants,
fighting and plotting against us on the one hand, and the declaring for him on
the other, should not be an espousing of a Malignant party, quarrel, or
interest, but be a mere fighting upon former Grounds and Principles, and in
defense of the Cause of God, and of the Kingdom, as has been these 12. years
last past (as ye say) for the security and satisfaction of Gods people in both
Nations, or the opposing of which should render us enemies to the godly with
you, we cannot well understand, especially considering, That all these
Malignants take their confidence and encouragement from the late Transactions
of your Kirk and State with your King; for as we have already said, so we tell
you again, it is but satisfying security to those that employ us, and are
concerned in that we seek, which we conceive will not be by a few formal and
feigned submissions from a person who could not tell otherwise how to
accomplish his Malignant ends, and therefore councel'd to this compliance, by
them who assisted his Father, and have hitherto acted him in his most evil and
desperate Designs, and are now again by them set on foot; against which, how
you will be able in the way you are in, to secure us or your selves, is
(forasmuch as concerns our selves) our duty to look after.

If the state of your quarrel be thus, upon which, as you say, you resolve to
fight our Army, you will have opportunity to do that, else what means our abode
here? And if our hope be not in the Lord, it will be ill with us. We commit
both you and our selves to him, who knows the heart and tries the Reins, with
whom are all our ways, who is able to do for us and you, above what we know,
which we desire may be in much mercy to his poor people, and to the glory of
his own great Name: and having performed your desire in making your papers so
public, as is before expressed, I desire you to do the like, by letting the
State, Kirk and Army have the knowledge hereof. To which end I have sent you
enclosed two Copies, and rest

From the Camp at Pencland Hills, 14. August. 1654. Your humble servant, O.
CROMWELL.

THe Victory at Gladsmore in Scotland, 30, and 31. of July 1650. M. G.
Montgomery slain, 200 arms taken of the Scots, 80. Troopers, 400. or 500.
wounded, 4 Colors, 15. Troops totally routed, 500. Foot routed at
Muscleburrough.

The Victory at Danbar, 30 August 1650. 400. killed upon the place, 10000
prisoners, 2000 Horse, 290 Commission Officers, 15000 Arms, 200 Colors, 32.
pieces of Ordnance.

Of ours that engaged in the Battle, 5000 Horse and Foot, Their Word, The
Covenant; Our Word, The Lord of Hosts, who manifested him self to be with us.

November. 1650. Insurrections in Norfolk, for which 24 were condemned, and 20
executed, the other left to mercy.

Col. Ker routed and taken, and the Town of Air.

December. 25. The strong Castle of Edinburgh delivered up, with 53 pieces of
Ordnance, whereof 15 Iron, the rest Brass; about 8000 Arms, store of
Ammunition and Provision; It was the hand of the Lord alone that wrought out
and extended such great salvations to us.

November. 21. A squadron of Ships commanded by Genesis Blague, surprised a
considerable part of the Portugal Brasil fleet fraughted with Sugar, and sent
them to England, and after pursued the revolted ships, and followed them beyond
Alligant, where they have taken 7 of P. Ruperts fleet, and pursued him to
Thoulon one of the furthest Havens of France, having but two ships left him;
which has sounded forth in the ears of Foreign Princes and States, who began
to acknowledge that God has been with the Parliament and Commonwealth of
England, and both Spain and Portugal have sent their Ambassadors to treat with
us. For all which signal salvations, the 30. of Jan. 1650. was set apart and
observed as a day of public Thanksgiving and holy rejoicing, in England,
Wales and Town of Berwick.

Jan. 1. 1650. The Scots King was crowned at Schone, He is General of the
Army, Duke Hamilton Lieut. Genesis of the Scotch Army, David Lesley M. Genesis
Middleton L. G. of the Scotch Horse, and Massey M. G. of the English.

A Speech made by K. Charles ye-2d-at his Coronation* 1. January. 1650 I will
by gods assistance bestow my life for your defense wishing to live no longer
then that I may see this Kingdom flourish in happiness.

The Oath, I do promise and vow in ye presence of ye eternal god yt I will
maintain ye true Kirk of god religion right preaching and administration of ye
Sacraments now received and preached within this Realm in purity; And shall
abolish and gain-stand all falce Religions and sects contrary to ye same. And
shall rule ye people com^ited to my charge, according to ye will of god, and
laudable laws and consti^^tions of ye Realm; causing justice and equity to be
ministered without partiality.



January 4. 1650. The King of Spain sent his Ambassador for the acknowledging
of this State, whose Authority and sovereignty resides in this Parliament of
the Commonwealth of England, and to stablish and close up a good friendship
with this Commonwealth.

The Portugal sent his Agent also to the like effect.

March 6. 1650. Sir Henry Hide beheaded at the Exchange for receiving and
acting by virtue of a Commission from Charles Stuart the Second, and King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, as his Agent to the Great Turk, with an
intent to destroy the Trade of the Turkey Company, and the Parliaments
interest, not only in Constantinople, but in Mitylene, Anatolia, and Smyrna,
in which conspiracies he had a Commission to be a Commissioner, and he was
likewise to seize upon our Merchants goods, for the use of the King of
Scotland; and procured Audience of the grand Vizier, and raised great fears and
uproars among the Merchants.

Brown Bushel, Beheaded under the Scaffold on Tower Hill, March 29. 1651. for
delivering up Scarborough.

June 2. 1651. The surrender of Silly Islands.

Insurrection in Cardiganshire, 24 June 1651. 40 slain, 60 prisoners taken.

Burnt Island surrendered, 29 July, 1651.

The Scotch King invaded England with 16000 Horse and Foot, and a light train
of Artillery, and caused himself to be proclaimed King of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, in Lancashire.

August 22. Charles the First erected his Standard at Notingham, and Charles
the second erected his Standard the 22 of Aug. at Worcester, 1651.

September 3. 1651. Old Lesly, Crawford, Linsey, Ogleby, with diverse of
quality, besides 300 taken that were making Levies to raise the Siege at Dundee.

August 2. 1651. St. Johnston surrendered.

August 19. 1651. The Castle of Sterling surrendered, 40 pieces of Ordnance, 27.
fair brass pieces, 2 great iron guns, 11 leather guns, provision of meal to
serve 500 men about twelve months, 40 or 50 Barrels of Beef, about five hundred
Arms, new Muskets and Pikes, twenty six Barrels of Powder, 20 or 30 vessels of
Claret wine and strong water, great store of match and other ammunition,
Lances, Guns, a thousand Flattes and other instruments of war of that nature,
all the Records of Scotland, the Chair and Cloth of State, the Sword, and
other (...) furniture of the Kings.

August 25. 1651. The total rout and overthrow of the Earl of Darby in
Lancashire, by Colonel Robert Lilburne.

A Full Narrative of the late dangerous design against the State, written with
Master Love's own hand, and by him sent to the Parliament; whereby he sets
down the several meetings, and secret actings, with Major Alford, Major Adams,
Colonel Barton, Master Blackmore, M. Case, M. Cauton, Dr. Drake, M. Drake,
Captain Far, M. Gibbons, M. Haviland, Maj. Huntington, M. Jenkins, M. Jaquel,
M. Jackson, Liev. Jackson, Captain Massey, M. Nalton, Captain Potter, M.
Robinson, M. Sterks, Col. Sowton, Col Vaughan, and others.


COnsidering how a clear and full Narrative may satisfy the State (although it
may prejudice my self) I am willing with an ingenuous freedom, and opennesse
of heart to make known the whole matter, so far as I distinctly know, and well
remember, humbly hoping that this large acknowledgement of mine (which is more
then any in the world can prove against me) shall not be taken as an
Aggravation of my fault, but as a Demonstration of my ingenuity. Before I
mention the matters of Fact, I humbly crave leave to signify the time when,
and manner how I came to be entangled in this unhappy business.

As for the time, it was after the breaking off the Treaty between the King and
the Scots at Jersey; for before that time (to the best of my remembrance) I was
not privy too, or acquainted with any meetings about the sending of Captain
Titus (whose face I never saw) to Jersey, or sending Letters to him, or
receiving Letters from him, while he was there; or about sending any Letters
too, or receiving any Letters from the King, Queen, Jermyn, Piercy, or any
other person in foreign parts during the Treaty at Jersey, but after that
Treaty was ended, M. W. Drake came to me, told me he had News to impart, and
to that end, he desired to know (if he could get friends together) whether I
was willing that they should meet at my house (it being conveniently situate
in the midst of the City) that so he might communicate what he heard of Affairs
abroad. To satisfy my curiosity to hear New^s, I was content to let him, with
those he should bring to meet at my house. Thus for the time when, and manner
how I came to be present at any meetings about Intelligence.

I now come humbly and truly to relate the matter of Fact, which is as
follows: It appeared to me by the testimony of the Witnesses, that there were
frequent meetings by Mr. Drake, Alford, Titus, Adams, and others, soon after
the death of the late King, and applications made to the King of Scots, the
Queen his Mother, to Jermyn, and Piercy, both before and during the Treaty at
Iersey, of which I know nothing, nor was I present: But the first meeting I was
at, was at my house, and was (as I remember) at the reading of a Letter which
came from Captain Titus, after the Treaty was ended at Jersey; the Contents of
that Letter were (if I mistake not) to this effect: That the Treaty at Jersey
was broken off through the violent and evil Counsels of desperate Malignants;
and that he had something of concernment to communicate, which he durst not do
in person, being not safe for him to come over into England, nor could he well
do it by writing, he judging it not fit nor safe to send by the Common Post,
fearing a miscarriage; wherefore he desired some body to be sent over to him to
Calice, to whom he might give an account of all proceedings. Upon the reading
of this Letter, Mr. Drake moved that some person should be desired to go to
Calice; for said he, We shall hear the whole relation of the business at
Jersey: Whereupon Major Adams or Captain Far were moved by Mr. Drake to go.
There was mention of Major Alford to go, though he was not then present that I
know of, nor was he ever within my house, as I remember, until after he
returned from Calice: so that there was none that I know of was gone, Mr. Drake
told me, Major Alford was the fittest man to go over to Calice, having
business of his own to go into France, to look after his Prodigal Son, so
that it was (said he) a plausible pretense to conceal his going over to meet
with Titus. There were present at this first meeting, M. Drake, M. Ienkins,
Maj. Adams, D. Drake, Cap. Far, Cap. Potter, and my self, with some others,
but who more, I cannot remember.

About two or three days after Major Alfords return from Calice, Mr. Drake
told me he was come to London, and told me he would go to several Ministers
and Citizens, to desire them to meet at my house, that so we might hear what
News Major Alford brought with him from Calice; accordingly the next day in
the evening they met at my house, Mr. Drake brought Major Alford with him;
Major Alford at that meeting gave an account of his conference with Titus, and
of his receiving a copy of the Kings Letter from him, as also a Narrative of
the proceedings at the Treaty at Jersey: But he said (if I mistake not) that he
brought not over the Letters himself, but delivered them to a Passenger that
came over in the Ship, to carry them, lest that himself should be searched;
but after he came into England, he received the Letter and Narrative from the
Passenger (but who he was I know not) and so brought them to London; whether
the Copy of the Kings Letter was read at my house, in my hearing, I remember
not; yet I deny not but it was read there, I am sure I heard that the Contents
of it were to this effect, That he took in good part the affections and
loyalty of those who formerly had made applications by way of Petition to him
(of which Petition I know nothing) and if ever God restored him, or put him in
a condition, he should remember them: The Narrative which Alford brought from
Titus, was read in my house, in my hearing, which was to this effect, He made a
large description of the Scots, commending his prudent carriage and good
inclinations to an Agreement with the Scots, but that his bad Council about
him hindered it; Also he made a rehearsal of his sufferings from the Cavaliers
at Iersey, how he was imprisoned in a close Room: Many things else was in the
Narrative, which I have forgotten. There were present at this meeting, Major
Alford, M. Drake, M. Case, Major Adams, M. Iaquel, M. Iackson, M. Ienkins, D.
Drake, Cap. Potter, M. Sterks, Cap. Far, and my self, with some others, but
who more, I do not remember.

A little before or about the Treaty, between the King and the Scots at Breda.
there was a meeting at my house, M. Drake proposed, that we should think of
some way to promote the Agreement between the King and the Scots; where by the
way, I desire humbly to give notice, That this was the first and only meeting
of this nature, and for this end, at my house, that I know of. At this meeting,
M. Drake took cut some papers out of his pocket, written in Characters, which
he read in my study; what he read, went under the name of a Commission and
Instructions (as he termed it) to be sent to the Lord Willoughby, Alderman
Bunce, Massey, Graves, and Titus, to appoint them to advise with, and use their
interests in persons of Honor, about the King, to provoke him to agree with
the Scots, and to take the Covenant; as also to advise with the Scots
Commissioners, and persuade them, That in their agreement with their King, they
would have special respect to the interest of Religion, and terms of the
Covenant; the Commission ran in this form, as if it were in the names of all
the Presbyteriall party in England: After I heard it read, I expressed my self
against it, alleging several Reasons, chiefly, That it was an Act of high
presumption for private persons to send a Commission with instructions, and an
act of notorious falsehood, to say, this was in the name of the Presbyteriall
party of England, when none but a few persons knew thereof, that I know of:
Many in the company did express a dislike thereof, as well as my self. M.
Drake did also read a Letter in this meeting, but to whom it was, I know not,
neither know I the Contents of it, I was at least a dozen times called out of
the Room, whiles the Company were there met, so that I am not able to give so
full and particular an account of the Contents of the Letter, and of the
Commission and Instructions: What M. Drake did about the Commission and
Instructions after he was gone from my house, I know not; what he sent away, I
know not, nor did I know by whom it was sent away, until Maj. Alford declared
before the High Court, That he received the Papers from M. Drake, carried them
to Gravesend, and delivered them to one Mason (whose face I never saw) and he
carried them to Holland. There was present at this meeting, Major Huntington
(who was never at my house before nor since, whose face I never saw before nor
since, but at my Trial) M. Drake, D. Drake, M. Jackson, M. Jenkins, M. Cauton,
Maj. Alford, M. Gibbons, Maj. Adams, Cap. Far, and my self, with some others,
whom I cannot remember.

There is one thing more I make bold to mention, That there are other persons,
besides those I have named, who did now and then come to these meetings at my
house, as M. Robinson, M. Nalton, M. Haviland, M. Blackmore, Col. Vaughan, Col.
Sowton, these were also present at one time or another, but at what particular
meeting, I cannot positively say.

Thus I have clearly laid open the whole matter of Fact, so far as I well
remember, and distinctly know of Passages about these Meetings and Transactions
at my house.

From the Tower of London, July 22. 1651. I attest the truth of this Narrative
under my hand, Christopher Love.

Mr. Love's Speech made on the Scaffold on Towerhill, August 22. 1651.
BEloved Christians, I am this day made a Spectacle unto God, Angels, and Men;
and among them I am made a grief to the godly, a laughing stock to the wicked,
and a gazing stock to all; yet blessed be my God, not a terror to my self;
although there be but a little between me and death, yet this bears up my
heart, there is but a little between me and Heaven: It comforted Dr Tailor, the
Martyr, when he was going to Execution, That there were but two styles between
him and his Fathers House; there is a lesser way between me and my Fathers
house, but two steps between me and glory; it is but lying down upon the
block, and I shall ascend upon a Throne: I am this day sailing toward the
Ocean of Eternity, through a rough passage, to my Haven of rest; through a red
Sea, to the promised Land. Methinks I hear God say to me as he did to Moses,
Go up to Mount Nebo, and die there, so go thou up to Tower Hill, and dye
there. Isaac said of himself, That he was old, and yet he knew not the day of
his death; but I cannot say thus, I am young, and yet I know the day of my
death, and I know the kind of my death also, and the place of my death also; it
is such a kind of death as two famous Preachers of the Gospel were put to
before me, John the Baptist, and Paul the Apostle, they were both beheaded: ye
have mention of the one in Scripture story, and of the other in Ecclesiastical
History: And I read in the 20 of the Revelations, and the 4. The Saints were
beheaded for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus. But herein is the
disadvantage, which I am in in the thoughts of many, who judge that I suffer
not for the word, or for Conscience, but for meddling with State-matters. To
this I shall briefly say, That it is an old guise of the Devil, to impute the
cause of Gods peoples sufferings, to be Contrivements against the State, when
in truth it is their Religion and Conscience they are persecuted for. The
Rulers of Israel they would put Jeremiah to death, upon a Civil account,
though indeed it was only the truth of his Prophecy made the Rulers angry
with him: yet upon a Civil account they did pretend he must dye, because he
fell away to the Chaldeans, and would have brought in foreign forces to invade
them: The same thing is laid to my charge, of which I am as innocent, as
Jeremiah was. I find other instances in the Scripture, wherein the main causes
of their sufferings were still imputed to meddling with State-matters: Paul,
though he did but preach Jesus Christ, yet he must dye, if the people might
have their will, under the pretense that he was a mover of sedition. Upon a
civil account my life is pretended to be taken away, whereas indeed it is,
because I pursue my Covenant, and will not prostitute my Principles and
Conscience to the ambition and lusts of men. Beloved, I am this day to make a
double exchange, I am changing a Pulpit for a Scaffold, and a Scaffold for a
Throne; and I might add a third, I am changing this numerous multitude, the
presence of this numerous multitude upon Tower Hill, for the innumerable
company of Angels in the holy hill of Zion; and I am changing a guard of
Soldiers, for a guard of Angels, which will receive me, and carry me into
Abraham's bosom. This Scaffold is the best Pulpit I ever preached in, for in
the Church Pulpit God through his grace made me an instrument to bring others
to Heaven, but in this Pulpit he will bring me to Heaven. These are the last
words that I shall speak in this world, and it may be this last speech upon a
Scaffold my bring God more glory, then many Sermons in a Pulpit.

Before I lay down my neck upon the block, I shall lay open my case unto the
people that hear me this day: and in doing it, I shall avoid all rancour, all
bitterness of spirit, animosity, and revenge; God is my record, whom I serve in
the spirit, I speak the truth, and lie not, I do not bring a revengefull heart
unto the Scaffold this day; before I came here, upon my bended knees, I have
begged mercy for them that denied mercy to me, and I have prayed God to forgive
them who would not forgive me: I have forgiven from my heart, the worst enemy I
have in all the world, and this is the worst that I wish to my Accusers and
Prosecutors, who have pursued my blood, that I might meet their souls in Heaven.

I have now done, I have no more to say, but to desire the help of all your
Prayers, that God would give me the continuance and supply of divine grace to
carry me through this great work I am now to do; That I, who am to do a work
I never did, I may have a strength that I never had; that I may put off this
body with as much quietness and comfort of mind, as ever I put off my clothes
to go to bed. And now I am to commend my soul to God, and to receive my fatal
blow, I am comforted in this, though men kill me they cannot damn me, and
though they thrust me out of the world, yet they canshut me out of Heaven. I am
now going to my long home, and you are going to your short homes, but I tell
you I shall be at home before you, I shall be at Heaven, my Fathers House,
before you will be at your own Houses. Now I am going to the Heavenly
Jerusalem, to the innumerable company of Angels, to Jesus Christ the Mediator
of the New Covenant, to the spirits of just men made perfect, to God the Judge
of all, in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand
there are pleasures for evermore. I shall conclude.

Then he kneeled down and made a short Prayer privately.

Then after rising up, he said, Blessed be God I am full of joy and peace in
believing, I lie down with a world of comfort, as if I were to lie down in my
bed. My bed is but a short sleep, and this death is a long sleep, where I shall
rest in Abraham's bosom, and in the embraces of the Lord Jesus.

And then saying, The Lord bless you, he laid himself down upon the
Scaffold, with his head over the block, and when he stretched forth his hands,
the Executioner cut off his head at one blow.

The humble Petition of William Jenkins, Prisoner.
Most humbly shows:
THat your Petitioner is unfeignedly sorrowful for all his late miscarriages,
whether testified against him, or acknowledged by him, and for the great and
sinful unsutablenesse of them to his calling and condition.

That upon earnest seeking of God, and diligent enquiry into his will, your
Petitioner is convinced, that the alterations of Civil Governments are ordered
by, and founded upon the wise and righteous providence of God, who removes
Kings, and sets up Kings, rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to
whomsoever he will.

That the providence of this God, have in the judgment of your Petitioner, as
evidently appeared in the removing of others from, and the investing your
Honors with the Government of this Nation, as ever they appeared in the taking
away, or bestowing of any Government, in any History of any age of the World.

That he apprehends, that a refusal to be subject to this present Authority,
under the pretense of upholding the Title of any one upon earth, is a refusal
to acquiesce in the wise and righteous pleasure of God, such an opposing of the
Government set up by the sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, as none can have
peace, either in acting in, or suffering for, and that your Petitioner looks
upon it as his duty, to yield to this Authority, all active and cheerful
obedience in the Lord, even for couscience sake, to promise (he being required)
truth and fidelity to it, and to hold forth the grounds of his so doing, to
any, as God shall call him thereunto.

That though an imprisonment, accompanied with the loss of estate, and to be
followed (without your gracious prevention) with a speedy Arraignment before a
high and eminent Iudicatory, are far from being pleasant to flesh and blood,
and though the enjoyment of your grace and favor, be a blessing most deserving
to be reckoned among the best of temporals, yet that neither the feeling, and
fearing of the former, nor the expectation of the latter, could have induced
your Petitioner against the light of his own judgment, and the prepondering
part of his own conscience to have made, or presenting this acknowledgement,
he sadly forecasting, that a whole skin is but a contemptible recompense for a
wounded conscience.

WILL. JENKIN.

Aug. 22. 1651. A glorious Victory obtained through Gods mercy, by the Forces
of the Commonwealth, over the Scotch Army at Worcester, 3 Sep. 1651. This day
twelve months was glorious at Dunbar, but this day has been very glorious
before Worcester, the Word was, The Lord of Hosts, and so it was now; The Lord
of Hosts having been wonderfully with us: the same signal we had now as then,
which was to have no white about us, yet the Lord has clothed us with white
Garments, tho to the Enemy they have been bloody, only here lies the
difference, that at Dunbar our work was at break of day, and done ere the
morning was over, but now it began toward the close of the evening, and ended
not till the night came, that in the end it became an absolute Victory,
determined by an immediate possession of the Town, with a total Routing and
Defeat of the Scotch Army, the number of persons taken is near 10000. near 3000
were slain of the Enemy, but of all our side not above 200. which adds much to
the mercy. My Lord General did exceedingly hazard himself, riding up and down
in the midst of their shot, and riding himself in person to the Enemies Forts,
offering them Quarter, whereto they returned no answer, but shot. Let us
conclude therefore in the words of our renowned General, The dimentions of
this mercy are above all our thoughts, it is for ought I know, a crowning
mercy, sure if it be not such a one we shall have, if this provoke not those
that are concerned in it to thankfulness, and the Parliament to do the will
of him, who has done his will for it, and for the Nation.

Sept. 1. 1651. Dundee taken by storm, sixty Ships in the Harbor, forty Guns.

The Scots King beaten at Worcester, gets into a hollow tree, remains there a
night, the next day in a Wood, cuts his hair short, shipped for Havre de Grace,
and so to Paris.



Sir, The Scottish King came hither on Monday the last of October, new style,
and being demanded by his Mother and the Duke of Orleans how he escaped the
Fight of Worcester, gave them this account.

That about six a clock in the evening, his Army being in all likelihood
beaten, he quitted Worcester Town, with a party of Horse, and marched toward
Lancashire, but being fearful of being pursued, and likewise of some of the
Scottish Officers that might deliver him up, he with my Lord Wilmot quitted
their Horses, sent the party of Horse upon their march, and betook themselves
the second days march from Worcester, into a Tree, where they remained until
night, and then marched on foot that night; the third day they took sanctuary
in a wood, and night approaching marched on toward Lancashire, where they were
received by a Lady who furnished them with Clothes for a Disguise, and cut off
their hair very short. Having reposed two or three days, the Lady resolved to
endeavor to ship them out of England, to which purpose, she riding behind the
King, and Wilmot as another servant by, they went to Bristoll, but finding a
narrow and hot inquiry there, resolved to go for London, where they stayed
three weeks. The King one day went into Westminster Hall, where he says he saw
the States-Arms, and Scots Colors; my Lord Wilmot procured a Merchant to hire
a ship of forty Tuns to transport them, which cost them a hundred and twenty
pounds, but where they took shipping is not yet known: but as soon as my Lord
was entered the Barque, and the King as his servant, the Master of the Vessel
came to my Lord, and told him, That he knew the King, and told him, that in
case it should be known, he could expect no mercy: which saying troubled them,
but at length, what with money and promises, they prevailed, and so set fail
for Havre de Grace, where they landed, and from thence to Roven, where they
clothed themselves, and writ to Paris. His arrival there will put them to new
Counsels, since now they cannot send their Ambassadors, which was concluded on
before his coming. The Duke of Orleans fetched him into Town, and expressed
much as to serve him. Yesterday he, with Thurenne, Beaufort, the Duke of Guise,
came to him to the Louvre, where the King told them, that they should endeavor
to reconcile the breach between the Prince and the King of France, for, said
he, to my knowledge the English will visit you with an Army in the Spring.

The Executing of the Earl of Darby at Bolton in Lancashire, October. 15. 1651.
The Isle of Jersey taken, October. 30.

Nov. 16. The Isle of Man taken.

Resol. That the time for the continuance of this Parliament, beyond which they
resolve not to sit, shall be Nov. 3. 1654.

The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England Declare.
1 THat no Power, Jurisdictions or Authority derived from, by or under Charles
Stewart, who pretended himself King of Scotland, or any of his Predecessors,
or any otherwise then from the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England be
used, exercised or enjoined within Scotland or the Isles or any of their
Territories thereof.

2 That they do forbid, annull and make void the use and exercise of any
Power, Jurisdiction and Authority whatsoever within Scotland or the Isles, or
any of the Territories thereof, other then such as shall be derived from the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

February 24. 1651.
An Act of general Pardon and Oblivion.


THe Parliament of England having had good experience of the affections of the
people to this present Government, by their ready assistance in the defense
thereof, against Charles Stuart Son of the late Tyrant, and the forces lately
Invading this Nation under his command, and being much afflicted with the
miserable and sad effects which the late unnatural War has produced, and
resolved (next to the glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ) to make no other use of the many victories the Lord has in mercy
vouch safed unto them, then a just settling of the peace and freedom of this
Commonwealth; and being most desirous that the minds, persons and estates of
all the people of this Nation might be composed, settled and secured, and that
all rancor and evil will occasioned by the late differences, may be buried in
perpetual Oblivion. Be it enacted by this present Parliament, and by authority
of the same, That all and every person or persons of or within the
Commonwealth of England, the Isles of Jersey and Gernsey, and the Town of
Barwick upon Tweed, and the heirs, executors, and administrators of them and
every of them, and all and singular bodies in any manner incorporated, Cities,
Buroughs, Shires, Ridings, Hundreds, Lathes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Towns,
Villages, Hamblets and Tithings, and every of them, are and shall be, and are
by the Authority of this Parliament, acquitted, Pardoned, released and
discharged (as against the Parliament the keepers of the liberties of England
by Authority of Parliament, or any or other of them) of all manner of Treasons,
Fellonies, Offenses, Contempts, Trespasses, Entries, Misdemeanors, Forfeitures,
Sequestrations, Penalties, and sums of moneys, pains of Death, pains corporal,
or pecuniary, and generally of all other things, causes, quarrels, fines,
judgments, and executions had, made, committed, suffered or done before the
third day of September 1651. not in this present Act hereafter not excepted nor
foreprized. And the said Keepers of the Liberties of England by the Authority
of this present Parliament, grants and freely gives, acquitteth, pardons,
releaseth and discharges to every of the persons, and to every of the said
Bodies corporate, and others before rehearsed, and to every of them, all goods,
debts, chattels, fines, issues, profits, Amercements, forfeitures, which to the
said keepers of the liberties of England do, or shall belong or appertain, by
reason of any offense contempt, trespass, entery, misdeameanors, matter,
cause, sequestration or quarrel had, suffered, done, or committed by them, or
any of them, before the said third day of September, and which be not hereafter
in this Act foreprized and excepted. And it is further Enacted, that this
pardon by these general words, clauses and sentences before rehearsed, shall
be reputed, deemed, adjudged, expounded, allowed, and taken in manner of Courts
of Justice, or elsewhere most beneficial and available to all and singular
the persons, bodies corporate, and others before rehearsed, and to every of
them. And if any person or persons, etc. shall be in any wise arrested,
attached, distrained, summoned, or otherwise vexed, etc. for, or because any
thing acquitted, pardoned, released, or discharged by virtue of this Act, that
every person so offending, and being thereof lawfully convicted by sufficient
Testimony, shall yield and pay for recompense to the party so grieved or
offended thereby, his or their reble damages, and forfeit ten pounds to the
keepers of the Liberties of England.

Excepted, and always foreprized out of this general free pardon, all and all
manner of High-treasons, (other then for words only) and all Levying of war,
rebellions, insurrections, and all Conspiracies and Confederacies, Traitorously
had, committed, and done against the Parliament, or the keepers of the
Liberties of England, either within or without the limits of this
Commonwealth, since the thirtieth day of January in the year of our Lord,
1648. And all misprisions and concealements of the said offenses or any of
them, or the abettimg, ayding, procuring of them, or any of them. And also
excepted all manner of voluntary murders, petty treasons, and wilful
poisoning; all piracies, and robberies upon the Seas, and the Abettors thereof;
All buggeries, rapes, and ravishments, and wilful taking away and marrying of
any maid, widow, or daughter against her will. And also except all persons now
attainted or outlawed, of or for petty treason, Murder, or wilful poisoning,
conjurations, witchcrafts, charms, wrongful detainments of any the customs,
and all Sequestrations and sums of money due upon compositions excise or
new-impost. And also excepted all conditions and covenants, and all penalties
and forfeitures due to the Parliament or the late King, since the 30. of
January 1648. And also all first fruits, and tithes, and all offenses and
misdemeanors whereof any sentence or judgment has been given in Parliament*
since the 30 of January 1648. And all offenses of Bribery, perjuries and
subordination of witnesses, counterfeiting deeds, debenters, bills of public
faith, escripts, or writings whatsoever: and all offenses touching the
carrying, sending or conveying over the Seas any gold, silver, Jewels, or any
coin. And all other offenses in the unlawful buying, selling, exchanging or
melting down of any Gold, silver or Bullion, or the transporting beyond the
Seas of auy Guns, shot, or Gun-mettle: And all offenses in detaining or
imbezling any the goods, moneys, or chattels of the late King and Queen: And
except all fines and amercements lost, imposed, or assessed: And all offenses
committed by any Jesuit or Seminary priest, contrary to the Statuts in that
case: Provided and except any outlawries upon any writ of Capias ad
satisfaciendum, and all except persons as were the 28^h of January 1651 in
prison, or otherwise constrained of liberty by immediate commandment, warrant,
or direction of Parliament or Council of State: And also excepted all
informations and proceedings concerning common high ways, and all forfeitures
of any goods or merchandise prohibited to be exported or imported:
All-Fee-farme Rents, Rents service, Rents charge, and Rents seck: and all
arrerages due since the 24th of June 1647. And all moneys imprested since the
third of November 1638. Provided that all acts of Hostility and injuries,
whether between the late King and the Lords and Commons in Parliament, or
between any of the people of this Nation which did arise upon any Action,
Attempt, Assistance, Council, or Advice having relation to, or falling out by
reason of the late troubles, that the same, and whatsoever has ensued thereon,
whether trenching upon the Laws and Liberty of this Nation, or upon the Honor
and Authority of Parliament, or to any particular person, shall in no time
after the 18th of June 1651 be called in question.



FINIS.

