The Great Eater of Grayes-Inne, OR THE LIFE OF Mr. MARRIOT THE CORMORANT.

Wherein is set forth, all the Exploits and Actions by him performed; with
many pleasant Stories of his Travells into Kent and other places.

ALSO, A RARE PHYSICAL DISPENSATORY, BEING THE MANNER how he makes his
Cordial Broaths, Pills, Purgations, Julips, and Vomits, to keep his Body in
temper, and free from Surfeits.

By G. F. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are sold by ^^^tam Reybould at the
Unicorne in Paul's Churchyard, 1652.

TO THE READER. His CHARACTER.
THE Ancients are of opinion that he came of the race of the Centaures, and it
may pass for current, his upper part being less then Man, and his lower more
then Beast; no Horse has such a switching Stomach: He loves Cook and Kitchen,
not so much for their Law as for their Names sakes, and at Bacon his mouth
waters; he knows better how to handle a Chyne of Beef then a Cause, for he
has more gutts then brains, and doubtless there was a stout Thrasher spoiled
when he was made a Lawyer: He is rather of the body Corporate then Politic;
the round Table is no more to him then the square, let him have meat enough
(if such a thing may be possible) he cares not if it be in a Wheelebarrow, and
makes but one meal a day, that is from morning to night: He is a great enemy
to a long Grace, and holds that it is time enough to give thanks when his Gorge
is full, for then he has most leisure, he carries a bottomless Pit about him,
by the Vulgar called his Maw, which has buried more flesh in a week, then
Stepney Churchyard has done Bodies this dozen years; He has one virtue, that
is, He drinks seldom, but when he falls to it he pays it, or some body for
him; he says he cannot endure to make a Sea of his Belly, but a Shambles he
may for the slaughtered: He walks in the Street like Pontius Pilate, in Robes
of Purple, but not like Dives in fine Linen; for he holds Shirts unnecessary,
and his Clothes are so Ornamented with Patches, that many are buried alive in
them: He has one property more then a Horse, for whereas the Stones wears out
their shoes, his shoes wears out the Stones; he has the virtue of
confidence, and is not nice of company: Provided there be eating, for he says,
of Idleness comes no goodness, and therefore had rather exercise his Teeth
then his Tongue: His company (it is confessed) is more costly then a Whores, and
for your avoiding it, Reader, I commend the ensuing Chapters of his
atchivements to your approbation, assuring you, that nothing is set down in
them, but what he has truly acted, and so to the variety of them I leave thee.

The first General notice taken of Marriots invincible Stomach.
THIS Great Man of Little Law, was not generally taken notice of for a Tall
Trencherman, till the beginning of the late Kings Reign, who having gleaned
some fragments of Law, was resolved to make some body pay form them: and in a
Michaelmas Tea^me, (when Roast beef savours best) he took up a Country
Client (as a Whore does her Chance) and to We^mnster he goes, where the first
motion he made, was, to Breakfast, saying, he should be the better prepared
for an Encounter at the Bar. The Gentleman in hopes to have success in his
own Motion, granted him his, and to Breakfast they went, the Place designed
for it was the Red Lion in the Palace yard, where they took a Room, and the
Gentleman bid the fellow bring a six penny-slice of Rost-beefe, six penny worth
( quoth Marriot) in wrath? what, do you take me to be a Chicken He looks
more like an Ox.
why, then bring twelve penny worth says his Client, sure that will serve, or
else the Devil is in us: Not so neither (quoth Marriot) Come, let us be good
Husbands, you shall see what a Caterer I will prove, and so enters the Kitchen:
quoth he to the woman of the house, what shall I give thee for as much of thy
Beef as will suffice two, Marriot did not mean himself.
ten groats quoth the woman, sye that is unreasonable quoth Marriot, I know not
how unreasonable you may be with my Beef (quoth she) I have no measure of your
Bellies, Nor he neither of his own.
nor had I ever such a question put to me before: Well, well, said Marriot,
then we will go another way to work, what is the price of the whole Surloyne?
what the Devil will you do with it quoth she, carry it away I warrant thee
quoth he, we will leave none behind us, fea^e not: It Is six shillings quoth
the woman, five said Marriot, and bring it in, and so returns to his Client,
what have you done Mr. Marriot quoth his Client, I have bid money for a pretty
morsel (quoth Marriot) if they will take it, and with that in comes the Beef,
at sight whereof his Client startles, why, what is the matter man quoth Marriot,
afraid of good meat? or did you never see a Surloin of Beef before? Bless me
said his Client what mean you, we have no more company to come to us. No matter
said Marriot, here is company enough, you know the proverb, The more the merrier,
but the fewer the better Cheer, and so Marriot sell on, his Client was so
amazed, he had not power to eat a bit: What said Marriot, does the sight of my
feeding take away your Stomach? see what it is to be so pulingly fedd. By this
time the Wonder was over, and the Beef wrought to the bones, the Gentleman
smiling, asked if there were any more meat in the house, for he had eat
nothing, Yes said the fellow that waited, there is a cold Capon: Oh let us have
it by all means quoth Marriot, no meat so excellent as a cold Capon, why then
said his Client (and smiled) let us have it, You shall not starve in a Cooks
shop Mr. Marriot; your Cause shall fare the better for it quoth Marriot. Will
you have any Sauce quoth the fellow, Sauce to a cold Capon (quoth Marriot) away
you Rascal, Hunger is the best sauce when all is done. I protest Sir (quoth
his Client) you have an excellent faculty, I Sir (quoth Marriot) I would you
had so good a stomach, so would not I (replied his Client) for I should starve
my Wife and Children then. The Capon was brought in, Sir (quoth Marriot) we
must make all the have we can, the Court will sit suddenly: I perceive Sir
(quoth his Client you will loose no time, oh it is a precious thing quoth
Marriot) and so dispatched the Capon, at which his Client laughed heartily, and
said it is the best frolique I ever paid for in London, I am glad it pleased
you, Sir, quoth Marriot. The reckoning being paid, quoth the woman of the
house, you are welcome Gentlemen, and for your part Sir (to Marriot) could you
but drink as well as you can eat, you would be the best Guest comes to my
house, provided you paid for what you called for, if I do not, some body else
shall I warrant thee woman: (quoth Marriot) I was not borne for my self only,
and so trotted on to the Hall, where we leave him to his socond Motion.

CHAP. II. How Marriot having his Motion granted, urged his Client to go to
dinner, and what happened.
MArriot, though a Man of weak Judgment, yet of strong Lungs, bellowed so
loud at the Bar, that to be rid of him the Judges opened their ears (I
cannot say their understanding) and granted his Motion: Upon which Marriot
hollowed forth in open Court, Blessing on the Judges, and keep them in this
mind ever. Now (quoth Marriot to his Client) what think you? have I not
friends? yes, and good ones too you see, but what say you to a Dinner Marriot
not in Commons.
? it is that time a day (for he was too dangerous a person to be admitted into
Commons among the rest of his Function:) why (replied his Client) are you ready
for a Dinner that made but now so stout a Breakfast? Ready Marriot never
unprepared.
and ready again (quoth Marriot.) Alas Sir, Meat quickly disgests with men of
my Calling, I have walked since, and talked since; and spent my Spirits in your
Cause, a Noble refreshment will be very seasonable. Hark you Mr. Marriot (quoth
his Client) your Motions are very chargeable, are all your Clients at the cost
to find you meat and money too? Yes, yes, quoth Marriot, some meat and some
money does well, but you will have all and sum where ever you come Mr. Marriot
quoth his Client. I take less fees for my Motions (quoth Marriot) then any Man
in Town, but you take more meat then will serve threescore quoth his Client,
and laughed heartily. Alas Sir, (quoth Marriot) my belly is not so deep but it
may be filled; marry and I will try that (quoth his client) if all the meat in
Westminster will do it: And so his Client being resolved to fathom his ungodly
Paunch, carried him to the house where they breakfasted; but he having made
there so great a slaughter in the morning, that they were unprepared to meet
his Noons Encounter; but very civilly the woman of the house told him (being a
good customer) that if he pleased to say what he would have, it should be dressed
in a trice: No quoth Marriot, my Stomach is up, and I must have something
presently to appease it, or my whole frame will be out of order, and so he
marched into Kings street with a Stomach of no small growth, in so short a
time, where, having searched every Cooks shop, that had a fit appearance to
receive his Client (though a stye would serve him) and finding Provision fall
short of Expectation, all being spent before, Marriot began to rave, and swore
the People had a mind to starve him. At last, searching for his Prey That is,
whom he may devour.
, espied on his left hand toward the three Tuns Tavern, a Dirty Tray full of
dirtier Draffe is good enough for Swine.
meat of all sorts, such as had endured the sury of the fire at least a dozen
times, and been drowned in Grease as often: The house, or rather a Den, The
house described.
out of which came a smoke able to choke a horse, and certainly from the time
of its building never had been befriended with Sun. The Cook himself of grisly
hue, appeared as though he had bin bred up in Pluto's Kitchen: His Maudlin, or
Shee-thing, of like complexion, with an Apron of perfect Sluttery, and of
countenance able (a Man would think) to overcome the most resolure and
strongest appetite. Yet Marriot no whit daunted, encouraged his Client to step
over, saying, See Sir, where the hand of Providence has directed us, I protest
I began to faint. His Client perceiving his ghastly countenance, fearing he
would eat him if he were kept longer from meat, resolved to endure the Plague
of the house, rather then suffer by his tyrannous Jaws, and so with Nose not
Scent-free, he enters the enchanted Castle, with Giantick Marriot; Marriot
poyses the Tray, and finds it answerable to his Stomach, quoth he, friend, what
will thou take for as much meat as I can eat, this Gentleman is not at this
time for eating: Why, Sir, (quoth the fellow) one of these pieces will serve
two men, and you shall dine on one of them for twelve pence: No quoth Marriot,
I am a Gentleman, and will not be confined to one Dish, I must take here a bit
and there a bit; troth I fear (quoth the fellow) it will spoil the fale of
them, but if if you please to give me three shillings, you shall make your
meal on them; thou art an honest fellow (quoth Marriot) and shall have it: So
up they went to a Room where no light had ever been seen, save Candlelight,
and stunck worse then the Shambles Excrements, or the Bear-garden. His Client
not able to endure their nasty accommodation, would have departed, and at the
Bell Tavern have stayed for him: but Marriot would not permit it, saying,
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris. Up came the meat, not ordered in
several Dishes, but clapped together in the Tray, as it stood upon the Stall;
but whether it was to blunt the edg of his Stomach, or for want of dishes, is
disputable; but Marriot to show he feared no colors For the meat had all.
fell on Pell, mell, and so defeated, or vanquished three of the pieces, the
whole body being but six, but of such mixtures, as an Army made up of
Switzers, French, Dutch, Spaniards, etc. So this hodgpodge of Veale, Mutton,
Porke, Beef, and so forth. The In plain English a Dirty cloth or Rag.
Maudlin of the house perceiving how magnanimously he went on, and fearing the
spoil of the rest, ran down to her Master, and told him that the Devil was
come in the likeness of a Lawyer, and had eaten three of the biggest pieces,
and was endangering the other. The fellow Fearing neither God nor Devil.
ran up stairs, but before he came, Marriot had made an end of two of them,
and was ready to fall upon the other: You Dog quoth the fellow, and seized on
the Tray and the remaining piece of meat; You Rascal quoth Marriot, give me
the meat: Sirrah (quoth the fellow) be thou the Devil or his Dam, I will
have money for the meat thou have eaten, Maudlin fetch me a Constable, at
which his Client was ready to burst with laughter, you Knave (quoth Marriot) I
will not give thee a penny till I have had my bargain, you shall know sirrah
who I am, and that I will straight quoth the fellow, and at him he flies, Sir
(quoth Marriot) bear witness, I am a Lawyer, the Devil's in the Lawyer then
(quoth the fellow) and I will beat him out of thee: Down falls Marriot, his
Client not able to endure longer, makes his way toward the stairs, thinking to
make up the sportby his leaving them; but the stairs being dark, down tumbles
his Clyent, in comes Maudlin with the Constable, the Constable seizes on the
Gentleman, immediately Marriot was heard to cry out, the Constable secured the
Gentleman, and then went up, where he found Marriot's hat off, his Gown over
his Ears Note the Antiquity of them.
, and his Blew breeches discovered, Bless me quoth the Constable, what have we
here? A distressed Gentleman (quoth Marriot) thou lie (quoth the fellow) thou
art no Gentleman, His Gentility questioned.
for if thou were thou would pay me for my meat; sirrah sirrah quoth Marriot,
thou art a Knave, I will make thee stand to thy bargain, thou shall be hanged
first, and at him he flies again: come, cries the Constable, a Justice of
Peace shall end this difference, with all my heart quoth the fellow, and mine
too (quoth Marriot,) I can show my face where thou dare not thine. So down
the Constable had them, to go before the Justice, but his Client being
unwilling to appear further in the business, offered to pay the fellow for
his meat: As I am a Christian (quoth Marriot) but you shall not, I will have
out my bargain, or I will not pay him a penny for his meat. What was the
bargain, quoth the Constable, I was to make a meal on his meat (quoth
Marriot) for three shillings, and he has eaten me five pieces (quoth the
fellow) as big He shows the piece.
as this, and would have this too. The Constable laughed heartily, and told
Marriot it was a shameful thing, and most unreasonable. I am a Lawyer (quoth
Marriot) and know it is no shameful thing for a Man to eat his Were there more
ont.
meat. Sirrah (quoth the fellow) it was none of thine, I will be paid for it,
and so to a Justice they went: The Constable there opened the matter to the
Justice, Marriot pleaded his bargain, the Fellow made his defense, and said, he
thought he had bargained with a Man, but he proved a Monster, It is all one for
that (quoth Marriot) a bargain is a bargain, and I will have right if there be
any Justice As though he doubted it.
in the Kingdom. The Justice (being of Gotam breed) checked the fellow, and told
him that a bargain was a bargain, Every fool can speak as he is taught.
and he would recover it against him, and therefore ordered the fellow (for
preventing his future trouble) to restore Marriot the other piece of meat, and
to take his three shillings for full satisfaction. Well (quoth the fellow) if
it must be so, he shall eat it in my sight, and the Devil do him good with
it: Good reason too, quoth the Justice, but not in my house (quoth the fellow)
I Will see him hanged first: I care not where I eat it (quoth Marriot) and yet
I Will eat it where I please: Not so neither quoth the Justice, you must eat it
where the bargain was made. Oh good your Worship (quoth the fellow) punish me
not so, unless you Order him to call for drink proportionable: Well Sir,
(quoth the Justice) give him twelve pence more, and eat it where you please
Sir, I Will eat it in the street first quoth Marriot; away, away, quoth his
Client, it shall be so, we but trespass upon this Gentleman's patience, friend
deliver him his bargain, and thou shall have four shillings, that is twelve
pence more then my bargain (quoth Marriot) it goes near my heart to give it
him. They departed from the Justices, and returned to the Cooks Cell-doore, for
into it he was not to be admitted, the meat was brought forth, the money paid,
and Marriot put the meat in his sleeve 'Twas not the first time he had done so.
: Sirrah sirrah, quoth Marriot, I shall know you for a Knave hereafter, and
shun thy house as I would a Prison. Bridewell is firter for you then a civil
house, quoth the fellow, and set the boys at him, that Marriot became in
danger, which his Client perceiving, slunk through Stevens Alley, and left him
to the mercy of the boys. Marriot observing the multitude to increase, and
fearing lest he should loose his meat in the combustion, stalked His usual
pace.
along the street, sometimes snapping at the meat, and sometimes at the boys:
Be quiet children, quoth he, I am a man In his own conceit.
, and shall -- then he swallows down a piece as big as his fist, and that is
of no small size, till by degrees he had made an end of it all, without the
help of bread or drink, and so laughing at the boys and his fancy of securing
his meat from them, kept on his Pace with the boys at his heels, till he
came to his Lodging, and there received his first shout and acclamation to be
no Innes of Court Dumplin, but a man of a large Colon.

CHAP. III. Marriots second Encounter, with his voyding a Worm.
MR. Marriot being invited to Dinner to a private house by some Gentlemen, was
met in the street by some other Gentlemen, who observing how he sweat with
going an unusual pace, apprehended that he was upon some design of meeting,
alias eating, and his have betrayed his fears of coming too late, and so they
having a disposition for mirth, resolved to stay his Journey. Mr. Marriot
(quoth one of them) why so fast? I pray Sir forbear (quoth Marriot) my
business is of concernment, the state of your body I warrant quoth the other
Gentleman: Sir (quoth Marriot) pray let me go Marriot begins to be angry.
, what have, what have, quoth the Gentleman: Well Gentlemen quoth Marriot, you
may do me more harm in an hour, then you will do me good in ten, how know you
that (quoth the other) You are a Man of good Intelligence, Mr. Marriot, what
News, what News? I have no more to do with News then News has to do with me
(quoth Marriot) pray let me Oh to see his face now.
go. Suppose (quoth one of them) I should bring you News of a Dinner, were
there any harm in it? Marriot lickt his lips, and said, pray Gentlemen do me
not thus much prejudice, there are some that stay for me: What to do (says the
Gentlemen) this is Vacation time, you have not Law Suits to follow, and held
him fast by the Wrist, Marriot began to You cannot blame him.
strive, at which the people that flocked about him laughed heartily. Gentlemen
(quoth Marriot) I pray let me go, or I Will call a Constable: To call a
Constable you mean (quoth the Gentlemen) and therefore it is best keeping you
here, with that the People laughed outright, why good people, good people,
quoth Marriot, will you let a Gentleman be thus obstructed in his Occasions?
What are your Occasions Mr. Marriot (quoth one of them) are they urgent? I, in
truth are they quoth Marriot; what, in matter of Dinner quoth the Gentlemen?
You have the right of it Gentlemen (quoth Marriot) as I am a Christian: Why
seriously (quoth one of them) nothing but your Stomach If that will not, I know
not what will.
should part us. I protest Gentlemen (quoth Marriot) I lie not. The Gentlemen
having had mirth sufficient with him, lets loose his Wrist; which no sooner
done, but Marriot takes his run as fast as his heavy heels could carry him, At
which all the People gave a shout, and the boys after him. At last Marriot
reached the place appointed, where he was no sooner entered, but he comes first
in the Kitchen, and finding his Detention had wronged him much, the last Course
being ready to go in, fell upon a bowl of cold Cream that stood on the
Dresser, and dispatched it in the twinkling of a Gloworm. The last Course going
in, he enters with it, and there to the Gentlemen he relates the reason of his
stay. Alack (quoth the Gentlemen) you have done your self a great deal of
wrong, Mr. Marriot, and us too. Nay quoth Mr. Marriot, I have not done it, but
the Knaves that held me in the Street, but I hope I shall recover the time I
have lost to all your Contents, and so fell on a dozen of Pigeons, and a leaze
of sucking Rabbets; which having devoured (to the wonder of the beholders)
quoth he, Gentlemen, I do not like this pidling dishes, have you no
substantial Beef or Mutton left in the house, and so what was remaining, was
brought in, which he as easily destroyed as the other, and was ready for more:
But Marriot being overheated with coming, and falling first on the cold Cream,
and drinking suddenly after it, found such quarrelling in his Guts, that he was
unable to sit longer at Table, and before he could get from thence, showed some
testimony of his loose Condition, to the prejudice of all their Noses there
present. His Vocative case made the Gentlemen weary of his Company; and finding
him worse and worse, they caused a Porter to be called for, and bargained with
him to lead him to his Lodging; but before the Porter got half way, he was so
strong of Monsieur Sir Reverence, that he was not to be endured. The Porter
espying a fellow with a Wheelbarrow, called him, and told him the Gentleman was
sick, and if he would carry him home, he would be very well paid for his
pains, for he was a Person of Quality. The fellow with hopes of profit, was
armed against Senior le Faugh, and takes him in, and carries his Worship, but
see his fate! he was unhappily carried that way where the Gentlemen had made
sport with him in the Morning, so that the Shopkeepers and Boys, espying him
in that case, ran out and cried, The great Eater has overeaten himself; to whom
Marriot still cried, good Christians forbear, and do not mock a dying man, ha
quoth the Boys, This is the great Eater of Grays Inn: A pox upon you quoth
the Wheelbarrow fellow, art thou the Cormorant? I would have seen you hanged
(had I known so much) before you should have come into my Barrow; Out, out, in
the Devils Name, it is no charity to preserve thy life: And so out poor Marriot
was thrown in a pitiful pickle; oh quoth Marriot, is there no
Christian-minded People among you? At last two women Tankerd-bearers, took
pity of him, had him into a house, and washed him, and at Night was led to his
Lodging, where he was no sooner sat down, but he was taken as though he had
quick silver in his guts, and nothing would satisfy him but a Doctor, who
almost as soon as sent for, came. Alas (quoth the Doctor) Mr. Marriot, you have
taken a surfeit with eating too much; fie, ^ye (quoth Marriot) Sir, you are
mistaken, I could have eaten thrice as much: You must take a Purge quoth the
Doctor, I purge too much already quoth Marriot, I quoth the Doctor, but this
proceeds from the malignity of the Cause, the effect of which being taken away,
this purging cease. Say you so Sir (quoth Marriot) pray use me well, and let
me have it as soon as possible, you shall have it made ready to night (quoth
the Doctor) fit to take to morrow, I shall dye before quoth Marriot; why then
quoth the Doctor, you shall have it to take to night, and so went his ways to
make ready the Purge, which being finished, Marriot received, and a while
before he went to bed, took it; about two hours after his being abed, it began
to work, and at last he felt a long thing come from him, at sight whereof he
cried out, oh the Devil, the Devil, whereupon all the house was disturbed. The
Doctor was sent for, who, when he saw the Worm, told him that it was a Worm
that had long time bred in his body, and would have come to a more perfect
growth, had not that accident of eating the cold Cream (which is an Enemy to
those kind of Worms) and drinking suddenly after it, curdled it, and so
suffocated and killed the Worm; for which resolvement, Mr. Marriot gave him
not only thanks, but paid him for his Purge, and to this day keeps the Worm
(dried up) in his Chamber, which was then about three yards long. But it is
conceived by the Wise, that it left behind at that time, young ones, which are
grown to a greater bigness, as may appear by the growth of his Stomach, but
whether it be or not, Time and such another Surfeit will produce, and until
which time you must have patience.

CHAP. IV. How the Lord Grandison served Mr. Marriot at Madam Pikes, and how
afterward caused him to fright the Archbishop of Canterbury, and what happened.
BY this time Marriot was grown Famous in his Art, insomuch, that happy was
that Noble person that could get him to make sport. It happened that the Lord
Grandisons Coach passing by the New Exchange, when his Footman espied Mr.
Marriot walking alone, he soon acquainted his Lord therewith, who being
merrily disposed, sent for him, and desired him to come into the Coach to him,
and now he has him to Madam Pikes, where was good Wine, and such knacks as
Lords use to have: But Mr. Marriot began to be angry, saying, I hope you have
not brought me hither to look only on taftaty Tarts, or a dish of Coxcombs: My
Lord, this is not meat for me, I love Beef, Mutton, Veale, or Pork, that is
meat which will endure some cutting: I pray my Lord set by your Ferboon
Kickshaws: Mr. Marriot, said my Lord, you shall first drink your belly full;
Marriot being unwilling, yet at the last, in hopes of meat, took up his cups
handsomely, but his brain being weak, was soon drunk. My Lord Grandison sends
for a Ba^ber to shave all the hair off his beard; which being done, they got a
large loose Gown, and pulled off his own Clothes, and put the Gown on him,
with Head-cloaths and Apron, dressing him like a Bawd. Marriot being so drunk
that he knew not what they did, was in this shape led to the Coach, and thence
he was carried to White Hall, where being conveyed to a Chamber, through which
the Bishop of Canterbury was to pass, they let him in a Chair, and left him;
The Archbishop coming through the room, starts at the sight of him, saying to
his Gentleman Usher, I do much wonder how this drunken Woman should come here;
Marriot being not full afleep, said, I am no Woman, I am a Man, and a Lawyer;
the Bishop much wondering at him, assured himself that some body had put him in
that place to affront him, and now begins to question Marriot, who for his part
was not able to speak for himself: but my Lord Grandison stepped into the room,
and ended the controversy, by sending Marriot away, telling the Bishop that he
came so disguised only to ask pardon for his faults: The Bishop was angry at
his saying, but could not help himself. My Lord Grandison gave Marriot a
suite of Clothes for his pains, which to this day, though greasy, are to be
seen on his back, and is very loath to leave them, for the very fancy of the
pastimes he had in them.

CHAP. V. How Marriot eat a Gammon of Bacon, and would not pay for it, and had
like to have been stoned.
Mr. Marriot desirous to see Bartholomew Fair, went up Hosier Lane, and there
espied a Gammon of Bacon set forth on the Stall (as the Custom is at Fares)
which put him in mind of Eating. So Marriot walks gravely and soberly in, and
asks the woman of the house to show a Room; which being done, quoth Marriot
to the woman, I saw Bacon in your Shop, and marry that is there quoth the
Woman, and the very best in all the Fare I Will assure you. A man may have a cut
at it (quoth Marriot) I hope, and pay for it, may he not? I blessing on your
heart quoth the Woman, and spare not. Gramercy quoth Marriot, thou seem to
be a good body; do you want any Company Sir, quoth the Woman, here is They were
Whores.
Gentlewomen in the house Berlady (which is indeed the only furniture of all
Fares) No quoth Marriot J thank thee Woman, not at this time, prithee fetch
thy Bacon. The woman brought her Bacon, quoth she blessing on your good heart
Sir, fall on and spare not, which speech (as J take it) she might have spared,
for he was resolved to that without her Counsel. The Woman was scarce returned
into the Shop, but Marriot had drunk up his single pot of Beer, eat two
Rolls, and picked the very bones of the Bacon, which had had but a small slice
cut off it before: Marriot comes into the Shop, quoth he J have quickly done,
so it seems Sir quoth she; there is twelve pence for thy Bacon quoth he, J
will come another time and be merry with thee: God bless you Sir quoth she,
and send you well to do, the woman not thinking he had eaten all, and being
busied in her Shop, could not presently go to see what spoil had been made,
thought her self well paid, and Marriot went his ways into the Fare; but it so
happened that Marriot came that way back, and the woman having found out the
Deceit, was cursing him deeply, and calling him all the names that could be. At
last she espied Marriot, oh there is the Rogue quoth she that eat up my whole
Gammon of Bacon, and has undone me, J will be the death of him, thou Rogue
quoth she, pay me for my Bacon: Why Woman, Woman, quoth Marriot, have
patience, did not J pay thee twelve pence: A pox upon you for a Gormandizing
Knave, is twelve peace enough for a large Gammon of Bacon? Go go, you are a
huswife, quoth Marriot, and would have had me been naught in thy house; Thou
lie like a whoreson Knave quoth the Woman, and at him she flew: But Marriot
was made too strong with her Bacon for her to overcome, and so down she came,
you Jade quoth he, J'le make you know your self. Murder, murder, quoth the
Woman, out you great Rogue quoth the boys, will you beat a woman? and so they
threw stones at him. Marriot seeing company flock about him, and every one had
a fling at him, took his run, and the boys hooting after him, till he came
near his Lodging, where he was rescued by the Porters in Grayes-Inne Lane.

CHAP. VI. How Mr. Marriot was invited to Dinner, and how he conveyed meat
away, but met with Stump the Wine-pot Carrier of the Fleece in Holborn, and of
the terrible Battle fought between them.
MAster Marriot was invited to the Globe Tavern in Chancery Lane by some
Gentlemen to Dinner, upon a Wager, that he should not destroy the Dinner that
was provided for themselves. Mr. Marriot came according to their invitation,
and was welcomed, and bid fall too, which Marriot was as ready to do, as they
to desire, and on he fell, drawing his dreadful Knife, and laying about him as
he had been mad, to the speedy destruction of the Dinner; whereat the Compan^
laughed, and said, why Gramercy Mr. Marriot, you show your self free from
Deceit; but Marriot it seems had been at it some where else a little before,
that had stopped up some of his Chinks, and so could not devour all but because
they should take no Exceptions, he clearly conveyed the remainder into his
false bagg which he had about him for the purpose, that none could discover his
slight of hand but such another Hocus Pocus as himself. The Gentlemen became
heartily merry at his Ledger de Fons, and drank to him: but Marriot: being weary
of drinking as well as eating, made his excuse to go down to exercise his
Posteriors, which they granted him, and desired his return: but he no sooner
was gotten down, but homeward he goes with more then his ordinary pace, and in
Grayes Inn met with Stump (so called because of his Wooden leg) quoth Stump,
how now you Monstrum Lame Latin.
Morendum, where have you been, and pulled him by the sleeve, and clapping him
about the Breeches and Pockets, felt something more then ordinary, at which
Marriot called him Rascal, and pulled his Bag forth: Oh sirrah, quoth Stump,
what Beggar-woman have you robbed, ha? or have thou taken it out of the
Prisoners Basket: You Rascal, quoth Marriot, I will break thy bones; go,
go, quoth Stump, thou art a ravenous hound, and fitter to be hanged, then to
live; with that Marriot strikes Stump, and Stump strikes Marriot, till both lay
on the ground. Marriot's Ruff was torn by Stump, and Stump's wooden leg was
broke; the scraps or fragments of the Feast were thrown about, and Stump lay
on the ground, not able to rise for want of his leg. Marriot thought he had
been revenged enough on Stump, gathers up his pieces of meat, and goes his
way: You Rogue, you Rogue, quoth Stump, could I but follow you, J would mall
your Ugly hide for you; but Marriot kept on his Pace, and minded him not, and
Stump at last by the help of a Porter, was carried to the Joyners, and there
had his leg set right again, and so went about his business.

CHAP. VII. How Marriot was sent for down to a Knights house, and how he was
served there.
A Knight living in Kent, having many Gallants at his house in the Christmas
time, could not have sport enough he thought to give them Entertainment: And
still studying and inventing for fresh mirth to make them laugh, at last it
came in his head to send to London for Mr. Marriot, on purpose that his friends
might be the more heartily Merry, which as soon as thought upon, the Knight
put in practice, and calling his Man to him, gave him 20. s. and commanded him
to saddle a couple of Horses, and make all the have be could to London, and
deliver this Letter to Mr. Marriot, you will hear of him in Grayes-Inne Lane,
and desire him not to fail to come along with you to me. The Letter was as
follows,

SIR,
I Have been beholding to you often when I was in London, for your good
Company, and now I have laid fifty pounds that you will come with my Serva^^,
and therefore I pray fail me not, for you shall not only have all the
Entertainment my house will afford you for a fortnight, or longer, as you
please, if your Occasions will permit you, but also gratify you for your loss
of time, and ever remain,

Your friend to serve you, J. S.


THe Knight having dispatched his Servant, went in to his Company, and told
them that he had sent for one that would make them all heartily merry, and be
hoped shortly to have him there; the Gentleman's friends enquired what he was,
quoth the Knight, did you ever hear of one Marriot of Grayes-Inne? who Marriot
the Great Eater quoth one of them? the very same replied the Knight, troth and
he will make good sport indeed quoth one of them; what is he quoth another? he
does pretend to the Law quoth the Gentleman, but is he so great an Eater said
another? you shall see that when he comes quoth the Knight. The fellow followed
his directions given him, and just as he was enquiring for Mr. Marriot, a
Cobbler in Grayes-Inne Lane showed the Servant the Man, who was coursed by
Boys, he coming from F^^ Lane with the four heinges of a Sheep on his Arm,
and three Bullocks Livers in a string on the other Arm, jeering him with the
Loyne of Mutton he had borrowed, hook, and all in Westm^nster. The servant
began to suspect that his Master had a plot to have him beaten, perceiving such
a tumult following the Man he was sent too, he being but a raw Country
fellow; but Marriot at last got into the house, and the boys after a great
shout departed. They were no sooner gone, but the Country fellow took upon him
the Courage (which he durst not before Seeing his eager Looks.
) to come up toward Marriots Lodging, and there very valiently knocked, and
desired to speak with Mr. Marriot, the servant of the house told him he was
newly gone up, but he would call him if the fellow pleased to come in, which he
did, and was directed to go up to him in a little Chamber; The fellow knocked
softly, but unawares to Marriot, who hastily coming forth with an Apron before
him like a Butcher: Friend, quoth Marriot, would you speak with me, yes Sir,
said he, I have a Letter for you, and so gave him the Letter; Which Marriot
having read, and being tickled with the Conceit of so good Entertainment,
pulled off his Apron, and made his Apology for having it on, saying, Friend, I
am but a lone Man, and therefore dres^ my meat my self, which makes me
appear thus uncouth, but I wi^^ ^^im my self up presently, On goes his purple
Robes.
and along with you I will go, his meat he put into a Barrel wherein was
sour small Ale, to the end it might be well soused against his return, and so
began to fit himself for the Journey, He first pulled out a pair of shoes
(for thickness may be three pair) out of a hole, as for Boots he had none;
Then he took great care for a Sword, and at last got an old rusty Hanger of
the Cutler over against his Lodging, He would not stay to have a Frienge set on.
and for a Belt, cut an old Leather pair of Breeches, which had been some
Paviers, into several pieces, and tied the ends together, and so the Gallant
was ready for his Journey, and went along with the Country fellow to the place
where the Horses stayed; and being come, quoth the fellow, Sir, I think it
very wholesome to take a Repase or so of meat before we set forward; with all
my heart quoth Marriot, I approve of your good motion, and so Marriot went to
bespeak Breakfast, which was half a dozen pound of Sausages, and a stewed Loin
of Mutton, which was immediately got ready, and brought in, quoth the fellow,
sure Sir here is too much; be not deceived Friend, quoth Marriot, I warrant thee
thou will find no such thing, but rather too little, and so they fell too, As
it appeared by the fellows share.
but before the fellow got one Sausage down, Marriot had eaten a pound, which
made the fellow stare. How now, quoth Marriot, what think you now? think quoth
the fellow, I think I shall get naught for my money. The Sausages being
dispatched, he fell on the stewed Mutton, nay quoth the fellow, Sir, pray give
me leave to come into play with you; but Marriot so ordered the business, that
the fellow had but a small Breakfast. Marriot laughed heartily to see the
fellow look so at him, and said, alas honest Friend, thy Master sends for me
to make him sport, and I shall do it I warrant him: This Breakfast is but a
pidling Collation to stay my Stomach, I could have put him to greater charge if
I had been so minded, but I reserve that till I come to his house. Well Sir,
quoth the fellow, I commend you, you have a good stroke with your Teeth. Hark
you Friend, quoth Marriot, I know it is your Masters will that I shall be at no
charges, and therefore pay the Reckoning, and let us be going; Well if it must
be so, it must be so, He wanted a Ladder.
quoth the fellow, and so called for the horses to be brought forth. The horses
being brought forth, Marriot endeavored to get up on his, but the weight of
his posteriors, and the goutinesse of his shoes hindered him, so that the
fellow laughed, and took down the stirrup Leathers to let in his ugly hoofs,
and then shouldered the Great Booby into the Saddle: Oh quoth Marriot, I hope
the Horse trots not! I am but a bad Rider, and therefore pray ride fair and
softly, and so on they went to their Journeyes end.

CHAP. VIII. How Marriot was entertained by the Knight, and the sport they had
with him.
THE Knight hearing that Mr. Marriot was come, went out to meet him, where
Marriot was unbinding his shoes and stockings, and vviping them with a wispe
of straw, the Knight bid him welcome, and asked him how he did, I tha^k you Sir
quoth Marriot, I am very well, but your splattering Nagge has done my Shoes
and Stockings a shillings worth of harm, I will make you reparations for any
harm my horse has done you, and therefore pray walk in, Mr. Marriot, walk
in, and dry your self, there is a good sire in the Kitchen: So going to the
Fire with him, bid him sit down, a Chair was brought him, and he sat down, and
then the Knight bid the Butler fetch a bottle of Sack, and drank to Mr.
Marriot, I thank you Sir, quoth Marriot, fill him a Beer-glasse quoth the
Knight, I thank you Sir quoth Marriot, I had rather eat then drink; Supper
will be ready straight quoth the Knight, Tom, Cook, make have with it, all the
have that possible can be (Sir) said the Cook. Come Mr. Marriot (quoth the
Knight) I have some Friends within would gladly enjoy your Company, shall we
into the Parlour? I am at your Commandment Sir, quoth Marriot, and with a
Spaniards stately gate, he paced into the Parlour after the Knight, but his
hobbled shoes made such a Noise, that the Knight looked still behind him,
thinking his Malt horse had followed him. The Gentlemen, made their Civil
Salute to Mr. Marriot, the Ladies fell a gigling at his Clouted shoes, what
(quoth Marriot) Ladies are you laughing already? what will you do anon? by
Lakins you shall have laughing enough Gallants, why that is well said Mr.
Marriot quoth the Knight, pray take notice of my Friends, these are Gentlemen
and Ladies of the Country, and such as may merit your friendship Mr. Marriot,
I am theirs, I am theirs, quoth Marriot, but your Rascally Cook methinks
stays something long, fie on these delays, I would he had as good a Stomach
as I, The Knight would not have kept him then for five hundred pounds a year.
and then J am sure he would make more have of Supper. Fear not Mr. Marriot
quoth the Knight, it will come immediately, and so gave Order to make all the
have he could. Sir, quoth one of the Gentlemen, what News at London? J seldom
talk before Meals quoth Marriot, after Supper J am for you: With that one of
the Ladies stepped toward him, J pray Sir (quoth she) were you ever married?
What to do Lady (quoth Marriot) what to do, is Supper coming yet? J perceive
(quoth the Lady) you have more mind on your Supper then on a Wife. Why truly
(quoth Marriot) a Wife is but an unnecessary Dish, and may serve to come well
as the last Course, and so to be served last (quoth the Lady) well, then be
pleased to receive your Idol (which was the meat newly brought in) and that I
shall, quoth Marriot, you shall see willingly. Down they sat; quoth Marriot,
Gentlemen, let no Man have more manners then will do him good; for my part, I
see the meat before me, and if any man has a better Stomach let him show it, I
am not ashamed of mine, and so Gallants, by your leave, which was the word to
be given, and thereupon Marriot fell upon the Spoil, and made havocke of what
e're came before him, that the Cook had much ado to make Dishes ready for the
Table so fast as he was ready for them; but there was no scarcity, the which
Marriot took Notice of, said, Sir I perceive you keep a good house, the like
plenty be in it for ever. Amen (quoth one of the Ladies softly) but keep thee
from it good Lord I beseech thee. I know the reason now Sir (quoth another
Lady) why you will not marry; good Lady quoth Marriot, spare your talking, I
shall find time enough to play when my work is done. It being Christmas time,
as well Great as little Pyes were set before him: Quoth Marriot, as for your
Diminitive Pies, I shall spare them, because they are not worth my Anger; but as
for the Towering Walls of the Goose and Turkey one, let them expect Demolishing,
and so placed his Engines of Bartery against them, and not admitting any
Parley, made his Breaches suddenly, and so desperately, one would have thought
him a stout Engineer. Now the Ladies begin to look one upon another with
pitiful Countenances, one of them setting all the mear and Pies that were
unrouted in Battle row, to hold him in Play while they rose They feared he
would eat them.
from the Table. The Gentlemen that were present laughed heartily to see the
Ladies in this fear, and whispered them not to be so simple to think he would
do them any harm; why quoth one of the Ladies, the Devil certainly is in
him, and one so possessed cares not what he does; troth He trust him not quoth
she, nor I neither, quoth another, and rose from the Table, and the rest of
the Ladies with them, and went to the fire, where they did at a safe distance
behold the dreadful strokes he gave, how he laid on without mercy, as men
placed on Hills, through Prospectives, behold whole Armies fighting, and yet
themselves in no danger: The Gentlemen would not rise from Table till Marriot
had made an end of the spoil, and could rise tryumphant: Marriot having filled
every Chink in his unsatiate gutts, gave the finishing stroke and rose up, and
said, Sir Knight thank you for my Supper; Gramarcy Horse quoth one of the
Ladies, you might have said for ten Suppers: He comes toward us, quoth another
Lady, let us be gone, good now lets be gone; let him be hanged quoth another
Lady, never fear him, his anger is over now, it is the ugliest thing, quoth
she, that ever Dunghill produced: it growing toward bedtime, some partly in
fear of him, and others to accompany them, left the Gentlemen with Marriot
and retired to their Chambers, where their tongues were so employed in
deliniating Marriots parts, that one of the Ladies cried out, For Heavens sake
talk no more on him, would I had touched the Monster, for I dare say I shall
dream of him: The Gentlemen perceiving that Marriot was more a lover of the
Kitchen then the Buttery, and was not company vvorth a Louse, save for his
Magical Art of eating; resolved before they went to Bed to Souce all the
meat he had Earrelled up in his Paunch, if all the Drink in the Buttery would
do it, and there was good store: Marriot with much entreaty was drawn to
the Buttery, but not with half the willingness a Bear is to the Stake,
healths past about, Gentlemen what mean you quoth Marriot, my guts will hold no
more, but they plied him so nimbly with mixed Drinks, that Marriot having but a
weak head, was knocked down with drink, and so to his Chamber they went with
him, and gave him the parting cup, which being unable to take, he tumbled into
Bed like a Boar into his Sty, where no sooner entered but you might hear by
his snorting how safe and secure he was: And so the Gentlemen left him to the
mercy of his Fate, and so went to consult how they might make sport the next
day with him; and having laid their Plot handsomely, the next day they put it in
practice, which is set down in the next ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IX. How they make Marriot believe that he is poisoned, and what happened.
THE Gent. being to give their Verdits what should be done with Marriot, but
none of their Projects were worth mentioning to this of the Knights, which only
was put in practice, as thus; the Knight said, I have a Butler that is a good
Tailor, and I will set him to work presently, so he caused one of his Servants
to fetch Marriots Clothes down, which being done, sets his Butler to take in
his Dublet of each side, so much as he should not be able to button it, and
likewise his Breeches; now being so neatly done that none could suspect it, his
Clothes were laid by his Bed again, and all the Servants were charged not to
say any thing of it, This Doctor was one of the Gentlemen that was in the House.
but to persuade him that he was much swelled, and that without doubt he was
poisoned, and to tell him that there was a Doctor in the House that could cure
him if there were but the least hope of life in him; so every one that was
confederate in this business, was instructed how to carry themselves, and for
this night they go to Bed, some not sleeping, to think how the Project would
work, passed away the time with other discourse, and so till Morning, He
wondered to see his Clothes so little.
which time they long expected; all being in a readiness in the Morning to
wait Marriots rising from his nest, which at last he did with the gesture of a
Madman, thinking absolutely he had been poisoned, and being persuaded by the
Servants of the House, that it was nothing but poison could make him so; Sir
said one of the Servants, here is a Doctor in the House, and if you please I
will call him, without doubt he will cure you: He mends the matter.
Oh said Marriot if you look to see me a live man, make no stay but go fetch
the Doctor, I hope he is not kin to Balams Ass, which will not speak without
he sees an Angel: Sir said he, Marriot had but little money.
this Doctor is so much a Gent. that he will not expect the least reward from
you that may be, away away, fetch him quickly or I dye, the Servant goes
presently to the Doctors Chamber, who as much desired to be sent for, The
Servant needs not tell the Doctor his Errant. He feels his Pulses The Doctor
prescribes him a Broth to drink. He was a Mountebanck. You may read of the
making of this Broth. in his Distillatory.
as Marriot did his coming; who when he came to Mr. Marriots Chamber saluted
him, and told him that by some Accedent he had received Poison into his Body,
that was of that subtle Nature, that would not make him sick to the inward
Vitals, but only swell outwardly for the present, but if not prevented would
kill him immediately: But I will cause a Broth to be made for you presently,
that is as famous as Mounsicure Puentes antedote for expelling Poisons; Marriot
gives him many thanks for his Care, and desires him that the Broth might be
made out of hand, the Broth being made, the Doctor gave him strait charge not
to take above three spoonfuls in an hours time, this was a grief to Marriot
to see his allowance so small: For the whole quart was no more in his Belly
then a Man in Paul's; This was his grief that by spoonfuls he must be fed, and
to eat no other thing: It being now Dinner time, the Knight to torment
Marriot, desired him to come and sit in the Parler to pass away time, Marriot
thought it would be some ease to him, went with the Knight, who caused his
Broth to be set by him, that as occasion did serve, to give a taste to his
mouth, but when Dinner was set on the Table, oh Reader had you but seen his
Countenance and Gesture, you would have admired to see a sick man lay violent
hands on all sorts of Meat, A good Sign in a sick man, when he has a coming
Stomach. You would have thought he had played Hocus Pocus with it.
and had eaten it, had not his Doctor with many entreaties desired him to the
contrary, and promising him that he would give him Meat which would digest
with him, made him forbear now to satisfy his greedy Appetite; the Doctor
gave him the wing of a Pullet, which the Doctor did desire him to mince very
small, but in the twinkling of an eye was vanished, and desired the Doctor to
let him have some more meat; the Doctor more willing to please the Company with
his Actions, then to fill his ungodly Stomach, dismembered a Foul of his
quarters to give Marriot the Carkas to pick, saying, Sir eat as little as you
can for to day, and to morrow you may eat your belly full, for then the danger
will be past: Marriots Belly having more ears then his head, gave little heed
to what the Doctor said, but fell to his Carkas, that he made both Meat and
Bones Invisible. Saying, Sir, you Diet me as if I had the Pox, but if I once
get out of your hands, They are never good that mind their bellies so much.
I Will never come under a Doctor again, I think no Physic like Kitchen Physic,
but Dinner being ended which was a grief to Marriot, the Doctor caused him to
go to his Chamber, for fear of taking cold, saying, He would not forget him at
Supper, if you do said Marriot I shall remember you, I make no doubt of it said
the Doctor, now taking his leave of Marriot, he went down to the Knight, to
plot more mischief on poor Marriots Body, which you shall hear in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. X. How Marriot Supped, and how the Butler made him drunk, and after took
away his Doublet, letting it out to its old shape, and how he eat a Bitch
baked in a Pie the next day.
IT being now Supper time, the pretended Doctor sent Marriot up a Chicken
roasted, and bid the Servant tell him that he might drink a glass of Sack after
it, Marriot did not stay for a Knife but pulled it a pieces, throwing it down his
throat without chawing, that those Servants that stood by him, thought he took
it to be a sin to bite his Meat: Marriot desired the Servant to give him some
Sack, he answered that he must go to the Butler for it, He need not to entice
him to eat or drink.
Marriot bid him go speedily, the Butler brought a Bottle which did hold a p
ottle of Sack up to Marriot, and said, Sir, I heard the Doctor say, that old
Wine was excellent good for you, and would do you much good, and I have brought
you that is right, come said Marriot let us taste it, I think you to be the best
Doctor when all is done, the Butler fills him a Tankord of Sack, which he soon
turned off, saying, It Is good Sack indeed, but give me the other Draught, and
then my Stomach will be warm, after he had drank he said to the Butler, Friend
have you no cold meat in your Buttery, you would much comfort me, A good sign
in a sick man.
for I am hungry even to Death: The Butler answered, I have some Fragments of
roast beef and powdered beef and such things, which was left at Supper, and if
you will accept of that I will fetch it, I, I, said Marriot any thing that is
flesh the Butler fetched up a Basket as if he had been to distribute a Dole to
poor Folk, when Marriot saw the Meat, like a man over Joyed, laid to the meat
and bred, All Is one to him for he had lost his taste.
Orange pills and parings of Aples being altogether in the Basket, having now
as he thought laid a good Foundation in his Belly: give me some Drink, they
gave him Sack, too good for such an ungodly Gut, he not leaving this Basket
with any thing in it, said to the Butler, well thou have saved my life by this
means, and though my Body be sweld to Night, I hope to Morrow I shall be
Iusty, for the very conceit of being poisoned made me feeble: Sir said the
Butler, will you be pleased to pledge this Health, its to my Master, The Butler
drank Beer.
yes said Marriot in a whole Tankard of Sack, I will begin it said the Butler,
drinking off his Tankard, and filled it with Sack, which Marriot soon drank off,
saying, I am sleepy and would go to Bed, it being ready, they undressed him,
and laying himself in his Bed, said, Put out the Candle, for I shall sleep
presently; the Butler taking his Dublet and Hose with him, and now having let
them out to their old form, he laid them in the place where they were before.

He then went to Bed, looking for the Morning more earnest then a Lawyer would
do for a Fee, to have share of the sport which follows in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI. How Marriot rose in the Morning and eat his Breakfast, and how he
was dined with a Pasty, wherein was an old spaid Bitch baked, and what happened.
MArriot having slept as long as he could, knocked for some of the Servants, to
bring up a Light to him, for to take Tobacco, one of the Servants brought up a
Candle, saying, Sir, it is very early, and there is no body up but the Cook
and my self, I hope you will not rise yet, no no said Marriot, I will not
disturb you if you are preparing for Dinner, Sir said the Servant, I am heating
of the Oven for two Venison Pasties, there is also great store of Provision to
be dressed for Dinner, go thy ways said Marriot, leave only the Candle with me;
he having a Pipe which held half an ounce, smoaked the Room as if wet Straw
had been set on fire, but when the Tobacco was out, he resolved to try if his
Clothes would come together, he quickly put it in practice; The Clothes sitting
him as if they had been made for him: I wonder the Devil who would have worn
them besides himself, now he walks like a new Alderman, looking much on
himself: was often asayling the Stairs, but fearing least he should awake
some of the house, did contain himself, by walking without his shoes, which
had they been on, He might only have waked the Horses lying over the Stable.
most sure the noise would have been such as if a Horse-Mill were going; but
what with hunger and joy he takes his Shoes in his hand and discends the
Stairs, coming to the Kitchen hastily, frighted the Cook almost out of his
wits; his Countenance was so terrible, that the Cook thought he would have
eaten all the Meat raw; but Marriot said, Friend, I love your Occupation and
would not disturb you, Sir, said the Cook, I never use to have lookers on when
I am at work: The man will make you a fire in the Parler, I know Cooks are
angry men said Marriot, I shall leave you to your self: The Cook was most
afraid that Marriot should have seen the Bitch which lay ready to be put into a
Pie for him, with Tobacco and other Ingredients, to make the flesh relish
somewhat better then ordinary: Now the Pie being finished, was set with the rest
to bake, the whilst Marriot was not idle, but gave a terrible onset to a great
Suffolk Cheese, making both Meat and Parings quickly Invisible; this being but
Breakfast meat, or rather a preparative to his Stomach, yet with much
difficulty, past out the time till Dinner was ready. Marriot thought the time
long, but at length the Knight with his Friends came to see Marriot, who was
smoking the house with his ugly great Pipe, they said Mr. Marriot, what are
you mad to come out of your Chamber to catch cold? Sir said Marriot, I was not
mad to stay there to be starved both with hunger and cold. They asked him if he
thinks his Stomach would serve him to eat a little Venison, no meat comes
amiss to me, for I have a good appetite; Dinner coming to the Board broke off
the discourse; but not Marriots Stomach: The Ladies also appeared, smiling at
his looks, and desire no other ^port, but to see him eat his Pasty which was
provided for him; being all set at Table, Marriot fell to some powdered Beef,
Sir, said the Knight, do not spoil your stomach, there is more choiser meat
provided for you, I thank you Sir, this will serve the mean time; but the
Pasties appear, one for the upper end and one for Marriot, the Knight desired
Marriot to feed heartily, do not fear it Sir, for I have been long absent from
Victuals, but I Will pay it now; do, do, Mr. Marriot and spare not, for it was
provided for you; he presently laid his trusty Blade on the walls of this Pie,
The Bitch be meant. Instead of Rabbets.
that he made it level to the Plate: Yet after this he fell to six bear Cats,
which were presented before him in a Dish, in whose bellies were dissolved a
pound of Candles, with the Herb called Spurgs, which without doubt would loosen
his Belly to some purpose. But the sport was to come: Now Dinner being ended,
many merry discourses past between Mr. Marriot and the young Ladies, but the
Maids of the House desired their Lady, that they may have leave to show one
Christmas Gamble, leave being granted them by the Knight and his Lady, the
Knight desired to know what it should be, one of the Maids answered thus, Sir,
you have been at great expenses with Mr. Marriot, and it is time he repair
homeward, and if you give me free leave, I Will satisfy you, as shall appear in
the next Chapter following.

CHAP. XII. How the Servants of the Knights House served Marriot a trick, and
sent him going to London.
THE Servant Maid began, Sirs you shall know this plot is thus; we have got
Horse hair cut very small, with bay Salt beat together, which we will strew in
his Bed, that being once laid down he shall never rest in quiet, for his
Clothes shall be sauced a little with the same spice, that he shall think he
has the pocky Itch: The Knight hearing this new project, laughed heartily,
saying, Do what you will, I shall wink at it: Now after a long Supper Marriot
was sent to Bed with a Fox at his tail; now the sport begins, for Marriot was
no sooner in the Bed, but he swore it was full of Fleas, stinging most
violently that he was not able to lie there any longer, and at last rose, but
they had spiced his Clothes also, which he having put on, was in a worse
condition then before, swearing that he thought it would make him go mad, they
persuade him to sit still, which he was as able to do as to build a Church, he
like a Fencer stood shruging and rigling his Body, that they that were present,
could not forbear laughing, Saying one to the other, now it works: Marriot
would presently go to the Knight, and acquaint him what tricks his Servants had
put on him, the Servants persuaded him to the contrary, but he is resolute, and
in a great fury goes out of the Chamber, stamping as if all the Horses were
dancing a Caranto, till he came to the Knights chamber Door, where with a
hoarce voice he said, Though it have been my goodness to spend some idle time
with your Worship, and to make you laugh and your friends; I thought I had
showed you sport enough in the day time, to have been a sufficient protection
for me at night, and not to be made dance like a halfpenny hot Loaf with q^ic^
silver in it, I shall take my leave of your Worship though it be late, I may
find a Lodging some where: The Knight speaks to Mr. Marriot saying, With the
Dogs he may.
Sir, be not angry with me, for if I knew who they were that thus have played
the Knave with you, J should turn them out of my house for your sake: Marriot
was even crying ripe for vexation of his misfortune. The Knight commanded his
servants to pull of those sheets from the bed, and to lay on fresh, and to give
him a Shirt to put on, whilst his own was washed; Marriot gives the Knight many
thanks, promising to show him the uttermost of his skill at any time, so for
that Night he went to Bed, and in the Morning he would take his Journey, the
Knight gave Mr. Marriot a Piece, to bear his Charges till he came to London,
No body would stay him.
so Marriot bid them Farewell.

CHAP. XIII. How be departed from the Knights, for to take water for
Billings-Gate, and how he eat Oysters there, and what befell him.
A Horse being ready for Mr. Marriot, and another for a Servant to conduct him
to Gravesend: The Knight with the rest of the Gentlemen went to see him take
horse, for this is the last trick they meant to show him: They had sadled a
Golt that was to be backed, which they knew would throw him: The Ladies were
got all to a Gallery, that looked to the Court, assuring themselves of sport:
Marriot was now taking leave of them all, and by the help of Steps for the
purpose, got up, but the Colt ran backward and rubbed his Legs against the
Walls, sometimes rising before and leaping, Marriot cries out, I shall fall,
hold the Horse, but every one looked on, but none helped him; so at the last
down he came tumbling, which made them laugh, nay do not laugh said Marriot,
for I might have broken my neck; really said the Knight, He said true enough.
be not angry with any of us, for we never saw any one fall from his back
before; so he commanded another Horse to be fetched for him, pray said Marriot
let me see some body on his back, for I am weary of falling, one of the
Servants rid the Horse about the Court, I said Marriot, I wish I had rode him
first, and then my bones would not have paind me now: Being mounted he took his
leave of them, and rod as he was guided to Gravesend, where he took Boat for
Billings-Gate, where being come, he saw many Boats which brought Oysters
Laden very full: He said to one of the Masters of the Boat, Friend, what
shall I give you to fill my belly full of Oysters, and I will find Bread,
Beer, Oynions, Vinegar, and Pepper; Sir said the Boate-man, you shall give me
but two shillings, and you shall eat till your belly is full, my man also
shall help you to open them, I yield to this bargain said Marriot: Now Marriot
discends into the Boat where the Oysters were, sending the Boy for a six penny
Loaf, two pennyworth of Oynions, Pepper and Vinegar, three Flagons of Beer to
wash them down, this is to comfort me said Marriot after all my sorrows, He
speaks to the Boat-man.
for J have had many of late; well be not angry at your Bargain, for I think I
shall eat out my two shillings in Oysters, my Stomach is still good, Boy fetch
me the other six penny Loaf, and three Flagons of Beer, and I shall have done
presently: The Devil do thee good with them, for I do verily believe that you
have eaten three Bushels, thou shall never escape thus, you may eat what you
please, but I Will warrant you shall pay for them before you go out of this Boat:
Friend said Marriot I made a bargain with you, and I will make you stand to it;
who the Devil will fill your belly with poor John for forty shillings, much
more with Oysters for two shillings: Friend said Marriot I am a Lawyer and can
be even with you at sometime or other, what I warrant, you are the great Eater
of Grayes-Inne, if you be, He gesses well.
overboard you go, for I will not have such gormodizing in my Boat: By the
Lord Harry tell me your Name, for I Will know, He is in earnest.
my Name is Marriot Jack, is not his name Marriot that we heard such talk of,
yes yes that is his name, well we will throw him into the Thames, and had not
some Gentlemen come by, He speaks toone by.
without doubt they had put it in practice, but the Gentlemen called Mr.
Marriot, who flung down the two shillings, and made have to the Gentlemen,
saying, I will eat no more Oysters at your Boat, He was out of the Boat first.
you keep such a quarrelling for an Oyster or two, well you Dogs, I Will be even
with you if you come near Grayes-Inne.

CHAP. XIV. How Marriot dined at the three Kings, and what happened.
MR. Marriot being now come with the Gentlemen to the three Kings, where were
many Gentlemen to Dine, the Gentlemen presented Mr. Marriot as a Rarity among
them, saying, It was our Fortune to save this Gentleman out of the Water this
Morning, and for our love he has graced us with his Company; we saw him
merrily at Breakfast with Oysters, they were like to have cost me dear said
Marriot, for they threatened to throw me into the River, which without doubt had
been, if you had not Countenanced me: I was in despair till I saw your sweet
Faces, which were more comfort to me at that time, then a Repreive to a Thief;
for I was in almost as much danger: But I thank God and these good Gentlemen, I
have escaped their Tyranous Project: Well to Dinner Gentlemen, Mr. Marriot pray
be no Stranger, but eat heartily, we all came to be merry: I know said
Marriot, your Mirth much lies in me, but my Stomcak is almost spoyld, and I
will not be laughed at, for my ill work-manship, well Mr. Marriot do your best
and it shall suffice, for we will press nothing on you; Marriot fell upon the
powdered Beef, then to a leg of Pork: Hens and Capons were of such light
digestion, that he scarce felt their going down; pish, Tarts were but tryfles,
but after his good Dinner came Cheese and Apples, I would said Marriot, I had
one hundred of good Pippins here, why said one of the Gentlemen, would you eat
them, I and thank you too, you shall have them then; they being brought, he
never pared them, but made both Rines and Coares Invisible: This being a
sufficient Digestion for his Dinner, desired leave of the Gentlemen to depart,
they having had sport enough with him, gave him leave to take his own time,
thus he left the Gentlemen for that present, and went to his Lodging.

CHAP. XV. How Marriot eat a Munkey baked in a Pie, in stead of a Hare.
A Knight who lived near the Kings Gate in Holborn, bought a Muncky of that
Reverent Matron Mall Thrift, but being not fed as he used to be, dyed; for
whose loss many of those that loved his apish Tricks, mourned: but the Knight
being frollick, laid a Wager with a young Esquire that he would produce a man that
should eat the Munckey, in stead of a Hare; the Wager was not great, but the
pastime to see any man so grossly mistaken: The Knight presently called his
Cook, and bid him bake this Munckey in the form of a Hare Pie, which being
done, Mr. Marriot was sent for; and because the Boys should not run hallowing
after him, the Coach was sent; the Footman delivers his Message thus; Sir, my
Master would entreat your company at Dinner, he has no Strangers, only his own
Family; the chiefest thing he desires of you, is to certify him of some Points
in Law, for part of his Estate is Morgaged to a cunning Usurer, whom he doubts
will deceive him, without your Counsel helps him; I Will warrant said Marriot I
shall do it if it be to be done: His Cloak was so greasy he was loath to put
it on.
J will but fetch my Gown and go with you; Having put on his Gown, he came to
the Servant again, saying, What House does your Master keep? a Noble House Sir,
for you may come in a Morning and find our Celler a foot thick in March Beer,
here a black Jack and there a Flagon, standing in it like Towers and Steeples
in a drowned City: There is Housekeeping Sir; I marry said Marriot, there is a
House well kept indeed, nay Sir, by this means we may make my Master a better
housekeeper, then ere his Father or Grandfather were before him; for they
were used to ride every day a Hawing and Hunting, my Master keeps the house
sometimes for two or three years together; and what is the cause, nothing but
our mirth? our Randans, our tara Tantaras -- Oh the only way in the World to
make a Gentleman a housekeeper.

I said Marriot, but what meat do you keep? We have always great store of all
kind of Provision in the house, let us away said Marriot, I long till I am
there, so he went into the Coach and was quickly at the Knights, where he was
entertained with great respect; being brought into the Parler, he saw the
Cloth laid, and great Preparation, which made him rejoice much; the Knight
with his Friend came and saluted this grave Counselor, giving him many thanks,
that he would vouchsafe to come at so short a warning; Marriot eats always of
that Dish which stands next him
Sir, I desire you to sit down, and take part of our small Commons, I thank you
Sir I shall not spare, The Pie being brought and set before Marriot, which he
soon devoured, the Knight asked him how he liked the Pie, very well said
Marriot, but the bones were mighty strong; the Knight desired to see one of the
bones, Munkies bones are so.
call's his Cook, saying, What Pie was this, a Hare Pie Sir, did you ever see
such a bone in a Hare said the Knight, I forty said Marriot; John said the
Knight if you will not tell me what it was I shall turn you away: why then Sir,
it was the Munckey which dyed: Mr. Marriot said the Knight, you are a fit
Counselor for the Devil, that does not know a Munckey from a Hare; with this
Marriot rose from the Table, and said, is this your Noble housekeeping to
poison a poor Gentleman, whereat they fell a laughing, and Marriot went to his
Lodging with many Boys attending him, crying, Marriot, Who eat the Munkey.

CHAP. XVI. How Mr. Marriot eat an Ordinary that was provided for twenty men.
THERE were certain Gentlemen which frequented an Ordinary, but having had some
distaste, resolved to vex the People of the house by some means, and by chance
met with Mr. Marriot, asked him if he would go with them to Dinner, with all my
heart quoth Marriot, but do not the People know me, if they do I shall not be
admitted to the Table: let us alone to carry the matter, for you and I will go
first in, and I will call you by another name, and not one will suspect you;
Marriot now walks boldly with the Gentleman, and being come into the Chamber,
was seated in a great Chair, the rest of the Gentlemen presently came, and
being all acquainted with the business sat them down, as their use was, to
play. But Dinner being come up, they left off and sat them down, forbidding
any Servants to be in the Room, only two of their own, because they had
private Discourse: The Meat being all on the Table, they desired Mr. Marriot
to fall on, and not to delay any time, he quickly took their advise, and
vanquished all that stood before him, to the amazement of the Beholders, the
Gentlemen not having as yet unfolded their Napkins, nor tasted of a bit of the
meat, sat still, nevertheless to keep him company: he having now finished his
task, arose from the Table and walked a little; but the Gentlemen advised him
to lay his half Crown under his Trencher and to walk away It was given him.
Marriot took their counsel, and away he went with one of the Gentlemen's
Servants, no more notice being taken of him then another: The Gentlemen,
presently knocked for the Master of the house, asking if they should stay his
leisure for a Dinner, the Host told them that he had sent them a sufficient
Dinner, they desired him to come in and see, if there be any thing that will
but satisfy hunger, much less variety, as is here expected; the Host looking
on the Table saw many Dishes, but could not perceive what had been in them,
they were so cleanly licked; one of the Gentlemen said, You may see Sir, what a
slight Ordinary you keep, that one man can eat that which you provide: for
twenty: If you will provide us now a Dinner we will pay for it, for the
Gentleman has left his half Crown for what he has eaten: The Host not willing
to loose all his Guests at once, provided them a Dinner presently, and many
things extraordinary provided: they brought M. Marriot thither no more to
Dinner.

CHAP. XVII. How Mr. Marriot eat eight pound of Corrans, with one pound of
Tobacco in them.
IT happened that Mr. Marriot was walking alone by Grayes-Inne when some
Gentlemen espied him being in a Grocers shop, The Plot's a making.
who sent the Boy to desire him to come to them, Marriot presently came, asking
their pleasure with him, one of the Gentlemen said, I have laid a Wager on your
head, Marriot desires that none should loose their wagers of his performances.
and I hope you will not let me loose it, not by any means said Marriot, if I
can help it: It is only thus, I have laid ten shillings that you will eat
eight pound of Corrans in one hour, Sir said Marriot, before you shall loose I
will try my best; the Corrans being weighed, out were put all in, to a great
Bowl, where doubtless they had conveyed. Tobacco, yet in his eating them,
they could not discern whether he tasted it or no, he had no sooner done, but
he fell to vomitting, having eaten much that day, all would not lie in his
Stomach, but flew out at both ends; the Gentlemen presently hired a Cedan and
sent him to his Lodging where he was made clean, but the Cedan men cursed him,
for the Chair was not sweet again in a Month.

CHAP. XVIII. How Mr. Marriot was pawned by some Gentlemen at a Tavern.
THere were certain Gentlemen at a Tavarn, who in a Morning made such haste,
that they had spent all their Money before Dinnertime, and knew not at the
present where to get a Dinner; but one of them being a notable Shifter said,
Let me alone to be Purver to day for you all, saying, I will first send for Mr.
Marriot to come hither, and when he is here, we will tell him that we have a
noble Dinner providing, which will make him stay the dressing of it, and I dare
to pay your Reckoning if he does not: Marriot was sent for, who soon came,
giving the Gentlemen many thanks for their love: One of the Gentlemen said,
Marriot lissens to him.
Mr. Marriot I hope you will accept of our small Commons, provide your Stomach,
for I will tell you your Cheer: There is first a leg of Porke and green sauce,
a leg of Mutton roasted with Anchovy Sauce, But not his Stomach.
two Pullets and a Gooseberry Tart: Marriots mouth watering, said, Why do you
not get good Beef, wherein a man might loose his Knife, that is meat which
will stay in the Stomach, these light things will digest presently: Meat being
on the Table, The Pork was powdered to the purpose.
they sat down, placing Mr. Marriot at the upper end of the Board, that he
might have the more elbow room: they all fed heartily, but Marriot had done
with the leg of Pork, before they had eaten two slices of their Mutton, which
they set presently to him that he might loose no time, so they fell to their
Pullets, but they had searse done carving when he was ready for his share:
Having now made an end of his Dinner, the Gentlemen drank to him in a glass of
Sack, saying, Mr. Marriot I hope you have eaten that which pleases you, the
Pork was salt indeed, but a cup of Sack will wash it down: Marriot took off his
Glasses till he began to be sleepy, and taking a nap in a Chair, the Gentlemen
saw it was time now or never to be gone, made down the Stairs privately and
went away, the Drawer coming in, asked Mr. Marriot where the Gentlemen were
gone, I see them not said Marriot, He was scarce awake.
then you must pay the Reckoning, I Will pay but my share said he, and so was
going down Stairs, but the boy prevented him by calling his Master, who caused
Mr. Marriot to pay the Reckoning, Marriot said, I was never pawnd before, but
this shall be a warning to me not to sleep again in a Tavarn: and with a ghastly
Countenance walked away.

CHAP. XIX. How, Mr. Marriot was apprehended upon suspicion of stealing Gent.
Dogs, and the merry sport they had with him before a Justice.
MR. Marriot being but a mallencholly man; still thought on some way or other
to pass away idle time, and at last it came in his mind to go a fishing with
an Angle, whereby there might arise profit as well as pastime, so he went to
Paul's and bought him a very strong Rod, and asked for the strongest Line he
had, the Man showed him a Pyke Line, the Hook having a double partition, he
liking it, paid for them, and went away to Newgate Market, where he bought a
Bullocks Liver to bait his Hook with; He thought all things would bite at
Bullocks Livers, and hearing that it was good fishing Westward, went in a Boat
to Braineford, where he resolved to lodge all Night; his Liver and other
Instruments he had in a Bagg which he carried to the Kings Arms, He needed
nothing but meat for his Stomach.
where being in some discourse with his Landlord, he said, that the reason he
came into the Country, was to take a little pleasure in Fishing, and to get
him a Stomach: Marriot after he had eaten some small matter, went to bed: the
Host being glad he had such a Guest as he was, to draw company to his house,
did acquaint some certain Gentlemen that lived thereabouts, they having notice
hereof, resolved to play a mad Prank with Marriot, so they acquainted a Justice
of the Peace, Most are so.
who was as very an Ass as themselves, but they desired his Warrant to
apprehend Marriot, upon suspicion of stealing Dogs to eat; having got this
Warrant, they employed a Constable to serve it, who was as much an Innocent as
the rest. In the Morning Mr. Marriot went forth, They were instructed before
what to answer him.
to ask whether it were good time to go a Fishing or no, the Watermen told
him, very good time Sir, to catch Sammons or Jacks or such great fish: I will
go with you presently, I will but fetch my Tackling, having discharged the
house, away he goes to the water side, where Mr. Marriot went into a Boat, and
said to the Water-man, carry me now where the grea^^st Fish lies, I shall Sir,
said the Water-man do my best endeavor, where having-set him on shore;
Marriot-puls out his Tackling, and baits his Hook with a piece of Liver enough
to choke a Dog: It being a deep place many Eeles resorted to his bait, many
times he pulled them to the top of the water, but caught none; he thought his own
way best, and so walked further, but being watched by those Gentlemen, who as
he was going over a Field, to a better place to stand to fi h in: a Constable
appeared and told him he had a Warrant for him, and he must go presently before
a Justice of the Peace, Marriot wondered what should be the matter, but knowing
that it could not be helped, went with the Constable; the Gentlemen being come
before the Justice, who demanded of them what they had to say to Mr. Marriot;
one of the Gentlemen said, Sir, upon suspicion of stealing our Dogs, for he
carries Instruments for the purpose, he has a line of Whipeord of thirty yards
long, with a Hook that is wired two foot: With these and the like Instruments
he does many mischiefs; also catching Ducks and other poor Creatures, as silly
Piggs; for the Dogs they supply his Stomach in the Vacation, and in the Term
time he either is, or makes his Clyents to be at the charge of the roasting of
the Pigs and Ducks, and the like: How is that quoth the Justice, why such
Designs may undo a whole Country: Sir, Sir, (quoth he) these Instruments are
unsufferable, how do you know how many poor People may be undone by your
Engines. I am a Gentleman and a Lawyer quoth Marriot, and know what belongs to
things of this Nature as well as your self, not unlikely quoth the Justice,
but Sir, Sir, you must know where you are, and who you are before, that I do
very well quoth Marriot, you are a Justice they say: Put case Marriot puts him
a Case.
I did use such Tricks, you have not taken me in the Manner, nor ought any man
to suffer for his Belly, for that is most an end the Susterer: Where where
quoth he is the Pigg or the Duck I did take, show me any and what; and Faith
let them be roasted, and we will laugh a little: With that the Gentlemen there
laughed heartily: Hold hold quoth the Justice, this is no laughing Matter (and
yet could hardly forbear it himself) of what Innes of Court are you,
Grayes-Inne quoth Marriot, I honor the Place very much quoth the Justice, but
Mr. Marriot it is a great dishonor to the house, for a Member hereof to become
a Dogg-stealer, I profess quoth Marriot they wrong me, I came for nothing but
my pleasure, well replied the Justice, for no other reason then that you are of
that honorable house, I shall remit the business and quit you, but have a
care Mr. Marriot how you come a fishing in these parts again, I warrant you Sir
quoth Marriot, I have a good warning, and so took his Journey home-ward, where
being Arrived, he told his Landlord how he had been served, and vowed never to
go a fishing more.

CHAP XX. How Marriot was privately Invited to a Supper in the City, which was
appointed for the making of two Neighbors friends, which had formerly been at
variance, and how he was discovered: And how both he and the rest of his
Company were dismissed without their expected Supper.
IT happened that two Citizens of London had a falling out, whether it were for
their own honesty or their Wives, I know not, which I shall not here question;
but by some Neighbors they were advised to put it to Arbitration, each man was
to choose two sufficient men in the Parish, to end this Controversy, rather
then to go to Law to spend much Money on both sides, and neither the Gainer;
all parties are agreed to put it to Arbitration, which accordingly was done;
and he who was supposed to have done the wrong, was by these learned men,
judged to give the party wronged, a Supper for himself and his Friend; the
time and place was appointed, and all are Friends again.

Yet he who had received the wrong, and not well pleased with the Result of the
Arbitration, still retained an inward Grudge, though he seemingly carried a
fair outside to the other, and did study how to vex him: at last he thought,
that if he could get Mr. Marriot with him, he should be sufficiently revenged
on him: for he knew that his Stomach was able to undo two such housekeepers as
he was, might he have but a full Table continually, he presently sent for Mr.
Marriot, and gave him the whole circumstances of the business, and declared
the cause of his sending for him, which was this.

Mr. Marriot, there has lately been some fallings out, betwixt one of my
Neighbors and my self, wherein I have received much Damage and Wrong, the
Particulars thereof will be too long to recount unto you, and keep you from
hearing that, which you suspect to be the occasion of my sending for you at
this time, you shall go as my Friend, and at the Supper I wish you to feed
heartily, for it will be a great satisfaction to me, to see him vex at the
spoil of his meat; do you think that your Stomach is able now to give a
finishing stroke to the meat that shall be brought to the Table: when Marriot
heard this, his solid Countenance changed into a smile, thinking himself half
at supper already, saying, Sir, I am so well prepared for such an Encounter,
that had I fasted a Week, I could not have a better Stomach then now I have:
for were there more meat then I guess there is, I durst attempt it all my
self: Bravely spoken Mr. Marriot, you shall be my only Champion in this
business, and I dout not but that we shall remain Conquerours in our
Enterprise.

Marriot who for such a business needed not to be much entreated: but straight
way Harnessed himself, and a long with the Messenger he goes; being now come
to the Citizens house, he was better instructed of the matter, and away they go
to the place where they should have their Supper, being come, they were led
into a fair Room where the Cloth was laid, Bread and Salt on the Table, and
other necessaryes on a side Cubboard: Marriot heard the Jack go, but as yet had
not smelt the meat; his Stomach being raw, fell upon a French Roll to appease
the waterish Humors that did trouble him: But the meat staying something
long, caused Marriot to eat all the rest of the Bread that was on the Table;
the Master of the house came up to welcome the Gentlemen, but when he saw the
Salt stand on the Table and no Bread by it, knocked for his Servant to come up,
being come, he said, Is there no Bread to set on the Table, Sir, said the
Servant; I brought six french Roules up and set them on the board, Sir, said
Marriot, you need inquire no further for them, for being hot with walking, I
love to eat a Crust, then said the Master it is well enough, calling the Maid,
whispered in her Ear, that she should carry the meat to a Neighbors house,
and that he would be there presently, for quoth he, here is the great Eater of
Grayes-Inne, who will make no more of this Supper, then a Plowman would do of
a poached Egg: When the Servant was gone, the Master of the house said to him
who was his Adversary, Sir, I always had a suspicion of you, by reason of your
equivocating, is this Pointing to Mr. Marriot.
a fit man to be brought to an honest man's Table; away, away, you get no Supper
here, for I will entertain no such belly-Gods at my Table: Mr. Marriot marched
up toward him, saying, Sir, I desire to be acommodated as well as any other
Gentleman, but your ill bred Citizens have no more manners then a Horse, and do
not know when they are in the presence of a Gentleman how to behave themselves:
I would have you to know Sir, that many Lords and Knights are glad of my
Company, and are you so nice; Mr. Marriot said the Citizen, They have money
enough, and send for you only to make them sport, my Purse will not reach the
pastime, therefore whilst it is time, go seek your Supper, for you get none here;
when Marriot heard this Sentance past on his Belly, like a Bear bereaved of
her Whelps, stormed, and went down the Stairs, as if a Water-Mill had been
going; you may conceive the Door was not shut against him, but rather set wide
open, to let out him and his stomach, which otherwise might have been the
destruction of more Meat then many a Butcher kills in a Week, had it been there
dressed, his Stomach was then at such a height: but Marriots Friend came down,
and with the best words he could use desired his patience, and for to stop both
his Mouth and his Belly, had him to an Alehouse, and gave him nine two penny
loaves and two pound of Suffolk Cheese, which for the present did allay the
knawing of another Worm which he has in his Maw, his Friend promising him a
better Collation when they met next, parted, and Marriot went heavily to his
Lodging.

CHAP. XXVII. How Marriot accidentally lighted on a Leg of Porke, which was
designed for the Dunghill, having layne in Salt above half a year, and what
happened after.
MArriot walking solitarily alone, was by the hand of Providence led to a place
where he espied a Damsel throwing a leg of Porke to a Dunghill; oh quoth
Marriot, I wonder you are not ashamed to throw away good meat, you know not the
price of it: Sir said the Maid, this meat has layne in a Powdring Tub unknown
this half year or more: no matter no matter quoth Marriot, give it me and I
will make a rare Dish of it* Bless me God what good meat is this, much pity
it were to throw such to Dogs: I thank you fair Damsel for your love, I will
get it ready for my Supper: So away he goes with his rich prise, which had it
been carried to the East Indies and brought back again, it could not have been
more salt then it was. Being come home he desired some water to set it on,
which was done accordingly; it being now boiled, Marriot fell to, and quickly
picked the bones, but he complained that it was very salt, but to put away the
thought of drink out of his mind, went to bed, thinking that sleep would a
pease his Drought, but it proved otherwise, for about Midnight he waked,
thinking himself to be near some great fire, by the reason of the great heat
he was in, started up and ran to his Window, crying out, fire, fire, murder,
murder, at last his Landlord came up, asking him what was the matter, pray
fetch me a Paile of water quoth Marriot, for the fire is only in my belly: so
you have not fired my house, I do not care if it were in your -- his Land-Lady
brought him up a paile of water, which he poured into his boiling Caldron, to
appease those humors which would have run into a further distemper if not
quenched in time: but Marriot began to wish that the Dogs had eaten the Porke
before he had seen it; but he said, if they had, a thousand to one but it had
killed them, poor Creatures, and therefore I am glad I eat it my self: So
desiring his Landlord not to take it ill that he knocked them up, at so
unseasonable an hour, but his Landlord very civilly said, Mr. Marriot, we are
all ready at your knock, if it please you to have any more water before we go
to bed, it shall be fetched, no more said Marriot at this time; so laying him
down, slept more quietly then before, his Landlord also went to bed, and did
think because Porke had so fired his Maw, that he would never love swines flesh
again: but he proved no Jew, for he was at Bacon the next day.

There are more stories of his doubtless (Reader) you have heard, but I have
selected these as the only truths, and that you may know more of him, he lies
at a Joyners house in Grayes-Inne Lane, and there may find him and his
Stomach, up together any Morning.

Reader, I shall trouble thee a little further, desiring thy patience till I
have revealed the chiefest Receipts that he continually uses, as well in times
of sickness as of health; they have been kept private these many years, and
now come to light, published by a special Friend to this Common Wealth, and
for the benefit of all those that are troubled with a coming Stomach, which
craveth more then their Estates are able to satisfy, as Mr. Marriot does, to
his great impoverishment.

CHAP I. How to make his Cordial Broth.
TAke three Sheeps Hinges with the Wool on their Heads: Three dozen of Sheeps
Trotters: Two Bullocks Livers, with half a peck of Otemeale; boil all these
in a Caldron two hours, then strain the Broth through a hair sackcloath, and
let it cool: The use of it is to appease grumbling in the Guts, or a wambling
Stomach, by drinking one Gallon at a time, and eating the meat after it: this
will preserve you from hunger and wind in the Stomach, using it but once in two
hours: Probatum est.

By Mr. Marriot.

CHAP. II. His Pills to appease hunger, ordinarily carried about him.
TAke of Rye meal nine pound, Of Chandlers Graves three pound, of the
skimmings of Honey one pound, warm water as much as will make it into a Paste,
then roll them up into a dozen Balls, then put them into some boiling Broth,
till they be through boiled, then set them to cool; but beware that the Dogs
do not deceive you of them, as they have done him often times.

THE chief use of these Pills are for traveling, for Mr. Marriot carried
always a dozen to Westminster in the Term time for fear of fainting; his
ordinary place for eating them, was in the dark place, near the Common Pleas
Treasury, where one might see him swallow these Pills, as easily as an ordinary
man would do a guilt Pill in the Pap of an Apple.

CHAP. III. A Purgation.
MR. Marriot would often follow the Farriars Rule for Drenches, which Receipt
best agreed with his Body: for he would take Milk and Oil with Aquavitae,
Pepper and Brimstone all mingled together, a Pottle at one time is nothing with
him, to scour his Maw.

CHAP. IV. Why he swallows Bullets and Stones.
THE heat of his Stomach is such, that without such a remedy he could not
subsist; for when he has gormandized himself at some great Feast, strait way
he swallows Bullets of almost four ounces weight, which causes a present
digestion: Also round Pebble stones he often swallows, which cools his Maw.

These kind of Tricks he has, by which he puts down many of our new Juglers
now a days, who will be an hour eating of a Cheese-Cake, he vanquisheth all
that dare oppose him in his Art.

CHAP. V. How he orders his baked Meat, or his rare Dish on Sundays.
MR. Marriot out of niceness, because he would not have women's fingers in his
meat, dresses his meat himself, having an earthen Pot which holds half a
bushel, he fills it in this manner as follows.

Take a Bullocks head, the bones being chopped small, and good store of Onions
and other course Herbs which are easily to be got, Pepper naught for the Pox.
with an ounce of Pepper, for he scares no pox, as many Turnups as will fill
the Pot, when he had laid all these in his Pot, he put thereto a Gallon of
Pumpe water, because it should not want moisture, then with his own paws he
carries it to the Bake-house, staying still by it, fearing least he should be
deprived of some of it in his absence.

He never goes to Church on a Sunday, but gives much attention to the Baker
when he says it is time to draw, which time being come, he carries his Pot
home, and to Dinner he goes without laying a Cloth, He buys no new Bread.
first he cuts slyces of stale Bread and sops them in this Restorative: He is a
right English man, for he eats his Broth first, which being done, he sends
the meat to be boiled once more in his hot Maw, which has so quick a
digestion, that three Cooks are not able to provide him meat at all the
motions of his Stomach: This being an absolute remedy for the present, I have
here set it down for those Stomachs that dare keep him company.

CHAP. VI. How to make his rare Fish-broath.
LIke a good Doctor he makes his broth; only in May or June, when Mackrell are
sixteen or twenty a Groat, and then he has great skill in choosing them, for
none but the broken bellyed ones will serve his turn: but because he would not
be cheated in them, he will go to Billingsgate himself, and will sit on the
stairs half a day, rather then be disappointed: but seeing fish for his
turn, presently buys three Groats worth, and puts them in his bag for the
purpose, and away he comes home, getting water, and setting them on in his
large Coldron, many herbs he uses, as Fennel, Bays, Rosemary, and a few
Leekes, but when it is boiling he skims it, because it is to make broth,
having so done, he lets them boil a little, and then takes up his Fish and his
herbs, then he puts half a peck of Malt in, and boiles it again, his fish he
sets to cool, yet like a good Cook, he lickes his fingers as he is a
dressing them, having now boyld his broth sufficiently, he falls on it, and
the fish, making no more of it, then the Welshman did of his three penny
Ordinary, who was ready for another, before he had done that he was about.

The use he made of this broth and fish, was only as I conceive to get him a
stomach, for he would often say, That fish was of a light digestion: therefore
good for those that have but a slight stomach at present, but desire a greater,

CHAP. VII. To make his cooling Sallet, to cool the Blood.
I Am of opinion that he has read Gerards Herball, or the History of Plants,
wherein partly he found this Receipt, but being enlarged by himself, I thought
fit to set it down amongst the rest; he being a man of a hot Stomach, did use
this Sallet following very often, wherein he found great benefit,

The way to make it is thus,

Take as many Watercresses as a large Flasket will hold, as many Radish tops,
and half so many Colworts, boil all these together for the space of two
hours, You may borrow his Caldron.
then take them up without much squeizing, and put them in a half Tubb,
putting thereto a Gallon of sour Ale, and a quantity of Goose-grease,
sufficient to give it a taste, with a pound of Pepper strewed upon it: This
Sallet is excellent good to purge the blood, and to loosen the belly, this
quantity being taken three several mornings in the week.

CHAP. VIII How to make Mr. Marriots new Dish, called a Frigazee.
MARRIOT hearing of a new Dish that was much used at Oxford Cates, and in other
places about the City amongst Gallants, thought in his fancy to make one that
should resemble it, because the materials that were used in it, were too deer
for him, but being a man of a rare Stomach, quickly guessed at something that
was eatable, though dressed in a strange way; when he had thought upon all the
materials of this Dish, he began to put it in practice, having gotten all the
Ingredients together, to try this rare conclusion.

And thus he made it.

He took three great Pomcitrons and pulled out the Curnels that were within
them, then he pared the outside rind off, and then slyced them into thinn
slyces, then he had many Apples which he slyced also, then he took two Bullocks
Livers and slyced them very thinn and broad, then he laid a row of the former
slyces in the bottom of his Oxe-cheek-pot, he peppered his Liver well, and
laid a laying of one and a laying of another, till he had filled his Pott,
strowing many fine herbs on the top of it, then (...) carried it to the
Bake-house, where he stayed till it was baked; being come home, he invited his
Landlord to taste of his new Dish, who I dare swear never saw the like before,
but his Landlord knowing his Stomach, and that a -- was as good for a Sow as a
Pancake, praised his Dish highly, saying, It is very good, but I have newly
supped, therefore I desire you to excuse me to night, I shall leave none for to
morrow, quoth Marriot, therefore stand to it now that you may say you have
eaten of a rare Dish, he not being over nice eat a bit or two with him, but I
will not tell how sick it made the poor old man, but it agreed with Mr.
Marriot as if it had been a Chicken roasted, and served in to his Table with
Butter and Parseley, so excellent is his Stomach for digestion.

FINIS.

