A BLOODY FIGHT BETWEEN ^he two Potent Fleets of ENGLAND and Holland, on
Thursday and Friday the second and third of June, in St. Georges Channel; With
the number of Ships that were burnt, sunk, and taken in the Engagement: And a
perfect Account of the proceedings of both the FLEETS.

depiction of two warships engaged in battle

London, Printed by Robert Wood. 1653.

The Copies of several Letters from the Navy, giving a perfect Account of the
proceedings of the English and Dutch Fleets; Wherein is the Relation of a
bloody fight between the English and the Hollanders on Thursday the third of
June, betwixt Dover and Calais.
SIR,
WE are now within fight of Yarmoth steepl, being about five Leagu^^ from the
shore, where we ride at Anchor, and shall stay here about two days, to receive
such ships as shall come to us from the River, and from Hull, according to
Orders already sent to that purpose. There are five Merchants ships which come
from Malaga, now put into Mounts Bay, they are all bound for London.

From on board the Resolution the 29 of May.
A Narrative from Major Dorril, of the proceedings at sea, from the 13 of May
to this present.
ON the 31 of May, coming out of the Sound, off the Naes, we discovered about
10 in the morning a fleet of some 60 or 70 great ships, with 5 great convoyers,
they were two English miles to the weather of us, and stood South-east for the
Sound; we stood along the Land Northwest. May 15. The wind blew very hard, we
stood in to the sea 6 or 8 Glasses, standing again to the shore south, we
discovered a great sail to our windward, about 4 in the afternoon, we aimed to
be between him and the shore, but looking out we discovered above 100 of great
ships, with many convoyers, who having a Galiot with him sent him off from the
fleet to discover us, we had a Danish Fane up, which when he discovered he came
no further. This is conceived to be the Russia fleet. May 16. We espied the
Berghen fleet, and immediately thereupon a great ship in our water athwart our
bow, and there was in his company above 300 great ships, which we afterward
discovered, all standing south, we could not miss them, therefore durst not
trust to our running, but rather by plain dealing or impudence, either to
outface them, or to deceive them, and so we stood through their whole fleet,
keeping all our men close but five, whereof 4 were Danes; the first ship that
came up to speak us, was a ship with 20 Guns, he hung out his Dutch colors, we
our Danish, he asked us whence we were, we told him from Coppenhagen, and bound
for Berghen in Norway; we asked them from whence their fleet, they answered,
from Amsterdam, Rotterdam, etc.

Aboard the Adventure Frigate May 27.
Out of Scotland it is certified, that the Advice, Fox, and Portsmouth frigates,
met with two of the Dutch Merchantmen not far from Shetland, laden with French
wines; who for some time disputed the seas, but after a very sharp conflict,
they were both boarded, and brought into Aberdeen.

From aboard the Resolution off the Texel, 27 May, came thus: A council being
called by the Generals on board this ship, it was this day resolved by the
Officers, That the whole English fleet do from hence set sail for the English
coasts; that the place of Randezvouz be where they shall come to anchor off of
Yarmouth, on the backside of the Sands; and it was resolved also that Orders
should be sent into the River, and other parts, which accordingly are sent for
the rest of the ships that are ready to sail, to come and join with the fleet
there, where it is resolved to stay 48 hours. We are now within sight of the
steeple, and do ride at Anchor five langues from the shore.

Van Trump we hear is at Gorce with 120 men of War, and fifty more are expected
to join with him, which will not probably be prevented. Genesis Blake is joined
with Monk and Dean, and now are bound Southward; and having sent forth a Van
squadron, soon possessed themselves of 10 Danish and Dutch ships, laden with
Pitch, Tar, etc.

But the enemy has taken from Us two brave colliers, and look with a notable
sheeps eye upon our Malego men, coming for London.

The Copy of a Letter from our Fleet in Lee ROAD
Right Honorable,
IN my last dated the 26 instant, I gave your Honor an account of ten sale of
ships in this Road, since which more men are put on board them, and I hope
there will be joined one or more to their number very suddenly, these being in
a good capacity for sudden service, as soon as the water and some other
necessaries are come down to them, which is expected every hour, and assurance
given of it. Yesterday the Hampshire Frigot came into this road, the Essex
Frigot is in Tilbury Hope, which will be ready to join with the other; General
Blake is in Tilbury hope aboard the Essex frigot.

This squadron is to fall down six or seven miles to morrow morning early to
the North, to be in readiness to answer any sudden command.

Major Bourn sent out the Nichodemus on Thursday last, and other vessels at
other times to gain intelligence of our fleet, as also of the Enemies motion.
The Nichodemus is returned this day, and gives account that the Dutch lie at
North-sand head, Long sand head, and as low North as Orfordness. There will
remain five or six Merchants ships in the service of the State that are
betwixt this and Eriff, which with care may be speedily made ready to sail with
those here. A Guard is appointed to ply to the North-foreland, for the security
of the Fishery.

Dated aboard the William in Lee Road, the 30 of May, 1653.
The Copy of a Letter from Dover.
SIR,
OUr fleet under the command of the two Generals, put forth from Yarmouth Road
the 31 of May, to seek for the Hollanders; and upon the second instant, about
four in the morning, they discovered a great fleet of ships near St. Georges
Channel; upon this discovery the Generals supposing them to be the Dutch fleet,
immediately called a Council of War, where it was resolved that they should
advance toward them, and give them battle: They likewise having a view of our
Fleet, as far as they could perceive, made preparation to oppose us, which was
a great rejoicing to our fleet, whose only aim was to engage them, so
referring themselves to the protection of the Almighty, they bore up to them:
About 7 in the morning they began to engage, and the fight was fierce and
terrible for us to hear; whereupon the Governor sent forth a pinnace to
observe the issue of the fight, which about 9 in the evening returned, and gave
us an account, that with great hazard, and not without some small loss, our
ships had took 4 of the enemies, sunk 5, and burnt 3, upon receipt of this we
in this Town not only gave thanks to the Lord for this, but required a future
blessing upon the endeavors of his poor servants. Having ended our Orisons we
began to make preparation both for offending the enemy, and defending our
selves, and mustred all the force we could make, planting our great guns in
convenient places, and providing ammunition for our selves, and for the ships
if occasion should serve. The Ordnance played til after day light, and this
morning very early they began again. I can give you no further account for the
present, but till the next opportunity, must desire to remain,

Your faithful Servant, W. H.

FINIS.

