Another BLOODY FIGHT AT SEA BETWEEN The English and the Dutch upon the Coast
of Flanders. Sent in a Letter to the Parliament of England, and the Council of
State, on Saturday last; with their debates likewise, and Consultations, and
Resolutions, on the Sabbothday in the afternoon at White Hall.

LIKEWISE The particulars of the Fight, the number sunk, and 40 men of War and
Merchants taken, and brought into the Downs, under the command and protection
of Dover Castle.

ALSO A Declaration of the Lords Ambassadors of the States of Holland,
touching War and Peace, and the Parliaments final Answer and Resolution
thereunto.

Ordered to be forthwith Printed and Published, and dispersed throughout the
several Counties in England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick.

Signed G. Nothro, Cler.



June. 15. LONDON: Printed for G: HORTON. 1652.

A PAPER Delivered by the LORDS AMBASSADORS To the Council of State.
Most Honorable Lords,
WE are here by reason of an unhappy and unexpected mischance; An horrible
report has amazed us, that a fight at sea should have been betwixt the Fleet
of this Commonwealth and of the united Provinces, and that ours should have
been the reason of this unfortunate business, That we began the fight, and
that thereupon is fought most cruelly; and that from thence the rumor of the
breaking off the treaty, and of open war (which should be very near at hand
between the two Nations) was spread: We astonished by this sad report, direct
our selves to this honorable Assembly and do Declare before God, and out of
all our Hearts, that the Fact, so as it is reported, is committed without the
knowledge, and against the will of the States of the united Provinces our
Lords, and of us their Ambassadors. Moreover, we do affirm, That the hearts of
ours do desire nothing but Unity, Peace, League, and a very near friendship
with this Commonwealth, and hope that withal their wishes. In the mean while,
we do think it not to be amiss, if we give notice unto your honors, that we
have received letters from the Admiral of the Fleet of the United Provinces
Dated the 30 of the last month, wherein the occasion and reason of the said
Fight quite otherwise is declared then the common Report is; for the truth of
which business, we suppose to be convenient to inquire exactly; but this is
worth observation in the mean time, That our Admiral Trump in the same letter
does declare plainly to have no other Order from the Lords the States, then to
sail about, and to view the shore and coast of our country, as far as Ostend
and Newport, and no further. By which it does appear as clearly as the Sun is
under heaven that by all means the States of the United Provinces have had no
mind to attempt any thing against the Fleet or other ships of this
Commonwealth. If any thing then in this business be done otherwise then ought
to be, this does not concern the said States, but them which have executed the
said business, and let them make it good. We have been here now almost six
months about the concluding a league, by special order of the States, and
have delivered some days ago to your Commissioners a paper, in which not only
the different points touching the Treaty, but also the means by which the same
could be brought to a good agreement, and reconciled one with another, were
sufficiently declared; so that we did expect nothing every day, but a happy end
to so good a work; and truly that excellent matter may in very few hours be
finished. But who should ever believe that so noble a work, and desired with so
many wishes of all honest men, and especially of all the Churches of the
Reformed Christian Religion, should be cut off or hindered by any such imprudent
and turbulent man (whosoever he may be) without knowledge and against the will
of the Lords the States? by Law and custom of all nations is very well known,
that he to whom a charge is given in particular things, an Ambassador in
public Business going beyond the limit of their Commissions, a General of an
army Depopulating without order of his Superiors any grounds of the
Neighbors; a wild beast doing any mischief after it has broken its bond, that
not the Masters but those that have broken the bond are obliged, especially if
the disapproving of the same Masters follows thereupon; which without
question (if the business be so as it is related) is to be expected from the
States of the United Provinces. In the mean while we make no doubt, that to
attempt any Hostility before the other party is heard, cannot be approved
neither by God, nor by any men, especially Christians. It is a custom by all
reasonable nations to demand restitution of their Goods if any trouble be done,
and in case satisfaction be given or offered, to lay aside all Hostility. And
it is no wonder that all Nations are so much against war, and inclined to
establish a Peace, the War being plainly a cruel Monster, a world of evil, and
a mere deluge of innocent blood; therefore the most holy Fathers of our
Religion have expressly declared the war (although just) to be execrable,
especially in relation to the Christians who are taught by their meekest Savior
to spare other men's blood as well as their own. But amongst all kind of wars
this is reputed the most detestable and horrible if between these nations war
be risen. Truly the experience teaches us, that the best and strongest wine
(if it be corrupted) becomes the sowerest Vinegar; and indeed if two Nations
having been friends of old times, of the same Religion, lovers of Liberty,
joining upon the same sea, next Neighbors, both valiant and warlike be clashed
together, what is to be expected but the ruin of both, and as the Proverb
says; a Cadmean Victory. And what else is this then to afflict and depresse
your Friends and Companions in Religion to please your enemies, and to give
occasion openly for to hurt them both. An Author, being none of the least
amongst yours, has very well compared, as we conceive, both the two Nations to
two earthen pots, driving in the sea with this device, if we hurt, we break; He
hitted it very well that honest man, and we may believe you are of the same
opinion. But if the two nations come to an agreement, Oh Lord, what store of
Happiness will this bring forth! The true Gods service will be established,
the Sea be quiet, and opportunity taken away from all enemies to trouble them
both, all Communions in Religion be resoiled, and which is to be reputed the
chiefest (...) ^ll, to the most good and gracious Lord, Praises and
Thanksgig^^^ng will be lift up into the Heavens.

We conclude then, most Honorable Lords, and instantly demand and desire, so
as we have longed to propose unto your Honors this three days since;

First, That a Copy may be given unto us of the Relation of the things that are
past.

Secondly, That we may send that over by your leave to our Lords the States,
and that the other part being heard, the truth of the business may be known.

Thirdly, That in the mean while all things may be kept whole and untouched.

Fourthly, That by no means the business of the concluding the Treaty be put
off, and that such unfortunate mischances may be avoided, and an everlasting
Peace may be established between both the Nations.

All which we desire of all our hearts, the great and bountiful God, the
Author of Peace will be pleased to grant us.

Signed, Cats. G: Schaep. Vandeperre.

The answer of the Parliament of the Common wealth of ENGLAND.
THe Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, calling to mind with what
continued Demonstrations of Friendship and sincere Affections, from the very
beginning of their intestine troubles, they have proceeded toward their
Neighbors of the United Provinces, omitting nothing on their part that might
conduce to a good correspondence with them, and to a growing up into a more
near and strict Union then formerly, Do find themselves much surprised with the
unsuitable Returns that have been made thereunto, and especially at the acts of
Hostility lately committed in the very Roads of England upon the Fleet of this
Commonwealth, the matter of Fact whereof stated in clear proofs, is hereunto
annexed, Upon serious and deliberate consideration of all, and of the several
Papers delivered in by your Excellencies to the Council of State, the
Parliament thinks fit to give this answer to those papers:

The Parl. as they would be willing to make a charitable construction of the
Expressions used in the said Papers, endeavoring to represent the late
engagement of the Fleets to have happened without the knowledge, and against the
mind of your Superiors; So when they consider how disagreeable to that
profession the Resolutions and actions of your State and their Ministers at Sea
have been, even in the midst of a Treaty offered by themselves, and managed
here by your Excellencies, the extraordinary preparations of One hundred and
fifty sail of Men of War, without any visible occasion but what does now appear
(a just ground of Jealousy in your own judgments, when your Lordships
pretended to excuse it) and the instructions themselves given by your said
Superiors to their Commanders at Sea, Do find too much cause to believe, That
the Lords the States General of the United Provinces have an intention, by
force to usurp the known Rights of England in the Seas, to destroy the Fleets
that are, under God, their Walls and Bulwarks, and thereby expose this
Commonwealth to Invasion at their pleasure, as by this late Action they have
attempted to do: Whereupon the Parliament conceive they are obliged to
endeavor, with Gods assistance, as they shall have opportunity, to seek
repairation of the wrongs already suffered, and security that the like be not
attempted for the future.

Nevertheless, with this mind and desire, That all differences betwixt the
Nations may (if possible) be peaceably and friendly composed, as God by his
providence shall open a way thereunto, and circumstances shall be conducing to
render such endeavors less dilatory, and more effectual then those of this
kind heretofore used ^ave been.

Hen: Scobel, Cleric. Parliamenti.

But to deviate from circumstances, and to proceed to realities, give me leave
to present you with the Proverb of King James, who said, Fair words would
butter no Parsnips; Even so it is with the Commonwealth of England: That
during an honorable Treaty, high affronts have been given, as before
specified, which upon mature deliberation, produced further action; as appears
by the Narrative sent to the Council of State, who upon Sabbath day last, came
to this result, That a Letter of thanks should be returned to Vice Admiral
Peacock, for his gallantry performed upon the Coast of Flanders; the perfect
Relation whereof take as follows.

Capt. Peacock having intelligence of the Hollanders imperiousness, resolved to
attempt some heroic Achievement for his Countries honor: In pursuance
whereof, sailing to the coast of Flanders, met with two Dutchmen of War, who
(upon Command in obedience to the Commonwealth of England) denied to strike
sail, insomuch that a bloody fight began, and after a sharp dispute, we sunk
one, and took another, carrying about 40. pieces of Ordnance; since which time;
divine Providence decreeing victory, about 40 sail are brought into Dover Peer
under protection of the Castle; for which gallant service, the Parliament has
returned a Letter of thanks and gratuity, to the further encouragement of the
Seamen.

FINIS.

