His Majesty's DECLARATION CONCERNING The Charge of the Army; And His
Resolution to die like a Martyr, rather then to answer to any Impeachment or
Articles, in relation to his Try all, by the Laws of the Land, as an ordinary
Subject.

And His Declaration and Proposals to the Governor of Winsor Castle concerning
Major Genesis Brown, and his present restraint under the power of the Sword, with
his Predictions thereupon, touching what shall befall the Army.

Also, the Declaration and Proposals of Col: Harrison to the King, and his
Protestation, to oppose all persons whatsoever, that shall offer any private
violence to His Majesty's Royal Person. Dated from Windsor Castle, the 1 of
January 1648.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the
other

Printed for C. Bradshaw, near the Inner Temple, 1649.

His Majesty's ANSWER Concerning the Charge of the ARMY AND His Resolution to
dye like a Martyr, rather then to an swer to any Impeachment or Articles, in
relation to his Trial by the Laws of the Land, as an ordinary Subject.
Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty has had some discourse about the Remonstrance of the Army, in
reference to the bringing of his person to a trial, proposing several
Queries, how that could be, what way they could do it, or which way they could
bring in any Charge against him: It was answered by a Member of the Army, That
what if a Charge should be brought against him for his life, according to the
manner of trial of the Subjects by the Laws of the Kingdom, what would he
then do, in reference to an answer, for preservation of his Life, Crown, and
Privilege, the King replied, That if any such Charge of Impeachment should be
exhibited against him, either by Parliament or Army, he would not give any
answer thereto, but declare against it, to be both Arbytrary and unlawful; and
that if they sought to depose and degrade him of his Titles and Honors, or to
spill his Royal blood, by separating his Soul and Body, he was resolved to
sacrifice his life with patience, and to cast himself in the Arms and Bosom
of his sweet Lord and Savior, and only Redeemer; to the end, He may dye like a
Martyr, in prosecution and defense of Religion and Country. So confident is the
King in his ways. But it is feared, that his great averseness to the peace of
this kingdom will cause cause much trouble and distractions to befall his
people.

His Majesty is in a very secure place in the Castle, and strong bolts and
guards are for the night about the Chamber, but he will not admit any to lie,
or remain in the chamber with him.

He says, that he knows there is a time for his redemption and that many of
his enemies will moulter away, and fall before him; for, in his discourse, he
often declares, that he is confident that both Scotland and Ireland will help
him, and that the Army will divide among themselves, and be destroyed.

Col. Tomlinson has the command of this Castle, and his Majesty is not
suffered to stir out, only walks sometimes upon the Territs, he is debarred
from the speech of many, and no suspicious persons are admitted to him: he
presses much for D. Hamond to be resident with him, and that He may have
leave to communicate a Declaratory Message to Holland and France.

Yesterday his Majesty desired a conference with Colonel Tompson, which was
assented to, and after some disputation touching the present matter of State,
his Maj. declared and proposed several questions touching Maj. Genesis Brown, and
the rest of the impeached members, saying, That the said M. G. was a man worthy
of honor and trust, and that he pittyed his case, as much as his own, not
doubting, but that few days would produce their liberty, notwithstanding their
present sufferings for Religion and a good conscience: his Maj. is oftentimes
exceeding high in his expressions, and very bitter against diverse of the Army;
but casts a favorable constfuction upon the Lord General, which is all at
present, from

Your Honors obliged, and devoted servant, J. WILLIS.
Windsor 1. Jan. 1648. Yesterday 16 of the restrained members were sent for to
the Genesis quarters, and told, that if they would promise to act nothing against
the army, they might have their liberty: whereupon they desired, 1 To know if
that was the Generals pleasure, 2 To know if they might not have their liberty
without any engagement, and it was permitted them, their names are, Lord
Weinman, Sir Walter Earl, Sir Robert Pie, Sir Samuel Luke, Sir Gilbert
Gerrard, Sir Thomas Somes, and the rest. As for the foregoing Charge against
the King, it is said, the army are resolved to try him very speedily, and that
if he can acquit himself of the guilt thereof, that then He shall be
re-invested, and restored to his just Rights and Dignities.

Westmin. 30. December. 1648.


A Declaration concerning the King.
HIs Excellency the Lord Gen Fairfax, Lieut. General Crumwell, and the rest of
the Council of Officers, have seriously debated the Remonstrance and Proposals
of the army, for the speedy settling of the peace of the Kingdom, and executing
of impartial Justice upon all Offenders whatsoever; and to that end, have
drawn up a Charge against the King, which contains these particulars, viz.

1 That Charles Steward has acted contrary to his trust, in departing from the
Parliament.

2 That the said Charles Steward has forfeited his trust reposed in him by the
people, by setting up his Standard, making a war against them, and thereby been
occasion of much bloodshed and misery to the people whom he was set over for
good.

3 That the said Charles Steward has been the chief Instrument of augmenting
and promoting a second War, by granting Commissions to Incendiaries and
Malignants, and inviting them thereunto.

4 That the said Charles Steward has acted contrary to the Liberties of the
Subject, and tending to the destruction of the fundamental Laws and Liberties
of this Kingdom; all which amounts to a forfeiture of the said trust reposed
in him by the People at his Coronation, with much more to this effect.

The Council of War (who now manage business, as in relation to him) have
ordered the way of State and Majesty observed about him, as to persons and
manner, viz. that nothing be done upon the knee, in reference to his trial,
who (as is said) will receive it at Windsor, about the 6. day of the next
month. And it is said, that his Maj. upon the receipt hereof, declared, That
though he could have no restoration to his rights, privileges, and Crown, and
had participated of far more trouble and misery in this world, than any of his
(late) Predecesors yet he doubted not, but in the world to come, to receive an
everlasting Crown of glory.

His Majesty's Queries.
FIrst, That no Law can judge a King, or make him rightly to suffer death by
any power. 2 That though He suffers under them by restraint, yet his Irish
Subjects will come in their time and rescue Him. 3 That all men when they find
that great decay of trade, which will be, if the Kingdom be not settled by him,
they will rescue him. 4 That He knows what an influence is from the people
upon him; That, that if he be not restored, they will not be satisfied. 5 That
the kingdom is generally well pleased with what he condescended to, as very
great on his part, at the Treaty with the Parliament. 6 That the City of London
are of great power both in purse and strength, and will oppose any that shall
seek to destroy him. 7 That relief will come to him from several parts of
Christendom. 8 That his Son Prince Charles is able to raise a good strength
in France and Holland.

Answer.
1 That there is not only example hereof in other parts, but in Scotland, yea,
and England also, of the 35 last Kings, above twenty were imposed and deposed
by power. 2 That nothing will ruin his Majesty more, than joining with the
Irish against his Protestant Subjects. 3 That there will be a sudden course
taken for settling of trade, and enriching the kingdom. 4 That Law and Justice
being executed, it will render great satisfaction to the people. 5 That the
kingdom cannot be satisfied with Ormonds negotiation with the Rebels in
Ireland. 6 That the City of London will be new modelled, and begins to be
framed to a pretty good order, and temper, since the putting of Malignants out
of power and authority. 7 That foreign forces cannot daunt the spirits of the
Soldiery of England. 8 That the French have troubles enough at home, by the
present distractions in the City of Paris, and that the Prince wants money for
facilitating his design in Holland.

The Declaration of Col. Harrison to the King.
1 That his trust was to be in God. 2 That his desire is, that God may have the
glory of all. 3 That he hated all base and obscure undertakings. 4 That what
would be done concerning his Majesty would be open, and to the eyes of the
world. And protested that he himself would oppose any that should privately
offer violence to his person. This gave his Majesty great satisfaction, who
replied, that if the Army acted beyond his thoughts and expectation, he would
proclaim their fame throughout all Europe.

FINIS.

