The Humble PETITION OF JAMES HIND (Close Prisoner in Newgate) To the Right
Honorable the Council of State; And their proceedings thereupon.

TOGETHER With the Speech and Confession of the Bishop of CLONWEL at the place
of Execution at Limmerick in Ireland, on the 9 of this instant November, 1651.

AS ALSO, His Prayer immediately before he was turned off the Ladder; And his
Declaration to the People, concerning the King of Scots; and the Grounds of his
Engagement against the PARLIAMENT.

Likewise, the manner of the Deportment of General Oneal, and 29 Colonels and
other Officers, who were all hanged at the same time. November. 21.

London, Printed for G. HORTON, 1651.

The humble Petition of James Hind, to the Right Honorable the Council of
State; and their proceedings thereupon.
SHOWS,
THat whereas your Petitioner (close Prisoner in Newgate) is unfeignedly
sorrowful for all his late miscarriages, whether testified against him, or
acknowledged by him; and that upon earnest seeking of God, and inquiring into
his Will, your Petitioner is convinced of his former misdemeanors and actings;
but yet remains under the heavy Yoke of Irons and Bondage:

May it therefore please this Honorable Council to take these premises into
your gracious consideration; and to vouchsafe your Christian favor and
clemency to your poor Supplicant, for the setting of him free from this
intolerable Iron Yoke; for the granting of his friends access unto him; and
for the reducing of him from the bare boords, to a more Christian-like
Condition.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

(...) premises being taken into consideration, it was or^^^^^ (...) he should
have a bed; which was the final result.

By Letters from Ireland it is certified, that upon the surrender of the strong
Town of Limrick in Ireland, the Bishop of Clonwel, Genesis Oneal, Col.
Fitzpatrick, Col. Hugh Brian, and 27. more Colonels, Lieut. Colonels, and
Majors, were delieved up to the Lord Deputy Ireton, on terms of mercy; who
upon the 8. of this instant November. called a Council of Officers, and after
some time spent in debate upon matter of life, it was resolved that justice
should seize (...) them; and accordingly gave sentence, That the said Bishop
Oneal, and the rest, should be executed on the day following; and that a
Gallows should be set up in the Marketplace, which was accordingly done; and
on the 9 instant the Bishop, Oneal, and the rest, were all brought to the place
of Execution, being guarded by 6. Troops of Horse, and one Regiment of Foot:
When they were brought to the said place, the Bishop was the first that tasted
of the Cup; and coming to the foot of the Ladder, he kissed it, saying,

Good people,
THis is a very uncomfortable place, for me to deliver my self unto you; but I
beseech you pardon my failings, and the rather, by reason of the sad occasion
that has brought me hither: Indeed, I have been long in my race, and how I
have looked unto Jesus the Author and finisher of my faith, is best known to
him; I am now come to the end of my race, which I find to be a death of shame,
but the shame must be despised, or there is no coming to the right hand of God;
Jesus despised the shame for me upon the Cross, and God forbid but I should
despise the shame for him upon the Gallows; I am going apace, as you see,
toward the Red Sea, and my feet are upon the very brinks of it, an Argument I
hope that God is bringing me to the Land of promise, for that was the way by
which of old he led his people.

But before they came to the Sea, he instituted a pass over for them, a Lamb
it was, but it was to be eaten with very sour Herbs, as in the 12. of Exodus. I
shall obey and labor to digest the sour Herbs, as well as the Lamb, and I
shall remember, that it is the Lords passe-over, I shall not think of the
Herbs, nor be angry with the hands that gathered them, but look up only to him
who instituted the one, and governs the other: For Men can have no more power
over me, then that which is given them from above; and although I am denied
mercy here on earth, yet I doubt not but to receive it in Heaven, I am not in
love with this passage through the Red Sea, for I have the weakness and
infirmity of flesh and blood in me, and I have prayed as my Savior taught me,
and exampled me; Vt transiret calix ista, That this Cup might pass away from
me; but since it is not, that my will may, his will be done; and I shall most
willingly drink of it as deep as he pleases, and enter into this Sea, I and I
pass through it, in the way that he shall be pleased to lead me. And yet
(good people) it would be remembrad, That when the Servants of God, old Israel,
were in this boystrous Sea, and Aaron with them, the Egyptians which persecuted
them, and did in a manner drive them into that Sea, were drowned in the same
waters while they were in pursuit of them: I know my God whom I serve, is as
able to deliver me from this Sea of blood, as he was to deliver the 3. Children
from the furnace. Dan. 3. And I most humbly thank my Savior for it. My
Resolution is now, as theirs was then; their Resolution was, they would not
change their principles, nor worship the Image which the King had set up; nor
shall I the imaginations which the people are setting up; neither will I
forsake the Temple and Truth of God, to follow the bleating of Jeroboams Calves
in Dan and in Bethel.

And I pray God bless all this people, and open their eyes, that they may see
the right way; for if it fall out that the blind lead the blind, doubtless they
will fall both into the ditch: For my self, I am, (and Lacknowledge it in all
humility) a most grievous sinner, and therefore I cannot doubt but that God
has mercy in store for me a poor penitent, as well as for other sinners; I
have upon this sad occasion ransacked every corner of my heart, and yet I thank
God I have not found any of my sins that are there, any sins now deserving
death by any known Law. And I thank God, though the wait of the sentence lie
very hard upon me, yet I am as quiet within, (I thank Christ for it) as I ever
was in my life. I shall hasten to go out of this miserable life, for I am not
willing to be tedious; and I beseech you, as many as are within hearing,
observe me, I was born and baptized in the bosom of the Church of Rome, (the
ancient and true Church) and in that Profession I have ever since lived, and in
the same I now die. As touching my Engagement in Arms, I did it in two
respects, First, for the preservation of my principles and Tenants. And
secondly, for the establishing of the King, and the rest of the Royal issue, in
their just Rights and Privileges. I will not enlarge my self any further, I
have done, I forgive all the world, all and every of these bitter Enemies, or
others whatsoever they have been, which have any ways prosecuted me in this
kind; I humbly desire to be forgiven first of God, and then of every man,
whether I have offended him or no; if he do but conceive that I have: Lord do
thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness of him, and so I heartily desire you to
join with me in prayer.

The Bishop of Clonwels Prayer immediately before he was turned off the Ladder.
O Eternal God, and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches
and fullness of all my mercies look down upon me; but not till thou have nailed
my sins to the Cross of Christ. Look upon me, but not till thou have bathed me
in the blood of Christ; not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ,
that so the punishment that is due to my sins, may pass away and go over me;
and since thou art pleased to buy me to the uttermost, I heartily bese^ch thee
give me now in this great instant full patience proportionable comfort, a heart
ready to die for thine honor, the Kings happiness, and the Churches
preservation; and my zeal to these (far from arrogance be it spoken) is all the
sin (humane frailty excepted, and all incidents thereunto) which is yet known
of me in this particular for which I now come to suffer: I say in this
particular of Treason; but otherwise my sins are many and great, Lord pardon
them all, and those especially whatsoever they be, which have drawn down this
present judgment upon me; and when thou have given me strength to bear it,
then do with me as seems best in thine own eyes, and carry me through death,
that I may look upon it in what visage soever it shall appear to me. O Lord, I
beseech thee, give grace of repentance to all people that have a thirst for
blood; but if they will not repent, then scatter their devices so, and such as
are, or shall be contrary to the glory of thy great name: the truth and
sincerity of the ancient Catholic Religion, the establishing of the Royal
Posterity in their just Rights and Liberties, the preservation of this poor
Church in her truth, peace, and patrimony, and the settlement of this
distracted and distressed people under their ancient Laws, and in their Native
Liberties: And when thou have done this in mere mercy for them, O Lord fill
their hearts with thankfulness, and with religious dutiful obedience to thee
and thy Commandments all their days. So Amen Lord Jesus; And I beseech thee
receive my sold to mercy.

When he had finished his Prayer, he took his leave of some friends there
present, saying, Gods blessing and his mercy be upon you all; and so went up to
the Ladder, where he again prayed as follows.

LOrd I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass through the shadow of
death before I can come to see thee; but it is but umbra mortis, a mere shadow
of death, a little darkness upon nature; but thou by the merits and passion
have broke the jaws of death; so Lord receive my soul, and have mercy upon me.

No sooner had he uttered these expressions, but immediately he was turned off
the Ladder. And after him, Gen: Oneal was the next in order, who died very
penitently; and so did all the rest, who at the very hour of death, declared
themselves to be professed Enemies to the Church of England.

FINIS.

