Die Sabbati 15. Junii. 1644.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
For continuance of the former Ordinance for four Months longer, from the time
of the expiration of the said Ordinance, For the Raising, Maintaining, Paying,
and Regulating of 3000. Foot, 1200. Horse, and 500. Dragoons, to be commanded
by Sir WILLIAM WALLER, As Sergeant Major General of the said Forces, under his
Excellency the Earl of ESSEX, in whose absence he is to be Commander in chief
over them, and all other Forces raised, or to be raised in the Associated
Counties of Southampton, Surrey, Sussex, and Kent.
THE Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, do Ordain and Declare, and be
it Ordained and Declared, That the Ordinance entitled, An Ordinance for the
raising, maintaining, paying, and regulating of 3000. Foot, 1200. Horse, and
500. Dragoones, to be commanded by Sir William Waller as Sergeant Major
General of the said Forces under his Excellency the Earl of Essex General,
and of all other Forces, raised, or to be raised in the associated Counties of
Southampton, Surrey, Sussex, and Kent, and every Clause, Article, and thing
therein contained, shall have continuance for and during the space of 4.
Months longer from the time of the expiration of the said Ordinance: And it is
hereby further Ordered and Ordained, that the Committee hereafter named, or any
three, or more of them, and no other, shall have power and authority to put in
execution the said recited Ordinance, and the Ordinance of the fourth of
November, 1643. for the associating the said Counties, and all other Ordinances
of Parliament, for the raising and leavying of money within the said several
and respective Counties, which are not yet executed, and shall, and may
Assesse, Rate, Tax, Collect, and Leavie all and every the Sum and Sums of
Money which are yet in Arreare, and not yet rated, assessed, taxed, collected,
leavied, or paid in, according to the said Ordinances, or any, or either of
them: and for the better expediting of the said Service, Be it Ordained by the
Authority aforesaid, that the Persons hereafter named, and no other, shall have
power to put in execution the said Ordinances, any former Ordinance to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding. That is to say.

For the County of Southampton, Southampton.
and the Town and County of Southampton, Sir henry Worsley, Sir William Lewis
Baronets, Sir Thomas Jervoise Knight, Robert Wallop, Richard. Whitehead,
William Jephson, John Doddington, Richard Norton of South wicke, Richard
Jervois, John Lisle, John Button, Edward Goddard, John Bulkley, Edward Hooper,
Richard Major, William Pit, Nicholas Love, John Hook, John Kempe, William
Wither, Richard Moore, Arthur Evelin, John Fielder, Thomas Bettesworth, Thomas
Creswell of Heckfield, Francis Rivett, Henry Bromfield, James Tutt Esquires,
Robert Harward of Sutton Skotney, George Baynard, Thomas Gale, Thomas Dowse of
Elden, William Wolgar, Willitime Gore, Alexander Wilson, the Major of
Southampton for the time being, Edward Exton, George Gallop, Alderman Robert
Wroth, and John Kittlewell Gent. Ralph Riggs Alderman of Winchester, and John
Elliott of Rugwood.

For the County of Surrey, William Lord Mounson, Sir Ambrose Brown Baronet,
Surrey.
Sir John Maynard Knight of the Bath, Sir Thomas Jervoyse, Sir Richard Onslow,
Sir John Dingley, Sir William Elliott, Sir Matthew Brand, Sir Robert Parkhurst,
Sir Robert Wood, Sir Robert Gorge Knights, Thomas Sandys, Nicolas Stoughton
George Farewell, Henry Tonstall, Arthur Onslow, Robert Goodwyn, Robert Wood,
Francis Drake, George Evelin, John Goodwyn, John Farewell, Edmond Jordan,
Thomas Lock, Lancelot Johnson, and John Turner Esquires, Sarkford Gunston,
George Wither, Robert Terrey, Robert Purse, and Robert Mead Gentlemen.

For the County of Kent, Sir Edward Scott, Kent.
Sir John Honywood, Sir Peter Godfree, Sir Henry Heyman, Sir William Man, Sir
John Routh, and Sir Thomas Godfree Knights, Thomas Westroe, Robert Scott,
Lambert Godfree, Thomas Broadnox, Richard Brown, John Brown, Sir Edward
Moinings, Sir Edward Boys, Sir Richard Hardres. John Boys of Elmington, John
Nutt, John Boys of Wingham, Sir Timothy Thornehill, Sir James Oxenden, Stephen
Moinings of Dover senior, Henry Oxenden of Deane, Sir John Roberts, Sir Michael
Livesay, (...) Kenricke, Thomas Plummer, John Bix, Humphrey Scot, Captain
Curlet, George Duke, Michael Bell, (...) Osborne junior, Sir John Rivers, Sir
John Sidley, Sir Henry Vane senior, Sir Henry Vane junior, Augustine Skinner,
Sir Humphrey Tufton, Sir Nicholas Miller, Richard Lee, William James, (...)
Beale, George Newman, George Hall, John Den Esquires, (...) Broughton of
Maidston, Thomas Sylliard, Thomas Blunt, Esqu. Sir Anthony Weldon, Sir Thomas
Walsingham, Ralph Welden, Thomas Franklin, (...) Twisden, John Baker, William
Boothby. For Canterbury, the Major for the time being, Sir Edward Masters, Sir
William Mann, Alderman Masterson, Thomas Denn Esquire, Recorder.

For the County of Sussex, Sir Thomas Pelham, Sussex.
Sir Thomas Parker, Sir John Chapman, Anthony Stapeley, Herbert Morley,
Laurence Ashburnham, Sir Thomas Ershfield of Denn, Henry Shelley, John Baker,
Hall Ravenscroft, Edward Dowse, William Hay, Herbert Hay, John Busbridge,
Herbert Board, Harbert Springate, Peter Farnden, Thomas Jefferay, William
Mitchelborne, Thomas Collins, John Board, Anthony Crutenden, Anthony Foul,
Francis Sellwin, William Newton senior, William Cawley, Thomas Middleton. John
Downs, Edward Apsley, George Oglander, Capt. James Temple, Thomas Chase, Ralph
Cooper, George Churcher, Peter Bettisworth of Fineing Esquires, Captain Chitty,
Thomas Henshaw, William Freeman, William Marlett, Henry Bridgier, Thomas Green
of Marden, Thomas Millett of Marden, William Cook, Nicholas Shepard, John
Fagg, William Morley, Robert Dike, Humphrey Edwards, Henry Nicholson, Arthur
Bettesworth, George Green, Philip Jermin Sergeant at Law, Stephen Humphrey,
Nathanael Studley, Robert Spence, Roger Gralwicke, Ambrose Traiton Esquires.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliament.

FINIS.

