THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON, IN Common Council ASSEMBLED, Presented to the Right Honorable THE
LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament Assembled: WITH The Answers of both Houses to
the said PETITION.

Printed by RICHARD COTES, Printer to the honorable City of London, October 17.
1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons In Parliament Assembled; The
humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London
in Common Council assembled.
SHOWS,
THat the Petitioners with all thankfulness do acknowledge, that by the
blessing of God upon the great and pious endeavors of the Honorable Houses,
much good has been obtained; as unto the Kingdom in general, so particularly
unto this City, in the removal of many scandalous and ill-affected Ministers,
and giving opportunity thereby for the placing godly, learned, painful and
orthodoxall in their rooms; who by their constant preaching and endeavors,
have labored against the errors, heresies, schisms, superstition,
profaneness, and malignity of the times, and have been (under God) very
instrumentally serviceable, since the beginning of these troubles, to raise and
stir up the hearts and affections of the people of this City, to join with,
and effectually to assist bo h with their Lives and Estates, the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, in their undertakings, for the suppressing of the adverse
power raised against them; that so Religion, Liberties, and the work of
Reformation might be carried on to a happy settlement in Church and
Commonwealth: But your Petitioners have for a long time (to the great grief of
their souls) foreseen and bewailed the sad condition this City was then coming
into, and which since is come upon it, by reason of the want of competent
maintenance, to uphold and cherish therein, their said godly and painful
Ministers, and have by many endeavors for diverse years past, been
considering, how a comfortable livelihood for the said Ministers might be
obtained, but could by no means of themselves effect so great a work, without
the help and assistance of this Honorable House; unto whom therefore your
Petitioners thought fit to have made their addresses, and humbly prayed your
help and assistance therein: But finding then the other great and weighty
affairs of the Kingdom so pressing, we did forbear until some seasonable
time might be found for this so pious a work. But in the mean while the thing
we feared is come to pass. Our Ministers for want are necessitated to leave
this City, and many have already removed themselves and families into other
parts of the Kingdom, and diverse others likewise going; whereby the City is
like to be rendered in a very sad condition for their souls; finding by a
representation lately presented to the Common Council, from the Provincial
Assembly of London, that there are at present about 40. parish Churches in the
said Province, that have no allowed or settled Minister belonging to them; and
your Petitioners to their grief do see diverse Churches shut up, and have none
to officiate in them, giving thereby opportunity to scandalous and il-affected
Ministers to creep in, and seduce the people, and many more will be in short
time, if not timely prevented; and how great dishonor that will be to God and
misery to this City, we need not express to this Honorable House, whose
religious constant care and endeavors is and has been to nourish and support
a godly and faithful Ministry in the whole Kingdom, and are confidently
assured, will not be wanting to do the like for this great and populous City,
and the rest of the Province (the affections and service whereof, this
Honorable house has been pleased so often to signify their good acceptance of)
there being above one third part of the Parishes within the Province where the
maintenance for the Ministers are not more then from 16 l. to 60. l. per annum,
many others little more, and thereof a great part cannot be received, partly
through the disaffection of many to the Reformation and Government now
established; and partly through the poverty of others in these hard times.

Your Petitioners therefore for preventing of the said miseries, and for the
future encouragement, and settling of a godly, painful and Orthodoxall
Ministry within the said Province, to the glory of God, the honor of the
Parliament, good of this Province, and gayning many souls unto God, (...) Do
humbly pray, (...)

That this Honorable House will be pleased to take the premises into your most
pious and serious consideration, And to grant that the Impropriations of the
late Archbishops and Bishops, the Houses and Lands now or late belonging to
Deans, Chapiters, and Prebends, within the said Province, and the Rents and
Revenues thereof, may be settled for an augmentation of maintenance of the
Ministry of the said Province, with such further addition as the greatness of
the Petitioners necessity do require, and the Honorable Houses in their
Wisdoms shall see meet.

And the Petitioners shall pray, etc.
Die Lunae, 16. Octobr. 1648.
AFter the Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, was this day read in the House, The Petitioners being called in again,
they were answered as follows;

That the House gives them thanks for the care they have for a faithful
Ministry within the Diocese of London, And that the Lords will do what lies
in them, for the furthering of their good desires therein according to their
Petition.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Lunae, 16. October. 1648.
THe House being informed that the Sheriffs and Aldermen of London were at
door, they were called in, and after a short preamble made by Sheriff Viner,
he delivered his message: That the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of
the City of London commanded him to deliver this their humble Petition, which
he did humbly present, and desired the same might be read, which after the
Petitioners were withdrawn was read.

Ordered by the House of Commons that the said Petition be committed to Mr.
Knightley Mr. Fouse Mr. Trenchard Col. Copley Sir Martin Lumbley Mr. Gourden
The Citizens and Burgesses of the City of London, Mr. Gesson Mr. Wheeler Mr.
Vassal Mr. Solwey Mr. Preistley Mr. Sheriff Brown Sir Robert Harley Alder.
Hoyle Mr. Got Mr. Whitaker Col. Stroud Col. Rigby Mr. Tate Sir Thomas Dacre Sir
Will. Lister Col. Brich^ Mr. Edward Stephens Sir John Boucher,
Or any five of them, and all that will come are to have voices.

The said Committee to have power to confer with the Common Counsel of the City
of London, or such as they shall appoint, how an expedient may be found out for
settling maintenance upon a Preaching Ministry within the said City, and are to
consider the Ordinance touching the late Dean, and Chapter of Paul's, and how
the same has been discharged and to find out the cause why the said Churches
stand empty and unserved; with power also to consider of an expedient how a
Preaching Ministry may be maintained in all other Cities within this Kingdom.
The said Committee is to sit at two a clock this afternoon in the Exchequer
Chamber, and so de die in diem, and for what concerns the City of London, to
make report to the House thereof forthwith.

The Petitioners being again called in, Mr. Speaker by command of the House
gave them this answer; Gentlemen, The House has considered of your Petition,
and finds it a thing of very great consequence, and have referred the same to
a Committee who are to sit this afternoon, and are to confer with you how an
expedient may be found out for maintenance of a Preaching Ministry within the
City, and to report the same forthwith.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


