PAUL'S CHURCHYARD. Libri Theologici, Politici, Historici, Nundinis Paulin^s
(una cum Templo) prostant venales. Juxta seriem Alphabeti Democratici.
Done into English for the Assembly of Divines. July 6 1659
CLASSIS I.
1. GUsman's Cases of Conscience, Revised and augmented by Hugh ^eters.

2. The Earl of Pembrook's Works, in three tomes, reprinted since his death,
with an Index added by the Earl of Salisbury.

3. (...). A discourse proving the World in the Moon is not governed by States,
because her Monthly Contributions do still decrease as much as increase, but
Ours increase and never decrease.

4. Hugo de Sante Victoria; Or a Confutation of that dangerous Error, that
Colonel Huson had his name from handling Sr. Hugh's Bones; proved by 200. Texts
of Scripture, taken out of his own Letters from Dublin.

5. Ecclesiasticus. A Plain Demonstration that Col. Pride, (alias Bride) was
Founder of S. Brides Church, and not found in the Porch, because the Porch was
built before the Chu^^h, that is, not behind it.

6. Quantum potes. The Lawfulness of taking 12. per^t. by Dr. William Gouge.

7. A Catalogue of the Nobility of England and Ireland from ^is Excellency the
Lord General Cromwell, and the Lord Deputy Ireton, to the several Peers and
Trades of each Regiment.

8. The Swing. Or the Life and Death of Alderman Hoile; with a short Appendix
by the States late Cheese-monger.

9. Several readings on the Statute of Magna Charta, by John Lilburn; with a
Treatise of the best way of boiling Soap.

10. Totquot. The Unlawfulness of holding two Benefices, and the lawfulness
of holding Four. By the Assembly of Divines.

11. Merlinus Anglicus. The Art of Discovering all that never was, and all that
never shall be. By William Lilly. With in Index thereunto. By John Bocker.

12. Pancirellae Medela. A way to find out things lost or Stolen; by the said
William Lilly. With a Clavis to his book, or the Art of his Art. By Mistress
Mary Frith.

13. Cujum pecus? The Law of Cousin Germans, cleared in this Case, [* An Elder's
Maid took a Mastiff Dog; and Independent ^ribi ex^ ^it, scr^be^ ^amen hor^ quod
vel ^etrasse ^udo^ ^cti non ^entur.
Corporal espoused a Bitch: may not the Presbyterian Dogs Son marry the
Independent Bitches Daughter, they being Brothers and Sisters Children?]

14. A Confutation of that vulgar Opinion that a Receiever is worse then a
thief, because now very honest men are Receivers of the Kings Revenues.

15. Tibi licet. That a Woman may have two husbands at once, if her second
husband be faithful to the State. By Mistress Jane Puckering.

16. The Childrens Dictionary. And exact Collection of all New words (born
since November 3. 1640.) in Speeches, Prayers, or Sermons, as well those that
signify Something as Nothing.

27. Gladius Justitiae. That the Power of the Sword belongs to him that can get
hold of the hilt.

18. Dooms day Book. A clear Manifestation that more Roundheads go to heaven
then Cavaliers, because Roundheads on their death beds do repent of their
former Cause and Opinions, but not Cavaliers.

19. A new Map of England. Showing that those few at Westminster are
Representatives of the Commonwealth, in regard the whole Nation pays them
Contribution.

20 Datur vacuum. Proving that there shall be nothing but Vacation, because
there shall be no Terms.

CLASSIS II. Containing twenty new Acts of Parliament.
21. AN Act for turning all Laws into English, with a short Abridgement for
such new Lawyers as cannot write and read.

22. An Act for making Adultery death in all persons except Representatives,
for whom it shall be lawful to have as many Women as they present Men.

23. An Act for expunging the word KING, and inserting the word PARLIAMENT in
all Texts of Scripture, beginning at Isa. 30. 33. Tophet is prepared for the --

24. An Act concerning the Thames, that whereas at Westminster it ebbs six hours
and flows but four; it shall henceforth ebb four hours, and flow six.

25 An Act for easing the people of Taxes, that no single and standing tax
shall exceed 12000. l. per mensem.

26 An Act for better ordering of Apparel, forbidding Cavaliers to wear any
cloaks.

27 An Act for Canonizing those for Saints that die in the States service; who
since there are but two worlds, ought at least to be honored in one.

28. An Act for regulating the Company of Link boys, that none shall carry
Links but such as shall be licensed, and pay unto the state two pence out of
every Link.

29. An Act for taking down those Letters which stand upon Suffolk-house (as
well as their neighbor Charing Cross) in regard the said Letters highly
endeavor the advancement of Learning.

30. An Act prohibiting all Delinquents to eat more then one Meal a week.

31. An Act for impressing 10000. soldiers whereby it is lawful to press any
Yeoman, unless he be a Member of some Committee, or lately made a Justice of
Peace.

32 An Act for pulling down all Monarchical Signs in London [the Sun, the
Eagle the Phoenix, the Lion, etc.] and setting up such B^rds and Beasts as have
more heads than one.

33. An Act for repealing a former Ordinance of October. 18. 1642. called An
Ordinance for bringing to condign punishment such as slander the Parliament to
have an intention to set up an Excise.

34. An Act for translating the Alcoran into English.

35. An Act forbidding Oxford to be called an University, since it is a
Congregation wherein two or three are gathered together.

36. An Act in behalf of all Clerks and Notar^es, wherein they have liberty to
sh^r^en* d^sh or contract any word, for avoiding false English, as heretofore
in Latin.

37. An Act injoyning the L. Generals meat to be carried to his table by men on
Hors^back.

38. An Act for ho^d^ng an Act at Oxford, provided the Terrae filius first take
the Engagement to be faithful to the State.

39. An Act for more speedy ending of Law Suits, by calling all Puineys to the
Bar, with a list of such Clerks and Scriveners as have lately put on Bar-gowns.

40 An Act commanding all Malignants to use only their S^r nam^s, their proper
Names (with all other properties) being forfeit to the State.

CLASSIS III. Historians and Philosophers.
41. ALl the London Diurnals bound together. Or a History of the Parliament, by
Thomas May Esquire

42. Liber crassus tres pollices. A Catalogue of such women as are not Wives,
Maids, nor Widows, being married without either Law or Liturgy, some by a
Directory, and some by Nothing.

43. Pro populo Anglicano Proving that Kings had many evils, because the Kings
Evil was so often cured.

44. Species quarta. A new division of Government into Monarchy, Aristocracy,
Democracy, and Anarchy, by Nathaniel Bacon of Grayes Inn Esquire: which Fourth
was found out by the four kinds of Seekers, some whereof did never seek at all.

45. Moon beams, showing how the Mood has stronger influence then the Sun: by
Dr. Chamberlain, Medico Entheato.

46. (...). That the Army ought to march but two a breast, since all creatures
at Noah's Ark went by Couples.

47. The Art of flying without wings: approved by diverse Commanders of quality.

48. The Confutation of Geographers, who said we of this Island were Antipodes
to none, though we tread contrary to all the world.

49. An Answer to all that James Howell has or shall write, especially to his
last Book written for the States against himself. By John Tailor the Water Poet.

50 Christian Liberty, or the lawfulness of shifting sides and opinions, as
the Saints do wives, which if not for their turn, do turn them off, and take
new ones.

51. Aristotle's works in English Meeter, by George Wither.

52. A Vindication of the Citizens of London, that as yet they want nothing but
wit and honesty.

53. A Declaration from All souls College in Oxford, that since they were
deprived of their Warden Doctor Shelden, they have not been an hour out of the
Physicians hands, most Members of that College being strangely taken away, and
a P
Member of Parliament set over the rest.

54. A Declaration from Saint John Baptists College in Oxford, that since
their Head was voted off, and a new on set on, they have bin troubled with very
strange fits, especially at this time of their College Dedication (commonly
called Midsummer) in which dangerous Month they desire that Mr. Cheynell may
not be their President.

55. The wandering Jew. By Dr. Du. Moulin Junior, Medico-Theologo* Historico
Bello, Gallicus Gallo-Belgicus.

56 The jurisdiction of Courts, That the upper and lower Bench are Legal Seats
of Justice, being made of such Wood as grew in the Kings Forests and cut down
by Ordinance of Parliament.

57. The Free State. Proving Republics the best kind of Government, which have
Stews for Curtizans, and Synagogues for Jews.

58 Lex Aragoniae. That Malignants are Dead men in the Spainiards account,
where ten years slaverie is held equal to a civil death.

59. The equitable Sense. That such as paid their whole Composition, with Fifth
and twentieth part, ought to enjoy but a Fifth part of their estates, and a
twentieth part of their liberty, keeping 20. miles from London, and not five
miles from home.

60. (...). Proving there is some body in some part of England who is not a
Preacher.

CLASSIS IV. Casuists resolving Tender Consciences in these 40. Quaeres.
61. WHether those Members who were never elected may be called Reprobates?

62. Whether Adam's Rib has slain more then Sampson's jaw bone?

63. Whether England be Sampson (as Master Goodwin tells us) because it is
strong; or because it is imprisoned, sh^ven close, and has lost its two eyes?

64. Whether the Spanish Ambassador Don Alonzo de Cardenas be better paid from
Madrid or Westminster?

65. Whether the two Hothams shall rise (as they were buried) in boots and
spurs?

66. Whether that Text [They are all become abominable, there is none that does
good, no not one,] does concern Committee men?

67. Whether we ought (with Master Harrison) to pray God to pardon the sins of
our complexion?

68. Whether they slanderd his Excellency who reported him dead, since his own
printed Letter calls him a dry bone?

69. Whether any now know what the Lord Say is doing, or whether now his
Lordship knows what to do?

70. Whether to shake off Allegiance for Christian Liberty, were not Don
Quixot's argument to turn loose the Gally, slaves, because God and Nature made
them free.

71. Whether Butchers and Cutlers ought to have precedence of all Companies in
London, since the power of the sword is the sole Title to Government?

72. Whether there be any other Insula Latronum besides that which stole
Megellan's Cock-boat?

73. Whether the States Book-man did not properly mistake when (for Insulares)
he called the English Insularii, i. e. poor slaves?

74. Whether since no man must print or write Books, we may print the Names of
Books that never were written?

75. Whether we (as well as Seneca) may call a Common woman Respublica?

76. Whether the Nobility are not bound to turn Soldiers, when most of their
houses at London are made Garrisons?

77. Whether Representatives have more lives then one?

78. Whether Master Dell, when he bid every Soldier be like the General,
meant they should all be Generals, or all look like the General?

79. Whether the Chaplains do well to tell the Army you shall never read the
like, when most of the Officers can neither write nor read?

80. Whether it be any dishonor to the Parliament that the first parley in the
world was 'twixt a Woman and the Devil?

81. Whether now more Bodies and Souls are saved, when every man does either
practice Physic or Preach?

82. Why all the Lawyers, when the term ended, shook hands at Westminster; and
whether they hope ever to meet there again?

83. Whether the Furriers Prentice or Doctor Chamberlain make better Sermons?

84. Whether it be as lawful to build a Church and call it S. Paul's, as to
build Ships and call them the Fairfax, the President, the Speaker?

85. Whether Saint Paul ought to have a Cathedral in England, since he had
none in any other part of the world?

86. Whether that place may be read, My House is called a House of Prayer, but
ye have made it a Guard of Independants?

87. Whether Mr. Rous or Robbin Wisdom be the better Poet?

88. Whether Malignants plotted the Spanish Armado in 88.

89. Whether the States Writers may be called poor Scriblers, since in all
their Books they still beg the Question?

90. Whether ever there was so much and so little written as now?

91. Whether the Stationer that gave 400l. for the Directory was cursed with
Bell and Candle as well as Book?

92. Whether the Common Prayer Book should fare worse because it first was
established on the 1549.
19th of May, which is the Kings Birthday?

93 Whether the Vintner in Saint Clements, when commanded to change his Sign of
the Kings Head, did well to put up the Head of Saint John Baptist?

94. Whether when Master Caryl called his Excellency an Angel, he ought not to
have told us he meant a good Angel?

95. Whether the States should not allow two Harvests in one year, when they
take double Taxes?

96. Whether the Maid at Oxford that was hanged and revived, had subscribed the
Engagement?

97. Whether it is not easy to be rich, if a man would quit his Conscience and
turn Roundhead?

98. Whether when they burned Don Quixot's Library, they did wisely to burn all
Translations; and if the like were done now, whether there would not be a most
lamentable fire?

99. Whether the Parliament had not cause to forbid Christmas when they found
their printed Acts under so many Christmas Pyes?

100. Whether he that scribled this Catalogue of Books was not robbed of all
his own?

Sio desinit Centuria prima.
PAUL'S CHURCHYARD. Libri, Theologici, Politici, Historici, Nundinis Paulinis
(una cum Templo) prostant venales, etc.
CENTURIA SECUNDA.
CLASSIS V.
101. THe Silver Shekel. A Treatise proving the Excise is jure divino: By John
Goodwin.

102. Scaliger in laudem anseris. Or, A panegyric to the Earl of Salisbury.

103. (...). That the Government by States is better than Kings by six Milions
per annum.

104. Terra Sancta. An Answer to the Adage which calls the King of England Rex
Daemonum, because now we are all Saints.

105. (...). That a Twentieth part is more than a Fifth, and a Fifth more than
all. By a Member of the Committee of * -- dashers Hall.

106. The blew Legend; Or, [Spirituall Experiences held forth by Saints at a
private Conference.] By Vavasor Powell.

107. Posthuma Pembrochiana. The late Earl of Pembrooke's old Clothes worn by
Alderman Titchborne; first, because he bought them; secondly, because they fit
him.

108. Oppiana (...) Proving the Sea is not governed like Islands, because the
Great Fish eat the Less, but here the Less devour the greater.

109. Bellum Grammaticale. That Parliamentdome, Counceldome, Committeedome, or
Sword-dome, are better words than Christendom or Kingdom.

110. The Devil of Saint Dunstan's. Or a Confutation of those who affirm Mr.
Strong has no mouth,

111. Aurum volatile. How to hit a Purse flying. By Edmund Prideaux.

112. Untempered mortar. That the Meal which is sold in S. Paul's Church, is
mixed with Lime, and has caused this new Plague in the Guts.

113. Trygobius. Of the shortest and cheapest way to heaven. By Stephen
Marshall.

114. The Army's Remonstrance, that His Excellency and his Officers took up
Arms in defense of their own Lands and Revenues.

115. Salus in ferro. That Primitive Christians were fools to be Martyrs when
Arms were in their hands. By Francis Rous Provost of Eaton.

116. Camden's Remains. Proving this Island was part of the Continent, and that
then it was governed by Parliaments and States.

117. Dominus a Domo. That the House of Commons is called a House, because the
Members resolve to dwell there.

118. Baubella. That the word Baubles (as appears in Hoveden in Rich. 1.) does
properly signify Jewels or precious Stones, By Sir Henry Mildmay Master of the
Baubles.

119 Probatur per con-testes. A Confirmation of Sir Hen. Mildmay's opinion for
the genuine signification of the word Baubles. By Sir John Hippesley and Mr.
Henry Martin.

120. Six hundred Texts of Scripture in Hebrew Anagrams. By Luke Harruney.

CLASSIS VI. Twenty new Acts of Parliament.
121 AN Act for Constituting six new Heralds, in regard old ones cannot blazon
the Arms of diverse new honorable Officers of State.

122. An Act for sending 2000. pair of shoes to the Soldiers in Ireland,
which shoes shall be approved by Col. Hewson Governor of Dublin.

123. An Act for Propagation of the Gospel in Wales, that whereas heretofore
each Parish had a Minister (who now are all Sequestered) there shall be three
Itinerants or Riding Preachers to teach the Word for benefit of the State.

124. An Additional Act for making Vavasour Powell one of the Riding Ministers,
because formerly he was a good Groom: and Ienkin Jones another, because he was
a Trooper: and David Gamm the third, because his Family were found good Horse
takers.

125. An Act for admitting Jews into England, with a short Proviso for
banishing the Cavaliers.

126, An Act for removing all Obstructions (especially those of Law or
Conscience) for sale of the Kings Free-farm Rents.

127. An Act for taking some small Excise from such as drink fair water, since
the State gave Order to cleanse the Rivers.

128. An Act for those who first sent Money or Plate to Guild Hall, to double
the sum or else lose the former.

129. An Act of Oblivion for Malignants to forget that ever they had Estates.

130. An Act commanding all men to agree, that since there must be but few
Laws, there may be few Causes.

131. An Act for Lawyers to plead in their Cloaks, and their Gowns to be hung
up in Westminster Hall among the Scott's Colors.

132. An Act for repealing a former Act [called An Act disabling Clergymen to
intermeddle in civil Affaires] that so Mr. Peter's may be of the Committee for
altering the Law.

133. An Additional Act that the Grand Committee for altering the Law shall
first sit on the 27th of January, which day His late MAJESTY was sentenced to
dye.

134. An Act for taking down the Scaffolds from Paul's, and seting up another
on Tower Hill.

135. An Act that the Author of Don Quixot shall explain whom he means by the
Parliament of Death.

136. An Act for sending some Cheese and Biscuit to the Army in Ireland,
provided the Cheese be not Holland cheese, but made in our State.

137. An Act forbidding any more to put Greek or Latin Titles to their books,
unless such persons as can spell English.

138. An Act forbidding Delinquents to Petition till the State has leisure for
more weighty affairs.

139. An Act for removing the Alphabet Cross from the Children's Primer, and
the Cross from off the Speaker's Mace, and for adding Saint Andrews Cross to
Saint George's in the State's Arms.

140. An Act forbidding all Grocers and Cooks from buying any more of the
Parliaments Declarations.

CLASSIS. VII. Half a dozen large Petitions.
141. THe humble Petition of the City of London, that those Citizens who can
raise no Horse, may raise a Troop of Oxen.

142. The humble Petition of the Keeper of Bedlam, (alias Bethlehem) that he
may have more help, in regard his Prisoners now break loose, and are all turned
Preachers.

143. The humble Petition of all North Wales, that the State would open their
Church doors; for since the Bedlamites (Riding Ministers) came to reform them,
their Stables are opened and their Churches all shut up.

144. The humble Petition of the six Counties of South Wales, that since they
must have but three Preachers, they desire those three may have six eye's; for
though Ienkin Jones look's nine ways, yet Davy Gamm is but half a Seer; and so
not capacitatea to be a new Light.

145. The humble Petition of William Du Guard the State's Printer, that having
now printed the Racovian Catechism, he may have the sole printing of
Bernardinus Ochinus, or the three Grand Impostours, which he has also ready,

146. The humble Petition of Matthew Walbank and Gyles Calvert, in regard that
Paper grows dear, the State would grant them the Paper which sticks in
needless Tickets upon every door, since now so few take lodgings in London.

CLASSIS VIII. Commentators and School men.
147 FLores Edvardi Coke. A Collection of all my Lord Cook's Latin Sentences,
with a List of those Authors (Lycosthenes, Calepine, Cato, and other good
Schoolmen) where his Lordship had his gatherings.

148. A large Commentary on Aristotle's Problems, by two Preaching Ladies, the
one young, the other old, and both painted.

149. Pro corpore Politico. That the new Representative was but an Apparition,
because it was so soon vanished.

150. The Archbishop of Canterburie's Trial, writ by William Prinn, declaring
all the Archbishop spoke or did before he was born, and since his Burial;
being the 9th Tome of Master Prinn's Works.

151. Testis Singularis. That Malchus might lawfully be a witness (against
Saint Peter) though his Ear was cut off. By an utter Barrister of Lincolne's
Inn.

152. Contra Verrem. The unlawfullnesse of eating Swines flesh. By Miles Corbet.

153. Pro Verre. In defense of Swines flesh, written in Tuscan by Bocco de
Porco; and procured into English by Signior Ambrosio, late Reader in the late
New Academy.

154. Sepelire Mortuos. A List of those Scotts who dying in prison were denied
Christian Burial, and (left in the Fields) were eaten by Hoggs, which now
makes Pork so cheap in London.

155. (...). That London is neither Horse nor Mule; first because she is so
easily bridled. Secondly, Horse and Mule cannot know their own strength, but
London can and dare not.

156. Angelus Lapsus. A discourse proving that Devils may be saved; written
lately by a Revolted Cavalier.

157. (...). The Art for turning three ways in two years. By Colonel George
Monk.

158. A plain exposition of Quid dabitis in Saint Matthew. By Colonel Dundas
late Governor of Edinburgh Castle.

159. A letter of Thanks from the Spanish Ambassador (Don Alonzo de Cardenas)
to the Council of State, for hanging his Rooms with Titian's 12 Caesar's and
other rare pieces of the King of England's goods.

160. (...). The Art of Declaring, Undeclaring, Adding or Expunging. By the
Earl of Lowdon Lord Chancellor of Scotland.

CLASSIS IX. Casuists, Resolving Tender Consciences in these 40 Quaeries.
161. WHether Cain had the power of the Sword when here* formed Abel.

162. Whether it is not a horrible Imprecation against the State to wish that
every man might have his due?

163. Whether John Lilburn were not an Ass to think that a Councellor of State
could Sin?

164. Whether the City of Dublin stands upon her head while a Shoemaker governs
her?

165. Why three Counties in Ireland should petition for Bread, when their
present Commander is a London Baker?

166. Why no man accepts of Master Nicholas Culpepper, though he offers to cure
all Diseases for three pence?

167. Whether Doctor Hoyle (for keeping the Chair at Oxford from Doctor
Saunderson) ought not to follow his Namesake Alderman Hoyle?

168. Whether the said Doctor Hoyle be fittest for the Chair, because (being
lately drunk with his Man) he fell off a Stool?

169. Whether Doctor Hill were a King, when he prayed, O Lord do thou depose
Him who would depose us?

170. Whether the said Doctor Hill (being then struck speechless) had the
Spirit of Utterance, or the Dumb Devil?

171. Why Saints are so much for things of this World?

172. Whether he that now dare be honest is not thought a Fool;

173. Whether Sir William Brereton does devour Church Lands, since he made
the Chapel at Croydon his Kitchen?

174. Whether Cavaliers may have one Christmas in twelve years, when the
States keep Christmas all the year long?

175. Whether Master Peter's did justly preach against Christmas-Pyes the same
day he eat two Mince-pies to his dinner?

176. Whether there now live more Men or Women in the Inns of Court?

177. Whether it is not clearly proved that there are Witches, since England
has been bewitched eleven years together?

178. Whether the new Congregation at VVrexham be all elected, because (like
Sheep) their bodies are Sealed, and whether the Mark may be called a Teat?

179. Whether our Reformers may lawfully trade in Magic, because Luther and
Dr. Faustus taught both in one Town?

180. Why Lucian makes Hell governed by a Committee?

181. Whether twelve years are sufficient to try how we can live without a
King?

182. Whether the House of Commons be a VVidow, a Wife, a Maid, or a
Commonwealth?

183. Whether our new States may not grow as great as old Rome, since They and
Romulus had the same Nurse?

184. Whether it yet appears that his late Majesty had reason to deny them the
Militia?

185. Whether Raunters and Committee Men (who deny there is a God) may not
lawfully affirm there are no Devils, since Scripture command's us to deny our
selves?

186. Whether Major General Harrison be bound to give no Quarter, because his
Father is a Butcher?

187. Whether the said Major General meant June or August in his last printed
Letter dated the fifteenth of the sixth Month?

188. Whether the disputation 'twixt his late Majesty and Master Henderson
(which broke Hendersons heart) did succeed the better because it began the 29th
of 1646.
May which is the Kings Birthday.

189. Whether the Scot's Marching for England (thrice against the King and
thrice against the Parliament) have not satisfied all Parties?

190. Whether it were in Memory of Saint Paul that the last week at Edinburgh
they voted an honest Scot to have forty Stripes save one?

191. Whether Mistress Owen did justly accuse two Gentlemen to have drunk the
Kings health in Latin, when their words were Hans en Kelder?

192. Whether to drink the Kings Health be the whole duty of a good Subject?

193. Whether all Parliament Men have Wives, since Lilly in his Dedication
says -- Vos non vobis fertis aratra boves?

194. Whether the Great Pox may be called the Engagement, since so many well
affected have lately engaged?

195. Whether ever the People will petition again to be put into a Posture of
Defense?

196. Whether those that bought or those that sold Church Lands are more errant
REformers.

197. Whether the worm of Conscience dare bite a Parliament Man?

198. Whether it is properly called PAVL'S CHVRCHYARD, since 'twill be a Yard
without a Church?

199. Whether the Saint that plundered my Books did well to mention the Iron
Age, when he himself had a wooden Leg?

200. Whether any Age of Gold, Silver, Brass, or Iron can match this Wooden
Age, when men must neither write nor read?

Sic explicit Centuria secunda.

