THE GEOMETRICAL SEAMAN: OR, THE ART OF NAVIGATION Performed by GEOMETRY.
SHOWING How all the three kinds of Sailing, viz. By the Plain Chart, By
Mercators Chart, By a Great Circle. May be easily and exactly performed by a
Plain Ruler and a pair of Compasses, without Arithmeticall Calculation. By
HENRY PHILLIPPES.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT and WILLIAM LEYBOURN, for GEORGE HURLOCK, and are to
be sold at his Shop at Magnus Church-corner, 1652.

TO The INGENIOUS, INDUSTRIOUS, and Younger SEAMEN.
AS it is chiefly for your profit that I write; so I hope, that though I shall
be condemned of others, yet I shall gain your pardon. I confess my labor may
seem needless, after so many learned Authots, to set forth any thing of this
subject. And it may be accounted a presumptious folly for any to go about to
teach Seamen in their Art, especially in these times, wherein there were never
more, nor more skillful Seamen. But in answer hereto take notice of these
considerations.

First, That many Books of this subject, though they are plain and easy for
all Seamen to understand, yet they are not so exact and perfect in all things
as they ought to be.

Secondly; That though Mr. Wright, Mr. Gunter, and Mr. Norwood, have very fully
showed the errors of the foresaid Books, and have very perfectly reformed
them; yet their Books are not plain and useful for all men, because they
require much knowledge in Arithmetic.

Thirdly, Though there be many skillful Seamen, which are able to make use of
these Authors; yet there are many others, who would willingly attain to a more
perfect knowledge in this Art, and yet cannot, for want of Arithmetic. Now for
the help of such as these especially, have I published this Book: wherein you
shall find how all that which is to be performed by Arithmetic in the
foresaid Authors, may be sufficiently exactly performed by Geometry with the
Ruler and Compasses; so that any one that can but read and write a little,
though he have no skill in Arithmetic, may hereby attain a true and perfect
knowledge of the Art of Navigation, so that he shall be able to keep as true
and certain an account of his Voyage in any part of the World, as one that
works by the most exact rules of Arithmetic. Nay, I dare say, that one that
can neither write nor read, yet being of an ingenious capacity; and having one
to teach him according to this way, may attain sufficient skill in this Art.

Fourthly, This may also be useful to those who can perform these things by
Arithmetic, and the Doctrine of plain Triangles: For by this way they may
perform them far more easily and readily, and almost as exactly. And though
such men may know many of these things already, yet perhaps they may gain some
knowledge hereby.

Lastly, As by this way the knowledge of the Art is most easily and speedily
attained, so it is more certainly and constantly retained and preserved, both
in respect of the knowledge and practice thereof. First, the knowledge hereof
is more certainly retained in your memory: for this is the reason why all
Authors are forced to make use of some Geometrical figures; partly to explain
their Rules, and partly to fix them in the memory, by making them visible to
the eye; for we more surely remember any thing which we see done, then what we
only hear. Now in this way, every thing is made much more visible to the eye,
and therefore more easy both to learn and remember. Secondly, the practice of
this knowledge will be more surely and constantly preserved: for Arithmeticall
calculations require many Tables, viz. of Sines, Tangents, Secants, Meridian,
which cannot possibly be kept in memory; so that if by any cross accident a
Seaman be deprived of his Books, he can make no use of his skill in
Arithmetic. But if a man knows how to perform these things by Geometry,
though all his Books and Writings be lost, yet having but a plain Ruler and a
pair of Compasses, he may quickly recover his loss, and fall to his work as
before.

Upon these considerations, I have adventured to publish this little Book,
wherein I have briefly and plainly laid down the whole Art (as to the
Geometrical part thereof) beginning at the first principles, and proceeding by
degrees to the highest conclusions. I have used the more figures to make every
thing the plainer. And I have provided such figures, as serve not only for
demonstration of the thing, but may serve for Instruments to work upon; or you
may easily, by the directions given, make the like. To conclude, I have studied
to make those things plainest, which have at any time most troubled my self to
understand. So that I question not but that any one that is industrious, may
here of easily and speedily attain, such a competent measure by knowledge in
this Art, that by Gods blessing upon his study and labor therein, he may
obtain much credit and profit. Which is all the desire, of

Your well meaning Friend Henry Phillippes.

THE CONTENTS AND order of the whole BOOK.
IN the two first Chapters is showed how to perform some Geometrical
Principles; which are necessary to be known, because most of the following work
is done thereby. The third Chapter shows the making and use of the plain Chart,
being the common way of sailing. The fourth Chapter shows the making and use of
the true Sea-Chart, being in many respects more perfect then the former. The
fifth Chapter shows the way of sailing by a great Circle; being the most exact
and best way of sailing that can be. The sixth Chapter shows many useful
observations in all these kinds of sailing. The seventh Chapter shows another
way of sailing by the arch of a great Circle. he last Chapter shows how to
keep a perfect account of any Voyage by a little common Arithmetic, viz.
Addition and Substraction.
The names of such Books as are printed and sold by George Hurlock, at Magnus
Church corner.
THe Seamans Calendar. The enemy of Idleness, teaching how to endite Epistles
and Letters in 4 Books, 83. Normans Art of Tens, or Decimall Arithmetic, 4o.
The Art of Navigation by Martin Curtis. Safeguard of Saylors, or great Rutter,
by Robert Norman. A Table of Gauging all manner of Vessels, by John Goodwin,
8o. Path way to perfect sailing, by Richard Polter, 4o. Pitiscus his Doctrine
of Triangles, with a Canon of natural Sines, Tangents, and Secants. Norwood's
Doctrine of Triangles, with Logarithmes Norwood's Epitomie, applied to plain
and Mercators sailing. Norwoods sea-mans practice. The Navigator, by Captain
Charles Saltonstall, 4o. Dary's description and use of a Universal Quadrant,
8o.
Errata.
Page 16. A is wanting in the figure. page 33 line last, read A F, page 56 line
25. for 28 read 58, page 62, 67, 69. some words doubled may b^ left out. page
70, line last, read, thereby know whether, etc. page 80. last line of the
Table, for 22 degrees. read 33. page 88. in the Table, Col. 3. line 3. for 1, 80,
read 1,00. Col. last line 3. for 0, 8, read. 0, 58.

THE GEOMETRICAL SEAMAN. OR THE Art of Navigation performed by GEOMETRY.
CHAP. I. Containing some Geometrical Propositions, which will be of frequent
use.
PROPOSITION 1. How to erect a Perpendicular line at the end of a line. The
first Proposition

What a perpendicular line is.
A Perpendicular line, is a line that stands directly upright from another line.
As in the figure, the line B C is a perpendicular line, to the line A B. Now in
the Figure there are two ways of raising it, the one on the right side, and
the other on the left.

First, Let the line A B be given: and it is required to erect the line B C
perpendicularly to it, at the end of the line in the point B.

To perform this: first, How to raise a perpendicular.
set one foot of your Compasses in the point B, and opening the other to any
distance (you please) draw the arch K E F, then keeping your Compasses at the
same distance, set one foot in K, and with the other mark the former arch at E:
then keeping your Compasses still at the same distance, set one foot in the
mark at E, and with the other draw the arch H F, then remove one foot of your
Compasses to F, and with the other draw the arch G I: lastly, lay your ruler by
the cross of the two last arches at I, and the point B, and draw the line C I
B, so you have performed the demand. geometrical diagram The first figure.


Another way.
The second way to perform this, is demonstrated on the left side of the figure.
Let the line A B be given as before, and it is required to erect the line A D
perpendicularly in the point A.

To perform this, first, set one foot of your Compasses in any convenient point
at pleasure, as at L, and open the other foot to the point A, and draw the arch
N A M, then lay your ruler to the center of this arch L, and the place where it
crosses the line A B, which is at N, and draw the line M L N, which does
cross the arch N A M in the point M. Lastly, laying your Ruler to this cross
at M, and the point A, draw the line D M A, so you shall have your desire.

PROPOSITION 2. To draw one line parallel to another line, at any distance
required. The second Proposition.

What is meant by a parallel line.
A Line is said to be parallel to another line, when it is equally distant from
it in every part thereof. Thus in the former figure the line P S is parallel to
the line A B. Now the way to draw a parallel line is thus.

Let the line A B be the first line given, and it is required to draw the line
P S parallel to it, according to the distance P A.

First, open your Compasses to the distance you have occasion to use, which in
this example is P A, then setting one foot in A, with the other draw the arch
at P, and then keeping your Compasses at the same distance, remove one foot to
B, and with the other draw the arch at S: lastly, laying your ruler on the very
edge of these two arches, draw the line P S, which will be parallel to A B, and
so the proposition is performed.

PROPOSITION 3. How to make a Geometrical Square. The third Proposition.

A Geometrical square, is a square whose four sides are all of one and the
same length. Now in the first figure, let the line A B be the side of such a
Square, and it is required to make a Square of that length and breadth.

First, How to make a Square.
you must draw the line A B according to the length given, then erect the
perpendicular line A D at one end thereof, as was showed before, then setting
one foot of your compasses in the corner A, open the other to B, and keeping
one foot still in A, with the other cross the perpendicular A D at D: then
keeping your compasses at the same distance, set one foot in B, and with the
other draw a short arch at C, then set one foot at the cross at D, and with
the other cross the arch last drawn in the point C: now if you draw lines
through these marks, from A to D, from D to C, and from C to B, so you shall
make the Geometrical Square A B C D as was required.

If you will try your work whether you have made it true or no, then set one
foot of your compasses in A, How to try a Square.
and open the other to the corner at C, then with that distance, set one foot
in B, and turn the other to the corner at D, if both these opposite corners
have the same distance, the Square is truly made, otherwise not.

A long Square
If you would make a long square, as the square A P S B, first, you may draw the
line P S parallel to A B, and according to the length of the side of your
square, then erect the perpendicular either at A or B, and draw the opposite
side, parallel thereunto, according as the length of your square requires: and
you may try the truth of this square, also by the opposite corners as before.

PROPOSITION 4. To raise a perpendicular in the midst of a line. The fourth.
Proposition.

IN this second figure, let A B be the line given; and it is required to raise
a perpendicular in the point C.

geometrical diagram The second figure.
First, set one foot of your compasses in the point C, and open the other to any
distance at pleasure, and mark the given line therewith on both sides from C,
at the points A and B, then setting one foot of your compasses in the point A,
open the other to any distance you please beyond C, and draw a little arch
above the line at F. Then with the same distance, set one foot in B, and with
the other cross, the arch F with the arch D. Lastly, lay your ruler to this
cross, and the point C, and draw the line G C, which is perpendicular to the
line A B, in the point C as was required.

PROPOSITION 5. From a point aloft, to let fall a perpendicular upon a line
given. The fifth Proposition.

LEt G be the point aloft, from whence it is required to let fall a
perpendicular upon the line A B in the second figure.

First, set one foot of your compasses in the point given, which is G, and open
your compasses so wide that you may draw the arch A H B, which may cut the line
A B in the points A and B, and the farther these two points are asunder so much
the better, then keeping your compasses at this distance; set one foot in A,
and with the other draw the arch E, then remove one foot to B, and cross the
last arch at E, lastly, laying your ruler to the point G, and this cross at E,
draw the line G C E, so you have performed the proposition.

PROPOSITION 6. To draw a line squire wise to another line. The sixth
Proposition.

IN the second figure let A B be the line given, and it is required to draw the
line G E squire wise to it, so that it may cross it at right angles.

First, open your compasses at pleasure, and setting one foot in the line at B,
with the other make two short arches, one above the line at D, and the other
below the line at E. Then with the same distance, set one foot in A, and with
the other cross the two former arches at D and E. Lastly, laying your ruler by
these two crosses D and E, draw the line G E, which will cross the line A B at
right angles as was required.

PROPOSITION 7. To divide a line given into two equal parts. The seventh
Proposition.

IN the second figure let A B be the line given, to be divided into two equal
parts.

First, set one foot of your compasses at the one end of the line at A, and
open the other to any distance above half the line, and therewith draw two
little arches one above the line at F, and the other below the line at E, then
remove your Compasses to B the other end of the line, and cross the two former
arches at F and E, then lay your ruler to these two crosses F and E, and draw
the line GC E, which will divide the line A B in two equal parts in the point
C, so that A C is the one half, and C B the other.

PROPOSITION 8. To raise a Perpendicular at the end of a line another way. The
eighth Proposition.

IN this figure, let the line given be A B, and it is required to raise a
perpendicular at the end thereof at B.

geometrical diagram The third Figure.
First, divide the whole line, or a part thereof into five equal parts, of any
quantity you please, as you see from B to A, then setting one foot in B, open
the other to three of those parts, and with that distance keeping one foot
still in B, with the other make a little arch at E, then open your Compasses to
five of those parts, and setting one foot in the fourth of those parts at D,
with the other cross the former arch at E, then lay your ruler to this cross
at E, and the point B, and draw the line E B, which will be perpendicular to
the line A B, as was required.

Here you may note that if the three sides of a Triangle be made of these three
numbers 3 4 5, or any other numbers that are proportionable thereunto, as 6 8
10, 9 12 15, 12 16 20, 30 40 50, it will have one right angle, which will be
opposite to the greatest side, as in the Triangle D B E, the side E B is 3, the
side B D is 4, and the side D E is 5, and the angle at B is a right angle.

PROPOSITION 9. To make one angle equal, or like to another. The ninth
Proposition.

AN angle is the joining or crossing of two lines: What an angle is, with the
general kinds of angles.
if the two lines cross one another, or join one to another perpendicularly,
then they are said to make a right angle, or angles: if two lines meet or
cross one another any other way, they are said to make an oblique angle or
angles.

Thus in the third figure, the lines D B and E B meeting in the point B, make a
right angle. And in the second figure, the lines A B and G E, crossing one
another in the point C, make four right angles, or quadrants. But in the third
figure, the lines E D and B D, meeting in the point D, are said to make an
oblique angle. Now these oblique angles, if they be less then a right angle,
they are called acute or sharp angles: if they be more then a right angle,
they are called obtuse or blunt angles.

Now for example of the proposition, let the angle E D B be the appointed
angle, and it is required to make the angle D B C like unto it.

In this example, because the line D B is limited, and is common to both the
angles, you shall need only to set one foot of your compasses in B, and open
the other to the nearest distance of the line D E, which you may do by drawing
the little arch which touches the line between 3 and 4: then remove your
compasses to D, and draw the like arch at C, then lay your Ruler to the point
B, and the very edge of this arch C, and draw the line B C, so shall the two
angles be of one quantity or wideness, as was desired.

In other cases this way will not serve, but this is sufficient for the present
purpose, and I shall show you other ways to perform that in the next Chapter.

PROPOSITION 10. To divide a line into any number of equal parts. The tenth
Proposition

IN the third figure, let the line B D be given, to be divided into four equal
parts.

First, from the end D, draw a line as D E, making an angle with the line D B
at pleasure, then from the other end of the line B make the angle D B C equal
to the former angle, as was showed in the last Proposition. Then from the point
D set off with your compasses, such a number of any equal parts, as lacks one
of the number desired, which in this example, therefore must be 3, set off
therefore on the line D E three equal parts 1, 2, and 3; then you must with
the same distance of your compasses set off 1, 2, and 3, from the point B, on
the line B C, then draw cross lines from the last number in the one line, to
the first in the other, that is from 3 to 1, from 2 to 2, etc. and these lines
will divide the line B D into four equal parts as was desired.

PROPOSITION 11. To bring any three points, not lying in a straight line, into
a Circle. The eleventh Proposition

IN this figure, let A B C be the three points given, and it is required to
draw a circle through them all.

geometrical diagram The fourth figure.
Set one foot of your compasses in the middle point at B, and open your
compasses to any distance you please, so it be above half the distance, between
B, and either of the other marks (yea, it is no matter if need be, though it
reach almost to, or quite beyond the nearest of the other marks) and draw the
arch D E F G, then keeping your compasses at this distance, set one foot in A,
and with the other draw the arch G F, which crosses the former arch at G and
F, then set one foot of your compasses in the third point C, and with the other
draw the arch E D, which crosses the first arch at E and D, then laying your
ruler to the intersections of these arches; draw the lines G F H and D E H,
which will cross one another in the point H, this cross at H, is the center
of the Circle: therefore setting one foot of your compass in this cross at H,
open the other to any of the three points A B or C, and draw the circle; which
if you have done well, will pass through all the three points A B C as was
required.

CHAP. II. Showing how to divide a Circle several ways which will be needful
for many things.
THe first usual division of a Circle, is into 24 equal parts, according to
the 24 hours of a natural day; which is thus to be performed.

First, draw a line at pleasure, and cross it in the midst with another line
at right angles, To divide a Circle into 24 equal parts.
then in the crossing of these two lines, set one foot of your compasses, and
open the other to what distance you please, and therewith draw the circle,
which by the cross lines of East and West, North and South in the figure, is
divided into 4 equal parts or quadrants, each of them containing 6 hours
apiece: set VI and VI, XII and XII to these 4 parts as in the figure; then
keeping your compasses at the same distance wherewith you drew the circle, set
one foot in the crossing of the line and the circle, at VI on the one side, and
with the other make two marks in the circle, one above and the other below, so
shall you mark out the hours of II and X: then removing your compasses to the
VI on the other side, mark out the hours of II and X on that side: Again,
keeping the compasses still at the same distance, diagram of compass points set
the one foot in the crossing of the line and circle at the upper XII, and with
the other you shall mark out the hours of VIII and IIII in the upper half of
the circle, then remove your compasses to the lower XII, and so mark out the
hours of VIII and IIII, in the lower part of the circle: thus the circle will
be divided into 12 equal parts, and every one of these will contain two hours
apiece, and now it will be easy for you to divide each of these parts into two,
so you will have the 24 hours; lastly, you may divide each hour into four
equal parts which will be quarters of hours, and so you may number them, and
draw them out as in the figure.

Secondly, another usual and necessary division of a circle is to divide a
circle into 360 equal parts. To divide a circle into 360 degrees.
For in all question of Astronomy, and in the calculation of all triangles,
these parts are the measure of the angles; so that every arch in this respect
is supposed to be divided into 360 equal parts, which are called degrees, and
each degree is supposed to be divided into 60 lesser parts called minutes. To
divide a circle after this manner, the ready way is thus.

First, draw a line at pleasure, and cross it at right angles with another
line, and draw a circle as before, then keeping your compasses at this
distance, divide the circle from the four quarters into 12 equal parts as
before, then closing your compasses divide each of these 12 parts into 3, so
you shall have in all 36 parts, then you may easily with your pen divide each
of these parts into 10 little parts, each of which stands for a degree, and so
you may number them as in the middle circle of the figure.

A third usual division of a circle is into 32 equal parts To divide a circle
into 32 parts.
according to the number of the points of the compass, which may be thus
performed.

First, draw the line of East and West, and cross it at right angles with the
line of North and South, and draw the circle as before, then keeping your
compasses at that distance, set one foot where the line of East does cross the
circle, and with the other draw two little arches one above at B, and the other
below at D: then with the same distance of your compasses set one foot where
the line of west does cross the circle, and draw two little arches like the
former at A and C: then with the same distance of your compasses, set one foot
where the line of North does cross the circle, and with the other, cross the
two upper arches at A and B: then set one foot where the line of South does
cross the circle, and with the other cross the two lower arches at C and D;
then laying your ruler crosse-wayes to these crosses, draw the lines A D and B
C: so the circle shall be divided into eight equal parts; then closing your
compasses, you may easily divide each of these 8 parts into 4, (for having
divided one of them they will all fall out alike) and so you shall have the 32
rumbes or points of the compass, which you may subdivide if you please into
halues and quarters, and draw the lines, and by three or four letters express
their names as in the figure, which signify as follows.

The names of the 32 points of the Compass.
North North by West North-North-west North-west by North North-west North-west
by West West-North-west West by North West West by South West-South-west
South-west by West South-west South-west by South South-South-west South by
West South South by East South-South-east South-east by South South-east
South-east by East East-South-east East by South East East by North
East-North-east North-east by East North-east North-east by North
North-North-east North by East
To make an angle of any quantity.
Having thus divided a circle into these three sorts of parts, it will be very
useful to you in the dividing of any other circle, quadrant, or arch, and by
this circle you may easily draw any angle of what quantity you please.

For example, let A B be a line given, and it is required to draw another line
from the point A, so that it may make an angle of 45 degrees.

First, set one foot of your compasses in the center of your divided circle,
and open the other to the circumference of that circle which is divided in to
degrees. Then with this distance, set one foot of your compasses in the point
A, and with the other draw the arch BC. Then again set one foot of your
compasses in that place of your divided circle, where the degrees begin to be
numbered, (which is where the line of North and South does cross the circle)
and open the other to 45 degrees of that circle; and with this distance set one
foot in B, and with the other cross the arch B C in the point C. Then lay your
ruler by the point A and the cross at C, and draw the line A C, so the angle
at A made by these two lines A B and A C, will be 45 degrees, as was required.
geometrical diagram

In like manner supposing the line A B to be the Meridian or South line, and it
is required to draw a line from the point A, Another Example.
which shall represent the Southeast or the fourth Rumbe from the Meridian.

First, set one foot of your compasses in the center of your divided circle,
and extend the other to that circle which is divided into Rumbes; and with that
distance draw the arch B C. Then setting one foot of your Compasses in that
point where the South line and the circle cross each other, open the other to
the line of Southeast, and then set off that distance from B to C in this last
figure, then draw the line A C which will represent the Southeast as was
desired.

You may do this also by a Scale of degrees, and Rumbes, To make a Scale of
Chords and Rumbs.
which you may have upon a straight line on your ruler, which you may thus
make. First, set one foot of your compasses in the center of the divided
circle, and open the other to that circle, which parts the divisions of the
degrees and rumbes, and set off this distance on a straight line upon your
ruler, and mark very well with some special mark, where this distance begins
and ends, for this is your Radius or distance, which you must always take to
draw your first arch withal, it being the sixth part of a circle, or 60
degrees. Then setting one foot of your compasses where the circle, which is
divided into degrees and rumbes does cross the line of North or South, open
the other to 10 degrees in that circle, and then transfer that distance into
your Scale, then again, take out the distance of 20 degrees out of the circle,
and transfer that likewise into your Scale, and so do for 30, 40, 50, 70, 80,
90 degrees. Always setting one foot in the place where the line of North or
South does cross the circle, and opening the other to the degree desired. And
in like manner when you transfer these distances into your ruler, you must
always set one foot of your compasses at the beginning of the line, and with
the other mark the distance in the line. And thus also you may take out the
distances of the Rumbes, and set them upon a line on your ruler, and so having
made your Scale, you may draw out any angle by it, as well as by the circle,
and it will be somewhat more ready.

Example.
Now if you would draw the foresaid angle of 45 degrees by this Scale, you must
first set one foot of your compasses in the beginning of your Scale, and open
the other to 60 degrees, which is the Radius of your Scale, and therewith draw
the first arch B C, then setting one foot in the beginning of the Scale again,
open the other to 45 degrees, and with that distance, setting one foot in B,
cross the first arch at C, and then draw the line A C, as in the former
example and figure.

CHAP. III. Showing how to make a plain Chart, and many Propositions of sailing
by it.
THe drawing of the plain Chart, and the way of sailing thereby, is the most
plain and easy of all others. And though it be fit to be used, only in places
near the Equinoctial, or in short Voyages: yet it will serve, for a good
introduction to that which follows, and this will not be lost labor, for the
same kind of work (with some cautions) must be observed in all kinds of Sailing.

The description and making of the plain Chart. The description of the plain
Chart.

First, make the square A B C D of what length, and breadth you please, and
divide each side into as many equal parts as your occasion requires, and then
draw straight lines through these parts crossing one another at right angles,
and so making many little Geometrical squares, each of which you may suppose
to contain one degree, in longitude and latitude, According to account 20
Leagues are in one degree, and so each 10 part will be 2 leagus, but it is
somewhat more, as you may see in the third proposition of this Chapter.
Then on the four sides of the Chart, let each of these degrees be subdivided
into 10 parts, so each part will contain about two leagues, which I therefore
call double leagues. And this division of your Chart will be exact enough for
the Seamans use, so that you need not trouble your self to divide the degrees
into 20 parts or 20 leagues, especially because this way of account by decimals
or tenth parts, is more easy and ready then any other. And if you keep your
account by Arithmetic, you may suppose each of these parts to be subdided into
10, so every degree will contain 100 parts, which will very well agree with the
Chart, better then the old division by 60 minutes, and is far more exact and
easy. This short description, if you remember what has been showed in the
first and second Chapters, showing you how to draw and divide the lines, with
the figure it self following, will I hope be very plain, so that I need not
repeat those things before, but proceed to the uses of it.

geometrical diagram The Figure of the Plain Chart.


PROPOSITION I. Knowing the longitude and latitude of a place, to find out
that very point upon the Chart, and so to set it upon the Chart.
THe Longitude of places, is their distance East and West. What the longitude
and latitude of a place is.
The latitude of places, is their distance North and South. In the Globe, the
longitude of places is accounted always from the West, Eastward; still
increasing the number of degrees, until they come to 360, which is the whole
compass of the Globe, so that you come to the first Meridian again. This
account of the Longitude may begin at any place, but Geographers do commonly
begin to reckon it from one of the Isles of the Azores. But it is the best way
for the Seamen, not much to regard this, but to reckon by the difference of
longitude, or (which is all one) by the difference of the Meridians of the two
places. The latitude of places is reckond by their distance from the
Equinoctial toward either of the Poles, so that it never exceeds 90 degrees. If
the place lie between the Equinoctial and the North pole, it is said to have
North latitude. If it lie between the Equinoctial, and the South Pole, it is
said to have South latitude. Now though in some propositions, the Seaman
reckons by the difference of latitude, yet in most of his accounts and
observations he does reckon the latitude of places by their true distance from
the Equinoctial North or South.

Now for example of the Proposition. By the longitude and latitude of a place
to find the point thereof upon the Chart.
Suppose a place to have 5 degrees of Longitude from the first meridian
Eastward and to have five degrees of north latitude, and it is required to
find out the point, where this place must be set upon the Chart.

To perform this you must suppose the line A B in the Chart to be the first
Meridian, and because the place proposed is 5 degrees from it to the Eastwards,
therefore you must count 5 degrees from the line A B both in the top and
bottom of your Chart, and laying your ruler there, draw the line H E I, then
because the place has 5 degrees of North latitude, you must suppose the lower
line A D to be the Equinoctial line, and so accounting 5 degrees upward in
both the sides of the Chart, lay your ruler there, and draw the line F E G. Now
mark where these two lines do cross one another, which is in the point by E,
and this is the point where you must set the place, or suppose it to be placed.

PROPOSITION 2. The longitudes and latitudes of two places being known, to
find the Rumbe, which you must steer your course upon, in sailing directly
between them.
SUppose the first place to be A, lying under the Equinoctial, and so having
no degree of latitude, and likewise to be in the first Meridian, and so to have
no degree of longitude. And let the other place be E, which has 5 degrees of
longitude, and 5 degrees of North latitude as before is said, and it is
required to find the Rumbe between these two places.

By the longitudes and latitudes of two places, to find the Rumbe.
First, set the places A and E upon the Chart, according to their longitudes and
latitudes, as is showed before, then laying your ruler by the two places, draw
the line A E: this line shows the direct way between these two places, and if
you would know what Rumbe it is, look back to your divided circle, and setting
one foot of your compasses in the center thereof, open the other to the circle
of Rumbes, and keeping that distance, set one foot in the corner A, and with
the other draw the arch K L, then setting one foot of your compasses, in the
point where this arch does cross the line A B, which is at K, open the other
to L, which is the place where this arch does cross the line A E, and with
this distance return to your circle, and setting one foot of your compasses, in
the point where the North line does cross the circle of Rumbes, turn the other
downward to the circle, the same way as it lies here, and it will point out the
fourth Rumbe, which is North-east, and this is the Rumbe you must sail upon,
from A to E. In like manner if you would know the Rumbe from E to A, you must
set one foot of your compasses in the point E, as you did before in the point
A, and draw the arch a b, and so by your circle of Rumbs you shall find that
the Rumbe from E to A is South-west, which is opposite to the North-east. And
this is a general rule, look what Rumbe you sail upon from one place to
another, the Rumbe opposed to that, will carry you back again.

You might have found out the Rumbe likewise by the Scale of Rumbes, and so you
would have found it to be the fourth Rumbe from the Meridian, which must be
either North-east or North-west, South-east, or South-west, which of the four
it is, you may know by the situation of the places when you are a little versed
therein, but till then the Rumbe will be found best by the circle.

PROPOSITION 3. Knowing the Longitude and Latitude of two places, to know how
far they are distant one from the other. 3. By the longitude and latitude, to
find the distance.

LEt the two places be A and E, whose longitude and latitude is as aforesaid,
and it is required to know how far they are asunder in some known measure,
viz. of miles, leagues, degrees and minutes, or degrees and tenths, or hundred
parts.

It is the common practice among Seamen to reckon the distance of places by
leagues, accounting 20 leagues to a degree, The best way to reckon the distance
is by tenths.
and every league to contain about three miles, and so each mile to be the 60
part of a degree or one minute. But this way is very troublesome, and requires
often reduction of one sort of parts to another. The decimall way of account is
far more ready and easy, and therefore I have divided the degrees on the sides
of the Chart only in to 10 parts which will be exact enough to this purpose,
each of those parts will contain about two leagues, and therefore I call them
double leagues or tenths of a degree. If you desire to be more exact when you
use your pen you may suppose each of these to be subdivided into 10, and so
make 100 parts in a degree, and then by adding to a cipher, or taking away the
last figure, they will be reduced one to the other.

Having thus determined the manner of the measure, the way to find the
distance of the places is thus First, set the places upon the Chart according
to their longitude and latitude at A and E, then setting one foot of your
compasses in one of the places as A, open the other to E the other place, then
measure this distance in one of the sides of your Chart, and your compasses will
reach from the corner A to * 7 degrees, 7, 07.
and one of the tenth parts very near, and that is the distance of the two
places, or 71 double leagues or tenth parts, or 710 hundred parts fere.

The true quantity of a degree upon the earth.
And here by the way, give me leave to tell you, that it is not enough for you
thus to know the distances of places in degrees and parts, but it is necessary
also to know, the just quantity or measure of a degree. And here in the common
rule is much out, which accounts 5 foot to a pace, and 1000 such paces, that is
5000 feet to a mile, and 60 such miles, that is 300000 feet to a degree.
Neither will the English mile which is somewhat more then this serve the turn,
whose length is thus by the Statute. 16 feet and a half make a pole, 40 poles
make a furlong, and 8 furlongs, that is 5280 feet, make a mile: and so 60 such
miles do contain 316800 feet. See the Seamans Practice
But Mr. Norwood, by measuring the way from York to London found that a degree
does exactly contain 367200 English feet, and shows how this experiment agrees
with former experiments made by others, if rightly considered: however his
experiment is so full and punctual, that it may well pass for current, rather
then any others which differ from it.

Now by this reckoning, if one degree contain 367200 feet, then the tenth part
of a degree does contain 36720 feet, and the hundredth part of a degree does
contain 3672 feet. Thus you shall know the true distance of places, knowing how
many degrees and parts they are asunder.

And the knowledge hereof is very considerable in the keeping of your dead
reckoning by the Log-line, How your log-line ought to be marked,
which you shall do well to rectify according to this experiment thus. If you
keep your account by an half minute glass, then at every 30 feet length of
your line, you must make a knot: and then so many of those knots as you veer
out in half a minute, so many 100 parts of a degree the ship runs in an hour.
As if you veer but one knot while the half minute glass is running, then the
ship runs but 1/100, that is one hundredth part of a degree in an hour, if you
veer 2 knots, then the ship runs 2/100 parts of a degree, and so if you veer 10
of those knots in half a minute, then the ship runs 20/100 or one tenth part of
a degree in an hour. If the glass be out not just at a knot, then for every 3
feet from the last knot you may count a tenth part of an hundredth part more.

And though by this reckoning there be but 360000 feet, allowed to a degree,
whereas there should be 367200, these 7200 feet are thought fit to be abated,
not only in regard of the rotundity of the number, to avoid fractions but for
these considerations. First, because though he that veers the line be never so
careful not to over-hale it, yet the log will be drawn thereby somewhat after
the ship. Secondly, the Eddy which the ship makes, is subject to draw the log
somewhat after it; or at least so to dead the water, that it will somewhat
hinder the motion of the log. Thirdly, the wind and waves beating after the
ship will drive the log somewhat forwarder then it should be. For these causes,
the way of the ship may very well be somewhat more then the log line shows for.
Besides if this were not so, yet it is the best way to have your reckoning run
somewhat before your ship, that so you may not fall upon a place before you are
aware of it.

PROPOSITION 4. Knowing the longitude and latitude of the place from whence you
came; the Rumbe you have sailed upon; and how far you have sailed there on:
to know the longitude and latitude of the place where you are, at that present.
4. By the Rumbe and distance, to find the difference of longitude and latitude.

LEt the place from whence you have sailed be A, whose longitude and latitude
suppose to be as aforesaid, ^00 degrees. let the rumbe upon which you have sailed
be Northeast, and let the distance which you have sailed upon this rumbe from
the place A, 7, 07.
be almost * 71 double leagues, or tenths of a degree. Now it is required, to
know what place you are now in, that is, what longitude and latitude you are
come to.

To perform this first set down the place A according to his longitude and
latitude, then by your circle or scale of Rumbes, draw the line A L E C which
is Northeast from the point A, then setting one foot of your compasses in the
beginning of your scale, which is on the sides of your chart, open the other
almost to 71 double leagues, that is to * 7 degrees. and one tenth part almost, 7,
07.
and with this distance set one foot in the point A, and with the other cross
the line A L E C in the point E. This cross at E is the place where you are
now, and if you would know the latitude and longitude of this place, then lay
your ruler (or rather a small thread) to the point E, so that it may cut the
scale of degrees, on both sides the Chart at like parts, as the line F E G
does, which you see cuts the scale at just 5 degrees on each side, which shows
the latitude of the place E to be 5 degrees North from the Equinoctial. So
likewise to find out the longitude of the place, lay the thread by the point E,
and like parts of the scale of longitude, both at the top and bottom of the
Chart, as the line H E I does, and it will show that the longitude of the place
is just 5 degrees. So that the place where you now are which is E, has 5 degrees,
of north latitude, and 5 degrees. of longitude.

Note. How to keep your dead reckoning upon the Chart.
This is the way whereby you may best keep your dead reckoning upon your Chart.
For the Seaman always knows what point of his compass he sails upon, and
also by the log-line, or by experience, he may guess very well how far his
ship goes in an hour, and by that, for any other time, which distance being
thus set upon the Rumbe line in the Chart, shows him still whereabouts he is.
And it will be very good, at all times to keep this dead reckoning as carefully
as you can, yea, though you sail near the meridian, and so have no need of it
for the present, yet then you may the better see how your dead reckoning agrees
with your observations, and so gain experience to keep your dead reckoning
more truly, in such courses, and against such times, as you shall have more
need of it. For some times it may be close weather, for 3 or 4 days together,
and in courses that lie near the East and West, you will be forced to stick to
your dead reckoning, having no help to rectify it by the observation of the
latitude.

PROPOSITION 5. Knowing the longitude and latitude of the place, from whence
you set sail: together with the Rumbe you have sailed upon; and by observation
knowing the latitude of the place you are in: to know thereby the longitude of
this place, and how far it is distant from the place you came.
LEt the place from whence you set sail be A, whose longitude and latitude
suppose to be as before; let the Rumbe upon which you have sailed be
North-east; and let the latitude of the place where you are, according to your
observation be 5 degrees of North latitude. Now it is required to find out the
longitude of this place, and how it is distant from the place at A. 5. By the
Rumbe and the difference of latitude, to find the difference of the longitude
and the distance.


To perform this, first set down the place A in your chart, according to its
longitude and latitude, and draw the line A L E C which is the Northeast Rumbe
from the point A, as is before showed. Then because by your observation you
find yourselfe to be in 5 degrees. of North-latitude, count 5 degrees on both the
sides of your Chart, and laying your ruler thereto, draw the line F E G. Now
mark well, where this line does cross the line of the Rumbe A L E C, which is
in the point E: for this point is the place where you are at the time of this
observation. Now to know the longitude of this place, lay your ruler or a thread
by the cross at E, so that it may cut like parts of the degrees of longitude,
both at the top and bottom of your Chart, so you shall draw the line H E I,
which shows that the longitude of the place is 5 degrees. Lastly, to find the
distance of this place from A, set one foot of your compasses in A, and open
the other to E, and measure this distance in your scale, you shall find it to
be 71 double leagues, or 7 degrees. one tenth almost.

Note.
Now this is the most certain way that the Seaman can keep his account by, and
therefore if there be any difference between your dead reckoning and this: you
must correct your dead reckoning by this, and not this by that. And therefore
it concerns the Seaman to be very careful in these two things, upon which
the ground of this Proposition depends. First, that the ship be steered exactly
upon the Rumbe supposed, and to this end, not only the Steers man must be
careful to keep the ship to the Rumbe of the compass, which he is appointed,
but you must be careful to observe the variation of the compass and allow for
it. And secondly when you make observation of the latitude, you must do it with
true and good large Instruments, and use the best diligence you can in
observing by them, that so you may find your latitude as exactly as you can.

PROPOSITION 6. How to rectify your account, when your dead reckoning differs
from your account by observation.
THis Proposition has two cases, the first is when yon have kept your way
only upon one point of the compass. 6. How to perfect your account.
The second is when you have been forced to sail upon two or more several
points, before you could make any observation of the latitude.

Case 1. If you have sailed only upon one Rumbe.
In the first of these cases, if you have only sailed upon one point of the
compass: as for example, suppose you have sailed from the point I which lies
under the Equinoctial line in 5 degrees of Longitude; upon the third Rumbe
from the Meridian N W by N, 40 double leagues, or tenths according to your dead
reckoning: if you set this upon the Chart according to the Rules before showed,
according to this your dead reckoning you will find your self to be in the
point R, which is in 2 degrees. 8/10 of longitude, and in 3 degrees. 3/10 of latitude.
But at this time suppose by observation, you find that you are but just in 3
degr. of North latitude. Wherefore to find the true place where you are, do
thus.

First, lay your Ruler, to 3^ degrees. of latitude on both the sides of your Chart;
and draw the line c M d, and mark where it does cross the line of the Rumbe I
R, which is at M, and this is the place where you must reckon your self to be
at the time of your observation, and not at R, as you supposed by your dead
reckoning. Now if you examine the longitude and latitude of this place M by the
former rules, you will find that it lies in 3 degr. of longitude, and in 5 degrees.
of north latitude, and from this place you must set off your next course, and
distance, and not from R.

But now for the second case. Case 2. When you have sailed upon diverse Rumbes.
If it so happen, that you are forced to sail upon two or more several points
of the compass, before you can make an observation of the latitude to correct
your dead reckoning by. As suppose you had sailed according to your dead
reckoning, first N W by N, 40 double leagues, which is set down from I to R,
(though in truth you had sailed but from I to M; which is but 36 double
leagues) and then being forced to shift your course to N E by E, and should
sail upon this rumbe likewise according to your dead reckoning 40 double
leagues, and at this instant time, you find by observation that you are but in
5 degrees of north latitude: to know the true longitude of this place, you must
do thus.

First, from the point I, set the first 40 double leagues upon the Rumbe N W by
N, which will end at R. Then from the point R draw the rumbe N E by E, which is
the line R Q, and set thereon the 40 double leagues from R to Q: thus you will
find Q to be the place you should be in, according to your dead reckoning
which is in 5 d. 5/10 and somewhat 5d. 55.
more of north latitude, whereas by your observation you find that you are but
in 5 degrees. of north latitude: now to know the true place where you are, in
respect of the longitude, because you have sailed upon two rumbes, draw the
line I Q from I, the first place you set sail from, to Q, the place of your
dead rekoning, and then drawing the line F E G at 5 degrees. of latitude according
to your observation of the latitude; mark where it crosses this line I Q,
which is in the point N, and this is the true place you are in, whose longitude
is 6 degrees. and whose latitude is 5 degrees. north. In like manner, if you should
sail upon 3 or 4 several Rumbes before you can make an observation of the
Latitude, your best way will be to draw a line from the first place of your
voyage to that present place according to your dead reckoning; or at least from
the last place, where you made a fair observation, and are thereby well assured
both of the longitude and latitude thereof: For otherwise you may be much
mistaken in the longitude of your places.

As for instance, if in the last example, you should think you were in that
place, where the line of latitude F E G does cut the last rumbe you sailed
upon, according to your dead reckoning, viz. the line R Q, by this account you
would be but in O, which is but in 5 degrees. 35/100 of longitude, whereas you see
by the other way which is the truth, you are in 6 degrees. of longitude, so that
the difference is ^/100. which is very considerable in so small a space.

PROPOSITION 7. Being to sail from one place to another, but by reason of
cross winds, or the coastings of the land, you cannot sail thither upon the
direct point of the compass which lies between the two places, but are forced
to alter your course several times: yet how you should keep your account of
your way, so that you may know at any time what longitude and latitude you are
in, and how the place you are bound to bears from you, and how far you want to
it. 7. The manner of keeping your reckoning upon the Chart.

This Proposition contains the use and practice of all the former.
FOr example, suppose you were to sail from the place I, in the former Chart,
which is under the Equinoctial, and in 5 degrees of longitude; unto the place
H, which has 5 degrees. of longitude, and 10 degrees of north latitude: here the
direct way from I to H lies full north: But supposing that you cannot sail upon
this point, but are forced first to run N W by N 36 double leagues, and then N
E by E 36 doubled leagues more, the question is what is the longitude and
latitude of this place, and how far it is distant from the place H, and upon
what point of the compass it lies from it.

First, from the point I, draw the Rumbe N W by N, and set off thereon 36 double
leagues from I to M. Then from this point M draw the Rumbe N E by E, and set
off thereon the 36 double leagues which you have sailed upon it, from M to N:
thus you shall find, that N is the place wherein you are, whose longitude is
fix degrees, and whose latitude is five degrees. Now if you lay a ruler from
this point N, to the place you are bound, to which is H, and draw the line H N,
this line is the direct way to the place you are bound, and by the help your
circle or scale of Rumbes, you shall find that it lies North by West, or the
first Rumbe from the meridian Westward. Lastly, if you set one end of your
compasses in N, and open the other to H, and measure that distance in the sides
of the Charts, you will find it to be about 5 degrees 1/^^ or 51 double
leagues, and so much you want to the end of your voyage.

PROPOSITION 8. How to know the distance of any Cape, Headland, or Island, from
you, which you can see at two distant places.
8. To know the distance of any Cape from you
SUppose that sailing on the Sea, you epsy an Island or Cape lying at the first
sight, just North-east from you; and then sailing forward upon your way, which
lies full North, to the distance of 5 leagues, you then observe that the Island
lies full East from you, the question is to know the distance of this Isle from
either of these two places.

In such questions as this, you may suppose each degree in the former Chart to
stand now but for a league, These two following Propositions rather belong to
the plain table then the chart.
and let the first place where you espied the Island be at A, now because the
Island lay North-east, from this place, draw the line A B which is N E from A.
Then count the 5 leagues which you have sailed upon your course which was full
north, in the meridian line from A to F, and because from this place, the
Island did lie full East, therefore from this point F, draw the East line F E G,
and mark where this line, does cross the former line A E of N E from A, which
is in the point E. This therefore must needs be the place of the Island, whose
distance if you take with your compasses, and measure in the sides of the
Chart, you shall find that the place E is distant from A 7 leagues and almost
1/15 part of a league; and from F just 5 leagues. A double use of this
proposition.
And by this means if you know the longitude and latitude of this Isle or Cape,
you may the more certainly know the truth of your account, and if need be
correct it. Or if you knew not the place before, you may set it down in your
chart by its longitude and latitude which you find it to be in, according to
the best account you can make by your observation.

PROPOSITION 9. By observing upon what Rumbes many places lie from you at two
several stations; to find the distances of those places, and their true
posture and bearing one from another.
9. To find out the true distance, and bearing of many places. The use of this
Proposition.
AS in the former Proposition you did for one place, so in this you may do for
many. And this will be of good use, for hereby, sailing in sight of any Coast,
you may find out how the Points and Rivers and such like lie, and so make a
Map thereof. The way to perform which is thus. First, observe well how the
several places lie from your first station, which suppose to be A; and let
these three places be observed by you viz. I M and E I bears from A full East,
M and E, North-east, therefore draw the lines A I and A M E according to the
bearing of the places from A. Secondly, you must observe your course which you
sail upon, until you come to the second station, which suppose to be five
leagues full North, let this be set down according to its place at F. Thirdly,
this being your second station, observe how the three-former places bear from
this place, and suppose you find, that E lies full east from this place, M lies
South-east by east, and I lies South-east, from this second station. Then draw
these lines F E, F M, F I, from the point F, and mark well where they cross
the former lines, which will be in the said points E M and I, and thus these
three places E M I are set down according to their true positions and
distances, both from the two stations A and F, and likewise one from another,
so that if you try by the former rules, and your comasses you shall find M
lies from I, N W b N 3 leagues and 6/10, and E lies from M, N E, 2 leagues and
8/10. Thus you may easily describe the coast of a Country as you sail by it in
sight of it, which will be both pleasant and profitable, especially when you
light upon Coasts that have not been discovered.

PROPOSITION 10. To draw a Rumbe line from any point assigned.
IN this description of the plain Chart, I have purposely omitted the old
custom, 10. To draw a Rumbe line from any point in the Chart.
of pestering the Chart with so many Rumbe lines, to little or no purpose. For
though they may seem to be of some use in this Proposition; yet it may better
be performed, only by the lines of longitude and latitude with the help of the
circle, or scale of Rumbes. For first, if your point assigned fall out in any
of the meridian lines, then you may readily by the rules of the second chapter,
page 13, 14. draw any rumbe line from that point. But if your point do not fall
just upon, a meridian line, then you must, first, from the point assigned, draw
a line parallel to any one of the meridian lines, as is showed by the second
proposition of the first chapter, and then draw the Rumbe line from your point
assigned in that line, as you did before. Thus you see these lines of longitude
and latitude are of double use. For first, they readily show you the longitude
and latitude of any place in some measure by the eye. And then they help in the
drawing rumbe lines, from any point. Whereas to draw so many rumbes after the
usual manner, is but a spending much time and labor to little purpose.

CHAP. IIII. Showing how to make a Sea-chart for any part of the World, which
shall agree in all particulars with the Globe; with several Propositions
showing the manner of using it.
The defects of the plain Chart.
THe way of sailing by the plain chart, is very easy to understand, as you may
see by what has been said in the former chapter: But it has this
inconvenience, that it is fit to be used only in places near the Equinoctial,
or in some short voyages. For it supposes the degrees of Longitude to be all
of one length, in every Latitude, and therefore it makes the degrees both of
longitude and latitude, all of one length and breadth in all places. But you
must know that though the degrees of Latitude, are always of one and the same
breadth ( viz. about twenty leagues) yet the degrees of longitude are not all
of this length, but as you may see in the Globe, they grow less and less
toward the Poles: so that though about the Equinoctial, a degree of longitude
is equal to a degree of latitude, viz. about 20 leagues: yet in the latitude
of 60 degrees. one degree of longitude is equal, but to half a degree of latitude,
viz. about 10 leagues; and about the latitude of 75 degrees. 30, one degree of
longitude is equal but to a quarter of a degree of latitude, which is about 5
leagues. And therefore it is impossible to set three places upon the plain
chart, which differ much in longitude and latitude, as they ought to be placed,
that is according to their places on the Globe. But if you set them down,
according to their longitudes and latitudes; then they will not stand in their
true Rumbes and Distances one from the other: and if you strive to set them
down according to their Rumbes and Distances; then their Longitudes and
Latitudes will not fail out right.

And therefore though you may make a shift to perform some short voyages by
it, yet you cannot use it in any long voyage without great error: except you
only go from one place to another, and so directly back again to the same
place, from whence you came, and by the same course which you came. This
example is M. Norwoods in his Problemes of sailing.
For example, suppose you were to sail from the Lyzard, to the Summer Islands,
and should according to the common course first sail South-west, about 500
leagues, and then finding your self to be in the latitude of 32 degrees. 20, you
should then sail full West 782 leagues, and then you should find your self
directly South from the Summer Islands, and about 2 leagues off them. Now by
this reckoning upon the plain chart, these Islands should be distant from the
Lyzard, 1189 leagues. Now admitting this reckoning outward to be true, and
these places to be thus situated upon the plain chart, let us suppose the
reckoning homewards to be also kept upon the plain chart. And because in
coming home, men keep to the Northwards, suppose that you steer away first N E
half a point Easterly 200 leagues; then N E by E 100 leagues, next E N E half a
point northerly 165 leagues; then E N E 130 leagues; then E N E half a point
Easterly 88 leagues, then E by N 70 leagues; lastly, East 317 leagues; if you
set down this reckoning upon the plain chart, you will be yet short of the
Lyzard about 160 leagues, whereas you are already come unto the Lyzard, and so
you will find it, if you keep your reckoning by this following Sea-chart.

For the reformation hereof, Mr. Wright in his book of the Errors of
Navigation, has showed how to make, and has also made a table, by the
continual addition of the secants of every minute, which shows how much you
are to lengthen the degrees of latitude in your Map, that so there may be a
true proportion between the degrees of Longitude and Latitude in all places:
which table Mr. Gunter has abridged, and made it more plain and easy, by
reducing it into decimall parts. I shall here show you how to do the same by
Geometry, and how to make a line of Latitudes, or a Meridian line answerable to
any line of longitudes.

geometrical diagram

The projection of the Meridi^n Line.
First, make the Quadrants A B C of what largnes you please, and divide the
limb thereof into 90 degrees numbering them from B toward C, then divide the
side of the Quadrant A B into 10 equal parts, and draw straight lines from
them parallel to A C, then take one of these parts from A to E, and subdivide
it into 10 lesser parts, and draw lines from them parallel unto A C. Now you
must note that the length of this one part A C is to be your radius, or the
measure of one degree of longitude in your Chart, so that the whole line A B
will be 10 degrees, and because these degrees of longitude are to be of one
length in all latitudes, therefore the degrees of latitude must increase as the
secants of the latitudes increase. Therefore if you would know how long one
degree of latitude must be in the latitude of 30 degrees. lay your ruler to the
center A, and the arch of the quadrant at 30 degrees. and draw the line A G, now
the radius being A E, this line A G is the secant of 30 degrees. to that radius,
and must be the length of one degree of latitude in a Chart for that latitude.
So likewise the line A H which is the secant of 45 degrees. to that radius, must be
the length of one degree of latitude, in the latitude of 45 degrees. and so for any
other latitude: and note that the 10 intermediate lines may serve to divide
each of these degrees into 10 parts.

If you would examine the truth of this projection how it agrees with the
Globe; The proof of of this projection.
whereas in the Globe one degree of latitude is equal to two degrees of
longitude in the latitude of 60 degrees: so here A K the secant of 60 degrees. is twice
the length of A E the measure of one degree of longitude, and whereas in the
Globe one degree of latitude is equal to four degrees of longitude in the
latitude of 75 degrees. 30: so here A L the secant of 75 degrees. 30 is four times the
length of A E, and so the proportion will hold in any other latitude.

If you desire to make a table hereof, To make a Table of the Meridian line.
then you may make the whole line A B to be your radius, or the length of one
degree, which you may divide into 100 parts, and then the secants will be the
lines drawn from the center A to the line B D, thus then the line A I will be
the secant of 30 degrees, whose length is 115, as you may measure in the scale
A B if it were increased. And so the line A D is the secant of 45 degr. whose
length is 141. Note.
* And note here if you make the table for whole degrees only, then it will be
the best way to draw the Secant line through the midst of the degree, as if you
would know the length of the line which must reach from 29 degrees to 30
degrees, draw the line through 29 degrees 30 minutes, the length whereof will be
115, and so by the continual addition of these Secants you may make the Table
following, which you shall find agrees very well with Master Gunters, only his
radius is divided into 1000 parts and this but into 100.

Another way to make a Meridian line.
Also by the Quadrant, or the Table, you may make the two Meridian lines
following. But if you make them by the Quadrant, then because the degrees would
fall too close together if they were all drawn, under the first Radius A E, you
may remove the Radius A E further from the center, and then draw them under it.
As for example, the distance between the lines 8 and 9 being equal to the
distance A E, you may there draw the first 20 degrees. Then between the lines 7
and 8 being of the like distance, draw the next ten degrees which is to 30, and
so do the rest as you see in the Quadrant. Then taking out these degrees one by
one with your compasses, set them upon the Meridian line, of your Chart, or
make a Meridian line, at your leisure, as in the following figure, which will
be very ready upon any occasion.

A Table of the Meridian line, as it is taken out of the Quadrant, as
aforesaid, the Radius or the whole line A B being divided into 100 parts.
The Latitude The Meridian line The Sec to be ad. D. D. P. P. 0 0 00 1 1 00 100
2 2 00 100 3 3 00 100 4 4 00 100 5 5 00 100 6 6 01 101 7 7 02 101 8 8 03 101 9
9 04 101 10 10 05 101 11 11 07 102 12 12 09 102 13 13 11 102 14 14 14 103 15 15
17 103 16 16 21 104 17 17 25 104 18 18 30 105 19 19 36 106 20 20 42 106 21 21
49 107 22 22 56 107 23 23 64 108 24 24 73 109 25 25 83 110 26 26 94 111 27 28
06 112 28 29 19 113 29 30 32 113 30 31 47 115 30 31 47 31 32 63 116 32 33 80
117 33 34 99 119 34 36 19 120 35 37 40 121 36 38 63 123 37 39 88 125 38 41 14
126 39 42 42 128 40 43 71 129 41 45 02 131 42 46 36 134 43 47 72 136 44 49 10
138 45 50 50 140 46 51 93 143 47 53 38 145 48 54 86 148 49 56 37 151 50 57 91
154 51 59 48 157 52 61 09 161 53 62 73 164 54 64 41 168 55 66 13 172 56 67 90
177 57 69 71 181 58 71 57 186 59 73 49 192 60 75 46 197 60 75 46 61 77 49 203
62 79 58 209 63 81 75 217 64 83 99 224 65 86 31 232 66 88 72 241 67 91 23 251
68 93 85 262 69 96 58 273 70 99 43 285 71 102 43 300 72 105 58 315 73 108 91
333 74 112 43 352 75 116 17 374 76 120 16 399 77 124 45 427 78 129 07 462 79
134 09 502 80 139 58 549 81 145 65 607 82 152 42 677 83 160 10 768 84 168 95
885 85 179 41 1040 86 192 21 1280 87 208 70 1649 88 231 95 2325 89 271 70 3985
90 infinite

geometrical diagram The lesser Meridian Line, for general Maps.
The long Meridian Line, for particular Maps.


I have made here two meridian lines and that for two reasons. First, because
in the larger line after 80 degrees of latitude, the degrees grew so large, and
increased so much, that it would be both needless and troublesome to make any
use of them: but the chief reason is this. Because when you are to go any long
voyage, it will be needful for you first to make a general Map of your whole
voyage by the lesser line, whereby you may know the course and distance thereof
in general: and then to make three or four other charts by the greater line
upon which, with your ruler and compasses you may set down your daily courses
and distances more exactly.

Also I have made these two lines in such proportion, that the one is the tenth
part of the other, that so that they may both agree with the scale upon the
Quadrant.

Now the way to make one of these charts is very easy, To make a Sea Chart by
these Meridian lines.
and much after the manner of the plain chart. For first, you may draw the line
of East and West A B of what length you please, and divide it into equal parts
or degrees, then you may erect a perpendicular line either at one of the ends
of the line or in any of the divisions toward the midst of the line, and then
draw the other parallels of longitude parallel thereto, so far it is all one
with the plain chart, but when you come to draw the parallels of latitude, you
must not make them all equal, (though they must be all parallel) each to
other; but you must either with your compasses, take them out of the Quadrant,
or which is more easy, lay a scroule of paper to the Meridian line which is
ready drawn to your hand, and so mark out the degrees of latitude upon the
scroule of paper, and then laying that scroule to the sides of your chart, you
may transfer the degrees of latitude into the sides of your chart, and
through them draw the parallels, and set fit numbers to them, as in the figure.

geometrical diagram The figure of a general Sea-Chart, containing almost an
eighth part of the Globe. NORTH.


Now though this be not a general chart of the whole globe, yet it may be
called a general chart in respect of others, which will serve only for a
lesser portion of the Globe. For this chart contains almost an eighth part of
the Globe, and may be fitted to set forth any part thereof. For if you change
the numbers of the longitude, if the latitude be northward, it will serve as it
now stands: but if the latitude be Southward, you must turn the bottom
upward. If you have occasion in one chart, to set down both North and South
latitude: then you must draw the like parallels of latitude below the
Equinoctial, as these are above it.

Now I will show you how the several Propositions which were performed by the
plain chart, may be performed by this, and wherein they agree, and wherein they
differ.

PROPOSITION 1. Knowing the longitude and latitude of any place, to set it upon
the Chart. 1. By the longitude and latitede, to find the point of any place in
the Chart.

THis must be done, as in the plain chart. For first laying your ruler by the
longitude of the place, you must draw a little occult line as near the
latitude of the place as you can guess, then laying your ruler to the latitude
of the place cross that line you drew before with another little line, and so
the crossing of these two lines will show you the point where the place must be
supposed to stand. Example.


Thus supposing the longitude of the Summer Islands to be 300 degrees, and the
latitude thereof 32 degrees, 25 minutes, you will find that it must be set at
S, upon the chart.

PROPOSITION 2. The longitudes and latitudes of two places being known, to
find the rumbe which you must sail upon, to go directly from the one place to
the other. 2. By the longitude and latitude of two places to find the Rumbe.
Example.

SUppose the one place to be the Summer Islands, whose longitude and latitude we
will suppose to be as is before set down, let the other place be the Lyzard,
whose latitude is about 50 degrees. and let the longitude thereof be supposed to be
10 degr. so the difference of the longitude of the two places, will be 70 degrees.
(as Mr. Norwood both in his book of the Doctrine of Triangles, and his Seamans
Practice supposes them to be, though as he says in one place, he does not
think them to be so far distant) and it is required to find the rumbe.

This Proposition must also be performed as in the plain chart. For first, the
two places must be set upon the chart, according to their longitudes and
latitudes, which will be at S and L, then draw a strait line from S to L, this
represents the direct way between the two places, now to know what rumbe this
is, open your compasses to the Radius of your scale of rumbes, and setting one
foot of your compasses in S with the other, draw the arch R M, then setting one
foot of your compasses in R, open the other to the crossing of the line, and
the arch at M, and measuring that distance on your scale of chords or Rumbes,
so shall you find it to be 71 degrees. 21 min. or the sixth rumbe and somewhat
above a quarter of a rumbe, from the Meridian.

PROPOSITION 3. Knowing the longitudes and latitudes of two places to know how
far they are distant one from another. 3. To measure the distance of places.

LEt the two places be as is before said S and L, it is required to find their
distance.

In the working this Proposition, there is some difference from the plain
chart, for whereas there you measure the distance of places by one and the same
scale of equal parts here you will have use of many scales, according to the
latitude of the places.

Mr. Gunter's way.
Now the ordinary way prescribed by Mr. Gunter, to perform this is thus. Open
your compasses to the distance of the two places; and then setting your
compasses in the Meridian line, so that the one point of the compasses may
stand just so much above the greater latitude, as the other does below the
lesser latitude, and so the degrees between them is the distance: this way may
serve for small distances as Master Gunter uses it; but in greater distances
it will not always hold true; and besides, it is somewhat troublesome to set the
compasses just as much above the one latitude, as below the other.

As in this example, if you take the distance S L in your compasses, and
measure it so in the Meridian line, it will reach from about 16 degrees, to
about 66 degree and an half, that is 16 degrees and an half above 50 degrees,
the greater latitude, and 16 degrees and an half below 32 degrees, 25 minutes,
the lesser latitude, and so the degrees intercepted between the points of the
compasses are about 50 degrees and a half, whereas the distance of the two
places is almost 55 degrees.

But you shall find the distance more exactly, The way to measure the
distances of places which differ in longitude and latitude.
if you do thus. First, divide the space that is in the meridian line between
the two latitudes into two equal parts, which in this Example will fall at 42
degrees, then take with your compasses half the length of the line L S, which
is L M, and setting one foot of the compasses in 42 degrees, which is the
middle point between the two latitudes, you shall find that the other point
will reach down to 8 degrees and a half, then keeping the one foot still fixed
in 42 degrees, turn the other foot upward, and it will reach to 63 degrees and
a half; now the degrees of the meridian line between these two points are 55,
which is the distance desired, which is 550 double leagues or tenths of a
degree, or 1100 leagues. But if this distance were to be measured in the plain
chart, the two places being set down therein according to their longitudes and
latitudes aforesaid, their distance would be above 72 degrees, which is 340
leagues, more then the truth.

If you would measure a parallel distance, How to measure the distance of
places which differ only in longitude.
as suppose the two places were L and T, both in the latitude of 50 degrees,
and their difference of Longitude is 70, the way will be to take half the
distance which is L Q, with your compasses, and setting one foot in 50 degrees
of the meridian line, the other foot will reach to 22 degrees and a half
downwards, and to 67 degrees and a half upward, and if you count the degrees
between these two places, or else substract the lesser from the greater, you
shall find 45 degrees. which is the distance of the two places.

Another way to measure the distances of parallel places
Yet this may more readily be performed by the Quadrant, Page 22, whereby the
meridian line was made.

First, if you would measure a parallel distance, as for example, suppose you
would measure the distance of the two places T and L, being both in the
latitude of 50 degrees, and their difference of longitude is 70 degrees. First,
draw the line A P at 50 degrees in the quadrant, then take the distance of the
two places T L with your compasses, and setting one foot in A, the center of
the quadrant, with the other foot, cross the line A P 50 at P, which is just
in the midst between the fourth and fifth parallel lines, which are drawn from
the scale of the quadrant, now because the chart is of the least size,
therefore you must account every of those greater parts, for 10 degrees, and so
the distance will be found to be 45 degrees, as before.

Now to know this exactly, these greater parts should each of them be divided
with lines into ten parts, as the first of them is: or else you may make use of
those lines in the first part thus. Having made the mark at P, as before; and
seeing it does not fall just upon one of the parallel lines you may set one
foot of your compasses on the next parallel line at R, and turning the other
toward the center A, it will reach in the line P A to the middle line among
the lesser diagonal lines, which shows it lacks 5 degrees of 50, and so it is
45 degrees.

But if you would measure the distance of two places which differ both in
latitude and longitude, To measure the distance of places which differ in
longitude and latitude.
as the two places L and S in the chart, you must do thus First, draw the line
AM in the quadrant, page 32, by the arch of the one latitude 32 degrees 25
minutes, then draw the line A P 50, by the arch of the other latitude, 50
degrees, then in any of the parallel lines, divide the space between these two
lines A M and A P 50 into two equal parts, which if you do in the eighth
parallel, the half or midst will be at N,, then draw the line A N, which will be
your scale to measure this distance by. Now if you take the distance S L in the
chart, and set it on the line A N in the quadrant, it will reach from A to S,
that is in the midst between the fifth and sixth parallel lines, so that the
distance is 55 degrees, for every one of these parallel lines stands for 10
degrees when the chart is drawn by the little meridian line.

PROPOSITION 4. Knowing the longitude and latitude of the place from whence you
came, and the rumbe you have sailed upon, and how far you have sailed on that
rumbe: to know the longitude and latitude of the place you are in. 4. By the
rumbe and distance, to find the difference of longitude and latitude.

The way of keeping your dead reckoning upon the Sea-Chart.
THis Proposition shows the way how you must keep your dead reckoning upon your
chart, which is good to be done always, but especially when you cannot have
opportunity to observe the latitudes, or when your course lies near the East or
West, so that observation of the latitude will do you little or no good, in
keeping of your account of the way you have sailed. And that you may the more
exactly keep this account, it will be needful to make your chart by the greater
meridian line, and if your voyage be so long that one sheet of paper will not
make a chart big enough, you may put it into two or three sheets, and keeping
your daily accounts upon them, you may as often as you shall see cause,
transfer your accounts out of these perticularr charts, into your general
chart, and so you shall see the better how to direct your course in general.

Thus supposing the voyage to be as is before mentioned between the Lyzard and
the Summer Islands, Example.
the chart following drawn by the greater meridian line may contain a part of
that voyage. And though this chart being straightened for room contain but a very
little part of the voyage, yet a sheet of paper will contain one third part of
the whole voyage, and it would be very ready and necessary for the Seamans use,
if such blank charts were drawn to all latitudes, which might be done to 70 or
80 degrees in 4 or 5 sheets of paper so that by setting, fitting numbers of
longitude to them, you might make them serve for most places in the whole World.

geometrical diagram

Having provided the blank chart, let the example to explain the Proposition be
this. Having sailed from the Lizard, about the distance of 5 degrees, or 50
tenths on the fifth Rumbe from the Meridian S W b W. I would know what longitude
and latitude I am come into.

Now to perform this, first you must set the Lizard according to its longitude
and latitude aforesaid upon the chart at L, Latitude 50d. Longitude 10d
then from L draw the line L M which is the rumbe you have sailed upon, then
take five degrees which is the distance you have sailed, out of the meridian
line; upon the side of your chart from 50 to 45, and set it from L to N, so the
cross at N shall represent the place where you are, which you may readily see
by the Map, to be about 47 degrees and 2/10 of latitude, and about 3 degrees
8/10 of longitude, that is 6 degrees 2/10 of longitude, distant from the
Meridian of L. But if you should keep your account by the plain chart you would
reckon your self but 4 degrees, 2/10 of Longitude distant from the place L.

And though this way there may be some small mistake, sometimes in over,
sometimes in under reckoning, if you be not very careful to take your distance
out of the meridian line, as near the latitudes as you can, yet if the distance
be not great, and especially if the Rumbe be not far from the Meridian, your
error will not be much. And you may the less regard it, because this being but
your dead reckoning, you need not trust to it, but may correct it afterward,
when you have opportunity to observe the latitude.

But when your course lies near the East and West, Example of a parallel course.
so that you are forced to trust to your dead reckoning, because you cannot
correct it by observation of the latitude, then it will be the more needful, for
you to be the more exact in setting off your distance, which you may do by the
Quadrant: as for example, suppose you have sailed the distance of 5 degrees, or
50 tenthsful West from L, and would know what longitude you are then in.

First, draw the line A R O in the Quadrant page 32, by the arch of 50 degrees,
which is the parallel latitude you have sailed in; then because you have sailed
the distance of 5 degrees in this latitude, mark where the fifth parallel line
in the Quadrant, crosses the line A R O, which is at R, therefore take the
distance A R out of the Quadrant, and transfer it into the chart from L to R,
so shall R be the true point where you are, whose longitude you may see by the
map to be about 2 degrees 2/10 being distant from the Meridian of L 7 degrees
8/1^, whereas by the plain chart you would think your self to be but 5 degrees
distant.

PROPOSITION 5. Knowing the longitude and latitude of the place from whence you
set sail, together with the rumbe you have sailed upon, and by observation
knowing the latitude of the place you are in: to know thereby the longitude of
this place you are in, and how far you are distant from the place you came.
5. By the Rumbe and difference of latitude to find the point where you are.

THis Proposition is the same with the fifth proposition in the use of the plain
chart, and is performed just after the same manner, but with far more truth in
respect of the longitude or difference of meridians. For example, let the place
from which you set sail be the Lyzard, whose longitude and latitude is before
set down, let the Rumbe upon which you have sailed be the fifth Rumbe from the
meridian S W by W. and lastly, by your observation, you find your self in the
latitude of 45 degrees, the longitude and distance of this place from L is
required.

To perform this. First, having made the foregoing chart, set down the Lyzard
according to 'its longitude and latitude at L, then draw the line L M which is
the fifth Rumbe from the meridian, and lastly, because you find your self to
be in the latitude of 45 degrees, lay your ruler to the parallel of 45 in your
chart, and draw the line D M. Now the point where this line D M crosses the
rumbe line L M, is the place which you are then in, whose longitude you see by
the Map is 358 degrees 9/10: so that it differs from the meridian of L 11
degrees 1/10. But if you should perform this proposition upon the plain chart,
you would account your self to be but 7 degrees. and an half from the meridian of L.

Lastly, if you measure the length of the line L M, either by the meridian line
on the side of the chart, or rather by the Quadrant, as was showed before, you
will find that you have sailed from L; 9 degrees, or 90 tenth.

Thus you see this, which is the most useful proposition of all, being the most
certain way by which the Seaman can keep his account, is as ready performed,
and just in the same manner, as in the plain chart. Neither shall the Seaman
need to trouble himself, in keeping his accounts with more curious
calculations: for considering he cannot observe the latitude so exactly but
that he may miss therein 5 or 6 minutes: as also that the ship cannot be
steered, so exactly, but that it may alter from the Rumbe supposed, many
minutes, if not some few degrees: and seeing also, it will be easy to draw the
lines of Rumbs and Latitudes, in a chart whose meridian line shall be about
this size, more exactly then can be observed or steered. What profit will be
gained then by more curious calculation?

PROPOSITION 6. The rectifying of your dead reckoning, by your observation. 6.

THis Proposition is to be performed here, as is showed in the plain chart,
only you must measure your distances by the meridian line, near the latitude
you are in.

PROPOSITION 7. 7.

THis Proposition is but for variety, and recollection of what was said before,
and to be performed in like manner upon this Chart.

PROPOSITION 8 and 9. 8 and 9.

THese two Propositions belong only to the plain chart or plain table, and is
not so fit for this.

In all these Propositions, there are these four principal things to be taken
notice of. 1 the Longitude, 2 the Latitude, 3 the Distance, 4 the Rumbe. Any
two of these being known; the other two may be known thereby. So that these
Propositions might be varied many ways, as you may see in Mr. Gunters Works.
But what I have said already, being I hope sufficient to instruct you in the
nature and use of the Chart, and these being the most necessary, I shall not
further enlarge upon this in this place.

CHAP. V. Of sailing by a great Circle.
The praise of this way of sailing by a great Circle
I Now come to show how you may sail by the arch of a great Circle, which is the
most exact way of sailing of all others, but in regard of the difficulty that
there is in the calculation thereof, it has discouraged the Seaman from
looking after it: but I shall show you how this may plainly and easily be
performed by Geometry, which I hope vvil be for the general profit and ease
of Seamen. For you must know that the distances of places found out as was
before shevved in the use of the Sea-chart, First, it is the nearest way.
is seldom the nearest distance betvveen any two places, but it is only
their distance in the rumbe. So that if the two places are not both under the
Equinoctial or both in one meridian, then there is somewhat a nearer cut
between the two places, then the rumbe points out: which sometimes,
especially near the Poles, is very considerable.

But this is not all the benefit which comes by this way of sailing,
Secondly, it is the most convenient way.
but many times when your course lies near the East and West, this way is
far more convenient. For if you should sail full East or West, you must
altogether depend upon your dead reckoning, having no way to help your self,
by the observation of the latitude, but now if you sail by the arch of a great
circle, betvveen two such places, you not only go the nearer way, but also
may alter your latitude many degrees, whereby your account may be often
rectified, So in the example of the Summer Islands the distance by the rumbe is
3299 miles. The distance by the arch is 3204 miles, that is 95 miles less.
as for example, suppose you were to sail from Spain to Virginia, both which
lie near the parallel of 40 degrees, and suppose the difference of longitude
betvveen two such places in the parallel of 40, to be 70 degrees, the distance
of these two places measured in the parallel of 40 (which is the rumbe that
leads betvveen the two places being East and West) is 53 degrees 62/100, but
their distance in the arch of a great circle is but 52 degrees, 08/100, that is
1 degree, 54/100 less. But this as said, is but the least part of the benefit
that comes by this way of sailing: the chiefest is this, that in sailing
between two such places by the arch of a great circle, you will first in the one
half of the way raise the Pole 5 degrees 69/100, and then in the other half
depress the Pole as much, so that in your whole Voyage you will alter the
latitude 11 degrees 38/^0, and so by the observation of the latitude you may
rectify your dead reckoning very well, which you cannot do, sailing in the
parallel. Thus you see this way of sailing is not only the nearest but the best
way.

Now concerning this way of sailing, there has been but little written by any,
Few have written of this subject.
and therefore I shall be the more large in this. Captain Saltonstall in his
Book called the Navigator, has said somewhat how to direct a parallel course,
but for any other course he has said nothing, and what he shows is to be
performed by Arithmetic. Master Norwood in his Book of Trigonometry, has
added as an appendix many Problemes of Sailing by the arch of a great circle
whereby those; who both can, and will take the pains, may by calculation find
out all things necessary in this way of Sailing. But those ways of calculation
as they are very difficult to the unlearned, so they are tedious to those that
have the best skill: and therefore I hope it will be well accepted, if I here
show you how the same may be performed by Geometry, both plainly and speedily,
and yet with as much exactness, as need be required.

The chief things to be known.
And in the pursuance hereof, I shall keep as close to Master Norwood, as I can,
both in his Propositions and Examples, that thereby you may see how nearly my
plain lines will approach to the exactness of his calculations. Now if you
observe him, there are these three things, which must be found out in every
Example. First, the distance of the two places in the arch of a great Circle.
Secondly, the angle of position from the one place to the other. Thirdly, to
find out what longitudes and latitudes the arch of the great circle does pass
through between the two places.

To find the distance of two places.
For the first of these, knowing the longitude and latitude of two places, to
find their distance in the arch of a great circle, which is always the nearest
distance. I might show you how to perform this in the first place, but I here
pass it by for these reasons. First, because Master Wright, Master Blundevile,
and Captain Saltonstall, have all of them demonstrated it in their Books
already. And secondly, because the chief benefit in this way of sailing does
not so much consist in saving of a little way, as in sailing the most convenient
way: that is, so as you may alter your latitude most, and so your reckoning may
be the more certain. For though near the Poles, the difference of the distance
of two places, in the arch of a great circle, and in their rumbe, may be
considerable; yet in most Voyages it is not: as in the forenamed Example of two
places in the parallel of 40 degrees, the difference by calculation is found to
be but one degree 54/100, which is scarce considerable in the whole Voyage,
being 52 degrees. Thirdly, it will be somewhat difficult, and it requires great
curiosity in drawing of those lines prescribed by them so exactly, that you may
come to the knowledge of the distance any thing near. Lastly, all that trouble
is needless. For though in calculation this distance must be found out first,
that so you may find out the rest of the Propositions following: yet in this
way I am about to show that which follows, no way depends upon the true
knowledge of this distance: it shall be sufficient therefore for the present, to
tell you, that this way is always somewhat the nearest way.

For the second of these Propositions, which is to know the angle of position
from the one place to the other. The angle of position is needless in this
operation.
Though this must be found out in calculation before you can proceed any
further, yet in this work it is more needless then the former proposition, and
therefore may be very well omitted.

But now for the third Proposition, To find out the longitudes and latitudes
by which the great circle does pass.
which is the finding out by what Longitudes and Latitudes the great circle
must pass between the two places, this being the very end aimed at in all the
work, may be thus attained.

First, draw the following Quadrant A D B, and divide it into degrees; then
consider of what length your Tangent line must be, and accordingly set off your
Radius from A toward D the larger You may make your tangent larger either by
making your Quadrant larger, or by setting your Radius further from the Center,
Thus in the Quadrant the line D K is a larger tangent line, which though it
reach but to 45 degrees, yet by lengthening of the line, you may set on the
rest.
the better, but in this Quadrant, the Radius is A R) and this Radius is always
a tangent of 45 degrees. Then from the point R, draw the line R T parallel to
the side of the Quadrant A B: this line R T is the Tangent line which you must
divide into degrees, as you see in the figure by drawing straight lines from
the Center A to the limb of the Quadrant. Then transfer this line to the
sides of the Quadrant A B and A D, and then setting one foot of your compasses
in the center A, open the other to the several degrees in the line A B or A D
and draw the arches. Now you must know that these arches are the parallels of
latitude; and the straight lines drawn from the Center, are Meridian lines, or
the lines of longitude. The arches of latitude you must number as in the
figure: but the lines of longitude you may number as your occasion requires.

geometrical diagram This is a projection of a part of the Globe in plano by
Natural Tangents: You may if you please, when occasion requires, divide a
Circle into four Quadrants, and draw the lines of Longitude from the Center,
and number them to 360, and likewise describe the Circles of Latitude round
about the Center, and you may make this Projection as large or as little as you
will by the Table of Natural Tangents, if you lengthen or shorten your Radius.


A Table of Natural Tangents The Radius being 1000 parts.
D. Ta^. D. Ta^g. D. Tang. D. Tange^t 1 017 24 445 46 1,036 69 02,605 2 035 25
466 47 1,072 70 02,747 3 052 26 488 48 1,112 71 02, 904 4 070 27 510 49 1, 150
72 03, 078 5 087 28 532 50 1, 192 73 03, 271 6 105 29 554 51 1,235 74 03,487 7
123 30 577 52 1, 280 75 03,732 8 141 31 601 53 1, 327 76 04, 011 9 158 32 624
54 1,376 77 04,331 10 176 33 649 55 1,428 78 04,705 11 194 34 675 56 1,483 79
05,144 12 213 35 700 57 1, 540 80 05, 671 13 231 36 727 58 1,600 81 06, 313 14
249 37 754 59 1,664 82 07,115 15 268 38 781 60 1, 732 83 08, 144 16 287 39 810
61 1,804 84 09, 514 17 306 40 839 62 1, 881 85 11,430 18 325 41 869 63 1,963 86
14,300 19 344 42 900 64 2, 050 87 19,081 20 364 43 933 65 2, 144 88 28, 636 21
384 44 966 66 2, 246 89 57,290 22 404 45 1000 67 2,356 90 Infinite 23 424 Rad.
68 2, 475

Let your Radius be of what length you please, first divide it into 10 equal
parts, and then subdivide each of those parts into 10, so you shall have 100
parts in your line, then you may, if you can, divide each of these 100 parts
into 10, so you shall have 1000, But this last division will be needless, for
you may by your eye guess at the proportion ill part. Having thus fitted your
Scale of equal parts, you may prick down the line of Tangents out of this
Table. Note after you are past 45 degrees in the Table, the Figure before the
Comma, shows the whole Radius, or how many times the whole Radius is contained
therein, and the three following Figures, the parts to be reckond upon the
Scale as before. You will find this Table necessary, either when you would
make a large Tangent line to serve for places only near the Pole; Or when you
would make a very little Tangent line that so you may bring in the degrees near
the Equinoctial into your Quadrant.

The flank being made will serve for many examples, so that the work will be
very easy.
Having thus drawn this blank Quadrant, you must set down therein the two places
you are to sail between, according to their latitudes and longitudes, and then
only by your ruler draw a straight line from the one place to the other, and
this straight line will represent the great circle which passes between the
two places, and will exactly cross those degrees of longitude and latitude,
which you must sail by.

For the example Example.
and proof hereof, I shall take Mr. Norwoods example of a voyage from the Summer
Islands to the Lizard, the latitude of the Summer-Ilands is 32 degrees 25
minutes, let the longitude thereof be supposed to be ^00 degrees, the latitude
of the Lizard is near 50 degrees, the difference of longitude betvveen the two
places is supposed to be 70 degrees, so that the longitude of the Lizard vvil
be 10 degrees. And it is required to know by what longitudes and latitudes the
arch of a great circle drawn between these two places does pass.

The working of the example.
First, let the line A B represent the meridian of the Summer Islands, upon which
you must mark out their latitude 32 degrees, 25 minutes at B, and because the
longitude thereof is 300: set down ^00 at the end of the line A B, so the
Summer-Ilands shall be set down according to their longitude and latitude: then
count still forward the degrees of the difference of longitude till you come to
70 degrees in the limb of the quadrant, and there draw the line A C 70, this
line will represent the meridian of the Lizard, and upon this line you must
mark out the latitude of the Lizard, which is 50 degrees at C, then lay your
ruler to these two marks at B and C, and draw the straight line B C. This line
B C will represent the arch of the great circle between these two places, and
if you guide your eye along in this line, you may readily and truly perceive by
what longitudes and latitudes you should sail, for mark well where this line
crosses the arches of latitude, and the lines of longitude, and that shows the
true longitudes and latitudes of the arch of the great circle, according to
your desire. The proof.
Now the truth hereof will more evidently appear, if you compare the latitudes
and longitudes which this line intersecteth with this table thereof calculated
by Mr. In the tenth Problem of sailing by the arch of a great circle.
Norwood for every fifth degree of longitude.

Longitude Latitude De. or difference of longitude. D. Degrees. m. 310 00 32 25 305
05 35 52 300 10 38 51 315 15 41 24 320 20 43 34 325 25 45 24 330 30 46 54 335
35 48 07 340 40 49 04 345 45 49 47 350 50 50 15 355 55 50 31 360 60 50 33 005
65 50 23 010 70 50 00

Now you may hereby see, that the line B C in the point G does cross the 305,
or the 5 degree of longitude from B almost at the arch of 36 degrees of
latitude, just as the table shows it should, at 35 degrees, 52 minutes of
latitude. Again, the line B C does cross the 310 or the 10 degree of longitude
from B in the point h, almost at the arch of 39 degrees of latitude agreeing
with the table which shows it to be in 38 degrees 51 minutes. And so in all the
rest it so nearly agrees, that if you take any care in making of this blank Map
to draw the arches of latitude, and the degrees of longitude truly, you shall
not need to use any calculation, though you are well skilled therein, for the
thing hereby may be much more exactly known, then the course of a ship can be
steered.

For the further explaining of this, take another example, An example of two
places in one parallel.
which shall be of a parallel course. Suppose two places to be situate in the
parallel of 40 degrees of North latitude, and their difference of longitude to
be 70 degrees, the one being in 300, the other in 10 degrees of longitude, and
it is desired to know what longitudes and latitudes the arch of a great circle
being drawn between these two places will pass through.

To perform this, first in the line A B mark out the latitude of the one place
which is 40 degrees at E. Then in that same arch count 70 degrees of longitude,
from E to F, and there make a mark for the other place, thus the two places
being set down upon the blanke map according to their latitudes and longitudes,
draw a straight line from E to F, and this will represent the great circle,
which is to be drawn between the two places, and the intersections which it
makes with the arches of latitude, and the lines of longitude will show the
true longitudes and latitudes by which this great circle ought to pass.

Proof of the work, by its agreement with calculation.
Now for the proof hereof though Mr. Norwood in his Book, has not calculated
the longitudes and latitudes of the arch of a great circle in such an example
as this: yet his rules show how to do it, and according to them I have
calculated this table, so that you might see the exactness of this way by its
agreement with the table.

Longitude Latitude Degrees. De. De. m. 100 parts 300 or difference of longit. 00
40 00 these minutes are in 00 305 05 41 34 57 310 10 42 53 88 315 15 43 55 92
320 20 44 42 70 325 25 45 15 25 330 30 45 35 58 335 35 45 41 68 335 35 45 41 68
340 40 45 35 58 345 45 45 15 25 350 50 44 42 70 355 55 43 55 92 360 60 42 53 88
005 65 41 34 57 010 70 40 00 00

Note if you draw lines by every degree of longitude in the blanck Map, as
there is by every degree of latitude, you may then find out the latitude of
the great circle for every degree of longitude. But this pains will be
needless, yet the lines may be for some use, for if your two places differ
more in latitude then they do in longitude, then it will be your better way to
set down by what longitudes the great circle does pass at every fourth or fifth
degree of latitude.

Now that the longitudes and latitudes of a great circle thus found out will be
exact enough for the Seamans use, The longitudes and latitudes of the arch thus
found out will be exact enough.
if you be any thing careful and handsome in drawing of the lines of latitude
and longitude true, observe what Mr. See Master Norwood in his Problemes of
saling by a great circle. Prob. 9. latter end.
Norwood says to this purpose, his words are these.

Having spoken before the calculation hereof: but notwithstanding all that has
hitherto been said, it may seem hard to direct a ship, and to keep such a
rekoning as may be agreeable to this method of sailing. And indeed as it is in
a manner impossible, so neither is it necessary that a ship should always
persevere exactly in the arch of a great circle. It may suffice, and it is
almost the same in effect, if a ship be so directed that she go near this
arch. Which how to do he shows in the next problem, wherein I shall follow
him, only whereas he directs you to find out the longitudes and latitudes of
the arch of the great circle, by calculation, I have showed you how to save
that labor, and yet find it out sufficiently exactly for your use.

Having therefore found but the longitudes and latitudes by which the great
circle must pass, as is before showed, How to use the longitude and latitude
being found out.
you must likewise provide you a blank Sea-chart, drawing it either by the
lesser or larger Meridian line, as is before showed. Then prick down in this
chart the latitudes through which the arch of the great circle does pass at
every tenth degree of longitude Then if your chart be of the lesser size, you
may with your compasses draw an arch of a circle through those pricks, and this
arch will represent the great circle between the two places. But if your chart
be of the larger size, and so your compasses be not large enough, to draw this
circle; or else you are forced in regard of the length of the voyage to make
two or three charts for it, then you may prick down the longitudes and
latitudes of the great circle for every fifth degree of longitude, and with your
ruler, draw little straight lines from one prick to another, and yet these
lines will represent the great circle well enough. And thus the great circle
being drawn upon the chart, you may easily by the former directions in the use
of the chart, see what point you must steer upon at the beginning of your
voyage, and afterward altering your course by half a point at a time, It is
not good to steer upon quarter points, because they are not so visible in the
Compass, neither is it good to alter your course too often.
you may keep as near to the arch of the great circle, as either you need or
can expect to do.

Now because Mr. Norwood has sufficiently explained this in the example of the
Summer-Ilands, and the Lizard, I shall pass by that example, only setting it
down upon the chart, and refer you to his directions, and show you the like
in a parallel course.

Suppose you were to sail from the coast of Virginia to the coast of Portugal
between two places lying in the parallel of 40 degrees north latitude, and the
difference of longitude between them is 70 degrees, the first place being in
These places are not set down according to their true Longitudes, it is only
the difference of Long. which I respect.
300 degrees of longitude, and the second place in 10 degrees of longitude, and
you would sail by the arch of a great circle, between these two places.

First, you must by your blank Map find out the longitudes and latitudes by
which the arch of the great circle must pass, then having drawn the following
Seachart, first prick down the first place therein at N according to its
longitude 300 degrees, The manner of working upon the general Chart.
and latitude 40 degrees. Then likewise prick down the second place at P,
according to its longitude 10 degrees, and latitude 40 degrees, then at every
tenth degree of longitude from N prick down the latitude of the great circle
for that proper longitude thus at b, which is 10 degrees. of longitude from N, you
must make a prick at 42 degrees, 53 minutes of latitude, and then at d, which
is 20 degrees of longitude from N, you must make another prick in 44 degrees,
42 minutes of latitude, and so for every tenth degree of longitude. Then draw
the circle N a b c d e, The course you must steer upon.
etc. to P, and this will represent the arch of the great circle between these
two places. And hereby you may see how you must shape your course, viz. as It
may seem to some that this Circle NO P cannot be the nearest way, but rather
the straight line of N P, but this proceeds from this cause, because the degrees.
of longitude grow still lesser toward the Poles, though they be made equal in
the Chart, and therefore the degrees. of latitude are made larger to answer
thereunto. But on the contrary, you see in the quadrant that the line E F, is
shorter then the circle E F, and so it is plainly to be seen upon the Globe.
follows. First, you must sail from N to a, upon the sixth rumbe from the
Meridian which is E N E, 4 degrees, 09/100, or 41 tenths of a degree, so you
will be in the point a, whose longitude is 305 degrees, and the latitude
thereof is 41 degrees, 34 minutes. Then you must sail from a to c, half a point
more Easterly, geometrical diagram 7 degrees 69/100 or 77 tenths, or double
leagues, so you will be in the point c, whose longitude is 315 degrees, and the
latitude thereof is 43 degrees, 48 minutes. Then you may sail from c to e, upon
the seventh rumbe from the meridian, which is E by N the distance of 7 degrees,
26/100, or 72 tenths of a degree, and so you will come to the point e, whose
longitude is 325 degrees and the latitude 45 degrees 13 minutes. Then altering
your course half a point more toward the East, you may sail from e to f, the
distance thereof being 4 degrees 93/100, or ^ degrees, 9 tenths, and almost an
half, so you will come to the longitude of 332 degrees, and the latitude is 45
degrees 42 minutes. Then from f you may sail to g, full East, the distance is 2
degrees 09/100 or 2 degrees, 1 tenth, and the longitude will be 335 degrees, and
the latitude 45 degrees, 42 minutes, thus you vvil be come just the one half of
your voyage. Now to perform the other half, as you raised the Pole before by
little and little, so now in the same order you may depresse the Pole again,
until you come to the same parallel of 40 degrees, and so finish your voyage,
which you may more plainly see by this follovving table of the whole voyage.

The several places where you alter your course. The course you steer. The
did. or way sailed. The Longitude The Latitude Degrees. P. Degrees. m. Degrees. m. P. 1
from N to a E N E 4 09 305 0 41 34 57 2 from a to c 7 69 315 0 43 48 80 3 from
c to e E b N 7 26 325 0 45 13 22 4 from e to f 4 93 332 0 45 42 70 5 from f to
g East 2 09 335 0 45 42 70 6 from g to h East 2 09 338 0 45 42 70 7 from h to i
4 93 345 0 45 13 22 8 from i to k, E by S 7 26 355 0 43 48 80 9 from k to l 7
69 005 0 41 34 57 10 from l to P E S E 4 09 010 0 40 0 0 The Sum 52 12

You must not think to find these courses and distances which I have set down
in this table, How to work upon a larger. Chart.
can be so exactly found out by the former general chart, which is drawn by
che lesser Meridian line, but if you draw two or three blank charts by the
larger meridian line, in two or three sheets of paper, you may then find them
out easily, and as exactly as need be. In these several charts, you may set
down your daily courses and distances, and then when you please you may prick
down the sum of these reckonings upon the general chart, and thereby the
better see whereabouts you are in respect of your whole voyage. Thus you may
easily, know the several parts, and the total sum of your voyage at any time.

Or else you may keep account of such a voyage as this, and find out all your
distances and courses upon one blank chart, A way to avoid drawing of many
Charts.
drawn in a sheet of paper, (or less if you please) as in the figure following.
But I would not wish you to scant your self to so small a chart as this is,
this being so little, only in regard of the littleness of the book, and so
the lines are broken off, oftener then otherwise you need to do.

Now in this following chart, being fitted to the latitudes you must sail
under, first set down your first place N according to the latitude thereof,
which is 40 degrees, then prick down the latitude of the great circle, at the
first fifth degree of longitude, which is 41 degrees, 34 minutes at a, then
laying your ruler from N to a, prick out the line N a, which will represent
the arch of the circle from N to a. Then the latitude of the circle for the
next 5 degrees, is 42 degrees. 53 minutes, or 88/100 parts, this must be set
down at R, and then draw the pricked line from a to R, so you have the arch of
the circle from N to R. Now if you would know what course you must steer: by
your scale of rumbes you shall find that from N to a, the course is E N E, and
the distance from N to a measured in the meridian line, is 4 degrees, 1/10, or
41 tenths of degrees. And here now because the rumb line does run above the
arch of the circle at a, I leave this course and alter my course half a point
more toward the east.

Also in regard of the shortness of the chart, I am forced to break off the
arch of the great circle at a, and set down the latitude thereof in the first
meridian again at a, and set down the latitude thereof in the first meridian
again at a, drawing a line from a to a, then 5 degrees from this meridian that
is 10 degrees, Take these Latitudes out of the Table. page 56.
from the first place N, I set down the latitude of the great circle, which is
42 degrees, 53 minutes or 88 parts at b, and 5 degr. from b, that is 15 degrees
from N, I set down the latitude of the circle, which is 43 degrees, 55 minutes,
or 92 at c, and prick out the lines a b and b c, which represent the great
circle, then by a scale of rumbes, I set off 6 rumbes and a half, which is the
black line a c, which almost meets with the pricked circle at c, and the
distance from a to c, is 7 degrees 7/10, as you may find by measuring it in
the meridian line. And note though the rumbe line and the arch of the circle,
do not here close exactly, yet it is no matter: for I have drawn it thus to
even 5 and 10 degrees that it might agree with what has been before said.

geometrical diagram

Here again because of the shortness of the chart I am forced to break off the
circle, and the rumbe-line, and set them in the first meridian at c, then 5
degrees. from the meridian at c that is 20 degrees. from N, I prick down the latitude
of the arch, which is 44 degrees. 42 minutes, or 70 parts, at 20; and five degrees
from this 20, I prick down the latitude of the arch in that longitude, which is
45 degrees, 15 minutes, or 25 parts, at c, then I draw the pricked lines from c
to 20, and from 20 to e, which represent the arch, and I likewise draw the
rumble line N by E from c to e, which does very nearly concur with the arch
at e, and the distance from c to e is 7 degrees, and almost ^/10 or as in the
the table, 7 degrees, 26/100.

Here again by reason of the shortness of the chart, I am forced to break off
again, and setting the latitude of this point e, in the first meridian at e, 5
degrees from this I set down the latitude of the arch of the great circle
belonging to that longitude, which is 45 degrees, 35 minutes, or 58 parts at
30, this meridian is 30 degrees distant from the first place at N. And then 5
degrees from this, which is 35 degrees from the first meridian at N, I set down
the latitude of the arch, which is 45 degrees, 41 minutes, or 68 parts at g,
then I draw the pricked lines from e to 30, and from 30 to g; this represents
the arch, now at the point e, I alter my course half a point more to the
Eastward, therefore by the scale of rumbes, setting off 7 points and a half
from the point e, I draw the line e f, which is N by E, half a point to the
East: and having sailed upon this point from e to f, the latitude will be 45
degrees, 42 minutes, or 70 parts, and the difference of longitude from e is 7
degrees, and the distance from E is 4 degrees, 9/10, but the difference of
longitude from the first place at N, is 32 degrees.

Lastly, because now I am as far to the Northward as the arch of the great
circle will allow me, I here at f alter my course half a point more, and so
sail from f to g full East, so I have altered my longitude in all 35 degrees,
and am come just one half of the voyage.

Now to perform the other half, you must continue to do as you did before,
first prick out the great circle, and then find out the rumbes you must sail
upon from one point to another, which you may alter now and then half a point,
and so you may lay the Pole in the same order and proportion that before you
raised it, as you may see by the table before, page 61.

CHAP. VI. Showing some observations which may be of use in all these three
kinds of sailing.
HAving showed you how to sail, either by the Rumbe that leads from one place
to another, or else by an arch of a great circle extended between two places, I
shall now lay down some observations, which may be useful in either of these
ways of sailing, for sometimes it is best to use the one way, sometimes the
other, in some voyages it is best to sail by the Rumbe, in some voyages it is
best to sail by the arch, in some voyages it is the best way to use both, and
to keep neither to the rumbe nor to the arch exactly.

In voyages to the West Indies, though the nearest way, be by the arch of a
great circle; and though the way by the direct Rumbe, lies very well: yet it is
usual in these voyages to steer wide from both these nearer ways, viz first, to
steer much more to the Southward then the course lies, until they come into the
latitude of the place, and then to run their course West, until they arrive at
their desired port. And this way is very good, especially when you sail unto a
little lone Island. To get the benefit of the wind.
For first, by sailing toward the Line, you shall gain the benefit of the
Tradewind (as they call it) which does most constantly blow between the North
and East, between and near the Tropicks. Secondly, hereby you may be sure not
to overshoot the Island you would sail to, To avoid overshooting the place you
go to
which otherwise may easily be done. For it is an hard matter in a long
voyage, to steer your courses so exactly, and keep your account of your way so
perfectly, as not to miss some few leagues: and beside if this could be done,
yet the courses and distances can not be so exactly known, because the true
longitudes of places one in respect of another is not so exactly found out, as
is to be wished for. And if by either of these causes, when you shall come to
the end of your reckoning, you shall chance not to be in sight of the Island,
you will then be at such a loss, that you will not know which way to sail to
find it, whether Eastward, or Westward, and so must be forced to wander at
random until you have a sight of some known place, by which you may know
how the Island bears from you. Therefore in sailing to such a place as this;
it is the best way to be sure to get into the latitude of the place, a good
while before you come to it, and then sailing near that latitude, you shall be
sure not to pass by it without a sight of it.

2 To get a wind.
In voyages from the West Indies, the usual way is first to sail much more
northerly, then the true Rumbe does lie, and this likewise is to get the
benefit of the wind, for as the wind lies most Easterly toward the
Equinoctial, so it blows most westerly toward the Pole: also this way is the
nearest way, because it lies near the arch of a great circle. But many Seamen
not knowing so much, and especially keeping their reckoning upon the plain
chart, this convenience might prove an inconvenience to them for they are many
times at their journeys end 150 or 200 leagues before they are aware, and so
might easily overshoot their port, and lose themselves, but that they sail to
the maine land, or great Islands that they cannot pass by.

3 The inconvenience of sailing in a parallel.
Now as for these causes you sometimes stray from the rumb or arch which lies
between the two places, so there is another consideration which may be a
sufficient reason for a little wandering, sometimes out of the way, and that is
the inconvenience that there is, in sailing far upon a course of East or West.
Because you must always depend upon your dead reckoning which is subject to
much mistake, having no way to correct it by observation. This parallel sailing
makes the journey many times seem tedious. As a man that travails in an unknown
way, thinks the miles and the way to be longer then indeed they are, whereas he
that knows the road and how far it is from place to place, goes on more
cheerfully. Therefore the labor will not be lost if you go sometimes a little
out of your way for this consideration, that so you may have the more certainty
of your account.

Indeed the way of sailing by the arch of a great circle does very much help in
this, How to avoid sailing in a parallel, partly.
as I have showed at large in the former Chapter, but yet if you keep your self
in your yoyage too strictly to the arch, you must run much of your way in a
parallel, or very near it. As in the example of the parallel voyage in the last
chapter, the difference of longitude between the two places being 70 degrees,
if you keep to the arch, you must first sail E N E, til you alter your
longitude 5 degrees, then half a point more Easterly, til you alter your
longitude 10 degrees more, then you must sail N by E til you alter your
longitude 10 degrees more, that is in all 25 degrees, but afterward the 7
degrees which are set down half a point off the East, and the three degrees full
East, is little better then a parallel course: then again this being the middle
point of your voyage, you must sail 10 degrees more in the same proportional
course, so that of the 70 degrees of the whole voyage you must sail 20 of them
near the course of East and West.

Now you shall see how easily this may be avoided, How to avoid sailing in a
parallel, totally.
and that several ways: first let the courses be continued as before til you
come to 25 degrees difference of longitude, which is at e in the last Page 63.
chart, then if at this point you leave the great circle a little, and keep on
your course still upon the 7 rumbe N by E, til you come to 35 degrees of
longitude, your latitude will be 46 degrees, 36 minutes, or 60 parts, differing
from the latitude of the arch 55 minutes, but your distance for these 10
degrees of longitude will be but 7 degrees 09/100, that is but 7/100, more then
the other way, which makes but 4 miles, which makes 4 miles, which is so little
that it is not to be regarded in respect of the distance in these 10 degrees,
being 425 miles.

Again if you begin sooner to swerve from the arch, yet the difference of your
way will not be much, as you may see by this table which differs much from the
other in the rumbes, latitudes, and longitudes, but yet it differs but little
in the total sum of the distances, being but 20/100, which is but 12 miles.

Difference of Longitude. The course or Rumbe. Distance or way sailed. The true
Longitude. The Latitude. Degrees. m. Degrees. P. Degrees. Min. Degrees. Min. 10 0 E N E 08 10
310 0 43 6 10 0 07 46 320 0 45 16 15 0 E by N 10 60 335 0 47 20 15 0 E by S 10
60 350 0 45 16 10 0 07 46 360 0 43 6 10 0 E S E 08 10 010 0 40 0 The Sum 52
32

See the general Chart, page 58.
Once * again if you try another way, as if you should sail from the first place
N, in the latitude of 40 degrees, upon the 6 rumbe E N E, til you have altered
your longitude 35 degrees, which is the half of your voyage, you will then find
your self to be at Q, in the latitude of 50 degrees, 12 minutes, and your
distance or way sailed, will be 26 degrees 63/100. Then if from this point you
alter your course, and sail upon the 6 rumbe Southward, again, E S E to P, your
distance will be as before 26 degrees 63/100, and so you will come to the
latitude of 40 again, being the place you desire, so that your whole voyage by
this reckoning will be but 53 degrees 26/100, which though it be somewhat more
then the distance by the arch, which is 52 degrees, 08/100, yet it is less
then the distance of these two places, in the parallel which is 53 degrees,
62/100, and the loss of the way will be well recompensed, especially in sailing
from the Indies, by the advantage of the wind, and by the certainty you may
keep off your account, sailing always upon the sixth rumbe.

By this also it appears, that the longitudes and latitudes of the arch of a
great circle, and the courses and distances which you are to sail upon, in
tracing thereof, may be sufficiently found out in the tracing thereof, may be
sufficiently found out by the ways before showed, so that there needs no other
calculation for them, since a small wandering from them, will not alter the
length of the way in any considerable quantity.

Thus also you may easily avoid sailing upon a course of East and West. Which
way soever your voyage lies, To avoid sailing East or West at any time.
it will be your best way to steer no nearer to the East or West, then the 7th
rumbe from the meridian. For so you may by your observation of the latitude,
correct your account which otherwise you cannot do, and in doing thus, you vvil
not go much out of your way. For suppose you were to sail betvveen two
places, under the Equinoctial line, so that the direct and nearest way between
these two places, lies full East and West, yet you may sail between these two
places upon the seventh Rumbe, and go not much out of your way. For example,
let the two places be distant 10 degrees, if you first sail the one half of
your way upon the 7 Rumbe, that is till you have altered your longitude 5
degrees, you will raise the Pole very near one degree, viz. 994/1000, and your
distance or way sailed will be but 5 degrees, 1/10 almost, viz. 5 degrees,
098/1000. Then if you alter your course, and so lay the pole as much upon the 7
Rumbe the other way; so you will come to the place desired, having run the same
distance as before: thus in a voyage of 10 degrees, or 100 tenths or double
leagues, you go not fully 2 tenths out of your way, which is not one in 50,
which will be well recompensed, because in sailing thus upon the 7 Rumbe, you may
by the observation of the latitude correct your account. For this rumbe raises
or depresse the Pole almost one degree in sailing of five, which will serve very
well to correct your account by, and therefore I will not persuade you to go any
further, out of your way. And if you direct your course according to this rule,
this is the farthest that you need go out of the way. For in all other places,
the arch of the great circle, which is the nearest way between two places, does
always lie somewhat between the Pole, and the parallel of East and West, and
therefore in raising the Pole upon the 7 Rumbe, you will not go altogether so
much out of your way, if you observe to incline your course always toward the
Pole. Thus you see you need not sail directly East or West at any time unless
it be when you fear you shall pass by some little lone Island, as is aforesaid.

4 Make use of the Sea chart and the Map, or Globe in plano, page 52. both
together.
In voyages near the Pole it is best to guide your self as near the arch of the
great circle as you can, having respect to the former considerations. And in
these voyages your best way will be to keep your reckonings, both upon the Chart
and upoe the Map, so the one will help the defects of the other. As for example,
the Rumbes from one place to another, are easiest to be found out upon the
chart, but the distances of the places, and the arch between them will be found
out more easily by the Map. For the places being set upon it according to their
longitudes and latitudes, will be more composed and hold better conformity to
the Globe, being in a manner the same with it, especially within 10 or 20
degrees from the Pole. Thus then if you are to sail upon discovery, and not to
a certain place, your best way will be; by the rumbe which you sail upon, and by
the latitude which you find by observation, to find out the longitude of the
place you are in at any time by the chart, and then setting down this place,
according to its longitude and latitude thus found out, upon the Map, you may
more readily see its distance and position from any other place. But if you are
to sail to a certain place, whose longitude and latitude is known, then it will
be best, to set the place down first in the Map, and so to find out the
longitudes and latitudes of the great circle between them, which being pricked
down upon the chart, you may see how to steer your courses to the place
appointed.

5 To find out if there be any current.
In all your voyages it will be a good way to keep your accounts upon two blanck
charts, upon the one, you may keep your dead reckoning, upon the other, your
corrected account. And the benefit hereof will be this: if you be careful to
keep your dead reckoning outward, and homewards true, you may thereby whether
there be any current between the two places, and which way that current sets,
and how fast it runs. For if there be a current between the places you sail
to, which way soever the current sets, your reckonings outward and homeward will
not agree, and indeed you can keep no good account of your way, til you know
which way and how fast the current runs.

For example: first, suppose the current runs East 12 miles a day, and you
sail against this current according to your account, by your Log-line (which is
the best measure of your dead reckoning) 60 miles West in a day, your true pace
or distance will be but 48 miles in a day, because the current will set you back
12 miles, which subtracted from 60, there remains but 48. On the contrary, if
you sail Eastward in this current, (and so sail with it) 60 miles a day
according to your log-line, then your true motion will be 72 miles a day,
because the current will set you forward 12 miles more then you seem to go.

Secondly, suppose the current run East one mile an hour, if you sail in this
current N E or S E, look how many hours you sail, so many miles the stream will
set you more forward in your longitude, then you are aware of; and yet your
latitude, vvil fall out according to your account. On the other side if you sail
N W or S W in this current, the current vvil drive you backwards so many miles,
and yet your latitude vvil be according to your account.

Thirdly, if the current run upon any rumbe betvveen the meridian, and the East
or West, then your true motion vvil differ from your dead reckoning, and also
from your account by observation, both in longitude and latitude, so that until
you know in some sort both which way and how fast the current runs, you can
never keep a good account of your way and the only way to find out the
current is to keep a good account by the log-line outvvard and homevvard, and
by setting this down upon your blanck chart you may plainly see which way
the current runs, and how fast, as Master Norwood has very well demonstrated
in the end of his Sea-mans Practice.

6 To alter your course as seldame as you can.
In most voyages, it will be good to keep your course constantly, (or as much as
you can) upon one and the same rumb, for so your account will be more easily and
certainly kept. For at every shifting of your course, the true point that you
are in, cannot be so certainly known, but that you may misreckon somewhat both
in the latitude and longitude thereof. For the latitude by which you have the
most certainty of your place, may be mistaken 5 or 10 minutes, by any
instruments ordinarily used, and this may cause 20 or 30 minutes error in the
longitude, and this error, at every changing of your course, may as well chance
to be increased, as to be balanced one time with another, whereas if you steer
your course constantly upon one rumbe, as it will avoid the trouble of drawing
so many rumbe lines, so there can be no greater error in your account, then
there shall happen to be in the last observation of the latitude, which cannot
be much. But if you are forced to shift your course in regard of the wind, then
in the correcting of your account, observe the rule in the second case of the
sixth Proposition of the plain chart, drawing a straight line from your first
place to the place you are then in.

7 To gain sight of land when you can.
It vvil not be amiss as often as you can, to get a sight of such Capes,
Headlands or Islands, as lie near your course, which being standing marks, will
give you certain knowledge, vvhereabouts you are, and so you may the better
direct your course and perfect your account.

8 To observe the variation of your Compass.
Lastly, you must have an especial care of your compass, that it be every way
perfectly and exactly made, and likewise you must be as careful, that you steer
your course exactly upon that rumbe you reckon on; to which end, not only the
Steers-man must be diligent to keep the ship to the course appointed, but you
must be frequent in observing the variation of the compass, which may be so
well performed by the Sea rings in use among Seamen, that no Instrument can be
devised fitter for the purpose, this variation being known, must be allowed
for in your account, that so you may know the true rumbe you sail upon,
without which there can be no true account kept.

CHAP VII. Of sailing by a great Circle.
ALthough the way already proposed for the finding out of the arch of a great
circle, Another way to find out the longitudes and latitudes of the arch of a
great circle.
between two places, is the most easy and plainest way that can be, yet
because it is not so general as to take in all places, but is only to be used
when the two places are both, on the one side of the Equinoctial: as also it
may seem somewhat defective, because it does not show the distances of places;
I have therefore here added this second way, partly for variety, and partly to
supply the defects of the former. But as this way is more artificial, so it is
more difficult, both in the demonstration, and practice, which cannot be
avoided. But you may the better bear with it, because you will seldom be forced
to use this way, but may very well content your self with the other in most
voyages.

This and all other questions of this nature, concerning the resolution of any
spherical triangle, may very easily be performed by the Globe: but because the
Globe is a chargeable Instrument, and so every one cannot have it: therefore
several men have for several uses invented several ways to project the
Globe upon a Plane. You may see the several projections thereof in Mr. Gunters
book of the Sector. The fittest for this purpose will be that of Gemma Frisius,
which is most used in Maps of the whole world, the projection whereof is, as
follows.

First, draw the circle A D B C, How to describe the Globe in plano.
and divide it into four parts or quadrants, by the cross diameters, A B and C
D, then divide each quadrant, into 90 degrees and number them as in the figure,
then if you keep one end of your ruler fixed at the point A, and lay the other
end to the several degrees in the lower Semicircle, D B C, so you shall divide
the Diameter C D into its parts, which are half tangents. In the same manner,
if you keep one end of your ruler fixed in the point C, and lay the other end
to the several degrees of the Semicircle A D B, you may divide the diameter A
B into half tangents.

Having thus divided the circumference and the diameters, they must guide you
in the drawing of the meridians and the parallels, How to draw the Meridians
and Parallels.
which are all parts of perfect circles, and you may find their centers by
these three points. First, for the Meridians, they all concur in both the
Poles A and B, and their third point is their correspondent degree in the
diameter C D. Then for the parallels, two of their points are their degrees in
the outward circle, and their third point is their correspondent degree in the
diameter A B. By these three points you may find the center, and so draw the
arch as is showed in the first chapter. But to save that labor, you must know,
that the centers all lie in the diameter lines, which must be extended beyond
the circle, and then the centers are thus found out. The diameter C D being
divided into half tangents as before, if for every degree you account two,
beginning from the center E, so you shall have the centers of the meridians.
Then if you set one foot of your compasses in that center, and open the other
to the Pole A or B, it will pass through the correspondent degree, or third
point in the diameter C D: on the other side of the center, so the meridian will
be drawn upon the one side. Then with the same distance of your compasses, you
must draw the other answerable to that on the other side. Then keeping your
compasses yet at the same distance, set one foot in the center E, and with the
other, mark the diameter A B, both above and below, and these marks shall be
the centers of the parallels. Then set one foot of your compasses in these
centers, and close your compasses, til the other foot reach to that degree of
latitude in the outward circle and so draw that arch from side to side And if
you find that the arches thus drawn, do pass exactly through their three
respective points, in the circle and diameter, your work is true, otherwise not.

For example, if you would draw the meridians and parallels of 45 degrees,
Example in the Meridians and Parallels of 45 degrees.
first the tangent of 45 being doubled, makes geometrical diagram 90, which
counted both ways from the center E does reach to C and D, therefore setting
one foot of your compasses in C or D, and opening the other to the Poles at A
or B, draw the two like arches A f B, on either side the center. Then to draw
the parallels of 45 degrees, keep your compasses at this distance, and setting
one foot in the center E, with the other cross the diameter A B, both above
and below in the points G and H, these are the centers for the parallels of 45,
therefore set one foot in the center G, and close the other, till it reach to
45 degrees in the outmost circle, and so draw the arch 45 R 45. Then set one
foot of your compasses in the other H, and so draw the other parallel 45 P 45.
thus these 4 arches are drawn.

And thus you may easily do for any other degree under 45, but when you come
to the degrees above 45, then you must extend the line C D, and laying one end
of your ruler to the point A, and the other to the degrees of the upper
semicircle, you may divide that part of the line without the circle as you did
before that part which was within, into half tangents, and so doubling your
degree find out the center thereof. Or else when you draw the former meridians,
you may remember to turn about the compasses, and mark the line C D without
the circle; by these marks you shall divide the line into half tangents, and so
you may find out the centers as before.

How to help your self when your compasses will not reach.
But because some of these centers, will fall so far without the circle, that
your compasses will not reach them; you may then bridle a thin ruler, that will
bend, with a double string like a cross bow, and then by tvvisting the string
together, you may by little and little, set it to what bent you please, till it
shall cut the three points of your arch you would draw, and then with your pen,
you may dravv your arch, which if the ruler be all of one thickness, and so
bend in all places alike, it vvil be very true. Your compasses vvil reach the
centers very well, til you come to 60 degrees, but afterward you must be
forced to use this or some such like way to help your self. The larger you make
your draught, and the more meridians and parallels you draw in it, so much the
better it is, therefore if you can, make it so large that you may draw
meridians and parallels through every degree, which you may do very well in a
sheet of large paper in a lesser draught, you may draw every second degree,
which is the least I would wish you to do.

Lastly, to save time and labor in drawing of these blanks for every question:
when you have made a little trial and know how to draw them, then draw two
good large ones of one and the same size, which you may do very well by drawing
the same lines in both, before you stir your compasses from their distances:
then six the one of these to the other by their centers so that they may be
turned round, and the uppermost of these being drawn in fine thin paper, and a
little oyled, you may easily see through it all the lines of the other. And
thus you shall have an This will be somewhat like Mr. Blagraves Mathematical
Jewel.
Instrument whereby this and most other questions of spherical triangles may be
resolved.

Having thus showed the drawing of this projection, I shall now come to show you
the use of it in several examples. The first example shall be the
forementioned voyage from the Summer-Islands, to the Lizard, the latitude of
the Summer-Islands being 32 degrees, 25 minutes North, The use of this
projection in finding out the great circle.
and the latitude of the Lizard, being 50 degrees North, and their difference
of longitude being 70 degrees, and it is required to know first the Latitudes
and Longitudes by which the arch of a great circle drawn between these two
places does pass. Secondly, the angle of position from the first place to the
second. Thirdly, the nearest distance between the two places.

To perform this, first you must set down upon your draught, First example.
the first place which is the Summer-Islands, according to the latitude thereof
which is 32 degrees, 25 minutes in the outmost circle at S. Note well which way
the first place bears from the second.
And herein you must regard how the second place does bear from the first If
the second place lie West from the first, then you must set down the first
place on the East or right side of the circle: but if the second place lie
Eastward from the first, as it does in this example, then you must set down the
first place on the West Side of the circle, as it is here at S. Then from the
point S through the center E, draw the diameter line S E K, and cross it at
right angles with the line M E N. Then accounting 70 degrees (which is the
difference of longitude of the two places) in the diameter C E from C to 70,
mark that meridian arch, and thereupon mark out the latitude of the other place
which is 50 degrees at L. Thus the two places are set down according to their
latitudes and the difference of their longitudes at S and L. Now to help you to
draw the arch of a great circle between these two places S and L, you have
these three points S L and K, by which you may find the center of the arch
which is at M, in the line N M, therefore set one foot of your compasses in M,
and opening the other to any of the three points, draw the arch S L K. This
arch is the great circle that passes through these two places, by which you
shall find all the things desired.

The longitudes and latitudes of the arch.
As first, if you would know by what longitudes and latitudes this arch does
pass (which is the thing most needful to be known) if you trace the way of
this arch, through the meridians and parallels of the draught, you will find
them to agree with the former table hereof for every fifth or tenth degree. For
at 10 degrees of longitude from S, the arch passes through 39 degrees of
latitude: at 20, through 43, and so of the rest.

The angle of position.
Secondly, if you would know the angle of position from S to L, then observe in
what point the arch S L K does cross the line N M, which is at T, then take
the distance N T, and measure it in the semidiameter C E from C toward E, and
it will reach almost to 49 degrees, which shows the angle of position to be
North-Easterly almost 49 degrees.

The distance of the places.
Thirdly, if you would know the distance of the two places, you must with your
compasses take the distance of the two places S and L, and measuring it in that
meridian, which agrees with the angle of position, viz. 49 degrees, you shall
find it will reach from A to V, now if you reckon the degrees of the parallels
of latitude from A to this point V, you shall have the distance which is 53
degrees and a half.

Likewise you may measure any part of this arch S L, in this meridian A V, if
you always set one foot in S, and open the other to the point required, and
then set one foot in A, and the other will show the distance of that place. Thus
the distances will be found out as exactly as by any other Geometrical way, but
in regard of the smalnesse of the projection, you may mistake some fevv miles
or leagues.

But if you were to sail from the Lizard to the Summer-Islands, The difference
in sailing forward and backward by the arch.
then you must first set down the latitude of the Lizard on the other side of
the circle (as I noted before) and so the work vvil fall out much as it did
before, for the longitudes and latitudes of the arch vvil be the same, only
accounting them backvvards, the distance vvil be the same, viz. 53 degrees and
a half, only it must be measured in another meridian, according to the angle
of position from the Lizard, which vvil be about 81 degrees, so that in
effect, all is the same, only the angle of position, which is of little use,
but to find out the scale of the distances. So that if you regard it well, one
labor vvil serve to find your way outvvard and homevvard.

I might here show you how to perform the parallel question, but because such
questions may with more ease and certainty be performed by the former way, I
shall not spend time about it, I shall only instance in two sorts of voyages,
which cannot be performed by the other projection, and in such cases as these
there vvil be some need of this way, and not else. First, when one of the
places is under the Equinoctial, and the other tovvard one of the poles. The
other is when the one place has North latitude and the other South.

Suppose you were to sail from the Island of St. Thomas, Example of 2 places in
another manner of situation.
which lies under the Equinoctial, and has about 35 degrees of longitude to
the Straights of Magellan, which has about 53 degrees of South latitude, and
differs in longitude from the former place 9^ degrees to the Westward: now it
is required to find out the arch of the great circle between these two places,
and the longitudes and latitudes of this arch, with the angle of position, and
the distances of the two places.

To perform this, first set down the Isle of St. Thomas, which is under the
Equinoctial, at the one end of the Equinoctial line at D, then accounting 90
degrees of longitude from D to E, there is the meridian of the Straights of
Magellan, whereupon you must mark out the latitude thereof, which is 53 degrees
at W, so you shall have these three points D W C, by which you may find the
center, and draw the arch D W C, now this part of the circle from D to W, is
the arch of the great circle, which lies between these two places; by which you
may find all the other things required.

As first for the longitudes and latitudes of this arch, they are found out by
noting where it crosses the circles of longitude and latitude in the draught,
which you shall find for every tenth degree to be as in this table.

Long Latitude Degrees D. m. 10 12 58 20 24 25 30 22 34 40 40 28 50 45 31 60 48 58
70 51 16 80 52 35 90 53 0

Secondly, for the angle of The difference of longitude being just 90 degrees. the
angle of position is ready measured in the semidiameter E B being the distance
B W, which is 37 degrees, but at other times must follow the rule.
position between the two places, this is showed by the arch DW crossing the
Semidiameter E B, so that if you take the distance B W, and measure it in the
diameter C D, it will reach from C to 37 degrees, which is the angle required,
and the situation shows it to be South westerly.

Lastly, for the distance of the two places, if you take the distance D W and
measure it in the 37 meridian line (according to the angle of of position) it
will reach from A to the Equinoctial line, Likewise the distance D W needs no
other measuring, but must needs be 90 degrees.
which shows the distance to be 90 degrees.

The last example shall be of two places, the one being on the one side, and the
other on the other side of the Equinoctial. As, suppose you were to sail from
the Summer-Isles, to the Cape of good Hope, Example of places in another
situation.
the latitude of the Summer-Isles, is 32 degrees 25 North, and the latitude of
the Cape of good Hope is 35 degrees south, and suppose the difference of
longitude between these two places to be 90 degrees, and it is required to find
out the arch of the great circle between these two places, according to the
longitudes and latitudes thereof, the angle of position and the distance of the
two places.

To perform this first you must set down the first place according to the
latitude thereof in the outmost circle at S, and draw the diameter S K, to
which you must draw the line N M squirewise at right angles, then counting the
difference of longitude which is 90 degrees from C, the meridian of the Cape of
good hope will fall in the line A B, which you must mark out according to its
latitude 35 degrees South at X, then by these three points S X K, find the
center which will be in the line M N extended, and so draw the arch S X K.

Now first for the longitudes and latitudes of this arch you may find them by
seeing how this arch does cross the circles of longitude and latitude in the
draught, which for every tenth degree of longitude is as follows.

Long. Latitude Degrees. Degrees. m. North Latitude decreasing. 0 32 25 10 26 57 20 19
40 30 11 18 40 02 05 50 7 19 South Latitude increasing. 60 16 7 70 23 48 80 30
05 90 35 0

Then for the angle of position, you shall find it thus, mark where the arch S
X K, does cross the line M N, which is at Z, then with your compasses take the
distance Z M, and measuring it in the semidiameter C E, you shall find it will
reach from C almost to 60, viz. 59 degrees 25 min. South easterly.

Lastly, for the distance of the two places, if you take the distance of the
two places in the arch S X, and measure it in this meridian, of 60, you shall
find it will reach from A to Y, which is 107 degrees and a half, or more
exactly 107 degrees, 34 minutes.

If you make two of these draughts, and join them together, as I noted before,
your work will be somewhat more easy and readily performed. For then in any
question of this nature, you need but turn the Pole of the upper paper, to the
latitude of the first place in the under paper. Then mark out the second place
according to its longitude and latitude, in the meridians and parallels of the
under paper. Then mark what circle of of the upper paper, passes through these
two places, this is the arch required. Now the longitudes and latitudes
thereof, you may easily see by its crossing the meridians and parallels of the
under paper. The distance of the two places, you shall know by counting the
parallels in the upper paper between the two places. The angle of position is
known by noting where the arch does cross the Equinoctial in the upper paper.

By this likewise most questions of Astronomy may be performed, as by the place
of the Sun, to know the Declination of the Sun, his right ascension, and
oblique ascension, his amplitude at rising and setting, and by the height of
the Sun to know the Azimuth and the time of the day, with many others but
because some of these require more exactness, then any such Instrument will
afford: and likewise they are somewhat beside my present purpose; I shall not
now speak of them.

CHAP. VIII. How to keep a perfect account.
ALthough the ways I have already showed may be sufficient for the setting
down of any reckoning upon your Charts: yet because it may be some trouble, if
you often alter your rumbe, to draw a new rumbe line from every point: and
besides the scale of the Chart being somewhat small, you will be subject to some
mistake, in finding out the several points, and this mistake being often
committed may come to some considerable error, I shall in this chapter show
you, how you may increase your scale, and by a little help of your pen find
out these points most exactly: and so you may set them down by the latitude,
and their Easting or Westing, without drawing of the Rumbe lines, from point to
point.

First, for the increasing of your scale, which is the chief ground whereon the
certainty of your reckoning will depend. In the figure following (which is the
same with the plain chart before) The way to keep a perfect account is to work
by a very large Scale.
let each side of the square be supposed to contain but one degree of longitude
or latitude (whereas before we supposed it to contain 10 degrees) so shall each
degree by this means be divided into 100 very sensible parts, and be 10 times
greater then the scale of your chart, by which means you shall keep your account
as exactly as need be required. Then it will be necessary if you use this as an
Instrument to draw lines through each of these 100 parts, crossing one another
as those ten lines do; but for the better distinction, you may make every tenth
line bigger then the rest, and every fifth line you may prick out. Then making
the corner at A the center, draw the arch of the quadrant B P 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 D,
which you may divide either into 90 degrees, or else into the 8 Rumbes and
their quarters, and it will be good to number them both ways, from B and D.
Lastly, you must provide you a thin ruler or Index which must be divided as the
side of the Quadrat is, into 100 equal parts. You may make this Index of a
piece of thin paper, and oil it: or it will be better, if you get a piecc of
fine clear horn, and make a scale of equal parts thereon, equal to the sides of
the quadrat, and so fastening it to the center A, you may turn it to any Rumbe
in the arch, and very plainly see all the lines of the Instruments through it.

The use of this Instrument might be showed in many propositions, but I shall
only show you how to use it in two very necessary propositions, by the one of
which you may keep your dead reckoning, by the other your true reckoning by
observation.

The proposition for your dead reckoning is this. How to keep your dead
reckoning.
By the rumbe and distance, to find the longitude and latitude of the place
you are in. As for example, suppose the place from whence you set sail to be A,
which here is under the first Meridian, and under the Equinoctial, and
therefore has 00 degrees of longitude or latitude. Now suppose you sail from
this place upon the first Rumbe from the Meridian N by E, to the distance of
one degree or 100 parts; it is desired to know the latitude and longitude of
this place. Or rather how far geometrical diagram this place will be Northerly
from A, and likewise how far it is Easterly from A

To perform this or any such like question, you must first consider which way
your course is in general, and lay the Quadrat so that the sides A B or A D,
How to work the proposition upon the instrument.
the one of them may represent the Meridian; and the other the line of East or
West as in this example, the side A B must represent the Meridian, and the side
A D the line of East. Then lay your horn Index to the Rumbe in the arch, and
find out the distance you have sailed, upon the scale of your Index. Now mark
very well the point, where your distance upon the scale ends, and what lines of
the Quadrat meet in this very point, and if by your eye, you trace these lines
to the sides of the Quadrat, the figures there, will show you the Northing or
Southing, Easting or Westing as the question requires.

As in this example, because your course in general is North-Easterly, let the
side A B represent the North Meridian line, so the side A D, at the bottom, or
B C at the top, will represent the lines of easterly longitude or distance. Then
because your course is N by E, which is the first rumbe from the North Meridian
Eastward, lay your horn Index upon the first rumbe from the line A B, which is
the line A P. Then count your distance which is one degree or 100 parts upon
your Index, and mark where this number ends, which is in the point P, where
the line A P crosses the arch B P. This is the exact point where you are.
Now if you trace the line P B that runs through this point to the Meridian
line, you shall there find that you are to the Northward of the place A 98
parts of a degree divided into 100 parts, likewise if you trace the line that
runs through this point P to the bottom or top of the Quadrat, there you shall
find that you have altered your longitudes 19/^^^ parts and a half.

Having thus found out the exact Northing and Easting H^w to set the Northing
and Easting found out, upon the Chart.
of this place from A, we vvil now to avoid the inserting of another figure)
suppose this last to be a plain chart again, hahaving each side divided into ^0
degrees as before, and if you set down this place by the first proposition of
the plain chart, according to the latitude and longitude thus found out, viz.
latitude 00 degrees 9^ parts, and longitude 0^ degrees 19 parts and a half,
you shall find that its place vvil be close by the corner A, at the figure 1.
Likewise for your better proceeding afterward, you may write down the
longitude and latitude of this place 1, as you may see in the table following.

Another example in the same voyage-
Now suppose that you alter your course at this place 1, and sail from hence N N
E, which is the second rumbe from the Meridian one degree, or 100 parts more.
And it is desired to know the longitude and latitude of this second place.

To know this lay the Index upon the second rumbe from the Meridian line A B,
and count upon it your distance sailed, which is 100 parts, and observing well
where this distance ends, which is where the line of the second rumbe does cut
the arch B P, which is in the cross at 2: this is the point that shows you the
difference of longitude and latitude of this place from the last. Now by the
lines that pass through this cross, you shall see the difference of latitude
to be 92 parts, and the difference of longitude to be 38 parts. Now if you
would know the true longitude and latitude of this place, in respect of the
first place A, that so you may set it down upon your chart; you must add the
Northing and Easting of both the places together thus.

From A to 1 N by E 100 parts is, North 98. East 19 From 1 to 2 N N E 100 parts
is, N. 92. E. 38 The Sum of both is 1, 90 57

So that the latitude of this second place is 1 degree 90 parts of North
Latitude, and 0 degrees 57 parts and a half of longitude. And then setting it
down according to the first proposition, of the plain chart, you shall find
this place to be at the figure 2 near the corner A.

And thus you shall find out the point of any place in your chart more
certainly then other ways it is possible for you to do, and with less trouble,
as you may see by the table following of the rest of the places, 3 4 5 6 7 in
the chart.

Note this well.
But here you must observe that as in these places where the latitude and
longitude does still increase, you make use of Addition, so if your course lies
so, that the longitude and latitude both decreaseth, you must make use of
Substraction both in longitude and latitude. And sometimes the course may lie
so, that the longitude may increase, and the latitude may decrease, then you
must add the one, and substract the other. your best rule to guide you in
this, when to add and when to substract is to observe your course in general,
which way it tends, which you may easily see by your Chart.

As for example Example.
being come to the place 7 in the chart, whose latitude is 4 degrees, 57 parts,
and the longitude thereof is 4 degrees, 57 parts, and from this place you sail
S by W, that is upon the first Rumbe from the Meridian to the Westward, 100
parts, and it is desired to know what longitude and latitude you are then in.

To perform this, first you may see by your course in general, which is
South-westerly from the place 7, that both the longitude and latitude of the
place you sail to must needs decrease, and therefore the difference of
longitude and latitude which you shall find out by the Instrument, must be
subtracted from the longitude and latitude of the place 7, that so you may
have the true longitude and latitude thereof. Now having considered this; by
your Quadrat you shall find that the course being the first rumb from the
Meridian, and the distance being ^0 parts, the difference of latitude will be 98
parts, and the difference of longitude 19 parts and a half: this subtracted
from the longitude and latitude of 7, shows the longitude and latitude of the
place 8 where you are.

The place 7 has latitude 4 degrees. 57 parts. long. 4 degrees. 57 p. Subst. the
differ of latitude 0 98 long. 0 19 Rest for the place 8 latit. 3 59 long. 4 37

Thus likewise you must do to find the longitude of the other places 9 10 11
12 13 A. A good way for young beginners to avoid mistakes.
And it will be a great help to direct you when to add, and when to substract,
if you join four of these Quadrats together, which you may very well do, if in a
large sheet of paper, you draw a large circle with your compasses, and dividing
it into four parts, make each of them like to this, and set the names of the
points of the compass to the rumbes, as in the figure of the compass page 10.
By this means without any trouble you shall plainly see the Easting and Westing,
the Northing and Southing of your course.

How to set down these distances in a table.
But now for the better setting down of these distances, you must divide your
table into four columns, for the four principal quarters, East, West, North,
South, and set down therein according to their titles, the Easting or Westing,
Northing or Southing of your course, which you find by the Instrument, and
then in casting up your accounts, you must add altogether that you find under
one column, but if you have any sums in contrary columns, as East and West,
or North and South, you must substract the sum of the East from the sum of
the West; and the sum of the North column from the sum of the South, so
often as you would find the longitude and latitude of the place where you are,
as you may see by this following table of all the voyage outward and homeward.

Course. did. d pa. Nor d. pa. Sou, d. pa. East d. pa. west d pa Lat. d. pa.
Lon d. pa The place A 0, 00 0, 00 Compa e this table and the Chart well together.
from A to 1 N by E 1, 00 0, 98 0, 19 0, 98 0, 19 from 1 to 2 N N E 1, 80 0, 92
0, 38 1, 90 0, 58 from 2 to 3 N E by N 1, 00 0, 83 0, 55 2, 73 1, 13 from 3 to
4 N E 1, 00 0, 71 0, 7^ 3, 44 1, 84 from 4 to 5 N E by E 1, 00 0, 56 0, 83 4,
00 2, 67 from 5 to 6 E N E 1, 00 0, 38 0, 92 4, 38 3, 59 from 6 to 7 E by N 1,
00 0, 19 0, 98 4, 57 4, 57 from 7 to 8 S by W 1, 00 0, 98 0, 19 3, 59 4, 38
from 8 to 9 S S W 1, 00 0, 92 0, 38 2, 67 4, 00 from 9 to 10 S W by S 1, 00 0,
83 0, 55 1, 84 1, 44 from 10 to 11 S W 1, 00 0, 71 0, 71 1, 13 2, 73 from 11 to
12 S W by W 1, 0 0, 56 0, 83 0, 57 1, 90 from 12 to 13 W S W 1, 00 0, 38 0, 92
0, 19 0, 98 from 13 to A W by S 1, 00 0, 19 0, 98 0, 00 0, 00

Thus I hope you see by this table, how that by adding or substracting, the
Northing, Southing, Easting or Westing, to, or from the longitude and latitude
of the place before, you may still find out the longitude and the latitude of
the place you are in, for the keeping of your dead reckoning, as exactly as
need be required.

Now the other Proposition which is useful in the rectifying of your account,
according to your observation is this. How to find out the true point of your
longitude, by observation of the latitude.
By the rumbe and the difference of latitude, to find the longitude of the
place where you are, and the distance of this place from the other. Now the way
of working this Proposition upon the Quadrat is thus, First, you must suppose
one of the sides to be the meridian line, and the other to be the line of East
or West as before, then lay your Index to the degree of the Rumbe, on which you
have sailed, and keep it there. Then count upon the Meridian line from A, the
difference of latitude of this place you are in (according to your observation)
from the place you came last, and note where this number ends, and mark well
the line that is drawn from this place, and trace it to your Index, and this
point where this line crosses the Index, is the point where you are. Now if
you count the parts upon your Index from A to this point, so you shall see the
true distance you have sailed in that Rumbe. And if you trace the line that
runs through this point to the line of longitude at the top or bottom of the
Instrument, there you shall see the difference of your longitude, or rather how
far Eastward or Westward it is from the former place.

For example, Example.
suppose you sailed from the place A. (whose longitude and latitude let be as
before) N by E, that is upon the first Rumbe from the Meridian, so long, til by
observation you found you had altered your latitude 98 parts of a degree
divided into 10 parts: and you desire to know how far you have sailed in the
Rumbe; and how far you are to the Eastward of the place A.

First, lay your Index upon the line A P, which is the first Rumbe from the
Meridian, and keep it there, then count the difference of the latitude, which
is 98 parts, in the meridian line from A to B, then mark the line that is
drawn from this part, and observe well where it crosses the Index or Rumbe
line, which is in the point P, and this is the very point where you are. Now if
you count the parts upon your Index from A to this point, you shall find your
distance sailed to be 100 parts or one degree. And if you mark the line that
runs through this point to the line of longitude, you shall there see the
difference of longitude which is 19 parts and a half to the Eastward from A,
thus the proposition is fully resolved.

But in this proposition you must take notice, that if you sail upon several
Rumbes before you observe the latitude, then first you must find out the Rumbe
which lies from your first place, to the place where you are according to your
dead reckoning (as is showed in the sixth proposition of the Plane Chart) and
then laying your Index upon this Rumbe, work as aforesaid.

How to work when the question is of more then 100 parts.
Note that in working of either of these propositions by the Quadrat, if the
distance or difference of latitude be more then a degree or 100 parts, then you
may first find out what belongs to one degree, and then what belongs to the
odd parts, and adding them together, you may find the truth as exactly, as if
your Instrument were large enough to show both at once. But if your distance or
difference of latitude be four or five degrres, you may then very well work the
proposition upon your chart, without using the Quadrat, and need not fear
error, if you be any thing careful, and work by a true scale of rumbes and
equal parts.

Hitherto I have showed you how to work these two propositions upon the plane
chart, How to perform these two propositions in all latitudes.
or in places near the Equinoctial: But because the degrees of latitude in the
true Sea-chart must not be all of one and the same length, therefore neither
can the true latitude nor longitude of places be set down by one and the same
scale of equal parts. Therefore I shall now show you, how when you have found
out the Northing or Southing, Easting or Westing of any place, as is before
showed by the Quadrat, how you shall set it down in any latitude that it may
show the true longitude thereof. For you must know, that though the Northing
and Southing, does show the true difference of latitude in all latitudes: yet
the Easting and Westing found out by the Quadrat, does not show the true
difference of longitude in those places, which are any thing distant from the
Equinoctial, I shall therefore show you how to perform these two Propositions
in all latitudes.

For example of the first Proposition. First, for the dead reckoning.
Suppose you were at the place H, in the following figure, whose longitude is
under the first Meridian, but it lies in 45 degres of North latitude, and
suppose you should sail from this place N by E to the distance of 100 parts, as
before said, and it is desired to find the latitude and longitude of this
place.

First, you must find out the Northing and Easting by the quadrat as is before
showed. The first way to perform this by the Chart it self.
Now the Northing of this course being 98 parts, must be added to the latitude
of the former place 45 degrees, so the latitude you are in will be known to be
45 degrees, 98 parts, then lay your ruler to this latitude in the sides of your
chart, and draw a short line a 1, then consider how much the Easting of your
place is, which in this example is 19 parts and a half, take this distance with
your compasses out of the scale of latitude, about the middle latitude between
these two places, and then setting one foot of your compasses in the Meridian
of H at a, with the other cross the line a 1 at 1, and so you shall set down
the place according to its true longitude which is 00 degrees, 28 parts from
the Meridian of H, as you may see by the chart: and not 19 parts, and a half,
as before it was under the Equinoctial, or by the plain chart.

But if you think this scale in the sides of your chart will be somewhat to small
to find out the difference of longitude exactly, you may have recourse to the
Quadrant of latitudes, A second and better way, by the Quadrant of Latitudes,
pace
page 32, and thus help your self. Suppose the whole side of the quadrant A B
to stand but for one degree, so you shall have in a degree 100 very sensible
parts, and then proceed thus in your work. Consider the latitude of the two
places, and draw your line through the middle latitude between them, or lay a
thread or ruler to it: then count the Easting or Westing of your geometrical
diagram place in the side A B, and where it ends observe the line that runs
from that place, where it crosses the line of the middle latitude. Then
setting one foot of your compasses in this cross, open the other to the center
A, and measure this distance in the scale A B, so you shall have the true
longitude of the place.

Thus in this example, the middle latitude between the two places being 45
degrees, 50 parts, draw the line A c D by this latitude, and then counting the
Easting of this course, which is 19 parts and a half in the side a b, the line
b c drawn from thence will cross the former line of the middle latitude at c,
then setting one foot of your co^passes in this point at c, and opening the
other to the center A, this distance A measured in the scale A B will show 28
parts, which is the true difference of the longitude of the place 1 from the
Meridian of H. And if thus you will make trial, you shall find out the
longitudes and latitudes of all the other places, 2 3 4 5, etc. as they are set
down in the table following.

Course. did. d. pa. Nor d. pa. Sou, d pa East d. pa. west d pa Latit. de. pa.
(*) d. pa. Lon. d. pa The place H 45, 00 0, 00 from H to 1 N by E 1, 00 0, 98
0, 19 45, 98 0, 28 0, 28 from 1 to 2 N N E 1, 00 0, 92 0, 38 46, 90 0, 74 0, 82
from 2 to 3 N E by N 1, 00 0, 83 0, 55 47, 73 0, 82 1, 64 from 3 to 4 N E 1, 00
0, 1 0, 71 48, 44 1, 06 2, 70 from 4 to 5 N E by E 1, 00 0, 56 0, 83 49, 00 1,
24 3, 94 from 5 to 6 E N E 1, 00 0, 38 0, 92 49, 38 1, 41 5, 35 from 6 to 7 E
by N 1, 00 0, 19 0, 98 49, 57 1, 50 6, 85 from 7 to 8 S by W 1, 00 0, 98 0, 19
48, 59 0, 30 6, 55 from 8 to 9 S S W 1, 00 0, 92 0, 38 47, 67 0, 57 5, 98 from
9 to 10 SW by S 1, 00 0, 83 0, 83 47, 84 0, 82 5, 16 from 10 to 11 S W 1, 00 0,
71 0, 71 46, 13, 102 4, 14 from 11 to 12 SW by W 1, 0 0, 56 0, 83 45, 57 1. 19
2, 95 from 12 to 13 W S W 1, 00 0, 8 0, 92 45, 19 1, ^1 1, 64 from 13 to 14 W
by S 1, 00 0, 19 0, 98 45 00 1, 39 0, 25 from ^ to H West. 0, 7 0, 17 45, 00 ^,
25 0, 00

This table agrees with the former in most things, the chief difference is in
the longitude, Note the difference of this Table from the former.
which must be thus found out. By the Easting or Westing of your course, you
must find out the difference of longitude thereof according to the middle
latitude, and set it in the table under the last column, but one, noted thus
(*) and this difference added or subtracted as it ought to be in the last
column, shows the true longitude of the place where you are. This will be your
best way to keep your dead reckoning.

How to perform the second proposition in all latitudes.
Now for the second proposition, which is by the Rumbe, and the difference of
latitude; to find the difference of longitude, and the distance. To perform
this, first knowing the latitudes of the two places, draw a line in your
Quadrant of latitude, by the middle latitude of the two places. Then count the
difference of latitude in the scale of the quadrant of latitude, A B, and where
the number ends, draw or observe the line drawn from it, where it crosses the
line of the middle latitude, then taking this distance in your compasses,
measure it in the scale A B (increased if need be) then work with this number
upon the quadrat as is showed before page 89, as if this number were the true
difference of latitude between the two places, so you shall find out the true
difference of longitude in degrees and parts. And for the true distance, if you
observe the parts of the Index of the quadrat at these points, and then measure
them in the line of the middle latitude, the line that runs from this point to
the scale of the quadrant, will show the true distance.

For example, let the place from which you sail be H, in the latitude of 45
degrees, let the Rumbe you sail upon be N by E and let the difference of
latitude be 98 parts; and it is required to find the true difference of
longitude, and the distance of this point.

First in the quadrant of latitude, draw the line A Z, by the middle latitude
of the two places; which is 45 degrees, 49 parts, then in the scale of the
quadrant A B (counting the whole scale or Radius for one degree) reckoning the
difference of latitude 98, and observe the parallel line that comes from this
where it crosses the line of the middle latitude which is at Z. Then setting
one foot of your compasses in this point Z, open the other to the center A, and
measure this distance in the scale A B lengthened, and you shall find it to be
140 parts: thus the true difference of latitude 98 parts is enlarged to 140
parts, which is the proportion it ought to have in this latitude. Then working
with this difference of latitude enlarged upon the quadrat, as was showed page
89. and 90, first, for 100 parts, I find the difference of longitude to be 20
parts, and the distance upon the Index is 102 parts, then likewise for the 40
parts; I find the difference of longitude to be 8 parts, and the distance on
the Index is almost 41 parts. These two sums added together makes the true
difference of longitude to be 28 parts, and the distance 143 parts almost. Now,
lastly, this distance measured in the line of the middle latitude, in the
quadrant of latitude, will reach from A to D, and the line that runs from this
place up to the scale A B shows the true distance sailed, which is one degree
or 100 parts.

Thus having found out by observation at any time the true latitude of the
place where you are, if it shall differ from your latitude by dead reckoning,
you may find exactly in what point you are in respect of the longitude as well
as the latitude. And though some of these things may seem at the first a little
difficult; yet if you consider well, all that has bin said before and so
understand the first principles of the Work, you shall find, that a little
practicing of these questions, and some such like, which you may propose to
your self, will make all very plain and easy.

FINIS.

