THE CHRISTIANS DESIRE, SHOWING, How and for what Causes a man may desire Death.

By WILLIAM HOUGHTON, Preacher at Bicknor in Kent.

Vt prima desideria sanctorum antiquae legis in primo Christi terminabantur
adventu: sic quoque modo desideria sanctorum novae legis in secundo Christi
adventu, qui perfectam nobis beatitudinem conferet, desinent.

August. HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA

ALMA MATTER CANTA BRIGIA



LONDON, Printed by Roger Daniel, for Samuel Cartwright, at the Sign of the
Bible in Duck-lane. 1650.

TO The Right Worshipful Sir EDWARD WORTLEY, and his Religious Lady, my
honored Friends.
Right Worshipful,
DEsires are the truest effigies of the mind: If a man be Heavenly, he has
heavenly desires; if outward things terminate his desires, he has but an
earthly mind, and no more then what Paul calls the spirit of the world: 1 Cor.
2.12^
Such men's desires the Psalmist speaks of, when he says, Who will show us any
good, that is, matter of gain, and profit? Isa. 26.8.
But the godly man's desire is thus set forth, Psalm. 73.23.
The desire of our soul is toward thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.
There is none that I desire upon earth, besides thee. The worldlings desire is
to live many days and years upon earth: the godly man's desire, that Christ may
be in him, while he is here; Luke 12.29.
and that he may be with Christ, when he departs hence: and these (as Paul
himself determines) are the best desires: Worldly desires at last give no
satisfying content to a man's soul; but, these are satisfying desires: those are
often frustrated, and come to nothing: but of these it is said, God will fulfill
the desire of them that fear him. When a whole Kingdom is in a shaking
condition, the desires of many must needs fail; (...) Heb. 12.28.
but the Christians desire is upon a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. My end and
aim in sending abroad this Sermon, is to 01 increase these holy desires in as
many as shall read it. It is but a plain and unpolisht piece: such as it is I
present it to your hands, as a small return of thankfulness for those many
favors I have received from you; hoping it will find the better acceptance,
because I have known you many years, and that your desires are set on the best
things: Praying for your prosperity, and for all that have relation to you, I
rest

Yours in the Lord Jesus, William Houghton.

Philip. 1.23. Desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best
of all.


PAul (as you may see in this Chapter) stands at a certain doubt with himself,
whether he should live or die; live he would, that he might glorify God; die,
to be with Christ. The words contain in them two things.

1. Paul's desire to be with Christ. (...), Having a desire, etc.

2. The reason of it; because it is best of all. The Greek is most emphaticall,
(...), Which is far better; or as if one should English it, Much more better.
Luke 2.29.
Simeon desired to die, because he had seen the Lords Christ: Paul here, that
he might see Christ, and be for ever with him. Simeon's word is (...), Paul's,
(...), there is no material difference between them. Vid. Sculter. Exercit.
156.
The former, according to the mind of the learned, signifies a dimission, to be
fairly dismissed, and suffered to depart: the latter, to be let loose, as
mariners, when they let loose and lanch forth. Or it may signify to return:
as, (...), Luke 12.36.
When he will return from the wedding. The first sense may imply thus much,
that the body is the souls prison, wherein it is kept till it be sent forth,
and suffered to depart. The second adds chains or coards wherein it is held
till it be let loose. The third, that this life is a place of exile, and the
soul herein a pilgrim, till it return to God that gave it. But not to stand
straining of metaphors, when he says, He desired to depart, or be dissolved,
it is as much as if he had said, That he desired to die. Now consider who it
was that thus desired death, Paul, a most zealous man, the Spirit of God calls
him an elect vessel; Chrysostom, an heavenly man, or, if ye will (says he) an
earthly Angel: yet he seeks death, he desires to be dissolved.

We see then, Act. 9.15. Doct.
That all must die, the best that are; the greatest and holiest must taste of
death: young men die as well as old: we see short graves as well as long: rich
men die as well as poor. It is said in the Gospel, that the beggar died: and
presently it is added, the rich man also dyed: Luke 16.22.
And wise men die, as well as the foolish: nay, Psalm. 49 10.
holy men too; Adam is called the son of God; Abraham, the friend of God; Luc.
3.38.
Moses, the man of God; the Virgin Mary, the mother of God: Jam. 2.23.
David, was a man after Gods own heart: John Baptist, Psalm. 93. tit.
a burning and shining light: yet they are all dead and gone, Luc. 1.43.
and descended into the slimy pit, as the Prophet calls it: so that howsoever
there may be a difference here amongst men, yet then, Abierunt, obierunt.
all shall be alike.

Statutum est (says the Apostle) It is a Statute Law, a thing decreed in the
high Court of Heaven, Heb. 9.27.
and must needs stand fast what is there determined.



Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return; though while we live here, one
be higher then another, yet then, there is an equality: as it is in casting
account, one counter stands for a thousand, another for an hundred; but put
them together into the bag, and one is no better then another: or, as it is in
a play, one bears the person of a King, another of a Knight, another of a
Beggar, and very busy they are; but when the play is done, every man goes to
his own place. Thus it is with men; one may stand here in a higher room then
another: but death makes him equal with the meanest: and if ye look into the
same grave, after twenty or thirty years, you shall find no difference between
the dust of a King, and a beggar.

Gehazi, this was his sentence, That the Leprosy should cleave to him and to
his posterity for ever: So sin cleaves close to us, till the day of our death:
And as the Ivy sticks so close to the wall, that you cannot get it out, unless
you pull the wall it self down: so sin will not be had out of us, till the
earthly house of this Tabernacle be dissolved.



Magnum discrimen, a great difference. For, God has ordained, that death to
wicked men shall be a passage to misery; but it is altered to the godly, to
them it is a passage to happiness; for to them, the sting of it is taken away,
therefore they need not to fear it, it can do them no hurt. Even as when you
see a snake or serpent, its sting being drawn out, you may play with it, put it
in your bosom, it cannot hurt you: so may we entertain death, the sting being
taken away. Even as through the same gate, the condemned person is led out to
execution, but the honest Citizen walks out for his pleasure and recreation: so
through the same gate of Death, wicked men pass to the torments of hell, but
the godly to the paradise of heaven. As it is with one that goes over a bridge
to a fair meadow: so death is as it were a bridge to bring the saints to heaven.
As Moses from the top of mount Pisgah had a sight of Canaan before he died:
Deuteronomy, 34.1.
so when the Saints and servants of God are ready to dye, they can see heaven
before they depart this world: or as the Israelites, having travelld forty
years in the wilderness, being now come to Jordan, they could look over it,
and see the land of Canaan; they had no more to do, but to pass over the
foard, and they were in the Land which flowed with milk and honey: so the
people of God, when they have lived forty or threescore years, in the
wilderness of this world, and are come to die, they are only to pass over
the foard of death, and then they are in the land of promise. Thus you see,
that howsoever all die, yet the death of all is not alike; Number. 23.10.
Oh let me dye the death of the righteous (said that wizard Balaam) and let my
last end be like his: showing plainly, that the death of righteous and wicked
men, in regard of their future estate, do exceedingly differ; alike they may be
in their death, but they shall be unlike to each other after death.

speak, the last word that ye may hear; therefore let us think of it seriously,
that so we may apply our hearts to wisdom: let us live every day, as if it
were our last day: The life of man, how long soever, is but a life of seven
days, which are multiplied and run in a course: Now as a man that has seven
servants to serve him, if he be told that one of those seven will kill him,
narrowly observes every one of them, when they come by course to serve him: so
man, whose life runs upon seven days in the week, which serve him by course,
since one of them will certainly make an end of him; he should therefore watch
every day, saying to it, as John to Christ, Art thou he that should come? or do
I yet look for another? sickness must come, and death must come, nothing so
sure; how are we provided for their coming? When sickness is upon us, we can
do nothing for extremity of pain; and therefore now, when the marrow is in our
bones, and blood in our veins, let us think of it; and earnestly prepare our
selves for death. Now for the main Doctrine, I desire says he to be dissolved,
etc.

A Christian may lawfully desire death: Its lawful, nay necessary sometimes to
desire death. Now when I say, that a man may desire it, it is a great height
this, and all attain not thereunto: for, death (says the Philosopher) is the
most terrible of terribles, (...) Job 18.14.
the King of fears, as Job calls it: when a man shall seriously take to heart,
and consider that his soul must be separated from his body, those two old
friends part and go assunder; some doubting and fear will arise through our
frailty, and the best may have temptations in that kind: we know this, that
when a man is to change his dwelling, it puts him to trouble, if it be but into
the next Shire, or the next town, every remove is troublesome: when therefore
the soul shall depart as far from the tabernacle of the body, as heaven from
earth, there may be some trouble at this great remove; yet there is something
overcomes this trouble, whereby the Saints are willing to embrace death, and
desirous of a dissolution. Would you see examples for it? Paul here in my Text,
comes in with his cupio dissolvi; and Simeon with his Nunc dimittis; the old
man had long waited for Jesus Christ, and now, when he had seen him, Lord
(says he) let thy servant depart in peace, Luke 2.29.
he had seen salvation; beheld Christ with a spiritual, as well as with his
corporal eyes; held him in the arms of his faith, as well as with the arms of
his body: and now the world would no longer away with him, Let me depart (says
he) let me be gone. But before I come to show what should move us to desire
death; I will speak a few things by way of caution, and to prevent mistakes.

Let this cup pass, or come, as thy will and pleasure is; not my will, but thy
will be done. If it be the will of Christ that Peter go, Mat. 26.39.
and John tarry still; Joh. 2 1.22.
they must both submit to it: So must we, for the time and manner of our death,
submit our selves to God: our wills are never right but when they are
conformable to the will of God. That's the first, the rest will follow upon it.
Paul's example, who says here, he desired to be dissolved, but it was not
merely to be rid of pain, so himself tells us, bonds and afflictions waited for
him in every place, yet he made no reckoning of them, as you may see, Act.
20.21. and 23. compared together. Many a man would be ready to break prison,
but to be loosed from such bonds, that is, iron bonds or chains: but Paul
gloried in these, yet cries out of the chains of his sins, and wishes
himself loosed from them; Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death? he does not say, oh miserable man, how am I afflicted? Romans
7.24.
I am in deaths often, who shall deliver me from this death of the body? but, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? This, this is it which makes many a
godly Christian even to sigh and groan within himself, longing for a
dissolution, that so the body of sin might be wholly destroyed; who yet is
willing patiently to bear any cross his heavenly Father shall lay upon him, to
render him conformable to his head Christ: and therefore they do very ill, and
show that they have not learnt that self-denial that becomes Christians; who
as soon as they begin to be afflicted in their bodies or estates, presently call
for death to come and take them away. It was Jonas fault, Oh (says he) that
thou would take away my life from me: he comes in a pelting chafe, Jonah
4.3.8.
in a pettish humor: So, many when they are crossed of their wills, wish with
him they were out of the world, that they were dead, and laid in their graves,
who (God knows) are but badly prepared, and would be found in an ill case,
should death come indeed. Therefore let this be a second Caution.

Hegesias, a Philosopher, of that eloquence and power in persuading, that when
he was pleased to represent before his auditors the miseries of this life, his
words struck such an impression in them, that many of them went and made away
themselves. And in Hollingsheads Chronicles, there is a story of a great man in
this Kingdom, who in the times of the Barons wars, being much perplexed in his
mind, called the Keeper of his Park to him, told him, he feared his Deer were
stolen, charged him every night to go into the woods, to walk his rounds, and
if he spied any man that would not stand at the first word, to shoot him: some
two or three nights after (out of the depth of melancholy, (the Devil, that
Prince of darkness, working upon that black humor) he himself rose out of his
bed, went into his Park, the keeper spying him, called to him, and bid him
stand; he answered not, but walking on amongst the trees, the Keeper took his
Crosse-bow, and shot his own Lord dead in the place: thus he fell by his own
counsel, and procured his own death by the hand of his Keeper. And if reports,
Lucernam non extinguebant, sed ultro consumi. Plut. Q. Romans 468. Et tibi Publi,
and piis omnibus retinendus est animus in custodia corporis, nec injuslu ejus a
quo ille est nobis datus ex hominum vita migrandum est, ne munus humanum
assignatum a Dco, defugisse videamini. Somn. Scip.
or papers may be credited, some have been brought to the same pass by reason
of the sore pressure of our late troubles. Now when I say, that a man may
desire death, it is far from my meaning, that a man should bring it upon
himself in any such way: grace teaches us not to offer violence to nature: and
therefore, as amongst the Romans, the lights of the Temple were not to be put
out, but suffered to burn as long as they lasted: so this candle of our lives
must not be extinguished, till it consume and go out of it self, or till God
shall require it in the defense of some lawful cause: we must retain the soul
in the custody of the body, it must not be forced out of it, till he that gave
it, call for it; lest we should seek to forsake that office and employment
which God has assigned us. This is a third Caution.

Paul, he desires death, because it was so advantageous to him: yet is content
to stay, for the benefit of Gods people; To stay (says he) is more expedient
for you, but for my self, I desire rather to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is far better: here is you see a mixture of desires, this is better
one way, that, another; for their private advantage, Gods children desire to be
in heaven; for the benefit of others, they are content to stay still in this
world. It is with them in this case, as it is with a chaste and loving wife, her
husband being gone from home, she desires his coming home; yet thinks
sometimes, oh that my husband would not come yet, till such a business be
dispatched, such a room dressed, and made ready for his coming, therefore keeps
her self doing, that nothing may offend the eye of her Lord when he comes and
brings his guests with him: So the godly Christian desires the coming of Christ
above all, Oh that thou would rent the heavens and come down: Come Lord
Jesus, Isa. 64.1.
come quickly: Rev. 22.20.
but because he knows not what hour his Lord will come in deed, therefore he
busies himself in preparing and making all ready against his coming. It is
written of Ortelius that great Cosmographer, that in his declining age, he set
up the Globe of the world in his Study, Bucolch. chron. 803.
with this inscription, Contemno, and orno, mente, manu: with his heart he
contemnd the world, though with his hand he adornd it. This Emblem may teach
us our duty; Let us seek to adorn the world by the works of our hands, let us
endeavor what we can that the world might be bettered by us, while we live in
it; yet let the world be in no esteem with us: let our minds sit loose from the
world, ready to leave it, whenever the Lord shall call us: and this is that
we may learn out of that heavenly prayer of Christ, They are not of the world,
even as I am not of the world; I pray not that thou should take them out of
the world, Joh. 17.14.15.
but that thou should keep them from the evil. In which words he meets with
an Objection.



I will not have them presently taken out of the world, they shall stay a while
to wrestle with their corruptions, to preach the Gospel to the world: that
done, I will receive them to my self. Verse. 24. he says, Father, I will that
those whom thou have given me, be with me: yet here he says, I pray not that
thou should take them out of the world; that is, not yet. Conformable to this
will of Christ, is the will and desire of the Saints: they desire to be with
Christ (for where should the servant be, but with his Lord? the members, but
with their head? the spouse, but in the bosom of the bridegroom?) they desire
therefore I say, as the top of all their happiness, to be with Christ; and
know assuredly they shall one day be with him in glory: yet they desire to keep
themselves from the evil of the world so long as it is his pleasure to continue
them in it. Christ does not pray his father to take us presently out of the
world, but to take the world, that is, the love of it out of us, and that we
may be satisfied with the truth, verse. 17. This should be our desire then, that
whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him. 2 Cor. 5 9.
That man therefore can have no true desire to dye, that has no desire to live
well: neither does he desire to have any communion with Christ after death,
that does not desire it in his life: he that desires to be with Christ after
death, desires also that Christ may be with him, and dwell in him before death.
These two desires then are in effect one, saving that one is the perfections of
the other; and in that regard the most desirable. These things premised, I now
come to show, why death may be desired of us.

1. It delivers us from manifold evils. 2. It brings with it infinite good, to
those that are prepared for it.
1. Bodily evils. The evils from which we are freed by death, Quis enim
sufficit quantovis eloquentiae flumine vitae hujus miserias explicare* August.
Eccles. 1.8. Verstegan. Antiquit. 58.
are either bodily evils, or soul evils, spiritual evils. For the first,
bodily evils; even these, if I should begin to speak of them, they are more
then I am able to express. All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it:
What toil and labor are our bodies subject unto? What hardship do they here
endure? Our old ancestors, the Saxons, counted the ages of their lives by
Winters; to show how many seasons of sharp and cold weather they had overpast:
besides, how many diseases are there incident to the frail bodies of men, and
women! impostemes, swellings, agues, aches, apoplexies, strangury, stone, gout,
etc. oh the stinging torment that is in some of these! I gave you an item
indeed before, that none of these temporal bodily evils should cause us to
desire death, through impatience, or any repining disposition; however, there is
enough in them to wean us from this world, and to let us see the misery of it:
and death when it comes, it will free us from all these diseases: when given by
the hand of our heavenly Physician, it is the first physic that can be to cure
us of them all. And as our bodies, so our estates likewise are subject to a
thousand changes: what losses and crosses do we meet with there! as if a man be
a rich man to day, he may be a beggar to morrow; if his estate lie in plate or
money, thieves may break through and steal it; if in goods or household stuff,
they may likewise plunder him of all; if in houses, the fire may consume all;
(how many Briefs tells us so?) if in lands, the rain may come and slocken all
his fruit; if in merchandise, the sea may swallow up all; if in cattle, the
enemy, as the Sabeans did Jobs, may carry all away: and he may then sit down
and say as he, naked came I out of my mothers womb, and I see I shall return a
naked man to the womb of the earth. I add here again, that a man must take heed
of impatience, and discontent, otherwise I see no harm in it, if these changes
mind him of his last change: and being thus stripped and left naked, he begin to
think of lying down to his rest. Besides this, many are the afflictions of the
righteous, Acerrimum par media mors dirimit. Seneca.
many are the wrongs they receive at the hands of wicked men: what cart-loads
of reproaches and disgraces are they ready to cast upon them? for there is an
antipathy between the one and the other, as there is between fire and water,
but when death comes, it ends the quarrel.

2. Spiritual evils. But now for the second, soul-evils, or spiritual evils,
they are of far more force to draw on this desire. The devil he is our
continual adversary; and so long as we live here, so long will he be tempting
us; he can no sooner look into my heart, or thy heart, but he will see to what
our natures and dispositions are most inclind, and thereby he will work upon
us. Romans 7.19.
Add hereunto that virus maternum, that venom and poison of original
corruption, whereby we are disabled from doing the good we would, and the evil
we would not, that we do: The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other: Gal. 5.17.
so that we cannot do the things that we would. Paul had a pitched field, as it
were, between himself and himself. Velis, noli:; intra sines tuos erit
Jebusaeus: prm. potest, non exterminari. Connatam habemus cupiditatem, haec
pussus est ut motus cordis, quem nemo mortalium in hac vita reprimit. Cas. eth.
Dan. 3.23. and 25.
As Rebecca had the two twins struggling in her womb: so in every regenerate
man, there is the flesh and spirit struggling together; do what we can, this
Jebusite will still be in our coasts: The seeds of sin may be in some measure
suppressed by the power of Gods spirit, but never rooted out till death: It is as
the pulse of a man's body, always beating till then, but then it will cease.
Death will do no more to us, but what Nebuchadnezars fire did to the three
children, it never touched, nor harmd them, only burnt their coards wherewith
they were bound, and let them loose: So death, when it comes, will loose us
from these coards and chains of our sins, and set us at liberty: Therefore we
ought to long after this full redemption. I remember what the Heathen did, they
placed the Temple of rest without the City, to show, that if ever we would have
tranquillity and quietness, it must be by going out of this world; then there
will be no trouble or vexation of spirit, no concupiscence, no sin to withdraw
us from God. Death came into the world by sin, and sin will not out of the
world, but by death: God shall wipe away all tears from the eyes of his
children, and then he says, there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
Revel. 21.4.
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: Mark, God will first take
away tears, and sin, the cause of tears, that shall be covered with the garment
of Christ's righteousness: and then, as with a handkerchief, he will dry up
their tears: he will first do away sin from their souls, then twill be easy to
wipe away tears from their eyes: it is sin makes so many tears stand in the
eyes of Gods children; therefore when sin is once done away, all sorrow and
tears, all crying and pains will cease. Thus for the evils we shall be freed
from. Now for the good, and benefit we shall be partakers of by death, and
after: My text says, We shall be with Christ, and that is, (...), far better:
If shall be far better then, then now in these four respects.

1. Propter elongationem suam a consuetudine nostra and a rebus seculi istius
non est facile, etc. Paris 696.
The Place of our habitation. 2. Our Society and Company. 3. Our Bodies: and 4.
In respect of our souls.
There is indeed a great elongation or estrangement between us, and things of
eternity and that shall come to pass hereafter, by reason of our earthly mould
and temper; let faith therefore which is the substance of things hoped for,
here act, and stir up it self, carrying us above our selves, and above our
senses, whilst we are speaking of these particulars. I begin with the Place.

Sea of glass: a Sea, for trouble; and glass, Place. Rev. 15.2.
for brittlenesse: it is a vale of misery, as you have heard; but Heaven is a
haven of rest, a Paradise of pleasures and delights. The earth is (...), an
ill-favored, dark, squallid, filthy place: 2 Pet. 1.19.
but in heaven is light inaccessible. Now if a man that had lived in a dark
cell or dungeon, should be taken thence to live in some great and sumptuous
palace; he would think the world well amended: or if a man that had lived
thirty or forty years in some mud-wall-Cottage in the country, should change
his dwelling, and live in the chiefest City of the Kingdom, and enjoy the
treasure and riches of it, he would think himself a happier man then ever he
was before: Job 4.19.
We now dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust; but the City
of God is a most glorious City, the very gates of it, Rev. 21.10, 11.
Saint John says, are of Pearl, and they that do his commandments, Rev. 22.14.
shall enter in through the gates into the City. Oh how glorious shall things
appear, when we shall come to the gates of that City! but when we shall pass
through those gates, how shall our souls be ravished with joy, to see the things
are there to be seen! The very streets (he tells us) are of pure gold; But alas,
What are Pearls? What is Gold? Indeed we see no better things here, and that's
the reason the spirit of God sets forth the glory of heaven by these things;
otherwise they were not good enough to be compared, or worthy to be named the
same day with heavens glory. And should you imagine such a City as he there
describes, whose gates were pearl, and streets gold; the glory of it would not
so far exceed the glory of the meanest village or hamlet, as the glory of
heaven would surmount, and go beyond it. Think then with your selves, how
desirous a place heaven is. S. Peter, you know, when he was upon the holy
Mount, Mat. 17.4.
and beheld Christ transfigured, was not his own man, but fell a talking of
building Tabernacles, and I know not what: but, how would he have been ravished,
if himself had been transfigured, and translated into the place of the Blessed!
and S. Paul being rapt up thither, was not able, 2 Cor. 12.2.
of fourteen years after, to tell us, whether he was in the body, or out of the
body, such and so glorious is that place.

Company.
Oh praeclarum diem, cum in illud animorum concilium coetumque proficiscar, and
ex hac turba and colluvione discedam! That is, Oh happy day, when I shall
depart out of this place of filth and loathsomeness, and go into that Synod of
souls! an excellent saying to come out of the mouth of a Heathen. So let us say
with David, Oh when shall I come and appear in the presence of God? and with
Paul, When shall I enter into the City of the living God, Psalm. 42.2.
the heavenly Jerusalem? When shall I be amongst that innumerable company of
Angels, and that general Assembly? When shall my soul be gathered to the souls
of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant? Heb.
12.22.
Oh when shall I rest in my center Christ Jesus? when shall I be wholly his,
and he be wholly mine? Oh this is our happiness to be with Christ, with him,
who is the desire of all Nations: with him, who suffered an accursed death on
the Cross, for our sins: with him, Joh. 17.24.
whom our soul loves: to be with him, and to behold the glory which the
father has given him: this is that shall make us happy for ever and ever.





Body. (...), which are tour excellent properties of a glorified body. Naz.
orat. funebr. Mat. 26.41. Phil. 3. (...).
it shall not be so dull and lumpish as now, but most agile and nimble: it
shall not then stand in need of sleep, meat and drink, which chain us so fast
by the teeth here. Now the spirit is sometimes willing, but the flesh is weak;
our souls would fly up to heaven, but the flesh clogs them and keeps them down:
then it shall not be so, but the body as a ready and willing instrument shall
follow the motions and desires of the soul or spirit. The Lord shall change our
vile body, or our body of humiliation, that it may be fashioned and made like
unto his glorious body: it is sown in weakness, raised again in power: it is
sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body: a body still, but adorned
with spiritual qualities. Now, will not faith cause us earnestly to desire a
dissolution (though nature shrink a little at the thought of it) when we shall
consider, that this mutable, sinful, corruptible, frail, and rotten tabernacle
of our body shall be taken down, for no other end, but that by a blessed and
glorious resurrection, it may be restored, advanced, to perfect, firm,
incorruptible, and celestial glory?

Soul.
be then enobled! How perfect the operation of them! Our understandings shall
be wonderfully irradiated, for the present they are blind and ignorant. let a
man be never so studious, and labor for knowledge with all his strength; yet
all he knows is but the least part of what he is ignorant: For now we see
through a glass darkly, 1. Cor. 13.12.
but then face to face: now we know in part, but then we shall know even as we
are known. The soul having been never so little a while in heaven, shall get
more knowledge, then here it has done in twenty or thirty years: For we shall
then see him as he is. 1 John 3.2.
So for our wills, what a sweet conformity shall there be between them, and the
will of God! We shall then follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Rev. 24.4.
Now we follow him too, but it is but lamely, and it is not wheresoever he goes;
because as we follow Christ, so the Devil follows us with his temptations,
whereby we are drawn aside and go astray. Oh, but then it shall not be so, but
our wills shall be wholly conformable and obedient to his blessed will, we
shall follow him wheresoever he goes. I have set before you the crown of life:
I have truly, though imperfectly and very briefly, described the nature of our
future happiness. All is true that has been said; yet all that has been
said, is nothing to the greatness of it. You must remember that of the
Apostle, The glory that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18.
it cannot be comprehended by us, no not by the most enlarged understanding,
but hereafter it shall be revealed in us. And this was it made Paul so desirous
of his dissolution: as Chrysostom brings him in speaking thus. I have tasted
of the joys of heaven, Chrysostom. to. 5. ad pop. Antioch. hom. 5.
therefore delay is tedious to me; I have had the first fruits of the spirit,
therefore I desire the whole harvest; I have been caught up into the third
heavens and have seen the glory which is unutterable; I have beheld the
splendour and glory of the court of heaven: Oh, I have learnt, I have learnt
what good things I want the fruition of, staying here: for this cause I sigh,
and groan within my self, desiring to be dissolved. To sum up all, we see
what reason there is, to make us desire our dissolution, whether we respect
outward and bodily evils, or spiritual evils, the Devil, and our own
corruptions joining with him; and because our sanctification is imperfect here.
The world is (...), a dusty, squalid, filthy place: no marvel, if the feet of
our affections be still gathering soil, while we are walking in it. And
lastly, because our condition hereafter shall be far better then now it is,
free from sin and misery; death will bring us to a far better estate, both for
place, company, body and soul: even to such happiness as eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor heart conceived. We can say no more, 1 Cor. 2.9.
but we shall know more when Christ shall say to us, Enter into thy Masters
joy: it cannot enter into us, Mat. 25.21.
therefore we shall enter into it, and be filled with it.

Now for application of this Doctrine, Death is a thing that may be desired. I
desire (says Paul) to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

thief, Luc, 23.43.
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And I will (says he) that those
whom thou have given me be with me, Joh. 17.24.
where I am: I hope they dare not say, that Christ is in Purgatory; he is not
in limbo, Heb. 8.1.
but in olympo: not in purgatorio, but in empyreo, at the right hand of the
throne of the Majesty in the heavens, there is he in glory, and he will have us
to be where he is, the text is plain.

the beggar dyed, and his soul went, whither? to purgatory? no; but 'twas
presently received into Abraham's bosom, Luc. 16 22.
that is, into heaven: and (says the Text) the rich man also dyed, and was
buried, and whether went his soul? to hell: the Text speaks plainly, The rich
man dyed, and was buried, and in hell, stayed no where by the way, but down to
hell he went immediately. So in Matthew, he shall set the sheep on his right
hand, the goats on his left; at his right hand is the kingdom of heaven, at
his left hand everlasting fire: he that is not on his right hand, shall surely
be on the left; therefore he that goes not into the kingdom of heaven, shall
doubtless go to hell, and fire everlasting: the Scriptures tell not of any
third place.

I desire (says Paul here) to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; there is no
Medium between them. But enough of this.

1 These. 4.
Weep not (says the Apostle) as men without hope: these tears are
unprofitable, they do our friends no good, but they may do us hurt. Consider
the necessity of death; it cannot be avoided: all must dye: it is a debt our
parents brought upon us, and must be paid, whenever it shall be required: and
think likewise of the commonnesse of death: it is as common a thing for men and
women to dye, as to be born, and to go out of the world, as it is to come into
the world: why then should we wonder more at the one, then at the other?
Anaxagoras, when one came and told him his son was dead; Spatio annorum 2256.
comprehenditur aetas quatuor partium qui a mundi exordio hucusque vixerant. Nam
etc. Bucolch. chron. 224.
made him this Answer: I knew my son was mortal: as soon as I had begot him, I
knew he should die. Death now in our days is a very common thing; indeed, in
the time between the Creation and the Flood, there was not a Coarse to be seen,
it may be, in two or three hundred years, they were then so long lived: but now
with us, many hundreds dye, and depart this world, every year, nay every week:
seeing then others dye so fast, what reason have we to think our friends should
be exempted, or why should we be so full of grief, Quid admirationis meretur
res, si scissum est quod eratscissile, and liquefactum quod eratliquesi. and si
id crematum est quod erat ustile, and si id periit, quod ita natum est ut
possit perire? Plut de consol. 185.
seeing death is so common a thing? What wonder is it to see trees consume with
age, wax melt, soluble things dissolved, or to see frail mortals die that are
born so, that they cannot but dye; is this any matter of wonder? But that which
should especially qualify our grief, is, from my text, and the doctrine
delivered. Death is a thing to be desired, then not overmuch lamented: we
should (I say) desire, and do desire it, as often as we say the Lords Prayer, Thy
Kingdom come. Therefore let us turn our sorrow for the death of our friends,
into a desire of being with them in restand peace, when Gods good will and
pleasure is.

Paul, Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me! Romans 7.24.
they would fain be delivered, they long to be with Christ, to enjoy his
desired presence. As a man that has sores and ulcers on his body, and his
shirt begins to cleave thereto, with what pain is it pulled from his back? Even
so is it with worldlings, whose affections are glewed to the earth, they are
haled and pulled from it, when they are to dye, as Joab was from the horns of the
Altar. Oh death! how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives in
his pleasures? It is the King of terrors to such men; when the thought of it
comes into their minds, how does it amaze and trouble them! Solomon describing
such a man, says, All his days, Ecclus. 41.1. Eccl. 5.17. Foaming anger with
or in his sickness. Pemb. in loc. Invenitur aliquis qui malit inter supplicia
tabescere, and perire membratim, and toties per stillicidiam amittere any. mam,
quamsemel exhalare. Sen. 450. Epist.
he eats in darkness, and he has much sorrow and wrath with his sickness,
because he is loath to depart, unwilling to leave this world. As it was with the
Gibeonites, they were content to be hewers of wood, drawers of water, rather
then depart from the tents of the Israelites: So these men had rather do any
thing here, endure any drudgery, then depart out of this world; had rather
consume in the midst of torments, have their souls drop away in drops, and all
the members of their bodies perish one after another; then dye and leave the
world.



the name of life: for, how can we call that life, where heat scorcheth, cold
pincheth, meats and drinks make us dull and heavy, fasting weakens us, humors
swell us up, old age buckles us together, shrinks our sinews, wrinckles our
skins, dimms our sight, rattling phlegm rises up and choaks us, and at last,
death seizes upon us! What a life is this? Oh vita non vitalis.
Oh wretched life that tends to death! Let us therefore be in love with that
life which death brings us unto, for that is life indeed. The Apostle says,
Our life is hid with Christ in God: the Saints aspire after this life, and they
have their affections wafted up to heaven, and this, to them, is all in all.
When Christ is here present, sometimes in his ordinances, what comfort do they
find herein! But how much greater will it be hereafter, when we shall see him
as he is! As a woman is glad of a Letter from her husband, but more desirous of
the company of her husband: so it may comfort us a little, that we hear from
him, and that God sends his Ministers, and servants to us, as Paul sent Timothy
to the Thessalonians, 1. These. 3.2.
to comfort us concerning our faith; that he is pleased to give us his holy
word, which is as it were a letter sent us from heaven: Oh, but how much
greater will our joy and happiness be, when we shall be with Christ, enjoy his
desired presence, and follow him wheresoever he goes! Now then, what terror
do we find in death? or for what need we to fear it? for it shall then come to
us, as an officer comes to an heir, giving him possession of an inheritance:
So, death is no more but Gods officer, to bring us into the possession of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Paul's desire; let us desire thus, that we may desire death: Its a great
height this, and God sometimes will not give his children so great a desire as
at other times, therefore labor thou to come to this, which that thou may
the better do, consider these helps to further thee herein.

Dulcedo divini amoris carnalis amoris suavitatem procul expellit. Divinae
dilectionis fervor interne ardens affectiones omnes externas quasi paleas
absumit. Comp. sper. doct. 198.
with the love of the spiritual life, too much affecting of earthly things,
with the love of heavenly; therefore raise up thy self to consider the
excellency of heaven, and heavenly things, and then earthly things will seem
less: as a man on the top of a high mountain, or tower, sees men below like
crows. I remember a pleasant relation in Scipio's dream, how that when he, as
he thought, was taken up into heaven amongst his friends Paulus and Affricanus,
and they showed him the motion of the Planets, and the greatness of the
Celestial Orbs; he cast his eyes down upon the earth which seemd but like a
Tennis-ball, and searching to find out the place where his kingdom lay, it was
so small he could scarce discern it: But as he was thus poaring on the ground,
Coelestia semper spectato, illa humana contemnito.
Affricanus pulls him by the sleeve, and bid him mind heavenly things, and not
to regard earthly; for what is it (says he) to have a name upon earth? say
thou had Carthage, and all Numantia; yet cannot thy name fly over this
Caucasus, nor swim over this Ganges: Thou see how small a thing the earth is,
and that sea, (pointing to the Atlantic.) which ye call the great sea and the
main ocean, which though it have so great a name, thou see how small a thing
it is. This was but a Philosophers dream, yet 'cis pleasant to consider how far
those men went. Let us that are Christians, seriously consider the excellency
of heaven, and vanity of earthly things; let us mount aloft upon the wings of
divine contemplation, and our minds being there, all things here below will be
as nothing to us. Seek those things (says the Apostle) that are above, or on
high: What? where the Orbs and Planets are? No, higher then so: Col. 3.2.
where Angels and Archangels are? No, higher yet, where Christ sits on the
right hand of God. Oh if the soul of any here present were, with Paul, rapt up
into the third heavens, to be there but one hour, to see what he saw; how would
he be ready to trample these things under his feet, as vile and despicable! he
would count them trash in comparison of Jesus Christ, as dung to that pearl.

Mortify therefore your members which are upon earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness. Col.
3.5.
Indeed, this mortification of all evil affections is a hard work: for as it is
with men that have strong bodies, and suffer violent deaths; you see what a
lamentable conflict there is, what struggling between life and death, and when
you think the man quite dead, a good while after, he gives a great sigh or
groan, nature then gathering all her strength to withstand death, flying as it
were in the very face of death, either to vanquish, or to be overcome: Even
thus it is, if we go about to take away the life of our dearest lusts, they
will gather all the forces they can either make of themselves, or the devil and
the world can supply them withal, to stand before them, and defend them, that
we may not come at them; but if for all that, we break through, and smite them
so that we give them their deaths-wound, yet they will gather strength again,
and rise up to hurt us, and do us a mischief afterward. Oh, it is hard, it is
hard, and many a Christian is forced even with tears in his eyes to cry out to
heaven for help when he is at this work, yet this ye see, is that we are Gal.
5.24: Romans 6.6.8.13.
called to, that which every regenerate man and woman sets himself to: and he
who has in good earnest set himself to it, and endeavored the mortifying of
his sins, will not be afraid of death; but rather see great cause why he should
desire it: whatsoever pains it brings, he is provided for it, and may say thus:
Oh death, I regard not any sting, thou can sting my body withal; for, sin
thy worst sting, wherewith thou would sting my soul to death, is in some
measure mortified and subdued by the power of Gods Spirit: that conflict thou
art now about to bring upon my body, will be but short to that I have endured
in my soul these so many years. Oh welcome death, come, do thine office: I have
been endeavoring a long time the death of my sins, and something through the
power and mercy of God I have done; though not so much as I would: come, lend
me thy hand to finish this work. I have often smote my sins, thinking to lay them
in the dust; yet they have risen again: one stroke now of thy hand will cause
them to dye, that they shall never rise up any more.

Non hic sumus sine peccato, fed exibimus sine peccato. Aug.
its true, the old man has received his deaths wound in every regenerate man,
and is bleeding out his life by degrees, and at death shall quite expire, and
bleed his last, but not till then: Paul says of himself, I find a law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind; who shall deliver me from this
body of death? Romans 7.23, 24.
or, oh that I were delivered from it! There will be a body of sin and death in
us, so long as we carry this body of earth and flesh about us: this is plain
then, as long as we live here, we shall sin; and what Christian desires to live
to sin, and to offend God! Oh ye that love the Lord, hate sin (says the
Psalmist) hate that which is evil. We should therefore desire it for this
cause. Psalm. 97.10.


Plato said, that the life of a Philosopher should be nothing else, but a
meditation of death, much more, the life of a Christian. It was a custom
amongst the Greek Emperors, a Stone-cutter came to the Emperor on the day of
his Coronation, presented diverse stones before him, and desired to know of him,
which of those stones he would have for his Sepulcher. And I have read of a
people, who at their feasts were wont to drink to one another out of dead-mens
skuls, to mind them of death. Joseph of Arimathea, who brought the Gospel
hither into England, he had his sepulcher hewn out of a rock, Joh. 19.41.
standing ready for him in his garden: So let us, when the world seems to crown
us with its chiefest delights, then remember death: when we eat and drink,
think we see death on our tables; when we are in our private Gardens, then also
let us take a turn with death, and let us act death before it comes: As a man
that would fain fall asleep, shuts his eyes, draws the curtains, lays his head
to the pillow, and so composeth himself to sleep: so do thou; often think with
thy self in what manner death will surprise thee, look at it before it comes,
and it will be the easier when it comes.

Paul's (...), how it will be far better with us then, then now; in regard of
Place, Company, our Bodies, and our Souls. But indeed (as I noted to you
before) that glory is unspeakable. As the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon's
glory, She heard a great deal, yet not half of it was told her: the same may we
say of eternal happiness, that, we cannot declare half of it unto you:
meditate we may, and ought, of that glory; yet this we must know, that we come
exceeding far short. This therefore should make us go with as great desire to
the grave, as they use to go to a marriage; because then, we shall be married
to Christ Jesus: And as Travelers, when the day is well spent, and the Sun
grows low, come cheerfully into their Inns at night: so should we, to this
common Inn of Death.

FINIS.

