A DECLARATION Of His Excellency Robert E. of Warwick Lord High Admiral of
ENGLAND, CONCERNING The uniting of the two Navies, and restoring of the Kings
Majesty, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of York and the rest of the Royal
Issue; to their just Rights and Privileges.

And His Resolution touching all those who endeavor to obstruct the Treaty,
and hinder the settling of Truth, and a happy Peace, in this unsettled Church and
Kingdom.

With His Majesty's last and final Propositions to all Loyal and reasonable
Subjects. Subscribed CHARLES R.

depiction of ship

Printed for satisfaction of all those who desire Peace, 1648

A DECLARATION OF ROBERT EARL of WARWICK, Concerning the Kings Majesty, and the
Prince of Wales, and his resolution touching all those who are opposite to
Peace.
Whereas, there are diverse persons within the City of London, and parts
adjacent, who endeavor to inflame the Kingdom in a most inhumane, bloody, and
intestine War, and to involve them in a Labyrinth of troubles and Calamities,
by the^r present commotions, actings, and contrivances, in making the King and
Parliame^^ odious to the People, and stirring up their hearts against them, for
the obstructing and blasting the hop^full Issue and Blossoms of this blessed
Treaty. Therefore, for preventing thereof, and propogating the present Work in
hand, his Excellency Robert Earl of ^^^wick Lord High Admiral of his Majesty's
narrow Seas, has declared his Resolution in reference to the same, protesting,

That He will use his utmost endeavors toward the settling of truth, and a
happy peace in this unsettled Church and Kingdom^ and that He will be
isntrumental for the bringing of his Majesty to London, and settling of His
Majesty, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of York, and the rest of His Royal
Issue in their just Rights and privileges, s^ soon as His Majesty shall be
pleased to satisfy and confirm the Desires of his two Houses of Parliament so
much tending to the good and preservation both of Religion, Crown and Lingdoms.
Some Overtures have been la^ely ^ade between his Highness the Prince of
Wales, and his Lordship, in relation to a conjunction and uniting of both
Navies; but his Lordship has utterly de^ested against the some, slighting the
Princes invitation and representing a Letter unto his Highness, That he takes
it as the greatest di^honour that can be incident to man, for any Personage
whatsoever to betray the trust reposed in him, and that He is resolved to
sacrifice his life in the Cause and Engagement which ^e has undertaken, not
doubting but that the omnipotent God of Heaven (to whom the Honor of his
Engagement does belong) will cause the Wnids and Seas to fight for them, whose
Truth is their Banner, Shield and Bucker; and therefore dehorts his Highness
to persist no longer in the way he is in, but forthwith to come in, and unite
himself with the Parliament, that so his person may be preserved from all
violence and injury and a restoration made of all due Rights and privileges,
and that he may render himself isntrumental for the composing of all
differences, and establlshing of a firm and lasting Peace throughout His
Fathers Realms and Dominions.

This Letter is said to be sent from aboard the St. George, to the Prince at
Helver-Sluce, and signed

WARWICK.

Letters further from the Navy say, That the Prince is desirous to spin out
some longer time at Gore^ before he puts to Sea, in expectation of what the
Treaty will produce, and that if it takes not effect, he is resolved for
Ireland, to join with the Marquis of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiqueen, and to
land an Army in the West of England at the Spring, for the re-investing of the
King, and restoring of Him to his just Rights, Power and Authority

The said Letters do further intimate, That the Lord high Admiral has
received a Letter from his Majesty, purporting things of great concernment, and
how far he has condescended to the desires of his two Hou^^^^ desiring him
to be isntrumental for the settling of a firm and lasting peace.

His Majesty's final Answer touching Episcopacy.
Right Honorable,
ON Wednesday morning last the Kings Majesty and the Commissioner, met in the
Treaty Chamber, and taking their places at the Council Table according to the
usual manner, the Earl of Northumberland rose up, and made a short Speech,
Humbly desiring his Majesty to remove his averseness from the settling of
Religion, and to hearken unto the advice of His great and loyal Council, so
much tending to the honor of His Majesty and Posterity, and the settling of a
true and lasting peace throughout all His Realms and Dominions.

Which done, his Lordship presented a Copy of the Parliaments last Votes
brought by Sir Peter Killegrey, on Tuesday night last, in answer to his
Majesty's Enlargement of Concessions touching Episcopacy. His Majesty (after
reading the same) rose up out of the Chair of State, and made a very learned
and excellent Speech to the Commissio^ers.

His Majesty having thus graciously declared Himself, the Commissioners began
to proceed according to their Instructions, and desired a more fuller and
satisfactory Answer, touching the utter extirpation of Episcopacy, which took
up some time of debate in pro and con, and the day being far spent, they
referred the further results thereof to the happy succession of the morrow
following.

And (accordingly) yesterday morning they met again, where the streams of joy
issued from the current of the hearts both of Prince and People, who came to a
final close upon all the Proposals, His Majesty promising upon his Royal Word
to pass those Bills into Acts which He had already assented to. And being
further pressed by the Commissioners to sign to the Bill for the establishing
of Episcopacy, his Majesty desired respite of time till Saturday morning, which
was accordingly granted.

And this morning (about the accustomed hour) his Majesty gave the
Commissioners a visit, and sitting down in the Chair of State, presented a
Paper to them, which is said to be very satisfactory, containing His Royal
Assent to the Proposition of the Church, and likewise to all the rest of the
Bills and Proposals. This joyful tidings were soon echoed throughout the
Island; insomuch that the Bells rang tryumphantly in all the respective
Parishes. But by reason of the sudden dispatch of the Post, I am forced to
conclude, and remain

Newport 5 October. 1648. Your Honors devoted servant, J. RISHTON.

Postscript.
SIR,
SInce my last. Here has happened several Overtures between his Majesty and the
Parliaments Commissioners; they have had much debate upon the Propositions,
especially that concerning the Church, which the King stuck much at; but the
dark Cloud being expelled, and the splendour of the Gospel shining most
gloriously in the eyes of his Majesty, He was graciously pleased to declare his
Royal Assent to all the Propositions, and to grant His Royal Word to pass
all things desired by his two Houses, that may be agreeable and cousonant to
the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. And as to the business of the Church
(which is all they stick at) the King has promised t^ give his concurrence
therein, rather then his People shall suffer for his dis assenting. And 14
days mo^^ being added to the Treaty, it is hoped a fair conclusion will attend
the happy beginning. His Majesty has ^^livered another Paper to the
Commissioners, which I have here inserted, viz.

CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty rests very much unsatisfied, That you have now again wholly
declined the answ^ring of those t^ree questions so clearly proposed by him,
which your selves also confess to be of grea importance, upon this only
pretense, That the whole volum^ of Ecclesia^^icall policy is contained in them:
Wherea^ his Majesty did neither expect not require from you any large or
polemicall Discourse concerning those Questions conceiving that you were ^n
some sort obliged to have declared what your judgment was therein, with the
grounds thereof. For certainly until one of these three things can be clearly
evidenced unto his Maj. 1. Either that there is no certain form of Church
Government at all prescribed in the Word. 2. That the Civil power may change
the same as they see cause. 3 Or if it be unchangable, that it was not
Episcopal, but some other, his Maj. thinks himself excusable in the judgment
of all reasonable men, if he cannot be induced to give his consent to the utter
abolition of the Government of the Church which be found here settled to his
hands, which has continued all over the Christian world, from the times of the
Apostles until this last Age.

FINIS.

