THE IRISH TREATY, OR The last and best Intelligence from IRELAND; Being a
perfect Relation of the most remarkable occurrents in that Kingdom, since the
Lord Taffes going over thither with a Commission from his Majesty to Treat with
the Rebels there.

In which is contained an exact Relation of the said Treaty at Trim, between
the Marquess of Ormond, and Sir Francis Willoughby, for his Majesty, and the
Lord Neuterfield and others in the behalf of the Rebels.

As also a continuation of the victorious success of the Protestant forces in
several parts of Ireland, since the breaking off and conclusion of the said
Treaty. In a letter to the Lady Rogers.

London, Printed by T. Harper for H Shepherd, and are to be sold by G.
Tomlinson, at his shop on Ludgate Hill. 1643.

The Irish Treaty. Or, The last and best News from Ireland.
Madam,
MY humble duty presented unto your Ladyship: I do admire that I have received
no Letters from you since the 14. of March last past, having since that time
written above twenty letters to your Ladyship; and still being ignorant whether
they went safe or no, the want of an answer possessed me of a jealousy, that it
did no go well with your Ladyship, (I mean in the fruition of your health)
but being very inquisitive of your welfare. I had the happiness to hear of
you by Thomas Harris a Merchant of Dubl^n, who, as he told me saw you in good
health in the new Exchange about the sixth of June, which encouraged me to
practice my pen in writing these following news, from this bleeding and
gasping Kingdom.

The Lord Taffe, having come from His Majesty, with a Commission to Treat with
the Rebels for Peace, and showing his Authority unto the Lords Justices,
desired their License to go to Kilkenny, where the Rebels sit in Parliament,
which was granted accordingly, in regard the Kings Broad Seal was tending,
and commanding to that purpose. The news of this Message being posted into our
ears, who were pertakers of the unparalleld Cruelties committed by the Rebels
against us, whereof your Ladyship was an eye witness, stroke us altogether
into an astonishment, when we rather expected a full revenge of our wrongs and
miseries, with a satisfaction of the loss of our goods, and a hundred thousand
souls of our brethren, who perished in this Rebellion, then any clemency to be
extended to the actors of our woe: but well, Taffe goes to Kilkenny, where he
is nobly entertained by the Rebels, and six days after, he sent Propositions
to the State, to this effect:

First, that they should have a free Parliament, with their Roman Prelates, and
dignitaries to sit in the House.

Secondly, that the means of the Bishops, and Protestant Ministers should be
restored to their Clergy.

Thirdly, that no satisfaction should be demanded by the British, for any
losses they sustained.

Fourthly, that any plantation taken from the Irish within these twenty years,
should be of no effect, but the Land so planted to be confirmed upon the
lawful Heir.

Fifthly, that no Lord Deputy should be Governor of that Kingdom, but two
Lords Justices, whereof the one should be Irish, the other English.

These Propositions being read, the Marquess of Ormond was appointed to Treat
with them; the appointed place was Trym, a garrison Town of ours, in the
County of Westmeath, to which place resorted from the Rebels the day appointed,
as Commissioners: The Lord Neuterfield, The Lord Viscount of Germanstowne, Sir
John Mac Crah, and O Carrall; so having met, The Rebels insisted very much upon
the former Propositions, which the Marquess of Ormond, and Sir Francis
Willoughby withstood very stoutly.

The Treaty held three weeks, during which time, the Rebels confiding in the
greatness of the Lord Taffe, came into Dublin daily so familiar, and in such
multitudes, no man daring to control them, pretending the Kings protection:
insomuch, that we were in a deadly fear, that the Castle of Dublin should be
surprised, and our throats cut in a night.

The Marquess of Orm^nd a week before the Parley sent to the North for four
thousand Scots to come to his affistance, which suddenly marched on with all
the haste that possibly could be; the Rebels never dreaming of such a thing,
otherwise I believe they would not stand so obsti^^^^ on their high terms.

Sir Francis Willoughby understanding by letters that the Scots were within two
days match, told the Lord Marquess of it, who very joyful of the news, bid
the Rebels shift for themselves, and that he scorned to treat any more with
them: and upon this he returned to Dublin, and is now in the field, having
divided his army into three bodies. The first commanded by himself, the second
by Sir Francis Willoughby, and the third by Coronel Craford, who lately sent to
Dublin two thousand Cowes from the Rebels, which he took in the County of
Wickloe, where he is at this present, which was a joyful comfort to us, having
before that, lean fresh Beef sold for Eight pence a pound, but our joy did
still increase more and more: for upon the neck of this happiness, Sir
Francis Willoughby sent from the County of Longford and Cavan, two thousand and
seven hundred Cowes, and fourteen hundred Sheep, which made things so
plentiful amongst us, that we stand in a good posture of defense, and strongly
resolved to be fully revenged upon the Rebels, notwithstanding any command
coming to the contrary whatsoever. We shall have Winter Barley here shortly,
to make bread, before all our Beef be spent. At the writing hereof, News
came to the State, that the Marquess of Ormond had given a great overthrow to
the Rebels, in the County of Carlo, at Castle Dermot, and got two pieces of
Ord^ance from them, and killed many of their chief Commanders, but I cannot,
as yet, certify their names, nor number, which I shall do by the next
convenience. In the mean time, I rest,

Your Ladyships faithful friend and servant, George Brimpahir.
Dublin, July 2. 1643. This is entered in Stationers Hall Book, according to
order.




