Numb. 1.

THE DIVINE PENITENTIAL MEDITATIONS AND VOWS OF HIS LATE Sacred Majesty IN
HIS SOLITUDE AT HOLMBY-HOVSE, Faithfully turned into Verse.

By E. R. Gentleman.

-- Respiciat Deus. Been cogitata -- Senec. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the READER
I Here present unto thee a flower plucked out of that most excellent storeyard
(...) meanly turned into verse, therefore I may boldly applaud, and admire the
one, and refer my own unto thy censure, yet if this finds acceptance (from
Loyal Subjects) it will incite me to proceed with the other Meditations; which
if I shall not be so fortunate as to perform, I hope some more happier, and
Deviner Muse will with an Elaborate Pen Dilucidate unto the world what is
deficient in my Skill, but not in will, I am far from desiring any plaudit;
Menander.
Omnis insipience arrogantia and plausibus capitor Every fool is won with
pride and his own flattering applaude, but as I should be sorry to affect the
one, so I hate, and disrespect the other, it shall be sufficent to me, if I
please them, who are Ravished with these Divine Meditations; which like A
Diamond cannot lose their Luster although they were mantled in
Cimmerian-Darkness; The world must confess with me that they are obstacles to
our profound Mercuralists, who can extract such Senses out of the Sacred
Scripture, that are again the sense of common reason, which yet catch poor
silly people by Shooles, as Fishermen with Drag nets take their Fishes, yet are
not (or will not) our Trumpettors be sensible of it, but either encourage them,
or remain silent as in a Lethargy; And thus, since neither our former, nor
present sufferings can refine, or cleanse our drossie and leprous souls: HOW
may we hope that our correction is ended? or that the rod shall be burnt?

Marius Nictor.
Nil hosts, nil dira fames, nil deing morbi
Egerunt, fuimus qui nunc sumus ijsque periclis
Tentati, nihilo meliores reddimur unquam,
Sub vitijs nullo colparum finum manentes.
Nor foes, nor famine, nor diseases have
Work't any change in us, that which we were,
We constantly remain, and still do crave
To be entangled in the self-same snare.
No time can our depraved manners move,
In vice we dwell, in endless sin's our love.
Which as it is too true, so must we still expect heavier Judgments, and none
but such who have the grape of Canaan. A good ^onscience will be able with
patience to endure them; Acts 27.
'twas that made PAUL courageous in the turbulent Adriatical Sea (when the
Mariners dispaired) the tempestuous Euroclidon blowing, and suffering 14. days
want of meat and light; Homer.
It Is a good Conscience that is like the Herb Nepenthes which drives away all
sadness, it is a good Conscience that without Music, or Wealth, or Honor, or
Liberty, nay in a forced and unlawful Death, is happy, and merry alone, 1 Pet.
2.17.
And it is that which I wish unto all who fear God and honor the King; For
Conscience is individual and inseparable, there is no putting of it to flight,
or flying from it; Lyps^pol:
nec fugere, nec fugare poteris, it was bread and borne with us, and says (as
Ruth to Naomi) I will go with thee whither soever thou go. Therefore since
our Kingdom is become a Pantheon (next after the Scripture,) I may well
prescribe this Panacea, which sure none will refuse for, Seneca.
Miser esse mavult, esse qui faelix potest?
Who miserable does desire to be,
That may be linked to felicity?


Yet if any shall (as I am confident many will) find fault with me, I only
desire them, either to mend what I have most willingly begun, or lay them away,
and not afford them any spare time for reading.

Farewell.
Penitential Meditations AND Vows in the KINGS Solitude at Holmby.
GIve ear to my words O Lord, consider my Meditations, and hearken to the
voice or my cry my King, and my God, for unto thee will I pray.

GIve ear unto my words (O Lord)
My Meditations think upon
To^ voice of my sad cry accord.
My King my God to thee alone,
I Will offer up my supplication.
I said in my have, I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes: nevertheless,
thou hear the voice of my supplication, when I cry unto Thee.

I unadvisedly did say,
That I am cast out of thy sight,
Of thy clear eyes more bright then day.
Yet thou to hear me do delight.
When I with cries to thee show my sad plight.
If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who can abide
it? But there is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared; therefore shall
sinners fly unto thee.

If thou (sweet Lord) should be extreme
To notify what is done amiss,
Who can abide't? but thy bright beam
Shines mercy, which with fear must kiss,
Therefore shall sinners fly to thee for blis.
I acknowledge my sins before thee, which have the aggravation of my condition;
the eminency of my place, adding weight to my offenses.

My leprous sins I with contrition
Acknowledge now before thy Grace,
Which ponderous are by my condition,
The Eminency of my place
Adding much weight to them, which me deface.
Forgive I beseech thee, my Personal, and my Peoples sins; which are so far
mine, as I have not improved the ^wer thou gav^t me, to thy Glory, and my
Subjects good.

Forget, forgive, I thee implore,
My Pers^nall, and my Peoples ill
Which are so added to my store,
As I improved nos power, and skill,
Thou gav'st me, for thee, and their hurt to kill.
Thou have now brought me from the glory and freedom of a King, to be a
Prisoner to my own Subjects.

And now thou have dejected me,
From what my Glory did disclose,
And freedom of a Majesty,
To be a Prisoner unto those,
Who Are my own Subjects, yet their King oppose.
Justly O Lord as to thy overruling hand, because in many things I have
rebelled against Thee.

But justly it is (most mighty Lord)
As to thy over ruling hand,
Because that I thy will deferred,
And contrary to thy Command,
In opposition against thee did stand.
Though thou have restrained my Person, yet enlarge my heart to thee, and thy
grace toward me.

And yet although thou have restrained
My Person, O enlarge my Heart,
To thee my God, my God unfain'd,
And let me have a greater part
Of thy good Grace, for to over way my smart
I come far short of David's Pyety, yet since I may equal David's afflictions,
give me also the comforts, and the sure mercies of David.

I come far short of David's zeal,
Yet since in afflictions equal his
I only unto thee appeal,
For David's Comforts (happy bliss!)
And the sure mercies which he did not miss.
Let the penitent sense I have of my Sins, be an evidence to me thou have
Pardoned them.

O let the feeling penitent sense
Which of my numerous sins I have,
Be unto me an evidence,
That thy sealed pardon will me save,
And that thoust buried them within Christ's grave.
Let not the evils which I and my Kingdoms have suffered, seem little unto
thee, though thou have not punished us according to our sins.

Let not the evils which both I,
And all my Realms have suffered,
Seem little to thy Majesty,
Although thou have not punished
Us; with such pains as our great sins have bred
Turn thee (O Lord) unto me; have mercy upon me, for I am desolate, and
afflicted.

Turn thee (O Lord) turn unto me,
Have mercy on thy Servant God,
For I am fraught with misery,
O I am desolate, and thy rod
Has much afflicted me my God! my God!
The sorrows of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my troubles.

The sorrows of my bleeding heart
Increased be, enlarged are,
O from thy mercy do not part,
But fetter from me lean despair,
Bring thou me out from troubles, and my care.
Have thou forgotten to be gracious, and shut up thy loving kindness in
displeasure.

Have thou forgotten for to be
A gracious and a loving Lord?
Have thou shut up thy bowels free,
Thy loving kindness and thy word
In black displeasure, not for to be stird
O remember thy Compassions of old, and thy loving Kindnesses, which have been
for many generations.

O now remember, call to mind,
Of old thy sweet compassion,
Thy kindnesses which all did find,
And which had a Relation,
To all thy Saints for many a Generation.
I had utterly fainted, if I had not believed to see thy goodness in the land
of the Living.

Lord! I had fainted utterly
If that my faith had not confirmed
My drooping heart to know that I,
Should see thy goodness great enthroned,
Within the Land of the living, ever owned.
Let not the sins of our prosperity deprive us of the benefit of thy
afflictions.

Let not the gilded swelling sins
Of our prosperity be show'n,
To take from us thy sweet blessings,
To take from us most wretched ones.
The benefit of thy afflictions.
Let this fiery Trial consume the dross, which in long peace and plenty we
had contracted.

O let this purging fiery Trial
Consume the Canker and the dross,
Which we (who never used denial)
In our long peace and plenty gross,
Contracted had, not to our gain but loss.
Though thou continuest miseries, yet withdraw not thy grace what is wanting of
prosperity, make up in patience, and repentance.

Though thou continuest miseries,
Thy grace yet do not Lord withdraw,
What Is wanting of prosperities,
Make up in patience and in awe,
As in repentance that we have brake thy Law.
And if thy anger be not yet to be turned away, but thy hand of justice must be
stretched out still.

And if thy anger be not yet
For to be turned from us away,
But that thou do account it fit,
Thy hand of Justice still should stay,
Stretch out, sharp punishment on us to lay.
Then will I make all the world to see, and my very enemies to enjoy the
benefit of this Vow and Resolution of Christian Charity, which I now make unto
thee O Lord.

Then will I make the world to see,
And all my foes joy with content,
The benefit of my Vow so free,
And Christian Charities intent,
Which now to thee (O Lord) from me is sent.
As I do freely pardon for Christ's sake those that have offended me in any kind.

As I do freely now forgive
For Christ my worthy Saviors sake,
All those who any ways did strive
Me miserable for to make,
Or yet their malice on me for to stake.
So my hand shall never be against any man to revenge what is past, in regard
of any particular injury done to me.

So shall my hand (which hate does shun)
Never lifted be against any one,
For to revenge what is past and done,
In reference unto what was shown,
Particularly against me, or yet my Throne.
We have been mutually punished in our unnatural divisions for thy sake O
Lord, and for the love of my Redeemer have I purposed this in my heart.

We mutually were punished,
By civil Wars unnatural,
For thy sweet sake (O Lord my Head)
And for's sake who for me did fall,
This have I purposed in my heart to all.
That I will use all means in the ways of honesty and indemnity; which may
most fully remove all fears, and bury all jealousies in forgetfulness.

That all means I will use to stay
In the blessed ways of honesty,
Indemnity to give, which may
Must fully make all fear to f^y,
And in forgetfulness ^combe jealousy.
Let thy mercies be toward me and mine, as my resolutions of Truth and Peace
are toward my People.

O let thy mercies be to me
Thy Servant Lord, and unto mine,
As these my Resolutions free,
Of canded Peace and Truth incline,
To those, whom thou did unto me design.
Hear my Prayer O Lord, which goes not out of fained lips.

Blessed be God, who has not turned away my Prayer, nor taken his mercy from
me.

O Lord my God my prayer hear,
Which out of lips feigned go not out
Blessed be God, who from my prayer,
H^th never turned himse^f about,
Nor taken his mercy from me so to doubt.
O my soul, commit thy way to the Lord, trust in him, and he shall bring it to
pass.

O my poor humble seeking soul,
Commit thy way to the Lord alone
Trust in him, who does all control,
And then be sure (as it will be known)
That he shall bring to pass, for what you moan.
But if thou will not restore me and mine, what am I that I should charge thee
foolishly?

But if thou (from thy Providence)
Nor me, nor mine wilt not restore,
What am I, what pre-eminence,
Have I a silly worm most poor,
To charge thee foolishly, whom I adore?
Thou, O Lord, have given, and thou have taken, Blessed be thy Name.

Thou, thou O God, omnipotent Lord,
Have, given, each thing from thee came,
And thou who rulest with a word,
Have taken from us worms the same,
Observed be! O blessed be thy Name!
Let it I beseech thee be against me, and my Fathers house; as for these
sheep, what have they done?

O let it Lord (I thee entreat)
Be turned from them, on me to light,
And on my Fathers House and Seat,
For as these poor sheep in right
What have they done? what hurt is in their sight
Let my sufferings satiate the malice of mine, and thy Churches Enemies.

But let their cruelty never exceed the measure of my chaity.

Let these my sufferings satiate
The cankered malice of my foe,
And such who thy pure Church do hate.
But let their cruelty never out-goe,
My charity which J would have here flow.
Banish from me all thoughts of revenge, that I may not loose the reward nor
thou the glory of my patience.

Banish from me revengfull thoughts,
That so I may not with offense.
Lose the reward which will be brought,
And which to me thou will despence,
Nor thou the glory of my patience.
As thou give me a heart to forgive them, so I beseech thee forgive what they
have done against thee and me.

As thou to me do give a heart
To pardon, and forgive them free,
So I beseech thy love impart
Forgivenes to them speedily,
For what they have done against, both thee and me.
And now (O Lord) as thou have given me an heart to pray unto thee: so hear
and accept this vow which I make before thee.

And now (O Lord) as thou have gave
Me such a plyant heart to pray,
To thee, who solely can me save,
So hear, and take without delay,
This vow, which I before thee make this day
If thou will in mercy remember me and my Kingdoms, in continuing the light of
thy Gospel, and settling thy true Religion among us.

If that thou will in mercy (Lord)
Think on me, and my Kingdoms too,
Continuing the light of th'word,
And settling of Religion true,
Amongst us all so errors to escew,
In restoring unto us the benefit of the Laws, and the due execution of
justice.

And in restoring (from thy might)
The benefit to every one,
Of th'fundamentall Laws upright,
With the due execution
Of real Justice, seated in her Throane.
In suppressing the many Schisms in Church, and Factions in State.

In weeding, and suppressing all
The poisonous Schisms which from hate,
Upon the Church in weight do fall,
And suddenly to discipate,
The Hydra factions of the State,
If thou will, restore me and mine to the ancient Rights, and Glory of my
Predecessors.

If that thou will Lord me restore,
And those who are unto me nigh.
To what we did enjoy before,
To the ancient Rights, and Majesty
Of my true Predecessors seated high,
If thou will, turn the hearts of my people to thy self in Piety, to me in
Loyalty, and to one another in Charity.

If thou my peoples hearts will turn,
Unto thy self in pious Love,
And make their loyal zeal to burn
To me their King, and cause them move,
To Charity, and only it to prove.
If thou will, quench the flames, and withdraw the fuel of these civil
Wars.

If that thou will extinguish quite,
The flames which cause such during scarrs,
And from thy goodness infinite
Withdraw our mind for moving jarres,
And the apt fuel of continued Wars.
If thou will, bless us with the freedom of public Counsels, and deliver the
honor of Parliaments from the insolency of the vulgar.

If for to bless us you are content,
With public Counsels to be free,
And keep the power of Parliament
From the insolence of such, who be
Breakers of Laws, and vulgar in Degree.
If thou will, keep me from the great offense of enacting any thing against my
Conscience, and especially from consenting to sacriligious rapines and
spoilings of thy Church.

If thou wilt keep me from that great sin
Of acting any thing, which I
By conscience know should not have been
And chief, not to consent to fly
To spoil thy Church most sacreligiously.
If thou will, restore me to a capacity of doing good, both to the Church and
State.

If that thou (Lord) wilt me restore
To a capacity, that so
I may endeavor more and more
To praise thee in the good I 'le do
But to the Church, and State, which now is low.
Then shall my soul praise thee, and magnify thy name before my people.

Then shall my never fainting soul,
Praise thee thou Lord of glorious might.
Then will I laud without control
And Magnify (as it is right)
Thy blessed name before my peoples sight.
Then shall thy glory be dearer to me then my Crown, and the advancement of
true religion both in purity and power, be my chiefest care.

Then shall thy glory be more dear
Unto me, then my Crowns now are,
And true Religion in its fear
As in its purity most fair,
For to advance, shall be my chiefest care.
Then will I rule my people with justice, and my Kingdom with Equity.

Then will I rule impartially
My People all as they will find,
With Justice, which shall hate defy,
And all my Kingdoms to their mind
With equity, which is with love combinde.
To thy more immediate hand shall I ever own as the rightful succession, to
the merciful restoration of my Kingdoms, and the glory of them.

As I 'le the true succession own
Unto thy more immediate power.
So the kind restoration
Of these my Kingdoms evermore
To thee I yield, with all their glorious store,
If thou will bring me again with Peace, Safety, and Honor, to my chiefest
City, and my Parliament.

If thou will bring me from thy pity
With Peace, with safety, and with Fame,
Again unto my chiefest City,
And my true Parliament, whose Name
I honor, nor do it desire to shame.
If thou again wilt put the Sword of justice into my hand, to punish and
protect.

If Lord, thou once wilt put again
The Sword of Justice in my hand
Impartially for to remain,
To punish those who hate Command,
And a Protector for the good to stand.
May my People and the Church be happy, if not by me, yet without me.

O may my people every one,
And thy pure Church (thy beautuous love)
Be happy, let their joy be known,
If not by me, yet (God above)
Without me sinner let them prosperous prove.
June 18. 1649.
Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNAME.

FINIS

