Alazono-Mastix: OR THE Character of a Cockney: IN A Satyricall Poem. Dedicated
(as a New-years-gift) to the Apprentices of LONDON.

By Junius Anonymus, A London Apprentice.

Capiat, qui capere potest. The Cockneyes eat their Breakfasts in their beds,
And spend the day in dressing of their heads:
Though God in mercy may do much to save them,
Yet what a case are they in that shall have them?
LONDON, Printed by R. I. 1652.

To the Heroical and Magnanimous, the Apprentices of the City of LONDON.
More especially, to such of them, as are lovers of Learning, Junius Anonymus,
their unworthy Brother, dedicateth, and consecrateth the first fruits of his
public Labors.
Gentlemen,
TO whom may I better presume, to offer this small Pamphlet, then to your
selves? for whose sake it obtained its original being, and if it be any ways
serviceable to you, in defending you as a Bulwark against all the enticing
allurements of that generation of Vipers (for as the Viper is the death of its
parents, so do these Vipers undo more in this City by their exorbitancies,
then all other casualties whatsoever) I shall have attained the utmost limits
of my ambition; And to those, that by no admonitions, will be premonished, I
shall only say, that,

Qui ante non cavet, post dolebit,
He that bewareth not in time,
He shall too late repent his crime.
For my own part, I have verified this Distich,
Nescio quid sit amor, nec amo, nec amor, nec amavi,
Sed scio si quis amat, uritur igne gravi.
Peradventure it will seem strange, that one of our Profession, should dare to
adventure upon the public Stage in this scribbling Age; yet what I have
written, I have written; And if any shall expect Apologies, they are like to
be frustrate of their expectation: I am confident I shall offend none, but
such as are conscious of their own guilt: And it is below my Genius to crave
pardon of them. I dare not enlarge, lest I should make the Porch so great, that
the House run out at the doors: I shall only add, that if you please to
extend the benevolent aspect of your favor, to this poor Pamphlet, it shall
engage me to requite you with something that shall be more worthy of your
acceptance. In the interim I remain,

Your most affectionate Servitor, I. A.

The Character of a Cockney.
The Prologue.
THe triple Trine of old Parnassus Hill,
Should I invoke to direct my Quill;
Or if that great Apollo's sacred Quire,
I should entreat my Muse for to inspire:
It would transcendently my Theme disgrace,
For to implore the aid of things so base.
The liquor of the Heliconian grape,
Did never yet my Pericranium rape;
Nor Nectar, or Ambrosia will I quaffe,
Such fictious fancies, I esteem but draffe;
For why? they are no better then a dream,
Compared to this divine Celestial theme.
For though the Muses, as the Poets feign,
Could really intoxicate the brain,
With Ecstasies and Raptures, yet think I
None will be so audacious to deny
Unto our Cockny's, the pre-eminence
Above them, for unhappy influence.
Which have produced more dismal effects,
Then ever the unfortunate Aspects,
Of the Erratick and Malevolent
Planets, that wander in the Firmament:
The mischiefs, which to Mars or Saturn's square
Are subsequent, thereto may not compare.
Their power extends, not only to the brain,
Infusing it with notions, idly vain,
But wounds the heart with horrid pangs of pain,
Which never perfectly are cured again,
Yea by their art, with a dissembling smile,
They many of their senses do beguile.
And for the sake of such unhappy men,
I have adventured to take my pen
In hand, for to delineate their folly,
If possible, to cure their melancholy,
That when their Idols pourtraiture they see,
They of their madness may ashamed be.
The Character.
THese Cockney's then, of which my Muse does sing,
They are the eldest daughters of the King
Of Pride, old Lucifer, and may compare
With all his offspring, for their filial care
To tread his steps: for Prides Epitome,
In them comprised exactly, you may see.
They do conceit, that the whole world, was
Created for their lust, and will not pass
For cost, or pains, to satisfy their will,
And their extravagant desires fulfill;
Nor East, nor Western-Indies able are
To suffice their ambitious minds by far.
They hang at once, more wealth upon their backs,
Then is contained in forty Pedlers packs,
In Silks, and Sattins, Pearls, and Diamond rings,
And many other superfluous things:
To which the Seller liberally affords,
Bumbastick names of long six-footed words.
For if their Names to understand were plain,
They with the greatest scorn would them disdain:
Like as the Rustic slights an Almanac,
If an useless Anatomy it lack:
For all strange things which are not understood,
Admired are, and judged very good.
If they be Snout-fair, then they do despise
All others, and do seem in their own eyes
Celestial Angels; and they think that all
Too little is for such Angelical
Creatures; who must by any means not be
Adorned, with things of low, and base degree.
But if they be as ugly as old Nick,
They do conceit, they have more need to trick,
And paint themselves; least their deformity
Should be conspicuous to every eye;
Which to effect, they no small pains do take,
Thinking fine Feathers gallant Birds do make.
If that crook'd shouldered, hopper-ar-they are,
Bunch-back't, or any other things that mar
Their sale; they are obscured from humane sight,
And they forsooth are made to go upright:
And this is wrought by virtue of the Art
Of Monsieur Prick-louse, who does act his part.
Yea, they have learned so much Philosophy,
That contraries each other best descry;
Therefore about their necks they ever wear
Black Halters, for to make them white appear:
Though naturally they are of themselves as dun,
As if they had been parcht with India's Sun.
Nor are they in the mode, except their Tail
At least a yard upon the ground does traile:
Bare Necks and Breasts, to the middle of their back,
Which is in English, Sirs, what do you lack?
Then to complete this bravery, is put
In the midst of all, a simple dirty Slut.
But Pride in them is not predominant
Alone, but likewise Idleness does hant
Them so inseparably close, that it
To them is as a second nature knit:
For that which once within the bone is bred,
Will never from the flesh be severed.
Idleness unto them does come by kind,
And thereto they do wholly give their mind;
They sucked it from their Mothers, and will give
Themselves to it, as long as they do live:
And slothfulness, and want of exercise,
They are the greatest nourishers of vice.
They never are, neither undrest, nor dressed
Without the help of one or two, at least;
And if their Lady-ships by ten do rise,
They think that they have done a mighty prize:
And then the rest oth' day, till noon, they pass
Away, in gazing in a Looking-glass.
The afternoon most commonly they spend
In Gossiping, and tatling without end;
Or else are Coacht, to the Old, or New Exchange,
To see if there they can spy any strange
New Fashions, which are daily there invented,
To please such fools as never are contented.
There have they Patches, for to represent,
Their faces like the starry Firmament:
Of Stars, horned Cinthia, and Pleiades, are
The most affected; Sextile, Trine, and square
Of Aspects, perfectly are imitated,
And all are unto Venus consecrated.
Or rather for to counterfeit the skars
Of Soldiers, which are gotten in the Wars;
And there they have, what ever else beside
Sub-servient is unto the sin of Pride:
There may be had more fashions, if you will,
Then would ten hundred thousand Horses kill.
And who unto the contrary can tell,
But that sometimes as well as buy, they sell?
Or one good turn do for another change,
(Which thing among them is not very strange)
For they who do for other things pay dear,
Had need sell somewhat, part of the charge to bear.
And all the work that e're they go about,
Is for to make fine Fool-toyes on a Clout;
They also for to Sing, and Dance, do learn,
And when Trades fail, their livings for to earne.
It Is work enough, if that they can but tell,
How to set out an ill-bred Jade to sell.
And as they study for to live at ease,
So they delight their palate for to please,
With dainties and delicious delicates,
Which must be purchased at any rates,
For skill in tastes so exquisite they are,
They do surpass the Art of Galen far.
Religion usually they send before,
And say, they will over-take it at threescore;
But yet with it they seldom promise keep,
For e're that time they in the dust do sleep,
Or else through custom are infatuated
With sin, and unto it habituated.
But yet the eyes of the world for to bleare,
They most demurely holy will appear;
And unto Church they will go every day,
Yet not regarding what the Preachers say:
To see, and to be seen, is their chief end,
And not to learn, whereby their lives to mend.
Likewise sometimes their way they do mistake,
And for the Church, perhaps a Tavern take;
Mean time the Boy that does on them attend,
Must mark exactly how the time does spend,
Lest if they should forget themselves, and stay
Too long, their Roguery they might betray.
For cankred malice, they do far excel
All creatures, that in the Universe do dwell;
For when with envy once they are conceived,
They are of all their senses quite bereaved:
And are possessed with such precipitate rage,
That nothing but revenge can it assuage.
Did you observe them, after what a fashion,
And height of pride, they Rant it in their passion;
You never after would fear any evil,
No, though that you perchance should meet the Devil;
For why? there is nothing can more horrid be
Then them, in their mad fury for to see.
To see, how here, and there they fling and frisk,
With eyes more poisonous then a Basilisk;
And faces, frowns, and gestures, that would fray
The stoutest Lion; so that one would say
That sees them, If themselves they did but see
In The Glass, to scold they would ashamed be:
But yet, to none they greater malice bear,
Then unto those, that better Gowns do wear,
Then their ability will well procure,
Whom they by any means cannot endure:
For they disdain that they should be out-vy'd,
By any Lady in the Land for pride.
Nor is their hatred such a fixed thing,
But that their friendship is as wavering;
For by the least displeasure it is lost,
If of their will by any they are cro'st:
Then all their former kindness is forgot,
And in Oblivions Grave does lie and rot.
It may be well compared to the blaze,
Which from a fire of Straw it self does raise,
For furiously it to its height does rise,
And suddenly it is extinct and dies;
For of this thing you may your self assure,
That no extremes do ever long endure.
The fickle, wavering, and unconstant winds
Are steadfast, if compared to their minds,
For they are so most vainly variable,
So foolishly unsteady, and unstable,
That they cannot attain by all their skill,
An hour beforehand, for to know their will.
They now do one thing will, and by and by
Their minds are changed to the contrary;
Anon, they will do neither this, nor that,
But some way else, if they could tell but what:
What they would have themselves, they cannot tell,
Nor ever are content when they are well.
They Will laugh, and cry, and frown, and smile together,
And make more change of faces, then the weather;
An hundred times they will their humors change,
Whilst the Earth once does round her Axis range:
Their fury to more Shapes transformed is,
Then Jove in Ovids Metamorphosis.
And if to their own minds they strangers be,
Then a grand Fool, and Idiot is he,
That thinks that he can ever please their humor
So long as they are troubled with the tumor
Of swelling Pride, and selfe-conceitednesse:
The Tithe whereof my Muse cannot express.
They all have a fantastical conceit
Of their own Beauty, which they think most great,
Though in their judgments they do go alone,
For of the same opinion there are none:
They all do judge themselves exceeding fair,
To find another of that mind were rare.
They, for dissimulation, do excel
All people, that in this vast world do dwell;
And can so cunnlngly lie, and dissemble,
That one would think they Angels did resemble,
At the first view they seem precisely pure,
Religious, holy, modest, and demure;
False hearts and tongues in them inherent are,
In words professing what from the heart is far;
For to dissemble, flatter, feign, and lie,
It is as easy as to drink, when dry:
But though they have this Art exactly learned,
But the judicious it is soon discerned.
They are of all right Reason wholly void,
And with good manners scorn to be annoyed;
All that is truly good, as Virtue, Grace,
They do esteem as things too low, and base
For their high birth, their breeding, and their blood,
It would dishonor be for to be good.
No Mediocrity they know, when they
Set on a thing it is no saying nay;
To whatsoever their fancy is inclined,
It Is to no purpose to gainsay their mind;
Over their passion, will, and fond opinion,
Nor right, nor reason, e're shall have dominion.
These rare creatures, thus richly qualified,
As unto you, I briefly have descried,
At fifteen years of age begin to whine
For husbands, and to wear away, and pine
With fretting and lamenting, if that they
Against their wills do any longer stay.
And by the force of melancholy phlegm,
They in the night most fearfully do dream,
As if they troubled with the Nightmare were,
And hideous sights do unto them appear:
With great anxiety, the time they pass,
To think how hard it is to catch an Ass.
And when unto the age of twenty she
Has once attained; they will no elder be,
Not in a dosen years, or half a score,
But boldly will affirm, they are no more:
Though it perspicuous be to every eye
How that their faces give their mouths the lie.
Their fathers carefully do cast in mind,
Where for these Girls, they may good husbands find,
Because they are a sort of brittle ware,
And unto ill mischances subject are
Delays in such like cases danger breeds,
It Is good to stay no longer then must needs.
Therefore they, this, and that young man espy,
And on them keep a strict observant eye,
And if they find that he is in a way
To thrive, they will strive hard to make a prey
Of him, and do unto the utmost bend
Their wits, that so they may attain their end.
But yet (forsooth) their worships are ashamed,
That in their own cause, they should once be named,
And that the matter they may closely carry,
They do obtain some running Emissary,
Whom for sinister ends they do procure,
To turn Fool-catcher, and these Gulls allure.
Then this Gull-groper does most craftily
Intrude himself into the company
Of this same Woodcock, and he does pretend
Himself to be to him a cordial friend;
But all for gold that glisters do not take,
Under the greenest grass lies hid the snake.
And when he has a fit occasion caught
As at an Alehouse ore a mornings draught,
His mind he breaks, and says, Sir, I admire
That you to marry should have no desire;
Since that the greatest blessing of this life,
Is to obtain a good, and virtuous wife.
And if your mind to marry do incline,
There Is such a Gentleman, a friend of mine,
Who has a daughter, which in my judgment,
Would make a wife for you to your content;
She handsome is, and every way complete,
Besides she has a portion very great.
Then he affirms with great asseverations,
And many deep and serious protestations,
That he his welfare merely does intend,
And has not any by-respects, or end;
And also adds, how that he cannot tell,
Whether or no, her friends will like it well.
And says, in them he has some interest,
And for him will not fail to do his best:
Unto that end he does him thither take
to see her once or twice, and then does make
The motion to her father, that they may
Have his consent, to come in such a way.
And he with much reluctance does grant
Them their desires, but seems most ignorant
Of this before contrived pernicious plot,
(Which was a babe that his own brain begot:)
I on this knavery do insist the more,
Because its grown an epidemick sore.
The hook that is covered with a silver bait,
Does all the senses so intoxicate,
That they all opportunities do watch,
Whereby they may enabled be to catch
That, which at length will prove a poisoned Pill,
Sweet in the mouth, though at the heart it kill.
The glittering gold does often blind the eyes
Of those that are judicious otherwise:
This is the only thing that all affect,
Which to attain their courses they direct,
So that they may their golden god but win
At any rate they weigh it not a pin.
Like as the Magnet constantly does bend
Unto the Artick-Pole; so all their end
Is to attain that which by no means can
Not in this world make happy any man,
As suddenly they by experience find,
All cannot purchase sweet content of mind.
This one word, Money, does their hearts so varish,
That to obtain it, they of gifts are lavish;
Themselves in Paradise they then do think;
They Are so ore-joy'd they scarce can eat or drink;
And are like Epicures securely sleeping,
When judgment on them every hour is creeping.
All things concurring thus to their desire,
It sets their affections all on fire
Until they have the business consummate,
Which they are like for to repent too late;
They every day conceit a month, a year,
But do not think gold may be bought too dear.
The match is made, all parties are agreed
The Nuptials to celebrate with speed,
That so the Creature may be made a Bride,
And then the Gordyan knot full fast is tied,
Which for the time that Cinthia runs round,
The Zodiac may with all joy abound.
But by that time be fully overpast,
Their rashness they do then perceive at last;
Their folly for to see they do begin,
And what a labyrinth they are plunged in:
The vices which before the gold did cover,
Do now themselves at leisure all discover.
He now perceives how finely he is matched,
And that in truth his worships Cunny-catch'd;
But now it is too late for to repent,
And come what can, he is like to be content;
The Proverb says, for what there is no cure,
The only remedy is to endure.
Now all the qualities, which I before
Have briefly here described, and many more
Do all most perspicuously appear,
And they begin to rant, and domineere,
Far more then the Athenian Tyrants, and
What ere come on it, they will have the upper hand.
She does suppose that he to her is tied
For nothing but for to support her pride,
And to maintain her in an idle life;
Is he not (think you) fitted with a wife?
If to be such a one, she may be said,
Seeing a wife was for an helper made.
Yet they are helpers, but it is to spoil
That which their husbands got by pains and toil;
It is their chief, yea only earthly joy
To help for to consume, waste, and destroy,
By satisfying of their vanity,
And in this sense they help abundantly.
For all for which these Gallants ever care,
Is to go fine, and daintily to fare,
Unto which end they diligently view
Abroad, amongst their neighbors, and what new
Fashions they see, they presently do cry,
O, such a one has so, why may not I?
Litigious, and prone unto contention,
Loving to make perpetual dissension;
And they are worse then mad, who will contend
With them, for why? in vain their breath they spend:
So rashly they are addicted to their will,
And will not from it, be it good, or ill.
With that all-conquering word, Because, they can
Vanquish the reasons of the wisest man:
This is the special, only argument,
Which all the force of Logic cannot rent;
By it most learnedly they all things prove,
Yea heaven to be below, and hell above.
And of all other torments, that there be,
There Is none that half so bad appear to me,
As unto death, with nonsense to be worded,
By such, who a good reason never afforded,
Which he is like to be perpetually,
That does himself unto a Cockney tie.
They are imperious, proud, perverse, and cruel,
And love unto all mischief to add fuel;
Their minds are so inconstant, that they mock
The various turnings of the Weathercock,
And if so be you diligently mind them,
An hour in one opinion, you will never find them.
They use the utmost of their art, and skill,
To make their children like them in all ill;
They Are so unnatural, they never nurse them,
And for their breeding, they have cause to curse them;
They teach them only pride, to sing, and dance,
And of all good to live in ignorance.
And that I may my Reader recreate,
A pleasant story I will here relate,
Though I thereby my self may much endanger
For to the truth thereof, I am no stranger:
I all the parties know exceeding well,
Stories by hearsay, I love not to tell.
A creature in this City, of that tribe,
Which in this Poem, I to you describe,
Had married been about two years, or more,
And did not fructify, which vexed her sore,
She pined and whin'd, and greatly did lament
The case wherein she was deficient.
At length her maid, a bird of the same feather,
(For like to like do best agree together:)
Upon a day when she her Mistress lac't,
She said forsooth you are thicker in the waste
Within this fortnight by at least two inch,
Your gown and bodies you extremely pinch.
She at this word (poor soul) was struck amazed,
But presently her courage up she raised:
And said, i'^t so? how happy then am I!
Thus was she neatly gulled with a lie,
And void of reason, straight she did conceit.
Her self with child, for to be very great.
Passion over reason did so far prevail,
That to provide all things they did not fail,
That necessary were, against that she
Of this great nothing should delivered be;
When this supposed time, drew near, it fell
Most happily out, she was not very well.
O, what a stir was there, (it was but need)
The midwife then was sent for with all speed,
And all the good wives that did live thereby,
Were called to see this Trage-comedy;
And all this hurly-burly, and this trouble,
At length amounted but unto a buble.
If that by force he think to be her master,
She Will scold, and frown, and mischief make the faster,
And if by lenity he do intend
To try if she will her conditions mend,
She for a coward then does streight-way take him,
And ten to one she does a Cuckold make him.
And now he does by dear experience find,
Riches compared to a contented mind
Are nothing; nay his wealth adds to his grief,
When she her portion casts in his teeth;
For though he loved it well, it does not please
Him, for to hear on it in such terms as these.
Why? what? I pray, says she, did I not bring
So, and so much, that you at every thing
Should thus think much, whereto I have a mind,
That hardly clothes you to my back will find?
Your betters far, know that I might have had,
And they thereof would have been very glad.
If that of me a fool you think to make,
I tell you that your self you do mistake.
Then the poor man does fret, and chase, and vex
And various thoughts his mind do sore perplex:
The day he curses that he e're was borne,
And leads a life most wretched, and forlorn.
Epilogue.
ANd you my Brethren, for whose only sake
The spirit moved me, for to under-take
This Work, you every one can testify,
That what I here have written is no lie;
And if that Zoilus carp, and Momus rage,
Because I lash the crimes of this our Age;
I weigh it not a rush, nor do I care,
Although they do their worst, let them not spare;
I know that none but the gal'd Horse will kick,
If so, i will deal them such another trick:
At what here is writ if any be offended,
It is not like by me to be amended.
And thou my Muse, who yet was never outwitted
By them, although too many have been fitted;
Flourish thou still, and live for to disdain
The sweet temptations of such bitter gain;
Those who their minds to it do wholly bend,
May they of sorrow never know an end.
FINIS.

