ENGLANDS REMEMBRANCER, OR A WARNING FROM HEAVEN: Setting forth the two
Judgments of God now upon the Land, viz. Sword and Plague.

With an admonition by a well-willer to his Country, for prevention of the
third Judgment threatened, which is Famine.

Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee: lest I make
thee desolate, a land not inhabited.

Jer. 6.8. He that abides in the City, shall die by the Sword, and by the
Famine, and by the Pestilence, etc. For I have set my face against this City
for evil, and not for good, says the Lord.

Jer. 21.9, 10. Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, for Francis Eglesfield, Anno Dom. 1644.

ENGLANDS REMEMBRANCER.
WE in England, Scotland, and Jreland, have been like the people of Laish,
Judge. 18. secure and careless. Like the old world in the time of Noah, and
like the men of Sodom in the days of Lot, Luke 17.27. Eating and drinking, and
saying, We shall have peace though we walk in the imaginations of our evil
hearts, Deuteronomy. 29.19. We would not hearken to the voice of our God, and Jsrael
would none of him, therefore may he now justly give us up unto our own hearts
lust: he has called, but we have refused; he has stretched out his hand, but
no man regarded; we have set at naught all his counsels, and would none of his
reproof; therefore may he now laugh at our calamity, and mock when our fear
comes, when it comes as desolation, and destruction as a whirlewind, that
all men may see and say, that the turning away of the simple has slain them,
and the prosperity of fools has destroyed them. God has given to this Nation
of ours many a fair warning, as loath to smite till needs he must; he has
sent his Ministers early and late to thunder in our ears, yet except we
repent, we shall all likewise perish. God has set our Neighbors house on fire
as a beacon to give us warning; I mean the Judgments that have befallen our
brethren beyond the Seas, and has made the Rebels in Jreland rods to his own
people; we have been worse to our God then Joab was to Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.29,
30, 31. for Absalom sent but twice, and Joab refused him, but God has sent
many and often to us, and we would not hear. When Absalom set Joabs field on
fire he came, but God has set our field on fire, and we come not. Our God has
given Jacob for a spoil, and Jsrael to the robbers, because we have sinned
against him, for we would not walk in his ways, neither were obedient to his
law, Isa. 42.24. therefore he powered upon us the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle, he has set us on fire round about, yet we know it not,
and it burns still, but we lay it not to heart; the sword of Almighty God
devoureth flesh, and drinks our blood, yet neither mercies nor judgments move
us: Still Ephraim eats the arm of Manasseh, and Manasseh Ephraim. The Kingdom
is like a mad man distracted, that saves the cruel enemy a labor, and with
his own bloody hands pulls as it were the hair from the head, the skin from
the flesh, the flesh from the bones, the bowels from the belly, the heart
from the breast, and tears and rends all in pieces, yet scarce ever sighs or
weeps or groans for all, but swells, and swears, and laughes, and rages, and
rores to death: God has formerly sent many small judgments before as
forerunners of this great judgment which now is come as little gunshots before
the great murdering piece. It has been told us before, that if we repented
not, God would do such a thing in England, that whosoever should hear thereof
both his ears should tingle; thus the cocks crowed before the storm, after
many grievous diseases, and plagues he has sent the sword and he can make our
streets swim with the blood of us all, and both with and after sword send
famine as he has threatened, Levit. 26. I will yet punish them seven times
more, and if that will not do it, seven times more; The Lord will not cease to
smite so long as we cease not to sin. Consider Jerusalem in the whole book of
the Lamentations, and consider Germany, they were Gods people as well as we,
yet had they their little ones dashed against the stones, and their women
ravished, and abominable Idolatry set up, and all turned topsie turvie, upside
down. We have had the clear light of the Gospel many years, we have had
many deliverances, especially those of the Gunpowder Treason, and Eighty eight;
we have had more peace, plenty, and prosperity then any Nation, yet we have
loved darkness rather then light, we have trampled Christ's blood under foot
in the contempt of the Gospel, and with bloody oaths and profanation of his
Sabbaths, with cursed Idolatry, riotous drunkenness and Atheism, Adultery,
Bribery, Oppression, Usury, Simony, Fraud, Hypocrisy, Pride, Idleness, many
still have a show of godliness, but deny the power of it, many lukewarm
Christians, shall not God visit for these things? Isa. 1.2, 3.

I take no delight to upbraid mine own Nation, or to defile mine own nest; I
cannot hold my tongue for Sions sake: let me perish if I see my Country perish,
and give them not warning. Wherefore I beseech ye my dear brethren (all true
hearted Englishmen) in the bowels of Christ Jesus, who died for us, and shed
his own heart blood for us, as you regard your own souls, bodies, and
estates; as ye wish and desire the peace and prosperity of this our Sion,
dally with the Lord no longer, God will not be always mocked, turn now at the
last unto the Lord with all your hearts; turn ye, oh turn ye, why will ye
die? Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he is near;
draw near to God and he will draw near to you. Oh that I could even weep
over this Land, as our Savior did over Jerusalem, and say: O England, England,
thou that rejectest my Prophets, Luke 13.34.
and despisest those that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered
thee together, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not; wherefore thy house shall be left unto thee desolate: oh that thou were
therefore now wise yet in this thy day to consider those things that belong
unto thy peace, lest at length they be hid from thine eyes. Woe to thee O
England, Mat. 11.21.
if the great works which have been done in thee, had been done in Tire and
Sidon, in Sodom and Gomorrah, they had repented in sackcloth and ashes long
ere this: And thou London, London, which art lifted up to heaven, for abundance
of spiritual means, shall be brought as low as hell, his sake, for the
Gospels sake, for your Countries sake, for your own souls sake be entreated;
Repent, repent; Search, even search your selves O nation not worthy to be
beloved, Zeph. 2.1.
before the decree come forth, and ye be as chafe that passes on a day:
look into your lives, consider your ways, go apart, and seriously ask your
souls; What have we done? Let your mirth be turned into mourning, Dan. 9.19.
your feasting into fasting, weep and lament bitterly for your sins, cry
mightily for mercy, even as for life and death; cease to do evil, learn to
do well; wash you, make you clean, put away your sins from before God his
eyes; rent your hearts and not your garwents, amend and change your ways,
bring forth fruits meet for repentance: that so ye may get the sword again
into his sheath, which is already drawn out, and will give every one of us our
deaths wound, except we repent; and may quench that wrath which is already
kindled, and will burn hotter and hotter, and never cease until it have
utterly consumed us, if in time we quench it not by the tears of true
repentance: wherefore now prepare to meet thy God, O England; It is more then
high time to repent, defer no longer, if the last blow be once stricken, that
is, cut it down, even utter desolation; there will then be left no place for
repentance. Oh that I could therefore persuade you; but it is not I, it is the
Lord that must do it; now Lord do thou persuade Japheth; for we cannot: Turn
thou us unto thee O Lord of hosts, make thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved; convert us unto thee, and we shall be converted, renew our days as of
old; Lord thou longest for our conversion; thou stand waiting and crying;
Jerem. 13.27.
Wash thine heart, O England, will thou not be made clean? oh when will it
once be? Lord cleanse thou us, and we shall be cleansed; wash thou us, and we
shall be whiter then snow; cause us to come unto thee, why have thou hardened
our hearts from thy fear? Isay. 64.8.
O Lord thou art our Father, we are thy clay; thou art the Potter, we are the
work of thine hands; oh destroy not the work of thine own hands; frame and
fashion us, and make us such as thou would have us to be: spare thy people,
O God, spare thy people, and be jealous for thine inheritance, Why shall the
people say, Where is their God? O Lord hear, O Lord consider, and do it,
defer not for thy names sake, for thy Christ his sake, pity the desolations
of thy Sion, of the City where thy name is called upon? Will thou O Lord,
forsake for ever? Why is thy wrath thus hot against the sheep of thy pasture?
Our sins indeed testify against us, that we are a rebellious and stifnecked
people, we lie down in our shame; and confusion covers us; thou art
righteous and just when thou judge, but we are a perverse and froward
generation; we would not hear when thou calledst, but stopped our ears, like
the deaf Adder, Pro. 1.26.27.
therefore thou may now justly laugh at our destruction, and mock when our
fear comes: but there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared, we
beseech thee in wrath remember mercy, have mercy upon us according to the
multitude of thy compassions, oh Lord save us; or else we perish. Comfort us
according to the days that thou have afflicted us: Return O Lord, how long?
and be pacified toward thy servants. Continue still to be our God, and let us
be thy people; remove thy judgments which lie heavy upon us, and destroy us
not uttterly for thy names sake: Make us al to turn to thee from the highest
to the lowest by speedy and unfeigned repentance, that so thou may not
utterly cut us off, even head and tail, root and branch, in one day; but
may still delight to do us good, to multiply thy blessings upon us; and make
us as worthy to be beloved in and through thy Son Christ Jesus, that Son of
thy love, as we have been for our long peace and prosperity of all the
Nations of the earth admired: even so be it Lord, so be it.

This is the first and general Remedy which a Nation must use for the
removal and preventing not only of the Plague, but of any other judgment
whatsoever; namely, 2 Chronicles. 7.13.14. Jerem. 18.7.8. Isa. 1.19.20. Jere.
14.11.12.
true repentance, which stands in sorrow for sin, and reformation of life. If
ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good fruits of the Land; but if ye
refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth
of the Lord has spoken it. Now if so be I cannot prevail with the whole Land;
then I turn to you that fear the Lord: I hope to have audience in your cares.
If ye cannot prevail for others, yet make sure of your own souls; learn to
hide your selves, to build an Arc for the safety of you and yours. But ye
will say, how may that be done? I answer.

We must separate from the sins of a land, if we would not be partakers of
their plagues, Deuteronomy. 4.3.4. Zeph. 2.3. The more wicked the times grow, the more
holy we should grow, like bright orient stars the deeper they go in the dark
night the brighter they shine, like the light of Goshen in the darkness of
Egypt, like Upright Lot in wicked Sodom, like righteous Noe in a bad world.

We must mourn for the sins of the times, Ezekiel. 9.4. and for our own
sins, and we must trust to God for safety. Nahum. 1.7. Psalm. 33.18.19. Psalm.
91.1. Pro. 18.10.

Lastly, Let us betake our selves to prayer: Pray, pray, pray therefore, cry
and say: O Lord we know not what to do, only our eyes are up toward thee:
what shall we say unto thee O thou preserver of men? we are even ashamed and
confounded to lift up our eyes to heaven; we have sinned exceedingly, we, our
Rulers and Governors. Prince, and people; we have all sinned; our sins are
gone up as an heavy load, too heavy for us to bear; heaven and earth even
groan under the burden of them, they cry mightily for vengeance, but hear
the groans of thy servants, let their cries be louder in thine ears; hear
the pleadings and intercessions of thine own Son for us; his blood cries
louder for mercy, then our sins can do for judgment, had it not been for
that, we had all long ago perished, and been utterly consumed. O thou the hope
of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble, why art thou as a
stranger, in the land, Ier. 14.8, 9.
as one that passes by to tarry for a night? Why art thou as a man astonished,
as a strong man that cannot help? Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us,
thy name is called upon us; forsake us not. Have thou utterly rejected Judah?
Has thy soul abhorred Sion? Why have thou smitten us, that we cannot be
healed? We looked for peace, and behold no good; for health, and behold
trouble: we acknowledge O Lord, our wickedness, and the wickedness of our
fathers, we have all sinned: do not abhor us for thy names sake: cast not
down the throne of thy Glory; remember and break not thy covenant with us;
Psalm. 51.18.
we have no help but of thee, thou art our God, therefore save us; oh be
favorable unto thy Sion; build thou the walls of Jerusalem: Psalm. 53.6.
so shall we praise thy name for ever, and teach all ages to keep praises for
thee in store. Oh give salvation to thy people out of Sion; when thou shall
restore again the captivity of thy people, then shall Jacob rejoice and Israel
shall be lagd.

FINIS

