Te Humple REMONSTRANCES OF Rice op Meredith, op Morgan, Shentilman of Wales;
To te Parliaments of Enghelandts, and and her cood Lord Shenerals.

Wherein is set forth; awl her troubles and crievanees, and such a way
propounded to te Parliaments, tat tey may (if tey please) kiff her present
Remeties.

AWLSO, Her makes a tiscovery of awl te chief (wat you call 'ems) Incentiaries
and tisturbers of te peace of her peloved Country of Wales, tat tey may pe
prought to condign punishment.

TOGETER, With a fery brave new Ballacks or Sangs, made py her nown cousins,
Shan op Shefferies, op Shenkins, etc. a fery exshellent cood Welsh-Poet, was
warrant her.

ORtered March te first, 1652 (being St Taffy's tay) to pe forthwith printed
and published; And appointed to pe read and sung in awl te Metheglins and
Strong-Alse houses, throughout Enghelandts and Wales.

Topies op Tomas, Cler.

LONDON, Printed by ROBERT WOOD, and are to sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. 1652.

A Remonstrance of the Shentleman of Wales, to her plessed Parliament, and cood
Lord Genesis Cromwell, etc.
WHereas her Contrymen in Wales have creat causes to put up her scrolls of
papers, to show unto your Honors, that her has in her Countries many enemies
inclining to Superstition; and a creat deal of foes her do know where, that
dwell hard by the Mountains, and in the Valleys, that do seek to testroy her
comm^dities and Trafficks, and eat up her bread and sheese out of her wives and
children mouths, and to devour all her other provisions, as all her Cosens can
be Witnesses upon her Oaths and Books. Her do not here make her complaints
against pipple pabbles, or small matters, but of a creat business, wherein her
must accuse a little old Jesuitical Thief, that has long made havoc in her
Countries; her I mean that has little small eyes, long head (not a Roundhead)
four legs, and a long Tail: Her do not mean Robin-Run in the hole; nor do her
complain of her Welsh Goat, or Runt, which yields her putter and sheese, and do
her much good by milk for her youngest shild to nourish it; yet her will never
be fat, but her will be still lean of the Ribs, so that you may see her haunch
bones: Nor do her mean to make Orations and complaints against Lightfoot, alias
Coging-Wat; for her can chase her away with her pupp^-^og which lies (...) he^
shimney corn^^, and make her run in crea^ f^ights over the Mountains. These,
and many other sorts of cattels, are not troublesome to her Countries, but only
that a^rant Rogue and greedy companion. Mr. Little-Eyes, who as soon as her
has done any mischief, whip Sir Davy, her runs into her hole, and draws her
long Tail after her; and moreover this Mr. Little-eyes has sharp teeth, like
the comb which fetch out her other enemy out of her head in the very thickest
place; as may plainly appear by her knawing her pest sheeses. And this is that
cunning pated Rascal, that do her Contrymen so much wrong, her may well call
her a Robber of the Commonwealths Habitations; and all his Ancestors coming
from Pig-houses, they are now so increased, that they eat up all her corn in
her parns, and will run from her Cosen ap-Morgans, to her cosen ap-Griffins
house, and do most lamentable spoils, so that all her cousens and contrymen
can send out no Hue-and-cry to take these her homepred enemies; neither can her
without her had Grim Molkins eyes, see out her enemies by night, but when her
be fast asleep with her wife and shildren, her is at her knavish pranks: O
horrible! Cod bless her from a Cun I pray Cod.

Her has sufficiently described her enemies condition and malignant nature,
for her does spoil and demolish her pest sheeses, having a notable pallat to
taste which is best; now what cood subjects can deny her enemies to be Rebels
and Felons; for they do daily steal, rob and devour, in spite of her nose; and
her be a Felon, pecause her comes in the night.

Nay, more then this, her do suspect her to be a Papist, for her has often
been seen to run and play, and make dumb adorations about the cross in the
Market place, and when her have set her Sacks of parley and Malt to sell,
before her Chapmen could ask her prices, her would be working with her Teeth at
the bottom of the sack, and being spyed, her would whip away, and run under the
market cross; as it has bin known that some of these her enemies, wanting
places of harbor to be delivered of their young ones, and being too nimble to
be carried to Cages, they have crept into holes in Churches, behind old Crosses
and Images, and there have bred up their posterities, so that some of her
Enemies be naturally Papists by their pedigree: What-shall her do in these
cases? her were pest ket a protection for her sheeses, for all her country is
in creat fears and uproars about these her enemies, and her know not what to do
if her may be robbed, and have her coods eaten before her face, and behind her
back, and yet have no course taken to stay and kill her domestic Enemies: Her
does therefore for redress of these grievances, fashion her Indictment into
Articulus, alias Articles; and then her will make her Arse tickle; for her
knows her enemies to be Traitors, and ploud-suckers of her ancient Rights, and
old Religion: Therefore, her is resolved to be fooled no longer, but to rise,
beat down her Enemy, and send her Guts (mark you that) to make Fiddlestrings
against Bartholomew Fair; And her Ambassador shall come in all her stately
manner, with Drums, Branches, and Arms of Trees, instead of rotten silken
Banners which will not endure a puff of wind: Also her shall have natural
colors called Leeks, and instead of Gowns, her shall have frize Jerkins; and
instead of a horse, her shall ride upon a Red-herring; and instead of Sonnets,
her shall have her natural Language, an echo, called Cokoo, Cokoo.

And therefore her desires are to all Christian Kings and Princes, and to her
Parl. and cood Lord Genesis that the Principality of Wales may be defended from
her enemies, and that there may be good store of Mouse-traps provided, whereby
her foes and enemies may be taken in their own Tevices. and their power
lessoned, their ravenous minds abated, and their fierce stomachs qualified; And
her further desires, That her may have 62 Canterbury Cats speedily sent to her
Aid; that these her enemies, so many as are taken prisoners and alive, may be
brought up in some convenient Hamper, and be committed to the Long powdring
tub, to remain there without Bayl or Mainprise.

Mr. Mouse his Answer to her Countrey-mans Petition.
It does seem by this Petition cood Countreyman Jenkin, that your Welsh blood
is up, you would make a good Laboror to carry Mort^r and Brick for as soon as
you are angry, you are presently a top of the house; but as it is said when any
thing is found knaw'd, that the M^use has been here; so he that shall read
this R^monstrance, and find ^herein such broken English, and so many hers in
every line, may very well think that the Welchman has been here, and has
becotten our of his prains a she Petition. You are afraid of Th^eves; that is
of your own shadow; for who more Thief then your se^f: and for your sheeses
they are as hard as Millston^s, and stink of Goats Milk, especially being
tosted, so that the Devil would rather pe starved then boorded with sheese in
Wales: Your other accu^ations are lies, and show you to pe a right Britain,
tat will make a Mountain of a Molehill, as appears py your setting her
countries wrongs and fears, in her long Pills and Petitions.

Te Welch-mans Reply.
WHhat toes her answer her so; compare her end call her Countryman, by her
precious conscience, her will show it is her enemy no more favors, ten te Tailor
does her enemy, when her finds her enemy in her neck or posome: Cots body, call
her her Country-mad, oh pase, oh intolerable, yea more baser ten her Bass Viol
which hangs in her champer: why her had pest pring te Frog, and such like
Caterpillars, and say her is her Countryman as well as te louse or mouse.

Her will fetch her long hook with te bike at te end of it her armor, and her
beece, and her gantlet, her touble edged sword or her pack-sword, and her pum
tagger, and all h^^ Country men shall march out with her in warlike
proportions, and kill her enemies, if her Betitions pe not regarded, wherein
her do know is true matters, and of good weights look you tere now: her made
not her Betitions to pe laughed at, Cots plutra nails; terefore her will make no
more ato with Betitions.

Te Brotestation of Thomas ap Shink in, ap Morgan, ap Howel, etc.
IN primis, Her was vow and brotest her self to live in te true faith, which
was always called in te old and ancient time Protestants.

Her was protest against Papists and Puritants life.

Put her was pray to Cot to pless her cood Parl. and Lort Shenerals, and tat
tey may endeavor to rite her from awl her enemies, tat her may live in her
nown Countries in peace, tat her may live tere like a true Shentleman of Wales,
and rite a hunting ore te hills, tales, titches and follow te pawling togs wit
her pugle horn py her side, and if her can catch te Hare, to eat her to supper.

A new Song made by her Cousin, etc.
THere was a man, was callant man
and her was born where her tid dwell
Pecot her was a faliant man,
as all her Country folk can tell.
Was a creat teal of house, was a creat teal of land
was hawk was house at hoor command, coushin Taffie.
Her was of a shentile ploud
and her come of a creat pig house
And every tay wear felset hood,
and kill both Capon Pig and Coose
And every day her made a great pie, Taffie Taffie,
pecot it was true, was tell her no lie, Coushin Taffie.
Unto te poor her tid pequeath
creat teal of fi^tle every tay,
Until one (was called Teach)
tid steal it is Shentilman away;
O her creat teal of coods her was pereaven, Taffy, Taffy,
And now her must co to twel in heaven, py Cousin Taffy.
Pehinde her, her tid leave a son,
which tid prove a faliant man,
Her kill two Spaniard wit a Cun,
her came not of no coward kind;
At Tilbu^y Camp a creat while aco, Taffy, Taff^,
Tere her was wit a thousand more, Cousin Taffy.
Peaw waw, her was at Mile end Green,
and at Crenwich Park pefore her Crace,
And tere her was a faliant man,
her was no coward in tat place.
Tere was creat teal of horse, tere was creat teal of folk, taffy, taffy
Was a creat teal of Cun make a creat teal of smoke, cousin Taffy.
At length her cot a foul mischance,
her aspie a Lady passing by,
Sir Cupit prick her wit a Lance,
and steal pehinde her cowardly;
And wit her rusty tusty Tart, Taffy, Taffy,
Was miss her skin, but was pierce her heart, Cousin Taffy.
Put when her had cot it is foul mischance,
as py her you shall hear,
Though Cupit prick her wit her lance,
her was not tead; her was fery near:
Her send for the Sexton to towl the pell, Taffy, Taffy,
Mark you, does Sir Cupit use her well? Cousin Taffy.
Well, pecot her was hold her a croat,
tat her had peen petter a kilt her Keese,
Her would not pe in Sir Kupits coat,
not for a creat teal of tost^d Sheese;
For if ever Sir Kupit come into Wales, Taffy, Taffy,
Was never come pack to preed more prawles, py Cousin Taffy.
FINIS.

