The first and second Priesthood declared according to the Scriptures, that
both Priests, Professors and People may come to see with the Light of Christ,
which Priesthood this belongs to.
THE first Priesthood and its Ministry stands without, and consists of the
outward things.

The second Priesthood and its Ministry stands within, and consists of the
inward work; and Paul who was made a Minister of the Spirit, which is within,
he said, Work out your salvation with fear and tremhling, 2 Cor. 5. 6. Phil.
2. 12.

The first Priesthood being made in the time of the Oath, under which
Priesthood the swearing is upheld, and the people continue in the swearing and
in he strife.

The second Priesthood is made with the Oath, the confirmation thereof is the
end of all strife, debate and dissension, and the end of the lust from whence
the wars, fightings, and vain janglings does arise; and the confirmation of
this Oath, and the second Ministry, which is confirmed by this Oath, puts an
end to all Oaths and swearing, the Word of the Oath being come, and become
flesh, which Word was before the Oath, and the world, and since the Law, which
Word makes the Son, who says, Swear not at all, Heb. 6. 15. 16, and Heb. 7.
20. Matt. 5. 34. Jam. 5. 12.

The first Priesthood and its Ministry under the first Covenant had a command
to receive tithes of the people, yet they were not to sue people at the Law if
they did not bring the tithes, but were to receive the tithes and offerings,
when they were brought their command was to receive them; and these tithes were
given unto the stranger, unto the fatherless, and to the widow, that they might
eat and be filled, as well as the Levite and the Priest, Deuteronomy. 26. 12, 13. Now
that Priesthood must needs be of Antichrist which is not agreeable to the first
Priesthood, and it is also contrary to Christ, Luke 10. 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 6.
3. and so on. 2 John 9. 1 John 2, 22.

The second Priesthood and its Ministry is of the New Covenant, where the Law
is changed, by which the first is made; and this is not of the world, neither
upheld nor maintained by the things of the world, neither is made by a carnal
Commandment, but by the power of an endless life, Heb. 7. 16. Matt. 10. 7, 8,
9. Gal. 1. 12. and 16.

The first Priesthood is after the flesh, where the lusts are not crucified,
whence the wars and fightings comes, where the likenesses are found among such
as are not come to the substance, for Abraham came from the wars, and gave the
tenth of the spoils unto him who was made like unto the son of God, Heb. 7. 3.
Heb. 8. 5. Genesis 14. 18.

The second Priesthood (who is of the Spirit, who comes of Abraham according to
the flesh) is the Power of God, and the substance of the former likenesses;
which substance being come, it puts an end to the wars, and so an end to the
spoylings, and also an end to all that which causes the spoils, and if so,
then an end to that of which tithes were first given; and so the substance of
the likenesses being come, the Blessing is received in him, and the
multiplyings known, and the increases of God witnessed, and the spoils divided
at home, the strong man being bound, and his Goods spoiled, Heb. 12. 22, 23,
24. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12. Collossians 2. 17 18, 19.

The first Priesthood is of the first Covenant, which makes nothing perfect,
and stands without, as in Tables of Stone, and diverse Ordinances written by
Moses a Minister of that Law which condemns, and yet is glorious in its time, 2
Cor. 37. 8, 9. Hobrews 7. 9.

The second Priesthood is of the New Covenant, which is written in the Tables
of the heart by a Mediator of a better covenant, in which Covenant there is a
coming to be presented perfect in the head, unto which, by the Ministry of the
word of life, they come to be joined, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 6.

The first Priesthood stands in diverse washings and carnal Ordinances, until
the time of reformation, until which time the outward ordinances yet stands,
and the outside Worships yet are, which worship being daily performed, yet the
daily comers to these Ordinances are not made perfect, as pertaining to the
conscience: Heb. 9. 10.

The second Priesthood is eternal, purging the conscience from dead works,
whereby also the spirit of truth is received, and so the worship in spirit and
in truth is known, which worship the Lord delights in; and such seek the Lord
and find him, and he is merciful to their iniquities, and their sin he
remembers no more, but they are blotted out as a thick Cloud; and so being made
free from sin, and become the servants of Righteousness, then fruit and service
is brought forth and performed unto God, well pleasing in his sight, Heb. 9.
14. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Romans 6. 22.

The first Priesthood stands in diverse and carnal Offerings for sin, and
confessions of sin Morning and Evening, and yet the sin not taken away, Heb. 7.
22. Heb. 10. 1. and 11.

The second Priesthood stands in one offering for sin, whereby the sin is taken
away, Zach. 13. 1. 1 Ioh. 1. 7. Revel. 1. 5. Romans 6. 2. and 7. and 18. Heb. 10
17.

Under the first Priesthood the vail is over the heart, and they that are there
cannot see to him that is the end of the Law, who is made under the Law, to
redeem them that are under the Law, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15.

Under the second Priesthood the vail is rent, and the broken heart is known,
with whom God is; and so him that is entered within the vail is seen, even him
that is the end of the Law and the Prophets, Heb. 9. 24. Heb. 10. 20.

The first Priesthood has the Shewbread, which the carnal eye may see, and the
natural man perceive; and so the Worship stands in outward show, in some form
and place where the life is not, and such may worship they know not what, being
not come to the truth which makes free to worship in, Heb. 9. 1, 2. Joh. 4. 22.

The second Priesthood has the bread of Life which comes down from Heaven and
gives life; the which bread being not in outward show, was not only hid from
the Scribes and Pharisees who had the Oracles of God outwardly, but also from
them that professes Christ without them only, for there is a time wherein
Christ is known after the flesh, or without, therefore says Christ, He that is
with you, shall he in you, Ioh. 14. 17. Ioh. 6. 35. and 60.

The first Priesthood, though made by a Law of God, which Law stands outwardly,
the Priests being Ministers of the Law and not come to Christ, but are out of
his Doctrine, This was sound Doctrine.
Matt. 23. and so are found themselves Transgressors of the same Law which they
teach to others; therefore the Lord declares against such, saying, Wherefore
ye Priests, this commandment is for you, if you will not hearken I will send a
curse upon you, and I will curse your blessing, and spread the dung of your
solemn Assemblies upon your faces, Mal. 2. 1, 2, 3. Mic. 3. 10, 11. Ier. 10.
21. Hos. 6. 9. Isa. 56. 9, 10, 11, 12. Romans 2. 21, 22, 23, 24.

The Ministry of the second Priesthood witnesses the Righteous ness of the Law
fulfilled within, and so comes to the freedom from the Law of sin and death,
and so comes to receive a blessing from God, not a curse, Romans 7. 6. Romans 8. 2,
3, 4. Heb. 6. 7.

The first Priesthood who offers daily for the people and themselves, though it
be much, and consists in many words and outward Ceremonies, yet this is not
able to make him that does it perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, but the
guilt remains still upon the conscience both of him and his followers, Heb.
9. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. and 14.

The second Priesthood, who has for ever perfected them that are sunctified,
he is of the heavenly Mansion, of the which there are many in the Fathers house,
whose house are we who are of the body, which is the Church, which is raised up
by the Ministry of the second Priesthood, to sit together with Christ in the
heavenly places, where the unclean cannot come; but the living service and
prayers are offered up through the eternal spirit, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 23, 23. Ephesians.
6. 2. Heb. 3. 6. Joh. 14. 2, 3.

The first Priesthood and its Ministry consists in reading of the Law that
was written in Tables of stone, and writings which are without, and in
preaching of Moses in the Synagogues every Sabbath Day, the vail being over the
heart, and the end of the Law not seen, nor him known that is made under the
Law, Act. 15. 21. 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14. 15, etc.

The second Priesthood and its Ministry consists in ministering life to the
seed in prison, and opening the prisor-doors, that the seed of Abraham may
spring out of the barren womb, and seal the power of the Son God breaking down
that which the Law had power over, and so to bring to him that is the end of
the Law, and to behold with open face the glory of him that takes away the sin,
and brings in everlasting righteousness, Isa. 61. i, 2, 3. Dan. 9. 24. 2. Cor.
3. 18.

The first Priesthood has the Letter, but resist the Holy Ghost, yet profess
Moses and the Prophets writings, and make a gain thereby, but resist the Holy
Ghost and the Spirit of Prophecy, the heart being uncircumcised, Act. 7. 51,
52. Jude 11.

The second Priesthood and its Ministry is of the Spirit, with the power of the
Holy Ghost, and the same Spirit that guided Moses and the Prophets and all the
holy men of God, and so comes to that from whence that was given forth, which
was preached in the Synagogues ^very Sabbath day, Isa. 44. 3. Isa. 59. 21. 2
Pet. 11. 21.

In the time of the first Priesthood the Cherubins covers the Mercy-seat, and
the Lord communeth with him that is the Minister of the Law above the
Mercy-seat, which Mercy-seat being both covered and under, and the people being
both stiff-necked and hard hearted; so the power stands above ministering the
Law, which, is to judge and cut down that which causes the hardness of the
heart, which is covered with the vail through the transgression of the Law,
under which the Mercy-seat is, and the testimony lies under it, Exodus 25. 31.
Let him that reads understand, Matthew. 24. 15. Heb. 9. 5.

In the time of the second Priesthood the testimony and witness of God is
raised up, and the Mercy-seat openened, and the hardness of heart broken, and
so the wall tkat's separated between him and his testimony comes to be broken
down, and the Fountain of living Mercies opened, and the seed refreshed with
the hidden Manna; so the seed of Abraham comes to be raised up through the vail
by the power of him who is the living Minister within the vail, made under the
Law, to redeem the seed from under the Law; and so as this is read in the work
of it, and so felt and understood, the promise of the second Covenant, under
the Ministry of the second Priesthood, is witnessed, even as it is written, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall
be my people, 2 Cor. 6. 16 Jer. 31. 33. Heh. 8. 8. to the end. Heh. 9. 12. Esaias
57. 15.

In the time of the first Priesthood there is much talking of the Ordinances,
and many are pleading from the Letter for the Ordinances, which say they are to
last for ever (as circumcision was) and also many are crying, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and yet the Temple is made [by such] a den of
Thieves, and a habitation of Dragons, and wild subtle devouring beasts of the
field, who have stolen up another way (in the Serpents wisdom) then by Christ
the Light and the Door, and so resist the Holy Ghost, being yet in their sins,
and their faith vain, and their minds and their consciences being defiled, and
they not come to the Doctrine of Repentance, the mountains being not levelled,
and the burning Light not felt, nor the Wilderness not yet found, nor the way
opened for the Seed, neither yet him seen that takes away the sin of the world;
and yet such are crying The Ordinances, The Ordinances, and the Commands, which
say they are to last to the end of the world, and yet they themselves not come
to the beginning of the world, nor to feel the power of the Word separating the
Light from the Darkness, nor yet to feel the entrance into the true
circumcision; and so the vail remains over the heart that they cannot see to
the end of the commands, figures, and Ordinances, which are a shadow of good
things to come, but the end and subltance is Christ, the light, life, and
cornerstone at which they stumble, Col. 2. 17. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

In the time of the second Priesthood the Kingdom is witnessed, which is not in
words, but in power, where the proud boasters are shut out, and thk unclean
enters not, nor the vain janglers, who comes with their carnal weapons from the
Letter without, to fight against the Lamb, whose commands are written in the
heart, where the Holy Ghost is by such resisted, who are not come to the second
Ministry, where all things are complete in him who is the head, the beginning
and the end, in whom the circumcision made without hands is witnessed; so the
vail is taken off the heart, and the end is seen, even he he that takes away
the sin of the world; and so all Trespasses comes to be forgiven unto them that
are buried in the baptism; and so dead unto sin, whereby also the handwriting
of Ordinances that was against us comes to be blotted out, and nailed down to
the cross, whereby the Principalities and Powers are spoiled by the Power of
the Word that becomes flesh, whereby those things that were in show are
triumphed over, and nailed down to the cross, through which the Life comes to
be raised, and so Christ Jesus the Son of God comes to be revealed and made
manifest, being quickened in the spirit, and so no more to know Christ after the
flesh, but in that which is raised up through the cross, unto which the shows
and shadows of things are nailed down; so the Doctrines of Baptism and
Repentance from dead works are left behind; and those things that are left
behind are forgotten, and there is a pressing forwards to perfection by the
Ministry of the second Priesthood, wherein every man is to be presented perfect
in Christ Jesus, in whom there is a growing from grace to grace, and a changing
from glory to glory by the same spirit, having received of his fullness, Col. 2.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Heb. 6. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. 22. 2
Cor. 3. 18.

In the time of the first Priesthood the patterns of the heavenly things are
purified with the outward blood, the transgression being without, and the Law
without; and so here is the outward washings with the outward water, and the
set-dayes of Purification; and these things were to be done often because of
the continual transgression of that Law which stood without, which comes to be
fulfilled, and the Justice satisfied by that without, and so the patterns of
things in the heavens comes to be purified with these outward washings, and
outward sprinklings; and did not Christ Jesus suffer without the gate, Heb. 9.
23. Col. 2 23. and the Law being without has the shadow, and yet not the
Image, therefore far short of Christ the substance, Heb. 10. 1.

In the time of the second Priesthood, the heavenly things themselves are
purified with better sacrifices then these Heb. 9. 33. which served to the
purifying of the patterns, and the heavenly things themselves, being purified
with the living sacrifice; so the way into the holiest of all is known which is
not manifested under the first Priesthood, Heb. 9. 8. and so there is an
entrance made into the believers rest Heb. 4. 3. and 10. Rev. 14. 13. where the
seed of Abraham sits down in the Fathers kingdom, which consists of
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. and so as there
is a coming to feel the power of the second Ministry preaching to the spirit
in prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 24. and so to quicken them that were dead in
sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. by whose quickening power the seed comes to be raised up,
together with Christ the head, who sits at the Fathers right hand in the
heavenly places, Ephesians. 1. 20 which are purified and prepared for the faithful,
who comes to sit down with Christ in the heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. John
17. 21, 22, 23, 24. And as the heavenly things of the heavenly places are
purified, and the entrance into the rest ministered, so Christ comes to be seen
exalted at the Fathers right hand in the heavenly places above all
principalities and powers, (which are spoiled) being the head over all things,
Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. And so there is a ruling over all that which stands in outward
show, the which Christ made a show of openly, triumphing over them in it, Col.
2. 15. and if there be a triumphing over these things which are in show, before
the entrance into the holiest of all be made, how much more are the outward
shows triumphed over, and the principalities spoiled, when the way into the
holiest of all is made manifest by the power of him who is gone into the
heavens, and is on the right hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and Powers
being made subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

In the time of the first Priesthood the rule is without, and such as are there
resist the Spirit within, yet profess the Scriptures without, and not resist
them, but resist the inspiration which gave them forth, and yet are zealous for
their rule without, being yet blind like Saul, even persecuting them in whom
the Spirit of Truth bares rule, which Spirit they being not come unto, (to open
the eye, and lead them into all truth,) are found out of their rule which they
so much talk of, read and see James 1. 26. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Tit. 3. 9. Ephesians. 4. 29.
30, 31, 32. Ephesians. 5. 11. 1 John.. 3. 4. 1 John 2. 4. Joh. 12. 36. Matthew. 5. 28,
29. 30. and 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. Matthew. 23. 26, 27. 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1 These. 5.
5. and 15. and 17. and 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 13. 11.

In the time of the second Priesthood, a measure of the spirit of truth is
owned and received within, which whosoever follows walks not in darkness. Ioh. 8.
12. the which leads into all truth, and orders, and rules the Creature in the
sear of him who is the God of order; whereby the strong holds are broken down,
and every thought comes to be subjected unto Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. who rules
over all, and upholds all things by the word of his power, Heb 1. 3. who has
given to every man a manifestation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 7. and a
proportion of faith, Romans 12. 6. Christ being all, and in all, Gal. 3. 28. Col.
3. 11. and as every man has received Christ, Joh. 9. 9. so to walk in him,
Col. 2. 6. according to the same rule already attained, Matthew. 25. 21. and to
mind the same things already received that is the cause, Phil. 3. 16 17. and
mark them that walks so, and not go beyond the measure of what they have
received, but be faithful in it as good stewards of the manifold graces of God,
Titus 2. 10. and such as walk according to that rule, grace, mercy, and peace
be to them, and to all the Israel of God, 2 Cor. 10. and 12. 13. verse.

Written by a servant of Jesus Christ the only high Priest, and Minister of
life, for whose sake he suffers in outward bonds at Dorcester this 28. day of
the first Month 57. who is despised, persecuted, and imprisoned by the world;
called Humphrey Smith.

The End.

