De non temerandis Ecclesiis, CHVRCHES NOT TO BE VIOLATED.

A Tract of the Rights and Respects Due unto CHURCHES: Written to a Gentleman
who having an appropriate Parsonage employed the Church to profane uses, and
left the Parishioners uncertainly provided of Divine Service in a Parish near
there adjoining.

Written and first published thirty years since By Sir HENRY SPELMAN Knight.

The third Edition with a new Epistle.

OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the UNIVERSITIE. 1646.

The Printer to the READER.
THis small Tract, now above two years past, was by me printed for that
worthy Knight the Author thereof, with no intent to have it published: and
being hitherto by me suppressed from reprinting here at home; I find it to be
of late time printed in Scotland (contrary both to the Authors and my
expectation) and Dedicated by another man to the Bishops and Clergy there, and
so made more public, being of it self private, then was first intended:
which (I suppose) had the Author known, or once misdoubted the sequel,
instead of De non temerandis Ecclesiis, he would have studied another Title, De
non temerandis Scriptis alienis: that his writings might not be imprinted, when
Benefices are made proper. Wherefore finding many slips in it from his Copy, I
have (as well in the right of the Author as of my self, (to whom the right of
the sole Printing belonged) caused it to be reprinted. And though at the time
of the putting it to the Press, I could not confer with the Author, he
being then in the Country, yet has it pleased him since his coming home to
add something more unto it, as his leisure would permit him; which I have
annexed to the end thereof. And thus have I attempted to make a private work
public, lest the faults of other men, should unjustly be cast upon him, that
deserved so well in so rare an Argument.

To the Reader.
ALL the vessels of the Kings House are not gold, or silver, or for uses of
Honor. Some be common stuff, and for mean services, yet profitable. Of the
first sort, I am sure this Tract is not. Whether of the other or no, I leave
that to thy judgment. To deal plainly; my self have no great opinion of it;
as finding mine own imperfections, and writing it only upon a private
occasion to a private friend, without curious observation of matter or method.
But having also written a greater work (much of the same Argument) and
intending to publish, or suppress it, as I see cause: I thought it not unfit
(upon some encouragement) to send this forth (like a Pinnesse or Post of
Advice) to make a discovery of the Coast, before I adventure my greater Ship.
If I receive good advertisement, I shall grow the bolder. Howsoever, take this
I pray thee, as it is: and let my zeal to the cause, excuse me in meddling with
matters beyond my strength.

H. S.

A Letter showing the occasion of this Treatise to the Worshipful his most
loving uncle FR. SA. etc.
MY good Uncle, the speeches that past casually between us at our last
parting, have run often since in my mind; and so (perhaps) have they done in
yours. You complained (as God would have it) that you were much crossed in the
building you were in hand with, upon a piece of gleabe of your Appropriate
Parsonage at Congham. I answered, that I thought God was not pleased with it,
insomuch as it tended to the defrauding of the Church, adding (amongst some
other words) that I held it utterly unlawful to keep Appropriate Parsonages
from the Church. etc.

But our talk proceeding, I perceived that as God had always his portion in
your heart, so in this, though it concerned your profit, you seemed tractable.
It much rejoiced me, and therefore apprehending the occasion, I will be hold to
add a continuance to that happy motion: (so I trust, both you and I shall have
cause to term it) and besides, to give you some tribute of the love and duty I
long have ought you. Therefore (good Uncle) as your heart has happily
conceived these blessed sparks, so in the name and blessing of God, cherish
and inflame them. No doubt they are kindled from heaven, like the fire of the
Altar, and are sent unto you from God himself, to be a light to you in your
old days (when your bodily eyes fail you) to guide your feet into the way of
peace, that is, the way and place from whence they came. So always I pray for
you, and rest,

Your loving and faithful Nephew HENRY SPELMAN.
Westminst. Aug. 17. 1613.
To the READER.
REader, this small Treatise was 30 years since written and published by my
Father now deceased; his intent was to dissuade a profanation of Churches, and
to persuade a restitution of Tithes and impropriations to the Church; Wherein
although he was not so happy as with Saint Peter at once to convert thousands,
yet was he not with him so insuccessefull, as to fish all might and catch
nothing; for some were persuaded with what is written, nor can I say that
others believed not; but rather think, that like the young man in the Gospel,
they went heavy away, because they had too great possessions to restore.

Mischeifes are with more ease prevented then cured, men sooner dissuaded from
a reception, then persuaded to a restitution. While therefore the great
dissolution of Bishoprics and Deanaries is only threatened not acted, I have
caused a reimpression of this Tract, hopeing that (as at first) it will find
some believers, and the rather because written long since, by one, no Levite,
himself and children as his Ancestors mere Laymen, not having nor hopeing
for any Ecclesiastical preferrement, and therefore I am confident he took his
motives solely from the dictates of religion and conscience, himself
practicing what he would persuade thee. I know thy argument for retaining
impropriations, Abbeys etc. is, the Law has made them lay-fees, thou did
legally buy them, and therefore may lawfully keep them.

I confess our Statutes of Dissolution have changed the course of the fee,
from a politic succession to a natural descent; and unhappily put a lay man
in to the Priests place. But tell me if any Statute or humane Law does or can
take away the Dedication or the Consecration of Abbeys, Monasteries etc.
discharge or annull the interest which God and his Church has in them, and for
which they were founded, as that hospitality, sick and feeble men may be
maintained, Alms given, and other Charitable deeds be done, and prayers be
there said, as is declared in the Statute. 35. Edw. 1. 35: Edw: 1. ca: 1.
or can any Statute divert, and dispense with the many and heavy curses of the
Church, upon the violators of Church liberties, to which the whole Kingdom
has not only cried Amen, but by Act of Parliament has enjoined the Bishops
to curse the violaters. If these be not removed, then remain they still
dedicated, still consecrated to God; and then seek and satisfy thy self,
whether thou having the appropriation and Tithes but as the Abbot had them, and
receiving the profit as the Abbot did, art not as the Abbot, tied in Law and
Conscience or one of them to perform the duties: for that he was, appears by
the opinion of all Judges 18. Eliz: Plow. fol. 496.
where it is said by the Judges, that none is capable of an appropriation (for
so the Law calls them) but only bodies politic not natural, and the reason
is because he that has the appropriation is to be perpetual incumbent, which
a natural body that must die could not be. And that body politic (to have the
rectory, the glebe, and tithes) must be Spiritual not Lay. For in that he is
made Parson (says the book) he has the cure of the souls of the
parishioners, and therefore must be Spiritual, for by the same reason that a
patron cannot present a Layman to his Church, by the same reason a Layman
cannot be an Appropriator; For they are both Parsons of the Church, the
presented Parson for life, the Appropriator for ever. And therefore Plowden
says, that the Appropriator, be he Abbot or Prior etc. is as fully incumbent
Parson, as if he had been presented, instituted and inducted: and as Parson
shall have his Actions, and that he that is duly made Parson is thereby made
possessor of the Parsonage for the spiritual Office, plow. fo. 500.
attracts the possessions of the things belonging to the Office, and in that he
is Parson, he receives the Tithes not as granted to him, but as things annexed
to the Office of a Parson. And Tithes are frequently in our Common Law termed
spiritual things because annexed to the spiritual Office. By these Books and
resolutions of the Judges it is clear that the appropriatour was the incumbent
Parson, and had the cure of the souls of the Parishioners, Fol. 33, 35.
and that upon the presentation of the appropriatour or upon the dissolution of
the Abbey, the Church became void, and presentative, as other Churches upon
resignation or death of the incumbent.

For appropriations (as thou now see) were but Parsonages with cures of
souls, annexed and appropriated to a particular Abbey or Religious house. For
when their Fraternities became numerous, and their annual charge greater then
their yearly revenue; providence to provide for their family made them think
how to increase their income; And themselves being patrons of many rich
parsonages, obtained severally (as occasion served) license from the King, and
consent from the ordinary to annex or appropriate that parsonage to their Abbot
and his successors for ever, whereby they became perpetual incumbent parson,
and anciently did duly officiate the Cure by one of their Fraternity until
the Statute of Rich. 2. prohibited the appropriating any Church, 15. Ric. 2.
ca. 6.
unless a Vicar be conveniently endowed by the discretion of the Ordinary to
do divine service, and keep hospitality; 4 H. 4. ca. 12.
and the Statute of 4 Hen. 4. ordained that no Religious (as Monks and Friars
were) should be made Vicars to any Church appropriated, but Seculars (as our
Ministers now be) canonically instituted and inducted. Upon these Statutes it
will concern the owners of Churches appropriated since 15 Rich. 2. to see,
that out of the profits of the Church a convenient sum of money be yearly
paid to the poor parishioners, 15 Ric. 2. ca 6.4. H. 4. ca 12.
and a Vicar endowed as the Statute of the 15. of R. 2. appoints, or else the
Stat. 4 H. 4. avoids the appropriation, and then the Church becomes again
presentative.

But some will object, that impropriate Churches with their oblations and
Tithes (the fat of impropriations) are made Lay and Temporal, and as Lay and
Temporal things disposable at the will of the owner: a doctrine which so
nearly concerns the estates and livelihood of so many men in this kingdom as
I shall not aver the contrary, least some Demetrius with his fellows tumuit
about it; yet give me leave to offer thee some opposite considerations, but
leave them, and their result to thy judgment and conscience.

Consider first that while God says, that ye have robbed me of my Tithes and
offerings, God claims the title and interest of them to be in him, not in the
Priest nor in the Levite, they being but the usu-fructuarii, God the owner.

Remember too, 27. H. 8. ca: 20. 32 H. 8. cap: 7.
that our Statutes have declared Tithes to be due to God and holy Church, and
thy withdrawing thy Tithes a neglecting thy duty to Allmighty God, and then
consider that if the Tithes be Gods, it matters not whether his title be by
Divine right (as our Dier. 28. H. 8. so 43. tithes are due by the Law of God.
ex debito. Co. 2. Wiochest. case. so. 45. b. tithes are due by Divine Right.
Law and Lawyers) not to press that with the resolution of Counsels and
opinions of Canonists, Fathers, and Divines, quoted by the Author) have taken
them to be, or by humane Constitution; for what Statute, what Law, can conclude
God, or bind his right? Then weigh how the King (from whom thou claimest) had
the Tithes, thou have, and to what intent he had them.

The Statute of 27. H. 8. gives the King the smaller Abbyes and houses of
Religion with their Appropriations and Tithes. To the greater, H. 8. makes his
title by grant and surrender of the Abbots, Priors: which between the 27 and
31. H. 8. had been labored by Cromwell; with some he prevailed by entreaty and
good Annuities; with others by the Kings Power and Sword for the Abbots of R.
Whiting.
Glassenbury, Hugh Farring^on.
Reading, and John Bech. Goodw. 167.
Colchester, whose innocence had made them regardlesse of Threats, and their
piety abhor rewards to betray their Churches; were therefore (says Goodwin)
tenderd the There was no Oath of Supremacy, until 1. Eliz. but these that
denied H. 8. to be supreme Head of the Church, were indicted upon the Statute
26. H. 8, c 12. since repealed, for that they malitiose optantes desiderantes
and volentes deprivare Domin: Regem de dignitate titulo and nominee status s^^
regal. Said that the King was not Supreme Head of the Church. And upon this
were Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Sir Thomas More, Exmew, and diverse others
indicted, convicted, and executed, by virtue of a Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, directed to Audley Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Suffolk, and other
Lords, and all the Judges, as appears by the Reports under the hand of Sir
John Spelman, who was then a Judge of the Kings bench.
Oath of Supremacy, which they refusing, are, as enemies to the State,
condemned and hanged, others terrified by their examples, leaves all to the
dispose of the King, who not resting on that title, procures the Statute of 31.
H. 8. c. 13. which reciting (how truly do thou judge) the Grants, Surrenders,
etc. to have been made freely, voluntarily, and without compulsion, gives all
the Religious houses, with their appurtenances and Tithes, to the King his
Heirs and Successors (as the Statute 27. of H. 8. did) in as large a manner as
the Abbot had the same to dispose thereof at his will and pleasure (but) to the
honor and pleasure of Almighty God: nor is there any one word either in this
Statute of the 31. or that of 27. H. 8. to alter or change the primative nature
and use of Tithes. And therefore the Statute of the 32. H. 8. calls the
withdrawing of thy Tithes, whether propriate or impropriate, a neglecting of
thy duty to Almighty God, thereby inferring, that the Tithes are still due to
God.

Consider that thy impropriate Tithes are yet even in Law called Ecclesiastic,
and solely recoverable in the Ecclesiastical Courts; and that the Statute of
Ed. 6. ^. Edw. 6.
gives one and the same remedy both for the presentative and impropriate Tithe,
and therefore must make both, or neither, Lay and Temporal.

Inquire too, whether the Impropriater has the Cure of Souls, the Abbot had,
(especially where no Vicar is endewed) if thou do find he has not, know who
has, for the Sheep must not be without a Shepherd, nor he without the milk
of the Flock.

Learn by what Statute, what Law, the Impropriator, if freed of the Cure, is
yet tied to repair the Chancell, as the Abbot did, and as the Abbot (where no
Vicar is endew'd) tied to provide one to officiate divine Service and
Sacraments. If impropriate Tithes be temporal things, why does the
impropriator in all Courts make his title in the Churches right? if lay and
temporal, why wear they these Ecclesiastique badges?

I cannot for my part think that Statutes which declares Tithes to be due to
God and holy Church, which directs (among other things, even impropriate
Tithes) to be disposed to the pleasure and honor of Almighty God, which calls
the withdrawing thy impropriate Tithes, a neglecting of thy duty to Almighty
God. I cannot think that these Statutes did either alter, or intended to alter
the Ecclesiastique primative nature and use of Tithes, and the rather because I
find that the Lawyers, who likely had the penning of them did hold Tithes due
by divine Right, and annexed to the spiritual office of the Parson, and
consequently not alterable. And then thou that justly condemnest this Parson,
or that Vicar, for sometimes neglecting his duty, think with thy self what
account will be exacted of thee that receives the same Salery and wages with
the Parson and Vicar; yet do totally neglect the duty and mispendest all the
Church Revenue upon thy own private occasions, 39. Canon.
while the Canon of the Apostles would not permit the Bishop to challenge ought
to himself, or to dispose among his kindred or friends, but to administer
them, Tanquam Deo intuente, to the poor and Fatherless. And consonant to that
is that in Cook. 5. Report. fol. 11.
Caudris case in the 5th Report, where the Abbot might not dispend the Free
alms were the rents and revenues, as appears by the Statutes. E. 1.24.14. E.
3.17.
free alms of the Abbey (much less thou Tithes) upon his secular friend, but
in hospitality upon the poor, the Fatherless, the Stranger, etc. and if so,
then the Abbots were but Gods trustees, and as his Almners dispensed them to
Gods Pentioners, the poor, the Fatherless and Widow. And do thou inquire
how thou havest them and Sir Edward Cook, in his Mag. Charta. f. 649. in his
Comment upon 2. Edw. 6. touching tithes, quotes the Text in Deuteronomy. 14. And the
Levite shall come, and the stranger, the fatherles, and widow, within thy
Gates shall eat thereof. Here is (says he) the right use whereto tithes
should be employed; and surely had they been lay or temporal, then they, no
more then other temporal things are tied to Ecclesiastique uses. And he wrote
long after our Statutes, and best knew the power and operation of them.
ought to dispose them. For I fear that at the last and general Audit,
thou will find them great Cloggs to thy account, and in the interim, ruins to
thy Family; yet I doubt not but thou will find probable reasons as well as Law
for reteining of Impropriations and Abbeys which thou have bought, or thy
Friends left thee: yet read this ensuing Treatise, the reasons may persuade
thee, if not, with me view the insuccesse of Sacrilegious persons.

But before thou can judge of Sacrilegious persons, thou must know, what is
Sacrilege, for such there is, else the Apostle erred, who whilst thou say,
that thou shall not commit Idolatry, upbraides thee with, and committest thou
Sacrilege.

Sacrilege is the diversion of holy and Ecclesiastique things to profane and
secular use: as Simeon and Levi; Theft and Sacrilege, be evil Brethren, Theft
robs thy Neighbor, Sacrilege thy God. Tithes are so undoubtedly Gods
inheritance, as though some have curiously disputed his title to them, as how
due; yet none but the Impropriator denies his right to them, as not due: but
Tithes and Impropriations are the subject of the ensuing Discourse, therefore I
will offer thee my Conceit, how Abbeys and Monasteries are consecrated to God,
and ought not to be profaned by secular use.

It is noted that in all Ages, in all Religions, the Temples of their Gods were
accounted holy, and not to be profaned by secular service: and this being so
universally observed in several Ages, in differing Empires, contrary
Religions, it must needs be by the Command of the universal Monarch God.

Reason taught a Heathen to conclude, Quod ab omnibus gentibus observatum est,
id non nisi a Deo sancitum est. Did God by the Law of Nations teach Heathens to
keep the Temples of their false Gods as sacred; And does he not by the same Law
Command thee a Christian to preserve his own holy and unviolated?

The Devil, that (to his greater Condemnation) best knows God, and is
therefore his best Counter-fait, gets himself among the Heathen Temples,
Priests, Oblations, and to these the Attributes of holy, and sacred; he knew
them to belong to God and his Church, and therefore, to be like the most high,
usurpes them to him and his.

The Devil knew that the Temple of God which sanctifies the gold that is upon
it, must needs be holy it self, and sanctify the ground on which it stands,
and therefore the Devil taught his Disciples that doctrine, Plin. Epist. l.
10. f. 615.
Licet aedes sacra Claudij Caesaris collepsa sit, religio tamen occupat solum.
Profit could not tempt Trajan to permit public bathes to be made where once
Caesar's Temple stood, the holy ground must not be profaned by secular
employment. Yet thou a Christian do not spare the very Temple of God
himself. Shall it not (in this point) be easier at the last day for Trajan,
then for thee, for if he a Heathen thus esteemed a false God, that must come to
be judged, how would he have reverenced, the true and ever living God (had he,
as thou) known him? but this only argues, and does not prove a sanctity in
Temples.

But God himself has told us in Leviticus, Levit. 27.
that Lands and houses may be sanctified to the Lord, but they are redeemable
at the value estimated by the Priest, and a fifth part more. But God there
tells us that things devoted are most holy to the Lord, Verse. 28.
and not redeemable, the reason given by Divines is, because it was given with
a Curse, and if that be the reason; do thou then peruse the Charters of
Foundations of Monasteries and Abbeys, and tell me if they be not devoted and
most holy to the Lord. And then, if not redeemable, much less I think to be
taken from the Church; without any satisfaction, or consent of the Triests.

The Charters were usually in these words, Concessi Deo and Ecclesiae etc.
offero Deo etc. confirmavi Deo and Ecclesiae, and these Grants have in our
Common Law been adjudged good and valid; our much reverenced Magna Charta, so
often confirmed by Parliament, begins with Concessimus deo quod Ecclesia
Anglicana libera sit etc. and Sir Edward Cook in his Comment upon it, says,
What is granted for God, Cook. Magna Charta. fol. 2. quod datum Eccltsiae datum
deo. Lib. 6. f. 176. cap. 285.
is in Law deemed to be granted to God, what is granted for his honor, what
for maintenance of his service of his Religion, is granted to and for God, and
that anciently these Grants were good in Law.

The Capituler of Charles the great says, that the Dedications were on this
sort, the Founder mentioning in a writing all he intended to give, and holding
it over the Altar, spoke thus to the Priest: I here give unto God all things
contained in this writing, for the remission of my sins etc. and for them for
whose good God will accept them, and by these to promote Gods service in
sacrifice in Lights, in Sustentation of the Clergy, the Poor, and in all
things honorable to God, and profitable to his Church, and if any man shall
take these away (which God forbid) let him for his Sacrilege give a most
strict account to God, to whom they are now dedicated, now devoted.

The Founders of Religious houses, in the conclusion of their Deed, following
the example of ^^ra. 6.12. And the God that caused his name to dwell there,
destroy all Kings and people that put to their hands to alter or destroy this
house of God.
Darius, imprecates a most heavy Curse on them that violate or withdraw their
gift Apostolatus Benedictin. in Angl: Apend. secund. f. 60.13. E. 1. ca. 6.
Venientibus contra haee and distruentibus ea occurrat Deus in gladio irae and
furoris and vindictae and maledictionis aeternae.

And here is to be remembered that Abbeys and Monasteries had in them Churches
and Chappells which had from the Bishops and Clergy a more particular
dedication and consecration, then from their Founders, the Bishop using therein
much Alms, many Prayers, and some decent Ceremonies, and after, even to the
Dissolution, the Sacraments, were there constantly administered, and our
Ancestors had so reverent an esteem of Churches, as following the example of
Christ, would not permit buying and selling in the Churchyard, but by
Parliament prohibites it.

Now consider, that if under the Leviticall Law, which in this was moral and
not taken away, the single act of devoting thy house to the Lord, conferred
such a Sanctity, such a Holiness upon it, that it could never be redeemed, but
at a fifth part more then the worth, and that valued by the Priest, shall the
Founders gift, (which was the dedication in the Leviticall Law) the fervent
Prayers and Intercessions of the Clergy and Church, the long and frequen
administration of Service and Sacraments under the Gospel, shall these add
nothing of Sanctity, nothing of Reverence to it; But even where thy Fathers and
Grandfathers for many hundreds of years reverently on their knees received
mystically the Body and Blood of Christ, there thou (to avoid superstition)
do sacrilegiously feed thy Ox, and thy Ass, and not permitting Christ, as
at first, to lie between them, but more uncivil then the Jewish host, turnest
him out to make room for them.

But thou will say these Abbeys, these Monasteries were Founded and dedicated
by Idolatrous Persons, Consecrated by Popish Bishops, and for superstitious
uses, and therefore not sacred, nor acceptable to God.

For the unworthiness of their Persons, and their act, consider Corah and his
company, who as God himself says, were sinners against their own Souls, nor
can thou think the sin small, where thou find their punishment so
great; for God smites them not as Vzziha with leprosy, nor with withered hands
as Jeroboam, nor with death like Vzza, but to make their punishment answerable
with their offense, God does a new thing in Israel, fire from above consumes
these, and the earth from beneath, swallows up those men; and although Moses
be commanded to scatter the fire (for Civil Magistrates may quench the fire of
Rebellion) yet Aaron the Ecclesiastique hand must first gather up the Censers,
for they were holy, and God gives there the reason why holy, for says he, they
offered them to the Lord. And if so bad men by a single, and so bad an act, did
consecrate their Censers to the Lord, needs must the Pious gift and charity of
the Founders, with the often Prayers and Sacraments of the Church daily used
for many years, needs must they sanctify the Church or Chapel where used.

While God spoke once from the Bush to Moses, Exodus 3.
he Commands him not to draw nigh, and yet at that distance bids him put off
his shoes, Joshua. 5.15.
for the ground was holy. And Joshua must be barefoot while he spoke with the
Captain of the Lords Host, because the ground was holy.

Consider then that if the places be holy, where God spoke once to Moses, once
to the Captain of the Lords Host, needs must the Church or Chapel be holy,
where God has so often spoken to thy Fathers in Sacraments and Sermons, and
where they to him so often in Prayers and Thankesgiving.

If public holy actions do not sanctify the place where acted, David
(though he would not offer to God that which cost him naught) needed not to buy
that which he did not offer, the Threshing-floore of Araugna, it had been
sufficient for David to pay for the Oxen and threshing instruments, that must
be burnt not restored. The floor remained, but not for Araughnas use, (says a
Learned Divine) for by David's Sacrifice, the floor was devoted and sanctified
to the Lord, and might not return to worldly employment, which David knew, and
therefore bought it.

But thou will say, these are Dedications and Sanctions under the Law, not
under the Gospel. It Is true these were Sanctions under the Law, and were
Moral, not Cerimoniall, and therefore remain under the Gospel. Christ that
sends thee from the Altar, to be reconciled to thy Brother, commands thee to
leave thy Gift behind thee at the Altar, and the reason given by Divines is,
because thou have devoted it to the Lord, the gift remains holy, and might
not return to the world, for though thy person be not accepted, yet thy gift
by thy devoting, is holy to the Lord, as were the Censers, in the case of Corah.

Thou see that Christ, who would not Peter should strike to rescue him, his
Master from violence, yet he himself strikes to free the Temple from
Sacrolege, and thou can not think that Christ stroke this day to preserve,
what he would abolish the next day, the Sanction of the Temple.

Dee but consider that of Ananias and Saphirah, and thou will conclude, that
the Devoting any thing to God, is under the Gospel, a sanctifying it to the
Lord, and the withdrawing it, must then be Sacrilege, which was Ananias sin,
agreed by all Diviner, and Junius in his notes upon it says, predium
Consecrassent Ecclesiae, they had Consecrated it to the Lord; to conclude, thou
can not violate or irreverently use a Church or Temple, but thou must
disrationate St. Paul's argument, who diswades the pollution of thy Body,
because it is the Temple of the holy Ghost.

Thou may observe our Law books to have held Tithes due by divine right, our
Parliaments in their Statutes too, have acknowledged Tithes due to God and holy
Church and this both before and after the Statutes of Dissolution; and that at
this day the Law reckons tithes of impropriate, as well as of presentative
Churches to be Ecclesiastique things, and if this will not persuade a
restitution of such as thou have, yet let it dissuade a reception of more: For
I know thou would not buy a Title litigious between thee and thy neighbor;
and why will thou that which (at best) is questionable between thee and thy
God, that must judge the Title, and in a Court where thou can have no
advocate but his Son, whom thou would disinherit.

But the destruction of Corah persuades more with the Isralites, then the soft
voyee of Moses, and such Oratory may take thee, Hell has frighted some to
Heaven; view then the insuccesse of Sacrilegious persons in all ages, that will
prevail with thee, for had Corah and his Accomplices been visited after the
visitation of other men, thou and I, nay perhaps the whole Congregation of
Israel, would have believed what they said is truth, it sounded so like
reason, and approved what they did as pious, it looked so like Religion, but
their end otherwise informed them, and better instructed us: I will not trouble
thee with presidents of foreign Nations, as Bohemia, the Palatinat, and
Germany, where under color of Reformation, the ruin of Monasteries, and
Religious Houses, mightily enriched for the present both public and private
Coffers, and now the Ravenous War has both exhausted the wealth, and almost
unpeopled the Country; hoc omen Deus avertat. I will therefore tie my self to
our own Country, and story, unhappily plentiful in miserable examples.

I will begin with William the Conqueror; In the first year of his reign, he
fires by his Normaines, St Holl. fol. 7.
Peter's Church in York. In the 4th, he rifles the Holl. fol. 8.
Monasteries, and about the Speed. f. 429 Camb. But. 259.
18th year of his reign destroyed 36 Mother Churches in Hampshire, to make his
New-Forrest, takes all their Plate, all their Treasure, even the Chalices. In
the Holl. 12. Speed. 428. Matt. Par. fol. 10.
13th year of his reign, the Son out of his own loins (Robert of Normandy)
Rebels against him, and in Battle beats his Father from his Horse, wounds
his Person, and (which to him is worse) his honor. About the 19th year,
Richard his second (but first beloved) Son, sporting in his Fathers
New-Forrest, is there strangely killed by the goaring of a Stagge, says Speed.
429.
Speed, Camb. 259.
Camden, by a pestilent Air. In the 20th of his reign, he burnt the City of
Holl. 14. Speed. 431. Matthew. Par. fol. 13.
Mannts, and Church of S. Mary's, with to Anchorites; and coming too nigh the
flame, the heat of the fire and his Arms attracts a dissease, and his Horse
leaping with him, breaks his Riders belly, whereof he dies, and his Body
(forsaken of his Nobles and Servants) lies three days neglected, after by the
courtesy of a Country gentleman, his Corpse is brought to St Speed. 434.
Stephens Church in Cane in Normandy, but in the passage the Town Fires and his
bearers leave him, and run to quench that, so that dead he goes not quietly to
his Grave, whither brought at last is there denied Burial by one who claimed
the ground as his inheritance, forced from him by the Duke, all Ceremonies stay
until a composition was made, and an Annual rent (says Daniel. 48.
Daniell) paid for his Grave, in which before he could be laid, his body
swelling, burst to the great annoyance of the Company, he is offensive dead and
living, afterward the town being taken by an Enemy, his Bones, as unworthy to
be inshrined in a Church, are dug up and scatrered like Chafe before the
wind, death denies him rest.

His Speed. 429.
Grandchild Henry the son of Robert, hunting in the New-Forrest, is struck
throw the Jaws with a bough of a Tree, and like Absalom, found hanging in the
thicket of an Oak. His Grandchild William (second Son to Robert Dake of
Normandy) was made Earl of Flanders, and in a War against his Uncle Henry
the first, received a small Speed. 462. Mat. Par. 71. Milles lat. 77.
wound in his hand, and thereof dyed the last of the Conquerors Grandchildren
by his eldest Son.

Robert of Normandy, the Conquerors eldest son, disinherited by his Father,
is taken Stow.
prisoner by his brother Henry the first, who puts out both his Eyes, and after
26 years imprisonment, Robert Ma. Par. 73. Speed. 467.
dies starved in the Goal at Cardaffe.

William Rufus succeeded his Father in his Crown and Curse, in his first year
his Nobles Speed 440. Mat. Par. 14.
Rebel, in his sixth, a great Famine rages, and such a mortality, as the
quick can scarce bury the dead. About the Holl. 22. Speed. 445.
19th year of his Reign, his Treasury is stored by sale of Chalices and
Church-Jewells. In his 13th year, while Sir Speed. 448. Mat. Par. 54. Cervus
magnus cum ante eum (regem) transiret dis Rex cuidem mi liti. Wall. Tirrel.
trahe Diabole. Exijt ergo telum volatile, and obstante arbore in obliquum
reflexum saciens per medium cordis sauciavit qui subito mortuus corruit.
Walter Tirret shoots at a Dear in the New-Forrest, he kills the King, (in the
same place where a Church stood) who dies ( beast like) not speaking a word.

Mills says, the Arrow glanced from the Dear, Speed, and Matthew Paris, from
a Tree, and killed the King, but both agree his death to be (as his Fathers) by
accident. He dead, his followers (as did his Father's) leave his body and fled;
his Funerals are as his Fathers interrupted, for his Mat. Par. ib. Speed 449.
Corpse were laid in a Colyers Court drawn by one silly lean Beast, (says the
Book) in his passage the Cart brake in foul and filthy ways, leaving his body
a miserable spectacle, pitifully goared, and filthily bemired, so, as his
Father, he passes not quietly to his Grave, yet at last he is brought bleeding
to Winchester, and there buried unlamented. Speed says his Speed, ibid.
bones were after taken up and laid in a Coffer with Canutus his bones; but
there they rest not, for in December 1642. Winchester being entered by the
Parliament forces, the Organes, Windows, and Chests, wherein the bones of many
our ancient Kings were preserved, were by the fury of the soldiers broken, and
among others his, and as his Fathers, scattered upon the face of the Earth, as
not worthy burial. And this was the third of the Conquerours Issue that was
murdered in the New Forest, where the Dogs licked the blood of Naboth, there
they must lick the blood of Ahab, where the sacrilege was committed, must be
the place of the punishment.

Hugh Earl of Shrewsbery 11th. Will. Rusin commanding against the Welchmen in
Anglesey, kenneled his Dogs in the Church of S. Frydance, where in the morning
they were found madd, the Earl shortly after fighting with the enemy, was with
an Arrow shot Holl. 23.
dead in the eye, the rest of his body being strangely armed.

Henry the first, the Conquerours fourth Son, is his brothers Successor, he
had several Children, whereof his eldest William, with his brother Richard and
Sister Mary, in a calm day are M. Pa f 69. Speed 459. Holl. 41.
drowned by the English shore, himself eating Lampreis dies on a surfeit, and
being opened, the stinck of his body and brains M Par. 73. Speed 467.
poison his Physicians, one other of his Daughters mournes her virginity in a
Nunnery, and dies Childlesse, and in the next Generation is his name forgot,
Plantaginet takes the Crown.

It is observable, that the Conqueror, all his Sons and all their Sons,
dyed untimely deaths, (unless thou reckonest the Lamprey Surfeit of H. 2. to be
natural) and what the Fol. 20. in margin.
Author notes of Nabuc. and H. 8. is also true of William the Conqueror (for in
the 68. after his destroying St Peter's Church at York, which was in his second
year) his Name is extinct, and his Kingdom is devolved to another Nation,
Speed. f. 46. that the Norman time, held 69 year.
Plantaginet takes his Crown, and upon search (I fear) thou shall find very
few Families (among the many thousands) in England, who enjoy their
Sacrilegious possessions of Abbeys and Impropriations beyond the 68 year, and
very many that hold them not half the time, and none almost but with some
notable misfortune.

I cannot omit the Sacrilege and punishment of King John, who in the 17th
year of his Reign, among other Churches, rifled the Abbeys of Hol. 194. Par.
f. 287.
Peterborough and Croyland; and after attempts to carry his sacrilegious wealth
from Lynne to Lincoln, but passing the Washes, the Earth in the midst of the
waters opens her mouth (as for Korah and his company) and at once swallows up
both Carts, Carriage, and Horses, all his Treasure, all his Regalities, all his
Churchspoyle, and all the Church-spoylers, not one Matt. Par fo. 287. nec pes
unas evasit qui regicasam nuntiaret.
escapes to bring the King word; the King himself passes the Wash at another
place, and lodges that night in Swinsteed Abbey, where the news and sickness
(whereof he dyed) together met him, some say he was poisoned by a Munke of
Swinsteed.

William Math Par. fo. 687.
Marshall Earl of Pembrooke, the great Protecter both of King and Kingdom,
having in the Irish war forceably taken from the Bishop of Furnes two Manors
belonging to his Church, was by him much solicited to restore them; but the
Earl refusing, was by the Bishop excommunicate, and so dying, was buried in
the Temple Church at London. The Bishop sues to the King to return the Lands,
the King requires the Bishop to absolve the Earl, and both King and Bishop
goes to the Earls grave; where the Bishop in the Kings presence used these
words, Oh William, which lies here snared in the bonds of Excommunication, if
what thou have injuriously taken from my Church, be with cempetent satisfaction
restored either by the King, thy heirs, or friend; I then absolve thee
otherwise, I ratify my sentence, Vt tuis semper peccatis involutus in inferno
maneas condemnatus.

The King blames the Bishops rigor, and persuades the Sons to a restitution,
but the Eldest William answered, He did not believe his Father to have got them
unjustly, because possessions got in War, becomes a lawful inheritance, and
therefore if the doting old Bishop has judged falsely, upon his own head be
the curse, my Father dyed, seized of them, and I lawful inherit them, nor will
I lessen my estate.

Which the Bishop hearing, was more grieved at the sons contumacy, then the
Fathers injury, and going to the King, told him, Sir, what I have said, stands
immutable; the punishment of Malefactors is from the Lord. And the curse
written in the Psalms, will fall heavy upon Earl William, in the next
Generation shall his name be forgot, and his sons shall not share the
blessing of increase and multiply, and some of them shall dye miserable deaths,
and the inheritance of all be dispersed and scattered, and all this my Lord, O
King, you shall see even in your days.

With what spirit the Bishop spoke it, do thou judge, for in the space of 25
years, all the five Sons of the Earl successively, according to their
Birth, inherits his Earldome, and Lands, and all dye Childlesse, the name and
Family is extinct, and the Lands scattered and dispersed; and that nothing
might fail of what the Bishop foretold Matthew. Par. 400. and 403.
Richard his second son is sore wounded, and taken Prisoner in Ireland, and
there dies of his hurts.

Matt. Par. f. 565. Aune Dom. 1241.
Gilbert the third son justing at Hertford breaks the Reins of his Bridle,
and falling from his Horse one foot hangs in the stirrup, and he thereby
dragged about the field, till rent and torn, and so by a miserable death
satisfied the Curse.

But these examples are at too great a distance and not to be discerned, but
through the perspective of Ancient History, I will therefore come nigher and
view Cardinal Woolsey, who from a m ane and obscure root grew to over shadow
all the subjects of England, eminent for Wit as Learning, great in the esteem
and favor of his Prince, laden with home and Foreign dignities, full of
wealth as years; in brief he was, while free from Sacrilege, the great and
successful Counselor of his Prince, and indeed the Catalogue of humane
blessings: but about the 17th year of Henry the 8th, Woolsey by consent and
license of the King and Pope Clement the 7th, Holl. f. 891. Stow. Good. f. 67.
dissolves forty small Monasteries in England, to erect two Colleges, the one
in Oxford, the other in Ipswich, thou and I may think this a work of Piety, to
destroy the poor Idolatrous Cells of lasie and ignorant Monks, to erect
stately Cottages for learned and industrious Divines, this God must accept, and
prosper both the Act and Acter. No, thou art deceived, he that would not that
thou should do evil, that good may come thereof, will not accept an
offering commenced by Sacrilege in the ruin of 40 Religious Houses, Woolsey
lays the foundation of his Colleges, but never sets up their Gates.

About three years after the King possesses his Palace at Good f. 104. Holl.
909.
Westminster, (Whitehall,) the Great Seal is taken from him, his great wealth
seized, and himself confined to a poor house at Assure, where he remained a
time (says God. f. 106.
Godwin) without necessaries driven to borrow furniture for his house, money
for his expenses, so as in his speech to the judges he complained, that he was
driven as it were to beg his bread, from door to door: 21. Hen. 8. he is
convicted in a Praemunire, all his Lands and Estate seized by the Holl. 909.
Good. f. 67. Good. 108.
King, his College at Ipswich, destroyed before built, that at Oxford receives
some indowment and a new name from the King, but is never to be finished. In
the 22. H. 8. at his Castle at Caywood, he is by the Earl of Holl. 915.
Northumberland arrested of High Treason, and fent toward London, at Lecester
the Lieutenant of the Tower met him, at whose sight he was much affrighted, and
to prevent a public and ignominious death which he feared, he gave himself
(says Mart. 304.306.
Martin) a Purge, Hist. Pont. Romans and Card. f. 1408.
Venenum recepisse, (say they that write the lives, of the Popes and
Cardinals) whereof he dyed, and was obscurely buried in Lecester Abbey without
other memory then his Sacrilege.

The Cardinal in dissolving his forty Monasteries had used the help of five
men (besides Cromwell) whereof two afterward Good. f 67.
fought a Duel, in which one is slain, and the survivor hanged for the
murder, so each dyed guilty of his own and the others blood; a third becomes
Judas-like his own executioner, for throwing himself into a well, he is there
drowned; the fourth a great Richman (to whom nothing is so terrible as poverty)
lives to beg his bread from door to door; the fifth, a Bishop, cruelly
murdered in Ireland, by Stow. abridg. f. 498.
Thomas Fitz. Garret, son to the Earl of Kildare.

I might here remember how Tope Clement the 7th, after his voluntary consent to
destroy poor Religious Houses, is himself forced out of his Speed. fol. 996.
Hist. Pont. Romans and Card.
stately Palace at Rome, and being besieged at his Castle of St Angelo, is
there constrained to eat Asses Flesh, and taking such conditions as a
Victorious Enemy would give, is driven to plunder his own Church to pay his
Enemies Army, and at last dies wretchedly of a miserable disease: but this is
Foreign, and I tied to home examples.

Thomas Lord Audley, received the first fruits of H. 8 his Sacrilege, for in
the 24th of his Reign, the King dissolved (by what means I find not) the
Priory of Christ. Church in London, and gave, says Stow. 24. H. 8.
Stow, the Church Plate and Lands to Sir Thomas Audley, who upon the
dissolution of Monasteries, got that of S. James in little Walden in Essex, and
made it both his Seat, and Place of his Barony, and after left it to Margaret
his Daughter and Heir, first married to Henry Dudley, Son to the Duke of
Northumberland, slain at St Quintynes, and dyed without Issue, and after she
was second Wife to Thomas Duke of Norfolk who had issue, Thomas Howard,
created Lord Walden, being his Grandfathers Title, and to credit his Mothers
Inheritance upon the Site of the Monastery, he began a goodly Audly Inn.
Structure (but attended with the fate of sacrilegious foundations) for that
much impaires him, and he never perfects that, he met also with other
misfortunes, which betiding so Noble a Family, and not yet published to the
World, are fitter for thy inquiry, then my Penn.

Cardinal Woolsey being dead, his servant Cromwell succeeds him in his Court,
Favor, and Fate, as their birthes were alike obsure, their rise, alike
eminent, so alike miserable were their downfall, wonder not at the first part
of their fortune, but contemplate the later; Policy in Kings, preferres able
men to high places and honor, for authority, power, and esteem of the
Persons, advantages their actions; of which wise Princes reap the Harvest, the
Actors get but gleanings, while the King makes Cromwell a Baron, his Seeretary,
Lord Privy Seal, his Vicegerent in Ecclesiasticis, he does but faciliate his
own great work of dissolving Speed. 10.6.
Monasteries, a business wherein Cromwell was too much versed, and unhappily
too successful. Report spoke him a great Stickler for the Protestant
Religion, and that although the Gospel had lost a Pillar in Queen Anne
Bullen, yet was another raised in Speed 1016.92.
Cromwell, for he had caused the Bible to be read, the Creed, Pater Noster, and
Ten Commandments, to be learned in English, and expounded in every Good. f.
146.
Church, some thought that Cromwell hoped to bury Popery in the ruins of the
Abbyes, and thereby give the better growth to the more pure Protestant
Religion; how pious soever his intents were in reforming Religion, yet was not
the manner of effecting them, it seems, acceptable to Heaven, for by
Parliament in the 31 of H. 8. he perfected his Dissolutions, and in April, in
the 32 of H. 8. he is made Holl. 950.
Earl of Essex, and Lord Great Chamberlain of England, high in the Kings
favor and esteem, yet instantly, while sitting at the Councell-Table, he is
suddenly apprehended and sent to the Tower, whence he comes not forth, until
to his Goodw. fol. 174.
Execution, for in Parliament he is presently accused of Treason and Heresy,
and unheard, is attainted. Some do observe that he Sir Edward Cook, in his
Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 37. says, that Sir Tho. Gaudy, then a grave Judge
of the Kings Bench, after told him, that Cromwell was commanded to attend the
Chief Justices, to know whether a man that was forth coming (as being in
Prison) might be attainted of high Treason by Parliament, and not called to
answer. The Judges ansvvered, It was a dangerous question, and they thought a
Parliament would never do it. But being by the express command^ment of the
King and they pressed by the said Earl (Cromwell Earl of Essex) to answer
directly, said, That if he was attainted by Parliament, it could not be
questioned, whether the Party was called to answer or not; but the Party,
against whom this was intended, (said he) was never questioned, but that the
first man that suffered by that proceeding, was the said Cromwell himself.
procured that Law of Attainting by Parliament, without hearing the Party, and
that himself was the first, that by that Law dyed unheard, for in July
following, he was thereupon beheaded.

Next consider, that King Henry the eight, who engrossed Sacrilege, and
retailed it to Posterity, what the Pope permitted Woolsey (says Cambden) H. 8.
with the assent of his Parliament, permits himself; the first to catch the
Pope, pretends charity, and good works ( Colleges shall be built) the later
to win the Layety in Parliament was offered with the revenue of religious
houses to maintain 40 M. Howes his Preface to Stowes Annals. Sir Ed Cooks
Jurisdiction of Courts. fol. 44.
Earls, 60 Barons, 300 Knights, 40000 Soldiers, and for ever ease the Subject
of Taxes, and Subsidies, both obtained their desires in dissolving, neither
perform the ends promised. H. 8th had first furthered Woolsey in his
dissolution, and thereby found the way to ruin all the rest.

In the Vid. the several Acts. 27. H. 8.31.
27th year of his reign, by Parliament he dissolves the lesser houses and in
the H. 8.
31th the great ones, in the 37. H. 8. c. 4.
37th all the Colleges, Hospitalls, and Free-chappells, except some few, and
possesses all their lands, goods, and treasure. For the first half of his
Reign, (while free from Sacrilege) he was honored of his Allies abroad,
loved of his subjects at home, successful in his actions, and at peace, as it
were, with God and Man; but after his Sacrilege (as in disfavour with both)
his Subjects Rebel, first in Suffolk, after in Lincoln, Somerset,
Yorkshire, and the Northern parts, as also in Ireland, such dearth of Bread
and Corn in England (the Grainery of Christendom) that many dye starved,
which has not been since the 40 of H. 3. And now (like Saul forsaken of God)
he falls from one sin to another. Queen Katherine (the Wise of his Bosom for
20 years) must now be put away, the marriage declared void, and he desirous of
sons, rather then Pillars to bear his name, marryes the Lady Speed. fol. 1040.
Anne Bullen, and by her had the Lady Elizabeth, and in the 27th of his Reign,
a son borne dead (to his great affliction) the 19 of May, 1536. The 28th of
his Reign she is beheaded, and the next day he Speed. 1039.
marryes the Lady Jane Seymore, who being with Child by him, she (nature
unwilling to give birth to the son of such a Father) wants strength to bring
forth* the Father Commands Speed. 1040.
her inseition, and the Mother the 12 of October. dies to give a short life to
her son, and the fixed of January, in the 31th year, the King weds the Lady
Anne Speed. 1039. Ibid.
of Cleve, and in July after is divorced: and in August following he marries
the Lady Katherine Howard, and in December in the 33 of his Reign she is
attainted, and dies on the block; and in July in the 35th of his Reign, he
marryes the Lady Katherine Parre. Here Is Wives enough to have peopled another
Canaan, Ibid.
had he had Jacobs blessing; but his three last are childlesse, and the
Children of the two first are by Statute declared 28. H. 8. c. ^^
illegitimate, and not inheritable to the Crown.

But himself growing aged and infirm, hopeless of more Children, and not
willing to venture the support of his Crown and Family, upon a single and so
weak a propt, as was his Son Prince Edward. In the 35. H. 8. c. 1.
35 year of his Reign he intailes the Crown upon his Children, after his death
they all successively sway his Scepter, and all dye Childlesse, and his Family
is extinct, and like Herostratus his name not mentioned, but with his Crimes.
His Crown happily descends to the issue of his eldest Sister, and a Foreign
Nation (like Cyrus his) fill his Throne.

Among the many great and active men ayding H. 8. in his dissolution of
Monasteries, and receiving great reward out of his Churchspoyle, Charles
Brandon, Duke of Suffolk was the chief, he had four wives, his first the
daughter of Nevile, Marqueste Mounteagle, who dyed without issue. By His second
wife he had one Daughter, married to Stanly, Lord Mountague, but dyed without
issue. His third wife was Mary Queen Dowager of France, and Sister to Henry
8th. by her he had one son, Henry, and two Daughters, Francis and Elianor.
His son was created Earl of Lincoln, but dyed a Child; his Daughter Francis
married Gray, Marquess Dorset, and after Duke of Suffolk, who had one son
Henry who dyed young, Jane Gray his eldest Daughter married to Speed. 1111.
Holl. 1099.
Guilford Dudley, and was with him Beheaded about 5 Mary. Katharine his second
Daughter was married to Edward Lord Seymore, Eldest Son to the Duke of
Somerset, Mary his third Daughter married to Martin Keys, and dyed without
Issue. God. f. 244.
Ellenor, second Daughter to Charles Brandon, married to Clifford Earl of
Cumberland a gallant Family, lately extinct.

The Queen Dowager dying, Charles Brandon Married the Daughter and Heir of the
Lord Willoughby of Eresby, who enriched him with two sons, Henry and Charles:
but the Duke dying about the 36. of H. 8. left his Title and Estate to his
son Henry, who enjoyed it until 5. E. 6. then dying of the Sweating
sickness, left them to his brother Holl. f. 1066. God. f. 244 Speed. 1100.
Charles, who only lived to be his brothers Heir, and Duke of Suffolk; and
the same day, and of the same Disease which his brother dyed, and with him the
Title, Name, and Family of Brandon.

The Statute of H. 8. c. 13. gives the Monastery of Sibeton in Suffolk, to the
Duke of Norfolk, and the Chauntry of Cobham in Kent, to the Lord Cobham, since
which time how heavy the hand of Justice has fallen upon these Noble Families,
inform thy self from our Annalls.

Consider next the Duke of Somerset, Protector to Edward the sixth, Godwin in
his Annalls says, Godwin. fo. 252.
He was a just and pious man, a zealous Reformer of Religion, a faithful
preserver of the King and Commonwealth, save that with the common Error of the
time, his hands were deep in sacrilege. In the first year of Stat. 1. E. 6.
c. 14.
Edward the 6 th, he procured the Dissolution of some Chantryes,
Free-Chappells, and Hospitalls, left undissolved by H. 8. In the third year,
he permits (if not procures) his Brother Thomas Lord Seymore, untried, (says
Godwin. fo. 227.
Goodwin) to be attainted by Parliament, and shortly after, (not unblamed)
signed a Warrant for his Execution, whereupon his Brother lost his Head, and he
a friend.

The same year his zeal to Reformation, adds new sacrilege to his former;
for he defaces some part of St Paul's Stowes Aunalls.
Church, converts the Charnell-house, and a Chapel by it, into dwelling
Houses, and demolishing some Monuments there, he turns out the old bones to
seek new Sepulchers in the Fields: next he destroys the Steeple, and part of
the Church of St John's of Jerusalem, by Smithfield, Ibid.
and with the stone begins to build his house in the Somerset House.
Strand, but as the leprosy with the Jews, with us the curse of Sacrilege,
cleaves to the Consecrated stone, and they become insuccessefull, so as the
Builder does not finish his House, nor does his Son inherit it. In the fifth
year of Edward the 6th, the Duke was indicted, and found guilty of Felony,
which was (says Hollinshead) upon a Statute made the third and fourth of
Edward the 6th, and since repealed, whereby to attempt the death of a Privy
Counselor, is Felony, ( Godwin says) upon the Statute of 3. H. 7. but
erroniously that not extending to Barons; it is observable that this Law was
but the year before passed by himself, and himself the only man that ever
suffered by it. The Statute being since repealed; Godwin. fo. 247.
Godwin observes and wonders that he omitted to pray the benefit of his Book,
as if Heavens would not that he that had spoiled his Church, should be saved by
his Clergy; and it is observable that in the Reign of Edw. 6th, none of the
Nobility dies under the Rod of Justice, but the Duke of Somerset and his
Brother the Lord Admiral, all the Uncles the King had, and their Crimes
comparatively were not heinous.

Did these men dye the common death of all men, or are they visited after the
manner of all men? if not, believe they provoked the Lord, and consider, that
if they sinned in the first profanation, thou that continuest their act,
can not be innocent.

Here thou may see God observing a Decorum in his punishment of Sacrilege,
the Issue of the Conqueror are strangely (almost miraculously) slain in the
New-Forrest, where their Father committed the Sacrilege. Woolsey, that by the
Kings license and power, had destroyed 40 Monasteries, is by the Kings power
ruined, and at last driven to seek entertainment, and an obscure grave in a
Monastery; his Agents that had thrust themselves into his sacrilegious
employment, are themselves their own Executioners, guilty of their own Bloods.

Pope Clement the 7th, that willingly permitted the spoil of 40 poor
Monasteries, to erect two Rich Colleges, is himself necessitated to Plunder
his own rich Church, to preserve his poor decayed Person.

The Lord Cromwell, and Duke of Somerset, commit their Sacrilege by Acts of
Parliament, and by Acts of Parliament they perish every one by the Sword,
wherewith he strikes.

And since in the Acts of Parliament for dissolution of Monasteries, the whole
Kingdom was involved either by their Personal consent as Barons, or their
implicit consent in the representative body in the House of Commons, we have
just cause to fear and pray, least God still observing his order, and turning
our Artillery upon our selves, should make use of a Parliament (whereby our
Fathers robbed him) to destroy us their Children.

I have here given thee instance only of such as were the first Actors in the
Violation and subversion of Monasteries, least therefore thou should think
the crime and punishment ends with them. Consider with me the condition and
success both of our Commonwealth in general, and of Private Families in
particular before the Dissolutions, and observe them after, and we shall find
just cause to think there is a cursed thing amongst us; For while our
Religious houses stood, they (employing their Revenues according to their
Donors direction) opened wide their Hospitable gates to all Comers, and
without the charge of a Reckoning, welcomed all Travailers, until the Statute
of 1. Edw. 1. restrained and limited them, and casting their Bread upon the
Waters, they releeved the Neighboring poor without the care of the two next
Justices of Peace, or the curse of a Penal Law; while they stood, the younger
Children both of Lords and Commons were provided; for without the ruin of
their Fathers Estate, or (almost) a charge to their Parents, and not left (as
now) often to an unworthy, necessitous, and vicious course of life: we had then
no new Laws, (the offspring of new Vices) to erect Houses of correction for
lewd and Vid. 43. Eliz. c. 3.
vagrant Persons, to provide stock to bind poor Children Prentises, or to make
weekly Leavyes, to maintain the weak, lame, indigent, and impotent People, to
our new charge of an Annual Subsidy at least, for these were provided for,
those prevented by the charity of our Religious Houses, and then the Families
and Estates of our Nobility and Gentry continued long through very many
descents. But when covetous sacrilege got the upper hand of superstitious
charity, and destroyed all our Monasteries, all our Religious Houses, the
preservers of Learning, both Divine and Humane, by their Learned works and
laborious Manuscripts, the suppressors of Vice, by their strict, regular, and
exemplar life: though some, nay many among them Sons of Ely, made the
offerings of the Lord to stinck before the People. Then all their Houses, all
their Lands, Appropriations, Tithes, and Oblations, (...) Par. Churches 9232.
Came. Brit fo. 162. 9284. whereof impropriate. 3845.
coming into the Kings hands, Policy (to prevent a restitution) distributes
them among the Layety, some the King exchanges, some he sells, others he gives
away; and by this means, (like the dust flung up by Moses) they presently
disperse all the Kingdom over, and at once becomes curses both upon the
Families and Estates of the owners; they often vitiously spending on their
private occasions, what was piously intended for public Devotion; insomuch
that within Twenty years next after the Dissolution, more of our Nobility and
their Children have been attainted, and dyed under the Sword of Justice, then
did from the Conquest, to the Dissolution, being almost five hundred years; so
as if thou examine the List of the Barons in the Parliament of the 27. H. 8.
thou shall find very few of them, whose Son does at this day inherit his
Fathers Title and Estate, and of these few, many to whom the Kings favor has
restored what the rigorous Law of attainder took both Dignity, Lands, and
Posterity. And doublesse the Commons have drunk deep in this Cup of deadly
Wine, but they being more numerous, and less eminent, are not so obvious to
observation.

Thou have seen the insuccesse of H. 8. and his Family, and may observe his
sacrilegious wealth not to thrive better.

Mr Cam^den. fo. 163.
Cambden in his Britannia, says, that in the time of H. 8. after the
Dissolution of the lesser Houses, there were remaining 645 Monasteries, (
Monuments of our Ancestors piety) built to the honor of God, and propagation
of the Christian Faith, Learning, and the relief of the Poor, as also 96
Colleges, (besides those in the University) 110 Hospitalls, and 2374 Chantryes
and Free-Chappells. All which, except some few Colleges, Free-Chappells, and
Chantryes, with all their Lands and Wealth, came to H. 8. the Annual value of
the Lands then being very Vast, their Goods and Personal Estate exceeding
great, besides the Plunder of Shrine inestimable, when the Pearl, Gold, and
precious stones of one Shrine filled two Godwin. fo. 159.
Chests so as each took eight strong men (says Mr Cambden) to carry it.

And although the dissolving of Chantryes, Colleges, and Free-Chappels, in the
37. of H. 8. his Reign did not yield him a Crop equal to the Vintage of his
former Reformations; yet was his Harvest better then the Gleanings of Ruth,
though among full sheaves. Speed fol 1011.
Speed says he had 12 Barrells filled with Gold and silver, which Cardinal
Woolsey provided for the Pope, Godwin remembers 118840l he had of the Clergy
for their Fine in a Praemunire, besides the great benefit of Forfeitures that
accrued by the attainders of many great men, and the multitude of Lones, Taxes,
and Subsidies, he received from his Subjects, being more (says Mr Cambden, and
Mr Howes) then all the Kings had in 500 years before; yet all this access of
wealth, added to that Mass of 5300000l left him in ready money by his Father,
as appears by the Close-Roll of 3. H. 8. (says Sir Edw. Cook. Jurisdiction of
Courts. fol. 198.
Cook) could not preserve him from want, (the certain attendant on
sacrilegious wealth) wherewith he is so sore pressed, that about the 36 year
of his Reign, of all the Kings of England, he alone, Coins not only base Non
tantum stanneam cuprinamque sed coreaceam pecuaiam solus omni^ regum Ang
procuders coactus est.
Tin and Coppar, but Lether money.

And it is observed that since the accession of Abbeys and Impropriations to
the Crown, even the Crown Lands (which formerly have been thought sufficient
to support the ordinary charge of the Crown,) are now so wasted (absit invidia
dictis) as they will scarce defray the ordinary charge of the Kings household.
And while such bitter streams flow from sacrilegious Wells, though dug by
Kings Subjects, that fin their Cisternes from thence, cannot expect to drink
sweet Waters.

Reynerus Apostolatus Benedict. in Ang. fo. 227. and 228.
tells us, and upon good credit, that at the dissolution H. 8. divided part of
the Church spoils among 260 Gent. of Families in one part of England, and at
the same time Thomas Duke of Norfolk, rewards the service of Twenty of his
Gentlemen, with the grant of 40l a year out of his own Inheritance, and that
while not sixty of the Kings Donees, had a Son owning his Fathers Estate,
every one of the Dukes, has the son of his own Loins, Flourishing in his
Fathers Inheritance, and that he could have set down their several names had
convenience required it.

Thou may here expect I should observe the ill success of particular private
men, possessors and owners of Impropriations and Scites of Religious Houses,
but to set down all, would make the porch much bigger then the House, a
disproportion, I fear, among other Errors I am already guilty of, and to set
down but a few, would displease thee, while I discover the nakedness only of
thee, thy Parents or Friends. But do thou, and let every man observe, how
often Impropriations and Religious houses; in a short time change and shift
their owners, like the Arc not resting, either with the men of Sam. ^.
Ashdod, Gath, nor Eckron, but wearies them out with Emrods, and Mice; curses
upon their persons and Estates, but returned to Bethshemeth and Kiriahjearim to
its own place, to the Priest and Levite, not only Obed-Edom, but even all
Israel is blessed.

And that thou may neither doubt, nor yet wonder, at the insuccesse of
Sacrilegious Persons, first weighing what David prayed against those that did
but say, Psalm. 83.
Let us take to our selves the houses of God into our possession; next
remember, the many and grievous Curses imprecated by Founders of Religious
Houses, and those seconded by their spiritual Mother the 17. E. 1. c. 6.
Church, she enjoined it by the natural Parent, in several Acts of
Parliament, and can thou hope good from their blessings, and not fear evil
from their Curses? If thou think the Founders Idolatrous, the Church Popish,
and therefore their curses not regardable, let that in Ezra. 6.
Ezra rectify thy Error, where thou shall find Darius finishing what Cyrus
began, the second Temple at Jerusalem, then restoring what Nebuchadnezzar had
taken, all the Golden and Silver Vessel, then he gives Cattle, Corn, Wine,
Oil, etc. for sacrifices, and adds this curse upon the violators, Ezra. 6. ^
And the God that has caused his name to dwell there, destroy all, King and
People, that put to their hand, to alter and destroy this house of God, which
is at Jerusalem, there thou may observe both an Idolater giving, and a
Heathen cursing, yet is his gift acceptable, and his curse prevalent, for thou
shall find Antiochus 1. Mac. 6.
Epiphanes his Armies destroyed, himself dejected and complaining even to
death, of his great tribulation and misery, acknowledges that they befall him
for his Evil done at Jerusalem, for he took thence the Golden Altar, the Table
of the Shewbread, the vessels of Gold and silver, as thou may read in the
1. Chap. 1. Mac. 1.1.11.12.
Mac. and himself dying of a most loathsome disease. And shortly after his
son Mac. 7.4.
Antiochus Eupater is slain, and in the same Chapter thou may observe
Nicanor threatening to burn up the Temple, and presently he first, and after,
all his Army is slain, not one escapes, the head and right hand of Nicanor,
which had been lift up against the 2. Mac. 3.
Temple, is cut off and hung up toward Jerusalem. Heliodorus is sent to
Jerusalem by Seleucus King of Asia, to take the Treasure out of the Temple, and
while in the Temple disposing the treasure, he is smitten of God, and ready to
dye, until Onias the High Priest, at the entreaty of Friends, offers sacrifice
for him, and obtaines his life, and Heliodorus returns to the King, and
declares what befell him, the King, yet thirsting for the Money of the Temple,
would send another, and demanding of Heliodorus whom; he answered, thy enemy or
a 2. Mac. 5.
Traitor, for if he escape with life, he shall be sure to be scourged, so
certain is the punishment of Sacrilege.

2. Ma. 8.33.
Calisthenes attempting to burn the Temple, set fire on the gates, and after
is himself burnt by the Jews.

2. Mac. 4.39.
Lysimacus, called the Church-Rober, commits many 2. Mac. 4.2.
saeriledges by the instigation of Menelaus; is slain by the 2. Mac. 13.5678.
treasury of the Temple, and his instigator, is by Antiochus put to a strange
Death. For in Berea was a Tower 50 Cubits high, full of Ashes, with a Round
instrument that went down into the Ashes, wherein they put Sacrilegious
persons, and Menelaus (says the Text) having committed sins against the
Altar, whose Fire and Ashes are holy, receives his Death by Ashes, not having a
Burial in the Earth.

Alcimus even in his Act of Sacrilege, while pulling down the 1. Ma. 9.55.
Temple walls, is stuck with a Palsy and dies in torment.

Jason that burnt the Porch, Demetrius and other Sacrilegious persons all fall
under the single Curse of one Heathen: and do thou think to escape so many
Curses of a Christian Church which twice a year (being so directed by
Parliament) curses the violators of Churehes, and Church Liberties.

But if these judgments and examples cannot fright thy covetous soul from
Sacrilege, but thy desires of being rich sway thee, then let thy provident
good husbandry so far prevail with thee, as not to meddle with God's and the
Levites portion, the Church patrimony; but even out of Temporal and Wordly
respects for the good of thee, thy Children, Neighbors, and posterity forbear
(what pretenses soever are made) the dissolving Bishoprics and Deaneries.

Remember that of all the specious pretenses and large promises made both by
Woolsey and H 8. upon their several Dissolutions, not any one of them is
performed; Woolsey neither settles his Colleges, nor H. 8. ease his Subjects
of Loanes, Taxes and Impropriations, maintains no Soldiers for defense of the
Kingdom, nor disposes the Lands, as the Statute directs, to the honor and
pleasure of Almighty God, nor indeed to the profit of the Kingdom; if thou
weighest the profit and convenience the Public had before, with what they
have now, the burdens and charges that we have since groaned under, and
formerly not known; but that evil is only to be lamented, not cured, may we
happily prevent the like for the future.

The Lands and Revenue of Bishoprics and Deaneries, clogged with long Leases
under small Rents, can give but little help in Pay of the Vast Public Debt;
and that with greater damage to the Commonwealth, then the draine of private
Purses can be, for this only weakens particulars, and for the present; that
ruins generally, and for ever for the Priesthood is not with us (as with the
Jews) intayled upon Aaron and his Sons: but thine, mine, his, the sons of
Nobles, Gentlemen, and Pesants, while all alike able, are all alike interested
in the Churches preferment, which in our Nation is the sole Spure, the only
reward for Learning, and happily provides for those which otherwise would be
burdens to their Parent, mischiefs to the Kingdom, while Colleges,
Bishoprics, and Deaneries, continue, thou and thy Neighbor continuest thy
Lease at small Rents, thy Sons and Grandchild renues it at easy Fines, and
by the accustomed charity of thy Ecclesiastic Landlord, thy continued Lease,
not clogged with Liveries, Primer seisins, and Wardships (the curse of Tenures)
equals, if not betters an Inheritance.

But Colleges, Bishoprics, and Deaneries dissolved, their Lands, and Houses
must be assigned (as were Monasteries and impropriations) to this Lord or that
Courtier, or to that or this Committee-man, and then thy rent (if thou be
continued Tenant) must be racked to the highest rate, 'till thou ruined by
paying so great a Rent, thy Landlord, by receiving the Church-Revenue, and all
we, while under the rod for the first, be guilty of a second National
Sacrilege; for shall we not believe this National War and general ruin,
to be for a general and National sin, which cannot be the acts of private
and partisular men though infinitely multiplied, but must proceed from the Acts
of the universal Nation, and such I know none, but that Sacrilege of
destroying some Churches, some Chappells, and robbing others of their Tithes
and Indowments, 27. H. 8. 31. H. 8.
which is not only connived at, but made lawful by our Acts of Parliament, to
which even every one in the whole Kingdom, by our own Law, is said to be
privy and consenting, and thereby guilty of the subsequent Sacrilege, and
then do thou judge, whether another Act for dissolution (which God prevent)
will not be a step to another National Sacrilege, and that to another
Scourge; therefore if Hophny and Phineas have sinned, and Eli not reproved
them, let them all three dye, yea in one day, for we have Text and president
for that, but neither, that the order should perish.

To conclude, do thou consider, that while we deteine Tithes from the Church,
and forbid Aaron to counsel Moses, whether we trespass not upon the Property
and Liberty of the Church, and shall not God visit for these things, when thou
with thy Sword maintainest against thy Brother (If not against thy King) thy
Property of Goods, and Liberty of Subject? But that God may withdraw his
Visitations, and thou sheath thy Sword, and the King receive the Allegiance and
Tribute due from His Subjects, His Subjects their Protection and Liberties from
the King; May King and Subject agree to return God and his Church what is due
to them, and may the first Acter, in restoring God his right, be by God first
restored to his own right.

Other things (and these more perfectly) I would have observed to thee, had not
London and Oxford, the Records and I been at so great a distance. Let therefore
thy goodness excuse, what is either omitted or mistaken by not viewing the
Records, and for my other Errors, I beg thy pardon, as I would have done for
meddling with this subject, fitter for a Pulpit then my Pen; but I have often
heard it slighted from the Levite, as Preaching his own profit, and therefore
thought it might take better (though worse delivered) from a Lay hand, no ways
concerned by it, but in the general Calamity of our Commonwealth. Farewell.

CLEM: SPELMAN.

De non temerandis Ecclesiis. OF THE RIGHTS AND RESPECT DVE UNTO THE CHVRCH.
INsomuch as the rights and duties that belong to our Churches are in effect
contained under the name of a Rectory or Parsonage: I will first define, what I
conceive a Rectory or Parsonage to be, according to the usual form and manner
thereof.

A Rectory or Parsonage, is a Plowd. Comment. in Quare Impedit per Grendom, etc.
Spiritual living, A Rectory what it is.
composed of Land, Tithe, and other Oblatio est omne quod ex. hihetur in cultu
Det, Tho. Aq. 2.7. q. 85.3.3. etc. and Urban in his epist. Tom. 1. Council. And
Lands are so termed, Ezekiel. 45.1. and Tithes, Number. 18.24. So also the Caronists
and Civilians expound them, Council. Aurel. cap. 7. Burcha. lib. 3. cap. 129.
and 143. Et Lex. Jarid. in verb. oblatio.
Oblations of the people, Levit. 27.28.
separate or dedicate to God in any Congregation, for the Touching divine
worship and works of charity.
service of his Church there, and for the maintenance of the Governor or
Minister thereof, to whose charge the same is committed.

By this definition it appears, that the ordinary living or revenew of a
Parsonage, is of 3 sorts: the one in Land, commonly called the Glebe: another
in Tithe, which is a set and regular part of our goods rendered to God. The
third, in other offerings and oblations bestowed upon God and his Church, by
the people, either in such arbitrable proportion as their own devotion moves
them, or as the laws or customs of particular places do require them.

2. Tithes how due.
Though I invert order a little, I will first speak of Tithes, because it is
Gods ancient demaine, and the nobler part of this his inheritance, founded
primarily, upon the Law of nature, (as the other be also after their manner,)
For the Law of Nature teaches us that God is to be honored: and that the
honor due unto him, cannot be performed without Ministers, nor the Ministers
attend their function without maintenance. And therefore seeing God is the
supreme Lord and possessor of all, Genesis 14.19.
and gives all things unto us that we are maintained with; it is our duty both
in point of Justice and Gratuity, to render something back again unto him, as
acknowledging this his supremacy and bounty; as honoring him for his
goodness; as a testimony of the worship, love, and service we owe him; and
lastly, as a means whereby these duties and services may be performed to him.
This, I say, the very Law of Nature teaches us to do: and this the Law of GOD
requires also at our hands: but what the set portion of our goods should be,
that thus we ought to render back unto God, I cannot say the Law of Yet there
be diverse natural reasons that commend this number (for this purpose) above
other.
Nature has determined that. But the wisdom of all the Nations of the World,
the practice of all Ages, the example of the Patriarchs Genesis 14.20.
ABRAHAM and Genesis 28.22.
JACOB, the Lev. 27.30. and 32. Deuteronomy. 12.6, and 11. Malachy 3.10
approbation and commandment of Almighty GOD himself, and the constant
Declared by the Fathers and Counsels.
resolution of his CHVRCH universally, has taught and prescribed us to render
unto him the Tenth part: and that this Tenth part or Tithe, being thus assigned
unto him, leaves now to be of the nature of the other nine parts (which are
given us for our worldly necessities) and becomes as a thing dedicate and
appropriate unto God. For it is said, Levit. 27.30. All the tithe of the land,
both of the seed of the greund, and of the fruit of the trees, is the Lords:
yea more then so, It is holy unto the Lord. And again (v. 32.) Every Tithe of
Bullock, and Sheep, and of all that goes under the rod, the tenth shall be
holy unto the Lord. He says, holy unto the Lord; not that they were like the
sanctified things of the Temple, which none might touch but the Anointed
Priests) but Holy and separate from the use and injury of secular persons, and
to be disposed only, to and for the peculiar-service and peculiar Servants of
GOD. And therefore in the 28. verse, it is said, to be separate from the common
use, because it is separate, and set apart unto the Lord.

3. But some happily will say, that this use of Tithing rises out of the
Leviticall Law, and so ended with it. Tithes originally not Leviticall


I answer, that it was received and practiced by Abraham and Jacob vovvet to
give tithes, Genesis 28.22. And Joseph shows he per forms his vovv. Antiquit.
lib. 1. cap. 27.
Jacob diverse hundred years before it came to the Levites. For it is said that
Abraham gave tithe to Melchisedeck, Genesis 14.20. And that Levi himself paid
tithe also in the loins of Abraham, Heb. 7.9. Melchisedeck was the image of
CHRIST, and his Church; Abraham of the congregation of the Faithful. Therefore
though Levi received tithes afterward, by a particular grant from GOD, for the
time: yet now he paid them generally with the congregation, in the loins of
Abraham unto the Priesthood of Christ, here personated by Melchisedeck: which
being perpetual, and an image of this of the Gospel, may well note unto us,
that this duty of Tithe, ought also to be perpetual. And therefore Hem 35. in
Genesis
Chrysostom says, that Abraham herein was OUR tutor: not the tutor of the
Jews. And insomuch as Abraham paid it not to a Priest that offered a
Leviticall Sacrifice of Bullocks and Goats: but to him that gave the Elements
of the Sacrament of the Gospel, The Scripture only mentions Bread and wine
to be given by Melchi sedeck to Abraham: But Josephus shows, that he gave
him also diverse other rich gifts, Antr^^^ lib. 1. cap 18.
bread and wine: it may also well intimate unto us, to what kind of Priest we
are to pay our tithes: namely to him that ministers unto us the Sacrament of
bread and wine, which are only those of the Gospel, and not the Leviticall
Priests. So that our tithe paid in this kind, cannot be said Leviticall: as
also for that the Leviticall tithes, were only of things Lev. 37.30, and 31.
renewing and increasing: whereas Abraham and Jacob paid them of all: as if
they had followed the commandment of the Apostle; Let him that is taught in
the Word, make him that has taught him partaker of (...).
ALL his goods Gal. 6.6.

God also requires this duty of tithe by his own mouth, as of old belonging
unto him, before the Levites were called to the service of the Tabernacle: and
before they were named in Scripture. For they are not named till Exodus. 38.21.
And it is said in Exodus 22.29. Thine abundance of thy liquor shall thou not
keep back: meaning Tithes and first fruits, and therefore Hierome doubts
not so to translate it; Thy Tithes and first Fruits shall thou not keep back.
And in this manner of speech, the word Keep back, shows that it was a thing
formerly due unto GOD: for we cannot say, that any thing is kept back, or with
holden that was not due before. Therefore we find no original commandment of
giving tithe unto GOD: but upon the first mentioning of them in Leviticus, they
are positively declared to be His, as a part of His Crown, and ancient
demaine; for it is there said, Cap. 27.30. All the tithe of the Land is the
Lords. And Moses commands not the people a new thing: but declares the Right
that of old belonged to GOD: namely, that All the tithes of the land was his.

Other phrases of Scripture do confirm this; for afterward when tithes came
to be assigned to the Levites: God does not say, The children of Israel shall
give their tithes to the Levites: but he says, Behold I have given them to the
Levites. And continuing this his claim unto them, Vum. 18.21, 14, and 26.
against those that many hundred years after disseised him of them: he
complains, Malachy, 3.8. That they that withheld their tithes from the
Levites, spoiled him himself.

But having handled this argument more largely in a greater work: I will here
close it up with opposing against these kinds of Adversaries, not only the
reverend authority of those ancient and most honorable Pillars of the Church
SS. Ambros. in Sermon. quadra^es.
Ambrose, August. in Sermon. de temp. ^ 29. and alias.
Augustine, Hieron in Ma^^. 3.
Hierome, and Chrysostom, in ^pist. ad Heb. Hom. 12. and ^om. 35. in ^^n.
Chrysostom, (who though they run violently with Saint Paul, against such
ceremonies, as they conceived to be Leviticall; yet when they come to speak of
Tithes, admit, maintain, and command the use thereof:) But also the resolution
of many ancient Roman Con^^l. 4. Aureli^n. 1. Tarracon. ^ub Horm.
Me^iomatricis, ^oletan. Agrip^in. cap 6. His^alens. Montis. ^o^clus. 2.
Va^entinum sub Leone 4. Rothomag. cap. 3. Cauallon. cap. 18. M^g^^^^ cap. 20.
Counsels, and a multitude of other Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian. Gregory, etc.
Fathers and Doctors of the Church in their several ages: all of them
concurring in opinion, that Tithes belong justly unto GOD; and many of them
commanding all men even upon peril of their souls not to withhold them: which
Argument See this Sermon in the end of (...).
S. Augustine himself pathetically maintains, in a particular Sermon of his
to this purpose. And though it be a great question among the learned, whether
they be due in quot a part, iure divino (which requires a larger discourse)
yet I never read of many that impugned them absolutely. C^^^er Hist. lib. 2. c.
11.
Lieutardus, who lived about 1000 years after Christ, taught the payment of
them to be superfluous and idle, and then growing desperate, drowned himself,
as it were to give us a badge of this Doctrine.

4. Touching Oblations and offering.
oblations and offerings. The Fathers under Viban. Epist. circi^er Ann. (...).
this name accounted all things, that were given or dedicated to the service of
God. And in the first ages of Christian religion (after the great persecutions)
the Church by this means began so to abound in riches. that the good Emperors
Constantine and Valentinsan made laws that rich men which were able to
support the charges of the Commonwealth, should not be admitted into religious
houses, because their possessions and goods were thereby amortized.
themselves, were constrained to make laws (not unlike our statutes of
Mortemaine) to restrain the excess thereof: for fear of impoverishing their
temporal estate. In those days, many Churches had Treasuries for keeping
these oblations (as the Storehouses at Jerusalem, appointed by 2 Chronicles. 31.11.
Hezechias, for the Temple) but the succeeding Ages, contracted them into
Chests: and in these later times, the Parsons pocket may well enough contain
them. I shall not need, therefore, to spend many words in a small matter: for
all the Oblations now in use, are in effect the two-peny Easter Offerings, and
a few other such like: which because the owners of Appropriate Parsonages shall
not ignorantly convert unto their own benefit: I will show them why they were
paid, and why they have them.

Saint Paul ordained in the churches of Galatia and Corinth, that every one
upon the Lords day should yield somewhat to God for the Saints. 1. Cor. 16.2.

But this (being once a week) came too thick and too often about. Therefore
in Tertullian. in Apologetico.
Tertullians time the use was to do it monthly, and (at last) at pleasure.
But it was ever the ancient use of the Primitive Church (as appears by
Justinus in Apol. 21 HIst. Eccles.
Justin and Cyprian) that all that come to the holy Communion, did according to
their abilities, offer something of their substance to God, for charitable uses
and maintenance of the Ministers. Therefore. Sermon 1. de Eleemosynis.
Cyprian sharply taxes a rich Matron, that received the Communion, and offered
nothing. Locuples and dives and dominicum celebrare te credis, quae He calls
the treasury Corban, of that at the Temple of Jerusalem.
Corban omnino non respicis etc. What? (says he) art thou able and rich? and
do thou think that thou celebratest the Lords Supper, which bring nothing
to the Treasury? So Irenaeus says) Novi Testaments novam docuit ( scil.
Christus) oblationem: quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in universo mundo
offert Deo, ei qus aelimenta nobis praestat; primitiaes suorum munerum in no vo
teslamento.
That it was the use of the Church through the world in his time, and received
from the Apostles; to offer something of the blessings that they lived by, as
the first fruits thereof, to him that gave these things unto them. Which Vide
Zanchium lib. 1. de cultu. Dei externe.
Zanchius understands to be meant of offerings at the Communion: given to
holy uses, and for relief of the poor of the Church: commending it for an
excellent custom, and complaining that it is now discontinued. But to this
end, and in imitation hereof, are our Easter and Communion offerings (as also
those, at, and for Christnings, Burials, etc. which I will not now speak
further of) at this day made, and therefore let Proprietaries consider with
what conscience they can swallow and digest them.

.5 Touching the land, glebe, Of Glebe Land and houses belonging to Parsonages.
and houses, belonging to Parsonages, (which I would have called Gods fixed
inheritance, but that I see it is moveable:) I cannot say that they are Gods
ancient demaines, in the same form that tithes are, and as our Clergy enjoys
them, but the warrant and ground thereof, rises out of the word of God; who
not only gave us a president thereof, when he appointed Cities for the Levites
to dwell in, with a convenient circuit of fields for the maintenance of their
Cattle, Number. 35.2, etc. but commanded also the Children of Israel (and in them
all the Nations of the world:) that in division of their land, they should
offer an oblation to the Lord, an holy portion of the Land for the Priest to
dwell on, and to build the house of GOD upon: Ezekiel. 45.1, and 4. So that the
houses and lands that our Ancesters have dedicated to God in this manner, for
the Churches and Ministers of this time: are now also his right and just
inheritance, as well as those which the Israelites assigned for the house of
God, and Levites of that time; and comes upon the same reason and in lien
thereof. But because it is uncertain when and how they were brought into the
Church, I will say something touching that point.

In the time of the Apostles the use was (as appears Acts 2.45. and Acts.
4.34, and 35.) to sell their lands, and bring the money only, How lands came
to the Churches.
to the Apostles. For the Church being then in persecution, and the Apostles
not to remain in any particular place, but to wander all over the world, for
preaching the Gospel: they could not possess immovable inheritances: and
therefore received only the money they were sold for, distributing it as
occasion served. But after when the Church obtained a little rest, and began to
be settled: It appears by the Epistles of Pius and Urban who lived about the
year of Christ 230. that the Church of Rome had then begun to retain lands in
this manner upon this reason: and it may well be, for that Origin and Eusebius
show, that Churches had then possessions.
it found much casualty in pecuniary contributions, and chused therefore rather
to retain the Lands themselves, given for the maintenance of Gods Priests and
Ministers: then (by suffering the same to be sold) to furnish the time present
with abundance, and leave the future time to hazard and uncertainty. Hereupon
the Fathers in the Edicta Constantine and Lucinis Impp. Eus. lib. 10. cap. 5.
Primitive Church, as well before Constantine (as appears by his own Edicts,
and by Ortgen speaks of rents of the Church: Hom. 31. in Mar.
Origin, Eusebius of an house belonging to the Church of Antiech that Paulus
Saemosatenus in the time of Aurelianus the Emperor (about 30 years before
Constantine) wrongfully invaded. Lib. 7. cap 24.
Eusebius, and the Epistles of Read the note (a) next before.
Pius, and Read the note (a) next before.
Urban) as after: began to accept and retain the lands thus given, and to
leave them over to their successors for a perpetual Dowry of the Church. And
this upon experience was found to be so godly and worthy a course that it not
only received the applause of all succeeding ages: But commends for ever
unto us their temperance, in desiring no more then for present necessity, their
zeal for providing for posterity, and their great wisdom, (or rather,
Prophetical spirit) which foresaw so long before hand, that devotion though
it were at one time hot and fervent, yet, at another it might be cold enough:
and therefore when time served, they would by this means provide that the
Church for ever, should have of her own, to maintain her self withal. Upon
this ensued many godly provisions for endowment of Churches, and for annexing
their livings so unto them, as neither the variety of time, nor the impiety of
man (if it were possible) should ever have divorced them; as appears by a
multitude of ancient Counsels, Canons, Statutes, and decrees of the Synod.
Reman. sub Symacho. 103. Episceporu^ circiter An. Christ. 503. tota contra
invasores Ecclesiarum. Council. Aurelianens. 4. Ann. 543. c. 19. and 34. Conc.
Meldens. cap. 5. Burch. lib. 11. cap. 16. Council. Gangrens. cap. 8. Bur. lib.
11. cap. 20. Council. Mogunt. cap. 3. 6. 7. and plurima alia.
Church, See the two Edicts of Constantine and Licimus Empp. Eusebius. lib. 10.
cap. 5. And the laws of Constant: Theodos: Justi Carel: Magn: and many other.
Emperors, and To pass over foreign Princes, our own in former times have
almost successively confirmed thems
Princes, to that purpose. Therefore whilst the world burned so with that
sacred fire of devotion, toward the advancement of the glory of God: that
every man desired to sanctify his hand, in the building of Churches, lest such
holy monuments for want of due maintenance, should in process of time become,
either contemptible, or unprofitable, It was at length ordained, in Si quis in
agro suo, aut habet, aut postulat habere diaecesim, trimum and terras ei
deputet sufficienter, and clericos: qui ibidem sua officia impleant, ut sacratu
locis reverentia condigna tribuatur. Aur. Conc. c. 23. in Conc. Tom. 2. ubi
nota quod dioecesis accipitur pro liberate condendi oratoria vel Ecclesias
itaque in argumento hutus capituli oratorium exponitur.
Aurel. Council. 4. ( An. 545.) cap. 3, And Tom. Council. 1.
Council. Valentin, ( An 855) cap. 9, That, whosoever builded a Church, should
assign unto it a Coloniam vestitam.
Ploughland, furnished for the maintenance of the Parson thereof. By virtue of
these Councels (as I take it) were the Founders of Churches in France first
compelled to assure Livings to those Churches. And it was also provided by the
third Council of Council. Tolet. 3. c. 15.
Tolledo in Spain, that no Bishop might consecrate any Church, till sufficient
maintenance (which Chrysostom. hom. 18. in Acta.
Chrysostom calls the Dowry of the Bride) were assigned to it.

But because these were foreign, and Provincial Councels, not General: they
bound not our Country, otherwise then by doctrine and example. Therefore it
was here decreed afterward, to the same effect in a Syn. Land. ca 16. Antiq.
Britan. ca. 34.
Synod at London under Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno Domini 1105. H.
1.3. And though the laws of our Church began then first (as farte as I yet can
find) to constrain our Countrymen to give Endowments to the Churches that
they builded; yet we were taught before (by the Custom and Example of our
precedent Ancestors, as well as by our duty, out of the Word of God) to do
the same: as appears by many Presidents, whereof I will only allege one
(but above others, that most famous) of Alias Adulphus.
ETHELVVULPHUS, King of West-Saxony, who (in the year of our Lord 855.) as
Ingulf. in Hist. Croil.
Ingulphus Saxo, and Sim Dunelm. citat. Antiquit. Brit. ca. 27.
Simeon Dunelmens. report, by the advice and agreement of all his Bishops and
Nobility: Gave not only the tithe of the goods, but the Decimam mansionem ubi
minimum sit.
tenth part of the Land through his Kingdom for ever, to God and the Churches,
free from all secular services, taxations, and impositions whatsoever: In which
kind of religious magnificence, as our succeeding Kings have also abounded: so
have they from As appears in their several laws, and namely 15 times in
Edw. 3. reign.
time to time, as well by Parliament Laws, as by their Royal Charters,
confirmed these and other the Rights of the Church, with many solemn See the
Stat. of 25. Edw. 1. in Rastals Abridgment tit. Confirmat. 3. And Sententia
lata super Chartas.
vows and imprecations against all that should ever attempt to violate the
same. Therefore if these things had not been primarily due unto God by the
rule of his word, yet are they now His. and separate from us, by the voluntary
gift and dedication of our ancient Kings and Predecessors: as was the Nehe.
10.32.
tribute of a third part of a shekel, which Nehemiah and the Jews out of their
free bounty covenanted yearly to give unto God for the service of his house.
For, as Saint Peter Acts 5.4.
says to Ananias: Whilst these things remained, they appertained unto us, and
were in our own power: but now, when we have not only vowed them, but
delivered them over into the hands and possession of Almighty God (and that,
not for superstitious and idle orders, but merely for the maintenance of his
public divine worship, and the Ministers thereof, (they are not now
arbitrable, nor to be revoked by us, to the detriment of the Church.

6. Churches and their livings dedicate to God.
Churches being erected and endowed: they and their livings, were (as I say)
dedicated unto God. First, by the solemn vow and oblation of the Founders:
then by the solemn act of the Bishop, who to separate these things from
secular and profane employments, not only ratified the vow and oblation of
the Patron or Founders: but consecrated also the Church it self: using therein
great devotion, many blessings, prayers, works of charity, and some Ceremony,
for sanctifying the same to divine uses. Therefore also have the ancient See
the 6. Syn. Romans of 103 Bishops (above 1000 years since) wholly against
violaters of Churches and Church-rights. And see many to this purpose. Burchar.
lib. 11.
Councels added many fearful curses against all such as should either violate
it, or the Rights thereof.

This consecration, Master Demonst. problem. tit. Templum sect. 3.
Perkins calls a Dedication, but confesses it to have been in use in this
manner, about the year of Christ 300. (which is within the time of the
Primitive Church) only he admits not, that it was then performed with
Ceremony and the sign of the Cross; which here I will not stand upon, nor to
show the greater antiquity thereof, (though I think it may well be proved.)
For In Epist. ad Constant Imp.
Athanasius being in those days accused by the Arians, of ministering the
Communion in a Church not consecrated, excused himself to have done it upon
necessity. And Histor. suae lib. 1. c. 30. and Sozom. lib. 3. c. 25. Niceph l.
8. cap 50. Hist. Triper l. 3. fol. 331.
Theodoret reports, that Constantine (then likewise) commanded, all those
that were at the Council of Tyrus, should come to Hie asalem. (...).
consecrare.
Aelia: and that others should be assembled from all parts, for Eusebius. in orat.
de laudib. Constant.
Consecration of the Churches builded by him. Which shows it to be so
notorious and general an use at that time, and to have such universal
approbation; as it could not, but have a root also from elder ages, though
there cannot be many presidents found thereof, for that the Christians being
then in persecution, might hardly build, or dedicate any Churches, but were
constrained to use private houses, and solitary places for their assemblies.
Yet, even those houses, had (as it seems) some consecration, for they were
most commonly called Ibidem.
aedes sacrae, Holy houses, and have left that name, (to this day) amongst us,
for our Churches, as a testimony of their sanctification, whereof I shall
speak more anon. Ibidem.
Eusebius also says: that insomuch as the Holy houses and Temples of that
time, were thus Dedicated and Consecrated unto God, the universal Lord of all:
therefore they received his name, and were called in Greek (...), (in Latin,
Dominica) the Lords houses: Which name, says he, was not imposed upon them by
man: but by himself only, that is Lord of all. Of this word (...), comes the
Saxon word Cyric or Kyrk: and (by adding a double aspiration to it) our usual
word Church or Church, as it were to put us ever in mind, whose these Houses
are: namely, Genesis 22.22.
the Lords houses: like that, which JACOB dedicating unto GOD, called (Bethel:)
that is, the house of God.

But both Church and Church Livings were thus solemnly delivered into Gods
possession; and therefore all ages, Councels and Fathers (that ever I yet have
met with) account them holy and inviolable things. Chrysostom. hom. 18. in Act.
Council. Mogunt. cap. 7.
And hereupon they are termed, Patrimonium Christi, Dos Ecclesiae, Dos sponsae
Christi, and Sacrata possessio, or Praedium sanctum. For, Everything that a man
does separate unto the Lord from the common use, whether it be man, or beast,
or Land of his Inheritance, it is Holy to the Lord: Levit. 27.28. And in what
sort I understand the word Holy, I have before declared.

7. Holy rights and Temples how respected by Heathens.
As then the Law of Nature, primarily taught all Nations in the world to give
these things unto God: so the very same Law, also taught them that it was
sacrilege and impiety to pull them back again: yea, the very heathen counted
the things thus severed unto their gods, to be Sancta and inviolanda. And Saint
Augustine expounds, Sanctum illud esse, quod violare nefas est. It is
execrable wickedness, Genesis 47.22.
to violate that that is holy. Pharach would not abridge the Priests of their
diet, or land: no not in the great famine. The very Barbarous Nations of the
world, even by the instinct of nature, abhorred this impiety. Biblioth. hist.
lib. 5.
Diodorus Siculus notes of the Gauls, that though they were a people, above
all others most covetous of gold: yet having abundance thereof, scattered in
all parts of their Temples, to the honor of their gods, none was found so
wicked amongst them, as to meddle with any of it. I could allege a multitude
of Heathen stories to this purpose. But I will not weave the woollen yearne of
the Gentiles, into the fine linen garments of the Christians; I mean, I will
not mingle profane arguments, in a discourse of Christian piety. For the sheep
that are of the fold of Christ, are tied only to hear his voice, John 10.3.
and to follow that, which if they do not, they are thereby known to be
Goats, and not of his fold.

8. How fearful a thing it is to violate the Church.
The cause why I touched upon this one heathen Example, is to aggravate the
manifold sins of us Christians, in this point. For if they that knew not God,
were so zealous of the glory of their Idols: how much more is it to our
condemnation, if we that know him, do less regard him? If it go hard with
Tyrus and Sydon in the day of judgment that sinned ignorantly; how much harder
will it be with Corasin and Bethsaida that sin presumptuously: Especially
with Capernaum that despises her Lord God and Master, Jesus Christ himself?
What is it to despise him; if to rob him of his honor, be not to despise
him? Or what is it to rob him of his honor, if to take from him the things
given him for maintenance thereof, be not to rob him? Therefore when the
children of Israel withheld their tithes and offerings from the Levites, he
cries out in Malachy 3.8. That himself was robbed and spoiled: and was so
highly offended therewith, that he cursed the whole Nation for it. And to make
this sin appear the more monstrous, he convinces the offenders therein: not
only to be violaters of his Legal ordinances, but even of the very law of
Nature, written in the heart of every man. For, says he, Will any man spoil
his gods? As if he should say: Can such a man be found as will, or dares commit
that sin, that all the Nations of the world, even by the instinct of nature,
account to be so horrible and impious? To spoil his gods: what his own gods?
Some were found, that now and then adventured to spoil the gods of other
Nations, (yet not without punishment) but few or none that I read of (till
these latter days) that spoiled their own gods, in apparent and overt manner,
as the Lawyers term it. I count it not overt and apparent, when we do as
Ananias and Sapphira did: pinch and detract from God, somewhat of that we vowed
to give: Nor, when we do as the children of Israel here did withhold that
which we ought to pay out of our own goods, (yet both these were heinous
sinners, and dreadfully punished.) But I call it overt and apparent, when we
throw our selves into a more dangerous sin, by invading openly the devotions
of other men, and taking that from God and from his Church, (as Athalia did)
which we never gave unto it, 2. Chron. 24. verse 7.
even the lands and livings thereof: yea, the Churches themselves. David's zeal
for the house of God.


9 Doubtless we have much to fear in this point: For as it is a transcendent
sin; so David laboring to match it with a transcendent punishment, bestows
a whole Psalm, ( viz. the This Psalm is alleged to this purpose by Lucius
(who was martyred about An Chr. 255.) in his epistle to the Bishops of Galli^
and Spain. Tom. Council. 1.
83.) in inveying particularly against these kind of sinners: such (expressly)
as would take to themselves the houses of God in possession; for that only is
the very center of the Psalm, and therein do all the lines and projections of
the Prophets invectives, concur. First he makes a flat opposition between
God and them: and therefore calls them his enemies. Then he describes the
nature of these kind of enemies: namely, that they are murmuring enemies, as
grudging, and envying at the prosperity of the Church: Malicious enemies: as
hating or hurting the service of God. Proud enemies, as lifting up their heads
against God: verse. 2. Crafty enemies; as imagining how to beguile the Church.
Conspiring enemies; as taking Council together against Gods secret ones (as
the Prophet calls them) that is, Gods servants and Ministers: verse. 3. And
lastly, Confederate enemies: as combining themselves one by example of another,
to persevere in their course of wronging and violating the Church: verse. 5. Yet
for all this, those against whom the Prophet thus inveigheth, did not that they
desired. They discovered their malicious purpose by word of mouth, saying: Let
us take to our selves the houses of God in possession. But they only said it,
they did it not. Their will was good, but their power failed. Our will and
power have both prevailed: for we have got the houses of God into our
possession: His Churches, his lands, his offerings, his holy rights. We have
gotten them, and led them away captive, bound in chains of iron: that is, so
conveied and assured unto us, by Deed, by Fine, by Act of Parliament, as if
they never should return again unto the Church. But hear what David says to
those of his time. Mark how he prays for them. Mark what strange and
exquisite punishments he designeth to them: and that in as many several sorts,
as there are several branches in this kind of sin.

First, he prays, that God would deal with them, as he did with the
Madianites, verse. 9. That is, that as Gedeon by Trumpets and Lamps, struck
such a terror in the night time, into the hearts of the Madianites, that the
whole army fell into confusion, drew their swords one upon another, were
discomfited, and 120 thousand of them slain. So that God by his trumpets, the
Preachers of his word; by his Lamps, which is, the light of the Gospel, would
confound in like manner, the enemies and spoilers of his Church, that sleep in
the night of their sin: And that he would make them like Oreb, and Zeb, like
Zeba and Salmana: verse. 11. All which were strangely overthrown, died violent
deaths, and being glorious Princes of their nations, became like the filthy and
loathsome Dung of the earth: verse. 10. And Judges 7.25. and 8.21.

But does the Prophet stay here? no, he goes on with them: O my God, says he,
make them like a wheel, verse. 13. that is, wavering and unstable in their
actions: so as they may never bring their purposes to an end. Yea, make them
abject and contemptible; like the chafe that the wind scatters from the face
of the earth: verse. 13. Well, is he now fatisfied? no. All this does but whet
his spirits to sharper imprecations. He now desires that the very floudgates
of Gods wrath may be broken open upon them; and that the tempest of his
indignation may rage at full against them: now he cries out to God to consume
them without mercy, yea, and that in two terrible manners. One naturally, As
the fire burns up the wood. The other miraculously, As the flame consumes
the mountains: verse. 14. Persecute them even so, (says he) with thy tempest,
and make them afraid with thy storm. Make their faces ashamed. O Lord, that
they may seek thy name. Let them be confounded and vexed ever more and more,
let them be put to shame and perish. verse. 15, 16, 17. How should the wit of
man discover and prosecute a sin in more vehement and horrible manner? Or, what
shall make us to abstain from such haughty sins, if all this prevail not?
Well, if to take the houses of God into possession be thus, take them that will
for me.

You see how David in this his sacred fury, The zeal of our Savior to the
house of God. And of the parts of the Temple.
was admirably carried against this sin. Well therefore might he say: The
zeal of thine house has eaten me up, Psalm. 69.9. Yet, he spoke it not of
himself alone: but in the person also of our Savior Jesus Christ; who in
prosecution of David's zeal, did that in this case, that he never did at any
time else in all his life. In all other cases he showed himself like the
Paschall Lamb, that every body did eat and devour at pleasure; and like the
sheep that was dumb before the shearer, even when his very life was taken
from him. But when he saw the golden fleece to be taken from the house of God:
that is, when he saw the Church his beloved spouse, deprived and spoiled of the
honor, reverence, duty and ornament, that belonged to her: Then, as David did,
he grows into a sacred fury; he leaves the mildness of the Paschall Lamb,
and takes upon him the fierceness of the Lion of Juda. Then he begins to
bestirre him, and to lay about him. He whippeth out them that profaned it;
drives out their sheep and their oxen, though they were for the sacrifice:
and overthrows the tables of the money changers: John 2.14. He would by no
means endure such trumpery to be in his Fathers house, Mat. 21.12: Mar. 11.17.
Luke 19.45.
nor his Fathers house to be made an house of Merchandise; but, much less
then, that merchandise should be made of his Fathers house it self. O
fearful and most inhumane sin! horresco referens.

But e're I depart from this place of Scripture; let me note one thing more
out of it, for the greater reverence of Churches: that although our Lord be
here said, to have cast these things out of the Temple; yet, in truth, they
were not in the Temple it self, but in the outward court or yard thereof. For
within the inward parts of the Temple, (namely, the first, and second
Tabernacles) did no man enter, but the Levite Priests: Numb. 18.5. Ebr. 9.2, 3,
4, 5, etc.
and of them also, none into the second Tabernacle, but the High Priest.
Therefore, although our Savior Christ, were a Priest for ever after the order
of Melchisedeck: yet because he was not a Priest of Levi: but of the Tribe of
Juda (of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing touching the Priesthood: Heb. 7.14. I
take it, that Christ came to fulfill the Law, and not to break it. Therefore
(doubtless) he observed the rules thereof, and the quality of his Tribe.
he never came within these parts of the Temple: nor where the sacrifice was,
but frequented only See the form of the Temple in Arias Montan: Antiquitat.
Judaic. l. Ariel. and in the Geneva Bible, 1. King. cap. 6. and mark well both
it, and the notes upon it; for I find them (above others) most agreeable to the
Scriptures, and rely not upon the figure of the Temple in Adricomius without
good examination; for I perceive he has misplaced some things therein.
Atrium populi, the outward Court from the Temple. For into this only the Sea
the note (a) among the notes aforesaid.
people resorted: to worship, pray, and hear the word of God expounded, not
pressing further toward the Temple: and in the midst whereof (the 2. Chron.
6.13.
brazen stage which Solomon prayed upon) was erected. Yet, this very place,
this court, or outward yard, would not our Savior permit to be profaned;
neither with market matters, nor with carrying so much as a burden or vessel
through it, Mark 11.16. For though it were not so Levitically holy, as the
Temple: yet it was dedicated to God, with the Temple: And taken often in the
new Testament, for the Temple: as in the places before alleged. And Acts 3.2,
3. By which reason the very Churchyards themselves (being Dedicated with the
Churches, and the principal soil thereof: Stat. Ne Rectores prosternant
arbores in Coemiterio.
as an old Statute witnesses) seem also to have in them a certain kind of
Sanctification: and are not therefore to be abused to secular and base
employments: as not only the Ancient Fathers, by the Canons of the Church: but
the present Laws of the Land, have well provided for them.

10. But some will say, that the sanctification of the Temple was Leviticall,
More of that matter and how far the sanctification of the Temple is
abolished: or remains to our Churches.
and therefore abolished, and not to be applied to our Churches. I answer, the
Temple was sanctified unto three functions; which also had three several
places assigned to them. The first, belonged to the Divine presence; and had
the custody of the Holiest Types thereof; the Oracle, the Arc, the Mercy seat,
etc. And was therefore called Sanctum Sanctorum, or the Holiest of all. The
second, was for ceremonial worship and atonement: namely, by sacrifice,
oblations, and other Leviticall rites; the place thereof being the Sanctuary,
(wherein were the Holy vessels) and the Court of Priests, wherein the Altar of
burnt sacrifice did stand. The third, was for simple worship, prayer, and
doctrine (without any pomp or ceremony:) and the place of this, was the
outward Court, (called, 1. Chr. 4.9. and 6.12.
Atrium populi, and Acts 31.1.
Solomon's porch;) which therefore had in it no Ceremonial implement at all.

The two first of these functions, with the places belonging to them; were
indeed particularly appropriat to the Law. For, they were Ceremonial,
Mystical, Secret, Leviticall, Judaicall, and Temporal, Ceremonial, as
celebrated with much worldly pomp. Mystical, as figurating some spiritual
things. Secret; as either performed behind the Veil or Curtain: or else
sequestered and remote from the people. Leviticall; as committed only to the
administration of that Tribe. Judaicall; as ordained only for the salvation of
that people. And Temporal; as justituted only for a season, and not to
continue. But the Sanctification, of the third function, and of the place
thereto appointed, was directly contrary in all the points alleged to the
former two. First (as I said before) it was for simple worship, Prayer, and
Doctrine, which were there to be performed and delivered in all sincerity,
without any ceremony or ceremonial implement used therein. Secondly, there was
no matter of mystery therein to be seen: but whatsoever was mystical in the
Law, or the Prophets, was there expounded. Thirdly, nothing there, was hidden
or secret from the people, but acted wholly without the Veil, and publicly
for every man. Fourthly, it was not appropriate to the Levites, but common
alike to all the Tribes. Fifthly, not ordained for the Jews particularly, but
for all Nations in general. And lastly, not to endure for a time, (as those
other two of the Law) but to continne for ever: even after the Gentiles were
called, as well as the Jews: that is, during the time of the Gospel, as well
as the Law. Therefore, says God, by Isaias the Prophet, cap. 56. 7. My house
shall be called an house of Prayer, to all Nations. He said not, an House of
Sacrifice to all Nations: for the Sacrifice ended before the calling of the
Gentiles, and so they could have no part thereof. Nor an House of Prayer for
the Jews only, for then had the Gentiles (when they were called) been
likewise excluded. But an House of prayer to all Nations, that is, Jews and
Gentiles indifferently: which therefore, must have relation to the times of the
Gospel. And consequently, the sanctification of that house, and of that
function, is also a sanctification of the Churches of the Gospel.

We read not therefore, that Christ reformed any thing in the other two
functions of the Temple; for they were now, as at an end. But because this
third function was for ever to continue to his Church: therefore he purges it
of that that profaned it; restores it (as he did marriage) to the original
sanctity: And that the future world (which was the time of the Gospel) might
better observe it, then the precedent, and the time of the Law had done; he
reports, and confirms the decree, whereby it was sanctified: It is written,
says he, (as producing the record and words of the foundation) My house shall
be called an house of prayer to all people. He says, My House, as excluding
all other, from having any property therein; for, God will be Ioynt-tenant with
no man. And it shall be, An house of prayer for all people: that is, public
for ever; not private, nor appropriate to any: nor a den of thieves; that is,
no place of Merchandise, or secular business, as Saint Hierome expounds it.
It must not be an Impropriation; no man can, or may hold it in that kind.

The time also when our Savior pronounced these words is much to the purpose,
as it seems to me. For it was after he had turned out the oxen and doves;
that is, the things for the Sacrifice. As though he thereby taught us, that
when the Sacrificall function of the Temple was ended, yet the sanctification
thereof, to be an house of prayer, for ever remained.

11. Saint Paul maintains the reverence of the Church.
This doctrine of our Savior, is continued unto us by Saint Paul: who seeing
the Corinthians to profane the Church with eating and drinking in it: though
much good might follow thereby, (being orderly done) as the increasing of
amity, and the relief of the poor; yet because it was against the reverence of
the place: he not only reproves them for it, demanding if they had not houses
to eat and drink in at home, 1 Cor. 11.12.
but skaring them also (by showing the danger they were falling into) he
speaks to them as with admiration: Despise ye the Church of God? As if he
should say, is your religion now come unto that? or is that your Religion, To
despise the place that God has sanctified unto himself; by making it,
Comment, in 1 Cor. 11.
as Saint Hierome says, Triclinium epularum, a banqueting house. God wondered
in Malachy, that any should spoil their gods. And the Holy Ghost here
wondereth, that any should despise the material Church: for so Saint Hierome
expounds it. Thus both of them wonder at one and the same thing: that any man
should be so irreligious, as to profane the reverence due unto God, and that
that is his.

12. So precise therefore were the Ancient Fathers in this point, The Zeal of
some of the Fathers to the Church. Sermon. de temp. tom. 10.234.
that, that meek Saint of God, Saint Augustine, would by no means endure that
any should use clamours, or dancing within the verge of the Church. Yea, he
terms them, Miserable and wretched men that did it. And denounces against
them, that If such came Christians to the Church, they went Pagans home. But
when the Church it self came to be abuse^^ Oh, how Saint Ambrose takes it,
even against the Emperor himself, great Valentinian that required it for an
Arian: O (says he) let him ask that is mine, my lands, my goods, and
whatsoever I possess, I will not deny them; yet are they not mine: but belong
to the poor. Verum ea quae divina sunt, Ad Marcellinam sororem: Epist. 33.
etc. says he, but those things that are Gods, are not subject to the
authority of the Emperor. If my lands (I say) be desired, enter them a Gods
name; if my body, I will carry it him; if he will have me to prison, yea unto
death, it pleases me well, I will not defend my self with multitude of
people, neither will I fly to the Altar, desiring my life; but with all my
heart will die for the Altars. And after, In fine eiusdem Epist.
in speaking of the impious Soldiers: O that God (says he) would turn their
hands from violating the Church, and then let them turn all their weapons upon
me, and take their fill of my blood. And many such excellent speeches he has
for the sanctity of the Church, and of the reverence due unto it, in his
Oration, De Basilicis tradendis.

My purpose is to be short; I will not therefore now enter any further into the
authorities of the Fathers: or meddle with the Counsels and ancient Canons of
the Church, which abound so in this kind of zeal, and have established it
(against the Enstathians, Messalians, and Fratricelli, Heretics which
contemned Churches.
heretics: and all other the enemies thereof) with so many examples,
admonitions, exhortations, precepts, threatenings, curses, and excommunications:
as it requires a book alone to repeat them.

13. Sacrilege not to be suffered in the least things. Coment. in 2 Cor.
11.22. tom. 9. Ecclus. 25.27.
It seems a small thing to dance in the Churchyard, or to cate and drink in
the Church. But sanctification (says Hierome, speaking on this matter)
consists also even in the small things. Therefore Ecclesiasticus advises us,
that we give not the water passage, no not in a little. For he that opens the
waters but a little, knows not how great a breach they will make at length.
So is it to make an entrance into sin, or to break the reverence of holy
things in trifles.

Therefore God punishes severely the petty offenders in this kind: not Corah
only and his company, that invaded the high function of the Priesthood: but
even him that gathered the sticks on the Sabbath day: Numb. 15.34. And poor
Vzzah himself (whom David so much lamented) that did, as it were, but stay the
Arc from shaking, (2 Samuel 6.6. and 1 Chronicles. 13.9.) and yet died for it,
because his hand was not sanctified to that purpose.

14. An admonition to them that meddle With holy things.
I conclude this point with the saying of Solomon, Prove. 20.25. (and let all
men consider it:) It is a snare for a man to devour that which is sanctified,
and after the Vows, to enquire. A Snare has three properties First, to catch
suddenly. Secondly, to hold surely. Thirdly, to destroy certainly. So was Vzzah
taken e're he was aware: he did but touch the Arc, and presently he was
caught. King Vzziah did but meddle with the incense, and presently the
Leprousie was on his face: 2 Chronicles. 26.19. Jeroboam did but stretch out his
hand against the Prophet, and presently it withered: 1 King. 13.4. And as a man
falls suddenly into it: so is it as hard to get out. Vzzah died in it
presently. Vzziah languished in it all his life, and then died in it also.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, were no sooner caught in this snare, but it held
them so surely, as when all Israel else fled and escaped; they, and their
companions (most miserable men) were detained in it, to their notorious
destruction.

I might here take just occasion to remember what has happened to many in this
Kingdom, that became unfortunate after they meddled with Churches, and
Church Livings. But I will run into no particularities, Let those men, and
those families, which are unfortunate (as we term them) consider, whether
themselves, their Fathers, or some of their Ancestors, have not been settered
in this snare.

And let the Proprietaries of Parsonages also well consider these things. For,
if Vzzah died, that did but touch the Arc to save it: what shall become of
them that stretch out their hands against Churches to destroy them? If the
sticke-gatherer was stoned, for so small a profanation of the Sabbath; what
shall they look for, that by destroying the Churches, destroy also the Sabbath
it self, (in a manner) as taking away the place appointed to the public
sanctification thereof. And if Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, offended so hainously
in meddling with the things of the Leviticall Priesthood, though they employed
them to the service of God: what have they to fear that usurp the things of
the Gospel, and pervert them wholly to their own use, from the service of God?
Yea, that pollute his Churches and houses of prayer to servile and base
offices: leaving the Parishioners uncertainly provided of divine service, to
the destruction both of the Priesthood it self, and of the service of God in
general? A surmise answered.


15. But they will comfort themselves with this: that though the Churches be
sanctified to some purpose, yet the sanctity thereof differs from Leviticall
sanctification: and that God does not now kill any from heaven, for profaning
the things of the Gospel, as he did then, for profaning the things of the
law. I answer: The sanctity indeed of the one, differs from the sanctity of
the other. For the Leviticall things were sanctified by the hand of man, to be
matter of Ceremony; but the churches of the Gospel, are sanctified by our
Savior himself, to be houses of prayer. Not that prayer is to be used only
in these places, but that these places are only to be used for prayer. And we
must not presume that God sleeps because he punishes not (now as he did of
old) the contemners of his worship. For as the law consisted in visible and
temporal things, so the punishments therein, were for the most part visible
and temporal. But the Gospel concerns things invisible and eternal, and
therefore the punishments assigned therein, are for the most part invisible and
eternal.

16. They have also another comfort, and that is, Another surmise answered.
that though these things were once Spiritual, now they are made temporal by
the Laws of Dissolution; and especially by the Stat. of 32. H. 8. cap. 7. It
is true that those Statutes apply diverse Law-termes unto these things that
properly belong to temporal inheritances: and that the Statute of 32. H. 8.
has made them demandable by original Writs, and has given certain real
actions, and other courses for recovering and conveying of them in Temporal
Coruts: because Laymen could not in former times have sued for things of this
nature in any Court of the Kingdom. But this proves not the things themselves
to be therefore temporal, Dissero non assero.
(no more then that an English man is a French man, because he saileth in a
French bottom,) For upon the same reason the Statute gives also other actions
(for recovering of tithes and offerings withholden, etc.) in the Courts
spiritual. They then that out of the one part of the Statute will have them
temporal, are by the other part enforced to confess them still Spiritual,
and so to make them like a Centaure, prolem biformem. It were very hard (in my
understanding) to ground a point of so great consequence, upon subtletie of
words, and ambiguous implications, without any express letter of Law to that
purpose, especially, to make the Houses and offerings of God, temporal
Inheritances. But I see it is a Law question in my Lord Term. Paes. An. 7. Edw.
6. Assise fol. 83.6.
Dier whether tithes be made Lay or Temporal, by any word in those Statutes.
And therefore I must leave this point to my Masters of the Law, who have the
key of this knowledge only in their own custody. Yet I think I may be so
bold, as to say thus much out of their own Doct. and Stud. cap. 6.
books, that a Statute directly against the Law of God, is void. If then
Tithes be things spiritual, and due de jure divino, as many great See Aug.
Ser. 219. de Temp. Hostiens. and most Canonists. Council. Montisc. 2. cap. 50.
Council. Mogunt. cap 38. alias 10, etc.
Clerks, Doctors, Fathers, some Counsels, and (that ever honorable Judge and
Oracle of Law) my Lord Coke himself in the second part of his Dismes sont
chooses spiritual, and due de jure di vine Le Evesque de Winch. case fol. 45.
Reports affirm them to be; I cannot see how humane laws should make them
Temporal. Of the same nature therefore that originally they were of, of the
same nature do I still hold them to continue: for manente subjecto, manet
consecratio, manet dedieatio. Time, Place, and Persons, do not change them, as
I take it, in this case. Nescio quo faio fit; ut eadem temporit periodo (viz.
an 68) post ereptas per Nabuc. and H. 8.) res templorum: stirps ut isque regia
extincta fit, imperium sublatum, and ad aliam gentem de volutum. Vlterius
igitur speremus, Cyrum nostrum Jacobum regem (qui sceptra dissidentia
compescuit) restitution^ etiam munus aliquanda aggressurum.
Nabuchodonozor took the holy vessels of the Temple, he carried them to
Babylon, he kept them there all his life, and at last left them to his son
and grandchildren: but all this while, the vessels still remained holy. Yea
though they were come into the hands of those that were not tied to the
ceremonies of the law, and at length into the hands of them that had them by a
lawful succession from their Fathers and Grandfathers: yet as soon as they
began to abuse them to profane uses; that very night Balshazzar himself
died for it, the line of Nabuchodonozor (that took them from the Temple) was
extinct, and the Kingdom translated to another Nation: Dan, 5.2.

17 Happily also, Lay Approprietaries comfort themselves, A third surmise
answered.
that they may hold these things by example of Colleges, Deanes and Chapters,
Bishops of the land, and of diverse of our late Kings and Princes. Before I
speak to this point, I take it by protestation, that I have no heart to make
an Apology for it. For I wish that every man might drink the water of his own
well, eat the milk of his own flock, and live by the fruit of his own
vineyard. I mean that every member might attract no other nutriment, but that
which is proper to it self. Yet are they greatly deceived, that draw any juice
of encouragement from these examples. For all these are either the Seminaries
of the Church, or the Husbandmen of the Church, or the Fathers and Nurses of
the Church: all de familia Ecclesiae, and consequently, belonging to the care
of the Church, and ought therefore to be sustained by it: for Saint Paul says:
He that provideth not for his own, and namely for them of his household, he
denies the faith, and is worse then an Infidel: 1. Tim. 5.8. All Church
revenues were at first paid to Bishops, and by them distrin buted to the
Priests, poor, etc. after the Bishops were to have a fourth part of all
tithes. Per Council. Aurelian. Mogunt. Tribur Hanet: etc. Et per Conc. Tarraeon.
the third part.
Therefore before the statutes of suppression of Abbeys, those that were not
merely Ecclesiastical persons, yet if they were mixed, or had Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, they might by the Laws of the Land, participate Ecclesiastical
livings, and Plowd. in Quare imper Grend. L. Coke Report. part. 5. fol. 15.
Tithes particularly. And this seems to take some ground out of the word of
God. For the provincial Levites (as I may term them) whom 1. Chr. 26.30.32.
David severed from the Temple, and placed abroad in the Country to be rulers
of the People, in matters pertaining to God, and the Kings business, (that is,
Spiritually and Temporally:) had their portions of tithes notwithstanding, as
well as the other Levites that ministered in the Temple. Now, that the King is
Se Plowd. in Quar. Imp. Gren. Et L. Coke de Jure Regis Eccles. part. 5.
Persona mixta, endowed as well with Ecclesiastical authority, as with
temporal. Is not only a sollid position of the common Law of the Land, but
confirmed unto us by the continual practice of our ancient Kings, ever since,
and before the Conquest, even in hottest times of Popish fervency. For this
cause at their Coronations, they are not only crowned with the Diadem of the
Kingdom, and girt with the sword of Justice, to signify their Temporal
authority, but are anointed also with the Reges sacro oleo uncti, sunt
spiritualis jurisdictionis capaces 33. Ed. 3. tit. Aid de Roy 103. Ex Dom.
Coke Repor. part. 5.
oil of Preisthood, and clothed, Stola Sacerdotali, and vest Dalmatia est
vestis qua modo utuntur omnes diaconi ex consuetudine in solennitatibus. ut 70
distin. de jejunto. Antiquitus tamen, sine concessione Papae, nec Epis. copis,
nec Dia conis licebat uti hac vest. Distinct. 23. cap. Omnes filius, Prateus.
Dalmatica, to demonstrate this their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, whereby the
King is said in the Law to be Supremus Ordinarius, and in regard thereof,
amongst other Ecclesiastical rights, and prerogatives belonging unto him, is
to have all the 22. Edw. 3 lib. Assis. plac. 75. L. Coke par. 5. fol. 15. a.
Tithes (through the Kingdom) in places that are out of any Parish, for some
such there be, and namely, diverse As Inglewood etc. ut patet an. 18. Edw. 1.
inter petitiones coram domino Rege ad Parliamentum.
Forests. But for all this: O! that his Majesty would be pleased to remembet
Sion in this point.

18 The danger that Proprietaries of Parsonages stand in.
I grow too tedious, yet before I close up this discourse, let me say one thing
more to the Approprietaries of Churches, that happily they hitherto have not
dreamed of. And that is, that by having these Parsonages, they are charged with
Cure of souls, and make themselves Subject to the Burden that lies so
heavily upon the head of every Minister: to see the service of God performed,
the people instructed, and the poor releived. For to these three ends and the
maintenance of Ministers, were Parsonages instituted, as not only the Canons of
the Church, but the books of the Law, and particularly the Statutes of 15, R.
2. cap. 6. And 4. H. 4. ca. 12. do manifestly testify. And no man may have
them but to these purposes, neither were they otherwise in the hands of
Monastical persons, nor otherwise given to the King by the statute of
dissolution, then See the extent of these words in L. Coke part. 2. fol. 49.
And note also that Parsonages appropriate, are not mentioned in that Statute of
27. H 8. and the word (tithes) there seems to be meant of tithes belonging to
the bodies of the Monasteries; not of Parsonage tithes. Ideo quaere how the
King had them before the Statute of 31. Regnesui.
in as large and ample manner as the governors of those Religious houses had
them, nor by him conveied otherwise to the Subjects. For, Nemo potest plus
juris in alium transfer, quam ipse habet: No man may grant a greater right
unto another, then he has himself. And therefore go where they will,
transeunt cum onere, they carry their charge with them. Upon these reasons
Proprietaries are still said to be Parsons of their Churches, Parsonimpersonee.
and upon the matter, are as the incumbents For the Monastical persons and
Prioresses themselves that could not perform the divine service, were
notwithstanding the Incumbents of their Churches: and lay Approprietaries
claiming under their right ought also to be subject to the same burdens.
thereof, and the Churches by reason of this their incumbency, are full and not
void. For otherwise the There is yet no express law made to take away the
Bishops jurisdictions over Churches appropriate, (that I can find.) Ideoquare
how it extends.
Bishop might collate, or the King present a Clarke (as to other Churches) as
it seems by the arguments of the Judges in the case between Grendon and the
Bishop of Lincoln in Master Plowdens Coment. where it is also showed, that the
Incumbencie is a See Dier Tren. 36. H. 8. fol. 58. pl. 8.
spiritual function, and ought not to be conferred upon any but spiritual
persons, and such as may themselves do the divine Service, and minister the
Sacraments. Therefore, Dier, L Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, there said,
that it was an horrible thing, when these Appropriations were made to
Prioresses and houses of Nuns, because that (although they were religious
persons, yet) they could not minister the Sacraments and divine Service.
Implying by this speech of his, that it was much more horrible for Laymen to
hold them, that neither could do these holy rites nor were so much as
spiritual persons to give them color for holding of spiritual things. Terms
of the Law in verbo Appropriation.
Therefore he that enlarged the Terms of law (first set forth by John Rastall)
also terms it a Wicked thing complaining (in his time) that it continued so
long, to the Hinderance (he says) of learning, the impoverishing of the
Ministry, and to the infamy of the Gospel, and professors thereof.

My Lord Coke also in the second part of his Reports, says, Levesque de
Winchesters case, fol. 44, b.
that it is recorded in History, that there were (amongst other) two grievous
persecutions, the one, under Dioclesian; the other under Julian, named the
Apostata: for it is recorded, that the Diocles. vide Eusebius. hist. eccles. lib.
7. cap. 3. Niceph. l. 7. cap. 3.
one of them intending to have rooted out all the Professors and Preachers of
the word of God, Occidit omnes Presbyteros. But this notwithstanding, Religion
flourished, for Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae: The blood of the Martyrs
is the seed of the Church; and this was a cruel and grievous persecution, but
the persecution under the Juli. vide Theod. hisb. lib. 3. cap 6. and Niceph.
lib. 10. cap. 5.
other, was more grievous and dangerous. Quia (as the History says) ipse
occidit presbyterium. He destroyed the very order of Preisthood. For he robbed
the Church, and spoiled spiritual persons of their revenues, and took all
things from them whereof they should live. And upon this, in short time, insued
great ignorance of true religion, and the service of God, and thereby great
decay of Christian profession. For none will apply themselves or their sons, or
any other that they have in charge, to the study of Divinity, when after long
and painful study, they shall have nothing whereupon to live. Thus far my
Lord Coke.

I allege these legal authorities, and leave Divinity, because the
Approprietariet of Parsonages (which shield themselves under the target of the
Law) may see the opinion of the great Lawyers of our own time and Religion,
and what the books of the Law have of this matter, to the end, that we should
not hang our consciences upon so dangerous a pin, nor put too great
confidence in the equity of Laws, which we daily see, are full of
imperfection, often amended, often altered, and often repealed. O how
lamentable then is the case of a poor Proprietary, that dying, thinks of no
other account, but of that touching his Lay vocation, and then coming before
the judgment seat of Almighty God, must answer also for this It is said in
my L. Dier in the case of a common person, that the service or a cure is a
spiritual administration and cannot be leased, and that the service is not
issuing out of the parsonage, but annexed unto the person. 36. H. 8. fol 58. b.
pla. 8.
spiritual function. First why he meddled with it, not being called unto it.
Then, why ( Proprietaries which have Vicars endowed, think themselves thereby
discharged: but though the Vicar be the Parsons deputy to do the divine
Service, yet a superior care thereof rests still upon the Parson himself,
and the surplusage of the profits belongs to the poor, as appeateth by the
whole body of Fathers, Doctors, Counsels etc.
meddling with it) be did not the duty that belonged unto it, in seeing the
Church carefully served, the Minister thereof sufficiently maintained, and the
poor of the Parish farthfully relerved. This I say, is the use whereto
Parsonages were given, and of this use we had notice before we purchased them:
and therefore, not only by the laws of God and the Church, but by the law of
the Land, and the rules of the Chancery, at this day observed in other cases)
we ought only to hold them to this use, and no other.

19. That it is not benevolence but duty to restore Church livings.
It is not then a work of bounty and benevolence to restore these
appropriations to the Church, but of duty and necessity so to do. It is a work
of duty to give that unto God that is Gods, Matt. 32.2. And it is a work of
necessity toward the obtaining remission of these sins. For Saint Augustine
says, Non remittetur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum cum restitui potest:
The sin shall not be forgiven, without restoring of that which is taken away,
if it may be restored.

It is duty, justice, and necessity, to give them back unto God. For it Judae
(who was the first president of this sin) were a theife as the holy Ghost Ad
Macedonium Epist. 54. tom. 2. Joh. 12.6.
terms him, for imbeasiling that which was committed unto him for the
maintenance of Christ and his Disciples, that is of the Church: by the same
reason, must it also be thee-very to withold these things which were given for
the maintenance of the Church and Ministers of Christ. And herein it is a
degree above that sin of Judas, as robbery is above theft, for Judas only
detained the money (delivered unto him) closely and secretly, but we and our
fathers, have invaded Church livings, and taken them (as it were by assault)
even from the sacred body and person of the Church.

It is a great sin to steal from our Neighbor; much greater (even
sacrilege) to steal from God. If it were so heinous a fact in Ananias to
withold part of his own goods, which he pretended he would give unto God, how
much more is it in us, presumptuously to reave that from God, that others have
already dedicated and delivered unto him. Solomon says; He that robs his
Father and his Mother, and says it is no sin, Prove. 28.24.
is the companion of [a murderer, or] him that destroieth. But he that
purloineth the things of God, robs his Father, and he that purloineth the
things of the Church, robs his Mother. And therefore that man is a companion
of the destroier.

The Synod. 5 Romans 218. Episcop. An. 503. Conc. Val. An. 855. ca. 9. Con. Romans
100 Episc. An. 1063. Conc. Romans 5. Anno 1078. Conc. Palent. An. 1388. Conc.
Oxon. Gene. Aug. Anno 1222.
Fathers, the Doctors, many great Counsels, and ancient Laws of the Church,
command that things taken from the Church, should be restored. And the Church
by her A strange change: h^ (...) realite gave their own goods so abundantly
to the service of God, that Moses was forced torestraine them by proclamation:
Exodus 36. (...) but now nothing can move us to give God that which is his
already.
Preachers and Ministers continually entreats, urges, and requires all men
to do it. They therefore that do it not, they refuse to hear the Church: And
then our Savior Christ, by his own mouth, denounces them Qui sub ^omine
fideli^m (...) gunt opera infidelium. Hieron ibid.
to be as Heathens and Publicans, that is, excommunicate and profane persons.
If he refuses (says our Savior) to hear the Church also, let him be unto
thee as a heathen man, and a publican. Mat. 18.17.

It is a fearful thing not to hear the We think the Chuch does not command
it till we make a parliament law for it, but the law is made already by Christ
himself.
Church, but much more, not to hear Christ himself, Christ has given us a
perpetual law and Commandment, touching things belonging to God: That we
should give them to God. If we break this Law, we break a greater Law then
that of the Medes, and the Dan. 6.15.
Persians: and therefore mark what the holy Ghost concludes upon us; Every
person that shall not hear this Prophet (Christ Jesus) shall be destroyed out
of the people. Act. 3.23.

20 To conclude then, The conclusion.
as the Philistims made have to send home the 1 Samuel 5.11.
Ark of God; and the Egyptians to rid themselves of the Exodus 12.31.
people of God: so let us ply our selves to render unto God his Lands, and
Possessions with all speed. Otherwise, as he struck the Philistims with Emrods
secretly, and the Egyptians with manifold scourges openly; so only himself
knows, what he has determined against us.

And thus I end, Cypr. Ser. 5. de laps. in fine.
with the saying of the blessed Saint Cyprian, Nec teneri jam, nec amari
Patrimonium debet, quo quis and deceptus and victus est. We must now neither
hold that Patrimony, or living, (no) nor so much as take pleasure therein,
whereby a man is entrapped and brought to destruction. Lib. de Her. cit. per.
Isid.
And with that other of the noble Saint Augustine; With what face can thou
expect an inheritance from Christ in Heaven, that defraudest Christ in thy
inheritance here on Earth? Therefore

Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Mar. 12.7.
and unto God the things that are Gods.

FINIS.
An Epilogue.
PArdon me good Reader, though I have neither satisfied thee, nor my self, in
this little discourse. It is hard to bring a great vessel into a small creek,
an argument of many heads and branches, of much weight, variety and difficulty,
into a few pages. It may be thou think the volume big enough for the
success that Books of this nature are like to have. I reject not thy
judgment, yet would I not have others thereby discouraged from pursuing this
cause: 10 ult. verse. 3
for though Peter fished all night and got nothing, yet he made a great draught
unlooked for) in the morning. He that directed that net, give a blessing to all
our labors. For my own part (if I catch but one fish) I shall think mine
well bestowed. Howsoever, it shall content me, and I thank God for it, that he
has girded me with so much strength as to strike one stroke (though a weak
one) in his battle, and to cast one stone (though a small one) against the
adversaries of his Church.

Some will say, I have used too much salt and vinegar in this discourse; and
that I have bent the great Artillery of Gods judgments and threatenings, Upon a
piece of too light importance. I would the consciences of men were such as oil
and butter might supple them. But I see they are for the most part overgrowne
with so hard a carnosity, as it requires strong and potent corrosives to make
an entrance into them. A Preacher may shake them now and then with a Sermon, as
Paul did Felix: but when the thunder and lightning are ceased, Act. 24.26. 1 Timothy 4.2.
they are (like Pharaoh) still where they were. Yea some have conscientias
cauteriatas, as the Apostle terms them, consciences seared with an hot Iron:
so stupefied, that dead Lazarus may be raised, before they can be moved. But
God knows the heart of man, and brings water out of the hard rock;
therefore though I have spoken this (as being jealous of the cause,) yet in
charity I will hope better even of the hardest of them. Only let no man think
it a light sin, to keep open the passage whereby the wild bore (of
Barbarism) enters the Lords vineyard, and whereby God is deprived of the
honor due to his name, Psalm. 80.13. Psalm. 96.


Now at the parting, it may be thou desire to know what success this my
labor had with the Gentleman to whom I sent it. In truth neither that I
desired, August 16. 1613.
nor that which I promised unto my self. For (so it pleased God) that even the
very day, the messenger brought it into Norfolk, the party died. Otherwise I
well hoped, not to have shot this arrow in vain. But because it then missed
the mark at which it was sent, (and many thought not fit to loose it;) I have
now let it fly at random with some notes and alterations, as the difference
between private and public things requires: but still desiring that I might
further have showed my mind in many passages hereof, (and particularly
touching tithes in quoto, and such Parsonages as have Vicarages well endowed)
which without making it almost a new work I could not do; and therefore
resting upon thy courteous interpretation, I leave it to thee, (for this time)
as it is.

A SERMON OF SAINT AUGUSTINES touching rendering of Tithes.
The occasion of this Sermon or Homily was ministered unto him by the time of
the year, it being the 12th Sunday after Trinity, that is about the beginning
of Harvest. The Scripture that he fitteth unto it is the 18 of Luke. Where the
Pharisee boasts of his precise justice in payment of Tithes. It is the 219
Sermon de Tempore: extant in the tenth Tome of his works, and there entitled:

De reddendis decimis.
BY the mercy of Christ (most beloved brethren:) the days are now at hand,
wherein we are to reap the fruits of the earth: and therefore giving thanks to
God that bestows them, let us mindful to offer, or rather to render back
unto him the tithes thereof. For God, Decret 16: Qua 1 cap. Decimae
that vouchsafes to give us the whole, vouchsafes also to require back
again the tenth, not for his own, but for our benefit doubtless. Where you
may see a great part of this Sermon cited for Augustines.
For so has he promised by his Prophet, saying: Mala. 3.10.
Bring all the Tithe into my Barnes, that there may be meat in my house; and
try me, says the Lord, in this point, if I open not the windows of heaven
unto you, and give you fruit without measure. Lo, we have proved how Tithes are
more profitable unto us, then to God. O foolish men! What hurt does God
command, that he should not deserve to be heard? For he says thus: The first
fruits of thy threshing floor, Exodus 22.29.
and of thy Wine press thou shall not delay to offer unto me. If it be a
sin, to delay the giving: how much worse is it, not to give at all? And
again, he says, 16 Quae. 1. ca. decima.
Honor thy Lord thy God with thy just labors, and offer unto him of the
fruits of thy righteousness that thy barnes may be filled with wheat, Prove.
3.9.
and thy presses abound with wine. Thou do not this, for God ha mercy, that
by and by shall receive it again with manifold increase. Perhaps thou will
ask, who shall have profit by that, which God receives, to give presently
back again? And also thou will ask who shall have profit by that which is
given to the poor? If thou beleevest, thy self shall have profit by it; but
if thou doubtest, then thou have lost it.

Tithes (dear Brethren) are a tribute due unto the needy souls. Give
therefore this tribute unto the poor, offer this sacrifice unto the Priests,
If thou have no Tithes of earthly fruits: yet whatsoever the Husbandman has,
whatsoever Art sustaineth thee, it is Gods, and he requires Tithe, out of
whatsoever thou live by: whether it be Warfare, or Traffic, or any other
Trade, give him the tithe. Some things we must pay for the ground we live on,
and something for the use of our life it self. Yield it therefore unto him (O
man) in regard of that which thou possessest: yield it (I say) unto him,
because he has given thee thy birth: Exodus 30.12.
for thus says the Lord: Every man shall give the redemption of his soul, and
there shall not be amongst them any diseases or mishaps. Behold, thou have in
the holy Scriptures the cautions of the Lord, upon which he has promised thee,
that if thou give him thy Tithe, thou shall not only receive abundance of
fruits, but health also of body. Thy barnes (says he) shall be filled with
wheat, Prove. 3.10.
and thy presses shall abound with wine, and there shall be in them, neither
diseases nor mishaps. Seeing then, by payment of Tithes, thou may gain to
thy self, both earthly and heavenly rewards: why do thou defraud thy self
of both these blessings together? 16. Quae. 1. ca. decimae.
Hear therefore, (O thou zeal. less mortality.) Thou know, that all
things that thou usest are the Lords, and can thou find in thy heart, to
lend him (that made all things) nothing back of his own? The Lord God needs
not any thing, neither demands he a reward of thee, but honor; he urges
thee not to render any thing that is thine, and not his. It pleases him to
require the first fruits, and the Tithes of thy goods, and can thou deny
them, (O covetous wretch?) What would thou do, if he took all the nine
parts to himself, and left thee the tenth only? And this in truth he does,
when by withholding his blessing of rain, the drought makes thy thirsty
Harvest to wither away: and when thy fruit, and thy vineyard, are stricken with
hail, or blasted with frost, where now is the plenty that thou so covetously
did reckon upon? The nine parts are taken from thee, because thou would not
give him the Tenth. That remains only that thou refusest to give, though the
Lord required it. For this is a most just course, that the Lord holds, If
thou will not give him the tenth, he will turn thee to the tenth. 16. Quae. 1.
ca. decimae.
For it is written, says the Lord, Insomuch as the Tithe of your ground, the
first fruits of your Land are with you: I have seen it, but you thought to
deceive me: havocke and spoil shall be in your Treasury, and in your houses.
Thus thou shall give that to the unmercifull Soldier, which thou would not
give to the Priest.

The Lord almighty also says; Turn unto me, Mal. 3.10.
that I may open unto you the windows of Heaven, and that I may pour down my
blessing upon you; and I will not destroy the fruit of your Land, neither shall
the vines of your field [or the trees of your orchards] wither away, [or be
blasted] and all nations shall say, that you are a blessed people. God is
allwaies ready to give his blessings. But the perverseness of man always
hinders him. For he would have God give him all things, and he will offer unto
God nothing, of that whereof himself seems to be the owner. This place is
cited as out of Aug. Cons. Triburie^s ca 13. An 895. and before that in council.
Mogunt. pri. c. 8. An. 874.
What if God should say? The man that I made, is mine; the ground that thou
tillest, is mine; the seed that thou so west, is mine; the cattle that thou
weariest in thy work, are mine, the showers, the rain, and the gentle winds
are mine; the heat of the Sun, is mine; and since all the Elements whereby
thou live, are mine; thou that lendest only thy hand, deservest only the
tithe, or tenth part. Yet because Almighty God does mercifully feed us, he
bestows upon the labourer a most liberal reward for his pains, and
reserving only the Tenth part unto himself, has forgiven us all the rest.

Ungrateful and perfidious deceiver, I speak to thee in the word of the Lord.
Behold the year is now ended: give unto the Lord (that gives the rain) his
reward. Redeem thy self, O Man, whilst thou live. Redeem thou thy self
whilst thou may. Redeem thy self (I say) whilst thou have wherewith in
thy hands. Redeem thy self, lest if greedy death prevent thee, thou then lose
both life and reward together. Thou have no reason, to commit this matter over
to thy wife, who happily will have another husband. Neither have thou (O woman)
any reason to leave this to thy husband, for his mind is on another wife. It is
in vain, to tie thy Parents, or thy kinsfolk, to have care hereof: no man
after thy death, surely shall redeem thee, because in thy life, thou would
not redeem thy self. Now then, cast the burden of covetousness from thy
shoulders, despise that cruel Lady, who pressing thee down with her
intolerable yoke, suffers thee not to receive the yoke of Christ. For as
the yoke of covetousness, presses men down unto hell, so the yoke of
Christ raises men up unto heaven. For tithes are required as a debt, 16. Quae
1. ca. decimae.
and he that will not give them, invadeth another man's goods. And let him look
to it, for how many men soever die for hunger in the place where he lives (not
paying his Tithes) of the murdering of so many men shall he appear guilty
before the triounall seat of the eternal Judge, because he kept that back to
his own use, that was committed to him by the Lord for the Poor.

He therefore that either desires to gain a reward, or to Promereri.
obtain a remission of his sins, let him pay his tithe, and be careful to
give alms to the poor, out of the other nine parts: but so notwithstanding,
that whatsoever remains over and above moderate diet, and convenient
apparel, be not bestowed in riot and carnal pleasure, but laid up in the
treasury of Heaven, by way of Alms to the poor. For whatsoever God has
given unto us more then we have need of, he has not given it unto us
particularly, but has committed it over unto us to be distributed unto others:
which if we dispose not accordingly, we spoil and rob them thereof. Thus far
Saint Augustine.

ERasmus in a general censure of these Sermons de Tempore, notes many of them
not to be Saint Augustines: so also does Master Perkins, and diverse other
learned men, who having examined them all particularly, and with great
advisement, rejecting those that appeared to be adulterate or suspected, admit
this notwithstanding as undoubted. And although Bellarmine seems to make a
little question of it, yet he concludes it to be, without doubt, an excellent
work: and either Forte non est Augustimiste sermot, amen insignis est sine du,
bio, and antiqui alicujus Patris, zam inde tanquam ex Augustine multa sunt
adscripta in Decret. 16. q 1.

Bellarm. lib. de clericis cap. 25.


Saint Augustines own, or some other ancient Fathers. But he says, that many
things are cited out of it as out of Augustine in Decret. 16. q. 1. And to
clear the matter further, I find that some parts hereof are alleged under
the name of Augustine, in Council. Triburiens. (which was in the year of our
Lord, 895) cap. 13. And twenty year before that also, in Council. Moguntin. 1.
cap. 8. So that Antiquity it self, and diverse Councels, accept it for
Augustines.

I will not recite a great discourse to the effect of this Sermon amongst the
works of Augustine in the Treatise, De rectitudine Christianae religionis;
because Erasmus judges that Treatise not to be Augustines. Yet seems it
likewise to be some excellent man's, and of great antiquity. But if thou would
hear more what Augustine says unto thee of this matter, take this for a
farewell; Homil. 48. ex lib. 50.
Majores nostri ideo copiis omnibus abundabant, quia Deo decima dabant, Ham.
com. 10.
and. Caesari censum reddebant: modo autem quia discessit devotio Dei, accessit
indictio fisci. Noluimus partiri cum Deo decimas, modo autem totum tollitur.
Hoc tollit fiscus, quod non accipit Christus.

An Appendix by the Author.
I Have been often solicited within these two years, both to reimprint this
little Treatise, and also to publish a greater work much of the same Argument.
Some especial reasons have made me unwilling to do either. Not that I do,
aut clypeum abjicere, aut causam deserere: But I find my arm too feeble for so
great an attempt: and in matters of such weight and consequence, a better
opportunity is to be expected, then is yet afforded. I desire therefore not to
be hastened herein, though he that published my Book in Scotland (out of his
zeal to the cause) takes that for one of his In his Epist. Dedicatory,
Motives. When I did first let it go forth: I did it only in covert manner:
not thinking it worthy of the bread eye of the World, nor holding it fit to
have that which was done in a corner, preached upon the house top: or that
which passed privately between me and my friend, to fly (in this sort, at
once) to both the Poles of the Monarchy. Hereupon I hitherto by entreaty
withheld it from a reimpression. But I being in the Country, and it being now
to me as filius emancipatus, and out of my power: the Printer has taken
advantage of his liberty, and in my absence printed it again with the former
infirmities.

I wish, since it must needs be thus: that I had overrun it with a new hand:
as well to explain it in some things, as to help and fortify it in other. For
the Argument has many adversaries, not of the Laity only: but amongst the
Churchmen themselves. All are not pleased with this form of Tithes
Maintenance: others are not satisfied how it is due. Some also conceive
Scriptures in this manner, some in that: and where one is best pleased, there
another finds most exception. Thus he that comes upon the Stage, is the
Object and Subject of every man's opinion. Yet must I herein confess my self
beholding unto many: for I understand that this small Essay has given them
good likeing.

To satisfy all I labor not: but to the worthier sort I would perform what I
could. Being therefore informed (about a year almost since) that some
particular Divines of learning and judgment, (conceiveing well of my Book,
supposed that I had departed from the ancient and modern interpreters in
applying the 12. verse of the 83. Ps. only to the sanctified things of the
Jews, which (they said) was spoken of all their houses and Cities in general.
I did then unto them (as I thought is fit) reddere rationem and fidei and
facti. And in like manner (because the book goes forth again upon a new
adventure, and may encounter with the like objections,) I held it now as
necessary to add something unto it in that point being so material. Yet must
I signify unto you, that they which took that exception, accounted both my
argument and whole discourse the stronger (notwithstanding) Ex consequente: as
namely, that if it were so heinous a sin to invade the temporal things of
the Jews, much more must it needs be to invade the spiritual. So that no man
is either freed or cased by this suggestion, but rather the more ensnared and
overwhelmed. Nevertheless (I understand) that which follows, has cleared
this point unto them: and I hope so shall it also do unto others (which
separate not themselves from our Church) if cause require.

I Am not ignorant that many modern and some Ancient Interpreters understand
the body of the 83 Psalm. of the taking of the houses and Cities of the Jews in
general, not only of the Temple and Synagogues, nor only of the Cities of
the Levites: for the very historical texture of the Psalm discovers as much.
But that branch of it, whereon I fastened my anchor, and where I chiefly
insisted, namely the 12 verse, touching the taking of the houses of God in
possession, (which indeed is the center of the Psalm: what interpretation
soever it receives) most of them interpret it primarily and positively for the
Temple and Holy things, then per transiationem for Jerusalem, and by
consequence, for all Judea, (and the people of God) in respect that they were
there planted.

For though we following Genebrard, Calvin and Arias Montanus, translate it
literally, Take the houses of God in possession; yet the Septuagint and Greeks
interpret it (...). And Hierom in the Latin Vulgar accordingly, Sanctuarium
Dei: in his other translation called Hebraica veritas, (which also agrees with
that elder, cited by Lucius in the primer ages of the Church) Pulchritudinem
Dei: Pelican, electissima: all of them by such denominations, as are most
proper to the Temple and holy things. And therefore the Church in all former
ages and for the most part yet also beyond the Seas, even in the reformed parts
of Germany, retains that interpretation of Sanctuarium Dei, as best agreeing
with the intent of the Hebrew, which Hierom in the Preface to his translation
professes confidently (by many witnesses) that he has changed in nothing.

I allege all this, but to show, that by what variety of words soever, the
translators express the original Hebrew, yet they all concur with this as
the Fountain and standard; that prima intention, it aims at the holy
things, though in secunda it be carried unto temporal.

Our selves also in our own English translation, understand the houses of God,
for places dedicated to the service of God. And therefore in the 9. verse of
the 74. Psalm, where our Church Psalter says, burnt up all the houses of God
in the Land: the Geneva and the Kings Edition report it, burnt up all the
Synagogues of God in the Land. So likewise in the 1 verse of the 84. Psalm. The
dwellings of God are expressly spoken of his Tabernacles, and holy habitations,
not of his Temporal.

Yet do I not deny; but (as I say) Secunda intention, the words Sanctuarium,
or Houses of God, in the 83. Psalm are truly carried to all Judaea and the
people of God, howbeit Hierome notes expressly no such matter upon it: neither
could Augustine find it in the literal or historical sense of the text: and
therefore he deduceth it to the people of God by way of Tropology, using the
metaphor of Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 3. Sanctuarium: (says he) Templum dei sanctum
est, quod estis vos. And Lyra accordingly, Sanctuarium, id est (says he)
Jerusalem, in quae erat Templum Dei: and per consequens, terram Judaeae, cujus
metropolis erat Jerusalem.

Arnobius likewise of the Ancients takes it first for the Temple and the holy
vessel: then extensively, for the people and Land of Israel. As for Cyprian,
Origin, Tertullian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Gregory, they meddle not with it,
that I can find, nor Hierome otherwise then as I have mentioned.

But admit that at this day most do expound it for the Temporalities of the
Jews, as well as for their Leviticall and Sanctified things; What does this
contradict my application of this Psalm against Spoilers of Churches? or
wherein is my erreur? I affirm the Genus of one of the membra dividentia, and
they upon both. I upon one not exclusive, and they upon both copulative. Do not
they then themselves affirm my assertion? Let Schoolmen be Judges. Yea do
they not justify and enforce it? For if God loves the gates of Sion, more
then all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. that is, the outward and petty
things of his Church, more then all the stately temporalties of his Lay people,
yea, if he loves Jacob but for Sion, that is, the People but for the Church,
then Ex necessario consequente, when the Prophet denounces such heavy things
against them, that menaced Gods Lay people, and their possessions, how much the
rather, does he it against such as with great fury and impiety afflict his more
peculiar and chosen servants, his Clergy, his Levites, his first borne? Against
those I say, that forbear not to violate the things more dear unto him: His
Temple, his Oracle, his holy mysteries, that is, things belonging to his honor
and divine service, things and means, ordained to the propagation of his
blessed word? For this is the consequence of destroying our Churches: this
kills the bird in the shell: and to a person offending in this nature, wrote
I my Book

By like reason, it may also be said; that this Psalm was framed against
Heathens and Infidells, (which in open hostility assailed the Church and people
of God with fire and sword) not against such as be our own brethren, and of
the family of the Church, though (in some sort) they do injury unto it. I
answer that the Ammonites and Moabites were also of the kindred of Israel:
yea, the Edomites, and Ismaelites, of the lineage of Abraham, as well as the
Israelites themselves: yet when they joined with them that sought the
destruction of the Church; the curses of the Prophet went as freely and as
fiercely against them, as the rest. So if our Church be spoiled by her
brethren, her children, or kindred, the sentence is all one against them, as
against Heathens and Infidells, yea, and that also more justly and deservedly
by the judgment of the Prophet, who accounts the treachery of a familiar
friend much more intolerable, then the violence of an open Enemy. Psalm. 55.12.

But say I have erred (which indeed is too common with me, though it be
humanum) and does the more easily befall me, having saluted the Shoole of
Divinity, only a long and a limine: I am therefore ready with Augustine to
put it amongst my retractations, if there be cause why. yet (as he said of
Romulus) Sed tamen errorem quo tueatur habet. For I am not the Author of this
exposition, neither is it my own weapon, but borrowed, and put into my hand by
others of elder time. I confess that as they which go to battle, whet their
swords, and bend their bows: so I sharpened both the edge and the point of it
to my purpose. For all spirits are not cast out by ordinary power, nor all
humors persuaded by ordinary reason. Knowing therefore what was necessary in
particular for the party to whom I wrote, I applied my self, and my pen to
that particular necessity: yet, not with Zidkiah to seduce him by untruths, 1
R. 22.17.
but as a faithful Michaiah to leave nothing untold that belonged to his
danger.

See then what I have to defend my self withal, both of Ancient and later
Fathers and Doctors of the Church: the first application (as I take it) that
ever was made of this Psame, was (only to the purpose I allege it) by Lucius a
devout Bishop of Rome, in the bloody age of the Primitive Church, about 225.
years after Christ; of whom (to let pass Cyprian) Bale, a man of our own,
Epist. l. 3. Epist. 1.
gives this testimony; That he was a faithful servant in the Lords house, --
and enriched his Church with healthful doctrine, and afterward being purified
in the Lambs blood, he peirsed the heavenly Paradise, being put to death at
Valentinian's commandment, Anno 255. This Lucius (as I noted in the margent of
my Book, page 39.) in an Epistle of his to the Bishops of Gallia and Spain:
See bear p. 60.
having determined many things touching the Church, and somewhat also against
spoilers and defrauders thereof (concluding them by the example of Judas to be
thieves and sacrilegious persons) he proceeds with them in this manner: De
talibus, id est (says he) qui facultates Ecclesiae rapiunt, fraudant, and
auferunt: Dominus comminans omnibus per prophetam loquitur, dicens: Deus ne
taceas tibi: ne sileas, etc. Reciteing the whole 83 Psalm every word, as you
may see, Tom. 1. Council. of Binius edition. pa. 180. col. 2.

I took this reverend Father and great Doctor of the Church; living in the
purity of religion, in the times of persecution, and so near the ages of the
Apostles, to be a faithful direction to my pen. Yet, lest he should seem like
a Sparrow alone on the house top, I will show you the opinion of others in the
after ages.

Petrus Damianus a Cardinal, whilst that title was rather a name of Ministry
then of Dignity, and long before it became mounted and purpurate, a star of
his time, now almost 600. years old, understands this Psalm also of Church
possessions, and dignities, and out of it does vehemently confute the
Chaplains, of Duke Gothifred, which held it no simony to buy Bishoprics and
Priests places, so they paid nothing for the imposition of hands (an opinion
too common at this day) and he applies against them the interpretation of the
names of the Heathen Princes there mentioned, and concludes them to be
haereditario quodam jure Sanctuarii possessores, as you may see in his Specula
Mor. l. 5. Ep. 13. ad Capellan. Gothif.

Rupertus who flourished about 500. years since; expounds it contra omnes
Ecclesiae hosts, falses Christianos, haereticos, etc.

Great Hugo Cardinalis, the first Postillator of the Bible, (who flourished
Anno 1240. a little also, before that order was distinguished with the Horse
and Red Hat, and a man to whom all the Preachers of Christendom are more
beholden, then many of them are aware: for much of that good juice that
sweetneth the expositions they read, dropped from his pen, though now like rivers
falling into other channels, it has lost his name) in his worthy Coment upon
the Psalter, applies the words, haereditate possideamus sanctuarium Dei,
against those that ambitiously seek Church livings and dignities, despising
the curses of this Psalm, as well among the great men of the Clergy as them of
the Laity, which by threatening or favor obtain Ecclesiastical promotions:
and particularly against such men of the Church, as confer Prebends and
Dignities upon their Nephews and kindred, building (as he says) Sion in (their
blond, and Jerusalem in iniquity. Neither spares he the Popes themselves, but
charge them also that they possess Gods Sanctuary, by way of inheritance, in
that they keep the succession of the Papacy among such as be only of the
Roman nation. And much more to this purpose, which were here too long to
recite: but (concluding that the Prophet has levelled at them all in this
Psalm) he says, De omnibus istis sequitur: Deus meus pone eos ut rotam, etc.

Joannes Vitalis, (who lived above 300. years since, and for his fame and
learning, was also called to be a Cardinal, ere that this dignity was yet at
the highest pitch) vehemently enforces this Psalm against the great men that
prey upon the Church, applying the interpretation of the names therein
mentioned very bitterly unto them. And says further, that they possess the
Sanctuary of God by inheritance, which enter into it unworthlly, or in
succession to their unckles, nephews, and parents, and they also which give
Benefices in that manner, wasting thereby as it were Christ's hereditary
patrimony; with much more to this effect, Speculo morale tit. Principes
saeculares. fol. 229. d.

Nicolaus de Lyra, who flourished about the same time, our own countryman,
(though of Jewish Parents) a star also in that age of the first magnitude,
for his learning; and exquisit above all in the Hebrew, (it being his mother
tongue, and elaborate by him) whose judgment I the rather esteem, for that
Luther loved him and preferred him above all interpreters, as Luther himself
testifies in the 2 and 9 chap. of Genests. He (I say, as before I have noted)
expounds it: first, and properly for the Temple (under which I understand all
things dedicated unto God) then for Jerusalem, because (says he) the Temple
was there: and lastly by consequence (for that is his own word) for the Land
of Judaea, whose chief City Jerusalem was. So that he makes the Temple and
things belonging to God, to be the maine part whereat the Prophet aims, and
the City and Country to follow but by inferance and implication.

Come to the later Writers, Genebrard notes upon Sanctuarium Dei; that the
Hebrew word is, Habitacula, and for the postill says; Generaliter de divinis
omnibus templis, urbibus, locis, and oppidis populi Dei. So that if he had
been questioned further; how he understood Habitacula, specialiter, it is then
like he would have answered, de divinis omnibus templis tantum: that is, only
of Churches. But be it as it is, he sets them in the first place, as the
proper signification, and the rest in consequence, as analogicall, according to
Augustine and our Countryman Lyranus.

As for Luther, he expounds not this Psalm himself, that I can find; but
you see what he attributes to Lyra's judgment.

Pelican a great Hebritian, translateth it Possideamus nobis electissima Dei,
and expounds it in like manner as before, Templum, eivitatem, vasa, populum
Dei.

Pomeranus interprets it of them that did seek to make themselves Lords and
heirs of the Temple.

To conclude, because the newest things are most acceptable with many. The last
man that has written upon the Psalter, Lorinus a Jesuit, (and therefore I will
not press his authority) yet to do him right, very well esteemed amongst
great Clerks of our own Church for much good learning (though in matters of
controversy, full enough of Romish leaven) recites somewhat more briefly the
former interpretations of Petrus Damianus, Hugo Cardinalis, and John Vitalis,
and approving those their applications, puts them still on into the world,
as truly consonant to the tenor of the Psalm, which notwithstanding I doubt
not has also many other expositions, as herbs have usually diverse virtues and
operations. But thus the eldest and newest expositors are wholly for me, many
also (and of the best of them) of the middle ages, none that I know against me.
For although Musculus, Bucer, Calvin, Marlorat, Mollerus, expounds this
Psalm historically of the Country and Nation of the Jews, yet when they
apply it to the Church of Christ (as otherwise there were no use of it) they
make that application by way of figure and analogy; And then is there no cause
to raise an antithesis, or contrariety between them and me. For to reconcile
the matter, Saint Jerome in his entrance into the exposition of this Psalm,
tells us, that we may expound it figuratively of the Church (which I
understand in matters of action, government, doctrine,) or historically of the
people of the Jews and nations about them. And though Calvin himself pursues
for the most part the historical interpretation, yet when he comes to the
12. verse, he says; Iterum accusat profanos homines sacrilegij, quod
praedatoria licentia involant in ipsam Dei haereditatem.

Thus much, and too much touching this point. As it is said in the end of the
Macchabees: If I have done well, and as the story required, it is the thing
that I desired: but if I have spoken slenderly and barely, it is that I could.
Let no man therefore rely upon me, but learn of them that are bound to teach;
For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law
at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 2.7.

Other things there be, wherein I would willingly have enlarged my self a
little: but as Papilius in Livy describing a circle about Antiochus enforced
him to answer before he stepped out of it. So the Printer (having printed all to
the last Sheet before I knew it) restrains me, ad articulum temporis, within
which accordingly I must needs end.

FINIS.

