An Abridgment of the Case of the Cities, Corporations and Market Towns of
England, most humbly Represented to the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal in Parliament Assembled.
THE said Corporations, Markets, and Market Towns (which are the Wombs of
Trade) together with all the Production and Staples of this Noble Realm
(wherein their Lordships are so great Proprietors, and so highly Interested) do
increase their Respective Rents and Values, according to the Encouragement they
receive by mutual Commerce, and that Commerce its Improvement from such
Regulations as our former Laws have Aimed at, but not Accomplished, by reason
of the Difficulties that have been found in putting the same in Execution.

For so it is, That the present Irregularities of Pedling and Hawking by Foot
and Horse-Packmen, and such Wandering and Unaccountable Persons, That they I.
Can neither themselves be duly Taxed, nor made Serviceable to the Offices and
Duties of the Public, but on the contrary. II. Do Undermine, Discourage and
Ruin many Thousands of Honest, Lawful, Settled Traders and Manufacturers, and
their Numerous Families, by which, III. They cause great Impoverishment and
Devastations in the said Markets and Towns, and consequently the Disimprovement
and Downfall of the Rents and Profits both in, about, or near the same. IV.
They are the Occasion of the Making, Vending, and Dispersing of Uncustomed,
Imperfect, and Deceitful Wares, and the Deceiving and Abusing, and sometimes
the Robbing and Destroying Their Majesty's Good Subjects, and Corrupting their
Servants. V. To the great hindrance of Their Majesty's Revenue, in their Taxes,
Customs, Excise, and Postage of Letters, especially cross the Countries; VI. To
the Hindrance and Discouragement of Serving Apprenticeships, and thereby
Exposing Youth to great Hazards and Misfortunes. VII. To the preventing of Good
Neighborhood, Credit; and consequently the Consumption of Goods and
Commodities of English Growth and Manufacture. VIII. To the rendering Useless
both Merchants, Shopkeepers, Artifficers, Ships of Burden, and Trade to
Remoter Parts, and consequently, IX. To make this Potent Island more weak and
obnoxious to the Power of France. etc.


To prevent all which, and but to reinforce our former Laws, the Bill now
before then Lordships, Entitled, A Bill to prevent the Decay of Trade in
Cities, Corporations, and Market Towns in England, is most humbly Recommended
to the Favor of their Lordships, by the Inhabitants thereof; in which Bill all
Wandering Traders (except for Provisions) are generally limited with due Liberty
to all Makers of Goods, with permission to such Pedlers, as are duly Qualified,
to take Houses and Shops, and to Live (as other fair Traders) within the Limits
of the Laws.

The abovementioned is humbly Offered as a plain Consequent from the Premises,
by which all Objections are Answered, and the Matters of Fact Attested but by
too many Witnesses from all Parts of the Kingdom. Note, That since the
Petitioners could not prevail for the Passing their Bill into a Law, they have
been Advised by their Council well to Consider the several Statutes formerly
Provided, for their Relief, and not to grudge to be at some Charge, more
Effectually to Prosecute the same, in such manner as from time to time they
shall be Advised.



