The Bloody ALMANAC, OR, Astrological Predictions, and Monthly Observations;
Denoting and setting forth, I. The great Changes, Mutations, and Revolutions,
that will happen in the Year of Christ, 1655. And the Direful Actions, and
memorable Accidents that will befall some great Ones in Authority, who have
enriched themselves by the sweat of other men's brows. II. The particulars of
the greatest Catastrophe that ever happened in England, the calling to an
account some of the Commonwealths servants, who are now become Her Masters;
and the making of diverse Headless. III. A Diary of the National Affairs, the
proceedings of the Nobles, and a most excellent Antidote to cure the Malady of
the Commons, and to confirm and establish our long-desired Liberties. IV. The
Arraignment and Conviction of diverse Time-buggering Changlings, and the
admirable Effects that will attend the motion of our lawful Governors. V. The
rectifying of the Magistracy, the administering of true Justice to the
Commonalty, and the exaltation of our long-contended for Liberty. VI. The
violent Diseases that will prove obnoxious and incident both to Men, and Women;
and a brief Computation of the Royal Chronicle.


Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for G. HORTON, 1655.

A brief Computation of some things very memorable, till this present Year,
1655.
SInce Charles the first to grief and sorrow born
Since true Allegiance from the Crown was torn
Since living Charles first breathed this loathsome air
Since Reverend Laud began St Paul's Repair
Since the late King advanced against the Scot
Since Peace concluded, but intended not
Since Wolves and Foxes first were idolized
Since learned Strafford's blood was sacrificed
Since Sects and Tumults set the Land on fire
Since the dead King was forced to Retire
Since Charles his Royal Standard streaming stood
Since Keinton sield deep died wtth English blood
Since Cheapside-Cross (for Conscience sake) did fall
Since Moses Tables forced to give the wall
Since first we felt the virtue of a Tax
Since glorious Laud tryumphed over the Ax
Since Naesby field first owned that fatal Blow
Since the stout Cavalry felt the Overthrow
Since pensive Charles left Oxford (in disguise)
Since he so treacherous Scots became a prize
Since Henderson received his Mortal wounds
Since Scotch-men sold their Prince for English pounds
Since Holmby house restrained his further flight
Since Joice surpised him in the Dead of Night
Since he had terms proposed and promised right
Since fairly juggled into th'Isle of Wight
Since the wise Commons took a purging Dose
Since Charles made truly great and glorious
Since Charles's Crown etc. exposed to a rate
Since England hight the Title of Free State
Since Mars Vnrousted those had twelve years ruled
Since Mad men (on their Ruins)'began to build
Since that illiterate Conclave's Dissolution
Since this blessed Government's Institution
Since Time was pregnant of a Lord Protector
Since she brought forth (a more then Trojan Hector)
Since Knights and Burgesses their free Election
Since winnowed and made of one complexion
Since they convened at Westminster and sat
Since they Enacted -- 'Next shall tell you what
A Table of the fixed Fe^sts, and other Days of Note for ever.
January 1. New years day, January 6 Twelfth day, February 2 Purification Mary,
February 24 Mathias, March 1 St David, March 25 Lady Day, April 25 St Mark, May
1 Philip and Jacob, June 12 St Barnaby, June 24 St John Baptist, July 15 St
Swithen, July 19 Dog. days begin, July 25 St James, August 1 Lammas day,
August 10 St Lawrence, August 23 Dog days end, August 24 St Bartholomew,
September 21 St Matthew, September 29 St Michael, October 18. St Luke, October
28 Simon and Jude November 1 All Saints November 5 Powder Treason November 30
St Andrews, December 21 St Thomas, December 25 Christmas, December 26 St
Stephen December 27 John Evangelist, December 28 Innocents.
Hillary Term begins January 23, ends February 12. Easter Term begins May 2.
ends May 28. Trinity Term begins June 15, ends July 4. Michaelmas Term begins
October 23, ends Novem. 28.
Go to, brave Hero's! And abridge the Law,
[Teach (in Epitome) to hang and draw:]
Make Magna Charta speak us LILBURN-free,
That Treason, which is writ without a T.
Correct old Littleton, and print him New:
The Sword's one Tenure, more, He never knew.

Monthly Predictions.
JANUARY.
A Mad world my Masters, when Time-Changlings are troubled with such a
Looseness, that whatever they take in, runs through them presently: yet were it
not for the general Fate of the Time yet impending, there was hopes of much
good to be acted by Authority, and the publike-weal: A pacification is like to
be between the Sword and the Gown; and Virtue now shall wear the Crown: so that
there is great hopes we shall arrive in some good measure to our long desired
Liberty. Cold and dry weather for the greatest part of the first week. Some
snow or rain about the 9. day. Cold winds after the full moon, but the weather
fair and seasonable. Full moon the 12 day at 5 in the morn. New moon the 27
day, at half an hour past 12.

FEBRUARY.
GReat Ones cannot agree, by reason of the Aphelion of Mars; and bad ones are
taken away, but worse put into their room: Here Is Virtue punished, and Vice let
go; beware the questioning of a great man I sure I am that Death seizes of a
mighty woman: some Parasi e flatters a great man in Authority, and makes him
believe wonders; but being discovered, it will appear evident, that he has
been Author of more mischief then a hundred thousand treacherous Scots, put all
together. Frost begins the month, and so continues for the most part of the
first ten days. After which, look for some rain, sl et, snow, or dark and
cloudy weather, with many nipping winds, especially about the 13, 15, 20, 23,
and 26 days. Full moon the 10 day, at 4 a clock in the afternoon. New moon the
26. day at 5 a clock in the afternoon.

MARCH.
A Most excellent Harmony attends the actions of the English; and exceedingly
will they enlarge their Dominions; the French tremble, and are like to suffer
extremely; the Spaniards quake, and Royal Phoebus cuts the Equator line in the
West Indies, which presageth notorious actions, and direful things, pest'ring
the Commmons, even as many has done their Kings. Cold mornings, and somewhat
windy the 1, 6, 7, days; and some sharp and sudden showr^ toward the latter
end. Full moon the 12 day, at 4 in the morning New moon the 29 day, half an
hour past 7 in the afternoon.

MAY.
THis Month produces very direful Actions, old sores will break forth unless
thoroughly searched by a long sword; and the soldiery will maintain their
Superiors as long as they can, yet at last the Magistracy will be handled by
Jupiter; and there is great hopes that the Nobles will advance the good of the
Commons; it is high time, too long has their freedoms been captivated; and that
ere long their privileges will receive an absolute exaltation in its own
Center and Hemisphere. Fair and pleasant weather until the 9. day. Some wind
and rain about the 10 day, but principally about the 15, 18, 19, and 20 days.
No great alteration of the air, till about the N. Moon; but from thence be sure
of winds chiefly about the three last days. Full Moon the 10. day. New M. 25.

JUNE.
AT the beginning of the month we might expect some gracious Act or Ordinance
to befall the people; but the excellency thereof will soon receive an Over-turn
for some space of time; yet at length its glorious splendour will shine forth in
streams throughout all the dark corners of the Nation, and speak brave English
to the long oppressed Commoner: At which time; young Charles is much talked of,
and very good and pleasing intelligence delights our Ears from Scotland. But
the Merchants are like to suffer much at sea, not only by Pyracie, but also by
shipwreck. London beware, violent Fevers, Dropsies, Bellaches, threaten thy
inhabitants: O cast off thy rebellious disputes, and maintain no longer thy
Worm-eaten Opinions: Condemn not the Holy Church, because of the ravening
Wolves, and subtle Foxes crept into (and now so miserably despoiling) her; and
decry not our reverend Clergy, because some Time-buggering Changlings have
dishonored the Function, seduced the Auditory, and preferred their worldly
interests and carnal ends of pride, ambition, hypocrifie, and desire of
pre-eminence above their masters: for which incredulity, let the bonds of
Loyalty be their Judges, and the Piety of a whole Covent of learned men, their
President. I dare proceed no further for fear of a surfeit; a word to the
ingenuous is sufficient; I having already participated of the influences of
contrary Constellation, without any impeding, etc. This month begins with fair
and pleasant weather; but concludes with high winds, thunder, and lightning.
Full moon the 8 day, 9 at night. New moon the 23 day, 6 at night.

JULY.
A Notable Scene attends the National Affairs, and great acts are brought upon
the Stage: withdraw but the Curtain, and you may discern the motion of the
Puppits, even unto the Netherlands, where the Belgic Lion begins to roar, and
once more to hang forth the skarlet streamers upon the British Ocean. Very
good, I shall then unravel the mystery, and tell you in plain English, that the
Dutch begin new Contingencies, and their Whimfie pated Noddles, are altogether
elevated with strange Chimera's; wonderful speculation! Rare invention! the
Design being founded upon the Element of water, although the Constitution hangs
most magically in the air, like the Tomb of Mahomet, by the virtue and
phantfie of some magnetical Boar, or Coxcomb. Well! admit this; nevertheless,
our Commonwealth stands in a gallant posture; and is ready to receive the
enemy, beyond the credit of succeeding Ages. Great Causes presuppose Events as
great,
Here sounds a Warlike March, There, a Retreat;
The Sword is drawn: I fear a Plague the next;
Much more some sermons on the Cobblers Text.


The month begins fair and comfortable, but concludes with gloomy weather, and
some showers, yet very hot and sultry, and thunder most part of the month,
Full moon the 8 day, half an hour after noon. New moon the 23, half an hour
after one in the morning.

AUGUST.
SOme in Authority now think to vaump and trim up an old fashion of
Gubernation; and promise much, but perform little, that is no news; The people
seem to be merry, but they have small cause; for when they think Authority will
alter something that may prove beneficial, lo it is but an establishing of
what they count obnoxious; insomuch, that the Commonalty are unsatisfied, and
many Paper-kites takes their flights up and down the countries, which incites
the people to a unanimous petitioning for the abatement of Taxes, I wish it
unfeignedly; O what a sweet harmony would Englishmen sing, if every man might
enjoy his own. The month begins and continues fair until the change of the
moon, only some winds about the 11, 13, 14, and 18 days. And from thence, to
the end thereof, be assured of Rain, and notable cooling Winds. Full moon the 7
day, at 4 in the morn. New moon the 21. half an hour after 9 in the morning.

SEPTEMBER.
O Heavens! is not thy Vicegeaent the equal Scale? where is th^n the perfect
administration of true Justice? when shall we partake and center on those
Golden Reins of Government so long contended for? What! must the weakest
always go to the wall, and might overcome right? No, no, there is a day of
redemption coming, wherein some great ones will be forced to rectify their
evil practices, and constrained to give an account of their stewardships; and
reason good, they may in time be fatted for the slaughter. Certainly, the rash
actions of some in Authority, will produce (in process of time) the greatest
Catastrophe that ever happened in England: We are threatened this month, and
strange news comes from France; beware an invasion for the Indies. Some
trifling winds and showrs the 3 first days. Some thunder and lightning
between the 9 and 15 days. Fair weather for the most part from, from the 19
day to the end of the month, Full Moon the 5 day, half an hour past 6 at
night. New Moon the 19 day, half an hour past 7 at night.

OCTOBER.
THe Sword rages, and Mars thunders up and down, Not quiet with, nor yet
without a Crown. The Commonwealth begins to swell, all things at Westminster
goes not well; the matter ^ng promised, is not to the people yet performed; for
which they now begin ^o grin, and threaten to bite, if they be not muzled: so
that this great thing no^ in question ( viz. Liberty and Freedom) finds a good
acceptaion, after a grand deliberation. The earth is barren, and a great
Mortality afflicts the Land. Alas! when siccity prevails, acute Fevers are
generated. Diseases also are excited that lead to Consumptions, Inflammations of
the Eyes, Griefs of the Head and Joints, Pains of the Entrals, with stoppage of
the Urine. Moreover, the winter shall abound with H^^d-aches, Coughs, Hoarsnes,
and Rh^ums (which according to Gallen) be symptoms of a full head. The Spring
with Fluxes, (which will kill many) and death of aged men. The Summer with
abortive births, and dissenteries, amonst such as be of a flegmacike
complexion. The plague of the guts will have great access, being aggravated
with extreme windiness, and corruption of blood: women's travels will not be so
sore as in many years and times past it ha, h been; but many are threatened with
sore lings ring sickness after deliverance, occasioned by the corruption of
blood. From the first to the last of this month the weather will be for the
greatest part very cold and windy; and some snow about the middle, Full Moon
the 5 day, half an ho: past 9 at night. New Moon the 19 day, at 11 at night.

NOVEMBER.
SOme great scuffling this month amongst Superiors, and mighty thwartings with
those that sit at the stern; yet they concur in the public cause, against a
^orrein enemy, which are may; yet shall the English become Victors, both in the
West Indies, and other places. Cold weather, with some winds, and rain the 3
and 5 days. Great winds about the 10, 12, and 13 days. Snow-like, or Rain the
17, 18, 19, and 20 days. The rest of the month will be fairer, but very cold
and chill. Full moon the 3d day, half an hour past 9 in the morn. New moon the
17 day, at 5 at night.

DECEMBER.
MAny great ones begin to tremble, and diverse are questioned and brought upon
the stage; some are in danger of being made headless; I wish all were so served
that deserves it. And seeing they can agree no better, but insist upon
Janglings, let them have a care they do not hang like Bells, to ring a fatal
Peal in this our latter

END.

