The Country-mans Recreation, OR THE Art of Planting, Graffing, and Gardening,
in three Books. The first declaring diverse ways of Planting, and Graffing, and
the best times of the Year, with diverse Commodities and secrets herein, how to
Set or Plant with the Root, and without the Root; to sow or set Pepins or
Curnels, with the ordering thereof, also to cleanse your Grafts and Cions, to
help barren and sick Trees, to kill Worms and Vermin, and to preserve and keep
Fruit; how to plant and proin your Vines, and to gather and press your Grape;
to cleanse and Moss your Trees, to make your Cider and Perry, with many other
secret Practices which shall appear in the Table following. The second treats
of the Hop-Garden, with necessary Instructions for the making and the
maintenance thereof, as also the Situation, quantity, charge and benefit,
preparation, time to cut and set, with Rules for the choice and preparation of
Roots, and also diverse Instruments useful for the Hop Garden: with some
directions for Tabaco. Whereunto is added, The Expert Gardener, containing
diverse necessary and rare secrets belonging to that Art, with Directions to
know the time and season to sow and plant all manner of Seeds; with diverse new
Inventions and Garden-knots, and also present Remedies to destroy Snailes,
Canker-worms, Moths, Garden-fleas, Earthworms, Moles, and all other Vermin,
which commonly breed in Gardens: hereunto is likewise added the Art of ANGLING.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb, for William Shears, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door 1654.

An Exhortation to the Planter and Graffer.
REgard always, before ye do intend to plant or graffe, it shall be meet to
have good experience in things meet for this Art, as in knowing the natures of
all fruits, and differences of Climates, which be contrary in every Land: also
to understand the East and West winds, with Aspects and Stars, to the end ye
may begin nothing that the Wind or Rain may oppress, that your labor be not
lost, and to mark also and consider the dispositions of the Elements that
present year; for all years be not of like operation, nor yet after one sort;
the Summer and Winter do not bear one face on the Earth, nor the Spring time
always rain, or Autumn always moist: of this none have understanding, without
a good and lively marking spirit; few or none without learning may discern of
the varieties and qualities of the earth, and what he does ask or refuse.
Therefore it shall be good to have understanding of the Ground, where ye do
plant either Orchard or Garden with fruit, first it behooves to make a sure
Defense, to the end that not only rude Persons and Children may be kept out,
but all kind of hurtful Cattle endamaging your Plants or Trees, as Oxen,
Kine, Calves, Horses, Hogs, and Sheep, as the rubbing of sheep does greatly
burn the sap, and often does kill young Trees and Plants, and where they are
broken or bruised with Cattle, it is doubtful to grow after. It shall be good
also to Set, Plant, or Graffe Trees all of like nature and strength together,
that the great and high Trees may not overcome the low and weak, for when they
be not like of height, they grow not ripe, nor your fruit so well at one time,
but the one before the other. That earth which is good for Vines, is good also
for other fruit.

Ye must dig your holes a year before ye Plant, that the earth may be the
better seasoned, mortified and wax t^nder, both by Rain in Winter, and ^eat in
Summer, that thereby your Plants may take root the sooner, if ye will make your
holes, and plant both in a year: at the lest ye ought to make your holes two
months before ye plant, and as soon as they be made, then it shall be good to
burn straw or such like therein, to make the ground warm. The further ye make
them asunder, the better your trees shall bear. Make your holes like unto a
furnace, that is, more straight in the mouth then beneath, whereby the roots
may have the more room, and by straightness of the mouth, the less rain or
cold shall enter by in Winter, and so less heat to the root in Summer.

Look also that the earth ye put to the roots, be neither wet nor la^d in
water: they do commonly leave a good space betwixt every tree for the hanging
boughs, for being nigh together, ye cannot set roots, nor sow nothing so well
under your trees, nor they will not bear fruit so well. Some leave forty foot,
some thirty between every Tree: your Plants ought to be greater than the handle
of a shovel, and the lesser the better. See they be straight without knots or
knobs, having a long straight grain o^ bark, which shall the sooner be apt to
take Graffes, and when ye set branches or boughs of old trees, choose the
straightest branch thereof, and those Trees which have born yearly good fruit
before, take of those which be on the Sunny side, sooner than those that grow
in the cover or shadow; and when ye take up or alter your Plants, ye shall note
to what your plant is subject, and so let them be set again, but those which
have grown in dry grounds, let them be set in moist grounds, your Plants ought
to be cut of three foot long. If ye will set two or three Plants together in a
hole, ye must take heed the root of one touch not another, for then the one
will perish and rot the other, or dye by Worms or other Vermen, and when you
have placed your Plants in the earth, it shall be good to strike down to the
bottom of every hole, two short stakes as great as your arm, on either side
your hole one, and let them appear but a little above the earth, that ye may
thereby in Summer give water unto the roots if need be. Your young Plants and
rooted Trees are commonly set in Autumn, from the first unto the fifteenth of
October, yet some think it better after Alhallontide until Christmas, than in
the Spring, because the earth will die too soon after, and also to set Plants
without root after Michaelmasse, that they may be the better mollified and
gather root against the Spring, whereof ye shall find hereafter more at large.
Thus much have I thought meet to declare unto the Planters, Graffers, and
Gardeners, whereby they may the better avoid the ^ccasions and dangers of
Planting, Graffing, and Gardening, which may come often times through ignorance.

A Table of all the principal things contained in this Book.
Of the seven Chapters following.
CHAP. I. Treats of the setting of Curnels, of Apple Treees, Plum Trees, Pear
Trees, and Service Trees.
HOw to choose your Pepins at the first pressing. Means to use the Earth to sow
your Pepins on. Seeing unto the Poultry for marring your beds, and how to weed
or cleanse your beds or quarters. Wild Cions how to pluck them up.
CHAP. II. Treats how to set your wild Trees which come of Pepins, when they
be first plucked up.
Wild Trees that come of Pepins how to dung them. Principal Roots how to cut
them in setting again. Young Trees, how to set them in rank. Spaces from one
rank to another, and how to mak^ them. Plants being dry, how to water them.
Removing your trees, how to plant them again. Removing, how to know the fittest
time for it. Negligence and forgetfulness, and the hurt of it. Not so good to
graffe the Service-tree, as to set him. Some trees without Graffing have good
fruit, and others being graffed, have but evil fruit. For to augment and
multiply your trees. The manner to change the fruit of the Pepin-tree. How to
make good Cider. To make an Orchard in few years.
CHAP. III. Is of setting of Trees which come of Nuts.
HOw to set trees that do come of Nuts, and the time to plant or set them. To
set them in the Spring. Dunging and deep digging thereof. Stones and Nuts like
the Trees they come of. Planting the said Nuts. Why fruit shall not have so
good favor. To set the Pine Tree. To set Cherry Trees. Trees of bastard or
wild Nuts. To set Filberds and Hasell wands. To set Damsons and Plum Trees. To
graffe Cions of Plums or the like. To set all sorts of Cherry Trees. How to
order Plum Trees and Cherry Trees. How to graffe Plum Trees and Cherry Trees.
How to proyn or cut Trees. How to cleanse and dress the roots of Trees. To
keep the stock being greater than the graffes. The remedy when a bough is
broken. How to enlarge the hole about the roots. To set small staves to stay
your Cions. What Tree to proine. Why the sower Cherry dureth not so long as the
great Helm Cherry. To graffe one great Cherry with another. Of deep setting or
shallow.
CHAP. IV. Shows how to set other Trees of great Cions pricked in the earth
without Roots, with the proyning of lesser Cions.
BRanches being pricked giving roots to Trees. How to set them. How to bind them
that be weak. How to dig the Earth to set them in. Cions without Roots.
Planting of the Fig Tree. Setting of Quinces. Setting of Mulberry Trees.
Cutting time for Cions. Setting Bush Trees, as Gooseberries and small Reisons.
A Note thereof.
CHAP. V. Treats of four manner of Graffings.
Diverse ways of Graffing. Graffing of all sorts of Trees. Graffing of Apple
trees, Pear trees, Quince trees, and Medlar trees. Graffing of great Cherries.
Graffing Medlars on other Medlars. Diverse kinds of Graffes on one tree.
Graffing of the Fig tree. Graffing the great Apricocks. Graffing the Service
tree. Setting the Service tree. Trees hard to graffe in the Shield. How to see
to Trees charged with fruit. Cho^sing of trees to choose your Cions in. Cions
on the East part are best. Choosing of your tree for Graffes. To keep Graffes a
long time. To keep Graffes ere they bud. How you ought to begin to graffe. When
is good Graffing the wild Stocks. To mark if the tree be forward or not.
When'ye Graffe, what to be furnished withal Of Graffes not prospering the first
year. For to Graffe well and sure. How to trim your Graffes. How to cut Graffe
for Cherries and Plums. A Note of your incision. To be heedfull in graffing
least you raises How to cut your stock. If your wild stock be great or
slender. Trees as great as a man's Arm. Great trees as big as ones Leg. The
Graffes being pinched in the Stocks. How you ought to cleave your stocks. To
graffe the branches of great trees. How to cut great old branches. How to bind
your Graffs against winds. To set many Graffes in one cleft. To saw your stock
before you leave him. If the stock cleave too much, or the bark open. How
Graffes never lightly take. How to set Graffes right in the stock. Setting in
of the graffes. A note of the same. How to draw forth the wedge. How to cover
your clifts on the head. How ye ought to see well to the close binding up of
your Graffes. How ye ought to temper your clay. How to bush your graffe-heads.
The second stay to graffe high Branches. The third manner of Graffing, is
betwixt the bark and the Tree. Dressing the head, to place your Graffes betwixt
the bark and the Tree. Covering the head of your stock. The manner of graffing
in the Shield. To graffe in summer, so long as the trees be leaved Big Cions
are best to graffe. Manner to take off the Shield. If your Scutchion or Shield
be good or bad, how to know it. Graffing on young Trees. Setting or placing
your Shield. A Note on the same. Raising up the bark to set the Shield on.
Binding on your Shield. A tree will bear the graffing of two or three Shields
Unbinding time for your Shield. Cutting the Branches grafted on Trees.
CHAP. VI. Is of transplanting or altering the Trees.
BEst to transplant or set them timely. To plant or set toward the South.
Cutting the Branches before ye set. Apple Trees commonly must be disbranched
before ye set them again. All wild stocks must be disbranched. What Trees do
love the Sun, and what the cold air. Many sorts and manner of Trees. Planting
or setting Trees at large. Right ordering your Trees. The best manner to
enlarge the holes when you plant your Trees. Dung and good Earth for your
Trees. If Worms be in the earth at your roots of Trees. Digging the Earth well
about the roots. Nature of the places. Goodness of the Earth. With what ye
ought to bind the trees.
CHAP. VII. Is of Medicining and keeping the Trees, when they are Planted and
Set.
FIrst our counsel is, when your Trees are but Plants (in dry weather) they
must be watered. With what Dung ye ought to dung your Trees. When ye ought in
Summer to uncover your Trees. When to cut or proin your Trees. Cutting off
great Branches, and when. Leaving great Branches cut. Great Branches, and of
the Trees that bear them. Barrenness of Trees, of cutting ill branches, and
uncovering the roots. Which Trees ye must break, or pluck up the roots. What
does make a good Nut. Cattle eating and destroying trees, how to graft them
again. Wild stocks ought not hastily to be removed. When to cut naughty Cions
from the head. Sometime how to cut the principal members. How to guide and
govern the said Trees. A kind of Sickness in Trees. Worms in the barks of
Trees. Snails, Ants, and Worms that mar trees. How to take those strange
creeping Worms. Keeping Antes from the Trees. A Note of ill airs and weathers.
Defenc^ from the Caterpiller.
Here follows the Table of Graffing, strange and subtle ways in using of
Fruits and Trees.
GRaffing one Vine upon another. To help a Tree long without fruit. To have
Peaches two months before others. To have Damsons unto Alhallontide. To have
Medlers, Cherries, and Peaches, in eating to taste like spice. How to make a
Muscadell taste. To have Apples and Pears to come without blossoming. To have
Apples and Chestnuts rath, and long on the Trees to remain. To have good
Cherries unto Alhallontide. To have rath Medlers two months before others. To
have Pears timely. To have Misplers and Medlers without stones. How to have
other pears betimes. Mulberries how to ripen them very soon and dure long.
Keeping of pears a year. To have fruit taste half an Apple and half a pear.
Graffing time. Graffing the Quine Apple. A way to destroy Pismires or Ants
about the Tree. Another way of the same. Nuts, Plums and Almonds how to have
them greater and fairer than others. How to make an Oak or other Tree as green
in Winter as in Summer. Planting with roots and without roots. Keeping fruit
from the frost. Choice days to plant and graffe. Green Roses all the year.
Raisins or Grapes good an whole year. Laxative fruit from the tree, how to make
it. A note for all planters and graffers.
Here follows a Table of certain Dutch practices.
TO Graffe one Vine upon another. Chosen days to Graffe in, and to choose
Cions. How to gather your Cions. Of Worms in the Trees or fruit. The setting of
stones and the ordering thereof. How to gather Gum of any tree. To set a whole
Apple. The setting of Almonds. The watering of Pepins. To plant or set Vines.
To plant or set the Cherry tree. To keep Cherries good a year. Remedy against
Pismires or Ants. The setting of Chestnuts. To make all stone-fruit taste as ye
shall devise good. The graffing of the Medlar or Misple. The bearing of fruit
of the Fig Tree. The planting of the Mulberry and Fig Tree. The tree that
bears bitter fruit. To help barren Trees. Another way for the same. To keep
fruit after they be gathered. The Mulberry-tree liking his earth. Of Moss on
your Trees. To keep Nuts long. To cut or proyn the Peach-tree. To color
Peach-stones. If Peaches be troubled with Worms. Peaches without stones.
Another way for the same. How to help trees that do not prosper. Graffing
Apples to last on the tree till Alhallontide. Making Cherries and Peaches smell
like spice. Graffing an Apple Tree half sweet, half sower, Graffing the Rose on
the Holly-tree. Keeping of Plums. Altering of Pears. Making of Cider and Perry.
How to help frozen Apples. How to make Apples fall from the Tree. Watering
trees in Summer, if they wax dry about the root. How to cherish Apples. How to
make an Apple grow in a Glass. How to Graffe many sorts of Apples on one Tree.
How to color Apples of what color ye list. How to graffe and have Apples
without Core. Setting of Vine-plants. How to proyn or cut a Vine in Winter.
Grape and Vine how to order them. How to have Grapes without stones. Making a
Vine to bring a Grape to t^ste like Claret. Gathering of your Grapes. How to
know if your Grapes be ripe enough. How to prove or taste Wine. Setting,
planting and ordering of Hops. How to choose your Hops. How to sow the seeds.
Setting your Poles. How to proine your Hop. How to gather your Hops. What Poles
are best for your purpose. How to order and dress your hills. The best ground
for your Hops.] A note of all the rest abovesaid. Packing and keeping your
Hops.
The Authors Conclusion of this Table.
TO God be praise on high
in all our wordly Planting,
And let us thank the Romans also,
for the Art of Graffing and Gardening.
A Table for the Hop-Garden.
A Perfect Platform of a Hop-Garden. Of unapt Ground, and apt for Hops Of the
situation. Of the quantity. A proportion of the charge and benefit of a
Hop-Garden. Of the preparation of a Hop-Garden. The time to set and ^ut
Hop-roots. Rules for the choice and preparation of roots. Of the good Hop. Of
the unkindly Hop. Of the wild Hop. Of setting of Hop-roots. The distance of the
hills. A Description of the Line. Abuses and disorders in setting. Provision
against annoyance and spoil of your Garden. Of Poles. Of the erection of Poles.
Of ramming of Poles. Of reparation of Poles. Of pulling up Poles. The way to
make the Instrument wherewith to pull up the Hop-poles. The manner of pulling
up the Hop-poles. Of the preservation of poles. Of tying of Hops to the poles.
Of hilling and hills. Abuses in hilling. Of the gathering of Hops. What there is
to be done in Winter herein. When and where to lay Dung. The order of cutting
Hoppe Roots. Of diverse men's follies. Of disorders and maintainers thereof. Of
an Oste. Of the several rooms for an Oste. Of the Furnace or Keele. Of the bed
or upper floor of the Oste, whereon the Hoppes must be dried. The orderly
drying of Hops. Other manner of Dryings not so good. The very worst way of
drying Hops. Of not Drying. Of the packing of Hops. The reformation of a garden
of wild Hops The Reformation of a disordered Garden. Needless curiosities used
by the unskilful.
THE COVNTRY-MANS Recreation, or the Art of Planting, Graffing, and Gardening.
CHAP. I. This Chapter treats of the setting of Curnels, young Plum-trees,
And Pear Trees, of Damsons, and Service-trees.
FOR to make young trees of the Pepins of Apples, Pears, Plums, and Service.
First, ye must prepare and make a great bed or quarter well replenished,
blended or mixed with good fat earth, and placed well in the Sun, and to be well
labored and dug a good time before you do occupy it: and if you can by any
means, let it be dug very deep the winter before, in blending or mixting it
well together with good fat earth, or else to be mixed almost the half with
good dung: and so let it rot and ripe together with the earth. And see always
that plot be clean unto the pressing of Syder, that no wild Cions or Plants do
spring or grow thereon. Then in the month of September, December, or there
abouts, take of the Pepins, or Pomes of the said fruit at the first pressing
out of your licour, before the Curnels be marred or bruised: then take out of
them and rub a few at once in a cloth, and dry them betwixt your hands, and
take so many thereof, as you shall think good: then make your bed square, fair
and plain, and sow your seeds thereon, then take and cover them with a rake
lightly, or with earth, not putting too much upon them. This done, devide your
beds into quadrants or squares, of four foot broad or thereabout, that when ye
list ye may cleanse them from the one side to the other, without treading
thereon. Then shall ye cover your Seeds, or Pepins with fine earth, so sisting
all over them, that then they may take the deeper and surer root, and will keep
them the better in Winter following, and if ye list ye may rake them a little
all over, so that ye raise not your P^pins above the earth.

Another way, how one may take the Pepins at the first coming of the licour or
pressing.
WHich is, ye shall choose the greatest and fairest Curnels or Pepins, and take
them forth at the first bruising of your fruit, then dry them with a cloth, and
keep them all the winter until St. Andrews tide: then a little after sow them
in good earth, as thin as you do Peason, and then rake them over as the other.

How one ought to use his earth to sow Pepins without dunging.
BUt in this manner of doing (in the Spring) it is not so great need for to
raise or dig the earth so deep as that which is dunged in winter: but to
devide your quarters, in covering your Pepins not so much with earth, as those
which be sown with good dung, but when ye have sown them, a little rake all
them over.

How ye ought to take heed of Poultrey for scraping of your beds or quarters.
AS soon after as your Pepins be sown upon your beds or quarters, let this be
done one way or other, that is, take good heed that your Hens do not scrape
your beds or quarters: therefore stick them all over light and thin with
boughs, or thrones, and take good heed also to Swine, and other Cattle.

How to weed or cleanse your Beds and quarters.
ANd when the Winter is past and gone, and that ye see your pepins rise and
grow, so let them increase the space of one year, but see to cleanse weeds, or
other things which may hurt them as you shall see cause. And in the Summer when
it shall wax dry, water them well in the Evenings.

How one ought to pluck up the wild Cions.
ANd when these wild Cions shall be great, as of the growth of one year, ye
must then pluck them up all in winter following, before they do begin to
spring again. Then shall ye set them and make of them a wild Orchard as
follows.

CHAP. II. Treats how one shall set again the small wild Trees, which come
of Pepins, when they be first plucked up.
FOr the Bastard or little wild Trees incontinent as soon as they be plucked up,
ye must have of other good earth well trimmed and dunged, and to be well in the
Sun, and well prepared and dressed, as it is said in the other part before of
the Pepins.

How to dung your Bastard or wild young Trees which come of Pepins.
ABout Advent before Christmas, ye must dig and dung well the place whereas
ye will set them, and make your square of earth even and plain, so large as ye
shall think good, then set your wild trees so far one from another as ye
think meet to be graft, so that they may be set in even ranks and in good
order, that when need shall require, ye may remove or renew any of them, or any
part thereof.

How ye ought in replanting or setting to cut off in the midst, the
principal great roots.
IN what part soever ye do set any Trees, ye must cut off the great master
root, within a foot of the stock, and all other big roots, so that ye leave a
foot long thereof, and so let them be set, and make your ranks crosse-wise one
from another half a foot, or thereabouts, and ye must also see that there be of
good dung more deep and lower than ye do set your Trees, to comfort the said
roots withal.

How you ought to set your Trees in rank.
YE shall leave between your ranks, from one rank to another, one foot, or
thereabouts, so that ye may set them with good fat earth all over the roots.

How to make the space from one rank to another.
YE shall leave between your ranks, from one rank to another, one foot, or
thereabouts, so that ye may pass between every rank, for to cleanse them if
need require, and also to graffe any part or parcel thereof when time shall be
meet. But ye must note, in making thus your ranks, ye shall make as many
allies as ranks. And if ye think it not good to make as many allies, then
divide those into quarters of five foot broad, or thereabouts, and make and set
four ranks (in each quarter of the same) one foot from another as ye use to set
great Cabbage, and as soon after as ye have set them in ranks and in good order,
as is aforesaid, then shall ye cut off all the sets even by the ground. But in
this doing, see that ye do not pluck up or loose the earth that is about them:
or if you will, ye may cut them before ye do set them in ranks. If ye do so,
see that ye set them in such good order, and even with the earth, as is
aforesaid. And it shall suffice also to make your ranks as ye shall see cause.
And look that ye furnish the earth all over with good dung, without mingling of
it in the earth, nor yet to cover the said Plants withal, but strowed betwixt;
and ye must also look well to the cleansing of weeds, grass, or other such
things which, will be a hurt to the growth of the Plants.

How to water plants when they wax dry.
IT shall be good to water them when the time is dry: in the first Year. Then
when they have put forth of new Cions, leave no more growing but that Cion
which is the principal and fairest, upon every stock one: all the other cut
off hard by the stock, and ever as they do grow small twigs about the stock, ye
shall (in the Month of March and April) cut them all off hard by the stock.
And if ye then stick by every Plant a pretty wand, and so bind them with Willow
bark, Bryer, or Ofiers, it shall profit them much in their grows. Th^n after
five or six years grows, when they be so big as your finger, or thereabouts,
ye may then remove any of them whereas ye will have them grow and remain.

How one ought to remove Trees, and to plant them again.
THe manner how ye ought to remove trees, is showed in the sixth Chapter
following: then about two or three years after their removing, ye shall graffe
them, for then they will be the better rooted. As for the others, which ye
leave still in ranks, ye may also graffe them whereas they stand, as ye shall
see cause good. When ye have plucked up the fairest to plant in either places
(as is aforesaid) also the manner how to graffe them, is showed in the fifth
Chapter following. But after they shall be so graft, in what place soever it
be, ye shall not remove or set them in other places again, until the Graffes
be well closed upon the head of the wild stock.

When the best time is to replant, or remove.
WHen the head of the stock shall be all over closed about the graffs, then ye
may, when ye will, transplant and remove them (at a due time) where they shall
continue, For with often removing, ye shall do them great hurt in their roots,
and be in danger to make them dye.

Of negligence and forgetfulness.
IF peradventure ye forget (through negligence) and have let small Cions two or
three years grow about the roots of your stocks unplucked up, then if you have
so done, ye may well pluck them up and set them in ranks as the other of the
Pepins. But ye must set the ranks more larger that they may be removed without
hurting of each others roots: and cut off all the small twigges about as need
shall require, though they be set or graffed. Order them also in all things as
those small Cions of a years growth.

It is not so convenient to Graffe the Service Tree as to set
WHereas ye shall see young Service Trees, it shall be most profit in setting
them, for if ye do graffe them, I believe ye shall win nothing thereby.

The best is only to pluck up the young Bastard Trees when they are as great
as a good walking-staffe: then proin or cut off their branches and carry them
to set whereas they may be no more removed, and they shall profit more in
setting then in graffing.

Some Trees without graffing bring forth good fruit, and some other being
graffed be better to make Syder of.
IT is here to be marked, that though the Pepins be sown of the Pomes of Pears
and good Apples, yet ye shall find that some of them do love the tree whereof
they came, and those be right, which have also a smooth bark and as fair as
those which be graffed: the which if ye plant or set them thus growing from the
master-root without graffing, they shall bring as good fruit, even like unto
the P^pin whereof he first came. But there be other new sorts commonly good to
eat, which be as good to make Syder of, as those which shall be graffed for
that purpose.

When you list to augment and multiply your Trees.
AFter this sort ye may multiply them, being of diverse sorts and diversities,
as of Pears or Apples, or such like. Notwithstanding, whenever ye shall find
a good Tree thus come of the Pepin, as is aforesaid, so shall ye use him. But
if ye will augment trees of themselves, ye must take Graffes, and so graffe
them.

Of the manner and changing of the fruit of the Pepin-tree.
Whenever ye do replant or change your Pepin trees from place to place, in so
removing often the stock, the fruit thereof shall also change; but fruit which
does come of graffing, does always keep the form and nature of the Tree
whereof he is taken: for as I have said, as often as the Pepin trees be removed
to a b^tter ground, the fruit thereof shall be so much amended.

How one ought to make good Syder.
HEre is to be noted, if ye will make good Syder of what fruit soever it be,
bearing Pears or Apples, but specially of good Apples, and wild fruit, have
always a regard unto the ryping thereof, so gathered dry, then put them in dry
places, on boards in heaps, covered with dry straw, and whenever ye will make
Syder thereof, choose out all those which are black bruised, and rotten Apples,
and throw them away, then take and use the rest for Syder: But here to give you
understanding, do not as they do in the Country of Mentz, which do put their
fruit gathered, into the midst of their Garden, in the rain and mislings,
upon the bare earth, which will make them to lose their force and virtue, and
does make them also withered rough, and lightly a man shall never make good
Syder that shall never come to any purpose or good profit thereof.

To make an Orchard in few Years.
SOme do take young straight slippes, which do grow from the roots, or of the
sides of the Apple Trees, about Michaelmasse, and do so plant or set them (with
Otes) in good ground, whereas they shall not be removed, and so graffe (being
well rooted) thereon. Othersome do take and set them in the Spring time, after
Christmas, in like wise, and do graffe thereon when they be well rooted: and
both do spring well. And this manner of way is counted to have an Orchard the
soonest. But these Trees will not endure past twenty or thirty years.

CHAP. III. Is of setting Trees of Nutts.
How one ought to set Trees which come of Nutts.
FOr to set trees which come of Nutts: when ye have eaten the fruit, look that
ye keep the Stones and Curnels thereof, then let them be dried in the wind,
without the vehemence of the Sun, to reserve them in a box, and use them as
before.

Of the time when ye ought to Plant or Set them.
YE shall plant or set them in the beginning of Winter, or before Michaelmass,
whereby they may the sooner spring out of the earth. But this manner of setting
is dangerous: for the Winter then coming in, and they being young and tender
in coming up, the cold will kill them. Therefore it shall be best to stay and
reserve them till after winter. And then before ye do set them, ye shall
soke or steep them in Milk, or in Milk and water, so long till they do stink
therein: then shall ye dry them, and set them in good earth, in the change or
increase of the Moon, with the small end upwards, four fingers deep, then put
some stick thereby to mark the place.

For to set them in the Spring time.
IF ye will plant or set your Nuts in the Spring time, where ye will have them
still to remain, and not to be removed, the best and most easy way is, to set
in every such place (as ye think good) three or four Nuts nigh together, and
when they do all spring up leave none standing but the fairest.

Of the Dunging and deep digging thereof.
ALso whereas ye shall think good, ye may plant or set all your Nuts in one
square or quarter together in good earth and dung, in such place and time as
they use to plant. But see that it be well dunged, and also dug good and deep
and to be well meddled with good dung throughout, then set your Nuts three
fingers deep in the earth, and half a foot one from another: ye shall water
them often in the Summer, when there is dry weather, and see to weed them, and
dig it as ye shall see need.

Of Nuts and Stones, like to the Trees they came of
IT is here to be noted, that certain kind of Nuts and Curnels which do love
the Trees whereof the fruit is like unto the Tree they came of, when they be
planted in good ground, and set well in the Sun, which be the Walnuts,
Chestnuts, all kind of Peaches, Figs, Almonds, and Apricocks, all these do
love the Trees they came of.

Of Planting the said Nuts in good earth, and in the Sun.
ALL the said Trees do bring as good fruit of the said Nuts, if they be well
planted and set in good earth, and well in the Sun; as the fruit and Trees they
first came of.

Why fruits shall not have so good savor.
FOr if ye plant good Nuts, good Peaches, or Figs in a garden full of shadow,
the which has before loved the Sun as the Vine does, for lack thereof their
fruit shall not have so good savor, although it be all of one fruit: and
likewise so it is with all other fruit and trees, for the goodness of the earth,
and the fair Sun does preserve them much.

For to set the Pine Trees.
FOr to set the Pine Tree, ye must set or plant them of Nuts in March, or about
the shoot of the sap, not lightly after, ye must also set them where they may
not be removed after in holes well dug, and well dunged, not to be
transplanted or removed again, for very hardly they will shoot forth Ci^ns,
being removed, specially if ye hurt the master root thereof.

For to set Cherry-Trees.
For to set sour Cherries, which do grow commonly in gardens, ye shall
understand they may well grow of stones, but better it shall be to take off the
small Cions which do come from the great roots: then plant them, and sooner
shall they grow then the stones, and those Cions must be set when they are
sm^ll, young and tender: as of two, or three years growth, for when they are
great they profit not so well and when ye set them, ye must see to cut off all
the boughs.

Trees of bastard and wild Nuts.
THere be other sorts of Nuts, although they be well set in good ground, and
also in the Sun, yet will they not bring half so good fruit as the other, nor
commonly like unto those Nuts they came of, but to be a bastard wild sour
fruit, which is Filberd, small Nuts, of Plums of Cherries, and the great
Apricocks; therefore if ye will have them good fruit, ye must set them in
manner and form following.

How to set Filberd or Hasel-trees.
FOr to set Filberds or Hasels, and to have them good, take the small wands
that grow out from the root of the Filbird or Hasel-tree (with short hairy
wings) and set them, and they shall bring as good fruit as the Tree they came
of: it shall not be needful to proin or cut off the branches thereof when ye
set them, if they be not great, but those that ye do set, let them be but of
two or three years growth, and if ye shall see those Cions, which ye have
planted, not to be fair and good, or do grow and prosper not well, then in the
Spring time cut them hard off by the root, that other small Cions may grow
there off.

To set Damsons or Plum trees.
IN setting Damsons or Plum-trees, which fruit ye would have like to the Trees
they came of: if the said Trees be not grafted before, ye shall take only the
Cions that grow from the root of the old stock, which grows with small twigs,
and plant or set them: and their fruit shall be like unto the Trees they were
taken of.

To take Plum Graffes, and graffe them on other Plum-trees
ANd if your Plum-trees be graffed already, and have the like fruit that you
desire, ye may take your graffes thereof, and Graffe them on your Plum-trees,
and the fruit that shall come thereof, shall be as good as the fruit of the
Cion, which is taken from the root, because they are much of like effect.

To set all sorts of Cherries.
TO set all sorts of great Cherries, and others: ye must have the graffes of
the same Trees, and graffe them on other Cherrie trees, although they be of
sour fruit, and when they are so graffed, they will be as good as the fruit of
the Tree whereof the graffe was taken, for the stones are good, but to set to
make wild Cions, or Plants to graffe on.

The manner how one may order both Plum-trees, and Cherrie-trees.
FOr so much as these are two kind of Trees, that is, to understand, the Cherry
and the Plum-tree, for when they be so graffed, their Roots be not so good, nor
so free as the Branches above, wherefore the Cions that do come from the
roots, shall not make so good and frank trees of. It is therefore to be
understood, how this manner and sort is to make frank trees, that may put forth
good Cions in time to come, which is, when they be great and good, then if ye
will take those Cions, or young springs from the roots, ye may make good trees
thereof, and then it shall not need to graffe them any more after: but to
augment one by the other, as ye do the Cions from the root of the Nut, as is
aforesaid, and ye shall do as follows.

How to graffe Plum-trees and Cherry-trees.
YE may well graff Plum-trees and great Cherry-trees, in ^uch good order as ye
list to have them, and as hereaftr shall be declared in the fifth Chapter
following: for these would be graffed while they be young and small, and also
graft in the ground, for thereby one may dress and trim them the better, and
put but one graffe in ^ach stock of the same. Cleave not the heart, but a
little on the one side, nor yet d^ep, or long open.

How you must proine or cut your Tree.
FOr when your graffes be well taken on the stock, and that the graffes do put
forth fair and long, about one years growth, ye must proine, or cut the branch
off commonly in winter, (when they proin their Vines) a foot lower, to make
them spread the better: then shall ye mingle all through with good fat earth,
the which will draw the better to the place, which you have so proined or cut.

The convenientest way to cleanse and proin, or dress the roots of Trees,
ANd for the better clensing and proining trees beneath, it is thus: Ye shall
take away the weeds, and graft about the Roots, then shall you dig them so
round about, as ye would seem to pluck them up, and shall make them h^lf bare,
then shall ye enlarge the earth about the Roots, and whereas ye shall see them
grow fair and long, place or couch them in the said hole and earth again: then
shall ye put the cut end of the Tree where it is graft, somewhat lower than his
roots were, whereby his Cions so grafted, shall spring so much the better.

When the Stocks are greater than the Graffs.
WHen as the tree waxes, and swells greater beneath the Graffing than above,
then shall ye cleave the roots beneath, and wreath them round, and so cover
them again. But see you break no root thereof, so will he come to perfection.
But most men do use this way: if the stock wax greater than the Graffes, they
do slit down the barks of the Graffs above in two or three parts, or as they
shall see cause thereof: and so likewise, if the Graffes wax greater above than
the stock, ye shall slit down the stock accordingly with the sharp edge of a
knife, This may well be done at any time in March, April and May, in the
increase of the Moon, and not likely after.

The Remedy when ane Bough or Member of a Tree is broken.
IF you shall chance to have B^ughs or M^mbers of Trees broken, the best remedy
shall be, to ^lace those Boughs or Members right soon again (then shall ye
comfort the roots with good new earth) and bind taste those broken boughs or
Members, both above and beneath, and so let them remain unto another year,
until they may close, and put forth new Cions.

When a Member or Bough is broken how to proine them.
WHereas ye shall see under or above superfluous boughs, ye may cut or proin off
(as ye shall see cause) all such boughs hard by the tree, at a due time in the
winter following. But leave all the principal branches, and whereas any are
broken, let them be cut off beneath, or else by the ground and cast them away:
thus must you do yearly, or as ye shall see cause, if ye will keep your Trees
well and fair.

How one ought to enlarge the hole about the Tree roots.
IN proyning your Trees, if there be many roots, ye must enlarge them in the
hole, and so to wreath them as it is aforesaid, and to use them without
breaking, then cover them again with good fat earth, which ye shall mingle in
the said hole, and it shall be best to be dug all over a little before, and
see that no branch or root be left uncovered, and when you have thus dressed
your Trees, if any root shall put forth, or spring hereafter out of the said
holes, in growing ye may so proin them, as ye shall see cause, in letting them
so remain two or three years after, unto such time as the said Graffes be
sprung up and well branched.

How to set small Staves by, to strengthen your Cions.
TO avoid danger, ye shall set or strick small staves about your Cions, for
fear of breaking, and then after three or four years, when they be well
branch^d: ye may then set or plant them in good earth, (at the beginning of
Winter) but see that ye cut off all their small branches hard by the stock,
then ye may plant them where ye think good, so as they may remain.

In taking up Trees, note.
YE may well leave the master root in the hole (when ye dig him up) if the
removed place be good for him, cut off the master roots by the stub, but pare
not off ^ll the small roots, and so plant him, and he shall profit more thus,
then others with all their master roots. When as Trees be great, they must be
disbranched, or boughs cut off, before they be set again, or else they will
hardly prosper. If the Trees be great, having great branches or boughs, when
ye shall dig them up, ye must disbranch them before ye set them again, for
when Trees shall be thus proined, they shall bring great Cions from their
Roots, which shall be frank and good to replant, or set in other places, and
shall have also good branches and roots, so that after it shall not need to
graffe them any more, but shall continue one after another to be free and good.

How to couch the Roots when they are not proyned.
IN setting your Trees again, if ye will dress the roots of such as ye have
proined, or cut off the branches before, ye shall leave all such small roots
which grow on the great root, and ye shall so place those roots in replanting
again, not deep in the earth, so that they may soon grow, and put forth Cions:
which being well used, ye may have fruit so good as the other aforementioned,
being of three or four years growth, as before is declared.

What Trees to proyne.
THis way of proyning is more harder for the great Chery (called Healmier) then
for the Plum-tree. Also it is very requisite and meet for those Cions or Trees,
which be graft on the wild sour Cherry-tree, to be proined also, for diverse
and sundry causes.

Why the sour Cherry dureth not so long as the Healmier or great Cherry.
THe wild and sower Cherry, of his own nature will not so long time endure, (as
the great Healme Cherry) neither can have sufficient sap to nourish the
Graffes, as the great Healme Chery is graft; therefore when ye have proined the
branches beneath, and the roots also, so that ye leave roots sufficient to
nourish the Tree, then set him.

If ye cut not off the under roots, the Tree will profit more easier, and also
lighter to be known, when they put forth Cions, from the root of the same, the
which ye may take hereafter.

To graffe one great Cherry upon another.
YE must have respect unto the Healme Cherry, which is graft on the wild Gomire
(which is another kind of great Cherry) and whether you do proin them or not,
it is not material, for they dure a long time. But ye must see to take away
the Cions, that do grow from the root of the wild Gomire, or wild Plum-tree:
because they are of nature wild, and do draw the sap from the said Tree.

Of deep Setting or shallow.
TO set your Stocks or Trees somewhat deeper on the high grounds, then in the
Valleys; because the sun in summer shall not dry the root: and in the low
ground more shallow, because the water in Winter shall not drown or annoy the
Roots. Some do mark the stock in taking it up, and to set him again the same
way, because he will not alter his nature: so likewise the Graffes in Graffing.

CHAP. IV. This Chapter does show how to set other Trees which come of wild
Cions, pricked in the earth without roots: and also of proining the meaner
Cions.
Trees take root pricked of Branches.
THere be certain which take root, being pricked of Branches proined of other
Trees, which be, the Mulberry, the Fig Tree, the Quince-Tree, the Service-Tree,
the Pomgranad-Tree, the Apple Tree, the Damson-Tree, and diverse sorts of other
Plum-Trees, as the Plum-Tree of Paradise, etc.

How one ought to set them.
FOr to set these sorts of Trees, ye must cut off the Cions, twigs, or boughs,
betwixt Alhallontide and Christmas, not lightly after. Ye shall chose them,
which be as great as a little staff or more, and look whereas you can find
them fair, smooth, and straight, and full of sap withal, growing of young
trees, as of the age of three or four years growth, or thereabouts, and look
that ye take them so from the tree with a broad Chizel, that ye break not, or
loose any part of the bark thereof, more than half a foot beneath, neither of
one side or other: then proine or cut off the branches, and prick them one foot
deep in the earth, well dug and ordered before.

How to bind them that be weak.
THose Plants which be slender, ye must proin or cut off the branches, then
bind them to some stake or such like to be set in good earth, and well mingled
with good dung, and also to be well and deeply dug, and to be set in a moist
place, or else to be well watered in Summer.

How one ought to dig the Earth to set them in.
ANd when that ye would set them in the earth, ye must first prepare to dig
it, and dung it well throughout a (...) ^eep in the earth. And then ye shall
set them every one in his place made (before) with a crow of Iron, and for to
make them take root the better, ye shall put with your Plants watered Oats, or
Barley, and so ye shall let them grow the space of three or four years, or
when they shall be branched, then ye may remove them, and if ye break off the
old stubby root, and set them lower, they will last a long time the more. If
some of those Plants do chance to put forth Cions from the root, and being so
rooted, ye must pluck them up, though they be tender, and set them in other
places.

Of Cyons without Roots.
IF that the said Plants have Cions without any roots, but which come from the
Root beneath, then cut them not off, till they be of two or three years growth,
by that time they will gather roots, to be replanted in other places.

To plant the Fig Tree.
THe said Plants taken off Fig Trees graffed, be the best. Ye may likewise take
other sorts of Fig Trees, and graff one upon the other, for like as upon the
wild Trees do come the Pepins, even so the Fig, but not so soon to prosper
and grow.

How to set Quinces.
LIkewise the nature of Quinces, is to spring, if they be pricked (as
aforesaid) in the earth, but sometime I have graffed with great difficulty,
says mine Author, upon a white Thorn, and it has taken and born fruit to
look on fair, but in taste weaker than the other.

The way to set Mulberries.
THere is also another way to set Mulberries, as follows, which is, if you do
cut in Winter certain great Mulberry boughs, or stocks asunder in the body
(with a Saw) in troncheons a foot long and more, then make ye a great furrow in
good earth well and deep, so that you may cover again your troncheons, in
setting them an end half a foot one from another, then cover them again, that
the earth may be above those ends three or four fingers high, so let them
remain, and water them in Summer, if need be sometimes, and cleanse them from
all hurtful weeds and roots.

Note one of the same.
THat then within a spa^ of time after, the said tronchions will put forth
Cions, which when they be somewhat sprigged, having two or three small twigs,
then ye may transplant or remove them where you lift, but leave your troncheons
still in the earth, for they will put forth many motions, the which, if they
shall have scanty of root, then dung your troncheons with good earth, and
likewise above also, and they shall do well.

The time to cut Cions.
Understand also that all trees, which usually put forth, put forth Cions, if
ye cut them in winter, they will put forth and spring more abundantly, for then
they be all good to set and plant.

To set Bush-tees, or Gooseberries or small Raisins.
THere be many other kind of Bush-trees, which will grow of Cions pricked in the
ground, as the Gooseberry-tree, the small Raifin-tree, the Berberrie-tree, the
Black Thorne-tree, these with many other to be planted in winter, will grow
without roots: ye must also proine them, and they will grow well enough, so
likewise ye may prick in Marh of Oziers in moist grounds, and they will grow,
and serve to many purposes for your Garden,

CHAP. V. IT is to be understood that there be many ways of graffings, whereof
here I have only put four sorts, which be good, both sure and well appoved,
and easy to do, which may very well be used in two parts of the year and
more, for I have (says he) graffed in our house, in every month, except
October and November, and they have taken well, which I have (says he) in the
winter begun to graffe, and in the Summer graffed in the Scutchion or shield
according to the time, forward or slow; for certain Trees, specially young
fair Cions have enough or more of their sap unto the middle of August, than
other some had at Midsummer before.
The way to graffe all soris of Trees.
ANd first of all it is to be noted, that all the sorts of frank Trees, as also
wild Trees of nature, may be graffed with grafts, and in the Scutchion, and
both do well take, but specially those Trees which be of like nature: therefore
it is better so to graffe. Howbeit they may well grow and take of other sort of
trees, but trees are not so good, nor will prosper so well in the end.

How to graffe Apple Trees, Peare-trees, Quince-trees, and Medlar-trees.
THey graffe the Peare-graffe upon other Peare-stocks, and Apple on
Apple-stocks, Crab or Wilding-stock, the Quince and Medlar on the white Thorn,
but most commonly they use to graffe one Apple upon another, and both Pears
and Quinces they graffe on Hawthorne and Crab-stock. And other kind of fruit
called in French Saulfey, they use to graffe on the Willow-stock, the manner
thereof ^^ hard to do, which I have not seen, therefore I will let it pass at
this present.

The Graffing of Cherryes.
THey graffe the great Cherry, called in French Heaubmiers, upon the
Crab-stock, and another long Cherry called Guiviers, upon the wild or sour
Cherry Tree, and likewise one Cherry upon another.

To graffe great Medlars.
THe Misple or Medlar, they may be graffed on other Medlars, or on
white-thorne, the Quince is graffed on the white or black thorn, and they do
prosper well. I have grafted (says he) the Quince upon a wild Peare-stock, the
which has taken and borne fruit well and good, but they will not long endure.
I believe (says he) it was because the graff was not able enough to draw the
sap from the Peare-stock. Some graffe the Medlar on the Quince, to be great.
And it is to be noted, though the stock and the graft be of contrary natures,
yet notwithstanding, neither the graff or Scutchion, shall take any part of the
nature of the wild stock so grafted, though it be Pear, Apple, or Quince, which
is contrary against many which have written, that if ye graft the Medlar upon
the Quince Tree, they shall be without stones, which is abusive and mockery.
For I have (says he) proved the contrary.

Of diverse kinds of Graffes.
IT is very true, that one may set a Tree, which shall bear diverse sorts of
fruits at once, if he be graffed with diverse kind of graffes, as the black,
white, and green Cherry together, and also Apples of other Trees, as Apples and
Pears together, and in the Scutchion (ye may graffe) likewise of diverse kinds
also, as on Pears, Apricocks and Plums together, and of others also,

Of graffing of the Figs.
YE may graffe the Fig Tree upon the Peach tree or Apricock, but leave a branch
on the stock, and there must be according for the space of years, for the one
shall change sooner than the other. All trees abovesaid do take very well being
graffed one with the other. And I have not known or found of any others:
howbeit (says he) I have curiously sought and proved, because they say one may
graffe on Coleworts, or Elmes, the which I think are but Jests.

Of the great Apricock.
THe great Apricock they graffin summer, in the Scutchion or shield, in the sap
or bark of the lesser Apricock, and be graffed on Peach-trees, Fig-rees, and
principally on Damson or Plum-trees, for there they will prosper the better.

Of the Service-trees.
OF the Service-tree they say and write, that they may hardly be graffed on
other Service-tres, either on Apple Trees, Pear or Quince-trees: and I believe
this to be very hard to do, for I have tried (says he) and they would not
prove.

The setting of Service-Trees
THerefore it is much better to set them of Curnels, as it is aforesaid, as
also in the second Chapter of planting of Cions, or other great Trees, which
must be cut in winter, as such as shall be most meet for that purpose.

Trees which be very fit to be graffed in the Shield or Scutchion.
ALl other manner of Trees aforesaid, do take very well to be graffed with
Cions, and also in the Shield, except Apricocks on Peaches, Almonds,
Perciginiers, the Peach-tree do take hardly to be graffed, but in the shield in
Summer, as shall be more largely declared hereafter. As for the Almonds,
Perciginiers, and Peaches, ye may better set them of Curnels and Nuts, whereby
they shall the sooner come to perfection to be graffed.

How a man ought to consider those Trees, which be commonly charged with fruit.
YE shall understand, that in the beginning of graffing, ye must consider what
sorts of Trees do most charge the stock with branch and fruit, or that do
love the Country, or Ground whereas you intend to plant or graffe them: for
better it were to have abundance of fruit* than to have very few or none.

Of Trees whereon to choose your graffes.
OF such Trees as ye will gather your Gr^ffes to graffe with, ye must take them
at the ends of the principal branches, which be also fairest and greatest of
sap, having two or three fingers length of the old wood, with the new, and
those Cions, which eyes somewhat nigh together, are the best; for those which
b^ long, are far one from another, and not so good to bring fruit.

The Cions toward the East are best.
YE shall understand, that those which do grow on the East, or Orient part of
the Tree, are best: ye must not lightly gather of the evil and slender graffes
which grow in the midst of the Trees, nor any graffes which do grow within
on the branches, or that do spring from the stock of the Tree, nor yet graftes,
which be on very old Trees, for thereby ye shall not lightly profit to any
purpose.

To choose your Trees for Graffes.
ANd when the Trees whereas you intend to gather your grafts, be small and
young, as of five or six years growth, do not take of the highest grafts
thereof, nor the greatest, except it b^ of a small Tree of two or three years,
the which commonly has too much of top or wood, otherwise not, for you shall
but mar your graffing.

How to keep Graffes a long time.
YE may keep grafts a long time good, as from Alhallontide (so that the leaves
be fallen) unto the time of grafting if that they be well covered in the earth
half a foot deep therein, and so that none of them do appear without the earth.

How to keep Graffes before they are budded.
ALso do not gather them, except ye have great need, until Christmas or
there-abouts, and put them not in the ground nigh any walls for fear of
Moles, Mice, and water, marring the place and grafts. It shall be good to keep
grafts in the earth before they begin to bud, when that ye will graft betwixt
the bark and the Tree, and when the Trees begin to enter into their sap.

How one ought to begin to Graffe.
ALso ye must begin to graft (in cleaving the stock) at Christmas, or before,
according to the coldness of the time, and principally the Healme or great
Cherry, Pears, Wardens, or forward fruit of Apples: and for Medlars it is good
to tarry until the end of January and February, until March, or until such
time as ye shall see Trees begin to bud or spring.

When it is good graffing the wild stock.
In the Spring time it is good Graffing of wild stocks, (which be great)
betwixt the bark and the tree, such stocks as are of later spring, and kept in
the earth before, The Damson or Plum-tree tarrieth longest to be graffed: for
they do not show or put forth sapp, as soon as others.

Mark if the Tree be forward or not.
ALso consider you always, whether the Tree be forward or not, to be graffed
soon or laterward, and to give him also a graffe of the like have or slownesse:
even so ye must mark the time, whether it be slow or forward.

When one will graffe what necessaries he ought to be furnished withal.
Whenever ye go to Graffing, see ye be furnished with grafts, clay and moss,
cloths or barks of Sallow to bind likewise withal. Also ye must have a small
Saw, and a sharp knife, to cleave and cut Graffes withal. But it wers much
better, if ye should cut your Graffes with a great Penknife, or some other
like sharp knife, having a small wedge of hard wood, or of Iron, with a hooked
knife, and also a small mallet. And your wild stocks must be well rooted before
ye do graffe them: and be not so quick to deceive your selves, as those which
do graffe and plant all at one time, yet they shall not profit so well: for
where the wild stock has not substance in himself, much less to give unto the
other grafts: for when a man thinks sometime to forward himself, he does hinder
himself.

Of Graffes not prospering the first year.
Ye shall understand, that very hardly your Graffes shall prosper after, if
they do not profit or prosper well in the first year, for whenever (in the
first year) they profit well, it were better to graffe them somewhat lower,
than to let them so remain and grow.

For to graffe well and sound.
ANd for the best understanding of Graffing in the cleft, ye shall first cut
away all the small Cions about the body of the stock beneath, and before ye
begin to cleave your stock, dress and cut your graffes somewhat thick and
ready, then cleave your stock, and as the cleft is small or great (if need be)
pare it smooth within, then cut your incision of your graffes accordingly, and
set them in the cleft, as even and as close as possible you can:

How to trim your Graffes.
ALso ye may graffe your Graffes full as long as two or three trunchions or
cut-graffes, which ye may likewise graffe withal very well, and will be as
those which do come of old wood, and oftentimes better, than to graffe a
bough, for often it so happens, a man shall find of Oylets or eyes hard by
the old slender wood, yet better it were to cut them off with the old wood, and
choose a better and fair place at some other eye in the same graffe, and to
make your incision thereunder as aforsaid, and cut your graffs in making the
incision on the one side narrow, and on the other side broad, and the inner
side thinn, and the outside thick, because the outside of your graff must join
within the cleft, with the sap of Bark of the wild, and it shall so be s^t
in. See also that ye cut it smooth, as your clefts are in the Stock, in joining
at every place both even and close, and especially the joints or corners of the
graffes on the head of the stock, which must be well and clean pared before,
and then set fast thereon.

How to cut graffes for Cherries and Plums.
IT is not much requisite in the helm Cherry, for to join the Graffes in the
stock wholly throughout, as it is in others, or to cut the graffes of great
Cherries, Damsons, or Plums, so thin and plain as ye may other graffes, for
these sorts have a greater sap or pith within, the which ye must always take
heed in cutting it too nigh on the one side or one the other, but at the end
thereof chiefly, to be thin cut and flat.

Note also.
ANd yet if the said incision be straighter and closer on the one side than it
is on the other side, pare it where it is most meet, and where it is too
straight, open it with a wedge of Iron, and put in a wedge of the same wood
above in the cleft, and thus may ye moderate your graffes as ye shall see cause

How in graffing to take heed that the Bark rise not.
IN all kind of cutting your gr^ffes, take heed to the bark of your graffes,
that it do not rise from the wood on no side thereof, and specially on the
outside, therefore ye shall leave it thicker than the inner side: Also ye must
take heed when as the stocks do wreath in cleaving, that ye may join the
graffe therein accordingly: The best remedy therefore is, to cut it smooth
within, that the graffe may join the better: ye shall also for the greatest
stocks make choice of the greatest Graffes.

How to cut your Stock.
HOw much the more your stock is thin and slender, so much more ye ought to cut
him lower, and if your stock be as great as your finger, or thereabouts, ye may
cut him a foot or half a foot from the earth, and dig him about; and dung him
with Goats dung, to help withal, and graffe him but with one graffe or Cion.

If the wild Stock be great and slender.
IF your wild stock be great, or as big as a good, staff ye shall cut him
round off, a foot or there-abouts above the earth; then set in two good graffs
in the head or cleft thereof

Trees as great as ones Arm.
BUt when your stock is as great as your arm, ye shall saw him cl^an off and
round, three or four foot, or thereaabouts from the earth, for to defend him,
and set in the head three graffes, two in the cleft, and one betwixt the bark
and the Tree, on that side which ye have most space.

Great Trees as big as your Leg.
IF the stock be as big as your leg, or thereabouts, ye shall saw him f^ir
and clean off, four or five foot high from the earth, and cleave him acrosse
(if ye will) and set in four graffes in the clefts thereof, or else one cleft
only, and set two graffes in both the sides thereof, and other two graffes
betwixt the bark and the Tree.

When the Graffes be pinched with the Stock.
YE must for the better understanding mark to graffe between the bark and the
Tree, for when the sap is full in, the wood or wild Stocks being great, they
do commonly pinch or wring the graffes too sore, if ye do not put a small
wedge of green wood in the cleft thereof, to help them withal against such
danger.

How ye ought to cleave your Stock.
WHensoev^r you shall cleave your wild Stocks, take h^ed that ye cleave them
not in the midst of the heart or pith, but a little on that si^e, which ye
shall think good.

How to graffe the branch of great Trees.
IF ye would graft Trees, as big as your thigh, or bigger, it were much better
to graffe only the branch^s thereof, than the stock or body, for the stock
will ^ot before the graffes shall cover the head.

How to cut Branches old and great.
BUt if the Branches be too rude and without order, the best shall be to cut
them all off, and within three or four years after they will bring fair young
Cions again, and then it shall be best to graffe them, and cut off all the
superfluous and ill branches thereof,

How ye ought to bind your Graffes throughout for fear of windss
ANd when your graffes shall be grown, ye must bind them for fear of shaking
of the wind, and if the Tree be free and good of himself, let the Cions grow
still, and ye may graffe any part or branch ye will in the cleft, or betwixt
the bark and the Tree, or in the Scutchion, if your bark be fair and loose.

To set many graffes in one cleft.
EVer when ye will put many graffes in one cleft, see that one incision of your
graffe be as large as the other, not to be put into the cleft so slightly and
rashly, and that one side thereof be not more open than the other, and that
these graffes be all of one length: it shall suffice also if they have three
eyes on each graffe without the joint thereof.

How to saw your stock before you leave him.
IN sawing your stock, see that you tear not the bark about the head thereof,
then cleave his head with a long sharp knife, or such like, and knock your
wedge in the midst thereof, then pare him on the head round about, and knock
your wedge in so deep till it open meet for your graffes, but not so wide, then
holding in one hand your graffe, and in the other hand your stock, set your
graffe in close bark to bark, and let your wedge be greater above at the head,
that ye may knock him out fair and easily again.

If the Stock cleave too much, or the bark do open.
IF the Stock do cleave too much, or open the bark with the wood too low, then
softly open your stock with your wedge, and see if the incision of your graffe
be meet, and just, according to the cleft, if not, make it until it be meet,
or else saw him off lower,

How Graffes never lightly take.
ABove all things you must consider the meeting of the two saps, betwixt the
graffe and the wild stock, which must be set in just one with another: for ye
shall understand, if they do not join, and the one delight with the other,
being even set, they shall never take together, for there is nothing only to
join their increase, but the sap, recounting the one against the other.

How to set the Graffes right in the cleft.
WHen the bark of the Stock is more thick than the graff, ye must take good
heed in setting of the graffe in the cleft, to the end that his sap may join
right with the sap of the stock on the inside, and ye ought likewise to
consider of the sap of the stock, if he do surmount the graffes in the
outsides of the cleft too much or not.

Of setting in the Graffes.
ALso ye must take good heed, that the graffes be well and clean set in, and
join close upon the head of the stock. Likewise then the incision, which is set
in the cleft, do join very well within on both sides, not to join so even, but
sometimes it may do service, when as the graffes do draw too much from the
Stock, or the stock also on the graffes do put forth.

Note also.
ANd therefore when the stock is rightly cloven, there is no danger in cutting
the incision of the graffe, but a little straight rebated at the end thereof,
that the sap may join one with the other better and closer together.

How you ought to draw out your wedge.
When your graffes shall be well joined with your stock, draw your wedge fair
and so^tly forth, for fear o^ dis^lacing your graffes, ye may leave within the
cleft a small wedge of such green wood as is aforesaid, and ye shall cut it off
close by the head of your stock, and so cover it with a bark as follows.

To cover your clefts on the head.
When your wedge is dr^wn forth, put a green pill of the thick bark of Willow,
Crab or Apple, upon the clefts of the stock, that nothing may fall between:
then cover all about the clefts on the stock head, two fingers thick with good
clay, or nigh about that thickness, that no Wind or Rain may enter, then cover
it round with moss, and then wreath it over with clothes, pills of Willow,
Bryar, or Oziars, or such like, then bind them fast, and stick certain long
pricks on the graffes head amongst the Cions, to keep off the Crows, Jayes, or
such like.

How you ought to see to the binding of your Graffes.
BUt all way^s take good heed to the binding of your heads that they wax slack
or shaggie, neither on the one side or one the other, but remain fast upon the
clay, the clay to remain fast likewise on ^he stock h^ad under the binding
thereof, wherefore the said clay must be moderated in such sort as follows.

How ye ought to temper your clay.
THe best way is therefore to try your clay betwixt your hands for stones and
such like, and so to temper it as ye shall think good, as it shall ^equire
moistness or dryness, and to temper it with the hair of beasts (for when it
dries, it holds not so well on the stock,) or knead Moss therewith, or
mingle Hay thin therewith: Some conceit that the Moss does make the Trees
mossie. But I rather suppose it is occasioned by the disposition of the place.

To bush your graffe heads.
When ye shall bind or wrap your graffe heads with you band, take small
Thorns and bind them within for to defend your Graffes from Kites, or Crows,
or other danger of other Fowls, or prick sharp white sticks thereon.

The second way to graffe high Branches on Trees.
THe second manner to graffe, is strange enough unto many: This kind of
Graffing is on the tops of branches of Trees, which thing to make them grow
lightly, is not so soon obtained: certain it is, that wheresoever they be
graffed, they do only require a fair young wood, as also a great Cion or
twig, growing highest on the top of the Tree, which Cions ye shall choose to
graffe on of many sorts of Fruits, if ye will, or as ye shall think good, which
order follows.

TAke graffs of other sorts of trees, which ye would graff in the top thereof,
then mount to the top of the tree which you would graff, and cut off the tops
of all such branches, or as many as ye would graffe on, and if they be greater
than the graffes which ye would graffe, ye shall cut and graffe them lower as
ye do the small wild stock aforesaid. But if the Cions that ye cut be as big
as your graffe you graffe on, ye shall cut them lower betwixt the old wood and
the new, or a little higher or lower: then cleave a little, and choose your
graffes in like sort which you would plant, whereof you shall make your
incision short, with the bark on both sides alike, and to be as thick on the
one side as it is on the other, and also set so just in cleft, that the bark
may be even and close, as well above as beneath, on the one side as the other,
and so bind them as is aforesaid. It shall suffice that every graft have an
oylet or eye, or two at the most without the joint, for to leave them too long
it shall not be good, and ye must dress it with Clay and Moss, and bind as it
is aforesaid. And likewise ye may graffe these, as ye do little wild Stocks,
which should be as big as your graffes, and to graffe them, as you do those
with sap like on both sides, but then you must graffe them in the, earth, three
fingers of, or thereabouts.

The manner of Graffing, is of Graffes which may be set between the Bark and
the Tree
To graffe betwixt the bark and the Tree.
THis manner of graffing is good, when Trees do begin to enter into their sap,
which is about the end of Februry unto the end of April, and specially on great
wild stocks, which be hard to cleave, ye may set in four or five graffes in
the head thereof, which graffes ought to be gathered before, and kept close in
the earth till then, for by that time aforesaid, ye shall shall scantly find a
Tree, but that he does put forth or bud, as the Apple called Capendu, or such
like.

Ye must therefore saw these wild stocks more charily, and more high, so they
be great, and then cut the Graffes, which ye would set together, so as you
would set them upon the wild stock that is cleft, as is before rehearsed. And
the incision of your graffs must not be so long and so thick, and the bark a
little at the end thereof must be taken away, and made in a manner as a Launcet
of Iron, and as thick on the one side as the other.

How to dress the head to place the Graffes betwixt the Bark and the Tree.
ANd when your graffes be ready cut, then shall you cleanse the head of your
stock, and pare it with a sharp knife round about the bark thereof, to the
end your graffes may join the better thereon, then take a sharp penknife, or
other sharp pointed knife, and thrust it down betwixt the bark and the stock,
so long as the incision of graffes be, then put your graffes softly down
therein to the hard joint, and see that it do sit close upon the stock head.

How to cover the head of your stock.
When as you have set in your graffes, you must then cover it well about with
good tough Clay, and Moss, as is said of others, and then you must incontinent
environ or compass your head with small thorny bushes, and bind them fast
thereon all about, for fear of great Birds, and likewise the wind.

Of the manner and graffing in the Shield or Scutchion.
THe fourth manne^ to graffe, which is the last, is to graffe in the Scutchion
in the sap in Summer, from the end of the month of May until August, when as
Trees be yet strong in sap and leaves, for otherwise it cannot be done; the
best time is in June and July, some years when the time is very dry, and that
some Trees do hold their sap very long; therefore ye must tarry till it return.

For to graffe in Summer so long as the Trees be full leaved.
FOr to begin this manner of graffing well, ye must in the Summer, when the
Trees be almost full of sap, and when they have sprung forth new shoots being
somewhat hardened, then shall ye take a branch thereof in the top of the tree,
which ye will have graffed, and choose the highest and principallest branches,
without cutting it from the old wood, and choose thereof the principallest
oylet or eye, or budding place, of each branch one, with which oylet or eye, ye
shall begin to graffe as follows.

The big Cions are best to graffe.
CHiefly ye must know that the smallest and worst oylets, or buds of the said
Cions be not so good to graffe: therefore choose the greatest and the best you
can find, first cut off the leaf hard by the oylet, then trench or cut the
length of a barley corn beneath the oylet round about the bark, hard to the
wood, and likewise above: then with a sharp point of a knife, slit it down
half an inch beside the oylet, or bud, and with the point of a sharp knife
softly raise the said Shield or Scutchion round about, with the oylet in in the
midst, and all the sap belonging thereunto.

How to take off the Shield from the wood.
ANd for the better raising the said Shield, or Scutchion from the wood, after
that ye have cut him round about, then slit him down, without cutting any part
of the wood within, you must then raise the side next you that is slit and then
take the same Shield betwixt your finger and thumb, and pluck or raise it
softly off, without breaking or bruising any part thereof, and in the opening
or plucking it off, hold it with your finger hard to the wood, that the sap of
the oylet may remain in the Shield, for if it go off in plucking it from the
bark, and stick to the wood, your Scutchions are nothing worth.

To know your Scutchion or Shield when he is good or bad.
ANd for the more easy understanding whether it be good or bad when it is
taken from the wood, look within the said shield, and if ye shall see it crack
or open within, then it is of no value, for the chief Sap does yet remain
behind with the wood which should be in the shield; and therefore ye must
choose and cut another Shield, which must be good and sound as aforesaid, and
when your Scutchion shall be well taken off from the wood, then hold it dry by
the oylet or eye betwixt your lips, till you have taken off the bark from the
other Cion or branch, and set him in that place, and see that ye do not foul
or wet it in your mouth.

Of young Trees to graffe on.
BUt ye must graffe on such Trees as be from the bigness of your little
finger, unto as great as your arm, having their bark thin and slender, for
great Trees commonly have their bark hard and thick, which ye cannot well
graffe this way, except they have some branches with a thin smooth bark, meet
for this way to be done.

How to set or place your Shield.
Ye must quickly cut off round the bark of the Tree that ye will graffe on, a
little longer than the Shield that ye set on, because it may join the sooner
and easier, but take heed that in cutting the bark ye cut not the wood within.

Note also.
AFter the incision once done, ye must then cover both the sides or ends well
and softly with a little bone or horn made in manner like a thin skin, which
ye shall lay all over the joints or closings of the said Shield, somewhat
longer and larger, but take heed ye hurt not or crush the bark thereof.

How to lift up the bark and to set your Shield on.
THis done, take your Shield or Scutchion by the oylet or eye that he has, and
open him fair and softly by the two sides, and put them straight way one the
other Tree, whereas the bark is taken off, and join him close bark to bark
thereon, then plain it softly above, and at both the ends with the thin
bone, and that they join above and beneath bark to bark, so that he may feed
well the branch of that Tree.

How to bind your Shield.
THis done, ye must have a wreath of good Hemp, to bind the said shield on his
place; the manner to bind it is this, ye shall make a wreath of Hemp together,
as great as a Gose-quill, or thereabouts, or according to the bigness or
smallnes of your Tree; then take your Hemp in the midst; that the one half
may serve for the upper half of the shield, in winding and crossing with the
Hemp, the said shield on the branch of the tree, but see you bind it not too
straight, for it shall let him from taking or springing, and likewise their sap
cannot easily come or pass from the one to the other and see also that wet
come not to your shield, nor likewise the Hemp that ye bind it withal. Ye
shall begin to bind your Scutchion first behind in the midst of your shield,
in coming still lower and lower, and so recover under the oylet and tail of your
shield, binding it nigh together, without recovering of the said oylet, then ye
shall return again upward, in binding it backward to the midst where ye
began. Then take the other part of the Hemp, and bind so likewise the upper
part of your shield, and increase your Hemp as ye shall need, and so return
ag^in backward, and ye shall bind it so, till the fruits or clefts be covered
(both above and beneath) with your said Hemp, except the oylet and the tail,
the which ye must not cover, for that tail will shed apart, if the Shield do
take.

On one tree you may graffe, or put two or three Shields.
YE may very well if ye will, on every tree graffe two or three shields, but
see that one be not right against another, nor yet of the one side of the Tree,
let your shields so remain bound on the Trees, one month or more after they be
graffed, and the greater the Tree is, the longer to remain, and the smaller,
the lesser time.

The time to unbind your Shield.
ANd then after one month, or six wkeks past, ye must unbind the Shield, or at
the least cut the Hemp behind the Tree, and let it so remain until the Winter
next following, and then about the month of March or April, if ye will, or
when ye shall see the sap of the Shield put forth, then cut the branch above
the Shield, three fingers all about all off.

How to cut and govern the Branches graffed on the Tree.
THen in the next year after that the Cions shall be well strengthened, and
when they do begin to spring, then shall ye cut them all hard off about the
Shield above, for if ye had cut them so nigh in the first year, when they begin
first to spring or but, it should greatly hinder them against their increase of
growing: also when those Cions shall put forth a fair Wood, ye must bind and
stay them in the midst, fair and gently with small wands, or such like, that
the wind and weather hurt them not. And after this manner of graffing, is
practiced in the Shield or Scutchion, which way ye may easily graffe the white
Rose on the Red: and likewise ye may have Roses of ^ivers colors and sorts
upon one branch or Root, This I thought sufficient and meet do declare, of this
kind of graffing at this present.

CHAP. VI. Of transplanting or altering of Trees.
The sooner ye transplant or set them, it shall be the better.
YE ought to Transplant or set your Trees from Alhallontide unto March, and the
sooner the better, for as soon as the Leaves are fallen from the Trees, they be
meet for to be Planted, if it be not in a very cold or moist place, the which
then it were best for to tarry until January, or February, to plant in the
Frost is not good.

To Plant or Set toward the South or Sunny place is best.
A Fore you do pluck up your trees for to plant them, if ye will mark the
South Side of each trees, that when ye shall replant them, ye may set them
again as they stood before, which is the best way as some do say. And if ye
keep them a certain time, after they be taken out of the Earth, before ye
replant them again, they will rather recover there in the earth, so they be not
wet with Rain, nor otherwise, for that shall be more contrary to them than the
great Heat or Drought.

How to cut the Branches of Trees before they be Set.
Whenever ye shall set or replant your Trees, first ye must cut off the
boughs, and specially those which are great branches, in such sort that ye
shall leave the small twigs or sprigs, on the stocks of your branch, which must
be but a shaftment long, or somewhat more, or less according as the Tree shall
require, which ye do set.

Apple Trees commonly must be disbranched before they be replanted or set.
ANd chiefly the Apple Trees, being Graffed or not Graffed, do require to be
disbranched before they be set again, for they shall prosper thereby much the
better: the other sorts of Trees may well pass unbranched, if they have not
too great or large branches, and therefore it shall be good to transplant or
set, as soon after as the graffes are closed, on the head of the wild Stock, as
for small Trees which have but one Cion or twig, it needs not to cut them
above, when they be replanted or removed.

All wild Stocks must be disbranched when they are replanted or set.
ALL wild trees or stocks, which ye think for to graffe on, ye must first cut
off all their Branches before ye set them again: also it shall be good, always
to take heed in replanting your Trees, that ye do set them again, in as good or
better Earth, than they were in before, and so every Tree, according as his
nature does require.

What Trees love the fair Sun, what Trees the cold Air.
COmmonly the most part of Trees, do love the Sun at Noon, and yet the South
Wind (or vent d'aval) is very contrary against their nature, and specially the
Almond-tree, the Apricock, the Mulberry-tree, the Fig Tree, and the
Pomgranade-tree. Certain other Trees there be which love cold Air, as these:
the Chesnut-tree, the wild and eager Cherry-tree, the Quince-tree, and the
Damson or Plum*tree, the Walnut loves cold Air, and a stony white ground.
Pear Trees love not greatly plain places, they prosper well enough in places
closed with walls, or high Hedges, and specially the Pear called bon Christien.

Of many sorts and manner of Trees following their nature.
THe Damson or Plum tree does love a cold fat earth, and clay withal, the
(Healm) great Cherry does love to be set or planted upon Clay. The Pine Tree
loves light earth, stony and sandy. The Medlar comes well enough in all
kind of grounds, and does not hinder his fruit, to be in the shadow and moist
places. Hasel nut trees love the place to be cold, lean, moist and sandy. Ye
shall understand, that every kind of fruitful Tree does love, and is more
fruitful in one place, than another, as according unto their nature.
Nevertheless, yet we ought to nourish them (all that we may) in the place where
we set them in, in taking them from the place and ground they were in. And ye
must also consider when one does plant them of the great and largest kind of
Trees, that every kind of Tree may prosper and grow, and it is to be considered
also if the Trees have commonly grown before so large in the ground or not, for
in good earth the Trees may well prosper and grow, having a good space one from
another, more than if the ground were lean or naught.

How to place or set Trees at large.
IN this thing ye shall consider, ye must give a competent space from one Tree
to another, when as you make the holes to set them in, not nigh, nor the one
tree to touch another. For a good Tree planted or set well at large, it
profits ofttimes more of fruit than three or four Trees set too nigh
together. The greatest and largest Trees commonly are Wallnuts and Chestnuts, if
ye plant them severally in ranks, as they do commonly grow upon highways,
besides hedges and fields, set them xxxv foot asunder, one from another or
thereabout, but if ye will plant many ranks in one place together, ye must set
them the space of xlv foot one from another, or thereabout, and so far you must
set your ranks one from another. For the Pear Trees and Apple Trees, and of
other sort of Trees, which may be set of this largeness one from the other, if
ye plant only in ranks by hedges in the fields or otherwise, it shall be
sufficient of xx foot from one another. But if you will set two ranks upon the
sides of your great allies in gardens, which be ten or twelve foot broad, it
shall be then best to give them more space, the one from the other in each
rank, as about xxv foot, also ye must not set your Trees right one against
another, but entermedling, or between every space, as they may best grow at
large, that if need be, ye mae plant other small Trees between, but see that ye
set them not to thick. If ye list to set or plant all your Trees of one
bigness, as of young Trees like rods, being Peare-trees or Apple Trees, they
must be set a good distance one from another, as of twenty or thirty foot in
square, as to say one rank to another. But to plant or set of smaller Trees, as
Plum-trees and Apple Trees, of the like bigness, it shall be sufficient for
them fourteen or fifteen foot space in quarters. But if ye will plant or set
two ranks in your Allies in gardens, ye must devise for to proportion it after
the largeness of your said Allies. For to plant eager or lower Cherrie-trees,
this space shall be sufficient enough the one from the other, that is of x or
xii foot, and therefore if you make of great or large Allies in your Garden, as
of x foot wide or thereabouts, they shall come well to pass, and shall be
sufficient to plant your Trees of nine or ten foot space, and for the other
lesser sorts of Trees, as of Quince-trees, Fig Trees, Nut-trees, and such like,
which be not commonly planted, but in one rank together.

Ordering your Trees.
WHen that ye plant or set ranks, or every kind of trees together, ye shall set
or plant the smallest toward the Sun, and the greatest in the shade, that they
may not annoy or hurt the small, nor the small the great. Also whenever ye
will plant or set Pear Trees, and Plum-trees, in any place the one with
another, better it were to set the Plum-trees next the Sun, for the Pears will
dure better in the shade. Also ye must understand when you set or plant any
ranks of Trees together, ye must have more space betwixt your ranks and Trees
than when you set but one rank, that they may have room sufficient on every
side.

Ye shall also scarcely set or plant Peare-trees, or Apple Trees, or other
great Trees upon dead or mossie barren ground unstirred; for they increase
thereon to no purpose. But other lesser Trees very well may grow, as
Plum-trees, and such like: now when all the aforesaid things above be
considered, ye shall make your holes according to the space that shall be
required of every tree ye shall plant or set, and also the place fit for the
same, so much as ye may convenient, ye shall make your holes large enough, for
ye must suppose the tree you do set, has not the half of his roots he shall
have hereafter; therefore ye must help him and give of good fat earth (or dung)
all about the roots, when as ye plant him. And if any of the same roots be too
long, and bruised or hurt, ye shall cut them clean off aslope wise, so that the
upper side of each root so cut may be longest in setting, and for the small
roots which come forth all about thereof, ye may not cut them off as the great
roots.

How ye ought to enlarge the holes for the Trees when you plant them.
FOr when ye set the Trees in the holes, ye must then enlarge the roots in
placing them, and see that they take all downwards, without turning any roots
the ends upward, and you must not plant or set them too deep in the earth, but
as ye shall see cause. It shall be sufficient for them to be planted or set
half a foot or thereabouts in the earth, so that the earth be above all the
roots half a foot or more, if the place be not very burning and stony.

Of Dung and good Earth for your Plants and Trees.
ANd as ye would replant or set, you must have of good fat earth or dung, well
mingled with a part of the same earth, out of which you took your plant,, with
all the upper crusts of the earth, as thick as you can have it: the said earth
which ye shall put about the roots, must not be put too nigh the roots, least
the dung being laid too nigh, the roots should be put into a heat: but let it
be well mingled with the other earth, and well tempered in the holes, and the
smallest and slenderest Cions that turns up among those roots ye may plant
very well.

If you have worms amongst the earth of your roots.
IF there be worms in the fat Earth or Dung, that ye put about your roots, ye
must also well mingle it with the dung of Oxen or Kine, or slak'd Sope-ashes
about the root, which will destroy those worms which would have destroyed the
Roots.

To dig well the Earth about the Trese Roots.
ALso ye must dig well the earth, principally all round over the roots, and
oftener if they be dry, than if they be wet: ye must not plant or set Trees when
it raineth, nor the earth to be very moist about the roots. The Trees that be
planted or set in Valleys, commonly prosper well by drought: and when it
raineth, they that be on the Hills are better by watering with drops than
others: and if the ground be moist by nature, you must plant or set your trees
not so deep therein.

The nature of Places.
ON high and dry places, ye must plant and set your Trees a little deeper than
in the Valleys, and ye must not fill the holes in high places so full as the
other, to the end that the rain may better moisten them.

Of good Earth.
Understand also that of good earth commonly comes good fruit, but in certain
places (if they might be suffered to grow) they would season the tree the
better; otherwise they shall not come to proof, or have a good taste.

With what ye ought to bind your Trees.
Whensoever your Trees shall be replanted or set, ye must knock by the root a
stake, and bind your trees thereto for fear of the wind, and when they do
spring, ye shall dress them and bind them with bands that will not break, you
may make them of strong soft herbs, as Bulrush or such like, or of old linen
clouts, if the other be not strong enough, or else ye may bind them with
Oziars, or such like, least you hurt or fret your Trees.

CHAP. VII. Of medicining and keeping the Trees when they are planted.
The first counsel is, when your Trees be but Plants, in dry weather they must
be watered.
THe young trees that be newly planted, must sometimes in Summer be watered
when the time waxes dry, at the least the first year after they be planted or
set. But as for the greater Trees which are both well taken and rooted a good
time, ye must dig them all over the Roots after Alhallontide, and uncover them
four or five foot compass about the root of the Tree: and let them so lie
uncovered until the latter end of Winter. And if ye do, then mingle about each
tree of good fat earth or dung, to heat and comfort the earth withal, it shall
be good.

With what Dung ye ought to dung your Trees.
ANd principally unto Mossie trees, dung them with Hogs dung mingled with other
earth of the same ground, and let the dung of Oxen be next about the roots, and
ye shall also abate the Moss of the Trees with a great knife of wood or such
like, so that ye hurt not the bark thereof.

When ye ought to uncover your Trees in Summer.
IN the time of Summer, when the earth is scantly half moist, it shall be good
to dig at the foot of the Trees, all about on the root, such as have not been
uncovered in the Winter before, and to mingle it with good fat earth: and so
fill it again, and they shall do well.

When ye ought to cut and proine your Trees
ANd if there be in your Trees certain branches of superfluous wood that ye
will cut off, tarry til the time of the entering in of the Sap, that is, when
they begin to bud, as in March and April: Then cut off, as ye shall see cause,
all such superfluous Branches hard by the Tree, that thereby the other Branches
may prosper the better, for then they shall sooner close their sap upon the cut
places than in the winter, which should not do so well to cut them, as some
do teach which have no experience. But forasmuch as in this time the Trees be
entering into the sap, as is aforesaid. Take heed therefore then in cutting off
your great Branches hastily, that through their great weight, they do not
cleave or separate the bark from the Tree in any part thereof.

How to cut your great Branches, and when.
ANd for the better remedy, first you shall cut the same great Branches, half
a foot from the tree, and after to saw the rest clean hard by the body of the
tree, then with a broad Chizel cut all clean and smooth upon that place, then
cover it with Ox dung. Ye may also cut them well in winter, so that ye leave
the trunk or branch som^what longer, so as ye may dress and cut them again in
March and April, as is before mentioned.

How ye ought to leave the great Branches cut.
OTher things here are to be showed of certain graffs and old trees only,
which in cutting the great branches truncheon-wise do renew again, as W^lnuts,
Mulberry-trees, Plum-trees, Cherry-trees, with others, the bough^ whereof ye
must disbranch even after Alhallontide, or so soon as their leaves be fallen
off, and likewise before they begin to enter into the Sap.

Of Trees having great Branches.
THe said great Branches, when ye shall disbranch them, ye shall so cut them
off in such Truncheons, to lengthen the Trees, that the one may be longer than
the other, that when the Cions be grown good and long thereon, ye may graffe on
them again as ye shall see cause, according as every arm shall require.

Of barrenness of Trees, the time of cutting all Branches and uncovering the
Roots.
SOmetimes a man has certain old Trees, which be almost spent, as of the
Pear Trees, and Plum-trees, and other great Trees, the which bear scant of
fruit: but when as ye shall see some Branches well charged therewith, then ye
ought to cut off the other ill Branches and Boughs, to the end that those that
remain, may have the more S^p to nourish their fruit, and also to uncover their
root after Alhallontide, and to cleave the greatest roots thereof (a foot from
the trunk) and put into the said clefts a thin slate of hard stone, there let
it remain, to the end that the humor of the Tree may enter out thereby, and at
the end of Winter ye shall cover him again with as good fat earth as ye can
get, and let the stone alone.

Trees which ye must help or pluck up by the Roots.
ALL sorts of Trees which spring Cions from the Roots, as Plum-trees, all kind
of Cherry-tres, and small Nut-trees ye must help in plucking their Cions from
their roots in Winter, as soon as conveniently ye can, after the leaf is
fallen. For they do greatly pluck down and weaken the said trees, in drawing to
them the substance of the earth.

What does make a good Nut.
BUt chiefly to plant these Cions, the best way is to let them grow and be
nourished two or three years from the root, and then to transplant them, and
set them in the Winter, as is aforesaid, the Cions which be taken from the foot
of the Hasell-trees, make good Nuts, and to be of much strength and virtue,
when they are not suffered to grow too long from the Root, or foot aforesaid.

Trees eaten with beasts must be graffed again.
WHen certain graffes being well in Sap, of three or four years, or
thereabouts, be broken or greatly endammaged with beasts, which have broken
thereof, it shall little profit to leave those Graffes so, but it were better
to cut them, and to graffe them higher, or lower than they were before. For the
Graffes shall take as well upon the new as old Cion being graffed, as on the
wild stock: but it shall not so soon close, as upon the wild stock-head.

How your wild Stocks ought not hastily to be removed.
IN the beginning when you have graffed your graffes on the wild Stock, do not
then hastily pluck up those Cions or wild stocks so graffed, until ye shall
see the graffes put forth a new shoot, the which remaining still, ye may graffe
thereon again, so that your Graffes in hasty removing, may chance to dye.

When ye cut off the naughty Cions from the Wood.
WHen your graffes on the Stocks shall put forth of new wood, or a new shoot,
as of two or three foot long, and if they put forth also of other small
superfluous Cion^ (about the said members or branches that ye would nourish)
cut off all such ill Cions hard by the head, in the same year they are graffed
in, but not so long as the wood is in Sap, till the Winter after.

How sometimes to cut the principal Members.
ALso it is good to cut some of the principal Members or Branches in the first
year, if they have too many, and then again within two or three years after,
when they shall be well sprung up, and the graffs well closed on the head of
the stock: ye may trim and dress them again, in taking away the superfluous
branches, if any there remain, for it is sufficient enough to nourish a young
tree, to leave him one principal Member on the head, so that it may be one of
those that has been graffed on the tree before, yea, and the tree shall be
fairer and better in the end, than if he had two or three branches, or
precidence at the foot. But if the tree have been graffed with many great
Cions, then you must leave him more largely, according as ye shall see cause or
need, to recover the clefts on the head of the said graffe or ^^ocke.

How to guide and govern the said Trees.
WHen your trees do begin to spring, ye must order and see to them well, for
the space of three or four years or more, until they be well and strongly
grown, in helping them above, in cutting the small twigs and superfluous wood,
until they be so high without branches, as a man, or more if it may be, and
then see to them well, in placing the the principal branches, if need be, with
forks or wands pricked right and well about them at the foot, and to proin
them, so that one branch approach not too nigh the other, nor yet the one fret
the other, when as they do enlarge and grow, and ye must also cut off certain
branches from them where they are too thick.

A kind of sickness in Trees.
LIkewise when certain trees are sick of the Gall, which is a kind of sickness
that does eat the bark, therefore you must cut it, and take out all the same
infection with a little Chizel, or such like thing. This must be done at the
end of Winter, then put Ox dung or Hogs dung upon the infected place, and bind
it fast thereon with Clouts, and wrap it with Oziars, and so let it remain a
long time, until it have recovered again.

Trees which have worms in the Bark.
OF trees which have worms within their Barks, you shall know them when as
you shall see a swelling or rising therein, therefore you must cut or cleave
the said bark unto the wood, that the humor may distill out thereat, and with
a little hook you must pluck or draw out the said worms with all the rotten
wood you can see, then shall you put upon the said place a plaster made of Ox
dung or Hogs dung, mingled and beaten with Sage, and a little unflaked Lime,
then let it be well boiled together, and wrap it on a cloth, and bind it fast
and close thereon so long as it will hold. The Lees of Wine shed or poured upon
the roots of trees, which be somewhat sick through the coldness of the earth,
which Lees do them much good.

Snayles, Ants and Worms do mar the Trees.
ALso ye must take heed of all manner of young trees, and especially of those
graffes, which are endammged and hurt in the Summer time by Worms and Flies,
those are the Snayles, the Pismires or Ants: the field Snaile, which does hurt
also all other sorts of Trees that be great, chiefly in the time the Cuckoe
does sing, and betwixt April and Midsummer while they be tender. There be
little beasts called Sowes which have many Legs, and some of them be gray, some
black, and some of them have a long sharp snowt, which be very noisome, and
great hurters of young Graffes, and other young trees also, for they cut them
off in eating the tender top of the young Cions the length of a man's finger.

How you ought to take the said Worms.
FOr to take them well, ye must take heed and watch in the heat of the day your
young trees, and where you shall see any, put your hand softly underneath,
without shaking the tree, for they will suddenly fall ere one thinks to take
them: therefore so soon as you can (that they fly not away nor fall) take
them quickly on the Cion with your other hand.

To keep Ants from young trees.
FOr to keep the young trees from Snailes and Ants, it shall be good to take
Ashes, and to mix unslak't Lime, beaten in powder therewith, then lay it about
the root of the tree, and when it raineth, they will be beat down into the
ashes and die: but you must renew your ashes after every rain from time to
time: also to keep them moist, ye must put certain small Vessels full of water
at the foot of your said trees, and also the lees of wine to spread on the
ground thereabouts. For the best destroying of the small Snailes on the trees,
ye must take good heed in the Spring time, before the trees be leaved, then if
ye shall see, as it were small warts, knobs or branches on the Trees, the same
will be Snayles. Provide to take them away fair and softly before they be full
closed, and take heed that ye hurt not the wood or bark of the said Tree, as
little as ye can, then burn those Branches on the Earth, and tread them under
your feet, and then if any do remain or renew, look in the heat of the day,
and if ye can see any, which will commonly be on the clefs or forks of the
Branches, and also upon the Branches lying like toftes or Troops together, then
wrap your hands all over with old clothes, and bind leaves beneath them and
above them, and with your two hands rub them down therein, and immediately fire
it, if you do not quickly with diligence, they will fall, and if they fall on
the earth, ye will hardly kill them, but they will renew again: these kind of
worms are noisome flies, which be very strange, therefore take heed that they
do not cast a certain redness on your face and body, for whereas they be
many of them, they be dangerous, it is st^ange to tell of these kind of Worms,
if ye come under or among the Trees where many be, they will cast your face and
hands, your covered body (as your neck, breast, and arms) full of small spots,
some red, some black some bluish, which will tingle, and trouble you like so
many nettles, sometimes for a day, or a day and a night after: they be most on
Plum-trees and Apple Trees nigh unto moist places, and ill airs: yet
nevertheless, by the grace of God there is no danger, that I understand to be
taken by them, that if it be in the evening or in the morning, when it raineth,
they will remain about the graffing place of the Tree, therefore it will be
hard to find them, because they are so small: Moreover, if such branches do
remain in the upper part of the boughs all under, then with a wispe on a Poles
end, set fire on all and burn them.

A Note in Spring time of Fumigations.
HEre is to be understood and noted, that in the spring time only, when trees
begin to put forth leaves and blossoms, ye must then always take heed unto
them to defend them from the F^ost, if there be any, with Fumigations or
smokes, made on the windy sides of your Orchards, or under your trees with
Straw, Hay, dry Chafe, dry Oxe-dung, Saw-dust dried in an Oven, Tanners Oze
dried likewise, Galbanum, old shoes, Thatch of houses, hair and such like, one
of these to be mixed with another: all these be good against the Frost in Spring
time, and especially good against the East Wind, which breeds (as some say)
the Caterpiller worm.

To defend from the Caterpiller.
ANd some do defend their Trees from the Caterpiller, when the blossoming time
is dry (if there be not a Frost) by casting on water, or salt water, every
second or third day upon their trees, with instruments for the same purpose, as
with Squirts of Wood or Brass or such like, for in keeping them moist, the
Caterpillar cannot breed thereon; this experience I have known proved of late
to be good. For to conclude, he that will set or plant trees, must not pass
for any pains, but to tak^ pleasure and delight therein, considering the great
profit that comes thereby: Against scarceness of Corn, Fruit is a very good
stay for the Poor, and often it has been seen, one Acre of Orchard ground,
worth 4 acres of Wheat ground. *

FINIS.
Here follows a little TREATISE How one may Graffe, Plant, and Garden,
subtily or artificially, and to make many things in Gardens very strange.
FOr to graffe a subtle way, take one oylet or eye of a Graffe, slit it round,
above and beneath, and then behind downright, then wreathe him off, and set
him upon another Cion, as great as he is, then dress him as is aforesaid, and
he shall grow and bear.

To graffe one Vine upon another.
BUt to graff one Vine upon another, ye shall cleave him as ye do other trees,
and then put the Vine graff in the cleft, then stop him well and close with
Wax, and so bind him and, he shall grow.

YE shall uncover his root, and make a hole with a Piercer or small Augur in
the greatest root he has, without piercing through the root, then put a pin in
the said hole of dry Wood, as Oak or Ash, and so let it remine in the said
hole, and stop it close again with wax, and then cast earth and cover him
again, and he shall bear the same year.

For to have Peaches two months before others
TAke your Cions of a Peach-tree that does soon blossom in the Spring time, and
graffe them upon a frank Mulberry-tree, and he shall bring of peaches two
months before others.

To have Damsons or Plums unto Alhallontide.
FOr to have Damsons all Summer long, even unto Alhallontide, and of many other
kind of sorts likewise, ye shall graffe them upon the gooseberry-tree, upon the
frank Mulberry-tree, and upon the Cherry, and they shall endure on the Trees
till Alhallontide.

To make Medlars, Cherries, and Peaches in eating to taste like Spices.
TO make Medlars, Cherries, and Pears to taste in the eating pleasant like
spice, which may also keep until the new come again, ye shall graffe them upon
the frank Mulberry-tree, as I have before declared, and in the graffing ye
shall wet them in honey, and put a little of the powder of some good spices, as
the powder of Cloves, Cinnamon or Ginger.

To make a Muscadel taste.
TO make a Muscadel taste, take a Gouge or Chizel of Iron, and cut your Sap
round about, then put in your gouge, or chizel under your Sap on your Cion, and
raise three eyes or eylets round about, and so take off softly your bark round
about, and when he is so taken off, anoint it all over within the bark with
powder of Cloves or Nutmegs, then set it on again, stop it close with Wax
round about, insomuch that no water may enter in, and within three times
bearing, they shall bring a fair Muscadel Reison, which you may after both
graffe and plant, and they shall be all after a Muscadel fruit, some slit the
bark down and so put in the spice.

To set Apples and Pears to come without blossoming.
FOr to make Apples and Pears, and other sorts of fruit to come without
blossoming, that is, ye shall graffe them as ye do other kind of fruit upon
Fig Trees.

To have Apples and Chestnuts rath, and also long on Trees.
FOr to have Apples called (in French) de blanc Durell, or de Yroal, and of
Chestnuts very rath, and long (as until Alhallontide,) on the trees, and make
such fruit also to endure the space of two years, ye shall graffe them on a
later-ward fruit, as Pome-Richard, or upon a pear tree, or Apple Tree of
Dangoise.

To have good Cherries on the Trees at Alhallontide.
TO have Cherries on many trees, good for to eat until Alhallontide, ye shall
graffe them upon a frank Mulberry-tree, likewise graffe them upon a Willow or
Sallow-tree, and they shall endure unto Alhallontide on the Tree.

To have rath Medlars two months before other^
FOr to have Medlars two months sooner than others: and the one shall be
better far than the other, ye shall graffe them upon a Gooseberry-tree, and
also a frank Mulberry-tree, and before ye do graffe them, ye shall wet them in
Honey, and then so graffe them.

For to have rath or timely Pears.
FOr to have a rath Pear, the which is in France, as the Pear Cailonet, and
the Pear Hastimean. For to have them rathe or soon, ye shall graffe them on
the Pine Tree: And for to have them late, ye shall graff them on the Pear,
called in French Dangoise, or on other like hard Pears,

To have Mispels or Medlars without Stones.
FOr to have Medlars without stones, which shall taste as sweet as honey, ye
shall graffe them as the other, upon an Eglentine, or sweet Bryar-tree, and ye
shall wet the graffes before ye graffe them in Honey.

To have Pears betimes.
ALso to have the pear Anguise, or Permaine, or Satigle, (which be of certain
places so called) a Month or two before others, which shall endure and be good
until the new come again, ye shall graffe them upon a Quince-tree, and likewise
upon the frank Mulberry-tree.

To have ripe or frank Mulberries very soon and late.
FOr to have frank or ripe Mulberries very soon, ye shall graff them upon a
rath peare-tree, and upon the Gooseberry-tree, and to have very late, and to
endure unto Alhallontide, ye shall graffe them on the Medlar-tree.

To keep Pears a year.
HOw to keep pears a year, ye shall take fine salt very dry, and put thereof
with your pears into a barrel, in such sort that one Pear do not touch
another, so fill the barrel if ye list, then stop it, and let it stand in some
dry place, that the Salt wax not moist, thus you may keep them long and good.

To have your fruit taste half Apples, half Pears.
IF you will have your fruit taste half Pear, and half an Apple, ye shall in
the spring take the graffs, the one a pear and the other an Apple, ye shall
cleave or pare them in the graffing joint or place, and join half the Pear
Cion, and half Apple Cion, set them into your stock, and see that no rain
enter therein upon your joint, the fruit shall bring thee half a Pear, the
other half an Apple in taste.

Times of Graffing.
IT is good to graff one or two days before the change, and no more, for look
so many more days as ye shall graff before them, so many more years it will be
ere your trees shall bring fruit: It is also good graffing in the increase of
the Moon, but the sooner after the change the better.

To graffe the Quine Apple.
IF ye graffe the Quine Apple upon an Apple-stock, he will not long continue
without the Canker, and if you graffe him on a knotty young crab-stock, he
shall endure long without the Canker.

To destroy Pismires or Ants about a Tree.
TO destroy Emets or Auts which be about a Tree, if ye remove and stir the
earth about the root of the said Tree, then put thereon all about a great
quantity of the foot of a Chimny, and the Ants and Pismires will either be
gone or shortly die.

Another for the same.
TO destroy Ants another way, take of the Saw-dust of Oak wood only, and
strew that about the Trees root, and the next rain that falls, all the
Pismires and Ants shall die there. For Earewigs, shoes stopped with Hay, and
hanged on the Tree one night, they come all in.

To have Nuts, Plums and Almonds greater than other
To have great Nuts, and Plums, and Almonds greater than others, ye shall take
four Nuts or of any of this fruit abovesaid, and put them into a pot of earth,
joining the one to the other as nere as you can, then make a hole in the bottom
of the pot, through the which holes these Nuts shall be constrained to issue,
and being so constrained for to issue, shall come to perfection and grow
together as in one Tree, Which in time shall bring his fruit greater and arger
then others.

To make an Oak or other Tree as green in Winter, as in Summer.
ALso to make an Oak or other Tree to be green as well in Winter as in Summer,
ye shall take the graffe of an Oak tree, or other Tree, and graffe it upon the
Holly tree; the best and surest way is, to graffe one through the other. and
who so will make an Orchard, he ought (if he can) to make it in a moist place,
whereas the South winds or Sea winds may have recourse unto them.

The time of Planting with Roots and without Roots.
ALso the best time to plant or set without roots, as with branches or
stevering^ of all sorts of Trees, which has a pith as Fig Trees, Hazel-trees,
Mulberry-trees, and Vines, with other like trees, which ought to be set from
the midst of September, if the leaves be off, until Alhallontide, and all
others Trees with roots, ought to be set in Advent until Christmas, or
presently after, if the time be not very cold and dangerous.

To keep fruit from the Frost.
ALso to keep fruit from the Frost, and in good color till the new come again,
ye ought so to gather them when the time is fair and dry, and the Moon in her
decreasing, and that they lie also in dry places by night covered thinn with
wheat straw, and if the time of winter be cold and very hard, then put Hay
above them in your straw, and take it away when as a fair time comes, and thus
ye shall keep your fruit fair and good.

The days to plant and graffe.
ALso, as some say, from the first day of the new Moon, unto the xiii. day
thereof, is good to plant, or graffe, or sow, and for great need some take unto
the xvii. or xviii. day thereof, and not after either graffe or sow, but as is
before mentioned, a day or two days before the change, the best signs are
Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn.

To have green Roses all the year.
FOr to have green Roses, ye shall as, some say, take your Rose buds in the
Spring time, and then graffe them upon the Holly-stock, and they shall be green
all the year.

To keep Raisons or Grapes good a year.
FOr to keep Raisons or Grapes good a whole year, ye shall take of fine dried
sand, and then lay your Raisons or grapes therein, and it shall keep them good
a whole year. Some keep them in a close Glass from the air.

To make fruit laxative from the Tree.
FOr to make any fruit laxative from the Tree, what fruit soever it be, make a
hole in the stock, or in the master-root of the Tree (with a piercer
slope-wise) not through, but unto the pith, or somewhat further, then fill the
said hole with the juice of Elder, Centory, Senith or Turbith, or such like
laxatives, then fill the said holes therewith of which of them ye will, or else
you may take three of them together, and fill the said hole therewith, and then
stop the said hole close with soft wax, then lay it thereon, and put moss all
over, so that nothing may fall out, and for ever after the fruit of the Tree
shall be laxative.

A Note for all grafters and Planters.
ALso whenever ye shall plant or graffe, it shall be meet and good for you to
say as follows. In the name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
Amen. Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth: and say the Lords Prayer,
then say: Lord God hear my Prayer, and let this my desire be heard of thee.
The holy Spirit of God, which has created all things for Man, and has given
them for our comfort, in thy name, O LORD, we set, plant, and graffe, desiring
that by thy mighty power they may increase and multiply upon the earth, in
bearing plenty of fruit, unto the profit and comfort of all the faithful
people, through Christ our Lord Amen. *

depiction of a man attaching a graft to a tree-stump, with two nearby trees
already grafted

Here follows certain ways of Planting or Graffing, with other necessaries
herein meet to be known.

Translated out of Dutch, by L. M.

To graffe one Vine upon another.
YOu that will graffe one Vine upon another, ye shall (in January) cleave the
head of the Vines, as ye do other stocks, and then put in your Vine Graffe or
Cion, but first you must pare him thin, ere ye set him in the head, then clay
and moss him as the other.

Chosen days to graffe in, and choose your Cions.
ALso whenever that ye will graffe, your choicest time will be on the last
day before the change, and also in the Change, as also upon the second day
after the change, if ye graffe (as some report) on the third, fourth, or fifth
day after the change, it will be many years ere those trees bring forth fruit.
Ye may believe it, but I will not. Some think it is good graffing from the
change unto the xviii day thereof, this I think good the Moon increasing, the
sooner the better.

To gather your Cions.
ALso such Cions or Graffs, which you get on other trees, the young Trees of
three, four, five or six years growth are best to take graffs. Take them of no
under boughs, but in the top on the East side, if ye can, and the fairest and
greatest. Ye shall cut them two inches long of the old wood beneath the joint.
And when you graff, cut them taper-wise from the joint two inches or more of
length, which set into the stock, and before you set it in, open your stock
with a wedg of Iron or hard wood softly; then if the sides of your clefts be
ragged, pare them on both sides with the point of a sharp knife within and
above, then set in your graffes close on the outsides, and also above, but let
your stock be as little while open as ye can, and when your graffs be well set
in, pluck out your wedge, and if your stocks do pinch your graffs much, then ye
must put in a wedge of the same wood to help your graffs: then lay a thick bark
or peel over the cleft from the one graff to the other, to keep out the clay
and rain, and clay them two fingers thick round about the clefts, then lay on
moss, but wool is better next your clay, or temper your clay with wool or
hair, for it will abide closer and stronger on the stock head, some take wool
next the clay, and wrap it all over with linen cloths, for the wool being once
moist will keep the clay so a long time. Others take woollen clouts, that have
been laid in the juice of Wormwood or such like bitter thing, to keep creeping
worms from coming under to the graffs. If ye graff or plant in the Winter, put
your clay uppermost, for Summer your Moss. For in Winter the Moss is warm,
and your clay will not cleave. In Summer your clay is cold, and your Moss
keeps him from cleaving or chapping. To bind them take Willow peels, cloven
B^yars, Oziars and such like. To gather your graffe on the East part, of the
Tree is counted best; if ye gather them below on the under-boughs, they will
grow flaggie and spreading abroad: If ye take them in the top of the Tree, they
will grow upright. Yet some do gather their Cions or graffes on the sides of
the Trees, and so graffe them again on the like sides of the stocks, which by
some men is not counted so good for fruit. It is not good to graff a great
stock, for they will be long ere they cover the head thereof.

Of Worms in Trees or Fruit
IF ye have any Trees eaten with worms, or bring wormy fruit, wash his body and
great branches with two parts of Cow-pisse and one of Vinegar, and if you can
get no Vinegar, with Cow-pisse alone tempered with common Ashes. This must be
done before the Spring, in the Spring or Summer. Anniseeds sown about the Trees
roots drive away worms, and the fruit will be the sweeter.

The setting of Stones and ordering of them.
AS for Almond Trees, Peach*trees Cherry-trees Plum-trees, or other, plant or
set them thus. Lay first the stones in water three days and four nights until
they sink therein, then take them betwixt your finger and your thumb with the
small end upward, and so set them two fingers deep in good earth, and when ye
have so done, ye shall rake them all over, and so cover them, and when they
begin to gr^w or spring, keep them from weeds, and ^hey will prosper the
better, specially in the first year. And within two or three year after ye
shall set or remove them where you list, if ye remove them after that, ye must
proin off all his twigs, as ye see cause, nigh the stock: This ye may do with
all kind of Trees, chiefly such as have the great Sap, as the Mulberry or
Fig Trees, or such like.

his twigs, as ye shall see cause, nigh the stock: this ye may do of all kind
of Trees, but especially those which have the great Sap, as the Mulberry or
Fig Trees or such like.

Togather Gum of any Tree.
IF ye list to have the Gum of an Almond tree, ye shall stick a great nail
into the Tree a good way, and so let him rest, and the Gum of the Tree shall
issue out thereat, thus do men gather Gum of all sorts of Trees: yea, the
common Gum that men do use and occupy.

To set a whole Apple.
ALso some say, that if ye set a whole Apple four fingers in the earth, all the
P^pins or Curnels in the same Apple, will grow up together in one whole stock
or Cion, and all those Apples shall be much fairer and greater than others: but
ye must take heed how you set those Apples, which do come in Leap-year, for in
Leap-year (as some do say) the Curnels or Pepins are turned contrary, for if
ye would so set, as commonly a man does, ye shall set them contrary.

Of setting the Almond.
ALmonds do come forth and grow commonly well, if they be set without the
shell or husk, in good earth or in rotten Hogs dung: If ye lay Almonds one day
in Vinegar, then shall they (as some say) be very good to plant, or lay him in
milk or water until he do sink, it shall be the better to set, or any other
Nut.

Of Pepins watered.
THe Pepins and Curnels of those Trees, which have a thick or rough bark, if ye
lay them three days in water, or else until they sink therein, they shall be
the better, than set them, or sow them, as is before mentioned, and then remove
them when they be well rooted, or of three or four years growth, and they shall
have a thin bark.

To plant or set Vines.
IF ye plant or set Vines, in the first or second year they will bring no
fruit, but in the third year they will bear, if they be well kept: ye shall cut
them in January, and set them soon after they be cut from the Vine, and ye
shall set two together, the one with the old wood, and the other without, and
so let them grow, plucking away all weeds from about them, and when ye shall
remove them in the second and third year, being well rooted, ye shall set them
well a foot deep, (in good fat earth) with good dung, as of one foot deep or
thereabouts, and keep them clean from weeds, for then they will prosper the
better, and in Summer, when the Grape is knit, then ye shall break off his top
or branch, at one or two joints after the Grape, and so the Grape shall be the
greater, and in the Winter when ye cut them, ye shall not leave past two or
three leaders on each branch, on some branch but one leader, which must be cut
betwixt two joints, and ye shall leave the young Vine to be the leader. Also ye
shall leave thereof three or four joints at all times, if a young Cion do come
forth of the old branch, or side thereof, if ye do cut him, ye shall cut him
hard by the old branch, and if ye will have him to bring the Grape next year,
ye shall leave two or three joints thereof; for the young Cion always brings
the Grape: ye may at all times, so that the Grape be once taken and knit, ever
as the superfluous Cions do grow, break them at a joint, or hard by the old
branch, and the Grape will be the greater: thus ye may order your Vine all the
Summer long without any hurt

To set or plant the Cherry.
CHerry-trees, and all trees of stone-fruit would be planted or set of Cions,
and cold Grounds, and places of good earth, and likewise in high or hilly
places, dry and well in the shade, if ye do remove, ye ought to remove them in
November and January, if ye shall see your Cherry-tree wax rotten, then shall
ye make a hole in the midst of the body two foot above the ground with a big
Piercer, that the humor may pass forth thereby, then before the Spring shut
him up again with a pin of the same tree: thus ye may do unto all other sorts
of trees when they begin to rot, is also good for them which bear scant of
fruit or none.

To keep Cherries good a year.
FOr to keep Cherries good a year, ye shall cut off the stalks, and then lay
them in a well leaded pot, and fill the said pot therewith, then put into them
of good thin Honey, and fill the said pot therewith, then stop it with clay
that no air enter in, then set them in some fair Sellar, and put of Sand under
and all about it, and cover the pot well withal, so let it stand or remain;
thus ye may keep them a year, as fresh as though they came from the Tree, and
after this sort ye may keep Pears or other fruit.

Against Pismires.
IF ye have Cherry-trees laden or troubled with Pismires or Ants, ye shall rub
the body of the Tree, and all about the root with the juice of Purslane mingled
half with Vinegar. Some do use to anoint the Tree beneath all about the body
with t^rr and birds-lime, with wool, oil, boiled together, and anoint the tree
beneath therewith, and lay the Chalk stones all about the Tree root, some say
it is good therefore.

The setting of Chestnuts.
THe Chesnut-tree men do use to plant like unto the Fig Tree. They may be both
planted and graffed well, they wax well in fresh and fat earth, for in Sand
they like not. If ye will set the Curnells, ye shall lay them in water until
they do sink, and those that do sink to the bottom of the water be best to
set, which ye shall set in the Month of November, and December, four fingers
deep, a foot one from another, for when they be in these two Months Set or
Planted, they shall endure long, and bear also good fruit, yet some there be
that Plant or Set them first in dung like Beans, which will be sweeter than the
other sort, but those which be set in these two Months aforesaid, shall first
bear their fruit, men may prove which is best, experience does teach.

This is another way to prove and know, which Chestnuts be best to plant or set,
that is, ye shall take a quantity of nuts, then lay them in Sand the space of
thirty days, then take and wash them in water fair and clean, and throw them
into water again, and those which do sink to the bottom, are good to plant or
set, and the other that swim are naught; thus may ye do with all other Curnels
or nuts.

To have all stone fruit taste, as ye shall think good.
IF ye will have all stone-fruit taste as ye shall fancy or think good, ye
shall first lay your stones to soke in such liquor or moisture, as ye will have
the fruit taste of, and then set them, as for the Date tree (as some say) he
brings no fruit, except he be a hundred year old, and the Date-stone must
soke one Month in the water before he be set, then shall ye set him with the
small end upward in good fat earth, in hot Sandy ground four fingers deep, and
when the boughs do begin to spring, then shall ye every night sprinckle them
with rain water, or other (if ye have none) so long till they be come forth and
grown.

Of graffing the Medlar and Misple.
FOr to graffe the Medlar or Misple: men do use to graffe them on the White
Hathorn Tree, they will prove well, but yet small and sour fruit, to graffe one
Medlar upon another is the better, some men do graffe first the Wilding Cion
upon the Medlar stock, and so when he is well taken and grown, then they graffe
thereon the Medlar again, the which does make them more sweet, very great and
fair.

Of the Fig Tree.
THe Fig Tree in some Country bears his fruit four times a Year, the black
Figs are the best being dried in the Sun, and then laid in a Vessel in
beds one by another, and then sprinkled or strawed all over, every Lay with
fine Meal, then stop it up, and so it is sent out of that Land. If the Fig Tree
will not bear, ye shall dig him all about, and under the roots in February,
and take out then all his earth, and put unto him the dung of a Privy, for that
he likes best: ye may mingle with it other fat earth, as Pigeons Dung mingled
with Oil, and Pepper stamped, which shall forward him much to anoint his roots
therewith: ye shall not plant the Fig Tree in cold times, he loves hot, stony,
or gravelly ground, and to be planted in Autumn is best.

Of the Mulberry-tree.
IF ye will plant the Mulberry-tree, the Fig Tree, or others which bring no
seed, ye shall cut a twig or branch (from the tree root) of a years growth,
with the old wood or bark, about a cubit long, which ye shall plant or set in
all the earth saven shaftment long to it, and so let it grow, watering it as ye
shall see need. This must be done before the leaves be in to spring, but take
heed ye cut not the end or top above, for then it shall wither and dry.

Of trees that bear bitter fruit.
OF all such Trees as bear bitter fruit, to make them bring sweeter, ye shall
uncover all the roots in January, and take out all that earth, then put unto
them of Hogs dung great plenty, and then after put unto them of other good
earth, and so cover them therewithal well again, and their fruit shall have a
sweeter taste. Thus men may do with other Trees which bring bitter fruit.

To help barren Trees.
HEre is another way to help barren Trees, that they may bring fruit, if you
see your Tree not to bear scaree in three or four years good plenty, ye shall
bore an hole with an Auger or Piercer in the greatest place of the body,
(within a yard of the ground) but not through, but unto or past the heart, ye
shall bore him aslope; then take Honey and water mingled together a night
before, then put the said Honey and water into the hole, and fill it therewith,
then stop it close with a short pin made of the same Tree, not stricken in too
far for piercing the liquour.

Another way.
IN the beginning of Winter, ye shall dig those Trees round about the roots,
and let them so rest a day and a night, and then put unto them of good earth,
mingled well with good store of watered Oats, or with watered Barley or Wheat,
laid next unto the roots, then fill it with other good earth, and he shall bear
fruit, even as the boring of a hole in the master root, and striking in a pin,
and so fill him again, it shall help him to bear, as before is declared.

To keep your fruit.
ALL fruit may be the better kept if ye lay them in dry places, in dry Straw or
Hay, but Hay ripeth too sore: or in a Barley mow, not touching one the other, or
in Chafe or in vessels of Juniper, and Cipresse wood: ye may so keep them well
in dry Salt or Honey, and upon boards, whereas fire is nigh all the Winter, also
hanging nigh fire in the Winter in Nets of Yarn.

The Mulberry-tree.
THe Mulberry-Tree is planted or set by the Fig Tree: his fruit is first sower
and then sweet, he likes neither Dew nor Rain, for they hurt him, he is well
pleased with foul earth and dung: his branches will wax dry within every six
years, then must ye cut them off, as for other Trees they ought to be proined
every year, as yeshall see cause, and they will be the better, and to plant
them from the midst of February to the midst of March is best.

Of Moss of the Tree.
OF the Moss on your Trees, ye must not let it too long be uncleansed, ye must
rub it off with a grate of wood, or arough Hair, or such like, in Winter when
they be moist or wet, for then it will off the sooner, for Moss does take away
the strength and substance of the fruit, and makes the Trees barren at length:
when you see your Trees begin to wax Mossie, ye ^ust in the Winter uncover
their roots, and put them under good earth, this shall help them and keep them
long without Moss: for the earth, not stirred about the root, is one cause of
Mossinesse, and also the barrenness of the ground whereon he stands, and
your Moss does succor in Winter flies and other Vermin, and so does therein
hide them in Summer, which is occasion of eating the blossoms, and tender
Cions thereof.

To keep nuts long.
FOr to keep nuts long, ye shall dry them, and cover them in dry Sand, and put
them in a dry Bladder, or in a Fat made of Walnut-tree, and put of dry
Ivie-berries therein, and they shall be much sweeter. To keep Nuts green a year
and also fr^sh, ye shall put them into a pot with Honey, and they shall
continue fresh a year, and the said Honey will be gentle and good for many
Medicines. To keep Walnuts fresh and green: in the time of straining of
Verjuice, ye shall take of the Pommis, and put thereof in the bottom of a
Barrel, then lay your Walnuts all over with Pommis over them, and so Walnuts
again, and then of the Pommis, as ye shall see cause to fi^l your Uessell. Then
stop it close as ye do a Barrel, and set him in your Sellar or other place,
and it shall keep your Nuts fresh and green a year. Some use to fill an earthen
pot with small Nuts, and put to them dry Sand, and cover them with a Lidde of
earth, or stone, and then they clay it, setting the mouth of the Pot down-ward,
two foot within the earth, in their Garden or other place, and so they will
keep very moist and sweet, until new come.

To cut the Peach-tree.
THe Peach-trree is of this nature, (if he be cut as some say) green, it will
wither and dry. Therefore if ye cut any small branch, cut it hard by the body:
the withered twigs ever as they wither, must be cut off hard by the great
branch, or body thereof, for then they prosper the better. If a Peach-tree do
not like, ye shall put to his roots the Lees of Wine mingled with water, and
also wash his roots therewi^h, and likewise the branches; then cover him again
with good earth, mingled with his own Leaves, for those he likes best. Ye may
graffe Peach upon Peach, upon Hasel, or Ash, or upon Cherry-tree, or ye may
graffe the Almond upon the Peach-tree. And to have great Peaches, ye must take
Cowes milk, and put good earth thereto, then all to strike the body of the Tree
therewith, both upward and downward, or else open the root all bare, three
days and three nights; then take Goats milk and wash all the roots therewith,
and then cover them again; this must be done when they begin to blossom, and
so shall he bring great Peaches.

To color Peach-stones
TO color Peach-stones that all the fruit thereof shall have the like color
here after, that is, ye shall lay or set Peach-stones in the earth seven days
or more, until ye shall set the stones begin to open, then take the stones and
the curnells softly forth thereof, and what color ye will color the curnell
therewith, and put them into the shell again, then bind it fast together, and
set it in the earth, with the small end upward, and so let him grow, and all
the Peaches which shall come of the same fruit, (graffed or ungraffed) will be
of the same color. The Peach-tree ought to be planted in Autumn, before the
cold do come, for he cannot abide the cold.

If Peach-tree be troubled with Worms.
ALso if any Peach-tree be troubl^d with worms, ye shall take two parts of
Cow-pisse, with one part of Vinegar, then shall ye sprinkle the tree all over
therewith, and wash his roots and branches also, and it will kill the worms;
this may ye do unto all other Trees, which be troubled with Worms.

To have the Peach without stones.
FOr to make the Peach grow without stones, ye shall take a Peach-tree newly
planted, then set a Willow hard by, which ye shall bore a hole through, then
put the Peach-tree through the said hole, and so close him on both sides
thereof Sap to Sap, and let him so grow one year, then the next year ye shall
cut off the Peach-stock, and let the Willow feed him, and cut off the upper
part of the Willow also three fingers high, and the next Winter saw him off
nigh the Peach, so that the Willow shall feed but the Peach only: and this way
ye have Peaches without stones.

Another way for the same.
YE shall take the Graffes of Peaches, and graffe them upon the Willow-stock,
and so shall your Peaches be likewise without stones.

If Trees do not prosper.
IF ye see that your Trees do not wax nor prosper, take and open the roots in
the beginning of January or before, and in the biggest root thereof, make an
hole with an Auger, to the pith or more, then strike therein a pin of Oak, and
so stop it again, and let it be well waxt all about the pin, then cover him
again with good earth, and he shall do well, some do use to cleave the root.

How to graffe Apples to last on the tree till Alhallontide.
HOw ye may have many sorts of Apples upon your Trees until Alhallontide, that
is, ye shall graffe your Apples upon the Mulberry-tree, and upon the
Cherry-tree.

Many Apricot trees of one.
PLant an Apricot in the midst of other Plum-trees round about it, at a
convenient distance; then in an apt season, bore through your plum-trees, and
let into every one of them, one or two of the branches of your Apricot tree,
through those holes, taking away the Bark on both sides of your branches, which
you let in, joining Sap to Sap, and lute the holes up with tempered loam; and
when they are well knit, the next year cut off the branch from the
Apricot-tree: and so you have gotten many Apricot trees out of one. Take away
in time all the head of your plum-tree, and all other branches, maintaining
only that which is gotten from the Apricot. But some commend rather the
letting in of a branch of one tree, into the other workmanlike, for the more
certain kind of graffing.

To graffe an Apple which shall be half sweet, and half sower.
TO graffe that your Apples shall be the one half sweet, and the other half
sower, ye shall take two Cions, the one sweet and the other sower, some do put
the one Cion through the other, and so graffe them between the Bark and the
Tree; and some again do pare both the Cions finely, and so sets them joining
into the stock, enclosing Sap to Sap, on both the outsides of the graffes, unto
the outsides of the stock, and so sets them into the head as the other, and
they shall bring fruit, the one half sweet, and the other half sower.

To graffe a Rose on the Holly.
FOR to graffe the Rose, that his leaves shall keep all the year green; Some do
take and cleave the Holly, and so graffe in a white or red Rose bud, and then
put clay and moss to him, and let him grow, and some put the Rose bud into a
sli^ of the Bark, and so put Clay and Moss and bind him featly therein, and
let him grow, and he shall carry his leaf all the year.

Of keeping of Plummes
OF Plums there be many sorts, as Damsons which be all black, which be counted
the best: All manner of other Plums a man may keep well a year, if they be
gathered ripe, and then dried, and put into Vessels of glass, if ye cannot dry
them well in the Sun, ye shall dry them on hurdels of Oziers made like Lattice
Windows, in a hot Oven after Bread is drawn forth, and so reserve them. If a
Plumtree like not, open his roots, and pour in all about the dregs of Wine mixed
with Water, and so cover him well again, or power on them stale Urine, or stale
piss of old men mixed with two parts of water, and so cover him as before.

Of altering of Pears and stony fruit.
IF a Pear taste hard or gravelly about the core, like small stones, ye shall
uncover his roots (in the Winter or before the Spring) and take out all the
earth thereof, and pick out all the stones, as clean from the earth as ye can,
about his root then sift that earth, or else take of other good fat earth
without stones, and fill all his roots again therewith, and he shall bring a
soft and gentle Pear to eat, but you must see well to the watering of him often.

The making of Syder and Perry.
OF Apples and Pears men do make Cider and Perry, and because the use thereof
in most places is known, I will here let pass to speak any further thereof,
but (in the pressing your Cider) I will counsel you to keep cl^an your
vessels, and the place whereas your fruit does lie, and specially after it is
bruised or broken, for then they draw filthy air unto them, and if it be nigh,
the Cider shall be infected therewith, and also bear the taste after the
infection thereof: therefore tun it as soon as you can into clean and sweet
vessels, as into vessels of white wine, or of Sack or of Claret, and such like,
for these shall keep your Cider the better and stronger a long time after: ye
may hang a small bag of linen by a thread down into the lower part of your
Vessel, with Powder of Cioves, Mace, Cinnamon and Ginger, and such like, which
will make your Cider to have a pleasant t^ste.

To help frozen Apples.
OF Apples that be frozen in the cold and extreme Wintyr, The remedy to have
the Ice out of them, is this. Ye shall lay them first in cold water a while,
and then lay them before the fire or other heat, and they shall come to
themselves again:

To make Apples fall from the Tree
IF ye put of fiery coals under an Apple Tree, and then cast of the powder of
Brimstone therein, and the fume thereof ascend up, and touch any Apple that is
wet, that Apple shall fall incontinent.

To water Trees in Summer, if they wax dry about the root.
WHereas Apple Trees be set in dry ground, and not dead in the Ground, in
Summer if they want moisture, ye may take of Wheat-straw or other, and every
evening (or as ye see cause) cast thereon water all about, and it will keep the
Trees moist from time to time.

To cherish Apple Trees.
IF ye use to throw (in Winter) all about your apple trees on the roots
thereof, the Urine of old men, or stale piss long kept, they shall bring fruit
much better, which is good for the Vine also, or if ye sprinckle or anoint your
Apple Tree roots with the Gall of a Bull, they will bear the better.

To make an Apple grow in a Glass.
TO make an Apple grow within a Glass, take a Glass what fashion ye list, and
put your Apple therein when he is but small, and bind him fast to the Glass,
and the Glass also to the Tree, and let him grow, thus ye may have Apples of
diverse proportions, according to the fashion of your Glass. Thus ye make of
Cucumbers, Gourds, or Pomecitrons the like fashion.

depiction of a grafted tree

THese three branches, and Figure of graffing in the shield in Summer is, the
first branch shows how the Bark is taken off, the middle place shows how it
is set too, and the last branch shows how to bind him on, in saving the oylet
or eye from bruising.

To graffe many sorts of Apples on one Tree.
YE may graffe on one Apple Tree at once many kind of Apples, as on every
branch a contrary fruit, as is before declared, and of Pears the like; but see
as nigh as you can, that all your Cions be of like springing, for else the one
will grow, and overshadow the other.

To color Apples.
TO have colored Apples, with what color ye shall think good, ye shall bore a
hole slope with an Auger, in the biggest part of the body of the Tree, unto the
midst thereof, or thereabouts, and then look what color ye will have them of
First ye shall take water, and mingle your color therewith, then stop it up
again with a short pin made of the same, wood or Tree, then wax it round about;
ye may mingle with the said color what spice ye list, to make them taste
thereafter: thus may ye change the color, and taste of any Apple: Your colors
may be of Saffron, Tourn sell, Brasel, Saunders, or other what ye shall see
good. This must be done before the Spring do come: Some do say, if ye graffe on
the O^ive stock, or on the Ald^r stock, they will bring red Apples. Also they
say, to graffe to have fruit without core, ye shall graffe in both the ends of
your Cion into the stock, and when they be fast grown to the stock, ye shall
cut it in the midst, and let the smaller and grow upward, or else take a
Cion, and graffe the small end of the stock downward, and so shall ye have your
Apple Tree on St. Lamberts day, (which is the xvii. of September) they shall
never waste, consume, nor wax dry, which I doubt.

The setting of Vine Plants.
depiction of three vines or vine plants set in the earth

THese Figures do show, how ye ought to Plant and set in your Vines, two or two
together, the one to have a part of the old Tree, and the other may be all of
the last Cion, but when ye plant him with a part of the old Tree, he shall
commonly take root sooner than the new Cion; ye must weed them every month,
and let not the earth be too close above their roots at the first, but now and
then loosen it with a Spade as ye shall see a rain past, for then they shall
enlarge, and put forth better. Further herein ye shall understand after.

How to proin or cut a Vine in Winter.
depiction of a pruned vine

THis Figure shows, how all Vines should be proined and cut in a convenient
time after Christmas, that when ye cut them, ye shall leave his branches very
thin, as ye see by this Figure, ye shall never leave above two or three Leaders
at the head of any principal branch, ye must also cut them off in the midst
between the knots of the young Cions, for those be the leaders which will bring
the grape, the rest and order ye shall understand as follows,

Of the Vine and Grape.
SOmewhat I intend to speak of the ordering of the Vine and Grape, to Plant or
Set the Vine, the Plants or Sets which be gathered from the Vine (and so
planted) are best, they must not be old gathered, nor lie long unplanted after
they be out, for then they soon gather corruption, and when ye gather your
Plants, take heed to cut and choose them, whereas ye may, with the young Cion
take a j^ynt of the old wood with the new, for the old wood will sooner take
root than the new, and better to grow than if it were all young Cion, ye shall
leave the old wood to the young Cion a foot or half a foot, or a shaftment
long, the young Cion ye must cut the length of three quarters of a yard or
therereabouts, and choose of those young Cions that be thickess joynted or nigh
joints together, and when ye Plant or set them, look that your ground be well
dug in the Winter before, then in January ye may both cut and Plant, but cut
not in the Frost, for that is dangerous to all kind of Trees, or ye may plant
in the beginning of February, and when ye do Plant, take two of those Plants,
and set or lay them together a foot deep in the earth, for two Plants set
together will not so soon fall, as one alone, and lay them a foot longwise in
the earth, so that there may be above the earth three or four joints: ye may
plant likewise a young Cion with the old, so that it be thick or nigh joynted,
for then he is better to root, and also to bring fruit, than when ye have set
or laid them in the earth, then cover them well therewith, in treading it fast
down unto the Plants, but let the ends of your Cions or Plants be turned
upright above the earth, three or four joints, if there happen to be more when
they are set, ye may cut them off, and cut them always in the midst between
the two joints, and then let them so grow, and see that ye weed them always
clean, and once a month loosen the earth round about them, and they shall
prove the better, if it be very dry and hot in the Summer after, ye may water
them, in making a hole with a Crow of Iron to the Root: and there ye may pour
in water in the Evening. As for the proyning of them, thus, when the Grape is
taken and clustered, then ye may break the next joint or two after the Grape,
of all such superfluous Cions as ye shall see c^use, which will cause the Grape
to wax bigger: ye may also break away all superfluous buddes or slender
branches, which comes about the Root, or on the under branches, which ye think
will have no Grape, and when ye proyn or cut them in Winter following, ye shall
not cut the young Cion nigh the old, by three or four joints, ye shall not cut
them like Oziers, to leave a sort of heads together on the branch, which does
kill your Vine, ye shall leave but one head, or two at the most of the young
Cions upon the old branch, and to cut those young Cions three or four knots, or
joints off, for the young Cion does carry the grape always, and when ye leave
upon a great branch many Cions, they cannot be well nourished, and after ye
have so cut them in Winter, ye shall bind them with Oziers, in placing those
young branches as ye shall see cause, and in the Spring time, when the branches
are tender, ye shall bind them so, that the stormy tempest or wind hurt them
not, and to bind them withal great soft rushes are best, and when the Grape is
clustered, then ye may break off all such branches as is before declared: upon
one old branch three or four heads be enough, for the more heads your branch
has, the worse your grape shall be nourished, and when ye cut off any branch,
cut him off hard by or nigh the old branch; if your Vine wax old, the best
remedy is, if there grow any young Cion about the root, ye shall in the Winter
cut off the old Vine hard by the ground, or as nigh as ye can, and let the
young Vine lead, and he will continue a long time, if ye cover and fill the
place about the root with good earth again. There is also upon or by every
cluster of grapes, a small Cion like a Pigs Tail, turning about, which does
take away the Sap from the Grape, if ye pinch it off hard by the stalk of your
Grape, your fruit shall be the greater. If your Vine wax too rank and thick of
branches, ye shall dig the root in Winter, and open the earth, and fill it up
again with Sand and ashes mingled together, and whereas a Vine is unf^uitfull
and does not bear, ye shall bore an hole (with an Auger) unto the heart or
pith, in the body or thickest part thereof, then put in the said hole a small
stone, but fill not the hole close therewith, that so the sickness of the Vine
may pass thereby, Then lay all about the root of good earth mingled with good
dung, and so shall not be unfruitful, but bear well ever after: or also to
cast of old men's Urine or piss all about the root of the barren Vine, and if
he were half lost or mard, he should grow again and wax fruitful as before:
this is to be done in Winter.

To have Grapes without stones.
FOr to have Grapes without stones, ye shall take young Plants or Branches, and
shall Plant or set the top or small end downward in the earth, and so ye may
set two of them together for failing, as I have before declared of the others,
and those branches shall bring Grapes without stones.

To make your Vine to bring a Grape to taste like Claret.
TO make your Vine to have a Grape to taste like Claret Wine, and pleasant
withal, bore a hole in the stock unto the heart or pith thereof, then make an
Electuary with the powder of Cloves, and Cinnamon, mingled with a lit-Fountatin
or running water, and fill the said hole therewith, and stop it fast and close
with wax, and so bind it fast thereon with a Linen cloth, and those Grapes
will taste like Claret Wine.

Of gathering your Grapes.
ALL Grapes that men do cut, before they are through ripe, the Wine will not be
natural, neither shall it long endure good: But if ye cut or gather Grapes, to
have them good, and thereby to have good Wine, ye must cut them in the Full, or
soon after the Full of the Moon, when she is in Cancer, in Leo, in Scorpio, and
in Aquarius, the Moon being in the Wain, and under the earth.

To know if your Grape be ripe enough.
FOr to know if your Grape be ripe enough, or not which ye shall not truly know
in the taste, but in sight and taste together, as in taste if they be sweet,
and full in eating, and in sight, if the stone will soon fall out being chafed
or bruised, which is the best knowledge, and also whether they be white or
blue, it is all one matter: The good Grape is he which comes out all watery,
or those which be all clammy as Bird-lime: by these signs ye shall know when
to cut, being through ripe or not, and whereas you do press your Wine, ye must
make your place sweet and clean, and your Vessels within to be clean also, and
see that they have strong heads, and those persons, which do press the Grape,
must look their hands, feet and body be clean washed, when as they go to press^
the Grape, and that no woman be there having her terms. Neither ought ye to eat
any Chebols, Scalions, Onions, Garlike, Anniseeds, or such like: For all strong
savours, your Wine will draw the infection thereof, and as soon as your Grape
is cut and gathered, you may press your Wine very speedily, which will make
your Wine to be more pleasant and stronger, for the Grapes, which tarry long
unprest, make the Wine to be small and ill; ye must see that your Vessels be
new, and sw^et within, and to be washed with sweet water, and then well dried
again, and to perfume them with Mastick, and such sweet vapor, and if your
Vessel chance not to be sweet, then shall ye pitch him on the sides, which
pitch will take away all evil, and such stinking savor therein.

To prove or taste Wine.
ANd whenever ye will prove or taste any Wine, the best time is early in the
morning, and take with you three or four sops of bread, then dip one after
another into the Wine, for therein ye shall find (if there be any) sharp taste
of the Wine: Thus I leave (at this present) to speak any further here of the
Wine and Grape.

If this my simple labor be taken in good part (Gentle Reader) it shall the
more hereafter encourage me, to set forth another book more at large, touching
the Art of Planting and Graffing, with other things necessary to be known.

Here follows the best times how to order, choose, and to Set or Plant Hops.
diagram of planting schemes

IN this Figure ye shall understand the placing and making of Hop hills, by
every Cipher over his head. The first place is showed but one Pole set in the
midst, and the Hop beneath: The second shows how some do chop down a Spade
in the midst of the Hills, and therein lays his Hop roots. The third place
shows, how other some do set out one Pole in the midst, and the Hop roots
at holes put in round about. The fourth place shows how some chops in a Spade
cross in the top, and there lays in his roots. The fifth place shows, how
some do set four Poles therein and put the Hop round about the Hill. The sixth
place shows that some use to make cross holes in the sides, and there lays
^n the Hop roots, Thus many practices have been proved good: provided always
that your hills be of good fat earth, specially in the midst down unto the
bottom. This I thought sufficient to show by this figure, the diversity in
setting, whereof the laying of the Hop is counted the surest way.

THe best and common setting time of Hops, is from the midst of November, to
the midst of February, then must ye dig and cleanse the ground of weeds, and
mix it well with good mold and fat earth. Then divide your Hills a yard one
from another orderly, in making them a yard asunder, and two foot and a half
broad in the bottom, and when ye plant them, lay in every Hill three or four
Roots: Some do in setting of them lay them crosse-wise in the midst of the
Hill, and so cover them again: Some set the Roots in four parts of the Hill,
others likewise do make holes round about the Hills, and put of the Roots
therein, and so cover them again light with earth: of one short root in a year
ye may have many Plants, to set and lay as ye shall see it good, and it shall
be sufficient for every Plant to have two knots within the ground, and one
without, then some do chop a Spade cross into the Hill, and lay Hop in cross,
and so cover it.

To choose your Hop.
YE may choose your roots best for your Hop, in the Summer, before ye plant
them, for then ye shall see which bears the Hop, for some there is that brings
none, but that which bears choose for your Plants, and set of those in your
Hills, for so ye shall not be deceived and they shall prosper well.

To sow the Seeds.
SOme do hold, that ye may sow among other Seeds, the Seeds of Hops, and they
will increase and be good to set, or else to make beds, and sow them alone,
whereby they may increase to be set, and when they be strong, ye may remove and
set them in your Hills, and Plant them as the other before mentioned.

The setting your Poles.
THe best time is in April, or when your roots be sprung half a yard long or
more, then by every Plant or Hop in your Hills, set up a Pole of xiii. or xiv.
foot long, or thereabouts, as cause shall require. Some do use to set but four
Poles in every Hill, which is thought sufficient, and when ye shall set them,
s^e that ye set them so fast that great Winds do not cast them down.

How to proyn the Hop-tree.
Observe when the Hop does blossom, and knit in the top, which shall be
perceived to be the Hop, then take and cut up all the rest growing thereabouts
(not having Hop thereon) hard by the earth, that all those which carry the Hop
might be the better nourished: thus do in Summer as ye shall see them increase
and grow until the time of gathering.

To gather the Hop.
AT such time before Michaelmasse, as ye shall see your Hop wax brown or
somewhat yellow, then he is best to be gathered in a dry day, in cutting your
Hop by the ground, then pluck up your Pole therewish for shaking off your Hop;
so carry them into some dry house, when ye have so plucked them, lay them on
boarded ^ofts, or on hurdl^s of clothes, that the wind may dry them, and the
air, but not in the Sun, for the same will take away the strength thereof, nor
with fire, that will do the same, and ye must daily toss and turn them till
they be dry: to try them when they are dry, hold them in your hand a space, and
if they cleave together when ye open your hand, they are not then dry; but if
they shatter asunder in opening your hand, ye may be sure they are dry enough.
If not, let them remain, and use them as is before said. Ye shall understand
the dryness of them is, to preserve them long to last, but if need be, ye may
occupy them well undryed, with less portion to sow.

What Poles are best.
YE shall prepare your ^oles of such Wood as is light and stiff, and which
will not bow with every Wind, the best and meetest time to get them is in
Winter, when the Sap is gone down, and as soon as ye have taken off your Hop,
lay your Poles in sundry places until the next Spring, whereby they may endure
the longer.

How to order and dress your Hills.
AFfter the first year is past, your Hop being increased to more plenty of
roots in your Hills, ye shall after Michael^masse every year open your Hills,
and cast down the tops unto the roots, uncovering them, and cut away all the
superfluous roots, some do pluck away all the roots that spread abroad about
the Hills, then opens the Hills, and puts good new earth unto them, and so
cover them again, which shall keep them from the Frost, and also make the
Ground fat, so shall ye let them remain unto the Spring of the year in February
or March, then again if ye shall see any superfluous roots, ye may take them
away and cut them up, and your Hop shall be the better, then again cast up the
earth about your Hills, and cleansing them from all weeds and other roots,
which will take away their strength, if the herbs remain, so let them rest till
your Poles may be set therein,

Of Ground best for your Hop.
THe Hop delights, and loves a good and reasonable sat ground, not very
cold, nor yet too moist, for I have seen them prove well in Flanders, in dry
sandy fields, the Hop-hills being of good fat earth, ye may (as some say) for
great need make your Hop grow and bear on any kind of Rocky ground, so that
your hills be great and fat earth, but the lower ground commonly proves best,
so that it stand well and hot in the Sun.

A note of the rest abovesaid.
YE shall mark and understand, all this order abovesaid is to have many Hops
and good, with a few roots and Plants placed in a small plot of ground. Ye
shall understand, that wild Hops, which grow in the hedges, is as good to
occupy as the other to set or Plant in any other places, but look that ye take
not the barren Hop to Plant, some Hop will be barren for want of good earth,
and lack of good dressing, which ye shall perceive (as I have told you) in the
Summer before, that when they should bear, they will be barren, which is for
want of good fat earth, or an unkind year, or lack of weeding and good
ordering. Therefore such as are minded to bestow labor on the Ground, may have
as good Hop growing in this Country, as in other Countries: but if ye will not
go to that cost to make Hop-yards, ye may with a light charge have Hops grow in
your Hedge-rows, to serve as well as the other, and shall be as good for the
quantity as the other in all respects: ye may (for lack of ground plant Hop
roots in hedge-rows, when you do quick-set, set up poles by them, when time
shall require in the Spring, and bestow every Winter after the gathering your
Hop, on every hill head a shovel-full of Dung to comfort the earth, for then
they will bear the more plenty of Hops the next year following. To conclude,
you that have Grounds may well practice in all things before mentioned, and
specially to have Hops in this ordering for your selves, and others: also ye
shall give encouragement for others to follow hereafter, I have heard by
credible persons which have known a hundred Hills, (which is a small plat of
ground) to bear three hundred pounds of Hops, so that the commodity is much,
and the gains great: and one pound of our Hops dried and ordered, will go as
far as two po^nd ^f the best Hops that comes from beyond the Seas. Thus much I
thought meet and necessary to write, of the ordering and planting of the Hop.

How to pack your Hops.
WHen your Hops be well tossed and turned on boarded floores, and well dried,
(as I before have showed) ye may put them into great Sacks, according to the
quantity of your Hops, and let them be trodden down hard together, which will
keep their strength Ionger, and so ye may reserve them, and take at you^
pleasure, some do use (which have b^t small store) to tread them into dry
Fattes, and so serve them for their use, which is counted the better way, and
the less portion does serve, and will longer keep their virtue and strength.

Wishing long life and prosperous Health,
To all furtherers of this Commonwealth.
FINIS.
A PERFECT PLATFORM OF A HOP-GARDEN. And necessary Instructions for the making
and maintenance thereof, with Notes and Rules for reformation of all abuses
commonly practiced therein, very necessary and expedient for all men which in
any wise have to do with Hops.

PROVERBS. 11. Who so labors after goodness, finds his desire. LONDON,
Printed by T. Mabb, for William Shears, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door 1653.

A PERFECT PLATFORM OF A HOP Garden.
AT what time necessity, or any other good consideration shall move you to
devise for a Hop Garden, you are to consider of these three things.

First whether you have or can procure unto your self any Ground good for that
purpose.

Secondly, of the convenient standing thereof.

Thirdly of the quantity.

And this I say by the way, if the ground that you deal withal be not your own
inheritance, procure unto your self some certain term therein, left another
man reap the fruit of your travel and charge.

Of apt and unapt Ground for Hops.
SOme hold at this day (and ancient Writers witness the Virgil.
same) that earth being sa^t and bitter of taste, is neither good, nor apt to
be made good.

It is also often written, and generally received, that such earth as you shall
see white and bare, (that is to say) wholly chalk, or all sand, lacking a
mixture of perfect earth, or if it be clay, or so dry, as thereby it shall gape
or coane in the Didymus, Plinius.
Summer, it is naught for this, or any like purpose.

It is further said, that if you shall feel a clod (being dissolved with water)
to be very clammy or cl^aving like wax to your fingers in kneading it, the same
to be profitable land, etc.

I for my part rely not upon other men's opinions, neither mean to dispute with
any man herein, I like not to make my mouth an arbitrator in this matter, mine
ey may be deceived, and my feeling may err in the precise distinction of good
or bad land, but mine experience has never failed in this thing (that is to
say) that a barren, a moory or wet soil, (though it perhaps do content a wild
Hop) shall never please nor maintain a good Hop.

I will not say with Varro, that a good ground yields Walwoorts, nor with
Columella, that where Crabs or slows grow, there the ground is rich. I can say
nothing of Florentines experience in digging a hole, and filling it up again,
and by the swelling to judge the strength, or by the gaping to define the
weakness thereof; but I can say again by sure experience, that a dry ground,
if it be rich, mellow, and gentle, i^ the soil that serves best for this
purpose, and such a mould must either be sought out, or else by cost and labor
be provoked.

If it be a very shallow rock (except you raise it with greet or good earth)
you shall not set your Poles deep, steady, and fast enough to withstand the
force of the wind.

But to redress the inconvenience hereof, you shall be taught in the Title of
Poles.

A light mould (though it be very rich) is not very apt for this purpose, for
it is a received and an approved rule, that the heaviest ground will bear the
most weight of Hops, I say, so as it be a ground apt for this purpose.

Of the situation.
IT were good to place your Garden, so as the Sun may have free recourse into
it, either the whole day, or the greatest and warmest part thereof, so also as
it may be armed against the violence and contagion of the wind; but this I
could wish to be considered rather in the situation of the place, naturally
defended with hills, then artificially to be set and guard^d with Trees.
Howbeit if you be driven hereunto, provide so (if you can) that your Trees may
stand aloof, even that the shadow of them, reach not into your Garden, but in
any wise that they drop not upon the hills.

There be many which (to purchase the favor and benefit of the Sun) lay their
Gardens very open and bleak to the South, the which I would not wish to be
done, for as the forepart of the year admits into your Garden the cold
Easterly winds, whereby insues Frosts, the which ingenders Blasts, etc. So the
latter part of the year makes it subject to Southerly storms, which do much
annoy an Hop-Garden when the Poles are laden with Hops, and then commonly no
other wind hurts.

It should also be placed near to your house, except you be able to warrant the
fruit thereof from such fingers, as put no difference between their own, and
other men's goods.

Also your Garden being thus placed, there may be made thereunto the more
sp^edy and continual recourse, besides that the Masters eye does many times
withstand and prevent the Servants negligence.

By this means it may be with most ease and least charge helped with Dung.

Finally (if it may be) let it not stand bleak to the East, West, North, or
specially to the South.

Of the quantity.
THe quantity of your Garden, must either be measured by the proportion of your
yearly expenses of Hops in your house, or by the cost you mean to bestow in the
preparation and keeping thereof, or by the pains and business, that you are
disposed, or able to employ upon it, or else according to the profit and gains,
that you mean to levy and win by it, which later consideration pleases and
flattereth much a covetous man's conceit, whose vein or humor, (or rather vain
humor) is so resisted in the Rules appertaining hereunto, as many times the
greediness of his desire is the overthrow of his purpose, as shall hereafter
appear.

A proportion of the charge and benefit of a Hop-garden.
BUt to be resolved in all these points that concern the quantity of your
Garden, you must make your account in this wise. One man may well keep two
thousand hills, and yet reserve his Winters labor for any other purpose.

Upon every Acre you may erect seven, eight, or nine hundred hills, as
hereafter shall be declared.

Upon every hill well ordered, you shall have three pounds of Hops at the least.

Two pounds and a half of these Hops will largely serve for the brewing of one
quarter of Malt.

One hundred pounds of these Hops are commonly worth xxvi. Shillings viii.
pence. So as one Acre of ground, and the third part of one man's labor, with
small cost besides, will yield unto him that orders the same well, forty
Marks yearly, and that for ever.

And here is to be noted, that ground orderly used does not only yield the
more, greater, harder and weightier Hops, but also they go further, they will
endure longer, be wholsomer for the body, and pleasanter of verdure or t^ste,
than such as be disorderly handled. And in the savor of the Hop thus much more
I say, that whereas you cannot make above eight or nine gallons of indifferent
Ale out of one Bushel of Malt, you may draw xviii. or xx. Gallons of very
good Beer, neither is the Hop more profitable to enlarge the quantity of your
drink, then necessary to prolong the continuance thereof: For if your Ale may
endure a fortnight, your Beer through the benefit of the Hop shall connue a
month, and what grace it yields to the taste, all men may judge that have
sense in them, and if the controversy be betwixt Beer and Ale, which of them
two shall have the place of pre-eminence, it suffices for the glory and
commendation of the Beer, that here in our own Country Ale gives place unto
it, and that most p^rt of our Countrymen do abhor and abandon Ale, as a
loathsome drink, whereas in other Nations Beer is of great estimation, and of
strangers entertained as their most choice and delicate drink. Finally, that
Ale which is most delicate and of best account, borrows the Hop, as without
the which it wants his chief grace, and best verdure.

These things considered ye may proceed to the making of your Garden, wherein
you are yet to have counsel, for the laying out thereof, for the due season
and the right trade to cut and set Hop-roots, what choice ye shall make of
them, what charge ye shall be at for them, you are yet also to learn the time
when, and the way how to prepare your ground, and to make it able to entertain
and nourish them, to frame your Hills, to maintain them, pull them down, to cut,
to fashion, to erect, to pull up, to peserve your Poles, to gather, to dry, and
to pack your Hops, with many other circumstances necessarily appertaining
her^unto. Finally ye must be taught the reformation of many ^normities and
abuses which are received in most places for good rules, the (which God
willing) I will set forth truly according to the notes of exp^rience although
not learnedly after the rules of Rhetoric.

Of the Preparation of a Hop-Garden.
YOu must lay forth the Ground which you determine to employ in this way, in as
level, square, and uniform wise as you may.

If your Ground be grassie rough or stiff, it should de first sown with Hemp
or Beans, which naturally makes the ground mellow, destroys weeds, and
nevertheless leaves the same in good season for this purpose.

But in what plight, or state soever your ground be, till it in the beginning
of Winter with the Plough, if it be great, or with the Spade if it be small,
and this do not only the year before you Plant it, but every year after, even
so long as you mean to receive the uttermost commodity of your Garden, assuring
your self, that the more pains you take, and the more cost you bestow hereupon,
the more you do double your profit, and the nearer you resemble the Trade of
the Flemming.

Howbeit in some Cases these pains may be spared (that is to say) where the
mould is not deep, and the hill made both good and great, in this case (I say)
the hills being pulled down, the earth contained in them, will cover the whole
Garden, and all weeds growing therein, and the same will with help of dung
maintain your hill for ever.

The time to cut, and set Hop-roots.
IN the end of March, or in the beginning of April, repair to some good Garden
orderly kept, as wherein the Hops be all of a good kind, yearly cut and wherein
all the hills are raised very high, for there the roots will be greatest) then
compound with the owner or keeper thereof for choice roots, which in some
places will cost six pence an hundred, but commonly they will be given unto
you, so as you cut them your self, and leave every hill orderly and fully
dressed, but what order you shall use herein, I will hereafter show.

Rules for the choice and preparation of roots.
ANd now you must choose the biggest roots you can find (that is to say) such
as are in bigness three or four inches about.

And let every root which you shall provide to be set be nine or ten inches
long.

Let there be contained in every such root three joints.

Let all your roots be but the Springs of the year last past.

You must have great regard that you cumber not your Garden with wild Hops,
which are not to be discerned from the good by the roots, but either by the
fruit, or by the stalk.

Of the Hoppe.
THe kindly Hop bears a great and grene stalk, a large, hard, and a green
bell, it appears out of the ground naked without leaves, until it be half a
foot long.

Of unkindly Hopps.
THe Hop that likes not his entertainment, namely his seat, his ground, his
keeper, his dung, or the manner of his setting etc. comes up small and green
in stalk, thick and rough in leaves, very like unto a Nettle, which will
commonly be much devoured or much bitten with a little black fly, who also
will do harm unto good Hops, where the garden stands bleak, or the Hop
springs rath, but be not discomforted herewith, for the heat of the Summer
will reform this matter, and the latter Springs will be little annoyed with
this fly, who, though she leave the leaf as full of holes as a Net, yet she
seldom proceeds to the utter destruction of the Hop.

Of the wild Hop.
OF the wild Hop, the fruit is either altogether seed, or else loose and red
light bells, the ^^alk is red, howbeit, herein the difference between the good
and the bad Hop is not to be discerned, until the stalk be two or three yard
high, for at their first coming up, the one as well as the other appears red,
and the best Hop is always the most red.

Provide your roots therefore where you are assured of of their goodness
before hand.

Of setting of Hop-roots.
HAving made your provision of roots in this wise, return therewith to your
Garden speedily, and either set them immediately, or lay them in some Puddle
near thereunto, or bury them in the ground until convenience or wind,
weather, and leisure (the want whereof may sometimes prevent good expedition)
shall serve. Provided always that you leave them not in water puddle above
xxiv. hours, but in the earth you may leave them as long as the time of setting
endures, that is to say, till the midst of April.

Your Garden being dressed, as before I advised you, it shall be easy for you
to direct your hills aright, and that in equal distance with a Pole, or rather
with a line (that will not stretch) tying thereupon short threads, or placing in
it pins, according to the proportion of space which you mean to leave between
your hills, whereof if one be placed out of order, it shall blemish and hurt a
great part of your Garden.

The distance of the Hills.
IF your Garden be one Acre in bigness, and lie square, leave between every
hole three yards, or eight foot at the leaft in space, as well that the hills
may be made the greater, and that the Hops of one pole reach not to another, as
also that the Sun may the more freely, and universally pass through your
Garden, which by this means may yearly be ploughed betwixt the Hills, whereas
otherwise it must be dug, which is a more tedious and costly business.

If your Garden be very little, you may set the hills somewhat nearer together,
namely, seven foot asunder.

A description of the Line.
depiction of a plant-training line

YOur line being laid level, you must dig, underneath every thread or pin
placed upon the same, a hole like a Pitfall, one foot square, and one foot deep.

When you have made twenty or thirty holes, take up so many roots; from where
you bestowed them, as ought to be therein, and go to work on this wise, always
watching a time (if you may) that the wind be in some part of the South or
West, but be not so scrupulous herein, that you overslip the month of April,
least Salomons saying, be spoken of you. He that regards the Wind shall not
sow, and he that has respect to the Clouds shall not reap. For he that
neglects the Month of April, shall have a bad season to cut or plant Hops.

depiction of a plant-training line with four stages of growth

Take two or three of your roots (which by this time will yield forth green
Cions or white buds, and will also have small roots or beards growing out of
them, the which must be, all saving the smaller sort of white buds, pared away
by the old root) join them close together, so as (in any wise) they may be even
in the tops: set them also together bolt upright, directly under the foresaid
thread or pin, holding them hard together with one hand, while you fill the hole
with the other with fine mould prepared and made ready before hand, regarding
that the tops of the roots be level with the face or uppermost part of the
ground.

Take good heed also that you set not that end downward, that grew before
upward, which you shall know by the buds that appear in the knots of each root,
and let no part of the dead remain upon the uppermost part of the joint thereof.

And when you have thus done, press down the earth with your foot hard to the
roots, not treading upon them, but driving the loose earth close to the corner
where the roots are set.

And here is to be noted, that the readiest and evenest way is always to set
your roots at one certain corner of the hole, which corner should always be
right underneath the said pin or thread, as is aforeshewed.

At this time you must make no hill at all, but only cover the tops of your
roots about two inches thick, with the finest mould you can get.

When you are driven to set your roots late, if there be any green springs upon
them, you may take the advantage thereof, leaving the same spring uncovered,
otherwise you both destroy the spring, and endanger the root.

Abuses and disorders in setting,
SOme use to set at every corner of the hole one root, but this is a naughty
and tedious trade, because a man shall be longer in dressing one of these, than
about four other. To be short, you shall this way so cumber both your self and
your Garden, that you will soon be weary with working, and your Garden as soon
weary of bearing.

Some wind them and set both ends upward, and herein the cunning of the
workman, and the goodness of the roots are lively expressed, for if the roots
were good, they could not be so wound, or if the workman were skilful, he would
not be so fond as to set them in that order.

Some use to lay them thwart or flat, but I say flatly that is a praeposterous
way, for they can neither prosper well (as being set contrary to their nature,
and kind of growing) nor be kept as they ought to be.

Some use to make hills and set the roots therein, but the moisture in regard
of the hill, cannot administ^r succor to them, besides other inconveniences
which may follow.

Some bury the roots under a great hill made on them after the setting, this
differs not much from the other, only the hill so choaks these that they will
do no good.

Finally, there be as many evil ways to set, as there be ignorant men to
devise.

Provision against annoyance, and spoil of your Garden.
IF your Garden be small, and very nigh to your house, you may arm every hill
with a few thorns to defend them from the annoyance of Poultry, which many
times will scrape and bath amongst the hills, and so discover and hurt the
springs, but a Goose is the most noisome vermin that can enter into this
Garden, for (besides the Allegory that may be applied in this case) a Goose
will knabble upon every young science or Hop bud that appears out of the
ground, which will never grow afterward, and therefore as well to avoid the
Goose, as other noisome cattle, let your closure be made strong, and kept
tight.

Of Poles.
IT remains that I speak now of Poles, because Poling is the next work now to
be done.

If your hills be distant three yards asunder, provide for every hill four
poles, if you will make your hills nearer together, three poles shall suffice.

And note that in the first year you may occupy as many poles as in any year
after, the reason whereof I will declare in the title of Hills.

Alder poles are best for this purpose, as whereunto the Hops seem most
willingly and naturally to incline, because both the fashion of these poles
being as a Taper, small above, and great below, and also the roughness of the
Alder-ryne, stays the Hop stalk more firmly from sliding down, than either
Ash or Ok, which for continuance be somewhat better howbeit, these with the
order that I shall prescribe, will endure six or seven years.

These are also best cheap, and easiest to be gotten in most places, and
soonest grown ready for this purpose.

There is in the Spring of these, least danger in growing, or in being
destroyed, or bitten by cattle.

Finally, by the expense of these, there ensues the least annoyance to the
Commonwealth, as well for the causes aforesaid, as also because they grow not
in so great quantity, to so good timber, nor for so many purposes as either Oak
or Ash.

The best time to cut your poles, is between Alhallontide and Christmas, but
you must pile them up immediately after they are cut, sharped, reformed in
length, and smoothed, lest they rot before you occupy them.

You may not leave any scrags upon them, the reason whereof you shall conceive
in the Title of gathering Hops.

Your Poles may not be above xv. or xvi. foot long at the most, except your
ground be very rich, or that you added thereunto great labor in raising up
your hills, or else except your hills stand too near together: if any of these
chance to be, or if all these three things meet in one Garden, the best way of
reformation, is to set the fewer poles to a hill, or to let them remain the
longer. Otherwise the Hops will grow from one pole to another, and so
overshadow your Garden, the fault thereof being especially to be imputed to the
nearness of the hills. Therefore chiefly you must measure your poles by the
goodness of your ground.

Your Hop never stocketh kindly, until it reach higher than the Pole, and
return from it a yard or two, for whilst it tends climbing upward, the
branches, which grow out of the principal stalk (wherein consists the
abundance of increase) grow little or nothing.

Let the quantity of your Poles be great (that is to say) nine or ten inches
about the lower end, so shall they endure the longer, and withstand wind the
better.

To describe the price of poles, or what it will cost you to furnish a Garden
containing an acre of ground, it were a hard matter, because the place alters
the price of Wood. But in a Wain you may carry an hundred and fifty poles, and
I see small cause why a load of these should be much dearer than a load of any
other Wood.

After the first year Poles will be nothing chargeable unto you, for you may
either pick them out of your own provision of Fuel, or buy them of your
Neighbors that have no occasion to apply them this way. For the yearly supply
of two loads of Poles, will maintain one Acre continually.

Your rotten and broken Poles will do you good service, for the kindling of
your fires in the Oste, whereupon you should dry your Hops, and they should be
preserved chiefly for that purpose.

At Poppering (where both scarcity and experience has taught them to make
careful provision hereof) they do commonly at the East and North-side of their
Gardens, set and preserve Alders, wherewith they continually maintain them.

Before you set up your Poles, lay them all along your Garden between every
row of hills by three or four together, I mean beside every hill so many Poles
as you determine to set thereon, so shall you make the more speed in your work.

Of the erection of Poles.
WHen your Hops appear above the ground, so as you may discern where the
principal roots stand, set up your Poles, preparing their way with a crow of
Iron, or a forked wooden tool, with a point of Iron, somewhat like unto these.
depiction of planting tools For if you stay till the Hops be grown to a greater
length, one inconvenience is, that either in making the holes, or in erecting
the poles, or else in ramming the earth to the fastening of them, you shall
hazard the bruising or breaking of your Hops: another is, that you shall be
forced to tie every stalk to the pole, whereas otherwise the most part of them
will climb up of their own accord: the third is, that it will hinder the growth
of the Hop, if it remain unstayd so long.

You must ^et every Pole a foot and a half deep, and within two or three inches
at the most of the principal root.

If your ground be rockie and shallow, tarry the longer before you set up your
Poles, so as your Hops may be grown two or three foot high, that you may
adventure to make a hill or bank at every pole to stay uphold the same, without
burying any of the young Springs, which may afterward be covered with less
danger and annoyance of the principal root.

Let the Poles of every hill lean a little outward one from another.

Of Ramming of Poles.
THen with a piece of wood as big below as the great end of one of your poles,
ram the earth that lies at the outside of the Pole thereunto, but meddle not
within the compass of your Poles, as they are placed, lest you spoil the
Springs.

Of Reparation of Poles.
IF any of the Poles chance to break in many pieces, when the Hop is grown up,
undo and pull away the same broken pole, and tie the top of those Hops to the
top of a new pole, then winding it a turn or two about according to the course
of the Sun, set it in the hole, or besides the hole where the broken pole
stood, but some being loath to take so much pains, turn it about the other Poles
that stand upon the same hill, and so leave it. But if it be not broken above
the midst, the best way is, to set a new pole or stalk beside the broken pole
to the same, which may uphold the said broken pole, and preserve the Hop. If
the pole be only broken at the nether end, you may shove the said pole again
into the hill, and so leave it.

Of pulling up Poles.
ANd because, when the hills are made great, and raised high you can neither
easily pull up any, nor possible pull up all your poles except you break them,
etc. especially if the weather or ground be dry, or else the Poles old or
small, I thought good to show you an Instrument wherewith you may pull them up
without disease to your self, destruction to your Poles, or expense of your
money, the charge being duly foureteen or fifteen pound of Iron, wherewith the
Smith shall make you a pair of Tongs, (or rather you may call them) a pair of
Pinsers, of the fashion here set down, the which may also be made with wood, if
you think good.

depiction of gardening pincers or tongs

The way to make the Instrument wherewith to pull up the Hop-poles.
THey must be one yard in length, whereof six or seven inches may be allowed
for the mouth or lower end of them, which serves to clasp or catch hold on the
Pole, the same nether end should be the strongest part thereof, and the mouth
somewhat hollow in the midst, and there also bending downward, whereby the
extreme point may rise a little upward.

Upon the upper edges of the infide thereof, the Smith should hack or raise a
few small teeth, whereby your tool may take the surer hold upon the Pole.

He must also fasten upon every side of this Instrument a riding hook, the
which may clasp and stay both sides together, when they have caught hold on the
pole.

The manner of pulling up the Hop-poles.
YOu shall lay a little square block upon the top of the hill, and the better
to remove the same from hill to hill, you may thrust therein a Pin. Upon the
same block you may rest your Pinsers, when they have clasped the very lowest
part of your Pole, and then holding the upper part of each side in your hands,
the hook being clasped, and pulled up hard toward you, you may easily weigh up
your Poles.

Of the preservation of Poles.
ANd although ye are not come to the laying up of Poles, I am bold herein, as I
began too late, so to make an end too quickly, because I would touch the whole
matter of Poles to^ether, laying them by themselves, (I mean) comprehending
under one Title, the business pertaining unto them.

For the preservation and better continuance of Poles, some make houses of
purpose, and lay them up therein.

Some set them upright to a Tree, and over them make a penthouse of boughs or
boords.

Some lay a great heap of Hop-stalks upon the Ground, and upon them a great
heap of Pol^s, and upon the Poles again lay another heap of stalks, etc.

These men hereby do ex^resse no great experience, although by their diligence
they signify a good desire.

You shall need to do no more but thus. At the ends or sides of your Garden,
take three Poles standing upon three Hills, placed directly one by another, and
three like Poles upon three other hills of the next row right over against
them, constrain them to meet together by two, and two in the tops, and so hold
them, till one with a forked wand put three withs (lik unto three Broom bands,
which may be made of the stalks of Hops) upon each couple of the said six
Poles, so shall the same six Poles being so bound by two and two together,
stand like the roof or rafters of an house.

To keep the Poles that shall lie nether most from rotting by the moistness of
the ground: within the compass of your said six hills, underneath the Poles
that you have fastened together in the tops,) raise three little banks cross
or thwart from hill to hill, as though you would make your six hills to be but
three.

Upon those banks lay a few Hop-stalks, and upon them your Poles, observing
that one stand at one end of the room, and another at the other end, ordering
the matter so, as the tops of the Poles lie not all one way, but may be equally
and orderly divided: otherwise one end of the room would be full before the
other, whereas now they will lie even and sharp above like an hay-stack, or the
ridge of an house, and sufficiently defend themselves from the weather.

If you think that you have not Poles enough to fill the room, pull down the
withs or bands lower, and your room will be less, and do this before you lay
in your Poles.

Of tying Hops to the Poles.
WHen your Hops are grown about one or two foot high, bind up (with a Rush or
Grass) such as decline from the Poles, winding them as often ye can about the
said Poles, and directing them always according to the course of the Sun, but
if your leisure may serve (to do at any other time of the day) do it not in the
morning when the dew remains upon them.

If you lay soft green Rushes abroad in the dew and the Sun, within two or
three days, they will be lithi, tough, and handsome for this purpose of tying,
which may not be foreslowed, for it is most certain that the Hop, that lies
long upon the ground before he be tied to the Pole, prosp^reth nothing so well,
as it which sooner attaineth thereunto.

Of Hilling and Hills.
NOw you must begin to make your hills, and for the better doing thereof, you
must prepare a tool of Iron fashioned somewhat like to a Coopers Adds, but not
so much bowing, neither so narrow at the head, and therefore likest to the
nether part of a shovell, the poll whereof must be made with a round hole to
receive a helve, like to the helve of a mattock, and in the powl also a nail
hole must be made to fasten it to the helve.

This helve should bow somewhat like to a Sith, or to the steal of a Sith,
and it must be little more than a yard long.

depiction of a hill-making tool The helve should be straight at the upper end.



With this tool you may pare away the grass, which grows in the spaces
betwixt the hills, and with the same also you may take your hills, and pull
them down when time requires.

Some think it impertinent and not necessary to make hills the first year,
partly because their distrust of this years profit qualifieth their diligence
in this behalf, and partly for that they think, that the principal root
prospers best, when there be no new roots of them forced and maintained. But
experience confuteth both these conjectures, for by industry, the first years
profit will be great, and thereby also the principal sets much amended, as
their prosperity in the second year will plainly declare.

But in this work, you must be both painful and curious, as wherein confisteth
the hope of your gains, and the success of your work. For the greater in
quantity you make your hills, the more in number you shall have of your Hops,
and the fewer weeds on your ground, the more Hops upon your poles.

In confideration whereof I say, your labor must be continual from this time
almost till the time of gathering, in raising your hills, and clearing ground
from weeds.

In the first year that you plant your Hop-Garden, suppress not one Cion, but
suffer them all to climb up to the poles, for if you should bury or cover all
the Springs of any one of your three roots, which you did lately set, the root
thereof perishes, and perhaps out of some one root there will not proceed
above one or two springs, which being buried, that root I say dies, and
therefore the more poles are at this time requisite.

After the first year you must not suffer above two or three stalks at the most
to grow up to one pole, but put down and bury all the rest.

Howbeit you may let them all grow till they be four or five foot high at the
least, whereby you shall make the better choice of them which you mean to
attain, whereby also the principal root will be the better, etc.

Some suffer their Hops to climb^ up to the tops of the poles, and then make
the hills at one instant in such quantity as they mean to leave them, which is
neither the best, nor the second way.

But if (for expedition) you be driven hereunto, begin sooner (that is to say)
when the Hops be four or five foot long, and afterward, if leisure shall
serve, refresh them again with more earth.

But to make them well, and as they ought to be made, you must immediately
after your poles are set, make a little bank or circle round about the outside
of them, as a dimension how wide your hill shall be, and as a receptacle to
retain and keep moisture, whereof there cannot lightly come too much, so it
come from above.

If your Garden be great, by that time that you have made an end of these
Circles or Banks, it will be time to proceed further toward the building up of
your hills,

Now therefore return again to the place where you began, or else where you see
the Hops highest, and with your tool pare off the uppermost earth from the
Allies or spaces between the hills, and lay the same in your Hops, upon and
within the circle that you made before, always leaving the same highest of any
part of the hill, and so pass through your Garden again and again, till you
have raised your hills by little and little, to so great a quantity as is
before declared, and look how high your hill is, so long are your new roots,
and the greater your new roots or springs be, the larger and better your Hops
will be

Great and overgrown weeds should not be laid upon the hills, as to raise them
to their due quantity, but when with diligence and expedition you pass through
your Garden, continually paring away each green thing as soon as it appears,
you shall do well with the same, and the uppermost mold of your Garden
together, to maintain and increase the substance of your hills, even till they
be almost a yard high.

In the first year make not your hill too rathe, left in the doing thereof you
oppress some of those springs which would otherwise have appeared out of the
ground.

It shall not be amiss now and then to pass through your Garden, having in
each hand a forked wand, directing aright such Hops as decline from the Poles,
but some instead of the said forked wands, use to stand upon a stool, and do it
with their hands.

Abuses in Hilling
SOme observe no time, and some no measure in making their hills, but (having
heard say, that hills are necessary) they make hills once for all, and never
after pluck down the same: but better it were to make no hill, than so to do,
for after the first year it does derogate, and not add any comfort to the
root, except the same be every year new made and dressed, etc.

Some use to break off the tops of the Hops when they are grown a xi. or xii.
foot high, because thereby they burnish and stock exceedingly, wherein, though
I cannot commend their doings, yet do they much better than such as will have
their Poles as long as their Hops.

But if your Pole be very long, and that the Hop have not attained to the top
thereof before the midst of July, you shall do well then to break, or cut off
the top of the same Hop, for so shall the residue of the growing time serve to
the maintenance and increase of the Branches, which otherwise would expire
without doing good in that matter, because that whole time would be then
employed to the lengthening of the stalk which little prevails (I say) to the
stocking or increase of the Hop.

And here is to be noted, that many covetous men, thinking (in have) to enlarge
their luere, do find (at leisure) their commodity diminished, whilst they make
their hills too thick, their Poles too long, and suffer too many stalks to grow
upon one Pole, wherein (I say) while they run away flattering themselves with
the imagination of double gains, they are overtaken with trebble damage (that
is to say) with the loss of their time, their labor, and their cost.

Of the gathering of Hops.
NOte that commonly, at St. Margarets day, Hops blow, and at Lammas they bell,
but what time your Hops begin to change color, (that is to say) somewhat
before Michaelmasse (for then you shall perceive the seed to change color and
wax brown) you must gather them, and for the speedier dispatch thereof, procure
as much help as you can, taking the advantage of fair weather, and note that
you were better to gather them too rathe than too late.

To do the same in the readiest and best order, you must pull down your hills
standing together in the midst of your Garden, cut the roots of all those
hills, as you shall be taught in the Title of Cutting, etc. Then pare the Plat
small, level it, throw water on it, tread it, and sweep it, so shall it be a
fair Floor, whereon the Hops must lie to be picked.

Then beginning near unto the same, cut the stalks asunder, close by the tops
of the hills, and if the Hops of one Pole be grown fast unto another, cut them
also asunder with a sharp Hook, and with a forked staff take them from the
Poles.

You may make the Fork and Hook (which cutteth asunder the Hops that grow
together) one apt instrument to serve both these turns.

Then may you with your forked and, thrust up, or shove off all such stalks as
remain upon each Hop-pole, and carry them to the Floor prepared for that
purpose.

For the better doing hereof, it is very necessary that your poles be straight
without serags or knobs.

In any wise cut no more stalks then you shall carry away within one hour or
two at the most, for if in the mean time the Sun shine hot, and it happen to
rain, the Hops (remaining cut in that sort) will be much impaired thereby.

Let all such as help you stand round about the Floor, and suffer them not to
pingle in picking one by one, but let them speedily strip them into Baskets
prepared ready therefore.

It is not hurtful greatly, though the smaller Leaves be mingled with the
Hops, for in them is retained great virtue, insomuch as in Flanders they were
sold Anno Domini 1566 for xxvi. shillings viii. pence the Hundred, no one Hop
being mingled with them.

Remember always to clear your Floor twice or thrice every day, and sweep it
clean at every such time, before you go to work again.

If the weather be unlike to be fair, you may carry these Hops into your house
in Blankets or Baskets, etc. and there accomplish this work. Use no Linen
hereabouts, for the Hops will stain it so, as it can never be washed out.

If your poles be seraggy, so as you cannot strip the stalks from them in this
order, you must pull them up with main force before the Hops be gathered, and
this is painful to your self, hurtful to your Hops, and a delay to your work.

Then must you lay these poles upon a couple of forked stalks driven into the
ground, being two or three yards distant one from another, as Spits upon
Ranges, and so dispatch this business, if the weather be fair, if it be like
to be foul, you must be fain to carry the Hops together with the pole into your
Barn or house, that they may not take wet, and so be made useless.

In any wise let not the Hops be wet when you cut them from the hills, neither
make any delay of gathering after the same time of cuttings, for in standing
abroad they will shed their seed, wherein consists the chief virtue of the
Hop, and hereof I cannot warn you too often, nor too earnestly.

Now by order I should declare unto you the manner of drying your Hops, but
because I must therewithal describe the places meet for that purpose, with
many circumstances appertaining thereunto, I will be bold, first to finish the
work within your Hop-Garden, and then to lead you out of the same, into the
place where you must dry your Hops, etc.

When your Hops are gathered, as soon as you have leisure, take up your Poles
and pile them (that remain good) as I have showed you in the Title of Poles.

Then carry out your broken Poles, and your Hop-straw to the fire.

Now may you depart out of your Garden, till the March following, except in the
mean time you will bring in dung, or good earth to the maintenance thereof,
toward the heightning of your hills, or else will plow it, etc.

What there is to be done in Winter herein.
TO be curious in laying dung upon the hills in Winter, as to comfort or warm
the roots (as some do) it shall be needless, rather pluck down the hills, and
let the roots lie bare all the Winter season, and this is usually done where
^ops are best ordered, especially to restrain them from too rathe springing,
which is the cause of blasts, and many other inconveniences.

If the ground be great that you keep, you shall be driven so to do, otherwise
you shall not be able to overcome your work in due time.

In any case you must avoid new horse-dung as a very noisome and pernicious
things for your Hops.

Stall dung is the best that can be wished for to serve this turn, so it be
thoroughly rotten.

Rather use no dung than unrotten dung about the dressing of your Hops, but
omit not to bring into your Garden dung, that may there be preserved till it be
good or needful to be used.

When and where to lay dung
ABout the end of April (if your ground be not rich enough) you must help every
hill with a handful or two of good earth, not when you cut your roots, for
then it will rather do harm than good, but when the Hop is wound about the
pole, then should you do it.

The order for reforming your ground.
IN March you may return to your Garden, and find it replenished with weeds,
except by tillage, etc. you have prevented that matter already. It must, (as
well therefore because the earth may be more fine, rich, and easy to be
delivered unto the hills) be dug over or plowed, except in the case mentioned.

The order of cutting Hop roots.
WHen you pull down your hills, (which if you have not already done, you must
now of necessity go about to do) you should (with your Garden tool) undermine
them round about, till you come near to the principal roots, and then take the
upper or younger roots in your hand, and shake off the earth, which earth being
again removed away with your said tool, you shall discern where the new roots
grow out of the old Sets.

In the doing hereof, be careful that you spoil not the old Sets, as for the
other roots which are to be cut away, you shall not need to spare them to the
delay of your work, except such as you mean to set.

Take heed that you uncover not any more than the tops of the old Sets in the
first year of cutting.

At what time soever you pull down your hills, cut not your roots before the
end of March, or in the beginning of April, and then remember the wind.

In the first year (I mean) at the first time of cutting and dressing of your
roots, you must (with a sharp knife) cut away all such roots or springs as grew
the year before out of your Sets, within one inch of the same.

Every year after you must cut them as close as you can to the old roots, even
as you see an Osiers head cut.

There grows out of the old Sets certain roots, right downwards, not joynted
at all, which serve only for the nourishing and comfort of those Sets or
principal roots, which are not to be cut off. There be other like unto them
growing outward at the fides of the Sets. If these be not met withal, and cut
asunder, they will cucumber your whole Garden.

Because it may seem hard to discern the old Sets from the new springs, I
thought good to advertise you how easy a thing it is to see the difference
thereof; for first you shall be sure to find your Sets where you did set them,
nothing increased in length, but somewhat in bigness enlarged, and in few
years all your Sets will be grown into one, so as by the quantity that thing
shall plainly appear: and lastly the difference is seen by the color, the old
root being red, the other white, but if the hills be not yearly pulled down,
and the roots yearly cut, then indeed the old Sets shall not be perceived from
the other roots.

If your Sets be small, and placed in good ground, and the hill well
maintained, the new Roots will be greater than the old.

If there grow in any hill a wild Hop, or whenever the stalk waxes red, or
when the Hop in any wise decays, pull up every root in that hill, and set new
in their places, at the usual time of cutting and setting, or if you list, you
may do it when you gather Hops with the roots which you cut away, when you make
your picking place.

Of diverse men's follies.
Many men seeing the springs so forward, as they will be by this time, are loath
to lose the advantage hereof, and more unwilling to cut away so many goodly
roots, but they that are timorous in this behalf, take pity upon their own
profit, and are like unto them that refrain to lay dung upon their Corn land,
because they will not beray it with so uncleanly a thing.

And some that take upon them great skill herein, think that for the first year
they may be left unhilled and uncut, etc. deceiving themselves with this
conceit, that then the Sets prosper best within the ground, when they send
least of their nature and state out of the ground. In this respect also they
pull away or suppress all such Springs (as soon as they appear) which grow
more, and besides them which they mean to assign to each Pole, as though when a
man's finger were cut off, his hand would grow the greater. Indeed if there be
no hill maintained, then the more Springs are suffered to grow out from the
principal root, the more burden and punishment it will be to the same. But
when the Springs are maintained with a hill, so much as remains within the
same is converted into roots, which rather add than take away any state from
the principal root, in consideration hereof, the suppressing of the Springs
may not be too rathe, for whatsoever opinion be hereof received, the many
Springs never hurt the principal root, if the the hills be well maintained,
but it is the cumbring and shadowing of one to another, that works the
annoyance.

When you have cut your Hops, you must cover them as you were taught in the
Title of Setting, and proceeding according to the order already set down.

Of disorder, and maintainers thereof.
SOme there be that despise good order, being deceived with a show of increase,
which sometime appears in a disordered ground, to them I say, and say it
truly, that the same is a bad and a small increase in respect of the other.

I say also, that although disorderly doings at the first may have a
countenance of good success, yet in few years the same, and all hope thereof
will certainly decay.

Some others there be that despise good order, satisfying themselves with this,
that they have sufficiently to serve their own turn, without all these
troubles, and surely it were pity that these should be troubled with any great
abundance, that in contempt of their own profit, and of the Commonwealth,
neglect such a benefit preferred unto them.

Of an Oste.
NOw have I showed unto you the perfect Platform of a Hop-Garden, out of the
which I led you for a time, and brought you in again when time required, and
there would I leave you about your business, were it not to show you by
description such an Oste as they dry their Hops upon at Poppering, with the
order thereof, etc. Which for the small charges and trouble in drying, for the
speedy and well drying, and for the handsome and easy doing thereof, may be a
profitable pattern, and a necessary instruction for as many as have, or shall
have to do herein.

Of the several rooms for an Oste.
FIrst a little house must be built of length xviii. foot or xix. foot, of
wideness eight, wherein must be comprehended three several rooms.

The middle and principal room must be for your Oste, eight foot square. The
fore part, which is to contain your dried Hops, will fall out to be five foot
long, and eight foot wide a piece.

The chief matters that are to be by me described herein, are the Furnace
below, wherein the fire is to be made, and the bed above, whereon the Hops
mustly to be dried: this I have chiefly to advise you of, that you build the
whole house, and every part thereof as close as you can, and to place it near
to your Garden, for the better expedition of your work, and somewhat distant
from your house to avoid the danger of fire.

Of the Furnace or Keel.
THe Floor or nether part of your furnace must be about thirteen inches wide.

The depth or height thereof must be thirty inches.

The length of it must be about six or seven foot (that is to say) reaching
from the fore part of the Oste almost to the further end thereof, so as there
be left no more room but as a man may pass between the wall and the end of it.

It must be made wide below, and narrow above, fashioned in outward shape
somewhat like to the roof of an house.

It must have three rows of holes at each side, the length of one Brick
asunder, and the bigness of half a Brick, placed checkerwise. Before you begin
to make your holes, you should lay two rows of Brick, and when your three ranks
of holes are placed upon them, you must lay again over them another row of
Brick, and upon the same you must place your last and highest course, and they
must stand longwise (as it were a tiptoe) the tops of the Bricks meeting
together above (the nether part of them resting upon the uppermost course) and
note that till then, each side must be built along directly upward.

You should leave almost a foot space between the mouth of your Furnace, and
your rows of holes, especially of that row which is nethermost.

The further or hinder end of your Furnace, the which is opposite to the mouth
thereof, must be built flat with an upright wall, and there must be holes also
left as at the sides.

The Furnace in the top, (I mean from the upper course of holes) must be dawbed
very well with mortar.

And so upon the top of your Furnace there will remain a gutter, (whereupon
Flemmimgs use to bake Apples, etc.) and the highest part thereof will reach
within two foot and less of the Oste.

Finally, it must be placed upon the ground in the midst of the lower Floor
of the Oste, which Floor must be made diagram of the back of a furnace The
hinder most part or Further end of the Furnace
diagram of the side of a furnace One side of the Furnace.
diagram of the front of a furnace The mouth and forepart of the Furnace.
very perfect, fine and level, the reason whereof you shall perceive in the
Title of drying.

Of the bed or upper floor of the Oste, whereon the Hope must be dried.
THe bed or upper floor, whereon your Hops shall lie to be dried, must be
placed almost five foot above the nether floor whereon the Furnace stands.

The two walls at each side of the house, serve for the bed to rest upon two
ways.

Now must two other walls be built at each end of your Oste, whereon the other
two parts of the bed must rest, and by this means shall you have a close square
room beneath, betwixt the lower floor and the bed, so as the floor below shall
be as wide as the bed above.

These two walls must also be made four foot above the bed (that is to say)
about nine foot high.

At the one end below, besides the mouth of the Furnace, you must make a little
door into the room beneath the bed. At the other end above the bed you must
make a Window to shove off from the bed the dried Hops, down into the room
below prepared for them.

The bed should be made as the bed of any other Oste, saving that the Rails or
Laths, which serve thereto, must be sawn very even one inch square, and laid
one quarter of an inch asunder. But there may be no more beams to stay the
Laths but one, and the same must be laid flat and not on edge, in the midst
from one end of the room to the other, and the Laths must be let into the same
beam, so as the upper side of the beam, and all the Laths may lie even.

If your Garden be very great, you may build your house somewhat larger, namely
xxii. foot long, and ten foot broad, and then you must make in this Oste two
Furnaces, three or four foot asunder, placing the door betwixt them both,
otherwise in all points like to that which I first described, and diagram of
the interior of an oast house or hop kiln The window pointed unto may not stand
below in the nether room, but above as is before declared.

the groundwork hereof is to set out here, that any Carpenter will easily
frame the whole house by the same Figure.

And now once again wishing you to make every door, Window and joint of this
house close, I will leave building, and proceed to the drying of Hops, saving
that I may not omit to tell you, that you should either build all the walls of
this Room with Brick, or else with Lime and Hair pargit them over: and at the
least that wall wherein the mouth of the Furnace stands, be made of Brick.

And although I have delayed you from time to time; and brought you from place
to place, and tediously led you in and out, to and fro in the demonstration
hereof, yet must I be bold to bring you round about again, even to the place
where I left you picking, from whence you must speedily convey your picked Hops
to the place built and prepared for them, and with as much speed hasten the
driyng of them.

The orderly drying of Hope.
THe first business that is to be done herein, is to go up to the bed of the
Oste, and there to receive baskets filled with Hops, at the hands of one that
stands below.

Then beginning at the further end (left you should tread on them) lay down
Basketfull by Basketfull, till the floor or bed be all covered, always
stirring them even and level, with a Cudgel, so as they may lie about a foot
and a half thick, and note that upon this Oste, there is no Oste-cloth to be
used.

Now must you come down to make your fire in the Furnace, for the kindling
whereof your old broken Poles are very good, howbeit for the continuance and
maintenance of this fire, that wood is best which is not too dry, and somewhat
great.

Your Hopstalks or any other straw is not to be used herein.

You shall not need to lay the wood through to the further end of your Furnace,
for the fire made in the forepart thereof, will bend that way, so as the heat
will universally and indifferently ascend and proceed out of every hole.

You must keep herein a continual and hot fire, Howbeit you must stir it as
little as you can.

Neither may you stir the Hops that lie upon the Oste, until they be thoroughly
dried.

When they are dry above, then they are ready to be removed away, and yet
sometimes it happens, (that through the disorderly laying of them) they are
not so soon dry in one place, as they are in another.

The way to help that matter, is to tak a little Pole (wherewith you shall
senfibly feel and perceive which be, and which be not dry, by the rattling of
the Hops which you shall therewith touch) and with the same Pole to turn-aside
such Hops as be not dry, abating the thickness to the moist place.

When your Hops are dry, rake up the fire in such sort, as there may be no
delay in the renewing thereof.

Then with exp^dition shove them out of the Window before mentioned into the
room prepared to receive them, with a Rake fashioned like a Cole-rake, having
instead of teeth a board, etc.

This being done, go down into the lower Floor, and sweep together such Hops
and seeds, as are fallen thereinto, and lay them up among the dried Hops, and
then without delay cover the bed again with green Hops, and kindle your fire.

Lay your dried Hops on a heap together till they be cold, and by this means
such as were not perfectly dried through some disorder upon the Oste, shall now
be reformed.

If they have been well ordered, they will now be brown, and yet bright.

If they be black and dark, it is a note that they are disordered.

The Flemmings pack them not up before they sell them to to the Merchant, but
lay them in some corner of a Loft, where they tread them close together.

Other ways of drying not so good.
SOme use to dry their Hops upon a common Oste, but that way there can be no
great speed in your work, nor small expense of your wood, besides the danger of
fire and ill success of your doings.

On this Oste you must have an Oste cloth, otherwise the Seed and Hops that
fall down shall not only perish, but endanger the burning of your Oste.

Upon this Oste you may not lay your Hops above eight or nine inches thick,
which nevertheless shall not be so soon dry, as they which lie upon the other
Oste almost two foot thick, and therefore this way you shall make more toil in
your work, more spoil in your Hops, and more expense in your wood.

Some use to dry their Hops in a Garret, or upon the floor of a Loft or
Chamber, in the reproof whereof I must say, that as few men have room enough in
their houses to contain any great quantity or multitude of Hops, so the dust
that will arise shall empair them, the chinks, crevises, and open joints of
your Lofts, being not close byrthed, will devour the seeds of them. in the end
the Leaves will endanger them with heating, when they are packt, as being not
so soon dry as the Hops, which thereby will be utterly spoiled in color, in
scent and in verdure.

As for any low rooms or earthen floors, they are yet worse for this purpose
than the other, for either they yield dust in dryness, or moisture in wet
weather.

And therefore if you have no Oste, dry them in a Loft as open to the air as
may be: sweep, wash and rub the boards, and let your Broom reach to the walls,
and even to the roof of your Loft, for I can teach you no way to divide the
dust from your Hops, but so to prevent the inconvenience hereof.

Stop the holes and chinks of your floor, lay them not above half a foot thick,
and turn them once a day at the least, by the space of two or three weeks.

This being done, sweep them up into a corner of your Loft, and there let them
lie as long more, for yet there remainneth peril in packing of them.

If the year prove very wet, your Hops ask the longer time of drying, and
without an Oste will never be well dried.

The very worst way of drying Hops.
SOme lay their Hops in the Sun to dry, and this takes away the state of the
Hoppes, contrary to the purpose of drying, which is very prejudicial to the
Brewer.

Of not Drying.
SOme gather them, and brew with them being green and undryed, supposing that
in drying the virtue and state of the Hop d^cayeth and fades away, wherein
they are deceived: for the verdure is worse, the strength less, and the
quantity must be more of green Hops, that are to be brewed in this sort.

In the first wort, which the Brewers call the Hop-wort (because the time of
seething thereof is short) there goes out of these Hops almost no virtue at
all, and therefore experience has taught them that are driven to brew with
these green Hops, to sees them again in the wort, which they call Ney-beere,
where after long seething they will leave the state which remains in them,
and that is not much.

Of the packing of Hops.
IN the making of your Hop-sacks, use your own cunning or invention, for I have
small skill therein, Howbeit I can tell you, that the Hop-sacks which are
brought out of Flanders, may be good Samplers for you to work by, the stuff is
not dainty where with they are made, the Loom is not costly wherein they are
woven, the cunning not curious whereby they are fashioned, but when you have
them, and are ready to pack your Hops, do thus.

Thrust into the mouth of your Sack (which must be doubled and turned in
strongly lest it break) four strong pinnes, a foot long a piece, placed in
equal distance the one from the other, then lay two Bats, or big Poles cross
or thwart two beams or couplings of your house, which two Bats mustly no
further asunder than the wideness^ of the Sacks mouth. Fasten upon each pin a
Rope, and knit two of those Ropes upon each cross Bat, so as the bottom of
the Sack being empty, may hang within half a foot of the floor, then stand
within the Sack, and receive the Hops, treading down very hard, and before the
Sack be half full, it will rest upon the ground, whereby you shall be able to
press them the harder together.

But the handsommer way were to make a square hole (as wide as the Sacks mouth)
in the floor of the loft, where your Hops lie, and to hang down your Sack at
that hole, and with a Scuppet or shovell to shove down your Hops thereinto, and
to receive them as is aforesaid: when the Sack is almost full, undo the Ropes,
and wind those pinnes about for the harder shutting of the Sack, and fasten
them therein.

If you please, you may sow (over the mouth of this Sack) another piece of
Sackcloth, whereof you must leave a little unsowed, until you have thrust as
many Hops as you can between the Sack and the same, but in beholding the
Hopsacks sent from Poppering, you shall better understand and learn the doings
hereof.

For your own provision, you may preserve them in Dryfats, Barrells, or such
like vessels, for want of room to leave them in, or Sacks to pack them in.

There is according to the Proverb, much falsehood in packing, I am unskillfull
in that Art, If I were otherwise, I would be loath to teach such dctorine.

But to avoid such deceit, and to make the more perfect and better choice, it
is usual and lawful in most places, where Hops are sold, to cut the Sack that
you mean to buy, in seven or eight places, and to search at each place, whether
the Hops be of like goodness.

Such places as you shall feel with your hand to be softer than the rest, you
should specially cut, where perhaps you shall find Hops of another kind, elder
or worse than the rest.

The reformation of a Garden of wild-Hops.
TO reform a Garden where the Hops be wild, the work is tedious, and none other
way remains, but to dig over the same with a Spade, so deep as you may search
out and throw out every root, and piece of Root that may be found in, or near
thereunto, and then to plant according to the order before declared.

The reformation of a disordered Garden.
TO repair a ruinous Garden, which through ignorance was disorderly set, and
through sloth suffered to overrun and decay, where nevertheless, the Hops
remain of a good kind (though somewhat empaired, as they must needs be by this
mean) the very best way were to do as to the wild Hop.

The second way is to forget that it is disordered at all, imagining that all
were well, and to set your Poles in such order and so far asunder, as is
prescribed in that Title, always directing them right with a line, so as a
stranger beholding them, may suppose that your Garden is kept after the best
manner, then lead unto each Pole two or three stalks, which you shall find
nearest thereunto, and there erect a hill which you may ever after cut and
dress according to the rules before declared, and so by continual digging,
paring, and diligence, you may at last bring it to some reasonable perfection.

If your Garden be very much matted with roots, so asit be too tedious to
dig, set your Poles as you are already taught, and bring into your Garden,
and lay near to every such place, where you mean to make a hill, one Cart load
of good earth, with the which, after your Hops are tied to your Poles, begin to
make your hill, and proceed as in the Title of hills, always cutting down such
Hops or weeds as grow between the said hills.

If your root be set orderly, and your hills made accordingly, and yet left
undressed by the space of two or three years, it will be very hard (I say) to
discern the Sets from the other later roots: nevertheless if your ground be
good, you may yet reform the inconvenience thereof, namely, by pulling down the
hill, and cutting away all the roots contained therein, even with the face or
upper part of the earth, searching also each side, and digging yet lower, and
round about the root which remains, and to take away from the same all such
roots as appear out thereof.

Needless curiosities used by the unskilful.
TO water your Garden, as to make the roots grow the better, it were more
tedious then needful, for the hilling thereof serves for that purpose, and
there is time of growing sufficient for them betwixt the midst of April and
August; and yet it never hurts, but rather does good, if it be before the
hill be made.

To pluck off the Leaves, to the end that the Hops may prosper the better, is
also needless, and to no purpose, and rather hinders than helps the growth
of the Hops, for they are hereby deprived of that garment which Nature has
necessarily provided for them, and clothed them with.

To flaw the Poles, thereby to prolong their continuance, is more than needs
to be done in this behalf, for it is too tedious to your self, and hurtful to
your Hop, and little available to the purposes aforesaid.

To burn the nether part or great end of your Poles, as some do, to the end
they should last or endure the longer, is also an unnecessary trouble, only
Willow-Poles you may so use, to keep them from growing.

So is it to weed the hills with the hand, whereas the same weeds shall be
buried by the raising of the hill.

THus have you a brief and short Description of the Platform of a Hop-Garden:
what ground is fit for them, as also the Situation thereof, with the
Proportion of ground a man may employ about Hops, which may either be according
to his own expending in his own private Family, or else according to the charge
which he intends to bestow about it, either of which will be well
recompensed, if Gods blessing go along with the pains and industry of the
Husbandman: for whose direction in the managing of his work, this small
Treatise was compiled: for besides the Platform, fitness or unfitness of the
Ground, etc. here. in you may learn how to choose, and set your Roots: the
distance of the Hills one from another; the number of Hop-poles, which you are
to set about each hills: in conclusion your Hops being come to perfection, the
manner of gathering, drying and packing them up that they may continue long,
and keep sweet. No man ever wrote more fully concerning the ordering of Hops
from the first setting them into the Ground, until the drying, and laying them
up for store, than this Author has done, none with more brevity.

The Husbandmans due observation of these Directions is required, and without
question he cannot fall short of his expectation.

Here follow certain directions for the Sowing, Planting and Transplanting of
TABACO.
I Intend to write but sparingly of this subject (through not very many have
formerly treated here of:) I shall first therefore begin (passing by the
several names it is called by) as also the several species or kinds thereof.
With us in England generally it is called Tabaco, the shape and form whereof
very much resembles the greater Comfry, insomuch that some would take it, or
rather mistake it for great Comfry, they may rather deem it to be yellow
Henbane, they are not much unlike. It has a thick round stalk nere about two
foot high, whereon do grow fat green leaves, but not so large as that which
grows in the Indies, somewhat round pointed, not being notched or cut in the
edges, and bigger down ward towward the root than it is above: while it is
young it is leaved, and puts forth some branches distant from one another
half a foot, whereby it is furnished with leaves, and putting forth several
joints, at length it grows to a great height. The stalk branching forth bears
at the tops sundry flowers coming out of a swad or husk, having the fashion of
a bell, scarce standing above the brinks of the husk: no sooner are the flowers
gone, but the seeds appear, which are very small, not much unlike the seeds of
yellow henbane; when they are not yet ripe they are of a green color, but when
they be ripe, they are of a black color. The roots are not very great nor
woody, but perishing, but that, not withstanding the hard frosts in winter, it
sprouts up again in the Spring.

The seeds were first brought from some remote part of the world into this
Commonwealth not many years since, and were it not for its physical qualities
that it has, more than the great benefit which will redound to this Nation by
planting it (being not of veric great esteem) I had spared this labor: and my
chief reason for this is, because I am of opinion, that herbs either
transplanted, or brought in seed into this Land, (if it shall agree with the
soil) will agree better with the constitution of our bodies, than that which is
brought from any foreign part from beyond the Seas.

The nature of the Soil that is required for the Sowing, Planting or
Transplanting Tabaco.
THe most fruitful and fertile soil naturally, or by art so made, is most
requisite for this purpose: if the Soil be naturally fat and strong, regard
likewise must be had of the situation of the ground, whether in field or
garden, that the place be not over-shadowed with Trees, whereby the Sun may
be hindered from yielding unto it its heat: neither must your Tabaco be planted
or sown in wide and large fields which lies open to all winds and weathers,
especially the North winds. And as unkindly blasts are a great enemy to the
thriving of it on the one side, so on the other side, the want of the comfort
of the heat of the Sun will so chill it, that it will never come to
perfection.

But if by Art: your ground must be well dunged and manured, which ought to be
mixed and incorporated with the earth, that there may not be the least
appearance of Dung. Moreover the Dung you so make use of must lie a long time
rotting, if it be gathered out of the stable: Your best soil therefore for
present occasion is such as is taken up in the streets, or else Ashes sifted.
Your Hops and Tabaco will require the self manuring, and I am of opinion that
such lands as they sow their Hemp in, must needs be fit for this purpose,
because it is fat and mellow.

The best way of sowing your Seeds
SOme are of opinion that the Seeds should be carelessly cast abroad without
either sowing or raking, the ground being first prepared with the Plough or the
Spade.

Others again will tell you, that you must make a small hole in the ground
with your finger, about the depth of your fingers length, wherein you may put
ten or twelve seeds, and so cover the hole again: and this reason they give
for their so doing: for say they, the seeds being very small, are either
subject to be blown away by every small wind: or else parched by the extreme
scorching heat of the Sun. I prefer this way before the former.

Others again would have us sow the seeds as Lettuces and other small seeds
are committed to the ground, by taking some of the finest moulde, and putting
it into a platter of wood, or some such like vessel, mixing the earth very
well with the seed, and so cast to it on the ground very thin and sparingly.
This may be their reason, because the seed being mixed so well with the earth,
will stick close to some small crummes of earth, that the wind cannot disperse
it, and besides it occasioneth the speedier rooting thereof, and somewhat
shelters it, that the heat of the Sun will not much annoy it: but if you
shall put a small quantity of Ashes very finely sifted into the vessel among
the earth and seeds, it would be much better.

The time of Sowing or Planting.
IN the Months of March, April, or May, the Seed may be committed to the
earth, but the most fit and convenientest season is conceived to be in the
midst of April, or before (if the Spring be very forward) for March winds
are no good friend unto them: wherefore a good way were to cover your beds,
already sowed, with old Matts, and when the Sun does appear to uncover them
the next morning, but because you should spare some daily labor and toil you
might be put to, once for all fence it with reeds against the North Wind, for
the space of a month or two.

Of ordering your ground after Sowing your Seed,
IN the first place keep your ground clear from weeds, as well before the
sowing of the seed, as afterward, because otherwise the weeds will choke the
plant, and steal away the strength of the ground, which should nourish it. Also
it would not be amiss to remove all stones from about them, because the stones
will impede their growth, and may occasion it to grow awry, contrary to the
nature of it. Indeed, if we will believe authors, it is a very sullen Plant,
and apt to take distaste, which may be the reason that Physicians term it a
herb of Mars, and I may add another observation of my own, that from hence
it is that all the Soldiers so generally approve of it, that scarce one of a
hundred can be well long without it. I write not this to give any encouragement
to our English Planters of Tabaco, because when they have done all they can,
they are recompensed with a sorry crop in eonclusion, it being, generally
styled by the name of Mundungos: but rather to animate Gentlemen, who happily
may have spare ground enough, to sow and plant it in their Gardens, not that
they should think thereby to make any great gain by it, but to have it in
readiness when occasion shall require, either for his own or neighbors use.
The rare virtues of Tabaco, the Physicians, Apothecaries and Herbalists, can
best acquaint you with.

If the Season of the year prove hot and dry, after the sowing of your seed,
you must have a special care to the watering of your ground, and this must be
done neither too early, nor too late in the morning, especially in the Months
of April or May, nor too late in the Evening, and after the leaf has appeared
above ground, about a foot high, you may then transplant them.

The manner of transplanting Tabaco.
YOu shall (for you must be very chary of roots that you perish them not) take
a knife, or some other tool, and cut round about the roots all the earth so
deep as you may take up the roots entire, which when you have done, you must be
very chary in separating of them, (if there be more than one root) wherefore
your best way is to take the earth, that you so dug up, with the roots, and
put it into a Tub of water, and in short time the water will wash away the
earth from the small and tender Imps, and by this means, you may sever the one
Imp from the other without any danger of breaking them; the one being parted
from the other, set them in the place (which before either was, or must now be
prepared for them) about four foot distance, the one from the other, and as
near as you can so order it, that it may have the benefit of the South Sun, and
that they may be defended from the North-winds: with all let them not want of
their due watering in Summer, for as drink to a thirsty soul; so water
cherishes and refreshes the drooping and almost dropping leaves of each
Plant: but chiefly this Plant, which above all other will require it, for of it
sell, it is very hot by nature.

The time of gathering it for your use.
THe store that you intend to keep for your use by you, must be gathered before
that it either flowreth or seedeth, and therefore I conceive your best time
would be about the middle of June, for then it is in its full strength, and
having gathered it, you may not leave it in the Sun to dry, but as Colesfoot is
ordered in drying, so may you order your Tabaco, and be sure that each leaf be
through dry before you put them together, for fear lest they should grow musty,
and by that means made useless, and to prevent this, your wisest course will
be to let them hang severally by themselves, as at first, only you may, if you
please, remove them from the drying place in Winter into some warmer place,
because though in the Summer, it lying open to the air, it was beneficial to
you, it may in the Winter prove as prejudicial.

The time of flowring and seeding.
IT bears Flowers from the latter end of June till the latter end of August,
and they are of a greenish, yellow color, which the stalk branching forth,
does bear at the top thereof: these flowers are set in green husks, but appear
not much above the brims of of the husks. The seed is likewise contained in the
great heads, after the flowers are decayed.

Of the Roots and Leaves.
THe Roots and Leaves do yield a Gluish and Rofinsh kind of juice, somewhat
yellow, and smelling somewhat like Rosin, but unpleasant, and of a sharp, eager
and biting taste; which shows that it is by nature hot, more than in the second
degree, and dry in the first, whereupon we may infer, that it is no kind of
yellow Henbane.

To preserve the Plant or Root from dying ^n the Winter.
THe root (as I said before) may spring up again of its own accord, but
seldom after a sharp winter: for when long and tedious frosts have crusted the
earth, out of all question the root, if not perished, will be much endangered,
and at the 'Spring time not be able, thorough weakness, to prosper. Therefore
I shall direct you how to preserve them, and keep the leaves green all the
winter.

Some would have you sense about your ground with reeds, or such things, as
will break the force of the cold winds: and to preserve them from frosts, they
advise you to cover the Plants with Matts: but as such a weight continually
pressing the Plant down will rotte it, so will it do but little good to the
Plants in extremity of Winter.

Others would have you make a slight house of Deal about your Plants to
preserve them, which you may remove afterward. Such as have enough may be at
this un necessary charge.

But the best way, as I conceive, to preserve them is by removing them in the
winter, the manner thus: Take up the root with the earth about them, put all
into some pot or any other thing fit for the purpose, and set them in a warm
place about your house, and let it abide there all the winter, but if the Sun
chance to shine very hot, afford your Plant the benefit thereof for one hour or
two, and so return it to its former place, this is the most certain way to
preserve roots and Plants all the Winter, and in the Spring set them into the
ground with the same earth about them.

FINIS.
The expert Gardener: OR, A Treatise containing certain necessary, secret, and
ordinary knowledges in Grafting and Gardening; with diverse proper new Plots for
the Garden. Also sundry expert directions to know the time and season when to
sow and replant all manner of Seeds. With diverse remedies to destroy Snailes,
Canker-wormes, Moths, Garden-Fleas, Earth-wormes, Moles, and other Vermin.
Faithfully collected out of sundry Dutch and French Authors.

LONDON, Printed by William Hunt. 1654.

Certain common Instructions how the Stumpe must be chosen whereupon you will
graffe or plant.
EVery diligent Householder who will plant, should use thereto a convenient
place, to the end, that the wild beast chaw not, nor pair the plants; or if
they be young, wholly eat in pieces; which to avoid, is needful to be in a
town or closed Orchard, where there is not too much shadow, but a sweet ground
well muckt, tilled and turned.

Every Plant will have four things.
First moistness, so that the seeds or stumpe be moist or green.

Secondly, a convenient place, which has such earth as will lightly be rubbed
to powder, and that Sun may come to it; for where there is filthy lome, a lean
ground, or sandy, dry, burnt, or salt ground, there is nothing good to be
planted, to have any continuance; nevertheless where the ground is lean, there
you must give more dung; in a fat ground not so much. Take heed the ground be
not too moist nor too dry; and muck the trees with hogs dung.

Thirdly, a mediate water or nourishing moistness, therefore be those Orchards
best which are situated between two waters; for those that are placed by a
water side, remain still young and fruitful, and have commonly the bark
smoother and thinner than the others. And those trees are more fruitful then
others which are planted in a valley, or in the lower part of a deep hill; for
from those hills may come to them nourishment and moistness, and the ground
which is so situated is very fruitful. But he that cannot get for his trees
such a ground, must with all diligence seek to bring to his trees a little
spring or pond, of which the trees may sometimes find some reviving, and if you
may not have any of those, and have a garden who by it self is naught, the
trees will grow with thick roots, which hinders the growing of them, and
dries them at length.

Fourthly, the air is required, which must be agreeable to them, and of
complexion to bear; for there be some trees that do prosper in all aires, to
wit, apple, and pear, cherry and plum-trees. Some will have a cold air, to
wit, chesnut-trees; and some a very warm air, as the palm and pepper trees:
therefore they be rare with us. That plant which has these four things shall
prosper: and if they want one or more of these four things, they will decay and
their prospering perish.

At what time trees ought to be planted and set.
ALL kind of trees may be planted, transported, and cut in March, but it is
better to turn them in October, for then the frost hurts them not so much as
at other times; for learned men say, that in dry Towns and warm Countries they
plant in October or November, and that in moist Towns and cold valleys, they
plant in February or March: in none other time may you plant or graffe. When
you will plant or set again wild stumps, if there be any thing broken at the
root, cut it off. Every plant must be set two foot one from another, or at the
least one foot, especially when they should bear strong fruits: likewise when
thou will set strong seeds, as nuts, almonds and peaches. When a man will plant
two stumps, so must they be of two year old, except the vine.

These things you must understand of those plants or stumps which are planted
with roots.

How the stumps and plants must be prepared and dressed, which you will plant.
THe plant or sprout you must cut round about, so that you leave the very end
of it, and put it then into a hole, but if the stump be great, cut it clean
off, and then put only the undermost part into a hole, long or short as you
will; but if you find two stumps grown together, you may cut the lesser away.
And above all things, you must take heed that the sprout grow upright, and if
it will not, you must constrain it, and tie it to a stick.

Here follow certain instructions how the trees must be kept, and how you must
labor them.
SOme trees will have a fat ground, as Fig trees and Mulberrie trees, and
some lean ground, but all trees be in that point equal, that they will have
in the top dry ground, and in the bottom moist earth.

2. In Harvest you must uncover the roots of the trees so deep, that they may
partly be seen, and lay dung upon them, which dung must be dissolved of rain
in the ground, that it may come to the roots, which mucking gives good
increase to the roots.

3. If the ground wherein the trees stand be too sandy, then mix among it
fair and new lome; and if it be too lomy, then mix amongst it sand in place
of mucke, the which you must not only do hard by the tree, but also four or
five foot off from it round about the tree, according as the tree is in
bigness, or that the roots are large and great.

Such diligence, gives to the trees great help, for their nourishment and
strength is thereby renewed. Hereafter you shall understand, whereby to know
the fruitful soil.

4. In the fat ground, the stumps whereupon you will graff, must be left long,
but in lean ground short.

5. The plants of trees from their youth, till three years must not be cut nor
shred, but they may be transported, and if they be too weak you may prick
sticks next unto them.

6. Diligent regard must be taken, that no sprouts spring out of the stump,
which might take the nourishment from the tree sprouts, and those boughs which
spring from the root of the tree at the first planting.

7. When thou perceivest the young trees to wax weak, then uncover the roots
and put other fresh ground to them.

8. If the ground be neither too soft nor too hard, then may you choose all kind
of stumps in February for to plant, when the green juice is dispersed in the
bark; but when the ground is too hard, then the swet holes or pores of the root
do remain closed and stopped, so that they cannot draw to them their
nourishment, such hardness of the ground or earth hinders the air and
moistness which comes from beneath upward, for it cannot be pierced of the
soft sprouts, with the small heat which is beneath, therefore you must come to
help them with a spade, for with a plough you will never come to an end,
because of the root.

9. There is great diligence to be taken for preserving of the trees, when they
begin to grow great, to scrape from the bark all rudeness which is done, when
you take from them all superfluity and sprouts which come out of the tree. You
may cut them in February.

10. It is good for the trees to muck them often, and moderatively to water
their roots.

Also to cleave the roots, and lay stones into them, to the end they may revive
again of the dryness which they have suffered, or of the barrenness of the
ground, or when the young planted trees for the great heat will perish. Also
when immoderate heat is, then you must help them with turning of the ground,
and with watering, but the water wherewith you should water them, must not be
altogether fresh nor cold, or newly drawn out of the spring, but out of a
ditch, pond, or well, or any other foul ditch water, or with spring water,
which has stood long in the Sun, or put a little dun^ in the water, and stir
it once or twice well about, and the water will be fat wherewith water your
trees. You may also keep them with shadows and straw from the heat: or else
put (in great heat) fat green herbs at the stump, tempred with loame: some
anoint the stumpe (toward the South or Midday) with chalk, some with oil, or
with any other ointment that cools.

11. When you would transpose a plant, or have wild stumps dug out to plant
again, then mark the part which stands toward the South of Midday, and put
it so again when you graffe it.

How to keep plants, stumps, or trees, from the wild beasts, that they hurt
them not.
WHere the path of the beast is free and remediless, there must be put poles,
and with thorns the same young trees must be enclosed.

That the Deeres spoil them not.
TAke the piss of a Dear and anoint the Tree therewith.

That the Hares do not hurt them.
SPet in thy hand, and anoint the sprouts therewith, and no Hare will hurt them.

Here follow some instructions of graffing.
depiction of a man on a ladder tending to a grafted tree

FIrst, you must know that imping, graffing, and setting, is all one thing.

The imping sprouts must be young and new, with great bodies and many eyes: for
where many and great buds be, that is a token, that is of a strong fruit.

2. The imping sprouts must be broken off at the Sun rising, although that
those of the other side broken off grow likewise: yet those of the other side
are most natural and temperate of heat: Some country clownes believe, that if
you in cutting the sprouts turn them upside down, that they will never grow
right, but be crooked.

3 All graffing and imp^^g is done by putting one into another by a fast
binding, that the little sprout may spread his boughs to the stump or tree,
wherein it is graffed, that so it may become one tree.

4. Over-young imps (which are so weak that they will break before they be put
into the earth, or into the stump) are naught, and therefore they may not be
imped or set.

5. When you impe upon a house or fruit tree, the fruit will be far better: But
if you cut of a Garden tree a branch, and imp it into one of his own sprouts,
it will bring forth fruit of another taste, form, and bigness; for imping
makes all the diversities in pears, apples, and other fruits.

6 It is far better to impe low in the stump, than in the top in the high
branches: yet nevertheless if you will make of wild apple trees garden trees,
you may impe them upon the top.

7. In great trees which have a great bark, it is not so good to impe, for they
take not to them so easily the veins of the roots which grow out of the young
sprouts, because of their hardness, and especially when the imping sprouts are
too weak. Wherefore they which graffe trees must seek small and young stumps,
wherein they find much liquor and little hardness, and which may endure the
binding.

8. It is best imping or graffing when the liquor is in the bark, if you have a
great tree upon the which you would impe, and has many branches, you may cut
them all off, and impe into the stumps all kind of boughs, such as you please;
but if the tree be over-old, so that her boughs be ranckled, and her
moistness consumed, then cut the tree clean off, and let ^he stump stand a
whole ^eare; afterward take the sprouts which are sprung out of that stumpe,
and graffe them, and cast the others away. Such a stump is like to bear, and
therefore nourish as many sprouts as you please: but if it be a wild stump,
graft garden sprouts upon it.

9. If you graffe a sprout or bough upon a Hawthorne tree, that same bough will
grow great, and the stump will remain small, therefore he that will impe upon
such a tree, see he cut it off by the root, then will the imped sprout and the
stumpe grow all of one thickness: but you must have still regard that you impe
kind upon kind, as apples upon apples, pears upon pears: for he that
graffeth strange upon strange, as pears upon apples, and apples on pears, and
such like, although it be done often for pleasures sake, yet will it not last;
for the natural nourishment is so, that it will hardly nourish a strange kind
of fruit.

10. The tree which is graffed in February, in his fruits grow no worms nor
maggots.

11. When the imping sprouts begin to prosper, and will not grow straight and
level, then you must constrain them perforce, that they may grow orderly.
Furthermore you must have a care to keep the prospering sprouts well with
sticks from the wind, if they stand any thing high, and especially when they
have stood a year or two, and where they are pricked in the stump, it is most
needful, as shall after appear. And because there be many and diverse ways to
graffe, and know how wild stumps and trees are to be made garden trees, we
thought it good to set some of them here down*

Diverse fashions and ways of graffing there be.
HE that will extraordinarily graffe all manner of trees, he must know, that
the more one tree is liker another, the better it will prosper.

The first sort of graffing is, when the sprout is pricked between the bark and
the wood of the stump; which must be done in May or April, when the bark may
easily be loosed from the tree, and is done after this sort.

First take a stump or tree, and cut him off with a sharp Saw, knife or such
like instrument, where he is smoothest and clearest, and full of juice, and
polish the place with the bark of the same tree which was cut off. Afterward ty
the stump with a piece of bark, and then prick a hole between the bark of the
tree with a prick of bone, elderwood or Iron, so that it cleave not, and then
put in the place of the prick the sprout, which you must have broken off a
plain and even tree, of a good kind, and one year old, which you shall know by
this; every branch has rinckled knots like the joint of a man's finger, cut it
at one side under the knot, so that you touch not the heart of the tree, and at
the other side you must softly loose the bark, that the sp^out may join very
close to the stump, then pull out the prick, and take the sprout, and turn the
green bark to the bark of the stumpe, so that it may stand straight.

The sprout may be four or five fingers, or eight at the most, high above the
stump.

Of this sort of imping, you may see two, three, or more, according to the
^^gnesse of the stump, or as he can bear, provided always that they stand at
the least the length of a finger one from another.

Afterward tie it fast (with bark) together, and put over it good muck, and tie
over it a cloth, that no rain or air may come between it and hurt it. This
sort of imping is commonly used in stumps, which are great and old trees, whose
bark is thick and strong, as apple trees, pear trees, cherry trees, and
willow trees, on which are imped oftentimes apples, also on fig trees, and
chestnut trees.

Such grafting is also done in high stumps, and branches, which be great, but
they must be well kept from the wind, that it do not break them.

After this sort you may graft many sorts and kinds of pears upon one tree, but
if you bring pears upon apples, or apples upon pears stumps, it will not last
long, as before is said.

The first way of grafting prospers best, and has a good continuance, there
be many other sorts of grasting, as follows.

Another way of grafting is, when the stumps are cloven, and the sprouts
afterward are put in, the which do as follows.
TAke a young tree which is scant of the bigness of a finger, and cut it
smoothe and even, and cleave it in the midst, then take the sprout which you
will impe, and cut it three square, and at the one side leave the bark uncut,
and then turn the same bark outward at the stump, and tie it fast as I have
taught, that the wind nor rain hurt him not.

Otherwise.
When the stump is unco^ered and clean burnisht at the soft place, then tie him
fast, that he cleave no further than to the length of your sprout, which you
must graffe upon him, and then leave the prick in it, then make your sprout
pointed like a prick, so that the middle be not touched, then put it into the
cleft, having cleansed the hole first with the point of a knife, so that one
bark may touch the other, and outward one wood another, to the end, the
moisture may have the more easier his course, then pull out the prick, and
that which remains open and bare between the cleft and the sprout, that bind
well every where with the bark of the tree, or with hard pressing with a little
sand, or with dung of an Ox, or with wax, or with a linen cloth washed in
wax, that no rain, wind or worms may hurt it. This helps much to keep the
moistness in, which comes from the root, that it cannot break out, but
nourishes the better the new plant; but when the stumps are great, they be
cleaved after two ways. The first is, that you cut or cleave the tree with a
knife at one side only, even to the heart, and that you graft into it but one
sprout. The other is, that you cleave it all over, and that you prick or graft
on every side one sprout, or one alone, and leave the other side without.

When the stump is but a little bigger, then the sprout must necessarily be
cloven in two, and you must graft but one sprout into it, as is said in the
beginning.

This cleaving may be done in February, March, and April, then it is good to
cut them before they be green, for to keep them the better under the ground,
in cold or moist places.

The third way of grafting.
THis sort of grafting is very subtle, witty, and ready; and is done as
follows.

Go to a smooth apple or pear tree, in April, when the trees get liquor, and
seek a branch which has green eyes, and see that the same be less than your
little finger, and tear it from the tree, and where you see that the green
sprouts will come off, there cut them off wholly, and cleanse the middle there
of, that the little red at the wood may turn about, and draw it not off,
until you come unto another good pear or apple tree, and seek there another
branch of the same bigness that the other was, and cut it off, and take from
it likewise the red, as far as you will put them again, and look where the
branches join, that they may well sit together upon the top, and tie the same
place gently and well with a little bark, behind and before, that the water
may not hurt them: in the first year it brings forth leaves and branches, in
the second flowers, which you may break off, for the sprout is yet too tender,
so that it may bear no fruit, and in the third year it brings flowers and
fruit, and by this means you may graft diverse kinds of pears and apples upon
one tree. I have likewise set such sprouts upon wild stumps, and they have
prospered.

The fourth way of grafting is,
HOw buds are transported and bound upon another tree, like as a plaster is
tied to a man's body: this sort of grafting, is called in Latin Emplastrum. We
read of such a sort of grafting which is called in Latin Abducellum, and it is
much like unto this sort, wherefore we will only speak of it, being done after
this sort.

When you see upon a great fruitful bough, a bud which will prosper without
doubt, and would feign plant it upon another tree, take a sharp knife, and
lift the bark up two fingers breadth, that the bud be not hurt, then go to
another tree, upon the which you will graft, and put into a convenient place, a
like hole into the bark, and put the same bud with the bark into it, and tie it
with dung (or with a clout that has lien in a dunghill) over the cut, that it
may be kept from the outward damage of weather, and for an especial
nourishment and keeping of the inner juice: then cut off the branches round
about it, that the mother may the better nourish the new son; within twenty
days after take away the band, so that you see that the strange bud has
prospered, and joined himself with the tree. This may be done in March, when
the bark comes easily from the tree. Also in April, May, and June, and yet
she prospers both before and after a time, when you may conveniently find
such buds.

This sort of planting prospers best in a willow tree or such like, which is
pierced through, and is done after this sort.

The fifth way.
When you pierce a willow stick with a sharp plercer, see that between every
hole, be left the space of one foot, and prick therein branches a little
scraped, and put the stick into a ditch, so that the branches stand upright,
one part of the stick remaining over the earth; and within a year after take it
out of the ditch, and cut the stick asunder, so find you the branches full of
roots, and put every one into a hole in the ground, and it is fit the holes were
stopped with lome, or with wax.

Some do take in March a fresh Beech tree, which is of a man's thickness, and
pierce him overthwart with maine and great holes and small holes, till unto the
lowermost bark, or quite through: then take sprouts or boughs, which be as
big and small, that they may fit into the holes; and when you will put them
into the Beech stump, you must scrape the uppermost bark off, until the
green, and no further: then the bough must remain into the Beech, the sprouts
must stand a foot, or somewhat less asunder, then keep your Beech stumps with
the sprouts in a fresh ground, and skant a soot deep, you must first maime the
sprouts, that they may not flourish; then the next March ensuing, dig it out
with the sprouts, and cut it a sunder with a saw, and every block which is cut
off with its branch, you must set in a fresh ground, and so they will bring
forth the fruit the same year.

The sixth Way.
This way teaches how to graffe, that they may bring forth fruit the first
year, which do as follows.

Pare an old stumpe of what kind soever it be, the uppermost bark, till to the
lower green bark, a span long or somewhat less, which do in Harvest in the
wane of the Moon, and anoint it with Ox dung and earth, and tie it with bark,
and after in March when trees are transposed from one place to another then cut
the same branch from the tree, and put it into the ground, and it will bring
fruit the same year. I have seen that one has pricked sticks on Alhallow eve,
in the earth, and has pulled them out again upon Christmas eve, and put
boughs in the holes, and they have prospered and come out.

The seventh.
Pierce the top of a stump, which is not over small, and draw a bark through
it, and maime it with a knife, as far as it stands on the top, and in eight
days after, pour water upon it, that the top of the stump may close. This must
be done in harvest, and in the March following cut it off from the tree, and
bruise the top, and put it with the same earth in other ground.

The eighth Way.
Will you graffe a tree that the fruit be without stones. Take a sprout and
graff it into a great stump, with the thicker and lower part of the sprout,
then take the upper or thinner end of the sprout, and cut it also fit to be
graffed, and turn it downward, and graffe it into the said stump; and when
the sprout of both sides prospers, cut it in the midst afunder, so that which
is grown right upward with the tree, the fruit of it has stones, but that
which was the top of the sprout that grows contrary, brings forh fruit
without stones. And if so be the turned sprout prosper, you must break off the
other, to the end, that the turned sprout do not perish, which you may try
after this sort; for oftentimes it comes and prospers, and many times it is
perished and spoiled.

How Cherries are to be graffed, that they may come without stones.
WIll you make that Cherries grow without stones? pare a little Cherry tree at
one year old at the stump, and cleave it asunder from the top to the root,
which do in May, and make an Iron fit to draw the heart or marow from both
sides of the tree; then tie it fast together, and anoint it with Ox dung or
lome, and within a year after, when it is grown and healed, go to another
little tree which is of the same kind, and which has not yet brought fruit,
and graffe that same on the little tree, so shall that same tree bring his
fruit without stones.

How a Vine is to be planted upon a Cherry tree.
PLant a Vine tree next unto a Cherry tree, and when it grows high, then
pierce a hole into the Cherry tree right above it, that the hole be no bigger
than the Vine is thick, and pare the upper bark of the Vine branch till unto
the green, so far as it must go through the tree, and look well to it that
the branch of the Vine be not bruised, and well anointed. You must not suffer
any sprouts to come out of the Vine from the ground up, but unto the tree only,
that which comes out of the other side, let that same grow and bring fruit.
Then the next March following if the Vine prosper and grow fast into the tree,
then cut the Vine from the tree off, and anoint the place with diligence, and
it will bring fruit.

How a grape of a Vine may be brought into a glass.
WIll you make that a grape grow into a narrow glass? take the glass before
the grape cast her blood, or while she is little, and put her into the glass,
and she will ripen in the glass.

To graffe Medlers on a Pear tree.
IF you graffe the branch of a Medler upon a Pear tree, the Medlers will be
sweet and durable, so that you may keep them longer ^h^n otherwise.

How apples or other fruit may be made red.
IF you will graft upon a wild stump, put the sprouts in Pikes blood, and then
graft them, and the fruit will be red.

Otherwise.
Take an apple branch, and graft it upon an alder stump, and the apples will be
red. Likewise if you graft them upon cherry trees.

Of the Quince tree.
THe Quince tree comes not of any grafting, but you must pluck him out by
the roots, and plant him again into a good ground or earth.

Otherwise.
The Quince tree requires a dry and sweet ground, and he prospers therein.

How to make that Quinces become great.
TAke a branch of a Quince tree when it has cast his blood where a Quince
grows at, and put it into a pot, and set it into the ground, and let the
Quince grow in it, and it will be very great.

And if you will show some cunning therewith, cause to be made a pot which has
a man's face in the bottom of it, or any other picture whatsoever, and when the
quinces have blossomed, then bow the branch, and put the Quince into the pot,
and she will grow very big, in the shape of a man, which may also be done in
Pompons, Mellons, Cucumbers, and other earthly fruits.

The conclusion of graffing.
OVT of all the forewritten causes (gentle reader) is evidently shown, that
although every planting or grafting be better from like to like, and from kind
to kind, yet nevertheless it agrees also with contrary kinds, as now is
said; wherefore he that will exercise and use the same, and try diverse kinds,
he may see and make many wonders.

What joy and fruit comes of trees.
The first fruit.
THe first is, that you plant diverse and many kinds: for every householder who
has care to his nourishment, with all diligence causes oftentimes, such trees
to be brought from foreign Countries.

The second.
The second is, when the trees be planted and set orderly and pleasantly, they
give no small pleasure to a man, therefore every one should cut his trees
orderly, and he that cannot, should procure other men to do it, which know how
to do it.

The third is of well smelling and spiced fruit.
Cleave a tree asunder, or a branch of a fruitful tree, to the heart or pith,
and cut a piece out of it, and put therein poudred spices, or what spice seever
you will, or what color you will desire, and tie a bark hard about it, and
anoint it with lome and Ox dung, and the fruit will get both the savor and
color according to the spice you have put in it.

How sour fruits be made sweet.
WHich tree bears sour fruits, in the same pierce a hole a foot or somewhat
less above the root, and fill that with honey, and stop the hole with a
haw-thorne branch, and the fruit will be sweet.

How trees ought to be kept when they wax old.
WHen trees lose their strength and virtue for age, and the branches break off
for the weight of the fruit, or when they wax barren for lack of moisture, that
they bear not fruit every year, but scant every other or third year, you must
cut some of his heavy branches, which he can little nourish, which is done to
the end he might keep some moistness to himself for his nourishment, or else
the moistness would go all into his branches.

Whereby you may mark whether you must give them, or take away from them
branches, according to their nourishment, and as the earth where she stands
can abide, that is, you must leave them so much as will nourish them, and no
more, which if you do not, the trees will bring so little fruit, that your
labor will not be recompensed.

Which cutting of trees may be done from the beginning of November till to the
end of March, in warm countries. But it is more natural to be done from the
time that the leaves fall, till the time that they begin to grow green again,
except where the frost is very great and sharp.

How trees must be kept from diverse sicknesses, and first how to keep them from
the Canker.
WHen the Canker comes in any tree, he becomes barren and dry, for it
mounteth from the stumps into the top, and when it takes a pear or apple
tree, the bark will be black and barren thereabouts, which must be cut off with
a knife, to the fresh wood, and then the place must be anointed with Ox dung,
and tied with bark, so that neither wind nor rain may hurt it.

Against worms which must be driven out of the tree.
IT happens oftentimes, that the superfluities of moistness in the trees
breaks out like as sometimes to a man or beast between the flesh and skin:
and when that begins to rot, worms grow out of it, which takes his strength
away: wherefore mark,

When the bark of a tree at any time swells, cut it presently open that the
poison may run out, and if you find already worms in it, draw them out with
a little Iron hook.

How the worms are to be killed, if they be already grown into the tree.
IF you will kill the worms which grow in the tree, take Pepper, Laurel, and
Incense, and mingle all well together with good wine, and pierce a hole into
the tree downward, to the pith or heart of the tree, and pour this mixture
into it, and stop it with a hawthorne, and the worms will dye.

Otherwise.
Take ashes or dust and mingle it with sallet oil, anoint the trees therewith,
and the worms will dye.

Otherwise.
Take powdered Incense when you graffe, and bring it between the bark of the
stump, which you will graffe, and no worms will eat the fruit.

When a tree in many places becomes changeable because of worms, or
superfluous humors, Cleave the tree at some end from the top of the stump to
the earth, that all the foul liquors may come out and dry. Also when a tree
becomes sick because of evil humors or fault of ground, so that he becomes
worme-eaten, or brings no fruit, take the earth away from the root, and put
other sweeter in the place, and pierce a great hole in the stump, and put
therein a pin of Oak, and it helps.

A remedy against Caterpillars.
ALL kind of Caterpillars which eat the green, and blossoms of the tree, do
hurt them very much, so that thereafter may come no fruit.

Therefore their eggs which lie hidden, as it were in a cobwebbe, must
diligently be searched, and burned from the boughs, before they bring forth
other Caterpillars, which do in December, January, and February.

Some were wont to break them off, and tread them with their feet, but
therewith they be not wholly killed. The fire consumes all things, and
therefore it is best to burn them.

Against the Pismires or Ants, when they will hurt the young trees.
CVT the leaves off which are eaten or poisoned of the Ants or Pismers, and
where there is any thing made unclean in the top of the tree, of those little
worms, that rub inpieces with your hands, that it may not stain the other
leaves, and that the young sprouts may grow up without any hinderance.

How to keep the Pismires from the trees.
FIrst make a juice of an herb, called Portabaca, and mix it with vinegar, and
sprinkle the stump therewith, or anoint the stumpe with wine dregs. Some take a
little weak pitch, but very thin; that it may not hurt the tree.

Another Instruction.
Take a little bundle of cotton, wool, flax, or towe, and lay it about the
stump, and tie likewise a bundle above, about the stump, and draw it out a
little, and the Pismires can do no hurt: or put about the stump bird-lime.

In what time of the harvest the fruit must be gathered.
THe Fruits are not altogether at one time gathered, for they are not ripe all
at once, as some pears which show the ripeness by the color, those should be
gathered in Summer, and if you let them stand too long, they will not last.

Pears which are ripe in harvest, those may be gathered in October, when the
weather is clear and dry: in harvest in the increase of the Moon, Fruits may
be gathered.

A short Instruction very profitable and necessary for all those that delight
in Gardening, to know the times and seasons when it is good to sow and replant
all manner of seeds.
CAbbages must be sown in February, March, or April, at the waning of the
Moon, and replanted also in the decrease thereof.

Cabbage, Lettuce, in February, March, or July, in an old Moon.

Onyons and Leeks must be sown in February or March, at the waning of the Moon.

Beets must be sown in February, or March, in a full moon.

Coleworts white and green in February, or March, in an old moon, it is good
to replant them.

Parsneps must be sown in February, April or June, also in an old moon.

Radish must be sown in February, March, or June, in a new moon.

Pompions must be sown in February, March, or June, also in a new moon.

Cucumbers and Mellons must be sown in February, March or June, in an old moon.

Spinach must be sown in February or March, in an old moon.

Parsley must be sown in February or March, in a full moon.

Fennel and Annisseed must be sown in February or March, in a full moon.

White Cycory must be sown in February, March, July or August, in a full moon.

Carduus Benedictus must be sown in February, March or May, when the moon is
old.

Basil must be sown in March, when the moon is old.

Purslane must be sown in February or March, in a new moon.

Margeram, Violets and Time, must be sown in February, March or April, in a
new moon.

Floure-gentle, Rosemary and Lavender, must be sown in February or April, in
a new moon.

Rocket and Garden cresses, must be sown in Fe^ruary in a new moon.

Savell must be sown in February or March, in a new moon.

Saffron must be sown in March, when the moon is old.

Coriander and Borage must be sown in February or March, in a new moon.

Hartshorne and Samphire must be sown in February, March or April, when the
moon is old.

Gilly-flowers, Harts-ease, and Wall-flowers must be sown in March or April,
when the moon is old.

Cardons and Artochokes must be sown in April or March when the moon is old.

Chickweed must be sown in February or March, in the full of the moon.

Burnet must be sown in February or March, when the moon is old.

Double Marigolds must be sown in February or March, in a new moon.

Isop and Savorie must be sown in March, when the moon is old.

White Poppy must be sown in February or March, in a new moon.

Palma Christi must be sown in February, in a new moon.

Sparages and Sperage is to be sown in February, when the moon is old.

Larks foot must be sown in February, when the moon is old.

Note that at all times and seasons, Lettuce, Radish, Spinach and Paseneps may
be sown.

Note also, from cold are to be kept Coleworts, Cabbage, Lettuce, Basil,
Cardons, Artochokes, and Colefloures.

Worthy remedies and socrets availing against the stroying of Snailes,
Cankerwormes, the long bodied Moths, Garden-fleas, Earthwormes, and Moles.
AFricanus, singular among the Greek writers of husbandry, reports, that
Garden-plants and roots may well be purged and rid of the harmefull worms, if
their dens or deep holes be smoaked, the wind aiding, with the dung of the
Cow or Ox burned.

That worthy Pliny in his first book of Histories writes, that if the Owner
or Gardener sprinckleth the pure mother of the oil Olive, without any salt in
it, does also drive the worms away, and defend the Plants and Herbs from being
gnawne of them. And if they shall cleave to the roots of the plants, through
malice or breeding of the dung, yet this weedeth them clean away. The plants or
herbs will not after be gnawne or harmed by Garden-fleas, if with the natural
remedy, as with the herb Rocket, the Gardener shall bestow his beds in many
places.

The Coleworts and all pot herbs are greatly defended from the gnawing of the
Garden-fleas, by Radish growing among them. The eager or sharp vinegar does
also prevail, tempered with the juice of Henbane, and sprinkled on the garden
fleas. To these, the water in which the herb Nigella Romana shall be steeped
for a night, and sprinkled on the plants, as the Greek Pamphilus reports,
does alike prevail against the garden-fleas.

Paladius Rutilius reports, that the noisome vermin or creeping things will
not breed of the Potherbes, if the Gardener shall before the committing to the
earth, dry all the seeds in the skin of the Tortoise, or sow the herb Mint in
many places of the Garden, especially among the Coleworts. The bitter Fitch and
Rocket (as I before uttered) bestowed among the pot herbs, so that the seeds be
sown in the first quarter of the Moon, do greatly avail us. Also the Canker
and Palmer worms, which in many places work great injury both to the Gardens
and vines, may the owner or Gardener drive away with the fig tree ashes
sprinkled on them and the herbs.

There be some which sprinckle the plants and herbs made with the lee of the
fig tree ashes, but it destroys the worms, to strew (as experience reports)
the ashes alone on them.

There be others which rather will to plant or sow that big on you, named in
Latin Scilla or Squilla here and there in beds, or hang them in sundry places
of the Garden.

Others also will to fix River Cresses with nails in many places of the
garden, which if they shall yet withstand or contend with all these remedies,
then may the Gardener apply to exercise this devise, in taking the Ox or Cow
urine, and the mother of oil Olive, which after the well mixing together, and
heating over the fire, the same be stirred about until it be hot, and when
through cold, this mixture shall be sprinkled on the pot herbs and trees, does
marvellously prevail, as the skillful Anatolius of experience reports.

The worthy Paladias Rutilius reports, that if the owner or Gardener burn
great bundles of the Garlic blades (without heads) dried, through all the
allies of the Garden, and unto these the dung of Backs added, that the savor
of the smoke (by the help of the wind) may be driven to many places,
especially to those where they most abound and swarm, and the Gardener shall
see so speedy a destruction, as is to be wondered at.

The worthy Pliny of great knowledge, reports that these may be driven from
the pot-herbes, if the bitter Fitch seeds be mixed and sown together with them,
or the branches of the trees, Crevises hanged up by the horns in many places,
does like prevail. These also are let from increasing; yea, they in heaps
presently gathered are destroyed, as the Greeks report of observation, if the
Gardener by taking certain Palmer or Canker-wormes out of the Garden next
joining, shall sees them in water with Dill, and the same being through cold,
shall sprinckle on the herbs and trees, that the mixture may wet and soke
through the nests, even unto the young ones, cleaving together, that they may
taste thereof, will speedily dispatch them. But in this doing, the Gardener
must be very wary, and have an attentive eye, that none of the mixture fall on
his face or hands.

Besides these, the owner or Gardener may use this remedy certain, and easily
prepared, if about the big arms of trees, or stumps of the herbs, he kindle
and burn the stronger lime and brimstone together. Or if the owner make a
smoke with the Mushromes, growing under the Nut tree, or burn the hoofs of
Goats, or the gum Galbanum, or else make a smoke with the Hearts horn, the
wind aiding, by blowing toward them.

The husbandmen and gardeners in our turn have found out this easy practice,
being now common every where: which is on this wise, that when these
after-showres of rain are cropen into the warm sun, or into places standing
against the Sun, early in the morning shake either their fruits and leaves of
the pot-herbes, or the boughs of the trees, for these being yet stiff,
through the cold of the night, are procured of the same, the lighter and sooner
to fall, nor able after to recover up again, so that the Palmer worms thus
lying on the ground, are then in a readiness to be killed of the Gardener.

If the owner mind to destroy any other creeping things noyous to herbs and
trees, (which Paladius and Rutilius name, both herb and Leek-wasters) then let
him hearken to this invention and devise of the Greek Dyophanes, who wills to
purchase the maw of a Wether sheep new killed, and the same as yet full of his
excrementall filth, which lightly cover with the earth in the same place, where
these most haunt in the Garden, and after two days shall the Gardener find
there, that the mothes with long bodies, and other creeping things will be
gathered in diverse companies to the place right over it, which the owner shall
either remove and carry further, or dig and bury very deep in the same place,
that they may not after arise and come forth, which when the Gardener shall
have exercised the same but twice or thrice, he shall utterly extinguish, and
quite destroy all the kinds of creeping things that anoy and spoil the Garden
plants.

The husbandmen in Flanders arm the stocks, and compass the bigger arms of
their trees, with wisps of straw handsomely made and fastened or bound about,
by which the Palmer worms are constrained to creep up to the tops of the
trees, and there staid, so that, (as it were by snares and engines laid) these
in the end are driven away, or thus in their way begun, are speedily or soon
after procured to turn back again; As unto the remedies of the Snailes
particularly belongs. These may the Gardener likewise chase from the kitchen
herbs, if he either sprinckle the new mother of the oil olive, or soot of the
chimney on the herbs, as if he bestowed the bitter sitch in beds among them,
which also availes against other noisome worms, and creeping things, as I before
uttered, that if the Gardener would possess a green and delectable Garden,
let him then sprinckle diligently all the quarters, beds, and borders of the
Garden, with the mixture of water and powder of Fennigreeke tempered together,
or set upright in the middle of the Garden, the whole bare head without the
flesh of the unchaste Ass, as I before wrote.

Excellent inventions and helps against the Garden. Moles.
THe skillful Paxanus has left in writing, that if the Gardener should make
hollow a big nut, or bore a hollow hole into some sound piece of wood being
narrow, in filling the one or the other with Rosin, Pitch, Chafe and
Brimstone, of each so much as shall suffice to the filling of the Nut, or
hollow hole in the wood, which thus prepared in a readiness, stop every where
with diligence, all the goings Forth, and breathing holes of the Mole, that by
those the fuming smoke in no manner may issue out, yet so handle the matter,
that one mouth and hole be only left open, and the same so large, that well
the nut or vessel kindled within, may be laid within the mouth of it, whereby
it may take the wind of the one side, which may so send in the savor both of
the rosin and brimstone into the hollow tomb, or resting place of the Mole; by
the same practice so workemanly handled, by filling the holes with the smoke,
shall the owner or Gardener either drive quite away all the Moles in the
ground, or find them in a short time dead.

There be some that take the white Neesewort, or the rind of Cynocrambes
beaten and farced, and with Barley meal and eggs finely tempered together, they
make both Cakes and Pasties wrought with wine and milk, and those they lay
within the Moles den or hole.

Albertus of worthy memory reports, that if the owner or Gardener closes or
diligently stops the mouths of the Moleholes, with the garlic, onyon, or
leek, it shall either drive the Moles away, or kill them through the strong
savor stinking or breathing into them.

Many there be, that to drive away these harmfull Moles, do bring up young
Cats in their Garden ground, and make tame Weasels, to the end, that either of
these through the hunting of them, may so drive away this pestiferous anoyance,
being taught to watch at their strait passages, and mouths of the holes coming
forth.

Others there be also, which diligently fill and stop up their holes with the
red Okare or Ruddell, and juice of the wild Cucumber, or sow the seeds of Palma
Christi, being a kind of Satyrion, in beds, through which they will not after
cast up, nor tarry thereabout.

But some exercise this easy practice, in taking a live Mole, and burning the
powder of brimstone about him, being in a deep earthen pot, through which he is
procured to cry, all others in the mean time as they report, are moved to
resort thither.

There are some besides, which lay silk snares at the mouth of their holes.

To the simple Husbandmen may this easy practice of no cost suffice, in
setting down into the earth, a stiff rod or green branch of the Elder tree.

FINIS.
depiction of a man attaching a graft to a tree-stump, with two nearby trees
already grafted

diagram of a planting scheme

depiction of gardening tools or instruments including sickles, saws, trowels,
a hammer and a file

diagram of a planting scheme A Direction to set or lay your lines or thread to
make or draw a simple Knot, without a border.


You must leave your Lines as they be first set, until your Knet be altogether
finished or done.

diagram of a planting scheme The Manner or Ordering to set the thread or line
upon another manner of Knot.


diagram of a planting scheme A Direction to fasten your Lines to make another
manner of Knot.


diagram of a planting scheme A plain Knot without Lines.


diagram of a planting scheme A plain Knot without Lines.


diagram of a planting scheme Another plain Knot without Lines.


diagram of a planting scheme Another.


diagram of a planting scheme Another.


diagram of a planting scheme Another.


diagram of a planting scheme Another.


diagram of a planting scheme Another.


diagram of a planting scheme Another.


diagram of a planting scheme planner A Direction to fasten Cords or Lines to
draw a Knot with a Border; as also to make a Border of Beds parted in the midst.


diagram of a planting scheme A Direction of the Cords fastened upon the Border,
with a Knot in the midst.


diagram of a planting scheme A Border with a Knot in the midst thereof.


diagram of a planting scheme A Border or Knot divided or parted, containing
five small Knots.


diagram of a planting scheme The form of the Lines set upon the Knot, whose
Squares or Beds are parted.


diagram of a planting scheme A Border of Beds or Squares parted; and the midst
thereof.


diagram of a planting scheme A Maze.


diagram of a planting scheme including a pond with fish

The Art of ANGLING. WHEREIN Are discovered many rare Secrets, very necessary
to be known by all that delight in that Recreation.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1653.

The Art of Angling.
REader: I will complement, and put a case to you. I met with a man, and upon
our Discourse he fell out with me: this man having a good weapon, having
neither wit, stomach, nor skill; I say this man may come home by
Totnam-high-Cross, and cause the Clerk to tole his knell: It is the very like
case with the Gentleman Angler that goes to the River for his pleasure: this
Angler has neither judgment, knowledge, nor experience; he may come home
light laden at his pleasure.

A man that goes to the River for his pleasure, must understand, when he
comes there, to set forth his Tackles. The first thing he must do, is to
observe the Sun, the Wind, the Moon, the Stars, and the Wanes of the Air; to
set forth his Tackles according to the times and seasons; to go for his
pleasure, and some profit.

As for example, the Sun proves cloudy; then must he set forth either his
ground Bait or Tackles, and of the brightest of his Flies. If the Sun prove
bright, then must he put on some of the darkest of his flies. Thus must you go
to work with your Flies, light for darkness, and dark for lightness, with the
wind in the South, then that blows the Fly in the Trouts mouth. Though I set
down the wind being in the South, if the weather be warm, I am indifferent
where the wind stands, either with ground Bait or Menow, so that I can cast
my Bait into the River. The very same observations is for night, as for day:
For if the Moon prove clear, or if the Stars glitter in the sky, there is as
ill Angling that night, as if it were at high noon in the midst of Summer, when
the Sun shines at the brightest, wherein there is no hopes of pleasure.

I will begin to Angle for the Trout, with the ground Baits with this quality.

The first thing you must gain, must be a neat taper Rod, light before, with a
tender hazell top, which is very gentle. If you desire to attain my way of
Angling, (for I have Angled these forty years) with a single hair of five
lengths, one tied to another for the bottom of my Line, and a Line of three
haired links for the uppermost part; and so you may kill the greatest Trout
that swims, with Sea-room.

He that Angles with a Line made of three haired links at the bottom, and more
at the top, may kill Fish: but he that Angles with one hair shall kill five
Trouts to the others one; for the Trout is very quick sighted; therefore the
best way for night or day, is to keep out of the sight. You must Angle always
with the point of your Rod down the stream; for a Fish has not the quickness
of sight so perfect up the stream, as opposite against him, observing
seasonable times; as for example, we begin to Angle in March; If it prove
cloudie, you may Angle with the ground Baits all day long: but if it prove
bright and clear, you must take the morning and evening, or else you are not
like to do any good; so the times must be observed, and truly understood; for
when an Angler comes to the River for his pleasure that does not understand
to set forth his Tackles fit for the time, it is as good keep them in the bag,
as set them forth.

I am determined to Angle with the ground Baits and set my Tackles to my Rod,
and go to my pleasure: I begin at the uppermost part of the stream, carrying
my Line with an upright hand, feeling the Plummet running on the ground some
ten inches from the hook, plumming my Line according to the swiftness of the
stream you Angle in; for one plummet will not serve for all streams; for the
true Angling is that the plummet runs on the ground.

For the Bait. The red knotted worm is very good where Brandlins are not to be
had, but Brandlins are better: now that you may bring these Brandlings fit to
Angle with, that they may live long on the hook, which causes the best sport.
When you have gathered your worms out of the dunghill, you must gain the
greenest Moss you can find, then wash the earth very clean out of it, then
provide an earthen pot, so put your Moss into the pot, then put the worms to
the Moss into the pot; within two days you shall find your worms so poor, that
if you bait some of them on your hook, you shall see that with throwing of them
two or three times into the water, they will dye and grow white: now the skill
is, when these worms be grown poor, you must feed them up to make them fat and
lusty, that they may live long on the hook; that is the chiefest point.

To make them lusty and fat, you must take the yolke of an Egg, some eight or
ten spoonful of the top of new milk, beaten well together in a Porringer, warm
it a little, until you see it curdle; then take it off the fire, and set it to
cool; when it is cold, take a spoonful and drop it upon your Moss into the
pot, every drop about the bigness of a green Pea, shifting your Moss twice in
the week in the Summer, and once in the winter: thus doing, you shall feed your
worms fat, and make them lusty, that they will live a long time on the hook;
so you may keep them all the year long. This is my true experience for the
ground Baits, for the running Line for the Trout.

The Angling with a Menow, called in some places Pencks for a Trout, is a
pleasant sport, and kills the greatest Fish; be comes boldly to the Bait,
as if it were a Mastive Dog at a Bear: you may Angle with greater Tackles, and
stronger, and be no prejudice to you in your Angling: a Line made of three
silks and three hairs twisted for the uppermost part of the Line, and two
silks and two hairs twisted for the bottom next your hook, with a Swivel
nigh the middle of your Line, with an indifferent large hook.

To bait your hook with a Menow, you must put your hook through the lowermost
part of his mouth, so draw your hook through, then put the hook in at the mouth
again, let the point of the hook come out at the hindmost Fin, then draw your
Line, and the Menowes mouth will close, that no water will get into its belly;
you must always be Angling with the point of your Rod down the stream, with
drawing the Menow up the stream by little and little, nigh the top of the
water; the Trout seeing the bait, comes at it most fiercely, so give a little
time before you strike: This is the true way, without Lead; for many times I
have had them come at the Lead and forsake the Menow, so he that tries shall
prove it in time: let us go to Angling with a Fly, which is a delightful
sport.

The Rod must be light and tender, if you can fit your self with an Hazell,
either of one piece or two set together in the most convenient manner, light
and gentle: set your Line to the Rod; for the uppermost part, you may use your
own discretion; for the lower part, next your Fly, must be of three or four
haired links. If you can attain to Angle with one hair, you shall have the
more rises, and kill more fish; be sure you do not over-load your self with
the length of your Line: before you begin to Angle, make a trial, having the
wind in your back, to see at what length you can cast your Fly, that the Fly
light first into the water, and no longer; for if any of the Line falls into
the water before the Fly, it is better unthrowne then thrown: be sure you be
casting always down the stream, with the Wind behind you, and the Sun
before; it is a special point to have the Sun and Moon before you; for the
very motion of the Rod drives all the pleasure from you, either by day or night
in all your Angings, both for Worms and Flies; so there must be a great care
of that.

Let us begin to Angle in March with the Fly: If the weather prove Windy, or
Cloudie, there are several kinds of Palmers that are good for that time.

First, a black Palmer ribbed with silver: the second, a black Palmer with an
Orange-tauny body: thirdly, a black Palmer, with the body made all of black:
fourthly, a red Palmer ribbed with gold, and a red hackle mixed with Orange
cruel; these Flies serve all the year long morning and evening, windy and
cloudie. Then if the Air prove bright and clear, you must imitate the
Hauthorn Fly, which is all black and very small, and the smaller the better.
In May take the May-flie: imitate that, which is made several ways; some make
them with a shammy body, ribbed with a black hair: another way made with
Sandy-Hogges wool, ribbed with black silk, and winged with a Mallards
feather, according to the fancy of the Angler. There is another called the
Oak-Flie, which is made of Orange color Cruel and black, with a brown wing;
imitate that: Another Fly, the body made with the strain of a Pea-Cocks
feather, which is very good in a bright day: The Grasse-hopper which is green,
imitate that; the smaller the Flies be made, and of indifferent small hooks,
they are the better; these sorts I have set down, will serve all the year
long, observing the times and seasons: Note, the lightest of your Flies for
cloudy and darkness, and the darkest of your Flies for lightness, and the
rest for indifferent times; that a man's own Judgment, with some experience
and discretion must guide him: If he mean to kill Fish, he must alter his Flies
according to these directions. Now, of late, I have found, that Hogs-wooll, of
several colors, makes good grounds; and the wool of a red Heyfer makes a
good body: And Bears wool makes a good ground; so I now work much of them, and
it procures very much sport.

The natural Fly is sure Angling, and will kill great store of Trouts with
much pleasure: As for the May-Flie, you shall have them always playing at the
River side, especially against Rain. The Oake-Flie is to be had on the butt
of an Oak, or an Ash, from the beginning of May to the end of August: it is a
brownish Fly, and stands always with his head toward the root of the tree,
very easy to be found: The small black Fly is to be had on every Hawthorn
Bush, after the buds be come forth: Your Grasse-hopper, which is green, is to
be had in any Meadow of Grass in June or July: with these Flies, you must Angle
with such a Rod as you Angle with the ground Bait; the Line must not be so long
as the Rod: with drawing your fly, as you find convenient in your Angling.
When you come to deep waters that stand somewhat still, make your Line some two
yards long, or thereabout, and dop your Fly behind a a Bush, which Angling I
have had good sport at; we call it doping.

A Lord lately sent to me at Sun going down, to provide him a good dish of
Trouts against the next morning by six of the Clock: I went to the door to see
how the wains of the Air were like to prove, and returned answer, that I
doubted not but to be provided (God willing) at my time appointed. I went
presently to the River, and it proved very dark; I drew out a Line of three
silks and three hairs twisted for the uppermost part, and a Line of two silks
and two hairs twisted for the lowermost part, with a good large hook: I baited
my hook with two Lob-worms, the four ends hanging as meet as I could guess
them in the dark: I fell to Angle; it proved very dark, that I had good sport,
Angling with the Lob-worms, as I do with the Fly, at the top of the water;
you shall hear the Fish rise at the top of the water, then you must loose a
slack Line down to the bottom, as nigh as you can guess, then hold a straight
Line; feeling the Fish bite, give time, there is no doubt of losing the Fish;
for there is not one among twenty, but does gorge the Bait: the least stroke
you can strike to fasten the hook, makes the fish sure, and then you may take
the fish up with your hands: The night began to alter and grew somewhat
lighter; I took off the Lob-worms, and set to my Rod a white Palmer Fly, made
of a large hook, I had sport for the time, till it grew lighter: then I put on
my red Palmer, I had sport for the time, until it grew very light; then I set
on my black Palmer, had good sport, made up my dish of fish, put up my Ta^^ies,
(...) at my time appointed for the service. For these (...) Flies, with the
help of the Lob-worms, serve to Angle all the year long, observing the times,
as I have showed in this nights work: a light Fly for darkness, the red Fly in
medio, and a dark Fly for lightness: This is my experiment for this kind of
Angling, which is the surest Angling of all, and kills the greatest Fish:
your Lines may be strong, but must be no longer then the Rod.

To take a Carp either in Pond or River, if you mean to have sport with some
profit, you must take a peck of Ale-graines, and a good quantity of any blood,
and mix the blood and grains together, and cast it in the places where you
mean to Angle; this feed will gather the seal Fish together, as Carp, Tench,
Roach, Dace, and Bream; the next morning be at your sport very early, plum your
ground: you may Angle for the Carp with a strong Line; the Bait must be either
a red knotted worm, or Paste: there is no doubt of sport.

To take Perch. The Perch feeds well, if you light where they be, and bites
very free: My opinion is, (with some experience) to bait with Lob-worms, chopped
in pieces over night; so come in the morning betimes, plum your ground, gage
your line, bait your hook with a red knotted worm; but I hold a Menow better:
put the hook in at the back of the Menow, betwixt the fish and the skin, that
the Menow may swim up and down alive, being boyed up with a Cork or Quill, that
the Menow may have liberty to swim a foot off the the ground: there is no
doubt of sport with profit.

I will show, a little, my opinion of floating for scale Fish in the River or
Pond: The feed brings the Fish together, as the sheep to the Pen: There is
nothing better in all your Anglings, for feed, then Blood and Grains, I hold it
better then Paste: then plumming your ground, Angling with fine Tackles, as
single hair for half the Line next the hook, round and small plumed,
according to your float: For the Bait, there is a small red worm, with a yellow
tip on his tail, is very good; Brandlins, Gentles, Paste, or Cadice, which we
call Cod-bait, they lie in a gravelly husk under stones in the River: these be
the special Baits for these kind of Fish.

One of my name was the best Trouler, for a Pike, in this Realm: he laid a
wager, that he would take a Pike of four footlong, of Fish, within the space of
one Month, with his Trouling-Rod; so he Trouled three weeks and odd days,
and took many great Pikes, nigh the length, but did not reach the full length,
till within the space of three days of the time; then he took one, and won the
wager. The manner of his Trouling was, with a Hazell Rod of twelve foot long,
with a Ring of Wyre in the the top of his Rod, for his Line to run through:
within two foot of the bottom of the Rod there was a hole made, for to put in
a wind, to turn with a barrel, to gather up his Line, and loose at his
pleasure; this was his manner of Trouling: But I will pawn my credit, that I
will show a way, either in Mayor, Pond, or River, that shall take more Pikes
than any Trouler with his Rod: And thus it is. First, take forked stick, a Line
of twelve yards long wound upon it, at the upper end, leave about a yard,
either to tie a bunch of Sags, or a Bladder, to Boy up the Fish, and to carry
it from the ground: the Bait must be a live Fish, either Dace, or Gudgin, or
Roach, or a small Trout: the forked stick must have a slit in the one side of
the fork to put in the Line, that you may set your live Fish to swim at a
gage, that when the Pike takes the Bait, he may have the full liberty of the
Line for his feed.

You may turn these loose, either in Pond or River: in the Pond with the wind
all day long, the more the better: at night set some small weight, as may stay
the Boy, as a Ship lies at Anchor, till the Fish takes. For the River, you
must turn all loose with the stream; two or three be sufficient to show
pleasure, gaged at such a depth as they will go current down the River; there
is no doubt of sport, if there be Pikes: for the hooks, they must be doubled
hooks, the shanks should be somewhat shorter then ordinary: my reason is, the
shorter the hook is of the shank, it will hurt the live Fish the less, and
must be armed with small wyre well softened; but I hold a hook armed with
twisted silk to be better, for it will hurt the live Fish least.

If you arm your hook with wyre, the neeld must be made with a small hook at
the one end thereof. If you arm with silk, the neeld must be made with an
eye: then must you take one of those Baits alive (which you can get) and with
one of your neelds enter within a strawes breadth of the Gill of the Fish, so
put the neeld betwixt the skin and the Fish; then pull the neeld out at the
hindmost finne, and draw the arming through the Fish, until the hook come to
lie close to the Fishes body: But I hold for those that be armed with wyre to
take off the hook, and put the neeld in the hindmost sin and so to come forth
at the Gill; then put on the hook drawn close to the body, 'twill hurt the live
Fsh the less, so knit the arming with the live Fish to the Line; then put off
either in Mayor or Pond, with the wind, in the River with the stream: The more
you put off in Mayor or Pond, you are like to have the more pleasure: For the
River I have showed you before.

There is a time when Pikes go a Frogging Ditches, and in the River to Sun
them, as in May, June and July, there is a speedy way to take them, and not to
miss scarce one in twenty.

You must take a Line of six or eight foot long, arm a large hook, of the
largest size that is made; arm it to your Line, lead the shank of your hook
very handsome, that it may be of such a weight as you may guide the hook at your
pleasure: you may strike the Pike, you see, with the bare hook where you
please: this Line and hook does far exceed snaring.

The principal sport to take a Pike, is to take a Goose or Gander, or Duck:
take one of the Pike Lines I have showed you before: tie the Line under the
left wing, and over the right wing, about the body, as a man wears his Belt:
turn the Goose off into a Pond, where Pikes are, there is no doubt of sport,
with great pleasure, betwixt the Goose and the Pike: It is the greatest sport
and pleasure that a noble Gentleman in Shropshire does give his friends
entertainment with.

The way to make the best paste is, Take a reasonable quantity of fresh Butter,
as much fresh sheeps Suet, a reasonable quantity of the strongest Cheese you
can get, with the soft of an old stale white loaf; beat all this in a Mortar
till it come to perfect paste; put as much on your hook as a green pease.

There are many ways to take Eeles: I will show you a good way to take a dish
of Eeles. When you stay a night or two Angling, take four or five Lines, such
as be laid for Pikes, of fourteen or fifteen yards long, and at every two yards
make a noose, to hang a hook armed either to double thread, or silk twist; for
it is better then wyre: Bait your Hooks with Millors-thumbs, Loaches, Menowes,
or Gudgins: tie to every noose a Line baited: these Lines must be laid cross
the River in the deepest places, either with stones, or pegged, so the Line lie
in the bottom of the river, there is no doubt of taking a dish of Eeles; you
must have a small neeld with an eye, to bait your hooks.

Now to show how to make Flies: learn to make two Flies, and make all: that is,
the Palmer ribbed with silver or gold, and the May-flie: these are the ground
of all Flies.

We will begin to make the Palmer Fly: You must arm your Line on the inside
of the hook; take your Scisers, and cut so much of the brown of the Mallards
feather, as in your own reason shall make the wings, then lay the outmost part
of the feather next the hook, and the point of the feather toward the shanke
of the hook, then whip it three or four times about the hook with the same silk
you armed the hook: then make your silk fast: then you must take the hackle of
the neck of a Cock or Capon, or a Plovers top, which is the best, take off the
one side of the feather, then you must take the hackle silk, or cruel, gold or
silver thread; make all these fast at the bent of the hook, then you must begin
with Cruel, and Silver, or Gold, and work it up to the wings, every bout
shifting your fingers, and making a stop, then the gold will fall right, then
make fast: then work up the hackle to the same place, then make the hackle
fast: then you must take the hook betwixt your finger and thumb, in the left
hand, with a neeld or pin, part the wings in two: then with the arming silk, as
you have fastened all hitherto, whip about as it falls cross betwixt the
wings, then with your thumb you must turn the point of the feather toward the
bent of the hook, then work three or four times about the shank, so fasten,
then view the proportion.

For the other Flies: If you make the grounds of Hogs-wooll, sandy, black, or
white; or the wool of a Bear, or of a two year old red Bullock: you must work
al these grounds upon a waxed silk, then you must arm and set on the wings, as
I have showed before: For the May-flie, you work the body with some of these
grounds, which is very good, ribbed with a black hair; you may work the body
with Cruels, imitating the Color, or with Silver, with suiting the wings. For
the Oak-flie, you must make him with Orange-tauny and black, for the body, and
the brown of the Mallards feather for the wings. If you do after my directions,
they will kill fish, observing the times fitting, and follow my former
Directions.

If any worthy or honest Angler cannot hit of these my Directions, let him come
to me, he shall read and I will work, he shall see all things done according to
my foresaid Directions: So I conclude for the Fly, having showed you my true
Experiments, with the Rod, I will set all laboring sports aside:

And now I am waiting on my Lord with a great Dish of Trouts, who meeting with
company, commanded me to turn Scullion, and dress a Dinner of the Trouts we
had taken: whereupon I gave my Lord this Bill of fare, which I did furnish his
Table with, according as it was furnished with flesh. Trouts in broth, which is
restorative: Trouts broyled, cut and filled with sweet Herbs chopped: Trouts
calvored hot with Antchovaes sauce: Trouts boiled; out of which Kettle I make
three Dishes; the one for a Soused Dish, another for a Stewed Dish, the third
for a hot Dish: the Sauce is Butter, Vinegar, beaten Cinnamon, with the juice of
a Lemmon, beaten very well together, that the Sauce is white and thick, or else
it is no Sauce for a great man's Table: Trouts fried, which must be done, and
not put into the Pan, until the Suet boil very high, and kept with stirring
all the time they are frying, being flowr'd first. Trouts stewed: Trouts close,
boiled with the calvored Trouts, all in one Kettle and the same liquor: Trouts
buttered with Eggs: Trouts roasted: Trouts baked: these are for the first
course, before the Salt.

And these are for the latter course. Trouts calvored cold: Trouts flat cold:
Baked Trouts: Trouts marilled, that will eat perfect and sweet three months in
the heat of Summer: if I did say, for the whole year about, I would make it
good.

For the dressing of four or five of the Dishes, I will show you how I did
perform them.

First, I will show you for the boiling and calvoring, that serves for hot and
cold, for first and latter course.

First, you must draw out the Intrails of the fish, cutting the fish two or
three times in the back; lay them in a Tray or Platter, put some Vinegar upon
them; you shall see the fish turn sanguine, if they be new, presently: you must
put so much water in the Kettle as you think will cover them, with a pint of
Vinegar, a handful of Salt, some Rosemary and Thyme and sweet Marjoram tied in
a bunch: then you must make this liquor boil with a fierce fire made of wood:
when the liquor has boiled very well, put in your fish by one and one, keeping
your liquor always boiling, until you have put all in: having provided a
cover for your Kettle, so put on the cover: you must have a pair of Bellows
to blow up the fire with speed, that the liquor may boil up to the top of the
Kettle; so the fierce boiling will make the Fish to calvor: provided, the fish
be new killed: you may let them boil nigh a quarter of an hour; when they are
cold, you may put them in a Tray or earthen Pan, until you have occasion to
use them: be sure they lie covered.

For your stewed Trouts, you must cut them on the side, as for broiling: there
are diverse ways of stewing; the English has one way, the French has another
way, the Italian has another way: I may speak this; for I have been admitted
into the Kitchins, to furnish men of most Nations, when they have been in
England.

We will begin with the English: He broyleth first upon a Charcoale fire: the
first thing that you must have a care of is, when your Grid-iron is hot you
must cool it with ruff Suet, then the skin of your Fish will not break, with
care of turning them: when they are nigh broyled, take them off the Grid-iron;
set on a Chafing Dish of coals in a Stew Pan, or Dish; put in a good quantity
of fresh Butter, so much Vinegar as will give the relish, a pennyworth of
beaten Cinnamon; then put in your broyled fish, and let them stew, about half
an hour will be sufficient, being turned: adorn your Dish with Sippets, take
the fish out of the stew pan, lay them for the service, be sure to squease a
Lemmon on them: I will warrant them good victual.

The Italian he stews upon a Chafing Dish of coals, with White Wind, Cloves,
and Mace, Nutmegs sliced, a little Ginger: you must understand when this fish
is stewed, the same liquor that the fish is stewed in, must be beaten with some
Butter and the juice of a Lemmon, before it is dish'd for the service. The
French do add to this a slice or two of Bacon.

I will show you the way to marrionate a Trout or other fish, that will keep a
quarter of a year in Summer, which is the Italians rarest Dish for fresh fish,
and will eat perfect and sweet.

You must take out the Intrailes as you do of other fish, and cut them
a-crosse the sides, as you do to broyle, washed clean, dried with a cloth, lay
themupon a Tray or board, sprinkle a little salt on them, and flower them as to
fry them, so take your Drying Pan with so much Suet, when it is melted, as the
Fish may lie to the mid-side in the liquor, and so fry them; and every time you
turn them, flower them again, until you find the fish fried sufficient: when
you think the fish is fried, take it out of the Pan, and lay it upon some
thing, that the liquor may draine out of it; when the fish is cold, you may
rear it an end.

You must have a close Vessel to keep this fish and liquor in, that no wind
comes in, according to the quantity you make trial of.

For the Liquor. First, you must take half Claret Wine, the other half
Vinegar, two or three Bay Leaves, so much Saffron as a Nut tied in a cloth,
with some Cloves and large Mace, some Nutmeg sliced; boil all these together
very well; when the liquor is cold, and the fish cold, put the fish and liquor
into the close Vessel, with three or four Lemmons sliced among the fish; make
all cl^se that no wind can get into the Vessel; after eight or ten days you
may begin to eat of this fish; the Sauce must ^e some of the same liquor, with
some of a sliced Lemmon.

To dress a Pike.
When the Pike comes into the Kitchen, kill it; then take a handful of Salt,
with water, and rub the fish very well to take the slime off, draw out the
Intrailes; wash the Pike clean, put a handful of Salt in the Pikes Belly;
then take so much water, with a pint of Vinegar: if the Pike be any thing
large, you must put in at least three handful of Salt, with a bunch of
Rosemary, Thyme, and sweet Marjoram, and two or three green Onyons; boil your
liquor very well with a high fire made of wood; then put in your Pike, cover
your Kettle, with your Bellows keep your Kettle boiling very high for the
space of half an hour or thereabouts: a Pike asks great boiling: for the
Sauce, it is sweet Butter well beaten with some of the top of the same liquor,
with two or three Antchovaes, the skin taken off, and the bones taken out, a
little Vinegar, so garnish your Dish: when your Pike is Dished, take the juice
of a Lemmon and put on the top of the fish: there is no doubt but it is good
victual.

I could set down as many ways to dress Eeles, as would furnish a Lords
Table: but I will relate but one.

Take off the skin whole, till you come within two inches of the tail,
beginning at the head: take out the Intrailes, wash the Eele clean, dry it
with a cloth, scotch it all along both the sides; take some Pepper and Salt,
mix them together, rub the Eele well with the Pepper, and Salt; draw the
skin on again whole; tie the skin about the head with a little thread
lapped round, broyled on a Charcoale fire, let your Grid-iron be hot, rub your
Grid iron with some ruff Suet; the skin will not burn; this is good; but
take the skin off, and stew the Eele betwixt two Dishes, on a Chafing Dish of
Coals, with sweet Butter, Vinegar, and beaten Cinnamon, they will be better.

The boiling of a Carp is the very same way as I have showed for the Trout, the
scales on: no better Sauce can be made then the Antchovaes Sauce. The high
boiling is the way for all fresh water Fish: I have served seven times seven
years, to see the experiment.

If there be any Gentleman that lives adjoining to a River side, where Trouts
are; I will show the way to bring them to feed, that he may see them at his
pleasure; and to bring store to the place. Gather great Garden-Wormes, the
quantity of a pint, or a quart, chop them in pieces, and throw them where you
intend to have your pleasure; with feeding often, there is no doubt of their
coming; they will come as Sheep to the Pen: you must begin to feed with pieces
of worms, by hand, by one and one, until you see them eat; then you may feed
with Liver or Lights, so your desire will be effected. And thus I conclude this
short Treatise.

FINIS.

