AN ABRIDGMENT Of the late Reverend Assemblies SHORTER CHATECHISM. Fitted for
the use of the weakest Capacities and Memories.
Question I.

WHat is God?

Answ. God the (a) Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is a (b) Spirit, (c) Almighty,
of perfect (d) goodness, holiness, (e) mercy, and (f) justice a Mat. 28.19. Go
ye therefore and teach all Nations baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost

1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one.

b Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and truth.

c Rev. 4.8. And the four beasts rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty.

d Mat. 19.17. Jesus said, There is none good but One, that is God.

e Exodus 34.6. The Lord proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and
gracious, long suffering, Ver. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands; forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin.

f Exodus 34.7. The Lord, that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the Children.

Q. 2. In what estate did God create or make man?

Ans. God created man after his own (g) Image, in (h) knowledge, (i)
righteousness and holiness, entering into a (k) Covenant of life with him, upon
condition of perfect obedience.

g Genesis 1.27. So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created
he him, Male and Female created he them.

h Col. 3.10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after
the image of him that created him.

i Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

k Genesis 2.16, 17. The Lord God commanded the man, saying, of every tree of the
Garden thou may freely eat, Ver. 17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die.

Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of faith, but the Man that does them shall live in
them.

Quest. 3. Did Man continue in that estate wherein he was created?

Answ. Man fell (l) from that estate by sin, and so brought himself, and all
mankind under the (m) wrath, and (n) curse of God.

l Genesis 3.6. When the Woman saw, that the tree was good for food, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat; and gave also unto her husband with her, and he
did eat.

m Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in time past, in the
lusts of our flesh, and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.

n Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works of the Law are under the curse: For
it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the Book of the Law to do them

Quest. 4. What is sin?

Answ. Sin is the (o) transgression of the Law of God.

o 1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the Law: for sin is
the transgression of the Law.

Quest. 5. By what means may man escape the wrath and curse of God?

Answ. Man may escape the wrath and curse of God by (p Jesus Christ, the only
(q) begotten Son of God, who became (r) man, being (s) conceived by the Holy
Ghost, and born of the (t) Virgin Mary.

(p) Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none
other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

q John 3.16. God gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

John 1.14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
glory, the glory of the only begotten of the Father.

s Luke 1.35. The Angel said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the highest shall over-shaddow thee; therefore also that holy
thing, which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

t Mat. 1.25. Joseph knew her not, till she had brought forth her firstborn
Son, and he called his name Jesus.

Quest. What has Jesus Christ done for man?

Answ. Jesus Christ underwent the (u) wrath and (w) curse of God for man, being
(x) crucified, (y) dead and (y) buried, He (y) arose again, (z) ascended into
Heaven, and sits at the (z) right hand of God the Father.

u Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed.

w Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us; for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree.

x Mat. 27.35. And they crucified him, and parted his Garments, casting lots.

y 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. Christ dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures, v. 4.
And was buried, and rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures.

z Mark 16.19. So then, after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into Heaven; and sat on the right hand of God.

Quest. 7. How came we to be partakers of what Jesus Christ has done for man?

Answ. We come to be partakers of what Jesus Christ has done for man by the
(a) Holy Ghost.

a Tit. 3.5, 6. According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of
Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, v. 6. Which he shed on us
abundantly; through Jesus Christ our Savior.

Quest. 8. After what manner does the Holy Ghost make us partakers of what
Christ has done?

Answ. The Holy Ghost makes us partakers of what Christ has done, by working
in us (b) faith in Christ, and (c) repentance unto life.

b 1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost.

c Romans 8.13. If ye by the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live.

Quest. 9. What is faith in Christ?

Answ. Faith in Christ, is a firm (d) believing that Christ is the only Lord
and Savior, and an hearty (e) acceptance of him accordingly.

d Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved.

c John 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons
of God, even to them that believe in his name.

Quest. 10. What is Repentance unto life?

Answ. Repentance unto life is an hearty (f) sorrow for, and turning (g) from
all sins unto God, with a full purpose of, and (h) endeavor after new
obedience.

f Joel. 2.12. Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all
your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.

g Isa. 1.16, 17. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, v. 17. Learn to do well, seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the widow.

Quest. 11. What is the rule of obedience?

Answ. The Rule of obedience is the (h) Mora^ Law contained in the Ten
Commandments.

h Deuteronomy. 10.4, 13. He wrote on the Table according to the first writing, the
ten commandments, which the Lord spoke unto you in the Mount out of the midst
of the fire, in the day o^ the assembly, and the Lord gave them unto me. --
Ver. 13. To keep the Commandments of the Lord and his statutes, which I
Command thee this day for thy good.

Quest. 12. Rehearse the ten commandments?

Answ. God speak all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, etc. Exodus
20.1, to 18.

Quest. 13. What is the sum of the ten commandments?

Answ. The sum of the Ten Commandments, is, to love the Lord our God, with all
our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our mind, and
our neighbors as our selves, Luke 10.27. Mark 12.30, 31.

Quest. 14. How does the Holy Ghost work in us Faith in Christ, and repentance
unto life?

Answ. The Holy Ghost does work in us Faith in Christ, and repentance unto life
ordinarily, by the (i) preaching and hearing (k) of the word of God.

Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the Testimony
of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.

k Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.

Quest. 15. How are Faith and Repentance strengthened?

Answ. Faith and Repentance are strengthened by the (l) same Word of God, by
the (m) Sacraments, and (n) by Prayer.

I Acts 20.23. I commend you to God and the word of his Grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them which are sanctified.

m Romans 6.4. We are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ
was raised from the dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life.

1 Cor. 11.24. When he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this
is my body which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me.

n Luke 11.13. If ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children,
how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask
him?

Quest. 16. What is the word of God?

Answ. The word of God is the (o) Scriptures of (p) the Old, and New Testament.

o 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable,
etc.

p Ephesians. 2 20. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone.

Quest. 17. What is a Sacrament?

Answ. A Sacrament is an (q) outward sign and seal of the New Covenant.

q Romans 4.11. He received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the Righteousness
of faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised.

Quest. 18. What is the new Covenant?

Answ. The new Covenant is that wherein God freely offers unto sinners (r)
life, and (s) salvation by Christ, requiring of them (t) faith in him that they
may be saved.

r 1 John 5.11. This is the record that God has given to us eternal life, and
this life is in his Son.

s Acts 3.25, 26. Yea are the Children of the Promise and of the Covenant which
God made with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the
Kindreds of the Earth be blessed, v. 26. Unto you first God having raised up
his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his
iniquities.

Romans 11.26, 27. And so all Israel shall be saved as it is written, There shall
come out of Sion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob ver.
27. -- For this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.

1 John 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Quest. 19. Which are the Sacraments, that signify and seal the new Covenant?

Answ. The Sacraments, that signify and seal the New Covenant, are (u)
Baptism, and the (w) Lords Supper.

u Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

w Mat. 26.26, 27, 28. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed
it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my
body, ver. 27. And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it them, saying,
drink ye all of it, ver. 28. For this is my blood of the New Testament, which
is shed for many, for the remission of sins.

Quest. 20. What is Baptism?

Answ. Baptism is the (x) washing with water in the name of the Father, and of
the son, and of the Holy Ghost.

x Mat. 28.19. See before Quest. 19. u.

Quest. 21. What does baptism signify and seal unto us?

Answ. Baptism does signify and seal unto us the (y) washing away of our sins
by the (z) blood of Christ.

y Acts 22.16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the
name of the Lord.

z Rev. 1.5. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood.

Quest. 22. To whom is Baptism to be administered?

Answ. Baptism is to be administered (only) to (a) believers and their (b) seed.

a Acts 8.37, 38. Philip said, if thou believe with all thy heart, thou
may: And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God, v. 38. And he baptized him.

b Acts 2.39. The Promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving husband is sanctified by his wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband; else were your children unclean,
but now they are holy.

Quest. 23. What is the Lord's Supper?

Answ. The Lord's Supper is the (c) giving and receiving of Bread and Wine
according to Christ's appointment, in Remembrance of his death.

c 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. I have received of the Lord, that which also I
delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which be was betrayed
took Bread, v. 24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take,
eat, this is my body which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me, v.
25. After the same manner also be took the Cup, when he had supped, saying,
this Cup is the New Testament in my blood; this do ye, as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me. Quest. 24. What does the Lords Supper signify and seal
unto us?

An. The Lords Supper signifies and seals unto the worthy receivers the (d)
feeding and nourishing their souls, by the body and blood of Christ.

d Mat. 26.26. See before Quest. 19. w.

Quest. 25. Who are the worthy Receivers of the Lords Supper?

Answ. They are worthy Receivers of the Lords Supper, that examine themselves
of their (e) Knowledge, (f) Faith, (g) Repentance, (h) Love, and (i) new
Obedience.

e 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup, v. 29. For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords
Body.

f 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own
selves. Know ye not your selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
Reprobates?

g 1 Cor. 11.31. If we would judge our selves we should not be judged.

h Cor. 10.16, 17. The Cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion
of the blood of Christ? The Bread which we brake, is it not the Communion of
the body of Chrst? v. 27. For we being many are one bread and one body, for we
are all partakers of that one bread.

i Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.

Quest. 26. What if persons neglect self-examination, before they receive the
Lords Supper?

Answ. Those that neglect self-examination, before they receive the Lords
Supper, are in danger to (k) eat and drink judgment to themselves, being (l)
guilty of the body and blood of our Lord.

k 1 Cor. 11.29. See before Quest. 25. e.

l 1 Cor. 11.27. Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Quest. 27. What is Prayer?

Answ. Prayer is the offering up of our (m) desires to God, in the (n) name of
Christ, with (o) confession of our sins and (p) thanksgiving.

m Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer, and
supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God.

n John 16.23. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you.

o Dan. 9.4. I Prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said, O
Lord, etc.

p Phil 4.6. See before, Quest. 27. m.

Quest. 28. What Rule has God given for our direction in Prayer?

An. The whole (q) word of God, is of use to direct us in prayer, but
especially the Lords Prayer.

q 1 John 5.14. This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us.

Quest. 29. Rehearse the Lord's Prayer?

Answ. Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy Kingdom
come. Thy will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the Glory, for ever, and ever, Amen. Mat. 6.9, 10, etc.
Luke 11.1, 3, 4.

Quest. 30. What benefits have we in Christ upon uor Faith and Repentance in
this life?

Answ. We have in Christ upon our Faith and Repentance in this life (r) pardon
of sin, (s) power to become the Sons of God, and a (t) renewing of the Image of
God in us.

r To. 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified.

s John 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he power to beeome the Sons
of God, even to them that believe on his name.

t Col. 3.9, 10. Ye have put off the Old man with his deeds. ver. 10. And have
put on the new man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the image of him that
created him.

Quest. 31. What benefits have we in Christ at death?

Answ. At death, our (u) souls shall immediately pass into glory.

u Luke 23.43. Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, to day thou shall
be with me in Baradise.

Quest. 32. What benefits have we in Christ at the Resurrection?

Answ. At the Resurrection, our (w) bodies also being raised up in glory, we
shall be (x) acquitted by Christ in judgment, and made perfectly (y) blessed
in the full enjoyment of God (z) for ever.

w 1 Cor. 15.43. It is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power.

x Mat. 25.33, 34. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats
on the left, v. 3, 4. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the world.

y 1 John 3.2. Now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear, what we
shall be: but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is.

z 1 These. 4.17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we
be ever with the Lord.

Quest. 33. What shall become of those that never repent and believe?

Answ. Those that never repent and believe besides the (a) wrath and (b) curse
of God upon them in this life, shall (c) die in their sins, and be (d) punished
with everlasting torments i^ Hell Fire.

a John 3.36. He that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath
of God abides on him^

b Gal. 3.10. See before Quest. 3. n.

c John 8.24. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins; for if
ye believe not tha^ I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

d 2 These. 1.8.9. In flaming Fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, v. 9. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power.

Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

FINIS.

