MER LINUS ANGLICUS: OR, ENGLAND'S MERLIN.

Prophetically foretelling, The Admirable Events, and Wonderful Effects, that
shall befall the King of Scots, the States of Holland, and the Parliament of
England, in all their Consultations, Warlike Actions, and Naval Designs, both
by Sea and Land, for the Year of our Lord, 1653.

WITH The most exact Predictions, and Monthly Observations, touching the great
Rising of the European Nations against England; and the success that will
attend them in all their Motions, Enterprises, and Attempts; As also, the
Causes of these strange Revolutions, Mutations, Inclinations, and Eversions of
Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths.

LIKEWISE, The Astromical Calculations of the Eclipses, Lunations, and
conjunctions; portending a great Change of Government, Religion, and Law, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland; together with the taking off all Taxes,
Assesments, Burdens, and Oppressions; and calling to a severe Account all
Committees and Treasurers; with the executing of many great Ones. October. 26.

COllected out of the most elaborate Works of Captain George Wharton, Esquire,
Mr. William Lilly, Mr. John Booker, Mr. Vincent Wing, and Mr. Nicholas
Culpeper, Students in Astrology and physic.

London, Printed by R. WOOD, 1653.

To the Reader.
ONce more I again appear in public (notwithstanding the late publishing of
an irreular and counterfeit Pamphlet, called, The Dutch bloody Almanac)
presenting you with the great Revolutions, Positions, Passions, and Prediction,
with every Months Observations, for the year of our Lord, 1653. to either with
sundry Judgments Astrologica: Calculated from the influence of the first
Opposition upon Saturn and Jupiter, 27 Feb. 52, and 53, 7 h. 16. P. M. as also
from the superlative Actions signified by the last two years Lunar Eclipses,
and by the Solar Eclipse of the 29. March, 1652. But before I enter on this
years Judgment, I conceive it most requisite and pertinent, to r^^^ollect and
commend to the Ingenious contemplation, the Causes of the Mutations,
Inclinations, and Eversious of Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths; and the
rather, because (as I suppose) Time never produced an Age so full of Prodigies,
nor a Generation of Men so inclined to Novelty, as now the present; wherein
every day presents a New Enquiry, every Month a fresh vicissitude. The Causes
are thus distinguished: The first Cause is God, the Creator and Governor of all
things, who has set certain Intervals, and periods of Times, to (...) ^rors,
etc. amongst which periods, the 500 and 700 th year are accounted most fatal
A^^ the Natural Reason hereof, is, for that in this space of time, there
elapseth the 6 Genera^^^n of Men; which abateth of, and more and more declineth
from, the simplicity, strength and f^rtitude of those Men, who at first
obtained and preserved Empires, by such Veriues: For (...) the as the Bodies of
men become weak and feeble in the 4 th and 5 th Generation, even so also
decreaseth the strength and fortitude, whereby Kingdoms are acquired preserved
and propagated. Secondly, The superior Natural Cause, is, the motion and
influence of the planets and stars; touching which, learned Keckerman gives
this Canon: Heaven (says he) most effectually operates upon a humane Body,
best agreeable to it self, and so also on the Body both of the Prince himself
and his subjects: to wit, as that it changes the Temperaments of men's bodies,
and with those Temperaments their manner^ or conditions; and the manner or
conditions of princes and subjects being changed, a Mutation of the
Commonwealth follows. And with him agrees that excellent Astrologer,
Origanus, who says, We observe not only fundry changes and translations of
Kingdoms, whilst these planets reign, and bear Rule with others; but also that
upon the whole surface of the Earth, there is nothing perpetual. Thus not
doubting, but that thou will vouchsase thy friendly acceptance, to these my
weak Endeavors, I humbly devote my self,

Yours, G. H.

Merlinus Anglicus, etc.
Januaries Observations.
THe year seems to begin pleasantly; our States promise fairly; and long-look't
for comes at last; for the heavy burden of the people is removing; the honors
of many great Ones are eclipsing; and the soldiery begin to be highly
elevated, whilst the poor Country Farmer (whose condition I pity) complains
and sads his heart, in regard his Cattle are like in many places to perish for
want of fodder and meat. A great change threatens the Lawyer: Sadness seems to
possess the spirits of many great Ones. The year initiates fair, but
seasonably cold and frosty; and so continues for the most part, until the 15
day, from whence (especially about the 18, 19, 20, and 21 days) look for
abundance of snow or rain, and dark unwholesome weather.

Observations on Feb.
GReat are the Designs now in Consults, and such as may (by Gods blessing) make
us happy for some succeeding years; Angels of Gold please the saints on earth,
else why are some zealous spirits now calmed? Remiss cold fair weather for the
most part till the 10 day; from whence expect cold winds, Rain or snow, until
the 14. The 15 and 16 days fair and seasonable. About the 17, 18, and 19 days
look for more rain and snow. The latter end of this month (especially the 26
day) will produce impetuous storms of Rain and Hail. Full moon the 2d day. New
moon the 17 day.

Observations on March.
THe Hollander is as busy as a fly in the hony-pot, and great preparations are
making against us; but alas! I could wish Noah's Dove might appear with glad
tidings of peace, after these late, long, and terrible wars, which are still
like to be for some years universal. Some small snow the first three days. Much
Rain or snow about the full Moon, and so for the most part till after the 6
day; and thence the Air will be more serene (though very cold and
frosty-mornings] until the 15 day. The rest of the month will be fair but
windy. The 4 day full Moon, but she is totally eclipsed all England over. The 19
day full Moon.

A word in season to the Lawyer: Gentlemen, to deal ingeniously, the divine
Aspects of heaven promises fair; balance your Wisdom in the Skales of Equity,
and do justice to all men; for there are a people that will swell with
invectives against Thee near these Times. The Term commences with the Lawyer's
grief
[Curt Fees, and they deserve as Curt relief:]
Lawyers prefer the sharpest Laws, as best
To keep a Commonwealth in peace and rest:
If so; why should the Gown-men frown and puff
To see the Courts of Justice lyn'd with Buff?
No Plea e're moved as a Sword can do;
For that ore-ruleth Judge and Jury too.


Observations on April.
FOur times shall the Inhabitants of the earth behold the Luminaries eclipsed
this year, twice the Sun, and as often the Moon; but we in England, as also
Ireland, France, Spain, and Scotland, shall not see any of them, except one,
and that total of the Moon, which will happen on the 4. of March; it will begin
at one of the clock, 48 min. past, in the morning; the beginning will be at one
min. before 3 of the clock, the greatest obscurity at 53 min. past 3 a clock;
the end of it at 17 min. past 4, and at 57 min. past 5 the Moon will have sully
recovered her borrowed light: the whole duration will be 4 ho: 9 min. the
color of the Eclipse at the greatest darkness will be black, with a greenish
ash color. The effects will operate about the 26 of October. about which time, up
goes some great Ones in Authority Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, most part of
the month. Full Moon the 2d day. New Moon the 16 day.

Observations on May.
O Save all, save all, save all; never more need; for the month seems to begin
with blood; and some eminent Gentlemen are exposed to the mercy of the
merciless. Heavens defend the City and Country from Oppression and Tyranny; for
violent seavers, the small pox, and a great sickness or pestilence threatens
the people. Violent and bloody sea fights all along our Coasts, and great
preparations in Scotland to invade us. The month b^gins with storms, but ends
fairly, with a full Moon the 2d day, and a new Moon the 16. day. Whither an
Army now? well! I could say
Who it is will get, or who shall lose the day,
Thrasillus like inform you, who shall prove
Victsrioas in's Ambition, who in's Love:
But I am silent, nay, I must be dumb,
It Is Treason, now, to pray, Thy Kingdom come.


Observations on June.
SAd news from several parts; and our Grandees begin to be somewhat amused, oy
reason of the vehemence of an extreme p^stilence that threatens to remove them
from their Judicature at Westminster: Gods will be done; but my ardent desire
is, That Divine providence may divert this sore and heavy judgment; and that
hunger and sickness may not afflict the poor: Few Kings and Princes in Europe
but shall taste of the sury of the Eclipse before cited; and those that
domineer like little Lords ought to look about them: but mum! I dare say no
more.

July's Observations.
A Sad time! All Europe are up in arms, and the people stretch their wits, even
till they break them, to sight against the Decrees of Heaven. The Commonwealth
in general is foreseen to be in a good condition, and the States receive good
news from their servants at sea; Which produces an atonement from the poor
Hogens of Holland, but without a miracle no peace proceeds; so that they swarm
like Locusts in our seas, yet return home handsomely beaten. Here is much
snarling and tugging again about the Laws and Tithes by discontented souls,
whilst our superiors are also amongst themselves divided in their
consultations, how to appease the demands of Thousands, whom nothing will serve
or satisfy but a new Election. Oh Heavens! the elaborate Works of many are
slighted, and their great policy is not now worth three leaps of a Louse; Some
great Ones are called to an account by man; others by death; and so the Month
ends pitifully with the Clergy-mans cry, Good people, ye are all gone astray.

August's Observations.
THe Lord defend this Nation from pestilential Ayrs, ill Weather, Thunder,
Lightnings, likely to happen about the beginning of this Month; but it ends
with sundry cross sea fights, much blood, and great tribulation in many parts,
occasioned by violent Fevers and Abortions. Spain, Rome, and Italy, are much
afflicted; and so are some great ones in England; which make the Farmer smile,
to see some Oppressors li^ted higher then ever their forefathers were; but I
dare not declare what I think; whet your wits about it: only thus much by the
way, some will prove headless. Very hot weather begins the month. Store of Rain
about the 4th day; after which the air will be very calm and seasonable: The 13
day New moon. The 16 day Thunder and Lightning. The 23 day wind and rain. The
28 Full Moon. Some Thunder about the 29 day.

September's Observations.
WHat! more Knaves yet? beware Mr Treasurer; the soldier now begins to whet
his sword, and having found out your Foxes holes, resolves to leave you not
worth a groat. Ah brave soldier! act fairly, down with Oppression, and
according to thy promise restore us to freedom: Oh that I could but see that
time when Taxes might be taken off, and the Poor might not complain for want of
bread! Be of good comfort, fellow-Commoner, it will come, and that quickly too.
In the mean time, our Naval Affairs are not pleasing; the seaman wants money
(and so do I) he threatens a return with the Navy, but at the last returns
again to his duty. The first 3 days fair and seasonable. From the 6 to the 14
cold rain and hail. New moon the 11th day. From the 18 to the end of the month
much rain, and variety of winds. Full moon the 26 day. Rare Missives n^w
arriv^: Our hearts grow strong,
We Will do no right, nor yet will suffer wrong:
Our ships are shattered, and their Tackling tore,
The Sea men grumble, and desire the shore,
But what of that? Large prize, and London pay,
And two Nights Wiveing, make them h^yst away.


Octobers Observations.
THe first week of this mouth fills our hearts with joy; Oppression grows
odious, and afterward insupportable, A fair riddance. Diverse of our Merchants
ships with safety return from the western parts, from the Straights, and Levant
seas. Great preparation throughout the European Nations, for C. Stuart, and
that young valiant son of Mars his brother James seems ready for action,
France and Holland combines against us, and many other Princes promise
assistance. Fair weather from the 3d to the 6. From the 6. till the 10 cold
showers and bitter blasts. New moon the 11 day. More winds and rain about the
16, 18, 19, 20, 21, and 22 days, after which the weather will be better until
after the full moon; and thence you shall have very turbulent winds to conclude
the Month. The Ocean swells with inveterate hate,
Nor France nor Holland brook our Infant State:
But she is daring, and lets bullets fly,
(The Accents of her supreme Authority:)
Hard hearts have they, and most lascivious thoughts,
That would deflour her in her swaddling clouts.


Novembers Observations.
A Merry Age, but a mad World: No peace amongst the Pulpit-men, or unity at the
stern of Affairs. I fear an universal rage of the people will ere long cut down
Cedars, and level Mountains; A pitiful time, self ends undoes all, by which
means the poor Countryman is still squeezed out of his estate. But alas! if
we thus rancounter each other farewell Englands Commonwealth. The month begins
with wind, bringing Rain about the 4. day. Snow or Rain about the 8, 9, and 10
days; but from thence till the 17 day the Air will be more serene, but cold and
frosty, afterward you shall be troubled with great and dangerous winds. The
Nation mournes because of monstrous Oaths,
Her scarlet sins cause want of bread and clothes:
Diseases rage and strongly multiply;
Our new Republique's sick, and like to dye:
London bewailes, beshrews her lewd pretense
Of begging for A posture of Defense.


Observations on December.
GReat is the increase of onr enemies abroad; and divisions heighten our
discontents at home: New Lords, new Laws; yet the year ends with discontent,
and the people stand fully resolved to proceed a step higher unto a suture
Election. Cold and frosty for the two first days, violent showers of Rain
about the 6 days. Snow about the 8 days. Frost and cold nipping weat^e^ from
the 12 to the 16. Fair and seasonable from the 16 day till the 23. after which
you shall have more snow or rain for the most part of the rest of the days;
but frest concludes the year. Before the year concludes fresh ills arise,
Few Discontents, but old Idolatries:
Our strength impaires, our enemies increase,
And all contribute to obstruct our peace:
We Are yet divided, and possessed with fears:
We must have better hearts, e're better years.


Astrological Judgments for the year, 1653.
THe Lord of the Ascendent in this Annual Revolution is divolved now by motion
into the Cusp of the 8th house, which signifies Exile or slaughter of some
famous King or Prince, great Discontents and Insurrections, an universal
hatred and malice betwixt the people and their Governors; cruel and bloody wars
both by sea and land; the sacking of Cities and Towns, House-burnings,
Roberies, Rapes. Depopulations, violent and unexpected deaths, pestilent
Seditions, long and grievous infirmities, the plague, and a general M^rrain
amongst Cattle: Abortive births, acute fevers, Coughs and Plurisies, with
other diseases proceeding of blood; vehement Cold, a dearth of corn and fruity,
abundance of Rain and Worms: New Religions, new Governments, new Laws, new
Customs. In a word, a general madness and confusion to all such Kingdoms,
Commonwealths, Cities, and Towns, as are under the division of Arles, Cancer,
etc. that is to say, England, Scotland, France, Germany, Zealand, Spain,
Portugal, etc. The present King of Spain has the Sun in the 18 degrees. of Aries,
with the Dragons Tail, and the Moon in the 28 of Sagittary, in conjunction with
Saturn, the Sun in the 5th, and the Moon in the 2d house of the Radix; and
therefore let him expect some harm or loss to befall him either in his body,
children, or revenew, if not all. Another King I know (and truly honor) which
Horoscope is within 3 degrees. of the point eclipsed, Mar. 3. 1653. which bodes him
some infirmity of body, what, I say not: because I suppose the progression of
the Horoscope to the Terms of Jupiter, may frustrate the evil thereby signified.

But I wish we may find it otherwise then is here premonished; I desire peace
and not war; but I fear it much, though I hope the contrary; for I see men's
hearts more obdurate thin ever, every man in these iron days looking after his
own by ends, and not at the common good; but what need I mention this? Does not
every man that has eyes see how miserably this Nation has already been wrackt
and poled by a company of beggarly cheats? Sub. Treasurers and Sequestrators
look about you, and all you, that have unjustly converted the Treasure of the
Commonwealth to your own uses; of what place and condition soever you are of,
you are fore threatened, the time will come, and is mere approaching, when you
must render an account of your actions; your riches may prove your ruin, if
you make not a timely account to the Commonweal. I pray God make the
Parliament wise, the Body of this Fabric standing upon a very tottering
foundation: for if this Authority under which we mou^n, after this Opposition
of Saturn and Jupiter, shall enforce us to some new and illegal assesment, or
by way of raising money upon any pretense whatsoever (except against the Dutch)
I am confident, we of the Commonalty joining with the soldier, shall assume so
much lib^rty to our selves, as to choose and elect such Members as hereafter
shall be more tender of our purser, and more liberal of their own; and we shall
endeavor so strictly to call unto account each member of this Parl. who has
fingured our Treasure, that we shall leave many of them as naked as when they
came out of their mothers wombs, or when first to be members of Parliament Thus
Changes come, thus Changes will ensue
(Till these corrupted Bodies change for new
And put on Incorruption) Men and Things,
Whole Countries, Cities, Beggars, Princes, Kings;
He who but lately wore a Crown of Gold,
Crown's now with thorns, exiled, or basely sold:
He clad in Rags and fed with scraps before,
Now throan'd in's stead and surseting with store:
A glorious Church and Kingdom, but to day,
To morrow both the Wolf and Foxes prey:
All, all to change, and Dissolution tend,
Poor Almanacks, even they! must have


AN END.

