AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE ENGLISH Military Discipline.

By His Majesty's permission.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. 1676.

AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE ENGLISH Military Discipline.
Of the Exercise of the Foot.
WHen a Body of Men are drawn up to Exercise, the distance of their Ranks must
be at six Foot, and their Files at three Foot, that they may have liberty to
use their Arms.

The Officers of the Body, (he only excepted that is to give the Words of
Command) are to draw off to the Right and Left, forming a Rank on each Wing,
opposite the one to the other.

The Officer Commanding, is to place himself before the Middle of the Pikes,
about ten Foot distance from them, the better to observe what is done, and to
be the more easily understood by the whole Body.

The Words of Command must be given Leisurely, that the Soldiers may perform
their Postures without Confusion.

The Officer must first Command Silence, and then proceed (as follows) to the

Exercise of the Musket.
SHoulder your Musket.

Lay your right hand on your Musket.

Poyse your Musket.

Rest your Musket.

Handle your Match.

Blow your Match.

Cock and try your Match.

Guard your Pan.

Blow your Match.

Open your Pan.

Present.

Give Fire.

Recover your Arms.

Return your Match.

Clean your Pan with your Thumb.

Handle your Primer.

Prime your Pan.

Shut your Pan with a full Hand.

Blow off your loose Corns.

Cast about to Charge.

Handle your Charger.

Open it with your Teeth.

Charge with Powder.

Draw forth your Scowrer.

Shorten it to an Inch against your right Breast.

Charge with Bullet.

Ram down Powder and Ball.

Withdraw your Scowrer.

Shorten it to a handful.

Return your Scowrer.

Poyse your Musket.

Shoulder your Musket.

Order your Musket.

Exercise of the Pike.
ADvance your Pikes.

Charge to the Front.

To the Right.

To the Right.

To the Right.

To the Right.

To the Right about.

To the Left about as you were.

Charge to the Left.

To the Left.

To the Left.

To the Left.

To the Left about.

To the Right about as you were.

Advance your Pikes.

From Advance, Shoulder your Pikes.

From Shoulder, Charge to the Front.

Shoulder as you were.

From your Shoulder, Charge to the Right.

Shoulder as you were.

Charge to the Right about.

Shoulder as you were.

Charge to the Left.

Shoulder as you were.

To the Left about.

Shoulder as you were.

From your Shoulder, Port.

From your Port, Comport.

From your Comport, Charge to the Front.

From your Charge, Trail, Facing to the Right about.

Charge as you were.

Advance your Pikes.

Exercise of the Musket and Pike together.
SHoulder your Musket. Musketeers, Make ready.

At which time, the Musketeers must Leisurely and Distinctly perform every
particular Posture of the Musket together.

The Musketeers being ready, the Pikes are to Charge as the Musketeers are
Faced.

To the Right.

To the Right.

To the Right.

To the Right.

To the Right about.

To the Left about as you were.

To the Left.

To the Left.

To the Left.

To the Left.

To the Left about.

To the Right about as you were.

Advance your Pikes.

Return your Matches.

Shoulder your Muskets.

Order your Arms.

Pikes, to your inside Order.

Lay down your Arms.

Which Posture is to be performed with their Left Legs; and stooping all
together, their Arms being upon the ground, they must take care to Rise all
together, every one observing his Right hand man, at the Word of Command.

Quit your Arms.

Face all to the Right about.

March clear off your Arms.

To the Left about to your Leader.

March to your Arms.

Handle your Arms.

Which must be done stepping forward with their Left Legs, and stooping, Laying
their hands upon their Arms, expecting the Word of Command.

Order your Arms.

Pikes, to your outside Order.

Poyse your Muskets.

Advance your Pikes.

Shoulder your Muskets.

March.

This way of Exercise is not altogether the same with what has been hitherto
in use, wherein it was thought fit to make some alteration, by leaving out some
Words as superfluous, and changing some of the Postures for others that are of
greater Use and readiness.

Closings and Openings.
RRanks, close forward to Order.

Ranks, close forward to close Order.

Ranks, open backwards to Order.

Ranks, open backwards to open Order.

Ranks, open backward to double distances.

The Ranks fall back without changing aspect.

Files, close to the Right.

Files, close to the Left.

Files, close to the Center.

Files, open from the Right.

Files, open from the Left.

Files, open from the Center.

For performing of which, the Body faces to the hand named, and moves. If to
the Right, the second File from the right first takes its distance, by moving
slower then its Leader: the rest of the Files do the like successively, and the
left hand File moves not at all.

Doublings.
Ranks, to the right hand double.

March.

Ranks, to the left hand as you were.

March.

Ranks, to the left hand double

March.

Ranks, to the right hand as you were.

March.

The Ranks that double, are to observe their right hand Man, to move at the
same time with him; They begin their motion with the foot next the hand named,
and are to come into their places at three steps. In this doubling, the even
Ranks double into the odd. And if you would have the odd Ranks also double,
Face the Body to the Rere; and the same Words of Command will perform it.

To reduce the Ranks.
The Ranks that doubled, are first to Face to the contrary hand, then beginning
with the contrary foot, at three steps to come into their former ground. Files
doubling is performed in the same manner, and is the same thing with the
reduction of doubled Ranks; the reduction of doubled Files is the same thing
with doubling Ranks.

Doubling of half Files with the Reduction.
Rere half Files to the Right, double your Front.

March.

To the Left about as you were.

March.

Rere half Files to the Left, double your Front.

March.

To the Right about as you were.

March.

If you do it upon a March, let your Rere half Files move into the Front with a
quicker motion, the Front half Files still continuing theirs. And for
Reduction, let the Rere half Files without facing about, stand till the Front
half Files have passed them, and then fall after their proper Leaders.

Fireings.
THe Commander in chief gives no Command nor Direction besides Make ready.

Present.

Give fire.

And the first of these he uses but once.

The Soldiers are to be instructed and minded by subaltern Officers, that when
the two first Ranks make ready and advance forward, the Body of Musketeers is
to make good the Front of Pikes, and the two next Ranks unshoulder and make
ready, without any Word of Command; and when the last Rank presents, or both,
if both fire together, to advance, and this also without any Word of Command.
If the Ranks be at six Foot, they are also at their advancing to close forward
to three Foot, without any Word of Command. If you fire by Single Ranks, the
first presents at three motions, beginning with his left foot, which as he
advances, he blows his Match; At advancing his right, he opens his Pan,
Presenting at the third step. Afterward they File into the Rere within three
Foot of the Body. Every Soldier is to be careful to place himself in his own
File, which is also taken care of by the Officers in the Rere.

Fireing to the Flanks.
TO the Right and Left present, falling off after your bringers up.

For this you leave six Foot between your Divisions of Musketeers and your
Pikes; which the Officers must have a great care to keep open, by causing the
Musketeers to incline to the Right and Left after every fireing to the Flank.
the two outermost Files are to make ready, keeping along with the Body, and not
to present, nor face to the Flanks, till ready; as soon as they have Fired, they
face to the Rere, and are by an Officer led athwart it, and so up between their
own Divisions and the Pikes. As Soon as the outermost Files face to the Flanks,
the two next Files are to make ready without any Word of Command, and keep
along with the Body, till the outermost Files be wheeled clear off them. The
Files that fire to the Left, are to blow, advancing with their right Leg.

Fireing to the Rere.
LAst Rank, make ready. To the Rerepresent.

Which it does keeping along with the Body; the Musketeers Advancing with
their Right Legs, Blow; Advancing with the Left, Open their Pans; then turning
upon the Ball of their Left Foot to the Right about, cast their Right Leg
backward, and fire then immediately at a good Round rate, within three Foot of
their Body, March up into the Front. As Soon as the last Rank Faces about to
Present, every other Rank of Musketeers falls back to the Rank of Pikes that
Marched behind it, so to keep the Rere full, and leave a Vacancy of one Rank in
the Front of the Musketeers, for the Rank that Fired to place it self.

The Word Make ready is made Use of but once, afterward when the last Rank
faces about; the next to it is to Make ready, keeping along with the Body.

Fireing the Street-way.
We that have fewer Pikes, should cause the half Files of Pikes to double, that
they may cover the Musketeers.

The Colors and Drums are to be between the Pikes and Musketeers, the
Captains with the Pikes, and the Lieutenants with the Musketeers. Lieutenants
or Sergeants cause the two first Ranks of the Musketeers to Face to the Right
or Left, and make ready; then Two and Two to File up to the Front, and March
athwart it; then to present. The Pikes ought to be charged, and the Musketeers
to stoop very low, and be careful to carry the Muzzles of their Muskets low.
When they have Fired, they pass away, still stooping to the contrary Flank, and
within three Foot of it, into the Rere of the Musketeers. As they move away by
the Left Flank, the next by the Right, Succeed them. If the Horse give you
time, let the Pikes Port or Advance to ease themselves. That you may always
reserve some Fire, it is best to Fire but one Rank at a time; As Soon as that
Wheels off, the Second Steps into it is place, and a third Rank comes in between
it and the Pikes. If the Street you are to defend be very Broad, you must of
necessity make an Interval besides those on the Flanks, Wide enough for Two Men
on a Breast, One to March up, the other down; For otherwise the long
Intermission between the Fireings will give the Horse opportunity to Attaque
you. The Musketeers in Presenting are to fall back with their Right Legs, and
by no means to Advance.

Swedes way.
REre half Files of Musketeers to the Right or Left, double your Front.

Then Divide them into Equal Subdivisions, the Rere of the Foremost
Subdivisions to Rank even with the Front of the Hindermost; the Rere of the
Hindermost with the Front of Pikes, of which one half Advance interchangeably.
Great care is to be taken that they return well their Rammers, lest they hurt
those that stand before them: Presenting either all Three Ranks, or Two only,
and one standing Guarded; they which have fired, rise up, and make Ready on
their Ground, and the Rere Subdivisions passing through the Intervals, fire in
like manner.

The Intervals to be very little Wider then to permit Passage to the
Subdivision of the Rere. They are also to fall back with their Right Legs,
without Advancing*

Reduction.
Musketeers, to the Right about.

March all till Even with your Rere of Pikes.

To the Left about all.

Front half Files, March till Even with your Front of Pikes.

To make a Square.
Face to your four Angles.

The Intervals between the Half Ranks and Half Files Divide the Body into four
parts; if there be an odd File, it Faces with the Right Half Ranks.

To your proper Front.

In all Facings, the Soldiers are to keep their Left Foot fixed, turning Round
on the Ball of it, and bringing about their Right.

A Solid Square.
TO Draw a solid Square, make it first Equal on all sides, by the Square Root,
then girdle it with Shot, which is speedily performed by these Words of Command.

Rere half Files of Shot, to the Right about.

Musketeers, March all till clear of the Pikes.

Face inwards, and March till you close in the Center.

Musketeers that are clear of Front and Rere, wheel into the Flanks.

Reduction.
Musketeers that wheeled into the Flanks, wheel into Front and Rere. Face all
outward, and March till clear of the Pikes, then face in opposition, and close.

To make a Hollow Square.
LEt the three outermost Files of Pikes of each Flank stand.

Rere half Files, to the Right hand about.

Front and Rere half Files, March.

Flanks of Pikes face inward.

March.

Rere half Files of Musketeers, to the right hand about.

Musketeers, March all till clear of the Pikes.

Musketeers, face inwards, and March till you close in the Center of the Pikes.

Musketeers that are clear of your Pikes, face in opposition, and Flank your
Pikes.

Reduction.
Musketeers that Flank the Pikes, wheel into Front and Rere.

Musketeers, face to the Right and Left outward, and March till clear of your
Pikes, then face inwards, and close.

Pikes of the Flanks, face outward, and March till clear of the Front and Rere
half Files.

Front and Rere half Files, face inwards, and close.

For greater expedition, the Words of Command may be given at the same time to
Pikes and Musketeers by two Officers.

Of Marching.
IN Marching, the Officers are to observe that the Ranks be at twelve Foot
distance, and that the Files be closed Shoulder to Shoulder, unless when a
Battalion Marches in a Body, in which case the Files must keep such a distance,
that they may have the liberty of their Arms.

The Soldiers must always begin to March with their right Foot first; which is
observed to conduce most to keep the Ranks even.

The Captains are to March with their Pikes Shouldered; A Lieutenant to March
with a Partizan; And an Ensign to March with his Pike Comported, which is to be
the distinction between the Captains and other Officers.

Sergeants have no place assigned them in Marching, but are to be moving up and
down, to observe that the Ranks and Files be at their due distance.

Of Drawing up a Body of Men, and the Place of the Officers.
WHen a Regiment is to be Drawn up, the easiest and readiest way of Placing the
Companies is, that the Eldest Company Draw up on the Right hand, and the second
Company on the Left, the Third next to the First, the Fourth next to the
Second, and so consequently to the youngest, which is to be in the Center; for
which the Words of Command are,

Musketeers, to the Right and Left outward.

Pikes, to the Right and Left inwards.

Interchange Ground.

March.

When a Regiment has so taken its Ground, to Place the Officers, you must
divide the Lieutenants equally, Placing one half of them at the head of the
Right Wing of Shot, and the other at the Left; The Ensigns are to be at the
Head of the Pikes, upon the same Line with the Lieutenants, and each of them at
four Foot distance from the Body.

The Captains are likewise to be divided equally, and Placed on each Wing, four
Foot before the Lieutenants. None must stand before the Ensigns, but he only
that Commands in Chief, who is to be ten Foot before the Pikes; there must be a
Sergeant Placed at the Right and Left of every Rank, and the Rest of the
Sergeants are to be in the Rere, at twelve Foot distance from the Body, making
a Parallel line to the last Rank.

The Drums must be divided likewise, one half on the right Wing, and the other
on the left, and are to stand on the same Line with the first Rank of the
Soldiers.

It is to be understood, that this way of Placing of the Officers, is only for
Ordinary drawings out, either for Musters or Parade; For upon any occasion of
Service, they are to be otherwise placed, as shall be shown hereafter.

But if the Regiments March in a Body, this Order of the Officers must be
changed; For then the Lieutenants are to be removed from the Front to the Rere,
the rest of the Officers keeping still their same Post; and the Sergeants that
were in the Rere must be moving up and down, to see that the Ranks and Files
March according to the Rules above given.

And if the Regiment March in Division, the difference is yet greater: for then
one half of the Captains are to March at the Head of the first Division of
Shot, and the other in the Rere of the last Division: One half likewise of the
Lieutenants are to be in the Rere of the first Division of Shot, and the other
at the Head of the last; The Ensigns are to March before the Pikes, and no
other Officer at their Head.

The Officers in Marching, are to observe the same Distance from the Body, as
when they were Drawn up.

Of Salutes.
WHen a Regiment is Drawn up, the Officers are to Salute one after another, as
the Person passes by whom they are to Salute.

If the Regiment March in Division, the Officer that Commands must begin first
to Salute, and the Captains that March in a Rank behind him, must not Salute
till he has done, and then they must observe all one Motion; The Lieutenants
likewise when they Salute, must keep the same Time, as also the Ensigns; which
is much more Graceful then doing it one after another.

The Ensigns must further observe in their Salutes, to bring their Colors all
the same way, otherwise they will be apt to meet and Entangle.

In making a Guard when the King or Queen passes by, the Pikes must be
Advanced; Otherwise only the Drums Beat, the Muskets are Shouldered, and the
Pikes Ordered.

When the King or General comes in the Rere, the Colors or Officers are not to
March through the Ranks, but to keep still at the Front: If it be in the Field,
and the whole Army Drawn up, then as the King Marches by, every Battalion is to
Charge their Pikes, and Rest their Muskets; which is a Posture of more Guard.

Of Wheeling, when a Body Marches in Division.
WHen the Word of Command is given to Wheel, (if it be to the Right) the
Right Hand man is to keep his Ground, and only turn upon his Heel, whilst at
the same time the Left Hand man moves about quick, till the Officer bids him
Stand.

The second Rank does not begin to Wheel, till they have taken the Ground of
the first: So every Rank is to take the Ground of that which is before them;
Upon which depends this way of Wheeling.

Of the Exercise of Horse.
THe Exercise of Horse consisting in fewer Words of Command then that of Foot,
is more generally known, and there is little need of any Alteration to be made
therein, but what is rather for Show then Use.

When a Troop or Squadron are to Exercise, they must first have Charged their
Carabins and Pistols; And when the Corporals have been through the Ranks, and
seen that they are all ready, the Officer must Command Silence, and proceed as
follows. Lay your Hands upon your Swords.

Draw your Swords.

Put your Swords into your Bridle Hands.

Lay your Hands upon your Pistols.

Draw your Pistols.

Cock your Pistols.

Hold up your Hands.

Note, after they have given Fire, they must still keep their Hands up, till
the Word of Command be given to Return their Pistols.
Give fire.

Return your Pistols.

The same Words of Command are given for the other Pistol, and then as
follows.

Lay your hands upon your Carabins.

Advance your Carabins.

Cock your Carabins.

Present your Carabins.

Give Fire.

Let fall your Carabins.

Take your Swords from your Bridle Hands.

Return your Swords.

All which Motions the Officer must take care to see done exactly at the same
Time, and therefore must not give the Words of Command too fast.

When a Body of Horse is Drawn up, the Officers must stand close to their Men;
only he that Commands must be a Horse length before the Rest of the Officers:
And they must observe the same thing in Marching; for nothing is more unseemly,
than to see the Officers at too great a Distance from their Men.

It is thought necessary to make an Alteration in the manner of Wheeling of
Horse; For whereas formerly, when a Squadron of Horse was Commanded to Wheel,
(if it were to the Right) the Right Hand Men closed to the Left; Which way was
found subject to put the Ranks out of Order, and therefore the Practice now is,
That the Right Hand Men should keep their Ground, only turning their Horses
Heads to the Right, whilst the Left comes about; in which Motion they must
observe their Left Hand man.

When a Squadron of Horse is to Charge another, it is better they should do it
with their Swords in their Hands, than either with their Pistols or Carabins.

The manner of Encamping for Horse or Foot.
THere must be allowed One hundred Paces for the Encamping of a Battalion
consisting in sixteen Companies, and fifty Men in each Company.

There must be allowed fifty Paces for a Squadron consisting in three Troops,
and fifty Men in each Troop.

From the Head of the First Line, to the Head of the Second, there is commonly
allowed three hundred Paces, whereof One hundred and twenty are for the
Encamping of the first Line; So that there remains One hundred and eighty Paces
for the distance between the last Tents of the first Line, and the Head of the
Second.

It is to be observed that this measure of ground aforesaid is meant only for
the Encamping of an Army; For if it was to be ranged in Battle in case of
Service, the distances between the Battalions or Squadrons must be greater than
in a Camp.

It must be endeavored as much as may be, that the Second Line be equal to the
First, keeping the same Distance upon the Right and Left.

All Troops or Companies of Horse or Foot consisting but of fifty Men, are to
be Encamped on one Row of Baraques or Hutts; But when the Troops or Companies
consist in more Men, there must be two or three Rows of Baraques or Hutts.

It is to be observed, that in each Squadron or Battalion, the Colonels
Company is always upon the Right or Left, and there make their Row of Hutts:
behind them must be left a space for the Street, then the Second Company makes
their Row of Hutts; near to which the Third makes theirs, leaving the space of
two Foot only between their Hutts, which is called the By-Street. And the same
thing is observed by the Horse.

The Hutts of the Foot always open toward the Street.

The Baraques of the Cavalry always open toward the Horses Heads.

The Particulars of Encamping of a Battalion.
WHen the Adjutant or Quartermaster has his Ground allotted to him for the
Encamping of a Battalion, which is commonly One hundred Paces, he is to divide
it in the manner following; (viz.) He must allow Seven Foot Square to each
Hutt, Two Foot to the By-streets, and Fifteen Foot to the great Streets.

Every Company consisting of Fifty Men, ought to have Ten Hutts; and there must
be the distance of Two Foot between the Hutts.

The Kitchens must be marked out at Twelve Foot distance from the last Row of
Hutts, and must be Placed just over against them, so that the Streets may be
open quite through, for the Officers to pass easily to the Head of the Camp, as
there shall be occasion.

The length of the Kitchens is to be of Nine Foot, and the breadth of Six Foot.

There must be thirty Paces distance between the Soldiers Kitchens, and the
Front of the Captains Tents.

There must be distance of forty Paces between the Captains Tents, and the
Front of the Tents of the Subaltern Officers; and the remaining Ground is for
the Encamping of the Captains Equipage.

The Sutlers are to Encamp behind the Officers Tents.

By this account, there remains Fifteen or Twenty Paces, which makes the
distance from one Battalion to another, which is always left upon the Left hand.

The Pikes (whether they are Placed against a Cross, or in a Stand) must be
allowed at Eighteen Foot distance from the Hutts.

The Muskets must be at Eighteen Foot distance from the Pikes, or they may be
Placed upon the same Line with them.

The Particulars of Encamping of a Squadron.
WHen a Quartermaster of Horse has his Ground allotted to him for a Squadron,
which is commonly fifty Paces, he is to divide it in the following manner, viz.

He must allow three Paces for the length of a Baraque, and two Paces distance
from the Opening of the Baraque to the Stakes to which the Horses are fastened,
and three Paces for each Horses standing, and ten Paces for the Street.

To the Second Troop is to be allowed two Paces distance, three Paces for their
Baraques, and one Pace distance for the By-street.

The third Troop must have two Paces distance, three Paces for the Baraques,
and three Paces for the Horses; After which, there will remain fifteen Paces,
which makes the distance from one Squadron to another.

If the Squadrons are stronger, they must have more Ground; And this is only
for a Squadron of one hundred and fifty Men, in three Troops, each Troop making
but one Row of Baraques.

The Colors must be Placed at eighten Foot distance from the Front of the
Baraques, in the same Line with the Pikes.

There are commonly ten or twelve Baraques on a Row, for every Troop of fifty
Men; And there must be at least two Paces distance from one Baraque to another.

For the Troops Kitchens, the Officers Tents, and the Sutlers which attend upon
the Troops, the same measures are to be observed in proportion, as are used for
Encamping of Foot.

By a Pace here, is meant three Foot.

Orders for Battle.
THough there can be no certain Rules given for any Order of Battle, which
depend chiefly upon the circumstances of Place, and other Accidents that may
happen, yet I shall set down some which may serve for an Example to show the
nature of the Thing.

You must then first of all Command Silence; next to March very Leisurely. To
observe the right in Marching, and preserve the Intervals, which are always to
be fifty or sixty Paces at least, that fifty of a Battalion may pass through
them.

None to speak but the Commander in chief, or the Major by his Order.

Advancing against the Enemy in Battle, out of Musket Shot, the Captains and
other Officers at the head of the Battalion, are all to March in a Line, with
their Pikes in their Hands, two good Paces before the Men, and are often to
look behind them; Because otherwise they may insensibly get too much before the
Body; And the Soldiers by following too fast, fall into disorder, whereof
great care is to be taken in Marching against an Enemy.

At which time the Ranks are to be two great Paces distant, and the Files
closed in such a manner, that every Soldier may March at his ease, and so
Charge and Fire; which will be effected, if he have liberty of moving his
Elbows as he Marches.

When the Musketeers come within Shot, and March ready with their Pans
guarded, the Ranks should be closed forward to the Swords point. But to avoid
talking, which usually happens at this instant, it is better to leave the
distance of one Pace between the Ranks; so the Soldiers will not press one
upon another; which ordinarily causes breach of Silence in a Battalion. The
distance of Files is to be preserved as has been said already.

He that Commands a Battalion, is to be in the Center of it, at the Head of the
Pikes; the Officer next in degree, is to be in the Rere of the Pikes; the third
in degree, at the Right Wing of Shot, in the Front; the fourth, at the Left
Wing of Shot, in the Front; The rest of the Captains are to be in the Rere on
the Wings of Shot, according to their degrees. The Lieutenants are to be
Placed, two in the Front, two in the Rere, and one on each Flank. The Colors
are to be in the Center of the Pikes. The Sergeants are to be Placed one on the
Right and Left of each Rank. If a Battalion consist of more then Six Companies,
the respective Officers are to be Placed according to the discretion of the
Commander of the Battalion.

It were not amiss to Place the Company of the Captain that Commands the left
Wing of Shot, on the left of all that Wing; unless the Battalion be the
outermost on the Line: for then the Colonels Company is to be on the Left of
all, in this case the Right and Left Exchanging.

In a Battle, the Captains and other Officers are to March in a Line; but
coming within Shot of the Enemy, and the Musketeers Marching ready with their
Pans guarded, the whole Line of Captains and other Officers is to retire each
of them into the Intervals of his Files next after his Post; yet so, as they
may look to the Right and Left of the Battalion. Whilst they are Marching
toward the Enemy, they are to be very careful to keep themselves in this
Posture, and neither to be forwarder nor backwarder, neither without the
Battalion, nor within it. And when they begin to March with their Pikes
Charged, and that the Musketeers are ready, the Ranks are to be closed forward
to one small Pace. As Soon as the Battalion comes to thirty Paces distance from
the Enemy, let the Musketeers Fire, the manner of which Firing shall be
ordered them before.

The Captain Commanding the Rere, is to observe that the Battalion March still,
to cause the Soldiers to close forward easily, and without noise or confusion:
His chief care ought to be to Command the Pikes ever to March even with the
Wings of Musketeers; For it often happens that in Marching any considerable
time in Battle, the Wings Advance, and form a Halfmoon, and the Pikes in the
middle being extremely pressed upon, the Battalion is broken. Provided the
motion of the Pikes be equal on the Right and Left, the Battalion cannot be
disordered by its March. Above all, we are carefully to preserve the distance
of Ranks and Files, according to what has been said already.

The Grenadeers (when there are any) are to be drawn up on the Right of the
Battalion, and to augment it, without intermixing with it, or troubling the
Order of it, they being a separate number of Men that are to be always ready
for whatever shall be Commanded them.

The Commander of a Battalion may be on Horsback at the Head of it, when the
Captains are on Foot with their Pikes in their hands, in consideration that he
is to be stirring to all parts, to see that the distances be observed; and
above all, that none speak, except himself, or the Major by his Order.

The Commander of a Battalion is to alight when the Musketeers make ready, and
is to March with his Pike charged against the Enemy.

When an Army is Drawn up for Battle, the distance between the Lines must be of
three hundred Paces, the same as is in a Camp.

Of Defiles.
TO pass a narrow Defile, the readiest way to perform it, and draw up again in
Order as soon as past, is to make the Ranks File, if to the Right, the
Right Hand man Files first, and the rest of his Rank follow him, till the
Defile be past, then they Rank again as they were; this seems better then Files
fileing, because it immediately makes a Front to the Enemy. If the Rank be
great, let it File two abreast, beginning with the two middlemost Files.

For larger Defiles, the Commander draws off as he judges the way will easily
receive; in order to which, the Battalion is divided before it Marches,
Sergeants taking care of the Subdivisions. The places of the Lieutenants may be
according to these Figures, Captains and Ensigns keeping their places.



FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1676.


