THE CONFESSION OF FAITH, Together with The LARGER and LESSER Catechismes.

Composed by the Reverend ASSEMBLY OF DIVINES, Sitting at WESTMINSTER,
Presented to both Houses of Parliament.

Again Published with the Scriptures at large, and the Emphasis of the
Scriptures in a different Character.

To which is annexed two sheets of Church Government with the SCRIPTURES at
large. [The second Edition.]

Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk
of them when thou fittest in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. London, Printed by E. M. for the
Company of Stationers, and are to be sold by John Rothwel at the Fountain in
Cheapside 1658.

The LARGER CATECHISM Agreed upon by the ASSEMBLY of DIVINES At WESTMINSTER.
Quest. WHat is the chief and highest end of man?

A. Man's Chief and Highest End, is, to glorify God Romans 11. 36. For of him,
and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen. 1
Cor. 10. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God,
, and fully to enjoy him for ever Psalm. 73. 24. to the end. Thou shall guide me
with thy counsels, and afterward receive me to glory; Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and there is none on earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh and
my heart fail, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
For lo, they that are far from thee shall perish, thou shall destroy all them
that go a whoring from thee; but it is good for me to draw nigh to God; I have
put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works. John 17. 21,
22, 23. That they all may be one as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that
they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me;
and the glory which thou gave me have I given them, that they may be one,
even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one, and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as
thou have loved me.
.

Quest. How does it appear, that there is a God?

Ans. The very light of Nature in man, and the works of God, declare that there
is a God Romans 1. 19, 20. Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in
them, for God has showed it unto them; For the invisible things of him from
the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they are without
excuse. Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handiwork. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto
night shows Knowledge. There is no speech nor language where their voice is
not heard. Acts 17. 28. For in him we live, and move, and have our being.
, but his Word and Spirit only, do sufficiently, and effectually reveal him
unto men for their salvation 1 Cor. 3. 9, 10. But as it is written, Eye has
not se^n, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, the
things that God has prepared for them that love him: But God has revealed
them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep
things of God. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. And that from a child thou have known the
holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for, doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works. Isai. 59. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with thee, says the
Lord, my Spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have put into thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor
out of the mouth of thy Seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for
ever.
.

Q. What is the word of God?

A. The Holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament are the Word of God 2 Timothy
3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. We have also a
more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise
in your hearts, V. 20.] Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture
is of any private interpretation, V. 21.] For the prophecy came not in old time
by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost.
, the only rule of Faith and Obedience Ephesians. 2. 20. And are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone. Rev. 22. 18, 19. For I testify unto every man, that hears the
words of the prophecy of this book, if any man shall add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book. V. 19.] And
if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this Prophecy, God
shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and
from the things which are written in this book. Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to
the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them. Luke 16. 29, 31. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them: if they believe not Moses and the Prophets neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead. Gal. 1. 8, 9. But though we or angel
from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, if any
man preach any other Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be
accursed. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. Before
.

Q. How does it appear that the Scriptures are the word of God?

A. The Scriptures manifest themselves to be the word of God by their Majesty
Hos. 8. 12. I have written to them the great things of my law, but they were
counted as a strange thing. 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 13. Howbeit we speak wisdom among
them that are perfect, yet not the wisdom of this World, nor of the Princes of
this World that come to naught, but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery,
even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory.
Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but
which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. Psalm.
119. 18, 129. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
law. Thy Testimonies are wonderful therefore does my soul keep them.
, and Purity Psalm. 12. 6. The words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried
in a furnace of earth; purified seven times. Psalm. 119. 140. Thy word is very
pure, therefore thy servant loves it.
; by the consent of all the parts Act. 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins. Act. 26. 22. Having therefore obtained help of God, I
continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other
things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come.
, and the scope of the whole, which is to give all glory to God Romans 3. 19. Now
we know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under
the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the World become guilty
before God.
; by their light and power to convince and convert sinners, to comfort and
build up believers to salvation Act. 18. 28. For he mightily convinced the
Jews, and that publicly showing by the Scripture that Jesus was Christ. Heb.
4. 12. For the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. I am. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us, with the word of truth, that
we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9. The
Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is
sure, making wise the simple: the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the
heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes: the fear of
the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the Lord are true, and
righteous altogether. Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever things were written before
time, were written for our learning, that we, through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures might have hope. Acts 20. 32. And now Brethren I commend you to
God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give
you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.
: but the Spirit of bearing witness by and with the Scriptures in the heart of
man, is alone able fully to persuade it that they are the very word of God Joh.
16. 13, 14. Howbeit when He the Spirit of Truth is come, He will guide you into
all Truth, for He shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever He shall hear,
that shall He speak, and He will show you things to come. 1 John 2. 20. 27. But
ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. V. 27.] But the
anointing which ye have received of Him, abides in you, and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is
truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you ye shall abide in him.
John 20. 31. But these are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his name.
.

Q. What do the Scriptures principally teach?

A. The Scriptures principally teach, what man is to believe concerning God,
and what duty God requires of man 2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the form of sound
words, which thou have heard of me, in Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus.
.

Q. What do the Scriptures make known of God?

A The Scriptures make known what God is Heb. 11. 6. But without faith it is
impossible to please God, for he that comes to God must believe that he is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
, the Persons in the Godhead 1 John 5. 7. For there are three; that bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One.
, the Decrees Act. 15. 14, 15, 18. Simeon has declared, how God at the first
did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name V. 15.] And
to this agree the words of the Prophets as it is written V. 18.] Known unto God
are all his works from the beginning of the World.
, and the execution of His Decrees Acts 4. 27, 28. For of a truth against the
holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with
the Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together. V. 28.] For to do
whatsoever thy hand, and thy counc^l d^termin^d before to be done.
.

Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit Joh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must
worship him in Spirit and Truth.
, in and of himself infinite in Being Exodus 3. 14. And God said unto Moses I am
that I am: and he said, thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I am
has sent me unto you. Job 11. 7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching find out God?
can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? it is as high as Heaven, what
can thou do? deeper then Hell, what can thou know? the measure thereof is
longer then the earth, and broader then the sea.
, Glory Act. 7. 2. The God of Glory appeared unto our Father Abraham, when he
was in Mesopotamia before he dwelt in Charran.
, Blessedness 1 Timothy 6. 15. Which in his times he shall show, who is the
blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
, and Perfection Mat. 5. 48. Be ye therefore perfect even as your Father who is
in Heaven is perfect.
, Allsufficient Genesis 17. 1. When Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord
appeared to Abram and said to him, I am God All sufficient: walk before me and
be thou perfect.
, Eternal Psalm. 90. 2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou
had formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou
art God.
, Unchangeable Mal. 3. 6. For I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye the
sons of Jacob are not consumed. Jam. 1. 17. Every good gift and every perfect
gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning.
, Incomprehensible 1 King. 8. 27. But will God indeed dwell on the earth?
behold the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less
this house that I have built.
, Every where present Psalm. 139. 1. to 13. O Lord thou have searched me and
known me; thou know my down sitting and mine up-rising, and thou
understandest my thoughts afar off, etc. Whither shall I flee from thy presence?
, Almighty Rev. 4. 8. And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him;
and they were full of eyes within; and they rest not day and night, saying,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.
, Knowing all things Heb. 4. 13. Neither is there any creature that is not
manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him
with whom we have to do. Psalm. 147. 5. Great is the Lord and of great power;
his understanding is infinite.
, Most wise Romans 16. 27. To God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ, for
ever. Amen.
, Most Holy Isa. 6. 3. And one cried unto another and said, Holy, holy is the
Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory. Rev. 15. 4. Who shall not
fear thee O Lord and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations
shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made manifest.
, Most Just Deuteronomy. 32. 4. He is the rock; his work is perfect: for all his ways
are judgment; a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.
, Most Merciful and gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth. (i) Exodus 34. 6. The Lord passed by before him and proclaimed, the Lord,
the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodnss and
truth.


Q Are there more Gods then one?

A. There is but one only, the living and true God Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear O Israel,
the Lord our God is one Lord. 1 Cor. 8. 4. 6. As concerning therefore the
eating of things offered in sacrifice to Idols, we know that an Idol is nothing
in the world, and that there is none other God but one. -- But to us there is
but one God, the Father, of whom are all things and we in him, and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him. Jer. 10. 10. But the Lord
is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King; at his wrath
the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his
indignation.
,

Q. How many persons are there in the Godhead?

A. There be three persons in the Godhead the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; and these three are one, true, eternal God, the same in substance, equal
in power and glory; although distinguished by their personal properties 1 John
5. 7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost: and these three are one, Mat. 3. 16, 17. And Jesus when he was
baptized, went up straightway out of the water, and lo the heavens were opened
unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove and lighting upon
him. And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved son, in whom I am
well pleased. Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 13.
14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion
of the Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen. Joh. 10. 30. I and my Father are one.
.

Q. What are the personal properties of the three Persons in the Godhead?

A. It is proper to the Father to beget the Son Heb. 1. 5, 6. 8. For unto which
of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten
thee? And again, I will be to Him a Father, and He shall be to me a Son. And
again when he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let
all the Angels of God worship him -- But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O
God, is for ever and ever; a scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy
Kingdom.
, and to the Son to be begotten of the Father John 1. 14, 18. And the word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. -- No man has seen God
at any time: The only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he
has declared him.
, and to the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Father and Son from all eternity
Joh. 15. 26 But when the Comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the
Father, even the Spirit of Truth which proceeds from the Father, he shall
testify of me, Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
.

Q. How does it appear that the Son and the Holy Ghost are God equal with the
Father?

A. The Scriptures manifest, that the Son and the Holy Ghost are God equal
with the Father, ascribing unto them such names Isai. 6. 3, 5-8. And one cried
unto another and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord, of Hosts, the whole earth
is full of his glory -- Then said I Woe is me for I am undone, because I am a
man of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts! --
Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send? and who will go
for us? then I said, here am I, send me. This compared with Joh. 12. 41. These
things said Esaias, when he saw His glory, and spoke of Him. And with Act 28.
25. And when they agreed not among themselves they departed, after that Paul
had spoken one word, Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet to our
Fathers. 1 John 5. 20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given
us an understanding, that we may know him that is true; and we are in him that
is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; this is the true God and eternal life.
Act. 5. 3, 4. But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart to lie
to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land? whiles it
remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? why have thou conceived this thing in thy heart? thou have not lied unto
men, but unto God.
, attributes John 1. 1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God, and the word was God. Isai. 9. 6. For unto us a Son is born, unto us a
child is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his name
shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father,
the Prince of peace. Joh. 2. 24. 25. But Jesus did not commit himself unto
them; because he knew all men, and needed not that any should testify of man;
for he knew what was in man. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. But God has revealed them to us
by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God.
For what man knows the things of a man save the spirit of man that is in him?
even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God.
, works Col. 1. 16. For by him were all things created, that are in heaven and
that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions,
or Principalities, or Powers; all things were created by him and for him. Genesis
1. 2. And the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face
of the earth, and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
, and worship Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 13.
14. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion
of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.
, are proper to God only.

Q. What are the Decrees of God?

A. God's Decrees are the wise, free, and holy acts of the counsel of his will
Ephesians. 4. 11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being Predestined
according to the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his
own will. Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past
finding out! Romans 9. 14, 15, 18. What shall we say then? Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. -- Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardens.
, whereby from all eternity he has for his own glory, unchangeably
foreordained whatsoever comes to pass in time Ephesians. 1. 4, 11. According as he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy and without blame before him in love. -- In whom also we have obtained an
inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of him, who works
all things after the counsel of his own will. Romans 9. 22, 23. What if God,
willing to show his wrath and to make his power known, endured with much
long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, and that he might
make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had before
prepared unto glory? Psalm. 33. 11. The counsel of the Lord stands for ever;
the thoughts of his heart unto all generations.
, especially concerning Angels and men.

Q. What has God especially decreed concerning Angels and men.

A. God by an eternal and immutable decree, out of his mere love, for the
praise of his glorious grace to be manifested in due time, has elected some
Angels to glory 1 T^m. 5. 21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things without preferring
one before another, doing nothing by partiality.
, and in Christ has chosen some men to eternal life, and the means thereof
Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundations
of the world; that we should be holy and without blame before him in love,
having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory
of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved. 2 These. 2. 13,
14. But we are bound to give thanks to God always for you, Brethren, beloved of
the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth; whereunto he called you
by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ:
, and also according to his sovereign power, and the unsearchable counsel of
his own will, (whereby he extends, or withholdeth favor, as he pleases)
has passed by and foreordained the rest to dishonor and wrath, to be for
their sin inflicted, to the praise of the glory of his justice Romans 9. 17,
18-21, 22. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, even for this same purpose
have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name
might be declared throughout all the earth. Therefore has he mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens -- Has not the Potter power
over his clay of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor and another unto
dishonor? What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction?
Matthew. 11. 25, 26. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank Thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and the prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes. Even so, Father, for
so it seemed good in thy sight. 2 Timothy 2. 20. But in a great house there are
not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and
some to honor and some to dishonor. Jude v. 4. For there are certain men crept
in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men,
turning the grace of God into wantonness, denying the only God and our Lord
Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 8. And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense to
them that stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were
appointed.
.

Q. How does God execute his Decrees?

A. God executes his Decrees in the works of Creation and Providence;
according to his infallible foreknowledge, and the free and immutable counsel
of his own will Ephesians. 1. 11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance,
being predestined according to the purpose of Him, who works all things
according to the counsel of his own will.
.

Q. What is the work of Creation?

A. The work of Creation is that, wherein God did in the beginning, by the Word
of his power, make of nothing, the World and all things therein, for himself,
within the space of six days, and all very good Genesis 1. Heb. 11. 3. Through
faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the word of God, so that
things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear. Prove. 16. 4.
The Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of
evil.
.

Q. How did God create Angels?

A. God created all the Angels Col. 1. 16. For by him were all things created
that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they
be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created
by him and for him.
, Spirits Psalm. 104. 4. Who makes his Angels Spirits, his Ministers a flame of
fire.
, Immortal Mat. 22. 30. For in the Resurrection they neither marry nor are
given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in heaven.
, Holy Matthew. 25. 31. When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the
holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory.
, excelling in knowledge 2 Samuel 14. 17. Then thine handmaid said, The word of
my Lord the King shall now be comfortable: for, as an Angel of God, so is my
Lord the King, to discern good and bad; therefore the Lord thy God will be with
thee. Matthew. 24. 36. But of that day and hour knows no man* no not the Angels
of heaven, but my Father only.
, mighty in power 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. And to you who are troubled, rest with us,
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels.
, to execute his Commandments, and to praise his Name Psalm. 103. 20, 21. Bless
the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in strength, and do his commandments,
harkening to the voice of his word. Bless the Lord all ye his Hosts, ye
Ministers of his that do his pleasure.
, yet subject to change 2 Pet. 2. 4. For if God spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness
to be reserved unto judgment --
.

Q. How did God create Man?

A. After God had made all other creatures, He created man male and female Genesis
1. 27. So God created Man in His own Image, in the Image of God created He him;
Male and Female created He them.
, formed the body of the man of the dust of the ground Genesis 2. 7. And the Lord
God formed Man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the
breath of life.
, and the woman of the rib of the man Genesis 2. 22. And the rib which the Lord
had taken from man, made He a woman, and brought her unto the man.
, endued them with living, reasonable, and immortal souls Genesis 2. 7. And the
Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils
the breath of life. and man became a living soul. Compare this with Job 35. 11.
Who teaches us more then the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser then the
fowls of heaven. And with Eccl. 12. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth,
as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it. And with Matthew. 10.
28. Fear not them who can kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but
rather fear him who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. And with
Luke 23. 43. And Jesus said unto him, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
, made them after his own image Genesis 1. 27. So God created man in his His own
Image, in the Image of God created He him, male and female created he them.
, in knowledge Col. 3. 10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in
knowledge, after the Image of Him that created him.
, righteousness, and holiness Ephesians. 4. 24. And that ye put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
, having the Law of God written in their hearts Romans 2. 14, 15. For when the
Gentiles who have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law;
these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves; which show the work of the
Law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another.
, and power to fulfill it Eccl. 7. 29. Lo this only have I found, that God
has made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions.
, with dominion over the creatures Genesis 1. 28. And God blessed them and said
unto them, Be friutful, and multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it,
and have dominion over the fi^h of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and
over every living thing that moves upon the earth.
, yet subject to fall Genesis 3. 6. And when the woman saw that the tree was good
for food, and pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise,
she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with
her, and he did eat. Eccl. 7. 29. Lo this only have I found, that God made man
upright, but they sought out many inventions.
.

Q. What are Gods works of Providence?

A. Gods works of Providence are his most holy Psalm. 145. 17. The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
, wise Psalm. 104. 24. O Lord how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou
made them all; the earth is full of thy riches. Isa. 28, 29. This also comes
from the Lord of hosts, who is wonderful in counselling and excellent in
working.
, and powerful preserving Heb. 1. 3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and
the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his
power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right h^nd of
the Majesty on high.
, and governing all his creatures Psalm. 103. 19. The Lord has prepared his
throne in the heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all.
, ordering them and all their actions Mat. 10. 29, 30, 31. Are not two sparrows
sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your
Father? but the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore ye
are of more value then many sparrowes. Genesis 45. 7. And God s^nt me before you,
to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great
deliverance.
, to his own glory Romans 11. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all
things; to whom be glory for ever, Amen. Isai. 63. 14. As a beast goes down
into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest; so did thou lead
thy people, to make thy self a glorious name.
.

Q. What is Gods Providence toward the Angels?

A. God by his Providence permitted some of the Angels, wilfully and
irrecoverably to fall into sin, and damnation Jude v. 6. And the Angels which
kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. 2 Pet.
2. 4. For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell,
and delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto judgment --
Heb. 2. 16. For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels but he took on
him the seed of Abraham. John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the
lusts of your father ye will do; he was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him; when he speaks a
lie he speaks of his own, for he is a liar and the father of it.
, limiting and ordering that, and all their sins to his own glory Job. 1. 12.
And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold all that he has is in thy power, only
upon himself put not forth thy hand; so Satan went forth from the presence of
the Lord. Mat. 8. 31. And the Dev^ls be sought him, saying, If thou cast us
out, suffer us to go away into the heard of swine.
, and establ^shed the rest in holiness and happiness 1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge
thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ and the elect Angels, that thou
observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality. Mar. 8. 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my
words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of
man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.
H^b. 12. 22. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels.
, employing them all Psalm. 104. 4. Who mak^th his Angels Spirits, his Ministers
a flaming fire.
, at his pleasure, in the administration of his power, mercy, and justice 2
King. 19. 35. And it came to pass that night that the Angel of the Lord went
out and smote in the camp of the ^ssyrians 185000. and when they arose early in
the morning, behold they were all dead corpses. Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all
ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation?
.

Q. What was the Providence of God toward man in the estate wherein he was
created?

A. The Providence of God toward man in the estate wherein he was created, was,
the placing him in Paradise, appointing him to dress it, giving him liberty to
eat of the fruit of the earth Genesis 2. 8.-15, 16. And the Lord planted a Garden
Eastward in Eden, and there he put the man whom he had formed -- V. 15.] And
the Lord took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it, and
keep it. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the
garden thou may freely eat.
, putting the creatures under his dominion Genesis 1. 28. And God blessed them and
said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue
it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
and over every living thing that moves upon the earth.
, and ordaining marriage for his help Genesis 2. 18. And the Lord God said, It is
not good that the man should be alone: I will make him an help meet for him.
, affording him communion with himself Genesis 1. 26, 27, 28, 29. And God said,
Let us make man in our own image, after our likeness, and let him have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the
cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps
upon the earth; so God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him, male and female created he them. And God blessed them, and said
unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply and replenish the earth, etc -- And God
said, Behold I have given you every herb bearing seed, upon the face of the
earth, and every tree in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed, to you it
shall be for meat. Genesis 3. 8. And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking
in the garden in the cool of the day; and Adam and his wife hid themselves from
the presence of the Lord, amongst the trees of the garden.
, instituting the Sabbath Genesis 2. 3. And God blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it; because that in it he had rested from all his work which God
created and made.
, entering into a covenant of life with him, upon condition of personal,
perfect, and perpetual obedience Gal. 3. 12. And the Law is not of faith; but
the man that does them shall live in them. Rom 10. 5. For Moses describes the
righteousness which is of the Law, that the man who does those things shall
live by them.
, of which the Tree of Life was a pledge Genesis 2. 9. And out of the ground made
the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for
food: the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil.
, and forbidding to eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, upon pain
of death Genesis 2. 17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
not eat of it: for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die,
.

Q. Did man continue in that estate wherein God at first created him?

A. Our first Parents being left to the freedom of their own will, through the
temptation of Satan, transgressed the Commandment of God, in eating the
forbidden fruit, and thereby fell from the state of Innocence, wherein they
were created Genesis 3, 6, 7, 8-13. And when the woman saw the tree was good for
food, and pleasant to the sight, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she
took of the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her,
and he did eat. And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew they were
naked; and they sewed Fig Leaves together, and made themselves aprons. And they
heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden, in the cool of the day;
and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord amongst the
trees of the garden -- V. 13.] And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is
this that thou have done? and the woman said, The Serpent beguiled me, and I
did eat. Eccl. 7. 29. Lo this only have I found, that God made man upright,
but they have sought out many inventions. 2 Cor. 11. 3. But I fear lest by any
means as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.
.

Q. Did all mankind fall in that first Transgression?

A. The Covenant being made with Adam as a public person, not for himself
only, but for his posterity, all mankind descending from him by ordinary
generation Act. 17. 26. And has made of one blood all Nations of men, for to
dwell on the face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed,
and the bounds of their habitation.
, sinned in him, and fell with him in that first transgression Genesis 2. 16, 17.
And the Lord commanded the man saying, Of every tree of the garden thou may
freely eat, but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat
of it; for on the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Compared
with Romans 5. from v. 12. to v. 20. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men for that all have
sinned -- V. 18.] Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all to
condemnation; even so -- V. 19.] For as by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners: so by the obedience, etc. -- And with 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. For since by
man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam
all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.
.

Q. Into what estate did the Fall bring mankind?

A The Fall brought mankind into an estate of sin and misery Romans 5. 12.
Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: Romans 3. 23. For all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God.
.

Q. What is sin?

A. Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of any Law of God,
given as a Rule to the reasonable creature 1 John 3. 4. Whosoever commits
sin, transgresses also the Law; for sin is the transgression of the Law. Gal.
3. 10-12. For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse; for
it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law to do them -- And the Law is not of faith; but
the man that does them shall live in them.
.

Q. Wherein consists the sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell?

A. The sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell, consists in the guilt
of Adams first sin Romans 5. 12-19. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned -- V. 19.] For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
, the want of that righteousness wherein he was created, and the corruption of
his nature, whereby he is utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite unto
all that is spiritually good, and wholly inclined to all evil, and that
continually Romans 3. from v. 10. to v. 20. As it is written, There is none
righteous, no not one. V. 11.] There is none that understands, there is none
that seeks after God. V. 12.] They are all gone out of the way, they are
altogether become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. V.
13.] Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used
deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips. V. 14.] Whose mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness. V. 15.] Their feet are swift to shed blood. V. 16.]
Destruction and misery are in their ways. V. 17.] And the way of peace have
they not known. V. 18.] There is no fear of God before their eyes. V. 19.] Now
we know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under
the Law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. And you has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins: wherein in time past ye walked, according to the course of
this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that
now works in the children of disobedience; among whom also we all had our
conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires
of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath even as
others. Romans 5. 6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ
died for the ungodly. Romans 8. 7, 8. Because the carnal mind is enmity against
God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be; so then
they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Genesis 6. 5. And God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
, which is commonly called Original sin, and from which do proceed all actual
transgressions Jam. 1. 14, 15. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away
by his own lust and enticed. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth death. Mat. 15. 19. For out of
the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts,
false-witness, blasphemies.
.

Q. How is Original sin conveyed from our first Parents unto their posterity?

A. Original sin is conveyed from our first Parents unto their posterity by
natural generation, so as all that proceed from them in that way, are conceived
and born in sin Psa. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me. Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
not one. Job 15. 14. What is man that he should be clean, and he that is born
of a woman that he should be righteous? Job. 3. 6. That which is born of the
flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.
.

Q. What misery did the Fall bring upon mankind?

A. The fall brought upon mankind the loss of communion with God Genesis 3.
8-10-24. And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the
cool of the day; and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the
Lord, amongst the trees of the garden -- V. 10.] And he said I heard thy voice
in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid my self -- V.
24.] So he drove out the man, and he placed at the East of the garden of Eden
Cherubims and a flaming sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the
tree of life.
, his displeasure and curse, so as we are by nature children of wrath Ephesians. 2.
2, 3. Wherein in times past ye walked, according to the course of this world,
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience; amongst whom also we all had our conversation in
times past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and
of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath even as others.
, bondslaves to Satan 2 Timothy 2. 26. And that they may recover themselves out
of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will.
, and justly liable to all punishments in this world, and that which is to come
Genesis 2. 17. But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat
of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Lam. 3. 39.
Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?
Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Mat. 25. 41.-46. Then shall he say also to them
on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil, and his Angels -- V. 46. And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment; but the righteous into life eternal. Jude v. 7. Even as Sodom and
Gommortha, and the cities about them, in like manner giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.
.

Q What are the punishments of sin in this world?

A. The punishments of sin in this world, are either inward, as blindness of
mind Ephesians 4. 18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the
life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness
of their heart.
, a reprobate sense Romans 1. 28. Even as they did not like to retain God in
their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, and to do those things
which are not convenient.
, strong delusions 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. And for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie.
, hardness of heart Romans 2. 5. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart,
treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God.
, horror of conscience Isai. 33. 14. The sinners in Zion are afraid;
fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with
devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Genesis 4. 13.
And Cain said unto the Lord, my punishment is greater then I can bear. Mat. 27.
4. -- Saying, I have betrayed innocent blood; and they said, What is that to
us? see thou to that.
, and vile affections Romans 1. 26. For this cause God gave them up to vile
affections: for even their women did change their natural use into that which
is against nature.
, or outward, as the curse of God upon the creatures for our sakes Genesis 3. 17.
And unto Adam he said, Because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife,
and have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not
eat of it; Cursed is the ground for thy sake, in forrow shall thou eat of it
all the days of thy life.
, and all other evils that befall us in our bodies, names, estates, relations,
and employments Deuteronomy. 28. 15. to the end. But it shall come to pass if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his
Commandments and his Statutes which I have commanded thee this day, that all
these curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee; Cursed shall thou be in
the City, and cursed shall thou be in the Field: Cursed shall be thy basket and
thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and of thy land, etc --
, together with Death it self Romans 6. 21-23. What fruit had ye then in those
things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death -- V.
23. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord.
.

Q. What are the punishments of sin in the world to come?

A. The punishments of sin in the world to come, are everlasting separation
from the comfortable presence of God, and most grievous torments in Soul and
Body without intermission, in Hellfire for ever 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the
glory of his power. Mark 9. 44-46-48. to go into Hell, where their worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched. Luke 16. 24. And he cried and said, Father
Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in
water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.
.

Q. Does God leave all mankind to perish in the state of sin and misery?

A. God will not leave all men to perish in the estate of sin and misery 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by
our Lord Jesus Christ.
, into which they fell by the breach of the first Covenant, commonly called the
Covenant of works Gal. 3. 10, 12. For as many as are of the works of the law,
are under the curse, for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things which are written in the Book of the law to do them. V. 12.] And
the law is not of faith, but the man that does them shall live in them.
, but of his mere love and mercy, delivers his elect out of it, and brings
them into an estate of salvation by the second Covenant, commonly called the
Covenant of Grace Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. But after that the kindness and love of
God our Savior, toward man appeared. V. 5. Not by works of righteousness which
we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of
regeneration, and the renewing of the holy Ghost. V. 6.] Which he shed on us
abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. V. 7.] That being justified by his
grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Gal. 3.
21. Is the law then against the promises of God? God forbid; for if there had
been a law given, which could have given life, verily righteousness should have
been by the law. Romans 3. 20, 21, 22. Therefore by the deeds of the law there
shall no flesh be justified in his sight, for by the law is the knowledge of
sin. V. 21. But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested,
being witnessed by the Law and by the Prophets. V. 22] Even the righteousness
of God, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them hat
believe, for there is no difference.
.

Q. With whom was the Covenant of Grace made?

A. The Covenant of Grace was made with Christ, as the second Adam, and in him,
with all the elect as his seed Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abrahaem and to his seed were
the promises made, he says not to seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy
seed which is Christ, Romans 5. 15, to the end. Of which before. Isa. 53. 10, 11.
Yet it pleased our Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief, when thou
shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall
prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. V.
11.] He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied; by his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many* for he shall bear their
iniquities.
.

Q. How is the grace of God manifested in the second Covenant?

A. The grace of God is manifested in the second Covenant, in that he freely
provideth, and offers to sinners a Mediator Genesis 3. 15. And I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Isa. 42. 6. I the Lord, have called
thee in righteousness and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and will
give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles. Joh. 6.
27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat which endures
unto everlasting life, which the son of man shall give unto you, for him has
God the father sealed.
, and life and salvation by him 1 John 5. 11, 12. And this is the record, that
God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. V. 12.] He
that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son, has not life:
; and requiring faith as the condition to interest them in him, Joh. 3. 16. For
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish but have everlasting life. John 1. 12. But
as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even
to them that believe on his name.
promises and gives his holy Spirit Prove. 1. 23. Behold I will pour out my
Spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you.
, to all his elect to work in them that faith 2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same
spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I
spoken, we also believe, and therefore speak.
, with all other saving graces Gal. 5. 22, 23. But the fruit of the Spirit is,
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith. V. 22.]
Meekness, temperance, against such there is no law.
, and to enable them unto all holy obedience Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments and do them.
, as the evidence of the truth of their faith Jam. 2. 18, 22. Yea, a man may
say, Thou have faith, and I have works, show me thy faith without thy works,
and I will show thee my faith by my works. V. 22.] See thou how faith wrought
with his works, and by works was faith made perfect.
and thankfulness to God 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. For the love of Christ constrains
us because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead. V. 15:]
And that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.
, and as the way which he has appointed to salvation Ephesians. 2. 10. For we are
his workmanship created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them.
.

Q. Was the Covenant of Grace always administered after one and the same manner?

A. The Covenant of Grace was not always administered after the same manner,
but the administrations of it under the Old Testament, were different from
those under the New 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. Who also has made us able Ministers
of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit, for the letter
kills, but the Spirit gives life. V. 7.] But if the Ministration of death,
written and engraven in stones was glorious, so that the children of Israel
could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his
countenance, which glory was to be done away. V. 8.] How then shall not the
ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? V. 9.] For if the ministration
of condemnation be glorious, how much more does the ministration of
righteousness exceed in glory?
.

Q. How was the Covenant of Grace administered under the Old Testament.

A. The Covenant of Grace was administered under the Old Testament, by Promises
Romans 15. 8. Now I say that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for
the truth of God to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers.
, Prophecies Act. 3. 20, 24. And he shall send Jesus Christ which was preached
unto you, yea, and all the Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after,
as many as have spoken have likewise foretold of these days.
, Sacrifices Heb. 10. 1. For the law having a shadow of good things to come,
not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they
offer year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect.
, Circumcision Romans 4. 11. And he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of
the righteousness of faith which he had, being yet uncircumcised, that he might
be the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that
righteousness might be imputed unto them also.
, the Passover 1 Cor. 5. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be
a new lump, as ye are unleavened: for even Christ our Passover is sacrificed
for us.
, and other Types and Ordinances, which did all fore-signifie Christ then to
come, and were for that time sufficient to build up the Elect in faith in the
promised Messiah Heb 8. 9. and 10. chapters. Heb. 11. 13. These all died in
faith not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were
persuaded of them and embraced them, and confessed, that they were strangers,
and pilgrims, on the earth.
, by whom they then had full remission of sin, and eternal salvation Gal. 3. 7,
8, 9-14. Know ye therefore that they who are of faith are the children of
Abraham. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen
through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall
all nations be blessed. So then they who be of faith, are blessed with faithful
Abraham. -- V. 14.] That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith.
.

Q. How is the Covenant of grace administered under the New Testament?

A. Under the New Testament, when Christ the substance was exhibited, the same
Covenant of Grace was and still is to be administered in the preaching of the
word Mark 16. 15. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach
the Gospel to every creature.
, and the administration of the Sacraments of Baptism Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go ye
therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo I am with you always unto the end of
the world.
, and the Lords Supper 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25. For I have received of the Lord
that which I also delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night
wherein he was betrayed took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it,
and said, Take, eat, this is my body which was broken for you; this do in
remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took the cup* when he had
supped, saying, This cup is the New Testament in my blood: this do ye as often as
ye drink it, in remembrance of me.
, in which Grace and salvation is held forth in more fullness, evidence, and
efficacy, to all Nations 2 Cor. 3. 6. to the end of the chapter. Who has also
made us able ministers of the New Testament not of the letter, but of the
Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. But if the
ministration of death written and engraven in stones was glorious, etc. -- Heb.
8. 6.-10, 11. For finding fault with them, he says, Behold the days come,
says the Lord, when I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and
Judah -- V. 10.] For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel, after those days says the Lord, I will put my laws into their minds,
and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people. V. 11.] And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me from the
least to the greatest. Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations
baptizing them in the name of, etc. --
.

Q. Who is the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace?

A. The only Mediator of the Covenant of Grace is the Lord Jesus Christ 1 Timothy
2. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus.
, who being the eternal Son of God, of one substance and equal with the Father
Joh. 1. 1.-14. In the beginning was the word; and the word was with God, and
the word was God -- V. 14.] And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us,
and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full
of grace and truth. Joh. 10. 30. I and my father are one. Phil. 2. 6. Who being
in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
, in the fullness of time became man Gal. 4. 4. But when the fullness of time was
come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law.
, and so was and continues to be God and Man in two entire distinct natures,
and one person for ever Luke 1. 35. And the Angel answered and said unto her.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
over-shadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee,
shall be called the Son of God. Romans 9. 5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom,
as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever,
Amen. Col. 2. 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.
Heb. 7. 24, 25. But this man because he continues ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.
.

Q. How did Christ, being God, become Man?

A. Christ the Son of God became Man by taking to himself a true body, and a
reasonable soul Joh. 1. 14. And the word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and
we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth. Mat. 26. 38. Then says he unto them, My soul is exceeding
sorrowful even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.
, being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin
Mary, of her substance, and born of her Luke 1. 27-31-35-42. To a virgin
spoused to a m^n whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, and the Virgins
name was Mary -- V. 31.] And behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring
forth a Son, and shall call his name, Jesus -- V. 35.] And the An^el answered
and said unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall over-shadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be
born of thee, shall be called the Son of God -- V. 42.] And [Elizabeth] spoke
out with a loud voice and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is
the fruit of thy womb. Gal. 4. 4. But when the fullness of the time: was come,
God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law.
, yet without sin Heb. 4. 15. For we have not an High Priest which cannot be
touched with a feeling of our infi^mities, but was in all points tempted like
as we are, yet without sin. Heb. 7. 26. For such an High Priest became us, who
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the
heavens.
.

Q. Why was it requisite that the Mediator should be God?

A. It was requisite that the Mediator should be God, that he might sustain and
keep the humane nature from sinking under the infinite wrath of God, and the
power of death Acts 2. 24, 25. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains
of death; because it was not possible he should be holden of it. For David
speaks concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on
my right hand, that I should not be moved. Romans 1. 4. And declared to be the
Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness by the resurrection
from the dead. Compared with Romans 4. 25. Who was delivered for our offenses,
and was ra^sed again for our justification. Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the
blood of Christ who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself without spot
to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living God?
, give worth and efficacy to his sufferings, obedience, and intercession Act.
20. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over which
the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he
has purchased with his own blood. Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself without spot to God,
purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? Heb. 7. 25, 26,
27, 28. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. V. 26.] For
such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners, and made higher then the Heavens. V. 27.] Who needs not daily, as
those High Priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for
the peoples; for this he did once when he offered up himself. V. 28.] For the
law makes men High Priests which have infirmities, but the word of the oath
which was since the law, makes the Son who is consecrated for ever.
, and so satisfy Gods justice Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. Being justified freely by
his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. V. 25.] Whom God has
set forth to be a propitiation through says in his blood to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past through the forbearance
of God. V. 26.]. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness; that he
might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus.
, procure his favor Ephesians. 1. 6. To the praise of the glory of his grace wherein
he has made us accepted in the beloved. Mat. 3. 17. And lo a voice from
Heaven, saying* This is my beloved Son, in whom alone I am well pleased.
, purchase a peculiar people T^^. 2. 13, 14. Looking for the blessed hope, and
the glorious appearing of the great God and our Sa^^^ur Jesus Christ; who gave
himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
, give his Spirit to them Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are sons, God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father.
, conquer all their enemies Luke 1. 68, 69.-71.-74. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people, and has raised up an horn
of salvation for us in the house of his servant David -- V. 71.] That we should
be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us -- V. 74.]
That he would grant unto us that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear.
, and bring them to everlasting salvation Heb. 5. 8, 9. Though he were a Son,
yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made
perfect he became the author of everlasting salvation unto all that obey him.
Heb. 9* 11. to the 16. But Christ being come an High Priest of good things to
come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to
say, not of this building. V. 12.] Neither by the blood of Goats and Calves,
but by his own blood, he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. V. 13.] For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and
the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of
the flesh; V. 14.] How much more shall the blood of Christ who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from
dead works, to serve the living God? V. 15.] And for this cause he is the
Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of
the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are called,
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.
.

Q. Why was it requisite that the Mediator should be Man?

A. It was requisite that the Mediator should be Man, that he might advance our
nature Heb. 2. 16. For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he
took on him the seed of Abraham.
, perform obedience to the law Gal. 4. 4. But when the time was come, God sent
forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law.
, suffer, and make intercession for us in our nature Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch then
as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is the Devil. Heb. 7. 24, 25. But this man because he continues
for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. Wherefore he is able also to save
them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them.
, have a fellow-feeling of our infirmities Heb. 4. 15. For we have not an High
Priest that cannot be touched with the seeling of ou^ infirmit^es, but was in
all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
, that we might receive the adoption of sons Gal 4. 5. To rede^m them that were
under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.
, and have comfort, and access with boldness unto the throne of grace Heb. 4.
16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
.

Q. Why was it requisite that the Mediator should be God and Man in one person?

A. It was requisite that the Mediator, who was to reconcile God and Man,
should himself be both God and Man, and this in one person, that the proper
works of each nature might be accepted of God for us Matthew. 1. 21. 23. And she
shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his Name Jesus: for he shall save
his people from their sins. V. 23. Behold, a Virgin shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his Name Emmanuel, which being
interpreted, is, God with us. Mat. 3. 17. And lo a voice from heaven, saying,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Heb. 9. 14. How much more
shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself
without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God.
, and relied on by us, as the works of the whole person 1 Pet. 2. 6. Wherefore
it is contained in the Scripture, Behold I lay in Sion a choice Cornerstone,
elect and precious, and he that believes on him shall not be confounded.
.

Q. Why was our Mediator called Jesus?

A. Our Mediator was called Jesus, because he saves his people from their sins
Mat. 1. 21. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins.
.

Q. Why was our Mediator called Christ?

A. Our Mediator was called Christ, because he was anointed with the Holy Ghost
above measure Joh. 3. 34. For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God;
for God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him. Psalm. 45. 7. Thou love
righteousness and hate wickedness; therefore God, thy God, has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
, and so set apart, and fully furnished with all authority and ability John 6.
27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that meat which endures to
everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you: for him has God
the Father sealed. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying,
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth; Go ye therefore and teach
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you; and lo, I am with you always even to the end of the world. Amen.
, to execute the Offices of Prophet Act. 3. 21, 22. whom the heavens must
receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken of
by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. For Moses truly
said unto the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of
your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall
say unto you. Luke 4. 18-21. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal the
broken in heart, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised -- V. 21.] And he began
to say unto them. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.
, Priest Heb. 5. 5, 6, 7. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an
High Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee. As he says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchizedck; who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up
prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears, unto him that was able
to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared. Heb. 4. 14, 15. Seeing
then that we have a great High Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus
the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an High Priest
that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all
points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
, and King of his Church Psalm. 2. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill
of Sion. Matthew. 21. 5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes
unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass.
Isai. 9. 6, 7. For unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
government shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Of the
increase of his government and peace, there shall be no end, upon the throne of
David and upon his Kingdom to order it, and to establish it with judgment and
with justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will
perform this. Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. And being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross;
wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above
every name: That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in
heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue
should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
, in the estate both of his Humiliation and Exaltation.

Q. How does Christ execute the office of a Prophet?

A. Christ executes the office of a Prophet, in his revealing to the Church
Joh. 1. 18. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in
the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
, in all ages, by his Spirit and word 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. Of which salvation
the Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, who prophesied of the
grace that should come unto you. V. 11.] Searching what, or what manner of time
the Spirit of Christ, which was in them did signify, when it testified
beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory which should follow. V.
12.] Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did
minister the things which are now reported unto you, by them that have preached
the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, which things
the Angels desire to look into.
, in diverse ways of administration Heb. 1. 1, 2. God who at sundry times and
in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has
in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom He has appointed heir of
all things, by whom also he made the worlds.
, the whole will of God Joh. 15. 15. Henceforth I call you not servants, for the
servant knows not what his Lord does, but I have called you friends; for all
things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you.
, in all things concerning their edification, and salvation Act. 20. 32. And
now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers. V. 12.] For the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ. V. 13.] Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. Joh. 20. 31. But these are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, and that believing you
might have life through his name.
.

Q. How does Christ execute the office of a Priest?

A. Christ executes the office of a Priest in his once offering himself a
sacrifice without spot to God Heb. 9. 14, 28. How much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living God -- V. 28.] So
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for
him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.
, to be a reconciliation for the sins of his people Heb. 2. 17. Wherefore it
behooved him in all things to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be
a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people.
, and in making continual intercession for them Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is
able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them.
.

Q. How does Christ execute the office of a King?

A. Christ executes the office of a King, in calling out of the world a people
to himself Act. 15. 14, 15, 16. Simeon has declared how God at the first did
vis^^ the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name; and to this
agree the words of the Prophets, as it is written, After this I will return,
and build again the Tabernacle of David which is fallen down, and I will build
again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up. Isai. 55. 4, 5. Behold I have
given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people:
Behold thou shall call a nation that thou know not, and nations that knew
not thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy One
of Israel; for he has glorified thee. Genesis ^9. 10. The scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come;
and unto him shall the gathering of the people be. Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness, from the
womb of the morning; thou have the dew of thy youth.
, and giving them officers Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ. 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then
gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.
, Laws Isai. 33. 22. For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King; he will save us.
, and Censures, by which he visibly governs them Mat. 18. 17, 18. And if he
shall n^glect to hear them, tell it to the Church; but if he neglect to hear
the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a Publican. Verily I
say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5.
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my
spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, To deliver such a one unto
Satan, for the destruction of the flesh that the Spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus.
, in bestowing saving grace upon his elect Act. 5. 31. Him has God exalted
with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repen^ance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sins.
, rewarding their obedience Rev. 22. 12. And behold I come quickly, and my
reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be. Rev. 2.
10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; behold the Devil shall
cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown
of life.
, and correcting them for their sins Rev. 3. 19. As many as I love I rebuke and
chasten; be zealous therefore and repent.
, preserving and supporting them under all their temptations and sufferings
Isai. 63. 9. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare
them and carried them all the days of old.
, restraining and overcoming all their enemies 1 Cor. 15. 25. For he must reign
till he have put all his enemies under his feet, Psalm. 110. throughout. The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I have made thine
enemies thy footstool, to the end. --
, and powerfully ordering all things for his own glory Romans 14. 10, 11. But why
do thou judge thy brother, or why do thou set at naught thy brother? We
shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is written, As I
live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess
to God.
, and their own good Romans 8. 28. We know that all things work together for good
to them who love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.
, and also in taking vengeance on the rest who know not God, and obey not the
Gospel 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9. In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power. Psalm. 2. 8, 9. Ask of me and I shall give thee the
Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Thou shall break them with a rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel.
.

Q. What was the state of Christ's humiliation?

A. The estate of Christ's humiliation was, that low condition, wherein he, for
our sakes, emptying himself of his glory, took upon him the form of a servant
in his Conception and Birth, Life, Death, and after his death until his
resurrection Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. Who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon
him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, and being found
in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the Cross. Luke 1. 31. And behold thou shall conceive in thy womb,
and bring forth a son, and shall call his name Jesus. 2 Cor. 8. 9. For ye know
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes
he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. Acts 2. 24. Whom God
has raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was not possible
that he should be holden of it.
.

Q. How did Christ humble himself in his Conception and Birth?

A. Christ humbled himself in his Conception, in that being from all eternity
the Son of God, in the Bosom of the Father, he was pleased in the fullness of
time to become the Son of Man, made of a Woman of low estate, and to be born of
her, with diverse Circumstances of more then ordinary abasement Joh. 1. 14-18.
And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth -- V.
18.] No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Gal. 4. 4. But when the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law.
Luke 2. 7. And she brought forth her first born Son and wrapped him in
swadling-clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them
in the Inn.
.

Q. How did Christ humble himself in his life?

A. Christ humbled himself in his life by subjecting himself to the Law Gal. 4.
4. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a
woman, made under the Law.
, which he perfectly fulfilled Mat. 5. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy
the Law or the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Romans 5. 19.
For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one shall many be made righteous.
, and by conflicting with the indignities of the world Psalm. 22. 6. But I am a
worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people. Heb. 12. 2, 3.
Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the throne of God. For consider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your
minds.
, temptations of Satan Mat. 4. from v. 1. to v. 12. Then was Jesus led up of
the Spirit into the wilderness, to he tempted of the Devil, etc. -- Luke 4. 13.
And when the Devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for a
season.
, and infirmities in his flesh, whether common to the nature of man, or
particularly accompanying that his low condition Heb. 2. 17, 18. Wherefore in
all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a
merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself has suffered
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. Heb. 4. 15. For we
have not an High Priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
Isa: 52. 13, 14. Behold my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted
and extolled, and be very high. As many were astonished at thee, (his visage
was so marred more then any man, and his form more then the sons of men.)
.

Q. How did Christ humble himself in his death?

A. Christ humbled himself in his death, in that having been be rayed by Judas
Mat. 27. 4. Saying* I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood;
and they said, What is that to us? see thou to that.
, forsaken by his Disciples Mat. 26. 56. But all this was done that the
Scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled; then all the Disciples forsook
him and fled.
, scorned and rejected by the World Isai. 53. 2, 3. For he shall grow up before
him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground; he has no form nor
comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire
him. He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief, and we hid as it were, our faces from him, he was despised, and we
esteemed him not.
, condemned by Pilate, and tormented by his Persecutors Mat. 27. from ver. 26.
10 v. 50. Then released he Barrabbas unto them, and when he had scourged Jesus,
he delivered him to be crucified, etc. -- John 19. 34. But one of the soldiers
with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came thereout blood and water.
, having also conflicted with the terrors of death, and the powers of darkness,
felt and born the weight of Gods wrath Luke 22. 44. And being in an agony he
prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood,
falling down to the ground. Mat. 27. 46. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried
with a loud voice, saying, ELI ELI LAMA SABACTHANI. that is to say, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me?
, he laid down his life an offering for sin Isa. 53. 10. Yet it pleased the
Lord to bruise him; he has put him to grief. When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.
, enduring the painful, shameful, and cursed death of the cross Phil. 2. 8. And
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the cross. Heb. 12. 2. Looking unto Jesus the author
and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of
God. Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made
a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on the tree.
.

Q. Wherein consisted Christ's humiliation after his death?

A. Christ's humiliation after his death, consisted in his being buried 1 Cor.
15. 3, 4. For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how
that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was
buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures.
, and continuing in the state of the dead, and under the power of death till
the thirdday Psalm. 16. 10. For thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither
will thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. Compared with Acts 2. 24,
25, 26, 27.-31. Whom God has raised up having loosed the pains of death,
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. V. 25.] For David
speaks concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is
on my right hand that I should not be moved -- V. 36.] Therefore did my heart
rejoice, and my tongue was glad, my flesh also shall rest in hope. V. 27.]
Because thou will not leave my soul in the grave, nor wile thou suffer thine
holy One to see corruption -- V. 31.] He seeing this before, spoke of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither did his
flesh see corruption, Romans 6. 9. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead
dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. Matthew. 12. ^0. For as
Jonas was three days and three nights in the whales belly so shall the Son of
man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
, which has been otherwise expressed in these words, He descended into Hell.

Q. What was the estate of Christ's exaltation?

A. The estate of Christ's exaltation comprehends his resurrection 1 Cor. 15.
4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to
the Scripture.
, Ascension Mark 16. 19. So then, after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was
received up into heav^n, and sat on the right hand of God.
, sitting at the right hand of the Father Ephesians. 1. 20. -- Which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
the heavealy places.
, and his coming again to judge the world Act. 1. 11. -- Who also said, Ye men
of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus who is taken
from you up into heaven, shall so come, in like manner as ye have seen him go
into heaven. Act. 17. 31. Because he has appointed a day, in which he will
judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he
has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.
.

Q. How was Christ exalted in his resurrection?

A. Christ was exalted in his resurrection, in that, not having seen corruption
in death, of which it was not possible for him to be held Act. 2. 24.-27. Whom
God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was not
possible he should be holden of it -- V. 27.] Because thou will not leave my
soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption,
, and having the very same body in which he suffered, with the essential
properties thereof Luke 24. 39. Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my
self: handle me and see me, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me
have.
, but without mortality and other common infirmities belonging to this life,
really united to his soul Romans 6. 9. Knowing that Christ being raised from the
dead dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. Rev. 1. 18. I am he
that lives and was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have
the keys of hell and death.
, he rose again from the dead the third day, by his own power Joh. 10. 18. No
man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it again; this commandment have I received of my
Father.
; whereby he declared himself to be the Son of God Romans 1. 4. And declared to
be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness by the
resurrection from the dead.
, to have satisfied divine justice Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.
, to have vanquished death and him that had the power of it Heb. 2 14. For as
much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is the Devil.
, and to be Lord of quick and dead Romans 14. 9. For to this end Christ both
died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead, and living.
, all which he did as a public person 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. For since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead, for as in Adam all die,
so in Christ shall all be made alive.
, the head of his Church Ephesians. 1. 20, 22, 23. Which he wrought in Christ when he
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly
places. V. 22.] And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the
head over all things to the Church; which is his body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all. Col. 1. 18. And he is the head of the body the Church, who
is the beginning, the first born from the dead, that in all things he might
have the pre-eminence.
, for their justification Romans 4. 25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and
was raised again for our justification.
, quickening in grace Ephesians. 2. 1-5, 6. And you has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins -- V. 5.] Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us
together with Christ (by grace ye are saved) And has raised us up together,
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Col. 2. 12. Buried
with him in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him, through the faith of
the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead.
, support against enemies 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26, 27. For he must reign till he has
put all his enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is
death. For he has put all things under his feet; but when he says, all things
are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted who did put all things
under him.
, and to assure them of their resurrection from the dead at the last day 1 Cor.
15. 20. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of
them that slept.
.

Q. How was Christ exalted in his Ascension?

A. Christ was exalted in his Ascension, in that having after his resurrection
often appeared unto, and conversed with his Apostles, speaking to them of the
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God Act. 1. 2, 3. Until the day in which he
was taken up, after that he through the Holy Ghost had given commandments unto
the Apostles, whom he had chosen; To whom also he showed himself alive after
his passion, by many infallible proofs being seen of them forty days and
speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.
, and giving them commission to Preach the Gospel to all nations Mat. 28. 19,
20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always unto the
end of the world.
, forty days after his resurrection, he, in our nature, and as our head Heb.
6. 20. Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made an High Priest
for ever after the order of Melchizedck.
, triumphing over enemies Ephesians. 4. 8. Wherefore he says when he ascended up on
high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.
, visibly went up into the highest heavens, there to receive gifts for men Act.
1. 9, 10, 11. And when he bad spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up and a cloud received him out of their sight. And while they looked
steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold two men stood by them in white
apparel; who also said, Ye men of Galilee why stand ye gazing up into heaven?
the same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. Ephesians. 4. 10. He that descended is the
same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all
things. Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity
captive, thou have received gifts for men; yea for the rebellious also, that
the Lord God might dwell among them.
, to raise up our affections thither Col. 3. 1, 2. If ye then be risen with
Christ, s^ck those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God; set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth.
, and to prepare a place for us Joh. 14. 3. And if I go and prepare a place for
you, I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am there ye
may be also.
, where himself is, and shall continue, till his second coming at the end of
the world Act. 3. 21. Whom the heavens must receive, till the ^imes of
restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets since the world began.
.

Q. How is Christ exalted in his sitting at the right hand of God?

A. Christ is exalted in his sitting at the right hand of God, in that as
God-man he is advanced to the highest favor with God the Father Phil. 2. 9.
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above
every name.
, with all fullness of joy Act. 2. 28. Thou have made known to me the ways of
life; Thou shall make me full of joy with thy countenance. Compared with Psalm.
16. 11. Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence is fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
, glory Joh. 17 5. And now O Father, glorify thou me, with thine own self,
with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.
, and power over all things in heaven and earth Ephesians. 1. 22. And has put all
things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church. 1 Pet. 3. 22. Who is gone into heaven and is on the right hand of God,
Angels, and Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him.
, and does gather and defend his Church, and subdue their enemies, furnishes
his Ministers and people with gifts and graces Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12. He that
descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he
might fill all things. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; For the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. Psalm.
110. throughout. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, till,
etc. -- to the end.
, and makes intercession for them Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died; ye rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand
of God, who also makes intercession for us.
.

Q. How does Christ make intercession?

A. Christ makes intercession, by his appearing in our nature continually
before the Father in heaven Heb. 9. 12-24. Neither by the blood of goats and
calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having
obtained eternal redemption for us. -- V. 24.] For Christ is not entered in the
holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven
it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us.
, in the merit of his obedience and sacrifice on earth Heb. 1. 3. Who being the
brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all
things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat
down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.
, declaring his will to have it applied to all believers Joh. 3. 16. For God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him, might not perish but have everlasting life. Joh. 17. 9.-20-24. I pray
for them, I pray not for the world; but for them which thou have given me, for
they are mine -- V. 20.] Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also that
shall believe on me through their word -- V. 24.] Father I will that they also
whom thou have given me, may be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory, which thou have given me; for thou lovedst me before the foundation of
the world.
, answering all accusations against them Rom 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies, Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died; yea rather that is risen again, who is even
at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.
, procuring for them quiet of conscience notwithstanding daily failings Romans 5.
1, 2. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein
we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 1 John 2. 1, 2. My little
children these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; And he is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole word. (Heb. 4. 16. Let us there come boldly unto the throne of grace,
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
, access with boldness to the throne of grace y, and acceptance of their
persons Ephesians. 1. 6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has
made us accepted in the beloved.
and services 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye also as lively stones are built up a Spiritual
house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God
by Jesus Christ.
.

Q. How is Christ to be exalted in his coming again to judge the world?

A. Christ is to be exalted in his coming again to judge the world, in that he
who was unjustly judged and condemned by wicked men Act. 3. 14, 15. But ye
denied the Holy One, and the just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto
you, and killed the Prince of life, whom God has raised from the dead; whereof
we are witnesses.
, shall come again at the last day in great power Matt. 24. 30. And then shall
appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven; and then shall all the tribes of
the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory.
, and in the full manifestation of his own glory, and of his Fathers, with all
his holy Angels Luke 9. 26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my
words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed when he shall come in his own
glory, and in his Fathers, and of the holy Angels. Mat. 25. 31. When the Son of
man shall come in his glory and all his holy Angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory.
, with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God 1
These. 4. 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ
shall rise first.
, to judge the world in righteousness Act. 17. 31. Because he has appointed a
day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised
him from the dead.
.

Q. What benefits has Christ procured by his Mediation?

A. Christ by his Mediation has procured Redemption Heb. 9. 12. Neither by the
blood of go^ts and calves, but by his own blood he en^red in once into the holy
place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.
, with all other benefits of the Covenant of Grace 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all the
promises of God in him are, yea, and in him, Amen, unto the glory of God by us.
.

Q. How do we come to be made partakers of the benefits which Christ has
procured?

A. We are made partakers of the benefits which Christ has procured, by the
application of them unto us John 1. 11, 13. He came unto his own, and his own
received him not. But as many as received him, to them gave be power to become
the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name.
, which is the work especially of God the Holy Ghost Tit. 3. 5, 6. Not by works
of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on
us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior.
.

Q. Who are made partakers of Redemption through Christ?

A. Redemption is certainly applied and effectually communicated to all those
for whom Christ has purchased it Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. In whom ye also trusted,
after that ye heard the word of Truth, the Gospel of your salvation; in whom
also after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which
is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession unto the praise of his glory. Joh. 6. 37-39. All that the Father
gives me shall come unto me, and him that comes unto me I will in no wise
cast out. -- V. 39.] And this is the Fathers will who has sent me, that of all
which he has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at
the last day. Joh. 10. 15, 16. As the Father knows me, even so know I the
Father, and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are
not of this fold; them also I must bring. and they shall hear my voice, and
there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.
, who are in time by the Holy Ghost enabled to believe in Christ according to
the Gospel Ephesians. 2. 8. For by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God. 2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same spirit of
faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we
also believe, and therefore speak.
.

Q. Can they who have never heard the Gospel, and so know not Jesus Christ, nor
believe in him, be saved by their living according to the light of nature?

A. They who having never heard the Gospel Romans 10. 14. How then shall they
call on him in whom they have not believed? ^^d how shall they believe in him
of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?
, know not Jesus Christ 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9. In flaming fire, taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ;
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. Ephesians. 2. 12. That at that time ye were
without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.
John 1. 10 11, 12. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the
world knew him not. He came unto his own and his own received him not. But as
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to
them that believe in his Name.
, and believe not in him, cannot be saved Joh. 8. 24. I said therefore unto
you, that ye shall die in your sins; For if ye believe not that I am He, ye
shall die in your sins. Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned,
, be they never so diligent to frame their lives according to the light of
nature 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe?
where is the Disputer of this world? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of
this world? V. 21.] For after that in the wisdom of God the world through
wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe. V. 22.] For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek
after wisdom. V. 23.] But we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling
block, and unto the Greeks foolishness. V. 24.] But unto them who are called,
both Jews, and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
, or the Law of that Religion which they profess John 4. 22. Ye worship ye
know not what; we know what we worship, for salvation is of the Jews. Romans 9
31, 32. But Israel which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the Law, for they stumbled at that
stumbling stone. Phil. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Though I might also have confidence
in the flesh; if any other man thinks that he has whereof he might trust in
the flesh, I more. V. 5.] Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel of
the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the law, a
Pharisee. V. 6.] Concerning zeal, persecuting the Church, touching the
righteousness which is in the law, blameless, V. 7. But what things were a
gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. V. 8.] Yea doubtless, and I
account all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do account them
but dung, that I may win Christ. V. 9.] And be found in him, not having mine
own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.
, neither is there salvation in any other, but in Christ alone Acts 4. 12.
Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is no other name under
heaven given amongst men, whereby we must be saved.
, who is the Savior only of his body the Church Ephesians. 5. 23. For the husband
is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church, and he is
the Savior of the body.
.

Q. Are all they saved who hear the Gospel and live in the Church?

A. All that hear the Gospel, and live in the visible Church, are not saved,
but they only who are true members of the Church invisible Joh. 12. 38, 39*
40. That the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be fulfilled which he spoke,
Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed? Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, He
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I
should heal them. Romans 9. 6. Not as though the word of God has taken none
effect; for they are not all Israel who are of Israel. Mat. 22. 14. For many
are called, but few chosen. Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father which is in heaven. Romans 11. 7. What then? Israel has not obtained that
which he seeks for; but the election has obtained it, and the rest were
blinded.
.

Q. What is the visible Church?

A. The visible Church is a society made up of all such as in all ages and
places of the World do profess the true Religion 1 Cor. 1. 2. Unto the Church
of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called
to be Saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ
our Lord, both theirs and ours. 1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one spirit are we all
baptized into one body whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or
free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. Romans 15. 9, 10, 11, 12.
And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, as it is written, For
this cause I will confess to thee among the Gent^les, and sing unto thy name.
V. 10.] And again he says; Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people. V. 11.] And
again, Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye people. V. 12.]
And again Esaias says, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise
to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust. Rev. 7. 9. After
this I beheld, and lo a great multitude Which no man could number, of all
nations, and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne and
before the lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands. Psalm. 2.
8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee, the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Ps. 22. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 All
the ends of the world shall remember, and turn unto the Lord, and all the
kindreds of the earth shall worship before thee. V. 28.] For the Kingdom is the
Lords, and he is the Governor among the nations V. 29.] All they that be fat
upon the earth shall eat and worship; all that go down to the dust shall bow
before him, and none can keep alive his own soul. V. 30.] A seed shall serve
him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation. V. 31.] They shall
come and shall declare his righteousness. Psalm. 45. 17. I will make thy name to
be remembered in all generations; therefore shall the people praise thee for
ever and ever. Mat. 28. 19* 20. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and
lo I am with you always unto the end of the world. Amen. Esai. 59. 21. As for
me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My spirit which is upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.
, and of their children 1 Cor. 7. 14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified
by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband; else were
your children unclean, but now they are holy. Act. 2. 39. For the Promise is
unto you and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as
the Lord our God shall call. Romans 11. 16. For if the first fruits be holy, the
lump is also holy, and if the root be holy, so are the branches. Genesis 17. 7.
And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee,
in their generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee.
.

Q. What are the special privileges of the visible Church?

A. The visible Church has the privilege of being under Gods special care and
government Isa. 4. 5, 6. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of
Mount Sion, and upon her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining
of a flaming fire by night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense. V. 6.]
And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and
for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm, and from rain. 1 Timothy 4.
10. For therefore we both labor, and suffer reproach, because we trust in the
living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe.
, of being protected and preserved in all ages, notwithstanding the opposition
of all enemies Ps. 115. throughout. Not unto us O Lord; not unto us, but -- to
the end. Isai. 31. 4, 5. For thus has the Lord spoken unto me; like as the
lion and the yonglion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of Shepherds are
called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase
himself for the noise of them; so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight
for mount Sion and for the hill thereof. V. 5.] As birds flying, so will the
Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem, defending also he will deliver it, and passing
over he will preserve it. Zech. 12. 2, 3, 4-8. 9. Behold, I will make Jerusalem
a cup of trembling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the
siege both against Judah and Jerusalem. V. 3.] And in that day will I make
Jerusalem a burthensom stone for all people; all that burden themselves with
it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered
together against it. V. 4.] In that day, says the Lord, I will smite every
horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness; and I will open mine eyes
upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people with
blindness -- V. 8.] In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them, at that day shall be as David, and
the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them. V.
9.] and it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the
nations that come against Jerusalem.
, and of enjoying the communion of Saints, the ordinary means of salvation Act.
2. 39-42. For the promise is to you and to your children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call -- V. 42] And they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and in fellow-ship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers.
, offers of grace by Christ to all the members of it in the ministry of the
Gospel, testifying, that whosoever believes in him shall be saved Psalm. 147.
19, 20. He shows his words unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto
Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation, and as for his judgments, they
have not known them; praise ye the Lord. Romans 9. 4. Who are Israelites, to whom
pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of
the Law, and the service of God, and the promises. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. And he gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ. Mark 16. 15, 16. And he said unto them, Go
ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned.
, and excluding none that will come unto him Joh. 6. 37. All that the father
gives me shall come unto me, and him that comes to me I will in no wise cast
out.
.

Q. What is the invisible Church?

A. The invisible Church is the whole number of the elect, that have been, are,
or shall be gathered into one, under Christ the Head Ephesians. 1. 10-22, 23. That in
the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him
-- V. 22.] And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over
all things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills
all in all. Joh. 10. 16. And other sheep I have which are not of this fold;
them also I must bring and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one
fold, and one shepherd. John 11. 52. And not for that nation only, but that
also he should gather together in one, the children of God that were scattered
abroad.
.

Q. What special benefits do the Members of the invisible Church enjoy by
Christ?

A. The Members of the Invisible Church by Christ enjoy Union and Communion
with him in grace and glory Joh. 17. 21. That they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the
world may believe that thou have sent me. Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. Even when we were dead
in sins, has quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved) And has
raised us up together, and has made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus. John 17. 24. Father I will that they also whom thou have given
me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given
me; for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.
.

Q. What is that Union which the Elect have with Christ?

A. The Union which the Elect have with Christ, is the work of Gods grace Ephesians.
1. 22. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all
things to the Church. Ephesians. 2. 6, 7, 8. And has raised us up together, and made
us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. V. 7.] That in the ages to
come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us
in Christ Jesus. V. 8.] For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not
of your selves, it is the gift of God,
, whereby they are Spiritually and mystically, yet really and inseparably
joined to Christ, as their head and husband 1 Cor. 6. 17. But he that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit. John 10. 28. And I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Ephesians.
5. 23-30. For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head
of the Church; and he is the Savior of the body -- V. 30. For we are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.
, which is done in their effectual Calling 1 Pet. 5. 10. But the God of all
grace who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye
have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. 1
Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
.

Q. What is effectual calling?

A. Effectual Calling is the work of Gods almighty power and grace Joh. 5. 25.
Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. Ephesians. 1.
18, 19. 20. The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know
what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints. V. 19.] And what is the exceeding greatness of his
power to us ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power,
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his
own right hand, in the heavenly places. 2 Timothy 1. 8, 9. Be not thou therefore
ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner, but be thou
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of God. V.
9.] Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose, and grace which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began.
, whereby, out of his free and especial love to his Elect, and from nothing in
them moving him thereunto Tit. 3. 4, 5. But after that the kindness and love of
God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we
have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5-7, 8, 9. But God who
is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us. V. 5.] Even when we
were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are
saved) -- V. 7.] That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of
his grace, in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. V. 8.] For by grace
ye are saved, through faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift of
God. V. 9.] Not of works, lest any man should boast. Romans 9. 11. For the
children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the
purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works but of him that
calls. --
, he does in his accepted time invite and draw them to Jesus Christ by his Word
and Spirit 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.
Compared with 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. We then as workers together with him, beseech you
also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain; for he says, I have heard
thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee;
Behold now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of salvation. Joh. 6.
44. No man can come to me except the Father who has sent me draw him; and I
will raise him up at the last day. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14. But we are bound to give
thanks always to God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because God has
from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth. Whereunto he has called you by our Gospel to
the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
, savingly inlightning their minds Acts 26. 18. To open their eyes and to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that they
may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith which is in me. 1 Cor. 2. 10.-12. But God has revealed
them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searches all things, yea even the
deep things of God -- V. 12.] Now we have not received the Spirit of the world,
but the Spirit which is of God, that ye might know the things freely given us
of God.
, renewing and powerfully determining their wills Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will give
them one heart, and I will put a new Spirit within you, and I will take the
stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh. Ezekiel. 36.
26, 29. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give
you an heart of flesh. V. 29.] I will also save you from all your
uncleanness, and I will call for the corn and increase it, and lay no famine
upon you. Joh. 6. 45. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all
taught of God: every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father
comes unto me.
, so as they, although in themselves dead in sin, are hereby made willing and
able freely to answer his call, and to accept and embrace the grace offered and
conveyed therein Ephesians. 2. 5. Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us
together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved.) Phil. 2. 13. For it is God that
works in you to will and to do of his good pleasure. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. And the
Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed to love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live.
.

Q. Are the Elect effectually called?

A. All the Elect, and they only, are effectually called Act. 13. 48. And when
the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord:
and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed.
, although others may be, and often are, outwardly called by the ministry of
the Word Mat. 22. 14. For many are called, but few are chosen.
, and have some common operations of the Spirit Mat. 7. 22. Many will say unto
me in that day, Lord, Lord, Have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name
cast out Devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? Mat. 13. 20, 21.
But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that hears
the word, and anon with joy received it: yet has he not root in himself, but
dureth for a while; for when tribulation or persecution arises because of the
word, by and by he is offended. Heb. 6. 4, 5. For it is impossible for those
who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come; If they, etc. --
, who, for their wilful neglect and contempt of the grace offered to them,
being justly left in their unbelief, do never truly come to Jesus Christ Joh.
12. 38, 39, 40. That the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be fulfilled which
he spoke, Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the
Lord been revealed? V. 39] Therefore they could not believe; because that
Esaias said again. V. 40.] He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart,
that they should not see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and
be converted; and I should heal them. Act. 28. 25, 26, 27. And when they agreed
not among themselves, they departed after that Paul had spoken one word, Well
spoke the Holy Ghost by the Prophet Esaias unto our Fathers, saying, V. 26.] Go
unto this people, and say; Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and
seeing ye shall see, and not perceive. V. 27.] For the heart of this people is
waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they
closed, least they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and be converted and I should heal them. Joh. 6.
64, 65. But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the
beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him. V. 65.]
And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me except it
were given him of the Father. Psalm. 81. 11, 12. But my people would not hearken
to my voice, and Israel would have none of me; so I gave them up to their own
hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels.
.

Q. What is the Communion in Grace which the Members of the Invisible Church
have with Christ?

A. The Communion in Grace, which the Members of the Invisible Church have with
Christ, is, their partaking of the virtue of his Mediation, in their
Justification Romans 8. 30. Moreover whom he did predestinate them he also
called, and whom he called them he also justified, and whom he justified them
he also glorified.
, Adoption Ephesians. 1. 5. Having predestined us to the adoption of Children by
Jesus Christ, to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.
, Sanctification, and whatever else in this life manifests their Union with him
1 Cor. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.
.

Q. What is Justification?

A. Justification is an act of Gods free grace unto sinners Romans 3. 22.-24, 25.
Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and
upon all that believe; for there is no difference -- V. 24.] Being justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. V. 25.]
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God. Romans 4. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his says is accounted for righteousness.
, in which he pardons all their sins, accepts and accounts their persons
righteous in his sight 2 Cor. 5. 19-21. To wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them;
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation -- V. 21.] For he has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Romans 3. 22-24, 25-27, 28. Even the righteousness
of God which is by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that
believe; for there is no difference -- V. 24.] Being justified freely by his
grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. V. 25.] Whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance
of God -- V. 27.] Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By what law? Of
works? Nay, but by the law of faith. V. 28.] Therefore we conclude that a man
is justified by faith, without the deeds of the law.
, not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom
we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the
riches of his grace.
, but only for the perfect obedience and full satisfaction of Christ, by God
imputed to them Romans 5. 17, 18, 19. Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a
new creature, old things are past away, behold, all things are become new. V.
18.] And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ, and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation. V. 19.] To wit,
that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation.
Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man unto
whom God imputes righteousness without works. V. 7.] Saying, Blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. V. 8.] Blessed is
the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin:
, and received by Faith alone Act. 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him shall receive
remission of sins. Gal. 2. 16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works
of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works
of the law, for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. Phil. 3. 9
-- And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith.
.

Q. How is Justification an Act of Gods free Grace?

A. Although Christ by his Obedience and Death, did make a proper, real, and
full satisfaction to Gods Justice, in the behalf of them that are justified
Romans 5. 8, 9, 10-19 But God commends his love toward us in that while we
were yet sinners Christ died for us. V. 9.] Much more then being now justified
by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. V. 10.] For if when we
were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled shall we be saved by his life -- V. 19.] For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous.
, yet, in as much as God accepts the satisfaction from a Surety, which he
might have demanded of them, did provide this Surety, his own only Son 1 Timothy
2. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus. Who gave himself a ransom: for all to be testified in due time.
Heb. 10. 10. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all. Mat. 20. 28. Even as the Son of man came not
to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.
Dan. 9. 24-26. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy
City, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy -- V. 26.] And
after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself,
and the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the
Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, etc. Esa. 53. 4, 5, 6-10,
11, 12. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows; yet we did
esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. V. 5.] But he was wounded
for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. V. 6.] All we like
sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord
has laid on him the iniquity of us all -- Ver. 10.] Yet it pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has put him to grief; when thou shall make his soul an offering
for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper in his hands. V. 11.] He shall see of the travel of his
soul, and be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many; for he shall bear their iniquities. V. 12.] Therefore will I divide him a
portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because
he has poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the
transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the
transgressors. Heb. 7. 22. By so much was Jesus made a Surety of a better
Testament. Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things. 1 Pet. 1. 18,
19. For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things,
as silver and gold, from your vain conversation, received by tradition from
your fathers. V. 19.] But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb
without blemish, and without spot.
, imputing his righteousness to them 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he has made him to be
sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.
, and requiring nothing of them for their Justification, but Faith Romans 3. 24,
25. Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ. V. 25.] Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that
are past, through the forbearance of God.
, which also is his gift Ephesians. 2. 8. For by grace are ye saved through faith,
and that not of your selves; it is the gift of God.
, their Justification is, to them, of free grace Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of his grace.
.

Q. What is justifying Faith?

A. Justifying Faith is a saving Grace Heb. 10. 39. But we are not of them who
draw back to perdition, but of them who believe to the saving of the soul.
, wrought in the heart of a Sinner by the Spirit 2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the
same Spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore
have I spoken, we also believe and therefore speak. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19. That
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory may give unto you the
Spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of him. V. 18.] The eyes of
your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, V.
19.] And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who believe
according to the working of his mighty power.
and word of God Romans 10. 14. How then shall they call on him, on whom they
have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?
, whereby he, being convinced of his sin and misery, and of the disability in
himself and all other creatures to recover him out of his lost condition Act.
2. 37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said
unto Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do
to be saved? Act. 16. 30. And brought them out, and said, Sirs, What must we do
to be saved? Joh. 16. 8, 9. And when he is come he will convince the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not
in me -- Romans 5. 6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ
died for the ungodly. Ephesians. 2. 1. And you has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins. Act. 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other; for
there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.
, not only assenteth to the truth of the promise of the Gospel Ephesians. 1. 13. In
whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your
salvation, in whom also after ye believed ye were sealed with that holy Spirit
of promise.
, but receives and rests upon Christ and his righteousness therein held
forth, for pardon of sin Joh. 1. 12. But as many as received him, to them gave
he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. Act.
16. 31. And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved and thine house. Act. 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name, whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins.
, and for the accepting and accounting of his person righteous in the fight of
God for salvation Phil. 3. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness which is by the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Act. 15. 11. But we believe
that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as they.
.

Q. How does Faith justify a Sinner in the sight of God?

A. Faith justifies a sinner in the sight of God, not because of those other
graces which do always accompany it, or of good works that are the fruits of
it Gal. 3. 11. But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, is
evident: for the just shall live by faith. Romans 3. 28. Therefore we conclude
that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law.
, nor as if the grace of Faith, or any act thereof, were imputed to him for his
justification Romans 4. 5. But to him that works not but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, Compared with
Romans 10. 10. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto salvation.
, but only as it is an Instrument, by which he receives and applies Christ
and his righteousness Joh. 1. 12. But as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. Phil.
3. 9. And be found in him not having mine own righteousness which is by the
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is
of God by faith. Gal. 2. 16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works
of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works
of the law; for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.
.

Q. What is Adoption?

A. Adoption is an act of the free grace of God 1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner
of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of
God.
, in and for his only Son Jesus Christ Ephesians. 1. 5. Having predestined us to
the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will. Gal. 4. 4, 5. But when the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.
, whereby all those that are justified are received into the number of his
children Joh. 1. 12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.
, have his Name put upon them 2 Cor. 6. 18. And I will be a Father unto you,
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Rev. 3. 12. Him
that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go
no more out, and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the
City of my God, which is new Jerusalem that comes down out of heaven from my
God, and I will write upon him my new name.
, the Spirit of his Son given to them Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
, are under his fatherly care and dispensations Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father
pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that serve him. Prove. 14. 26.
In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, and his children shall have a
place of refuge. Mat. 6. 32. For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need
of all these things.
, admitted to all the liberties and privileges of the sons of God, made heirs
of all the promises, and fellow-heirs with Christ in glory Heb. 6. 12. That ye
be not flothfull, but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit
the promises. Romans 8. 17. And if children then heirs, hoirs of God, and
joynt-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified together.
.

Q. What is Sanctification?

A. Sanctification is a work of Gods grace, whereby they, whom God has before
the foundation of the world chosen to be holy, are in time, through the
powerful operation of his Spirit Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has chosen us in
him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without
blame before him in love. 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you; but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. But we are bound to give
thanks to God always for you, brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has
from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth.
, applying the death and resurrection of Christ unto them Romans 6. 4, 5, 6.
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life. V. 5.] For if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection. V.
6.] Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.
, renewed in their whole man after the Image of God Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. And be
renewed in the Spirit of your mind; and that ye put on the new man, which after
God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
, having the seeds of Repentance unto life, and of all other saving graces put
into their hearts Act. 11. 18. When they heard these things they held their
peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted
repentance unto life. 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit
sin; for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God.
, and those graces so stirred up, increased, and strengthened Jude v. 20. But
ye beloved, building up your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the
Holy Ghost. Heb. 6. 11, 12. And we desire that every one of you do show the
same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end; V. 12.] That ye be
not slothful, but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the
promises. Ephesians. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. That he would grant you, according to the
riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might, by his Spirit in the inner
man. V. 17.] That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being
rooted and grounded in love. V. 18.] may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the breadth and depth, and length, and height, V. 19.] And to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the
fullness of God. Col. 1. 10, 11. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge
of God. V. 11.] Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power,
unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness.
, as that they more and more die unto sin, and rise unto newness of life Romans
6. 4-6-14. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism unto death, that like
as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also
should walk in newness of life -- V. 6.] Knowing this that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin, -- V. 14.] For sin shall not have dominion over you; for
ye are not under the law, but under grace. Gal. 5. 24. And they that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.
.

Q. What is repentance unto life?

A. Repentance unto life, is a saving Grace 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure may give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.
, wrought in the heart of a sinner by the Spirit Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour
upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of
grace, and of supplications, and they shall look on me whom they have pierced,
and mourn for him as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness
as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.
and word of God Act. 11. 18.-20, 21. When they heard these things they held
their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life. -- V. 20.] And some of them were men of Cyprus,
and Cyrene; who when they were come to Antioch, spoke unto the Grecians,
preaching the Lord Jesus. V. 21.] And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a
great number believed and turned to the Lord.
, whereby out of the sight and sense not only of the danger Ezekiel. 18.
28-30-32. Because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions
that he has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die. -- V. 30.]
Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his
ways, says the Lord God. Repent and turn your selves from all your
transgressions, so in^quity shall not be your ruin -- V. 32.] For I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God: wherefore turn your
selves and live ye. Luke 15. 17, 18. And when he came to himself he said, How
many hired servants of my fathers have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish
with hunger? I will arise, and go to my father, and say unto him, father I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee. Hos. 2. 6, 7. Therefore behold I will
hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall, that she shall not find her
paths. V. 7.] And she shall follow after her lovers, but shall not overtake
them; and she shall seek them, but shall not find them. Then shall she say, I
will go and return to my first husband; for then was it better with me then now.
, but also of the filthiness and odiousness of his sins Eze. 36. 31. Then shall
ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings which were not good, and shall
loath your selves in your ownsight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations. Isai. 30. 22. Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven
Images of silver, and the ornaments of thy molten Images of gold; thou shall
cast them away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, get thee hence.
, and upon the apprehension of Gods mercy in Christ to such as are penitent
Joel 2. 12, 13. Therefore also now says the Lord, turn ye even to me with all
your heart, and with fasting and weeping, and mourning. V. 13.] And rent your
heart and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him
of the evil.
, he so grieves for Jer. 31. 18, 19. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall be turned: thou art the
Lord my God. V. 19.] Surely after that I was turned, I repented, and after that
I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea even confounded,
because I did bear the reproach of my youth.
, and hates his sins 2 Cor. 7. 11. For behold this self same thing, that ye
sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what
clearing of your selves, yea what indignation, yea what fear, yea what vehement
desire, yea what zeal, yea what revenge, in all things ye have approved your
selves to be clear in this matter.
, as that he turns from them all to God Act. 26. 18. To open their eyes, and to
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith that is in me. Ezekiel. 14. 6. Therefore say unto the house of
Israel, Thus says the Lord God, Repent and turn your selves from your Idols,
and turn away your faces from all your abominations. 1 King. 8. 47, 48. Yet if
they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they were carried captives,
and repent, and make supplication to thee in the land of them that carried them
captives, saying, We have sinned and done perversely, we have committed
wickedness. V. 48.] And so return unto thee with all their heart, and with all
their soul. --
, purposing and endeavoring constantly to walk with him in all the ways of
new obedience Psalm. 119. 6-59.-28. Then shall not I be ashamed, when I have
respect unto all thy commandments. V. 59.] I entreated thy favor with my whole
heart; be merciful unto me according to thy word -- V. 28.] My soul melts for
heaviness; strengthen thou me according unto thy word. Luke 1. 6. And they were
both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments, and ordinances of
the Lord, blameless. 2 King 23. 25. And like unto him was there no King before
him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and
with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, neither after him arose
there any like him.
.

Q. Wherein do Justification and Sanctification differ?

A. Although Sanctification be inseparably joined with Justification 1 Cor. 6.
11. And such were some of you but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1
Cor. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus; who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.
, yet they differ, in that God in Justification imputes the righteousness of
Christ Romans 4. 6-8. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man
unto whom God imputes righteousness without works -- V. 8.] Blessed is the man
unto whom the Lord will not impute sin.
, in Sanctification his Spirit infuseth grace, and enableth to the exercise
thereof Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.
; in the former, sin is pardoned Romans 3. 24, 25. Being justified freely by his
grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. V. 25.] Whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past through the forbearance
of God.
, in the other it is subdued Romans 6. 6-14. Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin -- V. 14.] For sin shall not have dominion over you, for
ye are not under the law, but under grace.
, the one does equally free all believers from the revenging wrath of God, and
that perfectly in this life, that they never fall into condemnation Romans 8. 3,
334. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that
is risen again, who is even at the righthand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.
, the other is neither equal in all 1 John 2. 12, 13, 14. I write unto you,
little children, because your sins are forgiven you, for his names sake. V.
13.] I write unto you, Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the
beginning. I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the wicked
one. I write unto you, little children, because ye have known the Father. V.
14.] I have written unto you fathers, because ye have known him that is from
the beginning. I have written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and
the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. Heb. 5.
12, 13, 14. For, when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that
one teach you again, which be the first-principles of the Oracles of God, and
are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. V. 13.] For every
one that uses milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness, for he is a
babe. V. 14.] But strong meat belongs to them that are of full age, even
those who by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good
and evil.
, nor in this life perfect in any 1 John 1. 8.-10. And if we say, that we have
no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us -- V. 10.] If we say
that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.
, but growing up to perfection 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises
(dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. Not as
though I had already attained, either were already perfect, but I follow after,
if that I may apprehend that, for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.
V. 13.] Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those
things which are before. V. 14.] I press toward the mark, for the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
.

Q. Whence arises the imperfection of Sanctification in believers?

A. The imperfection of Sanctification in believers, arises from the remnants
of sin abiding in every part of them, and the perpetual lustings of the flesh
against the spirit, whereby they are often foiled with temptations, and fall
into many sins Romans 7. 18-23. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh
dwells no good thing; for, to will is present with me, but how to perform
that which is good, I find not -- V. 23.] But I see another law in my members
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law
of sin which is in my members. Mark 14 66 -- to the end. And as Peter was
beneath in the Palace, there comes one of the maids of the High Priest, etc.
-- Gal. 2. 11, 12. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed. V. 12.] For before that certain came from
James, he did eat with the Gentiles, but when they were come, he withdrew, and
separated himself, fearing them who were of the circumcision.
, are hindered in all their spiritual services Heb. 12. 1. Wherefore seeing we
also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside
every weight and the sin which does so easily beset us, and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us.
, and their best works are imperfect and defiled in the sight of God Isai. 64.
6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities, like the wind,
have taken us away. Exodus 28. 38. And it shall be upon Aarons forhead, that
Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel
shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forhead,
that they may be accepted before the Lord.
.

Q. May not true believers by reason of their imperfections; and the many
temptations and sins they are overtaken with, fall away from the state of Grace?

A. True believers by reason of the unchangeable love of God Jer. 31. 3. The
Lord has appeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee.
, and his decree and covenant to give them perseverance 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord
knows them that are his; and let every one that names the name of Christ,
depart from iniquity. Heb. 13. 20, 21. Now the God of peace, that brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the
blood of the everlasting covenant, V. 21.] Make you perfect in every good work,
to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, etc. 2 Samuel 23. 5. Although my house be
not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in
all things, and sure; for this is all my salvation and all my desire, although
he make it not to grow.
, their inseparable union with Christ 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9. Who shall confirm you
unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. V.
9.] God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord.
, his continual intercession for them Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to
save them to the uttermost who come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them. Luke 22. 32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not, and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.
, and the spirit and seed of God abiding in them 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born
of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin
because he is born of God. 1. Joh. 2. 27. But the anointing which ye have
received of him abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as
the same anointing teaches you of all things and is truth, and is no lie, and
even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him.
, can neither totally nor finally fall away from the state of Grace Jer. 32.
40. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me. John 10. 28. I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.
, but are kept by the power of God through Faith unto salvation 1 Pet. 1. 5.
Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be
revealed in the last time.
.

Q. Can true believers be infallibly assured that they are in the Estate of
grace, and that they shall persevere therein unto salvation?

A. Such as truly believe in Christ, and endeavor to walk in all good
conscience before him 1 John 2. 3. And hereby we do know that we know him, if
we keep his commandments.
, may, without extraordinary revelation, by faith grounded upon the truth of
Gods promises, and by the Spirit enabling them to discern in themselves those
graces to which the promises of life are made 1 Cor. 2. 12. Now we have
received, not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things that are freely given us of God. 1 John 3. 14-18,
19-21-24. We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren; he that loves not his brother, abides in death -- V. 18.] My little
children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth. V.
19. And hereby we know we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before
him. -- V. 21.] Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. -- V. 24.] And he that keeps his commandments dwells in him,
and he in him; and hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he
has given us. 1 John 4. 13-16. Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in
us, because he has given us of his Spirit -- V. 16.] And we have known and
believed the love that God has to us. God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him. Heb. 6. 11, 12. And we desire that every
one of you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the
end. V. 12.] That ye be not slothful but followers of them who through faith,
and patience inherit the promises.
, and bearing witness with their Spirits that they are the children of God Romans
8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the
children of God.
, be infallibly assured that they are in the estate of grace, and shall
persevere therein unto salvation 1 John 5. 13. These things have I written unto
you, that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have
eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.
.

Q. Are all true believers at all times assured of their present being in the
estate of grace; and that they shall be saved?

A. Assurance of grace and salvation not being of the essence of faith Ephesians. 1.
13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel
of your salvation, in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the
holy Spirit of promise.
, true believers may wait long before they obtain it Isa. 50. 10. Who is among
you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks
in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the Lord, and stay upon his
God. Psalm. 88. throughout. O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and
night, etc.
, and after the enjoyment thereof may have it weakened and intermitted through
manifold distempers, sins, temptations, and desertions Psalm. 77: 1. to the 12.
verse. I cried unto thee with my voice, etc. Cant. 5. 2, 3.-6. I sleep, but my
heart waketh; it is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me,
my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled; for my head is filled with dew, and
my locks with the drops of the night. V. 3.] I have put off my coat, how shall
I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them -- V. 8.] I opened
to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone; my soul
failed when he spoke; I sought him, but I could not find him; I called him, but
he gave me no answer. Psalm. 51. 8-12. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that
the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. V. 12.] Restore unto me the joy
of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. Psalm. 31. 22. For I said
in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes; nevertheless thou heardst the
voice of my supplications when I cried unto thee. Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the
words of my roaring?
, yet are they never left without such a presence and support of the Spirit of
God, as keeps them from sinking into utter despair 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is
born of God does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him, and he cannot
sin because he is born of God. Job 13. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him; but I will maintain mine own ways before him. Psalm. 73. 15.-23. If I
say, I will speak thus, behold, I should offend against the generation of thy
children. V. 23.] Nevertheless I am continually with thee, thou have holden me
by thy right hand. Isa. 54. 7, 8, 9, 10. For a small moment have I forsaken
thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. V. 8.] In a little wrath I hid
my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy
on thee, says the Lord my Redeemer -- V. 9.] For this is as the waters of Noah
unto me; for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over the
earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. V.
10.] For the mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be removed; but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee.
.

Q. What is the communion in Glory, which the members of the Invisible Church
have with Christ?

A. The communion in glory which the members of the Invisible Church have with
Christ is, in this life 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all with open face beholding, as
in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory
to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.
, immediately after death Luke 23. 43. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say
unto thee, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
, and at last perfected at the resurrection and day of Judgment 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
Then we who are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
.

Q. What is the communion in Glory, with Christ, which the members of the
Invisible Church enjoy in this life?

A. The members of the Invisible Church have communicated to them in this life,
the first fruits of glory with Christ, as they are members of him their head,
and so, in him, are interested in that glory which he is fully possessed of
Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with
Christ (by grace ye are saved); And has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
, and, as an earnest thereof, enjoy the sense of Gods love Romans 5. 5. And hope
makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by
the Holy Ghost which is given to us. Compared with 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also
sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.
, peace of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, and hope of glory Romans 5. 1, 2.
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ. V. 2.] By whom also we have access by faith into the grace
wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Romans 14. 17. For the
kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost.
: as, on the contrary, the sense of Gods revenging wrath, horror of conscience,
and a fearful expectation of judgment, are, to the wicked, the beginning of
their torments which they shall endure after death Genesis 4. 13. And Cain said
unto the Lord, My punishment is greater then I can bear. Mat. 27. 4. -- Saying,
I have sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent blood. And they said, What is
that to us? see thou to it. Heb. 10. 27. -- But a certain fearful looking for,
of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. Romans
2. 9. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. Mark 9. 44. Where their worm dies not, and the
fire is not quenched.
.

Q. Shall all men die?

A. Death being threatened as the wages of sin Romans 6. 23. For the wages of sin
is death: but the gift of God is eternaal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
, it is appointed unto all men once to die Heb. 9. 27. And as it is appointed
unto all men once to die, but after death the judgment.
, for that all have sinned Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned.
.

Q. Death being the wages of sin, why are not the righteous delivered from
death, seeing all their sins are forgiven in Christ?

A. The righteous shall be delivered from death it self at the last day, and
even in death are delivered from the sting and curse of it 1 Cor. 15. 26.-55.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death -- V. 55. O death, where is thy
sting? etc. Heb. 2. 15. -- And deliver them who through fear of death, were all
their lifetime subject to bondage.
, so that, although they die, yet it is out of Gods love Isa. 57. 1, 2. The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken
away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
V. 2.] He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one
walking in his uprightness. 2 King. 22. 20. Behold therefore I will gather thee
unto thy fathers, and thou shall be gathered into thy grave in peace, and thine
eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place.
, to free them perfectly from sin and misery Rev. 14. 13. And I heard a voice
from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord
from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors,
and their works do follow them. Ephesians. ^. 27. That he might present it to himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and without blemish.
, and to make them capable of further communion with Christ in glory, which
they then enter upon Luke 23. 43. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto
thee, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Phil. 1. 23. For I am in a
straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which
is far better.
.

Q. What is the communion in Glory with Christ, which the members of the
invisible Church enjoy immediately after death?

A. The communion in Glory with Christ, which the members of the invisible
Church enjoy immediately after death, is, in that their souls are then made
perfect in holiness Heb. 12. 23. To the general assembly and Church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to
the Spirits of just men made perfect.
, and received into the highest heavens 2 Cor. 5. 1.-6-8. For we know that if
our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens -- V. 6.] Therefore we are
always confident, knowing that while we are present in the body, we are absent
from the Lord -- V. 8.] We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be
absent from the body, and present with the Lord. Phil. 1. 23. For I am in a
straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which
is far better. Compared with Act. 3. 21. Whom the heavens must receive, until
the times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of
all his holy Prophets, since the world began. And with Ephesians. 4. 10. He that
descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he
might fill all things.
, where they behold the face of God in light and glory 1 John 3. 2. Beloved,
now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is. 1 Cor. 13. 12. For now we see through a glass, darkly, but then, face to
face: now I know in part, but then I shall know even as also I am known.
, waiting for the full redemption of their bodies Romans 8. 23. And not only
they, but our selves also, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our
selves, groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the
Redemption of our body. Psalm. 16. 9. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory
rejoices: my flesh also shall rest in hope.
, which even in death continue united to Christ 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. For if we
believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus
will God bring with him.
, and rest in their graves as in their beds Esa. 57. 2. He shall enter into
peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.
, till at the last day they be again united to their souls r: whereas the souls
of the wicked are at death cast into hell, where they remain in torments and
utter darkness, and their bodies kept in their graves, as in their prisons,
till the resurrection and judgment of the great day Luke 16. 23, 24. And in
hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his bosom. V. 24.] And he cried and said, Father Abraham have mercy
on me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool
my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. Act. 1. 25. That he may take part
of this Ministry, and Apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell,
that he might go to his own place. Jude v. 6, 7. And the Angels which kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. V. 7.]
Even as Sodom and Gomorrha and the Cities round about them in like manner
giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.
. (t) Job 19. 26, 27. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in
my flesh shall I see God. V. 27.] Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes
shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me


Q. What are we to believe concerning the Resurrection?

A. We are to believe that at the last day there shall be a general
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust Act, 24. 15. And have
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a
resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust.
, when they that are then found alive, shall in a moment be changed; and the
self same bodies of the dead which were laid in the grave, being then again
united to their souls for ever, shall be raised up by the power of Christ 1
Cor. 15. 51, 52, 53. Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but
we shall all be changed. V. 52.] In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the last trump (for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed:) V. 53.] For this corruptible must put
on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15, 16,
17. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive,
and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them who are asleep.
V. 16.] For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall
rise first. V. 17.] Then we who are alive, and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we
ever be with the Lord. Joh. 5. 28, 29. Marvail not at this, for the hour is
coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, V. 29.]
And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.
; the bodies of the just, by the Spirit of Christ, and by virtue of his
resurrection, as their head, shall be raised in power, spiritual,
incorruptible, and made like to his glorious body 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22, 23.-42,
43, 44. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
dead. V. 22.] For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive. V. 23.] But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits,
afterward they that are Christ's at his coming -- V. 42.] So also is the
resurrection of the dead; it is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption, V. 43.] It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power; V. 44.] It is sown a natural body, it
is raised a Spiritual body. Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile body, that
it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working,
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself.
, and the bodies of the wicked shall be raised up in dishonor, by him, as an
offended Judge Joh. 5. 27, 28, 29. And has given him authority to execute
judgment also, because he is the son of man. V. 28] Marvail not at this, for
the hour is coming in which all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice,
V. 29.] And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection
of life, and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation. Mat.
25. 33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
.

Q. What shall immediately follow after the resurrection?

A. Immediately after the resurrection shall follow the general and final
judgment of Angels and men 2 Pet. 2. 4. For if God spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness
to be reserved unto judgment. Jude v. 6, 7-14, 15. And the Angels which kept
not their first station, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. V. 7.]
Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them, in like manner giving
themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth
for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. -- V. 14.] And Enoch
also, the seventh from Adam prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord
comes with ten thousands of his Saints, V. 15.] To execute judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds
which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Mat. 25. 46. And those shall go away
into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.
, the day and hour whereof no man knows, that all may watch and pray, and be
ever ready for the coming of the Lord Mat. 24. 36-42-44. But of that day and
hour knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but my Father only. -- V.
42.] Watch therefore, for ye know not the hour when your Lord does come. -- V.
44.] Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son
of man comes. Luke 21. 35, 36. For as a snare shall it come on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth. V. 36.] Watch ye therefore and pray
always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall
come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.
.

Q. What shall be done to the wicked at the day of judgment?

A. At the day of judgment the wicked shall be set on Christ's left hand Mat.
25. 33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
, and, upon clear evidence, and full conviction of their own consciences Romans
2. 15, 16. Which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing,
or excusing one another. V. 16.] In the day when he shall judge the secrets of
men, by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel.
, shall have the fearful, but just sentence of condemnation pronounced against
them Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43. Then shall he say also to them on the left hand,
depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. V. 42.] For I was an hungered and ye gave no meat, I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink, V. 43.] I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked and ye
clothed me not; sick, and in prison and ye visited me not.
; and thereupon shall be cast out from the favorable presence of God, and the
glorious fellowship with Christ, his Saints, and all his holy Angels, into
hell, to be punished with unspeakable torments both of body and soul, with the
Devil and his Angels for ever Luke 16. 26. And besides all this, there is a
great gulf fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you, cannot,
neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9. In
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. V. 9.] Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.
.

Q. What shall be done to the righteous at the day of judgment?

A. At the day of judgment, the righteous being caught up to Christ in the
clouds 1 These. 4. 17. Thou we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we
ever be with the Lord.
, shall be set on his right hand, and there openly acknowledged, and acquitted
Mat. 25. 33. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the
left. Mat. 10. 32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I
confess also before my Father which is in heaven.
; shall join with him in the judging of reprobate Angels and men 1 Cor. 6. 2,
3. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world? And if the world, etc.
-- V. 3. Know ye not that we shall judge Angels? how much more then the things
that pertain to this life?
, and shall be received into heaven Mat. 25. 34.-46. Then shall the King say to
them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world -- V. 46.] And these shall go
away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.
; where they shall be fully and for ever freed from all sin and misery Ephesians. 5.
27. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, nor any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without blemish.
Rev. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.
, filled with unconceivable joys Psalm. 16. 11. Thou will show me the path of
life, in thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore.
, made perfectly holy and happy both in body and soul, in the company of
innumerable Saints, and holy Angels Heb. 12. 22, 23. But ye are come unto mount
Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and ^o an
innumerable company of Angels, V. 23.] To the general assembly of the first
born, which are written in heaven, and to God, the Judge of all, and to the
Spirits of just men made perfect.
, but especially in the immediate vision and fruition of God the Father, of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and of the holy Spirit, to all eternity 1 John 3. 2.
Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall
be: but we know that when we appear we shall be like him; for we shall see him
as he is. 1 Cor. 13. 12. For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face
to face; now I know in part, but then shall I know, even as I am known. 1 These.
4. 17, 18. Then we who are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with
the Lord. V. 18.] Wherefore comfort one another with these words.
: and this is the perfect and full communion which the members of the invisible
Church shall enjoy with Christ in glory at the resurrection and day of
judgment.

Having seen, what the Scriptures principally teach us to believe concerning
God; it follows to consider, what they require as the duty of man.

Quest. What is the duty that God requires of man?

A. The duty which God requires of man, is, obedience to his revealed will
Romans 12. 1, 2. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable service. V. 2.] And be not conformed to this world, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good,
that acceptable and perfect will of God. Mic. 6. 8. He has showed thee, O man,
what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. 1 Samuel 15. 22. And Samuel said,
Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in ob^ying
the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey, is better then sacrifice; and to
hearken, then the fat of rams.
.

Q. What did God at first reveal unto man as the rule of his obedience?

A. The rule of obedience revealed to Adam in the estate of innocence, and to
all mankind in him, beside a special command, not to eat of the fruit of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, was, the Moral Law Genesis 1. 26, 27. And
God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness, and let them have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the
cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps
upon the face of the earth. V. 27.] So God created man in his own image, in the
image of God created he him, male and female created he them. Romans 2. 14, 15.
For when the Gentiles who have not the law, do by nature the things contained
in the Law, these having not the law, are a law unto themselves; V. 15.] Which
show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one
another. Romans 10. 5. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the
law, that the man which does those things shall live by them. Genesis 2. 17. But
of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it: for in the
day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
.

Q. What is the Moral Law?

A. The Moral Law is the declaration of the will of God to mankind, directing
and binding every one to personal, perfect, and perpetual conformity and
obedience thereunto, in the frame and disposition of the whole man soul and
body Deuteronomy. 5. 1, 2, 3, -- 31-33. And Moses called all Israel, and said unto
them, Hear, O Israel, the Statutes and Judgments which I speak in your ears
this day, that ye may learn them, and keep, and do them. V. 2.] The Lord our
God made a covenant with us in Horeb. V. 3.] The Lord made not this covenant
with our fathers, but with us, even us; who are all of us alive here this day
-- V. 31] But as for thee stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto thee all
the Commandments, and the Statutes and the Judgments which thou shall teach
them, that they may do them in the land which I give them to possess it -- V.
33.] Ye shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God has commanded you,
that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong
your days in the land which ye shall possess. Luke 10. 26, 27. What is written
in the law? how read thou? V. 27.] And he answering said, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor, as thy self. Gal. 3. 10.
For as many, as are of the works of the law are under the curse; for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things contained in the
book of the law to do them. 1 These. 5. 23. And the very God of peace sanctify
you wholly, And I pray God your whole Spirit, and soul and body, be preserved
blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
, and in performance of all those duties of holiness and righteousness which he
owes to God and man Luke 1. 75. In holiness and righteousness before him all
the days of our life. Act. 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have
always a conscience void of offense both toward God and toward men.
; promising life upon the fulfilling, and threatening death upon the breach of
it Romans 10. 5. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the law, that
the man which does these things shall live by them. Gal. 3. 10.-12. For as many
as are of the works of the law are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the law to do them -- V. 12.] And the law is not of faith, but the man that
does them shall live in them.
.

Q. Is there any use of the Moral Law to man, since the fall?

A. Although no man, since the fall, can attain to righteousness and life by
the Moral Law Romans 8. 3. For what the law could not do, for that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. Gal. 2. 16. Knowing this that a man is
not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even
we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the law, for by the works of the Law shall no
flesh be justified.
, yet there is great use thereof, as well common to all men, as peculiar either
to the unregenerate, or the regenerate 1 Timothy 1. 8. But we know that the law is
good, if a man use it lawfully.
.

Q. Of what use is the Moral Law to all m^n?

A. The Moral Law is of use to all men, to inform them of the holy nature and
will of God Lev. 11. 44, 55. For I am the Lord your God, ye shall therefore
sanctify your selves, and ye shall be holy, for I am holy, neither shall ye
defile your selves with any manner of creeping thing that creeps upon the
earth. V. 45.] For I am the Lord that brings you up out of the land of Egypt,
to be your God, ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy. Lev. 20. 7, 8.
Sanctify your selves therefore, and be ye holy: for I am the Lord your God. V.
8.] And ye shall keep my Statutes, and do them: I am the Lord which sanctify
you. Romans 7. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the commandment holy, just and
good.
, and of their duty, binding them to walk accordingly Mich. 6. 8. He has
showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. Jam. 2. 10,
11. For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. V. 11.] For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do
not kill. Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a
transgressour of the Law.
; to convince them of their disability to keep it, and of the sinful pollution
of their nature, hearts, and lives Psalm. 19. 11, 12. Moreover by them is thy
servant warned, and in keeping of them there is great reward. V. 12.] Who can
understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults. Romans 3. 20.
Therefore by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified in his sight; for
by the law is the knowledge of sin. Romans 7. 7. What shall we say then? Is the
law sin? God forbid. Nay I had not known sin, but by the law; for I had not
known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not covet.
, to humble them in sense of their sin and misery Romans 3. 9-23. What then? are
we better then they? No, in no wise; for we have before proved both Jews and
Gentiles that they are all under sin. -- V. 23. For all have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God.
, and thereby help them to a clearer sight of the need they have of Christ Gal.
3. 21, 22. Is the law then against the promise of God? God forbid, for if there
had been a law given, which could have given life, verily righteousness should
have been by the law. V. 22.] But the Scripture has concluded all under sin,
that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.
, and of the perfection of his obedience Romans 10. 4. For Christ is the end of
the law, for righteousness to every one that believes.
.

Q. What particular use is there of the Moral law to unregenerate men?

A. The Moral Law is of use to unregenerate men, to awaken their consciences
to fly from wrath to come 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Knowing this that the Law is not
made for a righteous man, but for the lawless, and disobedient, for the ungodly
and sinners, for unholy, and profane, for murderers of fathers, and murderers
of mothers, for man-slayers. V. 10.] For whore-mongers, for them that defile
themselves with mankind, for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured persons,
and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine.
, and to drive them to Christ Gal. 3. 24. Wherefore the Law was our School
Master to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.
; or, upon their continuance in the estate and way of sin, to leave them
inexcusable Romans 1. 20. For the invisible things of him from the creation of
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse. Compared with,
Romans 2. 15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing
one another.
, and under the curse thereof Gal. 3. 10. For as many as are of the works of
the law, are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all the things which are written in the book of the Law, to
do them.
.

Q. What special use is there of the Moral Law to the regenerate?

A. Although they that are regenerate, and believe in Christ, be delivered from
the Moral Law as a Covenant of works Romans 6. 14. For sin shall not have
dominion over you; for ye are not under the law, but under grace. Romans 7. 4, 6.
Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law, by the body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. -- V. 6.] But now we are
delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were held, that we should
serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter. Gal. 4. 4, 5.
But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman,
made under the law. V. 5.] To redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons.
, so as thereby they are neither justified Romans 3. 20. Therefore by the deeds
of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight, for by the law is the
knowledge of sin.
, nor condemned Gal. 5. 23. Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no law.
Romans 8. 1. There is now therefore no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
; yet beside the general uses thereof common to them with all men, it is of
special use, to show them how much they are bound to Christ for his fulfilling
it, and enduring the curse thereof in their stead, and for their good Romans 7.
24, 25. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death?
V. 25.] I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, so then with the mind I my
self serve the law of God, but with the flesh, the law of sin. Gal. 3. 13, 14.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us:
for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. V. 14. That the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we
might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. Romans 8. 3, 4. For what
the law could not do, for that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh. V. 4.] That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
; and thereby to provoke them to more thankfuluess Luke 1. 68, 69, -- 74, 75.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his people. V.
69.] And has raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant
David -- V. 74. That he would grant unto us that we being delivered out of the
hand of our enemies, might serve him without fear. V. 75.] In holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life. Col. 1. 12, 13, 14. Giving
thanks unto the father who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light. V. 13.] Who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. V. 14.] In
whom we have redemption, through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.
, and to express the same in their greater care to conform themselves thereunto
as the rule of their obedience Romans 7. 22. For I delight in the law of God
after the inward man. Romans 12. 2. And be not conformed to this world, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may prove what is that
good, that acceptable and perfect will of God. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. For the
grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men. V. 12.] Teaching
us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present evil world. V. 13.] Looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. V. 14.] Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
.

Q. Where is the Moral Law summarily comprehended?

A. The Moral Law is summarily comprehended in the Ten Commandments, which
were delivered by the voice of God upon mount Sinai, and written by him in two
tables of stone Deuteronomy. 10. 4. And he wrote in the Tables according to the first
writing, the ten Commandments, which the Lord spoke unto you in the Mount, out
of the midst of the fire, in the day of the assembly, and the Lord gave them
unto me. Exodus 34. 1, 2, 3, 4. And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee ^wo
Tables of stone like unto the first, and I will write upon these Tables the
words that were in the first Tables which thou brakest. V. 2.] And be ready in
the morning, and come up into Mount Sinai, and present thy self there to me in
the top of the mount. V. 3.] And no man shall come up with thee, etc. -- V. 4.]
And he hewed two Tables of stone like the first, and rose early in the morning,
and went up into Mount Sinai, as the Lord had commanded him, and took in his
hand the two Tables of stone.
, and are recorded in the twentieth chapter of Exodus; the four first
Commandments containing our duty to God, and the other six our duty to man
Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. V. 38.]
This is that first and great Commandment. V. 39.] And the second is like unto
it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. V. 40.] On these two
Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.
.

Q. What Rules are to be observed for the right understanding of the ten
Commandments?

A. For the right understanding of the ten Commandments, these rules are to be
observed.

1. That the Law is perfect, and binds every one to full conformity in the
whole man unto the righteousness thereof, and unto entire obedience, for ever,
so as, to require the utmost perfection of every duty, and to forbid the least
degree of every sin Psalm. 19. 7. The law of the Lord is perfect converting the
soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. Jam. 2. 10.
For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. Mat. 5. 21. to the end. Ye have heard that it was said by them
of old time, Thou shall not kill -- But I say -- and so on to the end.
.

2. That it is spiritual, and so, reaches the Understanding, Will, Affections,
and all other powers of the soul, as well as words, works, and gestures Romans 7.
14. For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin.
Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy might. Compared with Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39. Jesus said
unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul and with all thy mind, V. 38.] This is the first and great Commandment. V.
39.] And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Matt. 5. 21, 22-27, 28, -- 36. to the end. Ye have heard that it was said by
them of old time, Thou shall not kill, and whosoever shall kill shall be in
danger of the judgment. V. 22.] But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry
with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment; and
whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the Council;
but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire -- V. 27.]
Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit
adultery. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart -- V. 36.] Neither
shall thou swear by thine head. etc. to the end of the chapter.
.

3. That one and the same thing, in diverse respects, is required or forbidden
in several Commandments Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are
upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness which is idolatry. Amos 8. 5. Saying, when will
the New Moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set
forth wheat? making the Ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the
balances by deceit. Pro. 1. 19. So are the ways of every one that is greedy of
gain, which takes away the life of the owners thereof. 1 Timothy 6. 10. For the
love of money, is the root of all evil, which while some have coveted after,
they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows.
.

4. That, as, where a duty is commanded, the contrary sin is forbidden Isa. 58.
13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my
holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words -- Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
and serve him, and shall swear by his Name. Compared with, Mat. 4. 9, 10. --
And says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me. V. 10.] Then said Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan, for it
is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. Mat. 15. 4, 5, 6. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and thy
mother, and he that curses father or mother, let him die the death. V. 5.] But
ye say, that whosoever shall say to his father or mother, It is a gift by
whatsoever thou might be profited by me. And honor not his father or his
mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none
effect by your tradition.
, and where a sin is forbidden, the contrary duty is commanded Mat. 5. 21, 22,
23, 24, 25. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not
kill, and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment. V. 22.]
But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall
be in danger of the judgment, and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca,
shall be in danger of the Council; but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be
in danger of Hell fire. V. 23.] Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar,
and there remember that thy brother has ought against thee. V. 24.] Leave
there thy gift, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift. V. 25.] Agree with thine adversary while thou art in
the way with him, least, etc. Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more,
but rather let him work with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have
to give to him that needs.
: so, where a promise is annexed, the contrary threatening is included Exodus 20.
12. Honor thy father and mother, that thy days may be long in the land, which
the Lord thy God gives thee. Compared with Prove. 30. 17. The eye that mocketh
at his father, and despises to obey his mother, the ravens of the valleys
shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.
; and, where a threatening is annexed, the contrary promise is included Jer. 18.
7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation or Kingdom, to pluck
up, and to pull down, and to destroy it. V. 8.] If that nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do unto them. Exodus 20. 7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in
vain. Compared with Psalm. 15. 1.-4, 5, Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle,
and who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? -- V. 4.] In whose eyes a vile person is
contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord: he that swears to his
own hurt and changes not. V. 5.] He that puts not his money out to usury,
nor -- He that does these things shall never be moved. And with Psalm. 24. 4, 5.
He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his hands unto
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. V. 5.] He shall receive the blessing from the
Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
.

5. That what God forbids, is at no time to be done Job 13. 7, 8. Will ye speak
wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? V. 8.] Will ye accept his
person? will ye contend for God? Rom 3. 8. And not rather, as we are
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil that good
may come, whose damnation is just. Job 36. 21. Take heed, regard not iniquity,
for this have thou chosen rather then affliction. Heb. 11. 25. Choosing rather
to suffer affliction with the people of God; then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season.
, what he commands, is always our duty Deuteronomy. 4. 8, 9. And what nation is there
so great, that has statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law which
I set before you this day? V. 9.] Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy
soul diligently, least thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and
least they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life, but teach them thy
sons, and thy sons sons.
, and yet every particular duty is not to be done at all times Mat. 12. 7. But
if ye had known what this means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye
would not have condemned the guiltless.
.

6. That, under one sin or duty, all of the same kind are forbidden or
commanded, together with all the causes, means, occasions, and appearances
thereof, and provocations thereunto Matt. 5. 21, 22-27, 28. See
. (s) before. V. 27.] Ye have heard that it has been said of old, Thou shall
not commit adultery: But I say unto you, whosoever looks on a woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart. Mat. 15. 4,
5, 6. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and thy mother; and he that
curses his father and his mother, let him die the death. V. 5.] But ye say,
that whosoever shall say to his father or mother, It is a gift by whatsoever
thou might be profited by me, and honor not his father and his mother, he
shall be free, thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your
tradition. Heb. 10. 24, 25. And let us consider one another to provoke unto
love, and unto good works. V. 25.] Not forsaking the assembling of our selves
together as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the
more as ye see the day approaching. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance
of evil. Jude v. 23. And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire,
hating even the garment, spotted by the flesh. Gal. 5. 26. Let us not be
desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Col. 3. 21.
Fathers provoke not your children to anger, least they be discouraged.


7. That what is forbidden or commanded to our selves, we are bound, according
to our places, to endeavor that it may be avoided or performed by others,
according to the duty of their places Exodus 20. 10 -- But the seventh day is
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor
thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy gates -- Lev. 19. 17. Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Genesis 18. 19. For I know him that he
will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the
way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham that which he has spoke of him. Josh. 24. 15. And if it seem evil to
you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve -- but as for me
and my house we will serve the Lord. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. And these words which I
command thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently to thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up.
.

8. That, in what is commanded to others, we are bound according to our places
and callings to be helpful to them 2 Cor. 1. 24. Not for that we have dominion
over your faith, but are helpers of your joy --
, and to take heed of pertaking with others in what is forbidden them 1 Timothy 5.
22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins; keep
thy self pure. Ephesians. 5. 11. And have no fellowship with the unprofitable works
of darkness, but rather reprove them.
.

Q. What special things are we to consider in the ten Commandments?

A. We are to consider in the ten Commandments, the Preface, the substance of
the Commandments themselves, and several reasons annexed to some of them, the
more to enforce them.

Q. What is the Preface to the Commandments?

A. The Preface to the Commandments is contained, in these words [I am the Lord
thy God which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt out of the house of
bondage Exodus 20. 2.
,] wherein God manifests his Sovereignty, as being Jehovah, the Eternal,
Immutable, and Almighty God Isai. 44. 6. Thus says the Lord the King of
Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of hosts, I am the first, and I am the last,
and besides me there is no God.
, having his Being in and of himself Exodus 3. 14. And God said unto Moses, I AM
THAT I AM, and he said, Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM
has sent me unto you.
, and giving being to all his words Ex. 6. 3. And I appeared unto Abraham and
Isaac, and Jacob by the name of God Almighty; but by my name Jehovah was I not
known to them.
, and works Act. 17. 24-28. God that made the world, and all things therein,
seeing that he is Lord of heaven, and of earth, dwells not in temples made
with hands. -- V. 28.] For in him we live, and move, and have our being, as
certain also of your own Poets have said, For we are also of his offspring.
, and that he is a God in Covenant, as with Israel of old, so with all his
people Genesis 17. 7. And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting Covenant, to be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. Romans 3. 29. Is he the God of the
Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also.
, who as he brought them out of their bondage in Egypt, so he delivers us
from our Spiritual thraldom Luke 1. 74, 75. That he would grant unto us, that
we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without
fear. V. 75.] In holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life.
; and that therefore we are bound to take him for our God alone, and to keep
all his Commandments 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18. But as he who has called you,
is holy; so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. V. 16. Because it is
written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. V. 17.] And if ye call on the father, who
without respect of persons judges according to every man's work, pass the time
of your sojoruning here in fear. V. 18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation received by tradition from your fathers. Lev. 18. 30. Therefore
shall ye keep mine Ordinances, that ye commit not any of these abominable
customs which were committed before you, that ye defile not your selves
therein: I am the Lord your God. Lev. 19. 37. Therefore shall ye observe all my
Statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: I am the Lord.
.

Q. What is the sum of the four Commandments, which contain our duty to God?

A. The sum of the four Commandments containing our duty to God, is, to love
the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with all our
strength, and with all our mind Luke 10. 27. And he answering said unto him,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all, etc.
.

Q. Which is the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods before me Exodus 20.
3.
.

Q. What are the duties required in the first Commandment?

A. The duties required in the first Commandment, are, the knowing and
acknowledging of God to be the only true God, and our God 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And
thou Solomon my son, Know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind; for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts; if thou seek him, he will
be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.
Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
judgments, and to hearken unto his voice. Esai. 43. 10. Ye are my witnesses,
says the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen; that ye may know and believe
me, and understand that I am he, before me there was no God formed, neither
shall there be after me. Jer. 14. 22. Are there any among the vanities of the
Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? Art not thou he,
O Lord our God? therefore we will wait upon thee, for thou have made all these
things.
; and to worship and glorify him accordingly Psalm. 95. 6, 7. O come let us
worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. V. 7.] For he is
our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands. Mat.
4. 10. Then said Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan, for it is written. Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Psalm. 29. 2.
Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; worship the Lord in the beauty
of holiness.
, by thinking Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to
another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name.
, meditating Psalm. 63. 6. When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on
thee in the night watch.
, remembering Eccl. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
etc.
, highly esteeming Psalm. 71. 19. Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high,
who have done great things. O God who is like unto thee?
, honoring Mal. 1. 6. A son honors his father, and a servant his master; if
then I be a father, where is mine honor? and if I be a master, where is my
fear, says the Lord of hosts, unto you, O Priests, that despise my name?
, adoring Isa. 45. 23. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my
mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall
bow, every tongue shall swear.
, choosing Josh. 24. 15-22. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord,
choose you this day whom ye will serve, whether the God which your fathers
served, that were on the other side of the flood, or the Gods of the Amorites
in whose land ye dwell; but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord --
V. 22.] And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against your selves,
that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him; And they said, we are witnesses.
, loving Deuteronomy. 6. 5. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.
, desiring Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee.
, fearing of him Isa. 8. 13. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let him
be your fear, and let him be your dread.
, believing him Exodus 14. 31. And Israel saw the great work which the Lord did
upon the Egyptians, and the people seared the Lord, and believed the Lord and
his servant Moses.
, trusting Isa. 26. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah
is everlasting strength.
, hoping Psalm. 130. 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is
mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption.
, delighting Psalm. 37. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give
thee the desires of thine heart.
, rejoicing in him Psalm. 32. 11. Be glad in the Lord and rejoice ye righteous,
and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.
, being zealous for him Romans 12. 11. Not slothful in business, fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord. Compared with Numb. 25. 11. Phineas the son of
Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, has turned my wrath away from the
children of Israel (while he was zealous for my sake amongst them) that I
consumed them not in my jealousy.
, calling upon him, giving all praise and thanks Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving let
your requests be made known unto God.
, and yiedling all obedience and submission to him, with the whole man Jer. 7.
23. But this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your
God, and ye shall be my people, and walk ye in all the ways that I have
commanded you, that it may be well with you. Jam. 4. 7. Submit your selves
therefore to God, resist the Devil and he will flee from you.
, being careful in all things to please him 1 John 3. 22. And whatsoever we
ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandment, and do those things
that are pleasing in his sight.
, and sorrowful when in any thing he is offended Jer. 31. 18. I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke turn thou me, and I shall be
turned, thou art the Lord my God. Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of waters run down
mine eyes because men keep not thy law.
, and walking humbly with him Mich. 6. 8. He has shown thee, O man, what is
good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justice, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in the first Commandment?

A. The sins forbidden in the first Commandment, are, Atheism in denying, or
not having a God Ps. 14. 1. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God --
Ephesians. 2. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world.
, Idolatry, in having, or worshipping more Gods then one, or any with, or
instead of the true God Jer. 2. 27, 28. Saying to a stock, Thou art my father,
and to a stone, Thou have brought me forth; for they have turned their back
upon me, and not their face; but in the time of their trouble they will say,
arise and save us. V. 28.] But where are thy Gods that thou have made thee? let
them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble, for according to
the number of thy Cities are thy Gods O Judah. Compared with 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9. For
they themselves show of us what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how
ye returned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God.
; the not having and avouching him for God, and our God Psalm. 81. 11. But my
people would not hearken to my voice, Israel would have none of me.
; the omission or neglect of any thing due to him required in this Commandment
Isa. 43. 22, 23, 24. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have
been weary of me, O Israel. V. 23.] Thou have not brought me the ^mall cattle
of thy burnt-offerings, neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices -- V.
24.] Thou have bought me no sweet cane with money, nor have thou filled me with
the fat of thy sacrifices, but have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have
wearied me with thine iniquities
, ignorance Jer. 4. 22. For my people is foolish, they have not known me; they
are foolish children, and have no understanding; they are wise to do evil, but
to do good they have no knowledge. Hos. 4. 1-6. Hear the word of the Lord, ye
children of Israel; for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of
the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the
land -- V. 6.] My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, because thou have
rejected knowledge, I also will reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to
me, seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I also will forget thy
children.
, forgetfulness Jer. 2. 32. Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her
attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number.
, misapprehensions Act. 17. 23-29. For as I passed by, and beheld your
devotion, I found an Altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD; whom
therefore ye ignorantly worship; him I declare unto you -- V. 29.] Forasmuch
then, as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead
is like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by art or man's device.
, false opinions Isai. 40. 18. To whom then will ye liken God, or what likeness
will ye compare unto him?
, unworthy, and wicked thoughts of him Psalm. 50. 21. These things have thou
done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as
thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.
, bold and curious searching into his secrets Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Secret things
belong unto the Lord our God; but those things that are revealed belong unto
us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of the law.
, all profaneness Tit. 1. 16. They profess they know God, but in works they
deny him, being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. Heb.
12. 16. Least there be among you any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau,
who for one morsel of meat, sold his birthright.
, hatred of God Romans 1. 30. Backbiters, haters of God, despightful, proud,
boasters, etc.
, self-love 2 Timothy 3. 2. For men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy.
, self-seeking Phil. 2. 21. For all seek their own, not the things that are
Jesus Christ's.
, and all other inordinate and immoderate setting of our mind, will, or
affections upon other things, and taking them off from him in whole or in part
1 John 2. 15, 16. Love not the world, nor the things of the world. If any man
love the world, the love of the father is not in him. V. 16.] For all that is
in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life is not of the Father, but is of the world. 1 Samuel 2. 29. Wherefore kick ye
at my sacrifice, and at mine offering which I have commanded in my habitation,
and honor thy sons above me, to make your selves fat with the chiefest of
all the offerings of Israel my people? Col. 3. 2-5. Set your affections on
things above, not on things on the earth -- V. 5.] For though I am absent in
the flesh, yet I am with you in the Spirit, joying, and beholding your order,
and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ.
, vain credulity 1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits, whether they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into
the world.
, unbelief Heb. 3. 12. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief in departing from the living God.
, heresy Gal. 5. 20. Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations,
Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies. Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an heretic*
after the first, and second admonition, reject.
, misbelief Act. 26. 9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many
things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
, distrust Psalm. 78. 22. Because they believed not in God, nor trusted in his
salvation.
, despair Genesis 4. 13. And Cain said unto the Lord, My punishment is greater
then I can hear.
, incorrigibleness Jer. 5. 3. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou
have stricken them, but they have not grieved, thou have consumed them, but
they have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder then
a rock, they have refused to return.
, insensibleness under judgments Isai. 42. 25. Therefore he has poured upon
him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle; and it has set him on
fire round about, yet he knew it not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to
heart.
, hardness of heart Romans 2. 5. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart,
treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God.
, pride Jer. 13. 15. Hear ye and give ear; be not proud, for the Lord has
spoken it.
, presumption Psalm. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins,
let them not have dominion over me, then shall I be upright and innocent from
the great transgression.
, carnal security Zeph. 1. 12. And it shall come to pass at that time, that I
will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their
lees, that say in their hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do
evil.
, tempting of God Mat. 4. 7. Jesus said unto him, it is written again, Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God.
, using unlawful means Romans 3. 8. And not rather, as we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil that good may come,
whose damnation is just.
, and trusting in lawful means Jer. 17. 5. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the
man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs
from the Lord.
, carnal delights and joys 2 Timothy 3. 4. Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers
of pleasure, more then lovers of God.
; corrupt, blind, and indiscreet zeal Gal. 4. 17. They zealously affect you,
but not well, yea they would exclude you that ye might affect them. Joh. 16. 2.
-- Yea the time comes that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
good service. Romans 10. 2. For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge. Luke 9. 54, 55. And when his disciples James
and John saw this, they said, Lord will thou that we command fire to come down
from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did? V. 55.] But he turned and
rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.
, luke-warmness Rev. 3. 16. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither
cold, nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth.
, and deadness in the things of God Rev. 3. 1. And unto the Angel in the Church
of Sardis, write, These things says he that has the seven Spirits of God, and
the seven stars, I know thy works, that thou have a name, that thou live, and
art dead.
; estranging our selves, and apostatizing from God Ezekiel. 14. 5. That I may take
the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are all estranged from me,
through their Idols. Isa. 1. 4, 5. Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters, they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they
are gone backward. V. 5.] Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt
more and more, the whole head is sick, etc.
, praying, or giving any religious worship to Saints, Angels, or any other
creatures Romans 10. 13, 14. For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord,
shall be saved. V. 14.] How then shall they call upon him in whom they have not
believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a preacher? Hos. 4. 12. My people ask counsel at
their stocks, and their staff declares unto them; for the spirit of whoredoms
has caused them to err, and they have gone a whoring from under their God.
Act. 10. 25, 26. And as Peter was coming in Cornelius met him, and fell down at
his feet, and worshipped him. V. 26.] But Peter took him up, saying, stand up,
I my self also am a man. Rev. 19. 10. I fell at his feet to worship him, and
he said unto me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow servants, and of thy
brethren that have the testimony of Jesus; worship God; for the testimony of
Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy. Mat. 4. 10. Then said Jesus unto him, Get thee
hence Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. Col. 2. 18. Let no m^n beguile you of your reward, in a
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things
which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. Romans 1. 25. Who
changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped, and served the creature
more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.
, all compacts, and consulting with the devil Lev. 20. 6. And the soul that
turns after such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards to go a whoring
after them, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off
from among his people. 1 Samuel 28. 7-11. Then said Saul to his servants, Seek me
a woman that has a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her;
and his servant said unto him, Behold there is a woman that has a familiar
spirit at Endor -- V. 11.] Then said the woman, whom shall I bring up unto
thee? and he said, bring me up Samuel. Compared with 1 Chronicles. 10. 13, 14. So
Saul died for his transgression which he committed against the Lord, even
against the word of the Lord, which he kept not; also for asking counsel of one
that had a familiar spirit to enquire of it. V. 14.] And enquired not of the
Lord, therefore he slew him, etc.
, and hearkening to his suggestions Act. 5. 3. But Peter said, Ananias, why
has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of
the price of the land.
, making men the Lords of our faith and Conscience 2 Cor. 1. 24. Not for that
we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy; for by faith ye
stand. Mat. 23. 9. And call no man your father upon earth, for one is your
father which is in heaven.
; slighting and despising God, and his commands Deuteronomy. 23. 15. But Jeshurun
waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxed far, thou art grown thick, and thou art
grown thick, and thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook the God that
made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. 2 Samuel 12. 9.
Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his
sight? thou have killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his
wife to be thy wife, etc. Prove. 13. 13. Whosoever despises the word, shall be
destroyed; but he that fears the commandment shall be rewarded.
, resisting and grieving of his spirit Act. 7. 51. Ye stiff-necked and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your
fathers did, so do ye. Ephesians. 4. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
whereby ye are sealed to the day of redemption.
, discontent, and impatience at his dispensations, charging him foolishly for
the evils he inflicts on us Psalm. 73. 2, 3-14, 15-22. But as for me, my feet
were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped. V. 3.] For I was envious at the
foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked -- V. 13.] Verily I have
cleansed my heart in vain, and washed mine hands in innocence. For all the day
long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning. V. 15.] If Isay I will
speak thus, behold I should offend against the generation of thy children -- V.
22.] So foolish was I, and ignorant; I was even as a beast before thee, Job 1.
22. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.
; and ascribing the praise of any good we either are, have, or can do, to
fortune 1 Samuel 6. 7, 8, 9. Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch
kine, on which there has come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring
the calves home from them. V. 8.] And take the Ark of the Lord, and lay it upon
the cart, and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a
trepass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof, and send it away that it
may go. V. 9.] And see, if it goes on by the way of his own coast to
Bethshemesh, then he has done us this great evil; but if not, then we shall
know that it is not his hand that smote us, it was a chance that happened to us.
, Idols Dan. 5. 23. But have lifted up thy self against the Lord of heaven, and
they have brought the vessels of his house before thee; and thou, and thy
Lords, thy wives and thy concubines have drunk wine in them, and thou have
praised the Gods of silver, of brass, iron, wood, and stone; which see not, nor
hear, nor know; and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy
ways, have thou not glorified?
, our selves Deuteronomy. 8. 17. And thou say in thy heart, my power, and the might of
my hand has gotten me this wealth. Dan. 4. 30. The King spoke, and said, Is
not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty.
, or any other creature Hab. 1. 16. Therefore they sacrifice unto their net,
and burn incense unto their drag; because by them their portion is fat, and
their meat plenteous.
.

Q. What are we especially taught by these words [before me] in the first
Commandment?

A. These words before me, or before my face, in the first Commandment, teach
us, that God who sees all things, takes special notice of, and is much
displeased with the sin of having any other God; that so it may be an argument
to dissuade from it, and to aggravate it, as a most impudent provocation Ezekiel.
8. 5. to the end. Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the
way toward the North; so I lift up mine eyes, and behold at the gate of the
Altar, this image of Jealousy in the entry. And he said -- so on. Psalm. 44.
20, 21. But if we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our
hands to a strange God; shall not God search this out? for he knows the
secrets of the heart.
; as also to persuade us to do, as in his sight, what ever we do in his fervice
1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father and
serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; for the Lord searches
all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts; if thou
seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee
off for ever.
.

Q. Which is the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment is [Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image,
or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; thou shall not bow down to
them nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation
of them that hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands, of them that love me,
and keep my Commandments Exodus 20. 4 5, 6.
.]

Q. What are the duties required in the second Commandment?

A. The duties required in the second Commandment, are the receiving,
observing, and keeping pure and entire, all such religious worship and
Ordinances as God has instituted in his word Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47. And he said
unto them, Set your hearts unto all the Words which I testify among you this
day which ye shall command your children to observe to do all the words of this
law. V. 47.] For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life, and
through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land whither ye go over
Jordan to possess it. Mat. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you; and ^o I am with you always unto the end of the
world. Act. 2. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayer. 1 Timothy 6. 13. 14. I give
thee charge in the fight of God, who quickens all things; and before Christ
Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, V. 14.] That thou
keep this Commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ.
, particularly, Prayer and Thanksgiving in the name of Christ Phil. 4. 6. Be
careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your requests he made known to God. Ephesians. 5. 20. Giving thanks
always, for all things, unto God, and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
, the reading preaching, and hearing of the word Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. And it shall
be when he sits upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a
copy of this law in a book, out of that which is before the Priests and
Levites. V. 19.] And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the
days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the
words of this law, and these statutes to do them. Act. 15. 21. For Moses of old
time has in every city them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues
every Sabbath day. 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the word, be instant, in season; out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and Doctrine. Jam. 1.
21, 22. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ^^graffed word, which is able to save your souls. V.
22.] But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
selves. Act. 10. 33, Immediately therefore I sent unto thee, and thou have well
done, that thou art come. Now therefore are we all here present before God, to
hear all things that are commanded thee of God.
; the administration and receiving of the Sacraments Mat. 28. 19. -- Go ye
therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 11. 23. to the 30. verse, For I have
received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus
the same might wherein he was betrayed, took bread, -- And so on.
, Church Government and Discipline Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. Moreover if thy brother
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if
he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. V. 16.] But if he will not
hear, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word may be established. V. 17. And if he shall neglect to hear
them, tell it to the Church, but if he will not hear the Church, let him be,
etc. Mat. 16. 19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. 1 Cor. 5. the
whole chapter. 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the Church; first
Apostles; secondarily, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers, after that Miracles,; then
Gifts of healings, Helps, Governments, diversities of tongues.
, the Ministry and maintenance thereof Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. And he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
Teachers, V. 12.] For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Let the
elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the word and doctrine. V. 18.] For the Scripture says, thou shall
not muzzle the ox that treads out the corn, and the labourer is worthy of his
reward. 1 Cor. 9. 7. to v. 15. Who goes a warfare any time at his own charge?
who planteth a vineyatd, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? -- And so on to v. 15.
, religious fasting Joel 2. 12, 13. Therefore also now, says the Lord, Turn ye
even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and weeping and mourning. V.
13.] And rend your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your
God, for he is gracious, and merciful etc. -- 1 Cor. 7. 5. Defraud ye not one
the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves
to fasting and prayer, and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for
your incontinency.
, swearing by the name of God Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
and serve him, and shall swear by his Name.
, and vowing unto him Isai. 19. 21. And the Lord shall be known to Egypt, and
the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall do sacrifice and
oblation, yea they shall vow a vow unto the Lord, and perform it. Psalm. 76. 11.
Vow and pay unto the Lord your God; let all that are round about him, bring
presents unto him that ought to be feated.
: As also the disapproving, detesting, opposing all false worship Act. 17. 16,
17. Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him
when he saw all the city given to idolatry. V. 17.] Therefore disputed he in
the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the devour persons, and in the market
daily with them that met with him. Psalm. 16. 4. Their sorrows shall be
multiplied that hasten after another God; their drink offerings of blood will
not I offer, nor take up their names into my lips.
; and, according to each ones place and calling, removing it, and all monuments
of Idolatry Deuteronomy. 7. 5. But thus shall ye deal with them, ye shall destroy
their Altars, and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn
their graven images with fire. Isai. 30. 22. Ye shall defile also the covering
of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold;
thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, Get
thee hence?
.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in the second Commandment?

A. The sins forbidden in the second Commandment, are, all devising Number. 15.
39. And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and
remember all the Commandments of the Lord, and do them, and that ye seek not
after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring.
, counselling Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8. If thy brother the son of thy mother, or thy
son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as
thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods,
which thou have not known, thou, nor thy fathers, V. 7.] Namely of the gods of
the people which are round about thee, or far off from thee, from the one end
of the earth to the other. V. 8.] Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken
unto him, nor shall thine eye pity him, nor shall thou spare, nor shall thou
conceal him.
, commanding Hos. 5. 11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, because
he willingly walked after the Commandment. Mich. 6. 16. For the Statutes of
Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab; and ye walk in their
counsels, that I should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an
hissing; therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people.
, using 1 King. 11. 33. Because that they have forsaken me, and worshipped
Ashtaroth the goodess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the God of the Moabites, and
Milcom the God of the children of Ammon, and have not walked in my ways, to do
that which is right in mine eyes, and to keep my statutes and my judgments, as
did David his father.
, and any ways approving any religious worship not instituted by God himself
Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31, 32. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by
following them, after they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou enquire
not after their Gods, saying, how did these nations serve their gods? even so
will I do likewise. V. 31.] Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God, for
every abomination to the Lord which he hates have they done unto their gods;
for even their sons and their daughters have they burnt in the fire to their
gods. V. 32.] Whatsoever I command you, observe to do; thou shall not add
thereto, nor diminish from it.
, tolerating a false Religion Deuteronomy. 13. from ver. 6. to ver. 12. If thy brother
the son of thy mother, or, etc. -- vide [b] Zech. 13. 2, 3. And it shall come
to pass in that day, says the Lord of hosts, that I will cut off the names of
the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered: and also I will
cause the Prophets, and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land. V. 3.] And
it shall come to pass that when any shall yet prophecy, then his father and
mother that begat him shall say to him, Thou shall not live; for thou speak
lies in the name of the Lord; and his father and mother that begat him, shall
thrust him through when he prophesies. Rev. 2. 2.-14, 15-20. I know thy works
and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not hear them which are
evil, and thou have tried them who say they are Apostles and are not, and have
found them liars -- V. 14.] But I have a few things against thee, because thou
have there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, and to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and to commit fornication. V. 5.] So have thou also them that hold the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. -- V. 20.] Notwithstanding I
have a few things against thee (the Church of Thyatira) because thou suffer
that woman Jezabel, who calls her self a Prophetess, to teach, and to seduce
my servants, to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols. Rev.
17. 12-16, 17. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have
received no Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the beast.
-- V. 16.] And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, these shall hate
the whore, and make her desolate, and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire. V. 17.] For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to
agree, and give their Kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shall be
fulfilled.
, the making any representation of God, of all, or of any of the three Persons,
either inwardly in our mind, or outwardly, in any kind of Image or likeness of
any creature whatsoever Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Take ye therefore good
heed unto your selves (for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the
Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire.) V. 16.] Lest you
corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, etc. -- V. 19.] And lest thou
lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou see the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
even all the host of heaven, should be driven to worship them, and serve
them, which the Lord God has divided unto all nations under the whole heaven.
Act. 17. 29. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to
think that the Godhead is like to gold or silver, or stone graven by art and
man's device. Romans 1. 21, 22, 23-25. Because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, nor were they thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. V. 22.] Professing
themselves wise, they became fools. V. 23.] And changed the glory of the
incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to birds,
and beasts and creeping things. -- V. 25.] Who changed the truth of God into a
lie, and worshipped and served the creature more then the Creator, who is
blessed for ever. Amen.
, all worshipping of it Dan. 3. 18. But if not, be it known unto thee O King,
that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy golden Image which thou have
set up. Gal. 4. 8. Howbeit then when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them
which by nature are no Gods.
, or God in it, or by it Exodus 32. 5-8. And when Aaron saw it he built an Altar
before it, and made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the Lord.
-- V. 8.] They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them;
they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed
thereunto, and said, These be thy Gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up
out of the land of Egypt.
; the making of any representation of feigned Deities k, and all worship of
them, or service belonging to them 1 King. 18. 26-28. And they took the
bullock, and dressed it, and called upon the name of Baal, from morning to
noon, saying, O Baal, hear us; but there was no voice, nor any that answered;
and they leapt upon the Altar which was made. -- V. 28.] And they cried loud,
and cut themselves with knives, etc. -- Isai. 65. 11. But ye are they that
forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for the
troop, that furnish the drink offering unto the number.
, all superstitious devices Act. 17. 22. Then Paul stood in the midst of
Mars-hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too
superstitious.

Col. 2. 21, 22, 23. (Touch not, taste not, handle not. V. 22.] Which all are
to perish with the using) after the commandments, and doctrines of men. V. 23.]
Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in Will Worship, and humility, and
neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh.


, corrupting the worship of God Mal. 1. 7, 8-14. Ye offer polluted bread upon
mine Altar, and ye say, Where have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table
of the Lord is contemptible. V. 8.] And if ye offer the blind for a sacrifice,
is it not evil? and if the lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now to thy
Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of
hosts -- V. 14.] But cursed be the deceiver, who has in his flock a male, and
voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King,
says the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.
, adding to it, taking from it Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall not add unto the word
which I command you, nor shall ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the
commandments of the Lord your God which I command you.
, whether invented and taken up of our selves Psalm. 106. 39. Thus were they
defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions.
, or received by tradition from others Mat. 15. 9. But in vain do they worship
me, teaching for doctrine the commandments of men.
, though under the title of Antiquity 1 Pet. 1. 18. Forasmuch as ye know ye
were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation received by tradition from your fathers.
, Custom Jer. 44. 17. But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth
out of our own mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings, and
our Princes in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, for then
we had plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil.
, Devotion Isa. 65. 3. 4, 5. A people that provokes me to anger continually to
my face, that sacrifices in gardens, and burns incense upon Altars of brick.
V. 4.] Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, which cat
swines flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels. V. 5.] Which
say, Stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am holier then thou; these are
a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day. Gal. 1. 13, 14. For ye have
heard of my conversation in times past in the Jews religion, how that beyond
measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it. V. 14.] And profited in
the Jews religion, above many mine equals in mine own nation, being
exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.
, good Intent, or any other pretense whatsoever 1 Samuel 15. 21. But the people
(said Saul) took of the spoil, sheep, and oxen, the chief of those things which
should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in
Gilgal.
, fimony Act. 8. 18. And when Simon saw, that through the laying on of the
Apostles hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money.
, sacrilege Romans 2. 22. -- Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit
sacrilege? Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me. But ye say,
Wherein have we robbed thee? in tithes, and offerings.
, all neglect Exodus 4. 24, 25. And it came to pass by the way in the Inn, that
the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. V. 25.] Then Zipporah took a sharp
stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, etc. --
, contempt Mat. 22. 5. But they made light of it, and went their way, one to
his farm, another to his merchandise. Mal. 1. 7-13. Ye offer polluted bread
upon mine Altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The
table of the Lord is contemptible -- V. 13.] Ye said also, Behold, what a
weariness is it, and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord of hosts, and ye
brought that which was torn, and the lame, and sick: should I accept this of
your hand? says the Lord.
, hindering Mat. 23. 13. But woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for
ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men, for ye neither go in your
selves, nor suffer them that are entering to go in.
, and opposing the worship and Ordinances which God has appointed Act. 13. 44,
45. And the next Sabbath day, came almost the whole City together to hear the
word of God. V. 45.] But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled
with envy, and spoke against those things which weee spoken by Paul,
contradicting and blaspheming. 1 These. 2. 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord
Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and they please not God,
and are contrary to all men. V. 16.] Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles,
that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always, for the wrath is come
upon them to the uttermost.
.

Q What are the Reasons annexed to the second Commandment the more to enforce
it?

A. The Reasons annexed to the second Commandment, the more to enforce it,
contained in these words [For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquities of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation, of them that hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands of them that
love me, and keep my Commandments Exodus 20. 5, 6.
:] are, besides Gods sovereignty over us, and property in us Psalm. 45. 11. So
shall the King greatly desire thy beauty, for he is thy Lord, and worship thou
him. Rev. 15. 3, 4. And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the
song of the lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. V. 4.] Who shall
not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy, for all
nations shall come, and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made
manifest.
, his fervent zeal for his own worship Exodus 34. 13, 14. But ye shall destroy
their Altars, break their images, and cut down their groves. V. 14.] For thou
shall worship no other God: for the Lord whose name is jealous, is a jealous
God.
, and his revengeful indignation against all false worship, as being a
spiritual whoredom 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21, 22. But I say that the things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God; and I would not
ye should have fellowship with Devils. V. 21.] Ye cannot drink the cup of the
Lord, and the cup of Devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lords table, and the
table of Devils. V. 22.] Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger
then he? Jer. 7. 18, 19, 20. The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle
the fire, and the women knead their dough to make cakes to the Queen of heaven,
and to pour out drink offerings to other gods, that they may provoke me to
anger. V. 19.] Do they provoke me to anger says the Lord? do they not provoke
themselves to the confusion of their own faces? V. 20.] Therefore thus says
the Lord God, Behold mine anger and fury shall be poured out upon this place,
upon man, and beast, and the trees of the field, and the fruit of the ground,
and it shall burn, and none shall quench it. Ezekiel. 16. 26, 27. Thou have also
committed fornication with the Egyptians thy neighbors great of flesh, and have
increased thy whoredoms to provoke me to anger. V. 27.] Behold therefore I
have stretched out my hand over thee, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. They
provoked him to jealousy with strange Gods, with abominations provoked him to
anger. V. 17.] They sacrificed to Devils, not to God, to gods whom they know
not, to new gods, etc. V. 18.] Of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindful,
and have forgotten God that formed thee. V. 19.] And when the Lord saw it, he
abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons, and daughter^. V. 20.] And
he said, I will hide my face from them; I will see what their end shall be, for
they are a very froward generation, children in whom there is no says.
, accounting the breakers of this Commandment such as hate him, and threatening
to punish them unto diverse generations Hos. 2* 2, 3, 4. Plead with your mother,
plead for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband; let her therefore put
away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her
breasts. V. 3.] Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was
born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry land, and slay her
with thirst. V. 4.] And I will not have mercy upon her children, for they are
the children of whoredoms.
, and esteeming the observers of it, such as love him, and keep his
Commandments, and promising mercy to them unto many generations Deuteronomy. 5. 29. O
that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my
Commandments always, that it might be well with them and with their children
for ever.
.

Q. Which is the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment is, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain
Exodus 20. 7.
.

Q. What is required in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment requires, that the Name of God, his titles,
attributes Mat. 6. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father which art
in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Deuteronomy. 28. 58. If thou will not observe to do
all the words of this law, written in this book, that thou may fear this
glorious and fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD. Psalm. 29. 2. Give unto the Lord
the glory due unto his Name, etc. Psalm. 68. 4. Sing unto God, sing praises unto
his Name, extol him that rides upon the heavens by his Name JAH, and rejoice
before him. Rev. 15. 3, 4. See above in [d]
, ordinances Mal. 1. 14. Cursed be the deceiver that has in his flock a male,
and offers unto the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King says the
Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen. Eccl. 5. 1. Keep thy
foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear, then to
give the sacrifice of fools; for they consider not that they do evil.
, the word Psalm. 138. 2. I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy
name for thy loving kindness, and for thy truth; for thou have magnified thy
word above all thy Name.
, Sacraments 1 Cor. 11. 24. 25.-28, 29. And when he had given thanks, he brake
it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you, this do in
remembrance of me. V. 25.] After the same manner also he took the cup, etc. --
V. 28.] But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread and
drink of this cup. V. 29.] For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.
, prayer 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up
holy hands without wrath, and doubting.
, oaths Jer. 4. 2. And thou shall swear, the Lord lives, in truth, in
judgment, and in righteousness, and the nations shall bless themselves, in him
shall they glory.
, vows Eccl. 5. 2-4, 5, 6. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart
be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven, and thou upon
earth, therefore let thy words be few. -- V. 4.] When thou vowest a vow unto
God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou
have vowed. V. 5.] Better is it that thou should not vow, then that thou
should vow and not pay. V. 6.] Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to
sin; neither say thou before the Angel, that it was an error. Wherefore should
God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hand?
, lots Act. 1. 24, 26. And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord who know the
hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen -- V. 26.] And
they gave forth their lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered
with the eleven Apostles.
, his works Job 36. 24. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.
, and whatsoever else there is whereby he makes himself known, be holily and
reverently used in thought Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke
often one to another: and the Lord hearkened, and heard it; and a book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought
upon his Name.
, meditation Psalm. 8. throughout* O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy Name
throughout the earth! -- to the end.
, word Col. 3. 17. Whatsoever ye do in word or in deed, do all in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the Father by him. Psalm. 105. 2-5.
Sing unto him, sing Psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous works. -- V.
5.] Remember his mavelous works that he has done, his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth.
, writing Psalm. 102. 18. This shall be written for the generation to come; and
the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord.
, by an holy profession 1 Pet. 3. 15. But sanctify the Lord God in your
hearts; and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. Mic. 4. 5. For all
people will walk every one in the name of his God: and we will walk in the name
of our God for ever and ever.
, and answerable conversation Phil. 1. 27. Only let your conversation be such
as becomes the Gospel of Christ, etc.
, to the glory of God 1 Cor. 10. 35. Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or
whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.
, and the good of our selves Jer. 32. 39. And I will give them one heart, and
one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their
children after them.
and others 1 Pet. 2. 12. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles,
that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works
which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.
.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in the third Commandment?

A. The sins forbidden in the third Commandment, are, the not using of Gods
name as is required Mal. 2. 2. If you will not not hear, and if you will not lay
it to heart to give glory to my Name, says the Lord of hosts, I will even send
a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings, yea I have cursed them
already, because you do not lay it to heart.
, and the abuse of it, in an ignorant Act. 17. 23. For as I passed by, and
beheld your devotions, I found an Altar with this inscription, To the unknown
God; whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.
, vain Pro. 30. 9. Least I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or
least I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.
, irreverent, profane Mal. 1. 6. 7-12. A son honors his father, and a
servant his master. If then I be a father, where is mine honor? and if I be a
Master, were is my fear, says the Lord of hosts unto you, O Priests, that
despise my Name? and ye say, Wherein have we despised thy Name? V. 7.] Ye offer
polluted bread upon mine Altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? in
that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemptible. -- Mal. 3. 14. Ye have
said, It is vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinance and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts?
, superstitious 1 Samuel 4. 3, 4, 5. And when the people were come into the camp,
the Elders of Israel said, Wherefore has the Lord smitten us to day before the
Philistines? Let us fetch the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh
unto us, that when it comes among us, it may save us out of the hand of our
enemy. V. 4.] So the people sent to Shiloh, to bring from thence the Ark of the
covenant of the Lord of hosts, who dwells between the Cherubims; and the two
sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinias were there with the Ark of the Covenant of God.
V. 5.] And when it came into the Camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout,
so that the earth rang again. Jer. 7. 4* 9, 10* 14. 31. Trust ye not in lying
words, saying, the Temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of
the Lord, are these -- V. 9.] Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and
swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other Gods whom ye
know not. V. 10.] and come and stand before me in this house which is called by
my Name, and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations; -- V. 14.]
Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name wherein ye
trust, and unto the place which I gave unto you, and to your fathers, as I have
done to Shiloh -- V. 31.] And they have built the high places of Tophet, which
is in the valley of the son of Hinnon to burn their sons and daughters in the
fire, which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart. Col. 2. 20,
21, 22. Wherefore, If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world,
why as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances? V. 21.] (Touch
not, Taste not, Handle not, V. 22.] Which all are to perish with the using)
after the Commandments and doctrines of men.
, or wicked mentioning or otherwise using his titles, atttibutes 2 King. 18.
30.-35. Neither let Hezekiah, make you trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord will
surely deliver us, and this city shall not be delivered into the hand of the
King of Assyria -- V. 35.] Who are they, among all the gods of the Countries
that have delivered their Country out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver
Jerusalem out of my hand? Exodus 5. 2. And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I
should obey his voice, to let Israel go; I know not the Lord, neither will I
let Israel go. Ps. 139. 20. For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine
enemies take thy Name in vain.
, ordinances Psalm. 50. 16, 17. But unto the wicked he says, What have thou to
do to declare my statutes, or to take my Covenant into thy mouth? V. 17.]
Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee.
, or works Isai. 5. 12. And the harp. and the viol, the Timbrel, and Pipe, and
wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, nor the
operation of his hands.
; by blasphemy 2 King. 19. 22. Whom have thou reproached, and blasphemed, and
against whom have thou exalted thy power, and lift up thine eyes on high, even
against the Holy one of Israel. Lev. 24. 11. And the Israelitish woman's son
blasphemed the name of the Lord, and cursed, and they brought him unto Moses --
, perjury Zech. 5. 4. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of hosts, and it
shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that
swears falsely by my name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and
shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. Zech. 8. 17.
And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against your neighbor, and
love no false oath; for all these are things that I hate says the Lord.
; all sinful cursings 1 Samuel 17. 43. -- And the Philistine cursed David by his
gods. 2 Samuel 16. 5. -- And Shimei the Son of Gera came forth and cursed still
as he came.
, oaths Jer. 5. 7. How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken
me, and sworn by them that are no gods, when I had fed them to the full, they
then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots
houses. Jer. 23. 10. For the land is full of adulterers, for because of
swearing, the land mourns. --
, vows Deuteronomy. 23. 18. Thou shall not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of
a dog into the house of the Lord thy God, for any Vow: for even both these are
an abomination to the Lord thy God. Act. 23. 12. And when it was day, certain
of the Jews banded together and bound themselves under a curse, saying that
they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.
, and lots Esth. 3. 7. In the fifth month (that is the month Nisan) in the
twelfth year of King Ahasuerus they cast Pur, that is the lot, before Haman,
from day to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is the
month Adar. Esth. 9. 24. Because Haman had devised against the Jews to
destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is the lot, to consume and destroy them.
Psalm. 22. 18. They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.
, violating of our oaths, and vows, if lawful Psalm. 24. 4. He that has clean
hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn
deceitfully. Eze. 17. 16.-18, 19. As I live says the Lord God, surely in the
place where the King dwells, tha^ made him King, whose oath he despised, and
whose Covenant he breaks, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die
-- V. 18, 19.] Seeing he despises the oath, by breaking the Covenant, (when
lo he had given his hand) and has done all these things, he shall not escape.
V. 19.] Therefore thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely mine Oath that he
has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense
upon his own head.
, and fulfilling them, if of things unlawful Mark. 6. 26. And the King was
exceeding sorry yet for his oaths sake, and for their sakes who sat with him,
he would not reject her. 1 Samuel 25. 22-32, 33, 34. So, and more also do God
unto the enemies of David, if I leave of all that pertain to him, by the
morning light, any that pisseth against the wall -- V. 32.] And David said to
Abigail, blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who sent thee this day to me; V.
33.] And blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou who have kept me this day
from coming to shed blood, and from avenging my self with mine own hands. V.
34.] For in very deed, as the Lord God of Israel lives, which has kept me
back from hurting thee, except thou had hasted, and come to meet me, surely
there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light, any that pisseth
against the wall.
, murmuring and quarrelling at Romans 9. 14.-19, 20. What shall we say then? Is
there unrighteousness with God? God forbid -- V. 19. Thou will say then unto
me, Why does he yet find fault? For who has resisted his will? V. 20.] Nay,
but O man, who art thou that replyest against God? shall the thing formed say
to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?
, curious prying into Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our
God; but those things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our children
for ever, that we may do all the words of this law.
, and misapplying of Gods decrees Romans 3. 5-7 But if our unrighteousness
commend the righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who
takes vengeance? I speak as a man -- V. 7.] For if the truth of God has more
abounded through my lie, unto his glory, why yet am I also judged as a sinner?
Romans 6. 1. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound? God forbid.
, and providence Eccl. 8. 11. Because sentence against an evil work, is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men, is fully set in them
to do evil. Eccl. 9. 3. This is an evil among all things that are done under
the sun, that there is one event unto all; yea also the heart of the sons of
men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart, while they live; and after
that they go to the dead. Psalm. 39. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I
sin not with my tongue -- throughout.
, misinterpreting Mat. 5. from. V. 21. To the end. Ye have heard that it was
said by them of old time --
, misapplying Ezekiel. 13. 22. Because with lies ye have made the heart of the
righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the
wicked that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life.
, or any way perverting the word, or any part of it 2 Pet. 3. 16. As also in
all his Epistles, speaking in them of those things, in which are some things
hard to be understood, which they that are unlea^ned wrest, as they do also the
other Scriptures, to their own destruction. Mat. 22. 24. to the 31. Verse.
Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die having no children, his brother shall
marry his wife, and raise up seed to his brother; for there were with us seven
brethren and the first etc. -- V. 29.] Jesus answered and said unto them, ye
err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God; For in the Resurrection
--
, to profane jests Isai. 22. 13. And behold joy and gladness, slaying of oxen
and killing of sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine; let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall die. Jer. 23. 34.-36-38. As for the Prophet, and the
Priests, and the people that shall say, The burden of the Lord, I will even
punish that man and his house -- V. 36.] And the burden of the Lord shall ye
mention no more; for every man's word shall be his burden for ye have perverted
the words of the living God -- V. 38.] But since ye say, The burden of the Lord,
and I have sent unto you saying ye shall not say, The burden of the Lord,
therefore I will utterly forget and forsake you, etc. --
, curious or unprofitable questions, vain janglings, or the maintaining of
false Doctrines 1 Timothy 1. 4-6, 7. Neither give heed to fables, and endless
genealogies, which minister Questions, rather then good edifying, which is in
faith; so do -- V. 6.] From which (faith) some having swerved, have turned
aside unto vain jangling. V. 7.] Desiring to be teachers of the Law,
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. 1 Timothy 6, 4,
5.-20. He is proud knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings. V. 5.] Perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that
gain is godliness, from such withdraw thy self -- V. 20. O Timothy, keep that
which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane, and vain bablings, and
oppositions of science, falsely so called. 2 Timothy 2. 14. Of these things put
them in remembrance; charging them before the Lord that they strive not about
words to no no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers. Tit. 3. 9. Avoid
foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the
Law; for they are unprofitable, and vain.
, abusing it, the creatures, or any thing contained under the name of God, to
charms Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. There shall not be found among you any one
that makes his son, or daughter pass through the fire, or that uses
Divination, or an observer of times, or an Inchanter, or a Witch. V. 11.] Or a
Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a Necromancer.
V. 12.] For all these things are an abomination to the Lord: and because of
these abominations, the Lord thy God does drive them out from before thee. V.
13.] Thou shall be perfect before the Lord thy God, V. 14.] For these nations
which thou shall possess, bearkned unto observer of times, and unto diviners;
but as for thee, the Lord thy God has not suffered thee to do so. Act. 19. 13.
Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them
who had evil spirits the Name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by
Jesus, whom Paul Preached.
, or sinful lusts and practices 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. For the time will come when
they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap
to themselves Teachers, having itching ears: V. 4.] And they shall turn away
their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. Romans 13. 13, 14.
Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying. V. 14.] But put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lust
thereof. 1 King. 21. 9* 10. And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a
Fast, and set Naboth on high among the people. V. 10.] And set two men, sons of
Belial, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou did blaspheme God and the
King; and then carry him out and stone him that he may die. Jude v. 4* For
there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to
this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
, the maligning Act. 13. 45. But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were
filled with envy, and spoke against those things that were spoken by Paul,
contradicting and blaspheming. 1 John 3. 12. Not as Cain, who was of that
wicked one that slew his brother: and wherefore slew he him? because his own
works were evil, and his brothers righteous.
, scorning Psalm. 1. 1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of
the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the
scornful. 2 Pet. 3. 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last
days scoffers, walking after their own lusts.
, reviling 1 Pet. 4. 4. Wherein they think it strange that you run not with
them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you.
, or any ways opposing of Gods truth, grace, and ways Act. 13. 45, 46-50. But
when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with envy, and spoke against
those things that were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming. V. 46.]
Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the word of
God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and
judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles:
-- V. 50.] But the Jews stirred up the devout and honorable women, and the
chief men of the City, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnahas, and
expelled them out of their coasts. Act. 4. 18. And they called them, and
commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name of Jesus. Act. 19. 9.
But when diverse were hardened and believed not, but spoke evil of that way
before the multitude, he departed from them and separated the Disciples. 1
These. 2. 16. Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved,
to fill up their sins always: for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.
Heb. 10. 29. Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood
of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and done despite
unto the Spirit of Grace?
, making profession of Religion in hypocrisy, or for sinister ends 2 Timothy 3.
5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn
away. Mat. 23. 14. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shut
up the Kingdom of heaven against men; ye neither go in your selves, nor suffer
them that are entering to go in. Mat. 6. 1, 2, -- 5, -- 16. Take heed you do not
your alms before men, to be seen of them; otherwise you have your reward of
your Father which is in heaven. V. 2.] Therefore when thou do thine alms, do
not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do, in the synagogues, and
in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They
have their reward. -- V. 5.] And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the
hypocrites are, for they love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the
corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say, etc. -- V.
16.] Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad countenance;
for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear to men to fast. Verily I
say unto you, They have their r^ward.
; being ashamed of it Mar. 8. 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me,
and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the
son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his father with the holy
Angels.
, or a shame to it, by uncomfortable Psalm. 73. 14, 15. For all the day long
have I been plagued, and chastened every morning. V. 15.] If I say, I will
speak thus, behold I should offend against the generation of thy children.
, unwise 1 Cor. 6. 5, 6. I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a
wise man amongst you? no, not one that shall be able to judge between his
brethren? V. 6.] But brother goes to law with brother, and that before the
unbelievers. Ephesians. 5. 15, 16, 17. See then that you walk circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wise. V. 16.] Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. V.
17.] Wherefore be ye not unwise but understanding what the will of the Lord is.
, unfruitful Isa. 5. 4. What could have been done more to my Vineyard that I
have not done in it? wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes,
brought i^ for^h wild grapes? 2 Pet. 1. 8, 9. For if these things be in you,
and abound, they mak^ you that y^ shall neither he barren nor unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. V. 9.] But he that lacks these things is
blind, and cannot see afar off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his
old sins.
, and offensive walkings Romans 2. 23, 24. Thou that make thy boast of the law,
through breaking the law dishonourest thou God? V. 24.] For the Name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is written.
, or backsliding from it Gal. 3. 1, -- 3. O foolish Galatians, who has
betwitched that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ
has been evidently set forth, crucified among you? -- V. 3.] Are ye so
foolish? having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect in the flesh? Heb.
6. 6. If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance: seeing they
crucify to themselves afresh the Son of God, and put him to open shame.
.

Q. What Reasons are annexed to the third Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the third Commandment in these words [The Lord thy
God] and [For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain
Exodus 20. 7.
,] are, because he is the Lord and our God, and therefore his Name is not to be
profaned, or any way abused by us Lev. 19. 12. And ye shall not swear by my
Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God, I am the Lord.
, especially, because he is so far from acquitting and sparing the
transgressors of this Commandment, as that he will not suffer them to escape
his righteous judgment Ezekiel. 36. 21, 22, 23. But I had pity for mine holy
Name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the heathen whither they
went. V. 22.] Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord God,
I do not this for your sakes O house of Israel, but for mine holy Names sake,
which ye have profaned among the heathen whither ye went. V. 23.] I will
sanctify my great Name which was profaned among the heathen, which ye have
profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen shall know that I am the Lord,
says the Lord God when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes. Deuteronomy.
28. 58, 59. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this Law that are
written in this book, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name, THE
LORD THY GOD. V. 59.] Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the
plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance; and sore
sicknesses, and of long continuance. Zech. 5. 2, 3, 4. And he said unto me,
What see thou? and I answered, I see a flying roll, the length thereof twenty
cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits. V. 3.] Then said he unto me,
This is the curse that goes forth over the face of the whole earth: for every
one that steals shall be cut off, as on this side according to it; and every
one that swears shall be cut off, as on that side, according to it. V. 4.] I
will bring it forth, says the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into the house
of the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely by my Name.
, albeit many such escape the censures and punishments of men 1 Samuel 2.
12.-17.-22.-24. Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the
Lord. -- V. 17.] Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the
Lord; for men abhorred the offering of the Lord. -- V. 22.] Now Eli was very
old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel, and how they lay with the
women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. -- V.
24.] Nay, my sons, for it is no good report that I hear; ye make the Lords
people to transgress. Compared with 1 Samuel 3. 13. For I have told him that I
will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he knows; because his
sons made themselves vile. and he restrained them not.
.

Q. Which is the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment is, [Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: six
days shall thou labor and do all thy work: but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy
son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle,
nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made
heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day;
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. Exodus 20. 8, 9,
10, 11.
]

Q. What is required in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment requires of all men, the sanctifying, or keeping
holy to God, such set time as he has appointed in his Word; expressly, one
whole day in seven, which was the seventh from the beginning of the world to
the resurrection of Christ, and the first day of the week ever since, and so to
continue to the end of the world; which is the Christian Sabbath Deuteronomy. 5. 12,
13, 14. Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God has
commanded thee. V. 13.] Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work. V.
14.] But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shall
not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor
thy maid servant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that thy manservant and thy maidservant
may rest as well as thou. Genesis 2. 2, 3. And on the seventh day God ended his
work which he had made: and he rested on the seventh day from all his work
which he made. V. 3.] And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it;
because that in it he rested from all his work which God created and made. 1
Cor. 16. 1, 2. Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given
order to the Churches of Galatia, so do ye. V. 2.] The first day of the week
let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there
be no gatherings when I come. Act. 20. 7. And upon the first day of the week,
when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached to them, ready to
depart on the morrow, etc. Mat. 5. 17, 18. Think not that I come to destroy the
Law, or the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. V. 18.] For
verily, I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall
in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Isai. 56. 2.-4. -- 6, 7.
Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man that lays hold on it;
that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and keeps his hand from doing
evil. -- V. 4.] For thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths,
and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my Covenant. -- V. 6.]
Also the sons of the stranger that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him,
and to love the Name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keeps
the Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant V. 7.] Even them
will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer;
their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar;
for mine house shall be called, etc. --
, and in the New Testament called the Lords day Rev. 1. 10. I was in the spirit
on the Lords day, and heard behind me, etc.
.

Q. How is the Sabbath, or Lords day to be sanctified?

A. The Sabbath, or Lords day is to be sanctified, by an holy resting all the
day Exodus 20. 8.-10. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. -- V. 10.] But
the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it thou shall not do any
work, thou, nor thy son, etc.
, not only from such works as are at all times sinful, but even from such
worldly employments and recreations as are on other days lawful Exodus 16. 25,
26, 27, 28. And Moses said, Eat that to day, for to day is a Sabbath unto the
Lord; to day ye shall not find it in the field. V. 26.] Six days shall ye
gather it, but on the seventh day, which is the Sabbath, in it there shall be
none. V. 27.] And it came to pass that there went out some of the people on
the seventh day to gather, and they found none. V. 28.] And the Lord said unto
Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my Commandments, and my Laws? Neh. 13. 15,
16, 17, 18, 19.-21, 22. In those days saw I in Judah some treading
Wine-presses on the Sabbath day, and bringing in sheaves, and lading ^sses as
also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into
Jerusalem on the Sabbath day; and I testified against them in the day wherein
they sold victuals. V. 16.] There dwelt men of Tire also therein, which brought
fish, and all manner of wares, and sold on the Sabbath day unto the children of
Judah, and in Jerusalem. V. 17.] Then contended I with the Nobles of Judah, and
said unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath
day? V. 18.] Did not your fathers thus? and did no: God bring all this evil
upon us, and upon this City? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning
the Sabbath. V. 19.] And it came to pass that when the gates of Jerusalem
began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut,
and charged that they should not be opened till after the Sabbath; and some of
my servants I set at the gates, that there should be no burden brought in on
the Sabbath day. V. 20.] So the merchants and sellers of all sorts of ware were
lodged without Jerusalem once or twice. V. 21.] Then testified I against them,
saying, Why lodge ye about the wall? If ye do so again, I will lay hands on
you. From that time forth came they no more on the Sabbath. V. 22.] And I
commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves, and come and keep
the gates, to sanctify the Sabbath. Remember me, O my God, concerning this
also, etc. -- Jer. 17. 21, 22. Thus says the Lord, Take heed to your selves,
and bear no burden on the Sobbath day, neither bring it in by the gates of
Jerusalem* V. 22.] Neither carry forth a burden out of your house on the
Sabbath, nor do ye any work, but hallow ye the Sabbath day, as I commanded your
fathers.
, and making it our delight to spend the whole time (except so much of it as is
to be taken up in works of necessity and mercy Mat. 12. from ver. 1. to ver.
13. At that time Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the corn, and his
Disciples were an hungered, and began to plack the ears of corn and to eat. But
when the Pharisees saw it, etc. --
) in the public and private exercises of Gods worship Isa. 58. 13. If thou
turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day,
and call the Sabba^h a delight, the Holy of the Lord honorable, and shall
honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor
speaking thine own words. -- Luke 4. 16. And he came to Nazareth where he had
been brought up, and, as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day, and stood up for to read. Act. 20. 7. And upon the first day of
the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached to
them, ready to depart on the morrow. -- 1 Cor 16. 1, 2. Now concerning the
collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia,
even so do ye* V. 2.] Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay
by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I
come. Psalm. 92. Title. A Psalm, or song for the Sabbath day. Isa. 66. 23. And
it shall come to pass that from one new Moon to another, and from one Sabbath
to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord. Lev. 23.
3. Six days shall work be done; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, an
holy convocation, ye shall do no work therein: it is the Sabbath of the Lord in
all your dwellings.
; and to that end we are to prepare our hearts, and with such foresight,
diligence and moderation to dispose, and seasonably to dispatch our worldly
business, that we may be the more free and fit for the duties of that day Exodus
20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Luke 23. 54.-56. And that day
was the preparation, and the Sabbath drew on. -- V. 56* And they returned, and
prepared spices and ointments, and rested the Sabbath day, according to the
Commandment. Exodus 16. 22.-25, 26.-29. And it came to pass on the sixth day
they gathered twice as much bread, two Omers for one man; and all the Rulers of
the Congregation came and told Moses. -- V. 25.] And Moses said, Eat that to
day; for to day is a Sabbath unto the Lord, to day ye shall not find it in the
field. V. 26.] Six days shall ye gather it, but on the seventh day, which is
the Sabbath, there shall be none. -- V. 29.] See for that the Lord has given
you the Sabbath; therefore he gives you on the sixth day the bread of two
days: abide you every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the
seventh day. Neh. 13. 19. And it came to pass that when the gates of Jerusalem
began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut,
and charged that they should not be opened till after the Sabbath. And some of
my servants set I at the gates, that there should be no burden brought in on
the Sabbath day.
.

Q. Why is the charge of keeping the Sabbath, more specially directed to
governors of families, and other superiors?

A. The charge of keeping the Sabbath is more specially directed to governors
of families and other superiors, because they are bound not only to keep it
themselves, but to see that it be observed by all those that are under their
charge; and because they are prone often times to hinder them by employments of
their own Exodus 20. 10. -- In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, nor thy
son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy
cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy gates. Josh. 24. 15. -- but as for
me and my house, we will serve the Lord. Neh. 13. 15-17. In those days saw I
in Judah some treading the wine-presses, etc. -- See above in [b] Jer. 17. 20,
21, 22. And say unto them, Hear the word of the Lord, ye Kings of Judah, and
all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates.
V. 21.] Thus says the Lord, Take heed to your selves, and bear no burden on
the Sabbath day -- etc. See above in [b] Exodus 23. 12. Six days shall thou do
thy work, and on the seventh day thou shall rest; that thine ox and thine ass
may rest, and the son of thine handmaid and the stranger may be refreshed.
.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in the fourth Commandment?

A. The sins forbidden in the fourth Commandment, are, all omissions of the
duties required Ezekiel. 22. 26. Her Priests have violated my law, and profaned
mine holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane,
neither have they showed difference between the unclean and clean; they have
hid their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
, all careless negligent, and unprofitable performing of them, and being weary
of them Act. 20. 7.-9. And upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples
came together to break bread, Paul Preached unto them, ready to depart on the
morrow, and continued his speech until midnight. -- V. 9.] And there sat in a
window a certain young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep; and
as Paul was long preaching he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the
third loft, and was taken up dead. Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31, 32. Also thou son of man,
the children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls, and in
the doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother,
saying* Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that comes forth from the
Lord. V. 31.] And they come unto thee, as the people comes, and sit before
thee as my people, and hear my words, but they will not do them; for with their
mouth they show much love, but their heart runs after their covetousness. V.
32.] And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a
pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument; for they hear thy words,
but they do them not. Amos 8. 5. Saying, When will the new Moon be gone, that
we may sell corn, and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat; making the
Ephah small, and the shekel great, falsifying the balances by deceit. Mal. 1.
13. Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is it! and ye snuffed at it, says
the Lord of hosts; and ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the
sick; thus ye brought an offering: Should I accept this of your hand, says the
Lord?
, all profaning the day by idleness, and doing that which is in it self finful
Eze. 23. 38. Moreover, this they have done to me, They have defiled my
sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my Sabbaths.
, and by all needless works, words and thoughts about our worldly employments
and recreations Jer. 17. 24.-27. And it shall come to pass if ye diligently
hearken unto me, says the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of
this city on the Sabbath day, but Hallow the Sabbath day, to do no work therein
-- V. 27.] But if ye will not hearken unto me to hallow the Sabbath, and not to
bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day,
then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces
of Jerusalem, and shall not be quenched. Isai. 58. 13. If thou turn away thy
foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not
doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own
words.
.

Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment the more to enforce
it?

A. The Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment, the more to enforce it, are
taken from the equity of it, God allowing us six days of seven for our own
affairs, and reserving but one for himself, in these words, [Six days shall
thou labor, and do all thy work Exodus 20. 9.
, from Gods challenging a special propriety in that day, [The seventh day is
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God Exodus 20. 10.
] from the example of God, who in six days made heaven and earth, the sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; and from that blessing which
God put upon that day, not only in sanctifying it to be a day for his service,
but in ordaining it to be a means of blessing to us in our sanctifying it;
[wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hollowed it Exodus 20. 11.
.]

Q. Why is the word Remember set in the beginning of the fourth Commandment?

A. The word Remember is set in the beginning of the fourth Commandment Exo.
20. 8.
, partly because of the great benefit of remembering it; we being thereby helped
in our preparation to keep it Exo. 16. 23. And he said unto them, This is that
which the Lord has said, To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the
Lord: bake that which ye will bake, to day, and sees that ye will sees; and
that which remains over, lay up for you, to be kept till morning. Luke 23.
54.-56. And that day was the Preparation, and the sabbath drew on. -- V. 56.]
And they returned and prepared spices, and ointments, and rested the sabbath
day according to the commandment. Compared with Mar. 15. 42. And now when the
even was come, because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the
sabbath. Neh. 13. 19. And it came to pass that when the gates of Jerusalem
began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut,
and charged that they should not be opened till after the Sabbath --
, and in keeping it better to keep all the rest of the Commandments Psalm. 92.
Title. A Psalm or song for the sabbath day. Compared with verse. 13, 14. Those
that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our
God. V. 14.] They shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat
and flourishing. Ezekiel. 20. 12.-19, 20. Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths,
to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that
sanctify them. -- V. 19.] I am the Lord your God: walk in my statutes, and
keep my judgments and do them; V. 20.] And hallow my sabbaths, and they shall
be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord your God.
, and to continue a thankful remembrance of the two great benefits of Creation,
and Redemption, which contain a short abridgement of Religion Genesis 2. 2, 3. And
on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and he rested on the
seventh day, from all his work which he had made. V. 3.] And God blessed the
seventh day and sanctified it; because that in it he had rested from all his
work which God created and made Psalm. 118. 22.-24. The stone which the builders
refused is become the head stone of the corner. -- V. 24. This is the day which
the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. Compared with Act. 4*
10, 11. Be it known unto you all and unto all the people of Israel, that by the
Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the
dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole. V. 11.] This is
the stone which was set at naught by you builders, which is become the head of
the corner. Rev. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind
me a voice as of a Trumpet.
: and partly because we are very ready to forget it Ezekiel. 22. 26. Her Priests
have violated my Law, and profaned my holy things; they have put no difference
between the holy and profane, the unclean and the clean, and have hid their
eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
; for that there is less light of nature for it Neh. 9. 14. And made known
unto them the holy Sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, and statutes, and
laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant.
, and yet it restrains our natural liberty in things at other times lawful
Exodus 34. 21. Six days shall thou work, but on the seventh day thou shall
rest; in earing time, and in harvest thou shall rest.
; that it comes but once in seven days, and many worldly businesses come
between, and too often take off our minds from thinking of it, either to
prepare for it, or to sanctify it Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15. But the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord, etc. -- V. 15.] And remember that thou wast a servant in
the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a
mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded
thee to keep the Sabbath day. Amos 8. 5. Saying, When will the new moon be
gone, that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat,
making the Ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by
deceit?
; and that Satan with his instruments much labor to blot out the glory, and
even the memory of it, to bring in all irreligion and impiety Lam. 1. 7.
Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction, and of her miseries all her
pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when her people fell into the
hand of the enemy, and none did help her; the adversaries saw her, and did mock
at her sabbaths. Jer. 17. 21. 22, 23. Thus says the Lord, Take heed to your
selves, and bear no burden on the Sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of
Jerusalem. V. 22.] Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the
Sabbath day, nor do ye any work, but hallow ye the Sabbath day, as I commanded
your fathers. V. 23.] But they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made
their neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction. Neh. 13.
from v. 15. to v. 23. In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine presses
on the Sabbath day, -- etc.
.

Q. What is the sum of the six Commandments, which contain our duty to man?

A. The sum of the six Commandments, which contain our duty to man, is, to
love our neighbor as our selves Mat. 22. 39. And the second is like unto it,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
, and to do to others what we would have them do to us Mat. 7. 12. Therefore
all things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even to them:
for this is the Law and the Prophets.
.

Q. Which is the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment is, Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days
may be long upon the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee Exodus 20. 12.
.

Q. Who are meant by Father, and Mother, in the fifth Commandment?

A. By Father and Mother, in the fifth Commandment, are meant not only natural
parents Pro. 23. 22.-25 Hearken to thy father that begat thee, and despise not
thy mother when she is old. -- V. 25.). Thy father and mother shall be glad,
and she that bare thee shall rejoice. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. Children obey your parents
in the Lord: for this is right. V. 2.] Honor thy father and thy mother (which
is the first Commandment with promise.)
, but all superiors in age 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat
him as a father, and the younger men as brethren V. 2.] The elder women as
mothers, the younger as sisters, with all purity.
, and gifts Genesis 4. 20. 21, 22. And Adah bare Jubal he was the Father of such
as dwell in Tents. and of such as have cattle. V. 21.] And his brothers name
was Juba; he was the father of all such as handle the Harp, and Organ. V. 22.]
And Zillah she also bare Tubal Cain, an instructor of every Artificer in Brass
and Iron, etc -- Genesis 45. 8. So now it was not you that sent me hither but God:
he has made me a father to Pharaoh, and Lord of all his house, and Ruler
throughout all the land of Egypt.
, and especially such as by GODS ordinance are over us in place of authority,
whether in Family 2 Kin. 5. 13. And his servants came near, and spoke unto him,
My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, etc. --
, Church 2 Kin. 2. 12. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father,
the Chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof. 2 Kin. 13. 14. Now Elisha was
fallen sick of his sickness whereof he dyed; and Joash the King of Israel came
down to him, and wept over his face, and said, O my father, my father, the
Chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof! Gal. 4. 19. My little children, of
whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you.
, or Commonwealth Isai. 49. 23. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and
Queens thy nursing mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their face toward
the earth and lick up the dust of thy feet, and thou shall know, that I am the
Lord --
.

Q. Why are Superiors, styled, Father and Mother?

A. Superiors are styled Father and Mother, both to teach them* in all duties
toward their inferiors, like natural parents, to express love and tenderness
to them, according to their several relations Ephesians. 6. 4. And ye Fathers,
provoke not your children to wrath but bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. 2 Cor. 12. 14. For the children ought not to lay up for
the parents, but the parents for the children. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8. 11. But we are
gentle amongst you, even as a nurse cherishes her children. V. 8.] So being
affectionatly desirous of you, if we were willing to have imparted to you, not
the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls; because ye were dear unto us --
V. 11.] As ye know how we exhorted and comforted, and charged everyone of you,
as a father does his children. Numb. 11. 11, 12. And Moses said unto the Lord,
wherefore have thou afflicted thy servant, and wherefore have I not found
favor in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me? V.
12.] Have I conceived all this people? Have I begotten them? that thou
should say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father bears a
sucking child, unto the land which thou swearest unto their fathers.
, and to work inferiors to a greater willingness and cheerfulness in
performing their duties to their Superiors as to their parents. 1 Cor. 4. 14,
15, 16. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons, I warn
you. V. 15.] For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye
not many* Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel,
V. 16.] Wherefore I beseech you be ye followers of me. 1 Kin. 5. 13. And his
servants came near, and spoke unto him, and said, My father. etc. --
.

Q. What is the general scope of the fifth Commandment?

A. The general scope of the fifth Commandment, is, the performance of those
duties which we mutually owe in our several relations, as Inferiors,
Superiors, Equals Ephesians. 5. 21. Submitting your selves one to another in the
fear of God. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor all men; Love the brotherhood. Fear God.
Honor the King. Romans 12. 10. Be kindly affectioned one to another, with
brotherly love in honor preferring one another.
.

Q. What is the Honor that Inferiors owe to their Superiors?

A. The Honor which Inferiors owe to their Superiors, is, all due reverence,
in heart Mal. 1. 6. A son honors his father, and a servant his master; If
then I be a father, where is mine honor? if I be a master, where is my fear,
says the Lord of hosts unto you, O Princes, that despise my Name? and ye^ say,
Wherein have we despised thy Name? Lev. 19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his
mother, and his father, and keep my Sabbaths. I am the Lord your God.
, word Pro. 31. 28. Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband
also he praises her. 1 Pet. 3. 6. Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him
Lord; whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with
any amazement.
, and behavior Lev. 19, 32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and
honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God: I am the Lord. 1 King. 2. 19.
Bathshebah therefore went unto King Solomon to speak unto him for Adonijah; and
the King rose up to meet her, and bowed himself to her, and sat down on his
throne, and caused a seat to be set for the Kings mother, and she sat on his
right hand.
; prayer, and thanksgiving for them 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that
supplications, prayers, intercessions and thanksgivings be made for all men. V.
2.] For Kings, and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.
, imitation of their virtues and graces Heb. 13. 7. Remember them who have the
rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of God, whose faith follow*
considering the end of their conversation. Phil. 3. 17. Brethren, be followers
together of me; and mark them who walk so as ye have us for an example.
; willing obedience to their lawful commands, and counsels Ephesians* 6. 1, 2.-5, 6,
7. Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. V. 2.] Honor
thy father and mother (which is the first Commandment with promise) -- V. 5.]
Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ. V. 6.]
Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the
will of God from the heart. V. 7.] With good will, doing service as to the
Lord, and not to men. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves to every ord nance
of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme. V. 14.] Or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Romans 13. 1, 2. 3 4, 5. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God;
the powers that be, are ordained of God. V. 2.] Whosoever therefore resists
the power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation. V. 3.] For rulers are not a terror to good works, but
to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good*
and thou shall have praise of the same. V. 4.] For he is the minister of God to
thee for good* but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not
the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath
upon them that does evil. V. 5.] Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only
for wrath, but for conscience sake. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule
over you, and submit your selves. Prove. 4. 3, 4. For I was my fathers son
tender, and only beloved in the sight of my mother. V. 4.] He taught me also,
and said unto me, Let thy heart retain my words, keep my Commandments, and
live. Pro. 23. 22. Hearken to thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy
mother when she is old. Exodus 18. 19-24. Hearken now unto my voice, I will give
thee counsel, and God shall be with thee -- V. 24.] So Moses hearkened to the
voice of his father-in-law, and did all that he said.
, due submission to their corrections Heb. 12. 9. Furthermore, we have had
fathers of our flesh, who corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we
not much rather be in subjection unto the father of Spirits, and live? 1 Pet.
2. 18, 19, 20. Servants be subject to your masters, with all fear, not only to
the good, and gentle, but also to the froward. V. 19.] For this is
thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. V. 20.] For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it,
ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God.
, fidelity to Tit. 2. 9, 10. Exhort servants to be obedient to their own
masters, and to please them well in all things, not answering them again. V.
10.] Not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the
doctrine of God, our Savior in all things.
, defense, and maintenance of their persons and authority, according to their
several ranks, and the nature of their places Mat. 22. 21. They say unto him,
Caesar's. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which
are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are God's. Romans 13. 6, 7. For this
cause pay ye tribute also: For they are God's Ministers, attending continually
upon this very thing. V. 7.] Render therefore unto all their dues; tribute, to
whom tribute is due; custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear; honor, to
whom honor. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy
of double honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. V. 18.]
For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzle the Ox that treads out the
corn: and, The labourer is worthy of his reward. Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is
taught in the Word communicate unto him that teaches in all good things. Genesis
45. 11. And there will I nourish thee (for yet there are five years of famine)
least thou and thy household, and all that thou have* come to poverty. Genesis 47.
12. And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his fathers
household with bread, according to their families.
; bearing with their infirmities, and covering them in love 1 Pet. 2. 18.
Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward. Prove. 23. 22. Hearken unto thy father which
begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old. Genesis 9. 23. And Sem and
Japhet took a garment and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went
backwards, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were
backward, and they saw not their fathers nakedness --
, that so they may be an honor to them and to their government Psalm. 127. 3,
4, 5. Lo, children are an inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is
his reward. V. 4.] As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man, so are children
of the youth. V. 5.] Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them; they
shall not be ashamed, but shall speak with the enemies in the gate. Prove. 31.
23. Her husband is known in the gates, when he sits among the Elders of the
land.
. (t) 1 Samuel 26. 15, 16. And David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant man?
and who is like to thee in Israel? Wherefore then have thou not kept thy Lord,
the King? for there came one of the people in, to destroy the King, thy Lord.
V. 16.] This thing is not good which thou have done. As the Lord lives, ye are
worthy to die, because ye have not kept your Master, the Lords anointed. -- 2 Samuel 18. 3. But the people answered, Thou shall not go forth: for if we flee
away, they will not care for us, neither if half of us die, will they care for
us; but now thou art worth ten thousand of us, therefore now it is better that
thou succor us out of the City. Esth. 6. 2. And it was found written that
Mordecat had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the Kings Chamberlains, the
keepers of the door, who sought to lay hands on the King Ahasuerus.


Q. What are the sins of Inferiors against their Superiors?

A. The sins of Inferiors against their Superiors, are, all neglect of the
duties required toward them Mat. 15. 4, 5, 6. For God commanded, saying, Honor
thy father and thy mother, and he that curses father or mother, let him dye
the death. V. 5.] But ye say, that whosoever shall say to his father or mother,
It is a gift by whatsoever thou might be profited by me. V. 6.] And honor
not his father and mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye made the Commandment
of God of none effect, by your tradition.
; envying at Number. 11. 28, 29. And Josuah the son of Nun, the servant of Moses,
one of his young men answered, and said my lord Moses, forbid them. V. 29.] And
Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? Would God that all the Lords
people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them.
, contempt of 1 Samuel 8. 7. And the Lord said unto Samuel, hearken unto the
voice of the people in all what they say unto thee, for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. Isa. 3. 5.
And the people shall be oppressed every one by another, and every one by his
neighbor, and the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and
the base against the honorable.
, and Rebellion 2 Samuel 15. from v. 1. to v. 12. And it came to pass after that
Absalom prepared him chariots and horses -- etc. -- and so on.
, against their persons Exodus 21. 15. And he that smites his father, or mother
shall surely be put to death.
, and places 1 Samuel 10. 27. But the children of Belial said, How shall this man
save us? and they despised him, and brought him no presents: but he held his
peace.
, in their lawful counsels 1 Samuel 2. 25 -- Notwithstanding they (viz. the sons
of Eli) hearkened not unto the voice of their father; because the Lord would
slay them.
, commands, and corrections Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. If a man have a stubborn
and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice
of his mother, and that when they have chastened him, will not bearken unto
them. V. 19.] Then shall his father and mother lay hold on him, and bring him
out unto the Elders of his City, and unto the gate of his place. V. 20.] And
they shall say to the Elders of his City, This our son is stubborn and
rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a drunkard. V.
21.] And all the men of his City shall stone him with stones, that he dye: So
shall thou put evil away etc.
, cursing, mocking Prove. 30. 11-17. There is a generation that curses their
father, and does not bless their mother. -- V. 17.] The eye that mocketh at his
father, and despises to obey his mother; the Ravens of the valley shall pick
it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it.
, and all such refractory and scandalons carriage, as proves a shame and
dishonor to them and their government Prove. 19. 26. He that wastes his
father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son that causes shame, and briageth
reproach.
.

Q. What is required of Superiors toward their Inferiors?

A. It is required of Superiors, according to that power they receive from
God, and that relation wherein they stand, to love Col. 3. 19. Husbands, love
your wives, and be not bitter against them. Tit. 2. 4. That they may teach the
young women to be sober, to love their husbands, to love their children.
, pray for 1 Samuel 12. 23. Moreover, as for me, God forbid that I should sin
against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and
the right way. Job 1. 5. And it was so, when the days of their feasting were
gone about, that Job sant, and sanctified them, and rose up early in the
morning, and offered burnt offerings, according to the number of them all: for
Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts:
Thus did Job continually.
, and bless their inferiors 1 King 8. 55, 56. And he stood and blessed all
the Congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying, V. 56.] Blessed be the
Lord God, that has given rest to his people Israel, according to all that he
promised; there has not failed, etc. -- Heb. 7. 7. And without all
contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater. Genesis 49. 28. All these are
the twelve Tribes of Israel, and this is it that their father spoke unto them,
and blessed them, every one according to his blessing, he blessed them.
; to instruct Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day
shall be in thy heart V. 7.] And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.
, counsel, and admonish them Ephesians. 6. 4. And ye fathers, provoke not your
children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
; countenancing 1 Pet 3. 7. Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to
knowledge, giving honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being
heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.
, commending 1 Pet. 2. 14. Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by
him, for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well.
Romans 13. 3. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good and thou shall have
praise of the same.
, and rewarding such as do well Esth. 6. 3. And the King said, What honor and
dignity has been done to Mordecai for this? Then says the Kings servants,
There is nothing done for him.
; discountenancing Romans 13. 3, 4. For Rulers are not a terror to good works,
but to the evil. -- V. 4*] For he is the Minister of God to thee for good: but
if thou do evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the
minister of God, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil.
, reproving, and chastising such as do ill Prove. 29. 15. The Rod and Reproof
give wisdom, but a child left to himself brings his mother to shame. 1 Pet.
2. 14. See above in [P]
; protecting Job 29. 12, 13, 14. 15, 16, 17. Because I delivered the poor that
cried, the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. V. 13.] The blessing
of him that was ready to perish came upon me; and I caused the widows heart to
sing for joy. V. 14.] I put on righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgment
was a robe and a diadem. V. 15.] I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the
lame. V. 16.] I was as a father to the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I
searched out. V. 17.] And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the
spoil out of his mouth. Isa. 1. 10.-17. Hear the voice of the Lord, ye Rulers
of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah. -- V. 17.]
Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
plead for the widow.
, and providing for them all things necessary for soul Ephesians. 6. 4. And ye
fathers, provoke not your children, but bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord.
and body 1 Timothy 5. 8. But if any man provide not for his own, and especially
for those of his own house, he has denied the says, and is worse then an
Infidel.
; and by grave, wise, holy, and exemplary carriage, to procure glory to God 1 Timothy 4. 12. Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of all the
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in Spirit, in faith, in
purity. Tit. 2. 3, 4, 5. The aged women likewise, that they be in behavior as
becomes holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good
things. V. 4.] That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their
husbands, to love their children. V. 5.] To be discreet, chaste, keepers at
home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not
blesphemed.
, honor to themselves 1 King. 3. 28. And all Israel heard of the judgment
which the King had judged; and they feared the King, for they saw that the
wisdom of God was in him, to do judgment.
, and so to preserve that authority which God has put upon them Tit. 2. 15.
These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all ^uthority: let no man
despise thee.
.

Q. What are the sins of Superiors?

A. The sins of Superiors are, beside the neglect of the duties required of
them Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3. 4. Son of man prophecy against the shepherds of Israel;
prophecy, and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God unto the shepherds, woe be
to the shepherds of Israel, that do feed themselves; should not the shepherds
feed the flocks? V. 3.] Ye eat the fat and cloth you with the wool, ye kill
them that are good; but ye feed not the flock. V. 4.] The diseased have ye not
strengthened, nor have ye healed that which was sick, nor bound up that which
was broken, nor brought again that which was driven away, nor sought that which
was lost, but with force and cruelty have ye ruled them.
, an inordinate seeking of themselves Phil. 2. 21. For all seek their own, not
the things which are Jesus Christ's.
, their own glory Joh. 5. 44. How can ye believe, who receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only? Joh. 7. 18. He that
speaks of himself seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his glory who
sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.
, ease, profit, or pleasure Isai. 56. 10, 11. His watchmen are blind, they are
all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down,
loving to slumber. V. 11.] Yea, they are greedy dogs, which can never have
enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their
own, every one for his gain from his quarter. Deuteronomy. 17. 17. Neither shall he
multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away; neither shall he
greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.
; commanding things unlawful Dan. 3, 4 5, 6. Then an Herald cried aloud, To you
it is commanded, O people, nations and languages, V. 5.] That at what time ye
hear the sound of the Corner, Flute, Harp, Sackbut, Psaltery, Dulcimer, and all
kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the golden Image, which
Nebuchadnezzar the King has set up. V. 6.] And whosoever falloth not down, shall
be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. Act. 4. 17, 18. But that it
spread no further among the people, let us straightly threaten them that they
speak henceforth to no man in this name. V. 18.] And they called them, and
commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus.
, or not in the power of Inferiors to perform Exodus 5. from ver. 10. to the
18. And the Taskmasters of the people went out and their officers, and they
spoke to the people saying, Thus says Pharaoh, I will not give you straw etc
-- Mat. 23. 2.-4. Saying, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Seat -- V. 4.]
For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's
shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.
; counselling Mat. 14. 8. And she being before instructed of her mother, said,
Give me here John Baptists head in a charger. Compared with Mark. 6. 24. And
she went forth, and said unto her mother, what shall I ask? and she said, The
head of John Baptist.
, encouraging 2 Samuel 13. 28. Now Absalom had commanded his servants saying,
Mark ye now when Amnons heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you,
smite Amnon, then kill him; fear not, have not I commanded you? be courageous
and valiant.
, or favoring them in that which is evil 1 Samuel 3. 13. For I have told him
that I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he knows;
because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.
, dissuading, discouraging, or discountenancing them in that which is good Joh.
7. 46, 47, 48, 49. The officers answered, Never man spoke like this man. V.
47.] Then answered them the Pharisees, are ye also deceived? V. 48.] Have any
of the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him? V. 49.] But this people who knows
not the law are cursed. Col. 3. 21. Fathers provoke not your children to wrath
lest they be discouraged. Exodus 5. 17. But he said, ye are idle; ye are idle,
therefore ye say, Let us go, and do sacrifice to the Lord.
; correcting them unduly 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. 20. Servants be subject to your
masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward. V. 19.] For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief, suffering wrongfully. V. 20.] For what glory is it, if when ye be
buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. Heb. 12.
10. For they verily for a few days, chastened us after their own pleasures;
but he for our profit, that we might be partakers etc. -- Deuteronomy. 25. 3. Forty
stripes he may give him, and not exceed, least if he should exceed, and beat
him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee.
, careless exposing, or leaving them to wrong, temptation and danger Genesis 38.
11.-26. Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy
fathers house, till Shelah my son be grown up: for he said, least peradventure
he die also, as his brethren did -- V. 26.] And Judah acknowledged them, and
said, She has been more righteous then I, because I gave her not to Shelah my
son: and he knew her again no more. Act. 18. 17. Then all the Greeks took
Sosthenes the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, and beat him before the judgment
seat, and Gallio cared for none of these things.
; provoking them to wrath Ephesians. 6. 4. And ye fathers, provoke not your children
to wrath, but bring them up in, etc.
; or any way dishonouring themselves, or lessening their authority, by an
unjust, indiscreet, rigorous or remiss behavior Genesis 9. 21. And he drank of
the wine, and was drunken, and he was uncovered within his tent. 1 Kin. 12. 13,
14, 15, 16. And the King (Rehoboam) answered the people roughly, and forsook
the old men's counsel which they gave him, V. 14.] And spoke to them after the
council of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy; and I will
add to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips; but I will chastise you
with scorpions. V. 15.] Wherefore the King hearkened not to the people; for the
cause was from the Lord -- V. 16.] So when all Israel saw that the King
hearkened not to them, the people answered the King, saying, what portion have
we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse; to your tents, O
Israel: now see to thine own house, David, so Israel departed to their tents. 1
Kin. 1. 6. And his father had not despleased him (viz. Adonijah) at any time,
in saying, why have thou done so -- 1 Samuel 2. 29, 30, 31. Wherefore kick ye at
my sacrifices, and at my offering, which I have commanded in mine habitation,
and honor thy sons above me, to make your selves fat, with the chiefest of
all the offerings of Israel my people? V. 30.] Wherefore the Lord God of Israel
says, I said, indeed, that the house, and the house of thy father, should walk
before me for ever; but now the Lord said, Be it far from me; for them that
honor me I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.
V. 31.] Behold the days come; that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of
thy fathers house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house.
.

Q. What are the duties of equals?

A. The duties of equals are, to regard the dignity and worth of each other 1
Pet. 2. 17. Honor all men, love the brotherhood, fear God, honor the King.
, in giving honor to go one before another Romans 12. 10. Be kindly affectioned
one toward another with brotherly love, in honor preferring one another.
, and to rejoice in each others gifts and advancement s, as in their own Romans
12. 15, 16. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. V.
16.] Be of the same mind, one toward another; mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate, etc. Phil. 2. 3, 4. Let nothing be done
through strife or vain glory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other
better then themselves. V. 4.] Look not every man on his own things, but every
man also on the things of others.
.

Q. What are the sins of equals?

A. The sins of equals are, beside the neglect of the duties required Romans 13.
8. O we no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loves another
has fulfilled the Law.
, the undervaluing of the worth 2 Timothy 3. 3. Without natural affection, etc.
, envying the gifts Act. 7. 9. And the Patriarchs moved with envy, sold Joseph
into Egypt; but God was with him. Gal. 5. 26. Let us not be desirous of vain
glory, provoking one another, envying one another.
, grieving at the advancement or prosperity, one of another Number. 12. 2. And
they said, Has the Lord indeed only spoken by Moses? has he not also spoken
by us? and the Lord heard it. Esth. 6. 12, 13. And Mordecai came again to the
Kings gate; but Haman hasted to his house mourning, and having his head
covered. V. 13.] And Haman told Zeresh his wife, and all his friends every
thing that had be fallen him. Then said his wise men, and Zeresh his wife unto
him, if Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to
fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him.
, and usurping pre-eminence one over another 3 John ver. 9. I wrote unto the
Church; but Diotrephes who loves to have the pre-eminence amongst them,
receives us not. Luke 22. 24. And there was also a strife among them, which of
them should be the greatest.
.

Q. What is the Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment, the more to enforce it?

A. The Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment, in these words, [That thy
days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God gives thee Exodus 20. 12.
] is an express promise of long life and prosperity, as far as it shall serve
for Gods glory, and their own good, to all such as keep this Commandment Deuteronomy.
5. 16. Honor thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God has commanded
thee, that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee, in
the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. 1 King. 8. 25. Therefore now, Lord
God of Israel keep with thy servant David, my father, that which thou
promisedst him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in thy sight to sit on
the throne of Israel, so that thy children take heed to their way, that they
walk before me as thou have walked before me. Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. Honor thy father
and thy mother (which is the first Commandment with promise.) V. 3.] That it
may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth.
.

Q. Which is the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment is, [Thou shall not kill Exodus 20. 43.
.]

Q. What are the duties required in the sixth Commandment?

A. The duties required in the sixth Commandment, are, all careful studies, and
lawful endeavors to preserve the life of our selves Ephesians. 5. 28, 29. So their
own wives as their own bodies. He that loves his wife, loves himself. V. 29.]
For no man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as
the Lord the Church?
and others 1 King. 18. 4. For it was so, when Jezebel cut off the Prophets of
the Lord, that Obadiah took an hundred Prophets, and bid them by fifty in a
cave. and fed them with bread and water.
, by resisting all thoughts and purposes Jer. 26. 15, 16. But know ye for
certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon
your selves, and upon this City, and upon the inhabitants thereof; for of a
truth the Lord has sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears. V.
16.] Then said the Princes, and all the people to the Prophets, This man is not
worthy to die; for he has spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord our God. Act.
23. 12-16, 17-21-27. And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together,
and bound themselves under a curse, saying, That they would neither eat nor
drink till they had killed Paul. -- V. 16.] And when Paul's sisters sen heard of
their lying in wait, he went and entered into the Castle and told Paul. V. 17.]
Then Paul called one of the Centurions unto him, and said, Bring this young man
unto the chief Captain, for he has a certain thing to tell him. -- V. 21.]
There lie in wait for him more then sorty men, which have bound themselves with
an oath, that -- and now are they ready, looking for a promise from thee. -- V.
27. This man was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them: then
came I with an army and rescued him, having understood that he was a Roman.
, subduing all passions Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. Be ye angry, and sin not; let not the
sun go down upon your wrath; V. 27.] Neither give place to the devil
, and avoiding all occasions 2 Samuel 2. 22. And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn
thee aside from following me; wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how
then should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother? Deuteronomy. 22. 8. When thou
buildest a new house, then thou shall make a battlement for thy roof, that thou
bring not blood upon thy house, if any man fall from thence.
; temptations Mat. 4. 6, 7. -- And says unto him, If thou be the Son of God,
cast thy self down: for it is written, He shall give his angels charge over
thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, least at any time thou dash
thy foot against a stone. V. 7.] Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Pro. 1. 10, 11-15, 16. My son, if sinners
entice thee consent thou not V. 11.] If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait
for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause. -- V. 15.] My
son walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path. V.
16.] For their feet run to evil, and make have to shed blood.
, and practices, which tend to the unjust taking away the life of any 1 Samuel
24. 12. The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee; but
mine hand shall not be upon thee. 1 Samuel 26. 9, 10, 11. And David said to
Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
anointed, and be guiltless? V. 10.] David said furthermore, as the Lord lives,
the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend
into battle and perish. V. 11.] The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth
mine hand against the Lords anointed. -- Genesis 37. 21. 22. And Reuben heard it,
and he delivered him out of their hands, and said, Let us not kill him. V. 22.]
And Reuben said to them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in
the wilderness, and lay no hands upon him; that he might rid him out of their
hands, to deliver* him to his father again.
; by just defense thereof against violence Psalm. 82. 4. Deliver the poor and
needy, nid them out of the hand of the wicked. Pro. 24. 11, 12. If thou forbear
to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be
slain. V. 12.] If thou say, Behold we knew it not, does not he that pondereth
the heart consider it? and he that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? and
shall not he render to every man according to his works? 1 Samuel 14. 45. And the
people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who has wrought this great
salvation in Israel? God forbid. As the Lord lives, there shall not one hair
of his head fall to the ground: for he has wrought with God this day. So the
people rescued Jonathan, that he died not.
, patient bearing of the hand of God Jam. 5. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Be patient
therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord; behold the husbandman waits
for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience, etc. V. 8.] Be ye
also patient, stablish your hearts* for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. V.
9.] Grudg not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold the
Judge stands before the door. V. 10. Take my brethren, the Prophets who have
spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of
patience. V. 11.] Behold we count them happy that endure. Ye have heard of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, etc. -- H^b. 12. 9.
Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh who corrected us, and we gave
them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection to the father of
Spirits, and live?
, quietness of mind 1 These. 4. 11. -- And that ye study to be quiet, and to do
your own business, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 4. Whose adorning let it not be that outward
adorning, etc. -- V. 4.] But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that
which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which
is in the sight of God of great price. Psalm. 37. 8, 9, 10, 11. Cease from
anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thy self in any wise to do evil. V. 9.] For
evil doers shall be cut off: but they that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the
earth. V. 10.] For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou
shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. V. 11.] But the meek
shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in abundance of peace.
, cheerfulness of spirit Pro. 17. 22. A merry heart does good like a medicine;
but a broken spirit dries the bones.
, a sober use of meat Prove. 25. 16-27. Have thou found honey? cat so much as is
sufficient for thee; least thou be filled therewith, and vomit it. -- V. 27.]
It is not good to eat much honey, etc. --
, drink 1 Timothy 5. 23. Drink no longer water, but drink a little wine for thy
stomach's sake, and thine often infirmities.
, physic Isa. 38. 21. For Isaiah had said, Let him take a lump of figs, and
lay it for a plaster upon the boil; and he shall recover.
, sleep Psalm. 127. 2. It is in vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late,
to eat the bread of sorrows; for so he gives his beloved sleep
, labor Eccles. 5. 12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat
little or much; but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. 2
These. 3. 10-12. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, That if
any would not work, neither should he eat. -- V. 12. Now them that are such we
command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and
eat their own bread. Prove 16. 26. He that labors, labors for himself; for
his mouth craveth it of him.
, and recreations Eccl. 3. 4.-11. A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time
to mourn, and a time to dance. -- V. 11.] He has made every thing beautiful in
his time: also he has set the world in their heart, etc. --
; by charitable thoughts 1 Samuel 19. 4. 5. And Jonathan spoke good of David unto
Saul his father, and said unto him, Let not the King sin against his servant,
against David; because he has not sinned against thee; and because his works
have been to thee-ward very good. V. 5.] For he did put his life in his hand
and slew the Philistine, and the Lord wrought a great salvation for all Israel
thou saw it, and did rejoice; wherefore then will thou sin against
innocent blood, to slay David without a cause? 1 Samuel 22. 13, 14. And Saul said
unto him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that
thou have given him bread, and a sword, etc. -- V. 14.] And Ahimilech answered
the King, and said* And who is so faithful among all thy servants as David,
which is the Kings son in-law, and goes at thy bidding, and is honorable in
thine house?
, love Rom 13. 10. Love works no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is the
fulfilling of the Law.
, compassion Luke 10. 33, 34, 35. But a certain Samaritan as he journied, came
where he was, and when he saw him, he had compassion on him; V. 34.] And went
to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his
own beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took care of him, etc. --
, meekness, gentleness, kindness Col. 3. 12, 13. Put on therefore, as the
Elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long-suffering. V. 13*] Forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any man has a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so
also do ye.
, peaceable Jam. 3. 17. But the wisdom which is from above is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
etc. --
, mild, and courteous speeches and behavior 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9 10, 11. Finally, be
all of one mind, having compassion one of another: love as brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous. V. 9.] Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are therefore called that
ye should inherit a blessing. V. 10.] For he that will love life, and see good
days; let him refrain his longue from evil, and his lips that they speak no
guile. V. 11.] Let him eschew evil, and do good, let him seek peace and ensue
it. Prove. 15. 1. A sost answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up
anger. Judge. 8. 1, 2, 3. And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why have thou
served us thus? Thou calledst us not when thou wentest to fight with the
Midianites; and they did chide with with him sharply. V. 2.] And he said unto
them, What have I done now in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the
grapes of Ephraim better then the vintage of Abiezer? V. 3.] God has delivered
into your hands the Princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; and what was I able to do
in comparison of you? Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said
that.
, forbearance, readiness to be reconciled, patient bearing and forgiving of
injuries, and requiting good for evil Mat. 5. 24. Leave there thy gift before
the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother. Ephesians. 4. 2.-32.
With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another
in love -- V. 32.] And be kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Romans 12. 17.-20, 21.
Recompense to no man evil for evil, etc. -- V. 20.] Therefore if thine enemy
hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing, thou shall
heap coals of fire on his head. V. 21.] Be not overcome with evil, but overcome
evil with good.
, comforting and succouring the distressed, and protecting and defending the
innocent 1 These. 5. 14. Now we exhort you brethren, warn them that are unruly,
comfort the seeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men. Job
31. 19, 20. If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering; -- V. 20.] If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not
warmed with the fleece of my sheep. -- Mat. 25. 35, 36. For I was an hungered,
and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and
ye took me in. V. 36.] Naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me;
I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Prove. 31. 8, 9. Open thy mouth for the
dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction V. 9.] Open thy
mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor and needy.
.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sins forbidden in the sixth Commandment, are, all taking away the life
of our selves Act. 16. 28. But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy
self no harm; for we are all here.
, or of others Genesis 9. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed: for in the image of God made he man.
, except in case of public Justice Number. 35. 31.-33. Moreover, ye shall take no
satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death: but be shall
surely be put to death. -- V. 33.] So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye
are: for blood, it defiles the land; and the land cannot be cleansed from the
blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.
, lawful war Jer. 48. 10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully; and cursed be he that keeps his sword from blood. Deuteronomy. 20.
Chap. throughout.
, or necessary defense Exodus 22. 2, 3. If a thief be found breaking up, and be
smitten that he die, there shall be no blood shed for him. V. 3.] If the sun be
risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him; for he should make full
restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.
; the neglecting or withdrawing the lawful and necessary means of preservation
of life Mat. 25. 42, 43. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; thirsty;
and ye gave me no drink. V. 43.] I was a stranger, and ye took me not in;
naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Jam.
2. 15, 16. If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food; V.
16.] And one of you say to them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed, and filled;
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body;
what does it profit? Eccles. 6. 1, 2. There is an evil under the Sun, and it is
common amongst men. V. 2.] A man to whom God has given riches, wealth and
honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires; yet God
gives him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats it. This is vanity,
and an evil disease.
, sinful anger Mat. 5. 22. But I say unto you that whosoever is angry with his
brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever,
etc.
, hatred 1 John 3. 15. Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer; and ye know
that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall
not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor,
and not suffer sin upon him.
, envy Prove. 14. 30. A sound heart is the life of the flesh, but envy the
rottonness of the bones.
, desire of revenge Romans 12. 19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves; but
rather give place unto wrath, for it is written, vengeance is mine: I will
repay, says the Lord.
, all excessive passions Ephesians. 4. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamor, and evil-speaking be put away from you, with all malice.
, distracting cares Mat. 6. 31-34. Therefore take no thought, saying, what
shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? V.
34.] Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of it self, sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.
, immoderate use of meat, drink Luke 21. 34. And take heed to your selves,
least at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeting, and drunkenness,
and the cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares. Romans 13.
13. Let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.
, labor Eccl. 12. 12. Furthermore, by these, my son be admonished of making
many books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh. Eccl.
2. 22, 23. For what has a man of all his labor, and of the vexation of his
heart, wherein he has labored under the Sun? V. 23.] For all his days are
sorrow, and his travel, grief; yea, his heart takes not rest in the night:
This is also vanity.
, and recreations Isa. 5. 12. And the harp, and the viol, and the tabret, and
pipe, and wine are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord,
nor consider the operation of his hands.
; provoking words Prove. 15. 1. A soft answer turns away wrath; but grievous
words stir up anger. Prove. 12. 18. There is that speaks like the piercings of
a sword; but the tongue of the wise is health.
, oppression Ezekiel. 18. 18. As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed and
spoiled his brother by violence; and did that which was not good among his
people, lo even he shall dye in his iniquity. Exodus 1. 14. And they made their
lives bitter with bondage, in mortar and brick, and all manner of service, in
the field: all their service wherein they made them serve was with rigor.
, quarrelling Gal. 5. 15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye
be not consumed one of another. Prove. 23. 29. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who
has contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? etc.
, striking, wounding Number. 35. 16, 17, 18-21. And if he smite him with an
instrument of iron (so that he dye) he is a murderer, the murderer shall surely
be put to death. V. 17.] And if he smite him with throwing a stone (so that he
dye) he is a murderer the murderer shall surely be put to death. V. 18.] Or if
he smite him with a hand-weapon of wood (wherewith he may dye) and he dye, he
is a murderer, the murderer shall surely be put to death -- V. 21.] Or in
enmity smite him with his hand that he dye, he that smote him shall surely be
put to death, for he is a murderer. --
, and whatsoever else tends to the destruction of the life of any Exodus 21.
from ver. 18. to the end, containing laws for smiters, for an hurt by chance,
for an ox that goreth, and for him that is an occasion of harm.
.

Q. Which is the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment is, [Thou shall not commit adultery Exodus 20. 14.
.]

Q. What are the duties required in the seventh Commandment?

A. The duties required in the seventh Commandment, are, Chastity in body,
mind, affections 1 These. 4. 4. That every one of you should know how to possess
his vessel in sanctification and honor. Job 31. 1. I have made a Covenant with
mine eyes; why then should I th^nk upon a maid? 1 Cor. 7. 34. There is a
difference also between a wife and a virgin; the unmarried woman cares for the
things of the Lord, that she may be holy, both in body and spirit: but she that
is married cares for the things of the world, how she may please her husband.
, words Col. 4. 6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with fall;
that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man.
, and behavior 1 Pet. 3. 2 -- While they behold your chaste conversation
coupled with fear.
; and the preservation of it in our selves and others 1 Cor. 7. 2-35, 36.
Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband. -- V. 35.] And this I speak for your profit, not that I
may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend
upon the Lord without destraction. V. 36.] But if any man think that he
behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin, if she pass the flower of her age,
and need do require, let him do what he will; he sins not, let them marry.
; watchfulness over the eyes, and all the senses Job 31. 1. I have made a
covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think upon a maid?
; temperance Act. 24. 24, 25. And after certain days, when Felix came with his
wife Drusilla, which was a Jew, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the
faith of Christ. V. 25.] And as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and
Judgment to come, Felix trembled, etc. --
, keeping of chaste company, Prove. 2. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. To deliver thee from
the strange woman, even from the stranger which flattereth with her words. V.
17.] Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her
God. V. 18.] For her house inclines to death, and her paths unto the dead. V.
19.] None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of
life. V. 20.] That thou may walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths
of the righteous.
, modesty in apparel 1 Timothy 2. 9. In like manner also that the women adorn
themselves in modest apparel with shamefastness and sobriety, not with
broidered hair, or gold, or pearl, or costly array.
, marriage by those that have not the gift of continency 1 Cor. 7. 2-9.
Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband -- V. 9.] But if they cannot contain, let them marry, for
it is better to marry then to burn.
; conjugall love Prove. 5. 19, 20. Let her be as the loving Hind and pleasant
Roe; let her breast satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished always
with her love. V. 20.] And why will thou, my son, be ravished with a strange
woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger.
, and cohabitation 1 Pet. 3. 7. Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them
according to knowledge, giving honor to the wife as unto the weaker vessel,
and as being heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not
hindered.
, diligent labor in our callings Prove. 31. 11-27, 28. The heart of her husband
does safely trust in her; so that he shall have no need of spoil -- V. 27. She
looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of
idleness. V. 28.] Her children arise up and call her blessed: her husband he
also praises her.
, shunning all occasions of uncleanness, and resisting temptations thereunto
Prove. 5. 8. Remove thy way from her, and come not nigh the door of her house.
Genesis 39. 8, 9, 10. But Joseph refused, and said unto his masters wife, Behold
my master knows not what is with me in the house, and he has committed all
that he has into my hand. V. 9.] There is none greater in this house then I;
neither has he kept back any thing from me, but thee, because thou art his
wife; How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? V. 10.] And
it came to pass, as she spoke to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto
her, to lie by her, or to be with her.
.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in the seventh Commandment?

A. The sins forbidden in the seventh Commandment, besides the neglect of the
duties required Pro. 5. 7. Hear me now therefore, O ye children, and depart not
from the words of my mouth.
, are, adultery, fornication Heb. 13. 4 Marriage is honorable in all, and the
bed undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Gal. 5. 19. Now
the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication,
uncleanness, Lasciviousness, etc.
, rape, incest 2 Samuel 13. 14. Howbeit he (viz. Amnon) would not hearken unto
her voice, but being stronger then she, forced her, and lay with her. 1 Cor. 5.
1. It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such
fornication as is not so much as to be named among the Gentiles, that one
should have his fathers wife.
, sodomy, and all unnatural lusts Romans 1. 24-26, 27. Wherefore God also gave
them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor
their own bodies between themselves -- V. 26.] For this cause God gave them up
unto vile affections; for even their women did change the natural use into that
which is against nature. V. 27.] And likewise also the men, leaving the natural
use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another, men with men
working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompense, of
their error which was meet. Lev. 20. 15, 16. And if a man lie with a beast, he
shall surely be put to death, and ye shall slay the beast. V. 16.] If a woman
approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shall kill the woman, and
the beast: they shall surely be put to death: their blood shall be upon them.
, all unclean imaginations, thoughts, purpose and affections Mat. 5. 28. But I
say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her al^eady in his heart. Mat. 15. 19. For out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
witness, -- etc. Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the
earth, fornication, uncle^nness, inordinate affection, evil concup^scence, and
covetousness, which is idolat^y.
, all corrupt or filthy communications, or listening thereunto Ephesians. 5. 3, 4.
But fornication and all uncleanness; or covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints: V. 4.] Neither filthiness, nor foolish
talking, nor jesting, which are not conven^ent. Pro. 7. 5-21, 22. That they may
keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger which flattereth with her
words. V. 21.] With much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the
flattering of her lips she forced him. V. 22.] He goes after her straightway,
as an ox goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks.
; wanton looks Is. 3. 16. Moreover the Lord says, because the daughters of
Sion, are haughty and walk with stretched out necks, and wont on eyes, walking
and mincing as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet. 2 Pet. 2. 14.
Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling
unstable souls, etc. --
, impudent, or light behavior; immodest apparel Pro. 7. 10-13. And behold
there met him a woman with the attire of an harlot, and subtle of heart -- V.
13. So she caught him and k^ssed him, and with an impudent face said unto him
--
; prohibiting of lawful 1 Timothy 4. 3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats, which God has commanded to be received with thanksgiving
of them who believe and know the truth.
, and dispensing with unlawful marriages Lev. 18. from ver. 1. to the 21. Mark
6. 18. For John said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers
wife. Mal. 2. 11, 12. Judah has dealt treacherously, and an abomination is
committed in Israel, and in Jerusalem; for Judah has profaned the holiness of
the Lord, which he loved, and has married the daughter of a strange God. V.
12.] The Lord will cut off the man that does this; the master and the scholar
out of the Tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offers an offering unto the
Lord of host.
, allowing, tolerating, keeping of stews, and resorting to them 1 Kin. 15. 12.
And he (viz. Asa) took away the Sodomites out of the land, and removed all the
Idols that his fathers had made. 2 King. 23. 7. And he (viz. Josiah) brake down
the houses of the Sodomites that were by the houses of the Lord, where the
women wove hangings for the grove. Deuteronomy. 23. 17, 18. There shall be no whore of
the daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite of the sons of Israel, V. 18.] Thou
shall not bring the hi^e of a whore, or the price of a dog into the house of
the Lord thy God, for any vow: for even both these are an abomination unto the
Lord thy God. Lev. 19. 29. Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a
whore, least the land fall to whoredom and become full of wickedness. Jer. 5.
7. How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and sworn
by them that are no gods: when I had fed them to the full, they then comm^tted
adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses. Pro. 7.
24. 25, 26, 27. Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the
words of my mouth. V. 25.] Let not thine heart decline to her way^s, go not
astray in her paths. V. 26.] For she has cast down many wounded, yea many
strong men have been slain by her. V. 27.] Her house is the way to hell, going
down to the chambers of death.
; intangling vows of single life Mal. 19. 10, 11. His disciples say unto him,
If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to ma^ry. V. 11.]
But he said unto them, all men cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it
is give.
; undue delay of marriage 1 Cor. 7. 7, 8, 9. For I would that all men were even
as I my self; but every man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner,
another after that. V. 8.] I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is
good for them if they abide even as I. V. 9.] But if they cannot contain, let
them marry; for it is better to marry, then to burn, Genesis 38. 26. And Judah
acknowledged them, and said, she has been more righteous then I; because I
gave her not to Shelah my son; and he knew her again no more.
, having more wives or husbands then one, at the same time Mal. 2. 14. 15. Yet
ye say, Wherefore? because the Lord has been witness between thee and the wife
of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt treacherously; yet is she thy
companion, and the wife of thy covenant. V. 15.] And did not he make one? yet
had he the residue of the spirit; and wherefore one? that he might seek a godly
seed; therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously; Mat.
19. 5. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to
his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh.
; unjust divorce Mal. 2. 16. For the Lord the God of Israel says that he
hates putting away; for one covers violence with his garment says the Lord
of hosts; therefore take heed to your spirits, that ye deal not treacherously.
Mat. 5. 32. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, saving
for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery; and whosoever
shall marry her that is divorced commits adultery.
, or disertion 1 Cor. 7. 12. 13. But to the rest I speak, not the Lord, If any
brother has a wife that believes not and she be pleased to dwell with him,
let him not put her away. V. 13.] And the woman which has an husband that
believes not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.
; idleness, gluttony, drunkenness Ezekiel. 16. 49. Behold this was the iniquity of
thy sister Sodom; pride fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her,
and her daughters; neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.
Pro. 23. 30, 31.-33 -- They that tarry long at the wine they that go to seek
new wine. V. 31.] Look not upon the wine when it is red -- V. 33.] Thine eyes
shall behold strange women, and thy heart shall utter perverse things.
, unchaste company Genesis 39. 10. And it came to pass as she spoke to Joseph day
by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her. Prove.
5. 8. Remove thy way far from her and come not near the door of her house.
, lascivious songs, books, pictures, dancings, stage plays Ephesians. 5. 4. --
Neither filthiness, nor foolish, talking, nor jestings, which are not
convenient, but rather giving of thanks. Ezekiel. 23. 14, 15, 16. And that she
increased her whoredom; for when she saw men pourtrayed upon the wall, the
images of the Chaldeans pourtrayed with vermilion. V. 15.] Girded with girdles
upon their loins, exceeding in dyed attire upon their heads, all of them
Princes to look to, after the manner of the Babylonians of Chalde, the land of
their nativity. V. 16.] And as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she doted
upon them, and sent messengers unto them into Caldea. Isai. 23. 15, 16, 17. And
it shall come to pass in that day, that Tire shall be forgotten 70 years,
according to the days of one King: after the end of 70. years shall Tire sing
as an harlot. V. 16.] Take an Harp go about the city, thou harlot, thou have
been forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many songs that thou may be
remembered. V. 17.] And it shall come to pass after the end of 70. years, that
the Lord, will visit Tire, and she shall turn to her hire, and commit
fornication with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth.

Isal. 3. 16. Moreover, the Lord says, Because the daughters of Sion are
haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks, and wanton eyes, walking and
mincing as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet. Mar. 6. 12. And
when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced and pleased Herod,
and them that sat with him, the King said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever
thou will, and I will give it thee, -- etc. Romans 13. 13. Let us walk honestly,
as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambring and wantonness,
not, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 3. For the time past of our life may suffice us to have
wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts,
excess of wine, revellings banquettings, and abominable idolatries.


, and all other provocations to, or acts of uncleanness either in our selves or
others 2 King. 9. 30. And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezabel heard of it,
and she painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.
Compared with Jer. 4. 30. And when thou art spoiled, what will thou do? though
thou cloathest thy self with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments
of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shall thou make
thy self fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life: and with
Ezekiel. 23. 40. And furthermore, ye have sent for men to come from far, unto whom
a messenger was sent; and lo they came for whom thou did wash thy self,
paintedst thine eyes, and deckedst thy self with ornaments.
.

Q. Which is the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment is, [Thou shall not steal Exodus 20. 1^.
.]

Q. What are the duties required in the eighth Commandment?

A. The duties required in the eighth Commandment, are, truth, faithfulness,
and justice in contracts, and commerce between man and man Psalm. 15. 2-4. He
that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in
his heart. -- V. 4.] -- he that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.
Zech. 7. 4.-10. Then came the word of the Lord of hosts unto me, saying, -- V.
10] And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, nor the stranger, nor the
poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. Zech.
8. 16, 17. These are the things that ye shall do, Speak every man the truth to
his neighbor, execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates. V. 17.]
And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and love
no false oath, for all these are things that I hate, says the Lord.
; rendering to every one his due Romans 13. 7. Render therefore to all their dues;
tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor.
; restitution of goods unlawfully detained from the right owners thereof Lev.
6. 2, 3. 4, 5. If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie
to his neighbor in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or
in any thing taken away by violence, or has deceived his neighbor; V: 3. Or
have found that which was lost, and lies concerning it, and swears falsely;
in any of all these that a man does, sinning therein: V. 4] Then it shall be
because he has sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he to^k
violently, away, or ^he thing which he has deceitfully got^en, or that which
was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found. V. 5.] Or all that
about which he has sworn falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal,
and shall add the fifth part more there^o, and give it unto him to whom it
appertains, in the day of his Trespass offering. Compared with Luke 19. 8.
And Zacheus stood and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I
give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false
accusation, I res^ore him four fold.
; giving, and lending freely, according to our abilities, and the necessities
of others Luke 6. 30-38. Give to every man that asks of thee, and of him that
takes away thy goods ask them not again. -- V. 38.] Give, and it shall be
given unto you, good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over shall men give into your bosom; for with the same measure that you mete,
it shall be measured to you again. 1 John 3. 17. But whosoever has this worlds
good, and sees his brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion
from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole
steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing that
is good, that he may have to give to him that needs. Gal. 6. 10. As we have
therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them that
are of the household of faith.
; moderation of our judgments, wills, and affections, concerning wo^ldly goods
1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. But godliness with contentment is great gain. V. 7.] For
we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.
V. 8] And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content. V. 9.] But they
that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. Gal. 6. 14. But
God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.
; a provident care and study to get 1 Timothy 5. 8 But if any provide not for his
own, espeically for those of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is
worse then an infidel.
, keep, use, and dispose those things which are necessary and convenient for
the sustentation of our nature, and suitable to our condition Pro. 27. from v.
23. to the end. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well
to thy herds. V. 24.] For riches are not for ever, -- etc. Eccles. 2 24. There
is nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and drink, and make his
soul enjoy good in his labor: This also I saw was from the hand of God. Eccl.
3. 12, 13. I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice and
do good in his life; V. 13.] And also that every man should eat and drink and
enjoy the good of all his labors; it is the gift of God. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, nor
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy. V. 18.] That they do good, that they be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Isa. 38. 1. In those days was
Hezekiah sick unto death; and Isaiah the Prophet came to him, and said, Thus
says the Lord, Set thine house in order, for thou shall die, and not live.
Mat. 11. 8. -- Behold, they that wea soft clothing are in kings houses.
; a lawful calling 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let every man abide in the same calling
wherein he was called. Genesis 2. 15. And the Lord God took the man, and put him
into the garden of Eden, to dress it and to keep it. Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat
of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground, etc.
, and diligence in it Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather
let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have
to give to him that needs. Pro. 10. 4. He becomes poor that deals with a
slack hand; but the hand of the diligent makes rich.
; frugality Joh. 6. 12. When they were filled, he said unto his Disciples,
Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost. Prove. 21. 20. There
is treasure to be desired and oil in the dwellings of the wise; but a foolish
man spends it up.
, avoiding unnecessary lawsuits 1 Cor. 6. from verse. 1. to verse. 9. Dare any
of you having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not
before the Saints? -- and so on.
, and suretiship, or other like engagements Prove. 6. From verse 1. to ver. 6.
My son if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy hand with a
stranger, thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, etc. -- Prove. 11. 15. He
that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it, and he that hates suretiship
is sure.
; and an endeavor by all just, and lawful means, to procure, preserve, and
further the wealth and outward estate of others, as well as our own Lev. 25.
35. And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen to decay with thee, then thou
shall relieve him, yea, though he be a stranger or a sojourner, that he may
live with thee. Deuteronomy. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4. Thou shall not see thy brothers ox, or
his sheep go astray, and hide thy self from them; thou shall in any case bring
them back again unto thy brother. V. 2.] And if thy brother be not nigh unto
thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shall bring it unto thine own house,
and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shall
restore it to him again. V. 3.] In like manner shall thou do with his Ass, and
with his raiment, and with all lost things of thy brothers that thou have
found; thou may not hide thy self. V. 4.] Thou shall not see thy brothers ox
or his assfall down by the way, and hide thy self from them; thou shall surely
help him to lift them up again. Exodus 23. 4, 5. If thou meet thine enemies ox
or ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again. V. 5.] If
thou see the ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden, and would
forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him. Genesis 47. 14, 20. And
Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and
Canaan, for the corn which they bought, and he brought the money into Pharaohs
house. -- V. 20.] And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the
Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them; so
the land became Pharaoh's. Phil. 2. 4. Look not every man at his own things,
but every man also upon the things of others. Mat. 22. 39. And the second is
like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in the eighth Commandment?

A. The sins forbidden in the eighth Commandment, besides the neglect of the
duties required Jam. 2. 15, 16. If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute
of daily food. V. 16.] And one of you say to them, Depart in peace; be ye
warmed, and filled; but give them not those things which are needful to the
body, what does it profit? 1 John 3. 17. But whosoever has this worlds good and
sees his brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him,
how dwells the love of God in him?
are, theft Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole steal no more, but rather, etc. --
, robbery Psalm. 62. 10. Trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery,
etc.
, man stealing 1 Timothy 1. 10. [The law was made] For whoremongers, for defilers
of themselves with mankind, for men stealers, for liars, etc. and if there be
any other thing contrary to sound doctrine.
, and receiving any thing that is stolen Pro. 29. 24. Whosoever is partner with a
thief hates his own soul: he hears cursing, and berayeth it not. Psalm. 50.
18. When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst with him, etc.
; fraudulent dealing 1 These. 4. 6. That no man go beyond and defraud his
brother in any matter; because the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also
have forewarned you and testified.
, false weights and measures Prove. 11. 1. A false balance is an abomination to
the Lord; but a just weight is his delight. Prove. 20. 10. Diverse weights, and
diverse measures, both of them are alike abomination to the Lord.
, removing landmarks Deuteronomy. 19. 14. Thou shall not remove thy neighbor's
landmark, which they of old time have set in thine inheritance, etc. Prove. 23.
10. Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields of the
fatherless.
; injustice and unfaithfulness in contracts between man and man Amos 8. 5. --
Saying, When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell corn; and the Sabbath,
that we may set forth wheat; making the Ephah small, and the shekel great, and
falsisying the balances by deceit? Psalm. 37. 21. The wicked borrows and
pays not again; but the righteous shows mercy and gives.
, or in matters of trust Luk* 16. 10, 11, 12. He that is faithful in that which
is least, is faithful also in much; and he that is unjust in the least, is
unjust also in much. V. 11.] If therefore ye have not been faithful in the
unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust, the true riches? V. 12.] And
if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you
that which is your own?
; oppression Ezekiel. 22. 29. The people of the land have used oppression, and
exercised robbery, and vexed the poor and needy; yea they have oppressed the
stranger wrongfully. Lev. 25. 17. Ye shall not therefore oppress one another;
but thou shall fear thy God: for I am the Lord your God.
, extortion Mat. 23. 25. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisces, hypocrites; for ye
make clean the outside of the cup and platter, but within they are full of
extortion and excess. Ezekiel. 22. 12. In thee have they taken gifts, to shed
blood: thou have taken usury and increase, and thou have greedily gained of thy
neighbors by extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord.
, usury Psalm. 15 5. He that puts not out his money to usury, nor takes a
reward against the innocent; he that, etc. --
, bribery Job 15. 34. For the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and
fire shall consume the Tabernacle of bribery.
, vexatious lawsuits 1 Cor. 6. 6, 7, 8. But brother goes to law with brother,
and that beofre the unbelievers. V. 7.] Now therefore there is utterly a fault
among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not rather take
wrong? Why do you not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? V. 8.] Nay,
you do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren. Prove. 3. 29, 30. Devise not
evil against thy neighbor, seeing he dwells securely by thee. V. 30.] Strive
not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm.
, unjust enclosures, and depopulations Isa. 5. 8. Woe unto them that join house
to house, and lay field to field till there be no place, that they may be
placed alone, in the midst of the earth. Meh. 2. 2. And they covel fields, and
take them by violence; and houses, and take them away; so they oppress a man
and his house, even a man and his heritage.
; engrossing commodities to enhance the price Pro. 11. 26. He that withholdeth
corn, the people shall curse him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him
that sells it.
, unlawful callings Act. 19. 19-24, 25. Many also of them which used curious
arts, brought their books together, and burned them before all men; and they
counted the price of them, and found it 50000 pieces of silver. -- V. 24.] For
a certain man named Demetrius, a Silver-smith, who made silver shrines for
Diana, brought no small gain unto the Crafts-men. V. 25.] Whom he called
together, with the workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by
this craft we have our wealth.
, and all other unjust, or sinful ways of taking, or withholding from our
neighbor what belongs to him, or of enriching our selves Job 20. 19. Because
he has oppressed and forsaken the poor, because he has violently taken away
an house which he built not. Jam. 5. 4. Behold the hire of the laborers which
have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries; and
the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. Prove. 21. 6. The getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity
tossed too and fro of them that seek death.
: covetousness Luke 12. 15. And he said unto them, Take heed, and bewere of
covetousness: for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things
that he possesses.
, inordinate prizing and affecting worldly goods 1 Timothy 6. 5. Perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that
gain is godliness: from which withdraw thy self. Col. 3. 2. Set your
affections on things above, not on things on the earth. Prove. 23. 5. Will thou
set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves
wings: they flee away as an Eagle toward heaven. Psalm. 62. 10. -- If riches
increase, set no your heart upon them.
; distrustful and distracting cares and studies in getting* keeping, and using
them Mat. 6. 25.-31.-34. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your
life, what ye shall eat, or what she shall drink, nor yet for your body, what
ye shall put on; is not the life more then meat? and the body then raiment? --
V. 31.] Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we cat? or, etc. -- V.
34.] Take therefore no thought for the morrow; for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of it self; sufficient to the day is the evil thereof.
Eccl. 5. 12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or
much; but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.
, envying at the prosperity of others Psalm. 73. 3. For I was envious at the
foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. Psalm. 37. 1-7. Fret not thy
self because of evil doers, nor be thou envious against the workers of iniquity
-- V. 7.] Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him; fret not thy self
because of him who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings
wicked devices to pass.
: as likewise idleness 2 These. 3. 11. For we hear that there are some who walk
among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busybodies. Pro. 18. 9. He
also that is slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a great waster,
, prodigality, wastful gaming, and all other ways whereby we do unduly
prejudice our own outward estate Prove. 21. 17. He that loves pleasure shall be
a poor man; he that loves wine and oil shall not be rich. Prove. 23. 20, 21. Be
not among wine bibbers, among riotous eaters of flesh. V. 21*] For the drunkard
and glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall cloth a man with rags
Prove. 28. 19. He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread: but he that
follows after vain persons shall have poverty enough.
: and defrauding our selves of the due use and comfort of that estate which God
has given us Eccl. 4. 8. There is one alone, and there is not a second, yea he
has neither child nor brother; yet there is no end of all his labor, nor is
his eye satisfied with riches, neither says he, For whom do I labor, and
bereave my soul of good? This is also vanity? yea it is a sore evil. Eccl. 6.
2. A man to whom God has given riches, wealth and honor, so that he wants
nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not power to
eat thereof; but a stranger eats it. This is vanity, and an evil disease. 1 Timothy 5. 8. But if any ^^ovide not for his own, and especially for those of his
own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel.
.

Q. Which is the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment is, [Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor Exodus 20. 16.
.]

Q. What are the duties required in the ninth Commandment?

A. The duties required in the ninth Commandment are, the preserving and
promoting of truth between man and man Z^ch. 8. 16. These are the things that
ye shall do, Speak every man truth to his neighbor, execute the judgment of
truth and peace in your gates.
, and the good name of our neighbor as well as our own 3 John ver. 12.
Demetrius has a good report of all men, and of the truth it self; yea, and we
also bear record; and ye know that our record is true.
: appearing, and standing for Prove. 31. 8, 9. Open thy mouth, judge
righteously, and plead the cause of the poor. V. 9.] Open thy mouth for the
dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction.
, and from the heart Psalm. 15. 2. He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, and speaks the truth from his heart.
, sincerely 2 Chronicles. 19. 9. And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in
the fear of the Lord, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.
, freely 1 Samuel 19. 4, 5. And Jonathan spoke good of David unto Saul his
father, and said unto him, Let not the King sin against his servant, against
David; because he has not sinned against thee, and because his works to
thee-ward have been very good. V. 5.] For he did put his life in his hand, and
slew the Philistine, and the Lord wrought great salvation for all Israel: thou
saw it, and did rejoice. Wherefore then wilt* thou sin against innocent
blood, to slay David without a cause?
, clearly Jos. 7. 19. And Josu^h said unto Achan, My son, give I pray thee,
glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him, and tell me now
what thou have done; hide it not from me.
, and fully 2 Samuel 14. 18, 19, 20. Then the King answered, and said unto the
woman, Hide not from me, I pray thee the thing that I shall ask thee. And the
woman said, Let my Lord the King now speak. V. 19.] And the King said, Is not
the hand of Joab with thee in all this? and the woman answered and said, As thy
soul lives, my Lord the King, none can turn to the right hand or to the left,
from ought that my Lord the King has spoken, for thy servant Joab he bad me,
and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid; V. 20.] To fetch
about this form of speech, has thy servant Joab done this thing; and my Lord
is wise, etc. --
, speaking the truth, and only the truth, in matters of judgment and justice
Lev. 19. 15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shall not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. Prove. 14. 5-25. A faithful
witness will not lie, but a false witness will utter lies. V. 25.] A true
witness delivers souls, but a deceitful witness speaks lies.
, and in all other things whatsoever 2 Cor. 1. 17, 18. When I therefore was
thus minded, did I use lightness? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose
according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea* yea, and nay, nay? V.
18.] But as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay. Ephesians. 4. 25.
Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbor: for we
are members one of another.
; a charitable esteem of our neighbors Heb. 6. 9. But beloved, we are
persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation. 1 Cor. 13.
7. [Charity] bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things.
; loving, desiring, and rejoicing in their good name Romans 1. 8. First I thank
my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spoken of
throughout the whole world. 2 John ver. 4.] I rejoice greatly that I found of
thy children walking in the truth, as we have received a Commandment from the
father. 3 John ver. 3, 4.] For I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came and
testified of the truth that is in thee, even as thou walk in the truth. V.
4.] I have no greater joy, then to hear that my children walk in the truth.
, sorrowing for 2 Cor. 2. 4. For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I
wrote to you, with many tears; not that you should be grieved, but that ye
might know the love which I have more abundantly toward you. 2 Cor. 12. 21. --
And least when I come again my God will humble me among you, and that I shall
bewail many, who have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness,
and fornication, and lasciviousness which they have committed.
, and covering of their infirmities Prove. 17. 9. He that covers a
transgression seeks love; but he that repeateth a matter separateth very
friends. 1 Pet. 4* 8. And above all things have f^rvent charity among your
selves; for charity shall cover a multitude of sins
; freely acknowledging their gifts and graces 1 Cor. 1. 4, 5.-7. I thank my God
always in your behalf for the grace of God which is given by Jesus Christ. V.
5.] That in every thing ye are enriched by him in all utterance, and in all
knowledge -- V. 7.] So that ye come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming
of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 1. 4, 5 -- Greatly desiring to see thee being
mindful of thy tears, that I may b^ filled with joy. V. 5.] When I call to
remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy
Grand*mother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.
; defending their innocence 1 Samuel 22. 14. Then Ahimelech answered the King and
said, And who is so faithful among all thy servants as David, which is the
Kings-son-in-law, and goes at thy bidding, and is honorable in thy house?
; a ready receiving of a good report 1 Cor. 13. 6, 7. [Charity] rejoices not
in in^quity, but rejoices in the truth; V. 7.] Bears all things, believes
all things, hops all things, endures all things.
, and unwillingness to admit of an evil report concerning them Psalm. 15. 3. He
that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes
up a reproach against his neighbor.
, discouraging tale-bearers Prove. 25. 23. The North wind drives away rain: so
does an angry countenance a b^ckbiting tongue.
, flatterers Prove. 26. 24, 25. He that hates dissembleth with his lips, and
lays up deceit within him: v. 25.] When he speaks fair, believe him not,
for there are seven abominations in his heart.
, and slanderers Psalm. 101. 5. Who so privily slandereth his neighbor, him
will I cut off, etc.
; love and care of our own good name, and defending it when need requires
Prove. 22. 1. A good name is rather to be chosen then great riches; and loving
favor then silver and gold. Joh. 8. 49. Jesus answered, I have not a devil:
but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor me.
, keeping of lawful promises Psalm. 15. 4. -- He that swears to his own hurt,
and changes not.
, studying and practicing of whatsoever things are true, honest, lovely, and of
good report Phil. 4. 8. Finally, brethren, Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.
.

Q What are the sins forbidden in the ninth Commandment?

A. The sins forbidden in the ninth Commandment, are, all prejudicing the
truth, and the good name of our neighbors as well as our own 1 Samuel 17, 28.
E^iab his elder brother heard when he spoke unto the men; and Eliabs* anger was
kindled against David, and he said, why came thou down hither, and with whom
have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the
haughtiness of thy heart, etc. 2 Samuel 16. 3. And the King said, and where is
thy masters son? And Ziba said to the King, behold he abides at Jerusalem: for
he said, To day shall the house of Israel restore me the Kingdom of my father.
2 Samuel 1. 9, 10-15, 16. He said unto me again, stand I pray thee, upon me, and
slay me; for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me. v.
10.] So I stood upon him, and sl^w him, because I was sure that he could not
live, after that he was fallen; and I took the crown that was on his head, and
the bracelets from his arm, and have brought them hither to my lord. -- v. 15.]
And David called one of the young men, and said, go fall upon him. And he smote
him, that he died. v. 16.] And David said unto him, thy blood is upon thy head;
for thy mouth has testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords
anointed.
, especially in public judicature Lev. 19. 15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness
in judgment; thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the
person of the mighty, but in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. Hab.
1. 4. Therefore the law is sla^ked, and judgment does never go forth; for the
wicked does compass about the righteous; therefore wrong judgment proceeds.
, giving false evidence Prove. 19. 5. A false witness shall not be unpunished,
and he that speaks lies shall not escape. Prove 6 16.-19. There are six things
which the Lord hates, yea seven are an abomination unto him -- v. 19.] A false
witness that speaks lies, and he that sows discord among brethren.
, suborning false witnesses Act. 6. 13. And they set up false witness, who
said, This man cease not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place
and the Law.
, wittingly appearing and pleading for an evil cause, outfacing and
over-bearing the truth Jer. 9. 3-5. And they bend their tongue like their bow,
for lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth: for they
proceed from evil to evil, and know not me, says the Lord. -- v. 5.] And they
will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth; they have
taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity.
Act. 24. 2-5. And when he was called forth, Tertullus begun to accuse him
saying, etc. -- v. 5.] For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a
mover of sedition amongst all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader
of the sect of the N^zarens. Psalm. 12. 3, 4. The lord shall cut off all
flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud things, v. 4.] Who have
said, with our tongues we will prevail, our lips are our own; who is Lord over
us? Ps. 52. 1, 2, 3, 4. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O thou mighty
man? the goodness of God endures continually. v. 2.] Thy tongue devises
mischief, like a sharp razor, working deceitfully. v. 3.] Thou love evil more
then good, and lying rather then to speak righteousness, Selah. v. 4.] Thou
love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.
, passing unjust sentence Prove. 17. 15. He that justified the wicked, and he
that condemns the just, even they both are abomination unto the Lord. 1 King.
21. from ver. 9. to the 14. And Jezebel wrote in the letter, saying, Proclaim a
fast, and set Naboth on high, and set two men, sons of Belial, before him to
bear witness against him, saying, Thou did blaspheme God and the King; and
then carry him out and stone him. v. 11.] And the men of the city even the
Elders and the Nobles did so as Jezebel had sent unto them. -- And they stoned
him with stones that he died.
, calling evil good, and good evil, rewarding the wicked according to the work
of the righteous, and the righteous according to the work of the wicked Isai.
5. 23. Who justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of
the righteous from him
; forgery Psalm. 119. 69. The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will
keep, etc. Luke 19. 8. And Zacheus stood and said unto the Lord; Behold, Lord,
the half my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any
man, by false accusation, I restore him fourfold. Luke 16. 5, 6, 7. So he
called every one of his Lords debtors unto him, and said unto the first, how
much owe thou unto my Lord? v. 6.] And he said an hundred measures of oil.
And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and write fifty. v. 7.] Then said he to
another, etc.
, concealing the truth, undue silence in a just cause Lev. 5. 1. And if a Soul
sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness whether he has seen or
known of it, if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity. Deuteronomy. 13.
8. -- Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, nor shall thine
eye pity him, nor shall thou spare, nor shall thou ^onceal him. Act. 5. 3-8, 9.
But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart, to lie to the Holy
Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land? v. 8.] And Peter
answered unto her, tell me whether you sold the land for so much; And she said
yea, for so much. v. 9.] Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have
agreed together, to temp the Spirit of the Lord? Behold the feet of, etc. -- 2 Timothy 4. 16. At my first answer, no man stood with me, but all men forsook me. I
pray God that it may not be laid to their charge.
, and holding our peace when iniquity calls for either a reproof from our
selves 1 King. 1. 6. And his father had not displeased him at any time in
saying, why have thou done so? Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thine heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy brother, and not suffer sin upon
him.
, or complaint to others Isai. 59. 4. None called for justice, nor any pleads
for truth; they trust in vanity, and speaklyes; they conceive mischief, and
bring forth iniquity.
; speaking the truth unseasonably Prove. 19. 11. A fool utters all his mind;
but a wise man keeps it till afterward.
, or maliciously to a wrong end 1 Samuel 12. 9, 10. Then answered Doeg the
Edomite who was set over the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse
coming to Noh, to Abimelech the son of Ahitub. v. 10.] And he enquired of the
Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and the sword of Goliath the Philistim.
Compared with Psalm. 52. 1, 2, 3, 4. A Psalm of David when Doeg the Edomite came
and told Saul, etc. -- v. 1.] Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty
man? the goodness of God, etc. and so on to v. 5.
, or perverting it to a wrong meaning Psalm. 56* 6. Every day they wrest my
words; all their thoughts are against me for evil. Joh. 2. 19. Jesus answered,
and said unto them, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up.
Compared with Matt. 26. 60, 61 -- At the last came two false witnesses. v. 61]
And said, This follow said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to
build it in three days.
, or in doubtful and equivocal expressions to the prejudice of truth or justice
Genesis 3. 5. For God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil. Genesis 26. 7-9.
And the men of the place asked him of his wife, and he said, She is my sister;
for he feared to say she is my wife, lest, etc.
, speaking untruth Isai. 59. 13. In transgressing and lying against the Lord,
and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and
uttering from the heart words of falsehood.
, lying Lev. 19. 11. Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie one to
another. Col. 3. 9. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old
man with his deeds.
, slandering Psalm. 50. 20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother, thou
slanderest thine own mothers son.
, backbiting Psalm. 15. 3. He that backhiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil
to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor.
, detracting Jam. 4. 11. Speak not evil one of another, Brethren, he that
speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil of the
law, and judges the law; but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the
law, but a judge. Jer. 38. 4. Therefore the Princes said unto the King, we
beseech thee let this man be put to death, for thus he weakeneth the hands of
the men of war that remain in the city, and of all the people, in speaking such
words unto them; for this man seeks not the welfare of this people, but the
hurt.
, tale-bearing Lev. 19. 16. Thou shall not go up and down as a tale bearer
among thy people, neither shall thou stand against the good of thy neighbor. I
am the Lord.
, whispering Romans 1. 29, 30. Bring filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder,
debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, v. 30.] Back-biters, haters of God, etc.
, scoffing Genesis 21. 6. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she
had born unto Abraba^, mocking. Compared with Gal. 4. 29. But as then he that
was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so
it is now.
, reviling 1 Cor. 6. 10. Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor revilers, nor
drunkards, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
, rash Matt. 7. 1. Judge not, that ye be not judged.
, harsh Act. 28. 4. No doubt, this man is a murderer; whom though he has
escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live.
, and partial censuring Genesis 38 24. And it came to pass about three months
after, that it was told Judah, saying, Thamar thy daughter in law has played
the harlot, and also behold, she is with child by whoredom; and Judah said,
Bring her forth, and let her be burnt. Romans 2. 1. Therefore thou art
inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge; for wherein thou judge
another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge does the same things.
, misconstruing intentions, words and actions Neh. 6. 6, 7, 8. In which [letter
that Sanballat sent] was written, it is reported among the heathen, and Cashmu
says it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel, for which cause thou buildest
the wall, that thou may be their King, according to these words. v. 7.] And
thou have also appointed Prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, There
is a King in Judah, and now shall it be reported to the King, according to
these words, Come now therefore, and let us take counsel together v. 8.] Then I
sent unto him saying, There are no such things done as thou say, but thou
fainest them out of thine own heart. Romans 3. 8. And not rather, as we be
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil that good
may come, whose damnation is just. Psalm. 69. 10. When I wept and chastened my
Soul with fasting, that was to my reproach. 1 Samuel 1. 13, 14, 15. Now Hannah
she spoke in the heart, only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard:
therefore Eli thought she had been drunken. v. 14.] And Eli said unto her, How
long will thou be drunken? put away thy wine from thee. v. 15.] And Hannah
answered and said, No, my Lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit, I have
drunk neither wine, etc. 2 Samuel 10. 3. And the Princes of the children of Amm^n
said unto H^nun their Lord, Think thou that David does honor thy father,
that he h^^h sen^ comfor^ers unto thee? has not David rather sent his servant
unto thee to search the city, and to s^y it out, ^n^ to overthrow it?
, flattering Psalm. 12. 2, 3. They speak vanity every man with his neighbor,
with flattering lips, and with a double heart does he speak. v. 3.] The Lord
shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud things.
, vainglorious boasting 2 Timothy 3. 2. For men shall be lovers of themselves,
covetou^, ho^sters etc.
, thinking or speaking too highly or too meanly of our selves or others Luk*
18. 9-11. And he spoke this Parable to certain that trusted in themselves, That
they were righteous, and despised others. -- v. 11] And the Pharisee stood up,
and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. Romans 12. 16. --
Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate; be not wise in your
own conceits. 1 Cor. 4. 6. And these things, brethren, I have in a figure
transferred to my self, and to Apollo, for your sakes: that you might learn of
us not to think of men, above that which is written, that no one of you be
puffed up for one against another. Act. 12. 22. And the people gave a shout,
saying, It is the voice of God, and not of man! Exodus 4. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
And Moses said, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since
thou have spoken unto thy servant; but am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.
v. 11.] And the Lord said unto him, Who has made the mouth? or who makes the
dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the Lord? v. 12.] Now
therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say.
v. 13] And he said, O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him, whom thou will send. v. 14.] And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, etc.
, denying the gifts and graces of God Job* 7* 5, 6. God forbid that I should
justify you; till I dye I will not remove mine integrity from me. v. 6.] My
righteousness I will hold fast, and not let it go; my heart shall not reproach
me as long as I live. Job 4. 6. Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, the
uprightness of thy ways, and thy hope?
, aggravating smaller faults Mat. 7. 3, 4, 5. And why beholdest thou the mote
that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam which is in thine own
eye? v. 4.] Or how will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out, etc.? v. 5.]
Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then thou
shall see clearly to cast out the more out of thy brothers eye.
hiding, excusing, or extenuating of sins when called to a free confession
Prove. ^8. 13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper; but whosoever confesses
and forsakes them shall find mercy. Prove. 30. 20. Such is the way of an
adulterous woman; she eats, and wipeth her mouth and says, I have done no
wickedness. Genesis 3. 12, 13. And the man said, The woman whom thou gave to be
with me she gave me of the tree and I did eat. v. 13.] -- and the woman said,
The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. Jer. 2. 35. Yet thou say, Because I
am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me: behold I will plead with
thee, because thou say, I have not sinned. 2 Kin. 5. 25. -- and Elisha said
to him, Whence come thou Gehazi? And he said. Thy servant went no whither.
Genesis 4. 9. And the Lord said unto Cain, where is Abel thy brother? And he said,
I know not; Am I my brothers keeper?
, unnecessary discovering of infirmities Genesis 9. 22. And Cham the father of
Canaan saw the wickedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.
Prove. 25. 9, 10. Debate thy cause with thy neighbor himself, and discover not
a secret to another. v. 10.] Lest he that hears it put thee to shame, and
thine infamy turn not away.
, raising false rumors Exodus 23. 1. Thou shall not raise a false report: put
not thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.
, receiving and countenancing evil reports Prove. 29. 12. If a Ruler hearken to
lies, all his servants are wicked.
, and stopping our ears against just defense Act. 7. 56, 57. And Stephen said,
Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand
of God. v. 57.] Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears,
and ran upon him with one accord. Job 31. 13, 14. If I did despise the cause of
my manservant, or maidservant, when they contended with me; v. 14.] What then
shall I do, when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him?
, evil suspicion 1 Cor. 13. 5. [Charity] does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil. 1 Timothy 6. 4. He
is proud; knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of words,
whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings.
, envying or grieving at the deserved credit of any Number. 11. 29. And Moses said
unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? Would God that all the Lords people were
Prophets, and that the Lord would pour out his Spirit upon them. Mat. 21. 15.
And when the chief Priests and Scribes saw the wonderful things that he did,
and the children crying in the Temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David,
they were sore displeased
, endeavoring or desiring to impair it Ezra 4. 11, 13. Be it known unto the
King, that the Jews who came up from thee to us, are come unto Jerusalem,
building the rebellious and bad city, and have set up the walls, etc. v. 13.]
Be it known now unto the King, that if this City be built, and the walls set up
again, they will not pay tole, tribute, and custom, and so thou shall endamage
the revenue of the Kings.
, rejoicing in their disgrace and infamy Jer. 48: 27. For was not Israel a
derision unto thee? was he found among thieves? for since thou spakest of him,
thou skippest for joy.
, scornful contempt Psalm. 35. 15, 16.-21. But in mine adversity they rejoiced,
and gathered themselves together; yea, the abjects gathered themselves
together, etc. -- v. 16.] which hypocritical mockers in feasts they gnashed
upon me with their teeth. -- v. 21.] Yea they opened their mouth wide against
me, and said, Aha, Aha, our eye has seen it. Mat. 27. 28, 29. And they
stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe. v. 29.] And when they had platted
a crown of thorns, they put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand, and
they bowed the knee before him, and said, Hail, King of the Jews.
, fond admiration Jude v. 16. These are murmurers, complainers, walkers after
their own lusts, and their mouth speaks great swelling words, having men's
persons in admiration because of advantage. Act. 12. 22. And the people gave a
great shout, saying, It is the voice of a God, and not of a man!
, breach of lawful promises Romans 1. 31. Without understanding,
Covenant-breakers, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 3. Without natural affection, Truce breakers,
false accusers, etc.
, neglecting such things as are of good report 1 Samuel 2. 24. Nay my sons; for
it is no good report that I hear, ye make the Lords people to transgress*
, and practicing or not avoiding our selves, or not hindering, what we can in
others, such things as procure an ill name 2 Samuel 13. 12, 13. And she [Tamar]
answered Amnon, Nay, my brother, do not force me: for no such thing ought to be
done in Israel; do not thou this folly* v. 13.] And I, whither shall I cause my
shame to go? And as for thee, thou shall be as one of the fools in Israel; now
therefore, etc. -- Prove. 5. 8, 9. Romove thy way far from her, and come not
nigh the door of her house. v. 9.] Lest thou give thine honor unto others, and
thy years unto the cruel. Prove. 6. 33. A wound and dishonor shall he get, and
his reproach shall not be wiped away.
.

Q. Which is the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment is [Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant,
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors Exodus 20. 17.
.]

Q. What are the duties required in the tenth Commandment?

A. The duties required in the tenth Commandment are, such a full contentment
with our own condition Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness; and be content with such things as ye have; for he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. 1 Timothy 6. 6. But Godliness with
contentment is great gain.
, and such a charitable frame of the whole Soul toward our neighbor, as that
all our inward motions and affections touching him tend unto and further all
that good which is his Job 31. 29. If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that
hated me, or lift up my self when evil found him. Romans 12. 15. Rejoice with
them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Psalm. 122. 7, 8, 9. Peace
be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. v. 8.] For my brethren
and companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee. v. 9.] Because of
the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good. 1 Timothy 1. 5. Now the end
of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience,
and of faith unfeigned. Esth. 10. 3. For Mordecai the Jew was next unto King
Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his
brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.
1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth
not; charity vaunteth not her self, is not puffed up. v. 5.] Does not behave is
self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil.
v. 6.] Rejoiced not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth. v. 7.] Bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things.
.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in the tenth Commandment?

A. The sins forbidden in the tenth Commandment, are, coffeehouse with our
own estate 1 King. 11. 4. And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased,
because of the word which Naboth had spoken to him; for he had said, I will not
give thee the inheritance of my fathers; and he laid him down upon his bed, and
turned away his face, and would eat no bread. Esth. 5. 13. Yet all this
avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings
gate. 1 Cor. 10. 10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer.
; envying Gal. 5. 26. Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one
another, envying one another. Jam. 3. 14-16. But if you have bitter envying and
strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth. -- v. 16. For
where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work.
, and grieving at the good of our neighbors Psalm. 112. 9, 10. He has
dispers^th, he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures for ever, his
horn shall be exalted for ever. v. 10.] The wicked shall see it, and be
grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked
shall perish. Neh. 2. 10. When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant
the Ammonite heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly, that there was come a
man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.
, together with all inordinate motions and affections to any thing that is his
Romans 7. 7, 8. What shall we say then? Is the Law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had
not known sin, but by the law; for I had not known lust, except the law had
said, Thou shall not covet. v. 8.] But sin taking occasion by the Commandment,
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence; for without the law sin was dead.
Romans 13. 9. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou
shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet; and
if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying,
namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Col. 3. 5. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry.
Deuteronomy. 5. 21. Neither shall thou desire thy neighbors wife, nor shall thou
covet thy neighbors house, his field, his manservant, or his maidservant,
his ox, or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbors.
.

Q. Is any man able perfectly to keep the Commandments of God?

A. No man is able, either of himself Jam. 3. 2. For in many things we offend
all. If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to
bridle the whole body. Joh. 15. 5. I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me
ye can do nothing. Rom* 8. 3. For what the law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin, condemns sin in the flesh.
, or by any grace received in this life, perfectly to keep the Commandments of
God Eccl. 7. 20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and
sins not. Joh. 1. 8-10* If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. -- v. 10.] If we say that we have not
sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. Gal. 5. 17. For the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these
are contrary the one to the other: So that ye cannot do the things that ye
would. Romans 7. 18, 19. For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no
good thing. For to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is
good I find not. v. 19.] For the good that I would, I do not; but the evil that
I would not, that do I.
, but does daily break them in thought Genesis 6. 5. And God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. Genesis 8. 21. -- And the Lord
said in his heart, I will curse the ground no more for man's sake: for the
imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth, etc.
, word, and deed Romans 3. from ver. 9. to ver. 21. -- for we have before proved
that both Jews and Gentiles that they are under sin. v. 10.] As it is written,
There is none righteous, no not one. v. 11.] There is none that under stands,
there is none that seeks after God. v. 12.] They are all gone out of the way,
they are altogether become unprofitable; there is none that does good, no not
one. v. 13.] Their throat is an open sepulcher, etc. -- v. 20.] -- that every
mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. Jam. 3.
from ver. 2. to ver. 13. For in many things we offend all, etc. --
.

Q. Are all transgressions of the Law of God equally heinous in themselves, and
in the sight of God?

A. All transgressions of the Law of God are not equally heinous: but some sins
in themselves, and by reason of several aggravations, are more heinous in the
sight of God then others Joh. 19. 11. Jesus answered, Thou coulst have no power
at all against me, except it were given thee from above; therefore he that
delivered me unto thee has the greater sin. Ezekiel. 8. 6.-13.-15. But turn thee
yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations. -- v. 13.] Turn thee yet
again, and thou shall see greater abominations that they do. -- v. 15.] Turn
thee yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations then these. 1 John 5.
16. If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask,
and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin
unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for it. Psalm. 78. 17.-32.-56. And
they sinned yet more against him, by provoking the most High in the wilderness.
-- v. 32.]. For all this they sinned still, etc. -- v. 56.] Yet they tempted,
and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimonies.
.

Q. What are those aggravations which make some sins more heinous then others?

A. Sins receive their aggravations,

From the persons offending Jer. 2. 8. The Priests said not, Where is the Lord?
and they that handle the Law knew me not; the Pastors also transgressed against
me, and the Prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not
profit.
; if they be of riper age Job 32. 7.-9. I said, Days should speak, multitude
of years should teach wisdom. -- v. 9.] Great men are not always wise,
neither do the aged understand judgment. Eccl. 4. 13. Better is a poor and a
wise child, then an old and foolish King, who will no more be admonished.
, greater experience, or grace 1 King. 11. 4.-9. For it came to pass when
Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods, etc. --
v. 9.] And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from
the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared to him twice.
; eminent for profession 2 Samuel 12. 14. Howbeit, because by this deed thou have
given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child that
is born unto thee shall surely dye. 1 Cor. 5. 1. It is reported commonly, that
there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not so much as named
among the Gentiles, that one should have his fathers wife.
, gifts Jam. 4. 17 Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it not,
to him it is sin. Luke 12. 47, 48. And that servant that knew his masters will,
and prepared not himself, nor did accordingly, shall be beaten with many
stripes. v. 48.] But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whom much is given, of him shall be
much required; and to whom men have committed much, of them they will ask the
more.
, place Jer. 5. 4, 5. Therefore I said, Surely these are poor, they are
foolish, they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. v.
5.] I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for they have
known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God; but these have
altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bands.
, office 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8, 9. And Nathan said unto David, Thou art the man. Thus
says the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee King over Israel, etc. -- v. 8.]
And I gave thee thy masters house, and his wives into thy bosom, and gave thee
the house of Israel and Judah; and if that had been too little, I would
moreover have given thee such and such things. v. 9] Wherefore have thou
despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? etc. Ezekiel. 8.
11, 12. And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the house of
Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every
man his Censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up. v. 12.] Then
said he unto me, Son of man, have thou seen what the ancients of the house of
Israel do in the dark, every man in the chamber of his imagery? For they say,
The Lord sees us not; the Lord has forsaken the earth.
; guides to others Romans 2. from ver. 17. to ver. 25. Behold thou art called a
Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God, v. 18.] And know
his will, etc. -- v. 19.] And art confident that thou thy self art a guide to
the blind, a light of them which are in darkness, etc. -- v. 21.] Thou
therefore that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that
preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? etc. --
, and whose example is likely to be followed by others Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14,
But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was
to be blamed. v. 12.] For before that certain came from James, he did eat with
the Gentiles; but when they were come, he withdrew, and separated himself,
fearing them which were of the Circumcision. v. 13.] And the other Jews
dissemble likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with
their dissimulation. v. 14.] But when I saw that they walked not up^ightly
according to the truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If
thou being a Jew, live after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the
Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?


From the parties offended Mat. 2. 38, 39. But when the husbandmen saw the son,
they said among themselves, This is the heir, come let us kill him, and seize
on his inheritance. v. 39.] And they caught him, and cast him out of the
Vineyard, and slew him.
; if immediately against God 1 Samuel 2. 25. If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for
him? etc. Act. 5.-4 Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. Psa. 51. 4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned and done this evil in thy sight; that
thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge.
, his attributes Romans 2. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance?
, and worship Mal. 1. 8.-14. And if ye offer the blind for a sacrifice is it
not evil? and if ye offer the lame, and sick, is it not evil? offer it now to
thy governor, etc. -- v. 14.] But cursed be the deceiver which has in his
flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I
am a great King, says the Lord of hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the
heathen.
; against Christ, and his grace Heb. 2. 2, 3. For if the word spoken by Angels
was steadfast, and every transgressing and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward; v. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation? Heb. 12. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they
escaped not, who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven.
; the holy Spirit Heb. 10. 29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall
he ^e thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has
counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of grace? Mat. 12. 31, 32.
Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men: but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto
men. v. 32] And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man it shall be
forgiven him, but whosoever speaks a word against the holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.
his witness Ephesians. 4. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are
sealed unto the day of Redemption.
and workings Heb. 6. 4, 5. For it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the holy Ghost, v. 5.] And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of
the world to come; If they fall away, to renew them again unto rep^ntan^e, etc.
--
, against superiors, men of eminency Jude ver. 8. Likewise also these filthy
dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Number.
12. 8, 9. -- Wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant
Moses? v. 9.] And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and he
departed. Isa. 3. 5. -- the child shall behave himself proudly against the
ancient, and the base against the honorable*
and such as we stand especially related and engaged unto Prove. 30. 17. The eye
that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother, the Ravens of the
valleys shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. 2 Cor. 12. 15.
And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I
love you, the less I be loved. Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 14, 15. For it was not an
enemy that reproached me, then I could have born it: neither was it he that
hated me, that did magnify himself against me, then I would have hid my self
from him. v. 13.] But it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and my
acquaintance. v. 14.] We took secret counsel together, and walked, etc. v. 15.]
Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quickly into bell; wickedness
is in their dwellings and among them.
; against any of the Saints Zech. 2. 8.-10, 11. I have heard the reproach of
Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have provoked my
people, etc. -- v. 10.] This shall they have for their pride, because they have
reproached, and magnified themselves against the people of the Lord of hosts.
v. 11.] The Lord will be terrible unto them, etc. -- Mat. 18 6 But whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 8. Nay you do
wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren. Revel. 17. 6. And I saw the woman
drunken with the blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus, etc.
, particularly weak brethren 1 Cor. 8. 11, 12. And through thy knowledge shall
thy weak brother perish, for whom Christ dyed? v. 12.] But when ye sin so
against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.
Rom 14. 13.-15.-21. Let us not therefore judge one another any more; but judge
this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way. -- v. 15.] But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now
walk thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ
dyed. -- v. 21.] It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any
thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended or is made weak.
, the souls of them or any other Ezekiel. 13. 19. And will ye pollute me among my
people for handfuls of barley, and for pieces of bread to slay the souls that
should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying
to my people that hear your lies? 1 Cor. 8. 12. But when you sin so against the
brethren, and wound their weak consciences, ye sin against Christ. Rev. 18.
13.] The merchandise of gold] And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and wine,
and oil, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and
slaves, and souls of men. Mat. 23. 15. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisces,
hypocrites; for ye compass sea and land to make one pros^lite, and when he is
made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell then your selves.
, and the common good of all or many 1 These. 2. 15, 16. Who both killed the
Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and they please not
God, and are contrary to all men. v. 16.] Forbidding us to speak to the
Gentiles, etc. -- Josh. 22. 20.] Did not Achan the son of Zorah commit a
trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the Congregation of
Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity.
.

From the nature and quality of the offense Prove. 6. 30. to the end. Men do not
de spise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul, when he is hungry. v. 31.]
But if he be found he shall restore sevenfold, etc. v. 3.] But whosoever
commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding; he that does it
destroys his own soul. V. 33.] A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his
reproach shall not be wiped away, etc. --
; if it be against the express letter of the Law Ezra. 9. 10, 11, 12. And now,
O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy Commandments,
V. 11.] Which thou have commanded by thy Prophets, saying, The land unto which
ye go is an unclean land with the filthiness of the people, etc. v. 12.] Now
therefore give not your daughters to their sons, nor, etc -- 1 King. 11. 9, 10.
And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned away from the
Lord God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice, v. 10.] And had commanded
him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods; but he kept
not that which the Lord commanded him.
, break many Commandments, contain in it many sins Col. 3. 5. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate aff^^ction, evil concupiscence, and covet^usness, which is Idolatry.
1 Timothy 6. 10. For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some
have coveted after they have erred from the faith, and pi^rced themselves
through with many sorrows. Prove. 5. 8, 9 10, 11, 12. Remove thy way f^r from
her, and come not nigh the door of her house. v. 9.] Lest thou give thine
honor unto others, and thy years unto the c^uel. v. 10.] Lest strangers be
filled with thy wealth, etc. v. 11.] And thou mourn at the last when thy flesh
and body are consumed, v. 12.] And say, How have I hated instruction, and my
heart despised reproof! Prove. 6. 32, 33. But whosoever commits adultery with a
woman, lacks understanding: he that does it destroys his own soul. v. 33.]
A wound and dishonor shall he get, etc. -- Josh* 7. 21. When I saw among the
spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and 200 shekels of silver, and a wedge of
gold of 50 shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them, etc. --
; if not only conceived in the heart, but breaks forth in words and actions
Jam 1. 14, 15. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts,
and enticed. v. 15.] Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and
sin when it is finished, brings forth death, Mat. 5. 22. But I say unto you
that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger
of the Council; but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell
fire. Mich. 2. 1. Woe unto them that devise iniquity, that work evil upon their
beds; when the morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of
their hand.
, scandalize others Mat. 18. 7. Woe to the world because of offenses; for it
must needs be that offenses come, but woe to that man by whom the offense
comes. Romans 2. 23, 24. Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking
the law dishonourest thou God. v. 24.] For the name of God is bl^sphemed among
the Gentiles through you, as it is written.
, and admit of no reparation Deuteronomy. 22. 22. If a man be found lyi^g with a woman
married to an husband, then they shall both of them dye: So shall thou put away
evil from Israel. Compared with v. 28, 29. If a man find a damsel that is a
virgin which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they
be found, v. 29.] Then the man that lay with her shall give to the damsels
father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife, because he has
humbled her; he may not put her away all his days. Prove. 6. 32, 33, 34, 35.
But whosoever commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding: he that does
it, destroys his own Soul. v. 33.] A wound and dishonor shall he get, and
his reproach shall not be wiped away. v. 34.] For jealousy is the rage of a
man: therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. V. 35.] He will not
regard any ransom, nor rest content, though thou give many gifts.
; if against means Matt. 11. 21, 22, 23, 24. Woe unto thee Corazim, woe unto
thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done
in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. v.
22.] But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, etc. v.
23.] And thou Capernaum that art lifted up to heaven shall be brought down to
hell; for if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in
Sodom, it would have remained until this day. v. 24.] But I say unto you that
it shall be more tolerable for Sodom, etc. -- Joh. 15. 22. If I had not come
and spoken unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for
their sin.
, mercies Isai 1. 3. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib,
but Israel does not know; my people does not consider. Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? is not he thy father that has
bought thee? has he not made thee, and established thee?
, judgments Amos 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. So two or three cities wandered unto one city
to drink water; but they were not satisfied: yet have they not returned unto
me, says the Lord. v. 9.] I have smiten you with blasting and mil-dew, etc.
yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. v. 10.] I have sent among you
the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, your young men have I slain with the
sword, etc. yet have ye not, etc. v. 11.] I have overthrown some of you as I
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the
burning yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. Jer. 5. 3. O Lord,
are not thine eyes upon the truth? Thou have stricken them, but they have not
grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction;
they have made their face harder then a rock, and refused to return:
, light of nature Romans 1. 16, 17 For this cause God gave them up to vile
affections; for even their women did change the natural use into that which is
against nature. v. 27.] And likewise the men leaving the natural use of the
women, etc. -- and receiving in themselves that recompense of their error that
was meet.
, conviction of conscience Romans 1 24. Who knowing the judgment of God, that
they who do such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have
pleasure in them that do them. Dan. 5. 22. And thou, O Belshazzer his son, have
not humbled thy heart, though thou know all this. Tit. 3. 10, 11. A man that
is an heretic, for the first and second admonition reject. v. 11.] Knowing
that he that is such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself.
; public or private admonition Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved
hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.
, censures of the Church Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an heretic after the first
and second admonition, reject. Matt. 18. 17. And if he shall neglect to hear
them, tell it to the Church: but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be
as an Heathen man and a Publicane.
, civil punishments Prove. 27. 22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar
among wheat wi^h a p^stel, yet will not his folly depart from him. Prove. 23.
25. They have stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten
me, and I left it not, when shall I wake? I will seek it yet again.
, and our own prayers, purposes, promises Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37. When he
slew them, then they sought him, and returned and enquired early after God: v.
35.] And they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their
redeemer. v. 36.] Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they
lied unto him with their tongues. v. 37.] For their heart was not right with
him, neither were they steadfast in his covenants. Jer. 2. 20. For of old time I
have broken thy yoke, and bur^t thy bands, and thou said, I will not
transgress when upon every high hill, and under every green tree thou wandrest,
playing the harlot. Jer. 42. 5, 6.-20, 21. Then they said to Jeremiah, the Lord
be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not even according to all
things for which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us, v. 6.] Whether it be
good or evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord our God, to whom we send thee,
etc. -- v. 20.] But ye dissembled in your hearts when ye sent me to the Lord
your God, saying, Pray for us unto the Lord our God, and according to all that
the Lord our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do is. v. 21.] And
now I have this day declared it to you, but ye have not obeyed the voice of the
Lord your God, nor any thing for which he has sent me unto you.
; vows Eccles. 5. 4, 5, 6. -- When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to
pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools, pay that thou have vowed. v. 5.]
Better is it that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow, and not
pay. v. 6.] Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou
before the Angel that it was an error; wherefore should God be angry at thy
voice, and destroy the work of thine hands? Prove. 20. 25. It is a suare to the
man who devoureth that which is holy, and after voweth to make enquiry.
, covenants Lev. 26. 25. And I will bring the sword upon you, that shall avenge
the quarrel of my covenant, etc.
, and engagements to God or men Prove. 2. 17. Which forsakes the guide of her
youth, and forgets the covenant of her God -- Ezekiel 17. 18, 19. Seeing he
despised the oath, by breaking the covenant (when lo he had given his hand)
and has done all these things, he shall not escape. v. 19.] Therefore thus
says the Lord God, surely mine oath that he has despised, and my covenant
that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head.
; if done deliberately Psalm. 36. 4. He devises mischief upon his bed, he
sets himself in a way that is not good, he abhorteth not evil.
, wilfully Jer. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways, and see, and
ask for the old paths, where is the good way and walk therein, and ye shall
find rest for your souls: But they said, we will not walk therein.
, presumptuously Number. 15. 30. But the soul that does ought presumptuously,
whether he be born in the land, or a stranger, the same provokes the Lord, and
that soul shall be cut off from among his people. Exodus 21. 14. But if a man
come presumptuously upon his neighbor to slay him with guile, thou shall take
him from mine Altar that he may dye.
, impudently Jer. 3. 3. Therefore the showers have been withholden, and there
has been no latter rain; and thou have a whores forehead, thou refusedst to be
ashamed. Prove. 7. 13. So she caught him and kissed him, and with an impudent
face said unto him, etc. --
, boastingly Psalm. 52. 1. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O thou mighty
man? etc.
, maliciously 3 John ver. 10. Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his deeds
which he does, prating against us with malicious words, etc.
, frequently Number. 14. 22. Because all those men who have seen my glory, and my
miracles which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now
these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice, etc. --
obstinately Zach. 7. 11, 12. But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the
shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear. v. 12.] Yea they
made their hearts as an Adamant stone, least they should hear the law, and the
word which the Lord of hosts has sent in his spirit by the former prophets;
therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of hosts.
, with delight Prove. 2. 14. Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the
frowardness of the wicked.
, continuance Isai. 57. 17. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth,
and smore him; I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of
his heart.
, or relapsing after repentance Jer. 34. 8, 9, 10, 11. This is the word that
came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, after that the King Zedckiah had made a
Covenant with all the people which were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty to
them, v. 9.] That every man should let his man servant, and maidservant, being
an Hebrew, or Hebrewess, go free, that none should serve himself of them, to
wit, of a Jew his brother. v. 10.] Now when all the Princes and people which
had entered into the COVENANT, heard it, they obeyed, and let them go* v. 11.]
But afterward they turned and caused the servants and handmaids, whom they
had let go free, to return, and brought them into subjection for servants and
for handmaids. 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22. For if, after they have escaped the
pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse
with them then the beginning. v. 21.] For it had been better for them not to
have known the way of righteousness, then after they have krown it to turn from
the holy Commandment delivered unto them. v. 22.] But it is happened unto them
according to the true Proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and
the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.
.

From circumstances of time 2 King. 5. 26. And he said unto Gehazi, Went not my
heart with thee when the man turned again from his Chariot to meet thee? Is it
a time to receive money, and garments, and olive-yards, and vine-yards, and
sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants?
, and place Jer. 7. 10. -- And come and stand before me in this house which is
called by my Name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations. Isa.
26. 10. Let favor be shown to the wicked, yet will not he learn
righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not
behold the Majesty of the Lord.
; if on the Lord's Day Ezekiel. 23. 37, 38, 39. That they have committed adultery,
and blood is in their hands, and with their idols have they committed, etc. --
v. 38.] Moreover this they have done unto me, They have defiled my Sanctuary in
the same day, and have profaned my Sabbaths. v. 39.] For when they had slain
their children to their idols, then they came the same day into my Sanctuary to
profane it; and lo, thus have they done in the midst of my house.
or other times of divine worship Isa. 58. 3, 4, 5. Wherefore have we fasted,
say they, and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our selves, and thou
take no knowledge? Behold in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact
all your labors. v. 4.] Behold ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite
with the fists of wickedness; ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your
voice to be heard on high. v. 5.] Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day
for a man to afflict his Soul? Is it to bow down the head as a bull-rush, and
to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Will thou call this a fast, and an
acceptable day to the Lord? Number. 25. 6, 7. And behold one of the children of
Israel came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman in the fight of
Moses, and of all the congregation of the children of Israel, who were weeping
before the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. v. 7.] And when Phineas
the son of Eleazer, the son of Aaron the Priest saw it, he rose up from among
the Congregation, and took a Javelin in his hand --
, or immediately before 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21. When ye come together therefore into
one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper: v. 21.] For in eating, every
one takes before other his own supper, and o^e is hungry, and another is
drunken.
, or after these Jer. 7. 8, 9, 10. Behold ye trust in lying words that cannot
profit. v. 9.] Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely,
and burn incense to Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not. v. 10.]
And come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my Name, and
say, We are delivered to do all these abominations? Prove. 7. 14, 15. I have
Peace Offerings with me; this day I have paid my vows. v. 15] Therefore come I
forth to meet thee diligently, to seek thy face, and I have found thee. Joh.
13. 27-30. And after the sop Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him,
what thou do, do quickly. -- v. 10.] He then having received the s^p, went
immediately out, etc.
, or other helps to prevent or remedy such miscarriages Ezr. 9. 13, 14. And
after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass,
seeing that thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities deserve, and
given us such deliverance as this. v. 14.] Should we again break thy
Commandments, and join in affinity with the people of those abominations?
would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there
should be no remnant, nor escaping?
; if in public, or in the presence of others who are thereby likely to be
provoked or defiled 2 Samuel 16. 22. So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top
of the house, and Absalom went in unto his fathers concubines in the fight of
all Israel. 1 Samuel 2. 22, 23, 24. Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his
sons did unto all Israel, and how they lay with the women that assembled at the
door of the tabernacle, etc. v. 23.] And he said unto them, why do ye do such
things? for I hear of your evil dealings by all this people. v. 24.] Nay, my
sons; for it is no good report that I hear, ye make the Lords people to
transgress.
.

Q. What does every sin deserve at the hands of God?

A. Every sin, even the least, being against the sovereignty Jam. 2. 10, 11.
For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. v. 11.] For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do
not kill, Now, etc.
, goodness Exodus 20. 1, 2. God spoke all these words, saying. v. 2.] I am the
Lord thy God who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage.
, and holiness of God Hab. 1. 13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil,
and can not look on iniquity: wherefore look thou upon them that deal
treacherously, and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is
more righteous then he? Lev. 10. 3. Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is that
the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and
before all the people will I be glorified. Lev 11. 44, 45. For I am the Lord
your God, ye shall therefore sanctify your selves, and ye shall be holy, for I
am holy; neither shall ye defile your selves with any manner of creeping thing,
etc. v. 45.] For I am the Lord which brings you up from the land of Egypt, to
be your God; ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.
, and, against his righteous law 1 John 3. 4. Whosoever commits sin,
transgresses also the law, for sin is the transgression of the law. Rom 7. 12.
Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, just and good.
, deserves his wrath and curse Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain
words, for because of these things the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience. Gal. 3. 10. For as many as are of the works of the law, are under
the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the book of the law to do them.
, both in this life Lam. 3. 39. Wherefore does aliving man complain, a man for
the punishment of his sin. Deuteronomy. 28. from v. 15. to the end. But it shall come
to pass, if thou will not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe
to do all his commandments, and statutes which I command thee this day, that
all these curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee -- v. 29.] Cursed shall
thou be in the City, and cursed in the Field, cursed in the basket and store,
etc. --
, and that which is to come Mat. 25. 41 -- Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels.
, and cannot be expiated, but by the blood of Christ Heb. 9. 22. And almost all
the things are by the law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood
there is no remission. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. For as much as ye know that ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation, received by tradition from your fathers; v. 19.] But with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.
.

Q. What does God require of us that we may escape his wrath and curse due to
us by reason of the transgression of the Law?

A. That we may escape the wrath and curse of God due to us by reason of the
transgression of the Law, he requires of us repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ Act. 20. 21. Testifying both to the Jews and also
to the Greeks repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
Matt. 3. 7, 8. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his
Baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee
from the wrath to come? v. 8.] Bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance. Act: 16. 30, 31. And he (the Jailer) brought them out, and said,
Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? v. 31. And they said, Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thine house. Ioh. 3. 16-18. For God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him might not perish, but have everlasting life -- v. 18.] He that
believes on him is not condemned, but he that believes not is condemned
already, because, etc.
, and the diligent use of the outward means whereby Christ communicates to us
the benefits of his mediation Prove. 2. from v. 1. to v. 6 My son if thou will
receive my words, and hide my Commandments with thee. v. 2.] So that thou
incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thy heart to understanding, v. 3.]
Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and lif^est up thy voice for understanding,
v. 4.] If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her, as for hide
treasure, v. 5.] Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. Prove. 8. 33, 34, 35, 36. Hear instruction, and be wise, and
refuse it not. v. 34.] Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my
gates, waiting at the posts of my doors. v. 35.] For whosoever finds me, finds
life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. v. 36.] But he that sins against
me, wrongeth his own Soul; all they that hate me, love death.
.

Q. What are the outward means whereby Christ communicates to us the benefits
of his mediation?

A. The outward and ordinary means whereby Christ communicates to his Church
the benefits of his mediation, are, all his ordinances; especially the Word,
Sacraments, and prayer; all which are made effectual to the elect for their
Salvation Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; v. 20.]
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I
am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Act. 2. 42-46, 47. And
they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers -- v. 46.] And they, continuing daily with
one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their
meat with gladness, and singleness of heart. v. 47.] Praising God, and having
favor with all the people. And the Lord added to the Church daily such as
should be saved.
.

Q. How is the word made effectual to Salvation?

A. The Spirit of God makes the Reading, but especially the Preaching of the
word, an effectual means of enlightening Neh. 8 8. So they read in the book in
the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to unstand the
reading. Act. 26. 18. To open their eyes, and turn them from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them who are sanctified by Faith that is in me.
Psalm 19. 8. -- The Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.
, convincing, and humbling sinners 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. But if all prophecy, and
there come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all,
he is judged of all. v. 25.] And thus are the secrets of his heart made
manifest, and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report that
God is in you of a truth. 2 Chro. 34. 18, 19.-26, 27, 28. Then Shaphan the
Scribe told the King saying, Hilkieh the Priest has given me a book. And
Shaphan read it before the King. v. 19.] And when the King had heard the words
of the Law, he rent his cloths. -- v. 26.] And as for the King of Judah, who
sent you to enquire of the Lord, so shall ye say unto him, Thus says the Lord
God of Israel, concerning the words which thou have heard. v. 27.] Because thy
heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self before God, when thou heardst
his words against this place, and humblest thy self before me, and did rent
thy clothes, and weep before me, I have heard thee also, says the Lord. v.
28.] Behold I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be gathered to
thy grave in peace, -- etc. --
, of driving them out of themselves, and drawing them unto Christ Act. 2.
37.-41. Now when they heard this, they were pricked to their hearts, and said
unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do to
be saved? v. 41.] Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and
the same day there were added unto them about 3000 Souls. Act. 8. from ver. 27.
to ver. 39. And behold a man of Ethiopia, an Eunuch of great authority, etc.
was returning, and sitting in his chariot read Esaias the Prophet. v. 29.] Then
the Spirit said to Philip, Go near, and join thy self to this Chario^. v. 30.]
And Philip ran thither to him, and said, Understandest thou what thou read?
etc. -- v. 35.] Then Philip began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him
Jesus. -- V. 36.] -- And the Eunuch said, See here is water, what does hinder
me to be baptized? v. 37.] And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine
heart, thou may. And he answered, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God. -- V. 38.] -- And they went down both into the water, and he
Baptized him.
, of comforming them to his Image 2 Cor 3. 18. But we all with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.
, and subduing them to his will 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6. For the weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong
holds. v. 5.] Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to
the obedience of Christ. v. 6.] And having in a readiness to revenge all
disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled. Romans 6. 17. But God be thanked
that ye were the servants of sin; but ye have obeyed from the heart that form
of doctrine which was delivered to you.
, of strengthening them against temptations and corruptions Mat. 4. 4.-7. --
10. But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live, etc. -- v. 7.]
Jesus said unto him, It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord, etc. -- v.
10.] Then said Jesus unto him, get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, Thou
shall worship, etc. -- Ephesians 6. ^6, 17. Above all taking the shield of Faith,
whereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. v. 17.]
And take the helmet of Salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God. Psalm. 19. 11. Moreover by them is thy servant warned; and in
keeping of them there is great reward. 1 Cor 10. 11. Now all these things
happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon
whom the ends* of the world are c^m^.
, of building them up in grace Act. 20. 32. And now, brethren, I commend you to
God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give
you an inheritance among them that are sanctified. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16 17. And
that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make
thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. v. 16.] All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. v. 17.] That the man
of God may be perfect thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
, and establishing their hearts in holiness and comfort through faith unto
salvation Rome. 16. 25. Now to him that is of power to establish you according
to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of
the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began -- 1 These. 3. 2-10,
11.-13. And sent Timotheus our brother and minister of God, and our fellow
labourer in the Gospel of Christ, to establish you, and comfort you concerning
your faith -- v. 10.] Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your
face, and perfect what is lacking in your faith. v. 11.] Now God himself, and
our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto you -- v. 13.] To the
end he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, etc. Romans
15. 4. For whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our
learning, that through patience and comfort of the Scriptures we might have
hope. Romans 10 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. For whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved. v. 14.] How then shall they call on him, on whom they have
not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
and how shall they hear without a Preacher? v. 15.] And how shall they preach,
except they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? v. 16.] But
they have not all obeyed the Gospel, for Esaias says, Lord, who has believed
our report? v. 17.] So then faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God Romans 1. 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the
power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first and
also to the Greek.


Q. Is the word of God to be read by all?

A. Although all are not to be permitted to read the Word publicly to the
Congregation Deuteronomy. 31. 9.-11 12, 13. And Moses wrote this Law, and delivered it
unto the Priests the sons of Levi, which bare the Ark of the Covenant of the
Lord, and unto all the elders of Israel. -- v. 11.] When all Israel is come to
appear before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose, thou shall
read this law before all Israel in their hearing. v. 12.] Gather the people
together, men, and women, and children, and thy stranger that is within thy
gates, that they may hear, and learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe
to do all the words of this law, v. 13.] And that their children which have not
known any thing, may hear, and learn to fear the Lord your God, as long as ye
live in the land, etc. Neh. 8. 2, 3. And Ezra the Priest brought the law before
the congregation both of men and women, and all that could hear with
understanding. v. 3.] And he read therein before the street that was before the
watergate, from morning till noon, before the men and women, and those that
could understand, and the ears of all the people were attentive unto the book
of the law. Neh. 9. 3, 4, 5. And they stood up in their place, and read in the
book of the law of the Lord their God, one fourth part of the day, and another
fourth part they confessed, and worshipped the Lord their God. v. 4.] Then
stood up upon the stairs of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, etc. and cried with
a loud voice unto the Lord their God. v. 5.] Then the Levites, Jeshua, and
K^dmi^l, etc. said, stand up, and bless the Lord your God, etc.
, yet all sorts of people are bound to read it apart by themselves Deuteronomy. 17.
19. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his
life; that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this
law, and these statutes to do them, Rev. 1. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and
they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein, for the time is at hand. Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of
me. Isa. 34. 16* Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read, no one of these
shall fail, etc.
, and with their families Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. And these words which I command
this day shall be in thine heart; v. 7.] And thou shall teach them diligently
to thy children, and thou shale talk of them when thou sit in thine house,
and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up. v. 8.] And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thy hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. v. 9.] And thou shall write them upon
the posts of thy house, and upon thy gates. Genesis 18. 17-19. And the Lord said,
Shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I do? -- v. 19.] For I know him, that
he will command his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep
the way of the Lord, etc. Psalm. 78. 5, 6, 7. For he established a Testimony in
Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers that they
should make known to their children. v. 6.] That the generations to come might
know them, even the children which should be born, who should arise and declare
them to their children, v. 7.] That they might set their hope in God, and not
forget the works of God, but keep his Commandments.
, to which end the holy Scriptures are to be translated out of the Original
into vulgar languages 1 Cor. 14. 6-9-11. 12-15, 16-24-27, 28. Now, brethren, if
I come unto you, speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall
speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by
doctrine? -- v. 9.] So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy
to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into
the air. -- v. 11.] Therefore If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall
be unto him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a
Barbarian unto me. v. 12.] Even so ye, for as much as ye are zealous of
Spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church. -- v.
15.] What is it then? I will pray with the Spirit, and will pray with
understanding also; I will sing with the Spirit, and with understanding also.
v. 16.] Else when thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies
the room of the unlearned, say, Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say? -- v. 24.] But if all prophecy, and there
come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is
judged of all. -- v. 27.] If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by
two, or at most by three, and that by course, and let one interpret. v. 28.]
But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church, and let him
speak to himself and to God.
.

Q. How is the word of God to be read?

A. The holy Scriptures are to be read, with an high, and reverend esteem of
them Psalm. 19. 10. More to be desired are they then glod, yea then much fine
gold, sweeter also then the honey, and the honeycomb. Neh. 8. from ver. 3. to
ver. 10. And he read therein from morning till noon, etc. and the ears of the
people were attentive unto the book of the Law. V. 4] And Ezra the Scribe stood
upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the same purpose. etc. v. 5.]
And he opened the book, etc. v. 6.] And he blessed the Lord the great God; and
all the people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands, and they
bowed their heads and worshipped the Lord, with their faces to the ground, etc.
-- Exodus 24. 7. And he [Moses] took the book of the Covenant, and read in the
audience of the people; and they said, All that the Lord has said will we do,
and be odedient. 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Because thine heart was tender, and thou
did humble thy self before God, when thou heardest his words against this
place, and humblest thy self before me, and did rent thy clothes, and weep
before me, I have heard thee also, says the Lord. Isa. 66. 2. -- But to this
man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word.
; with a firm persuasion that they are the very Word of God 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20,
21. We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto you do well that ye
take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, till the day dawn, and
the day star arise in your hearts. v. 20.] Knowing this first, that no prophecy
of the Scripture is of any private interpretation. v. 21.] For the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.
, and that he only can enable us to understand them Luke 24. 45. Then opened
he their understandings, that they might understand the scriptures. 2 Cor. 3.
13, 14, 15, 16. And not as Moses, who put a vail over his face, that the
children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is
abolished; v. 14.] But their minds were blinded, for until this day remains
the same vail untaken away, in the reading of the Old Testament; which vail is
done away in Christ. v. 15.] But even to this day, when Moses is read, the vail
is upon their heart. v. 16.] Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the
vail shall be taken away.
, with desire to know, believe and obey the will of God revealed in them Deuteronomy.
17. 19, 20. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days
of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words
of this law, and these statutes to do them. v. 20.] That his heart be not
lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the Commandment,
to the right hand, or to the left; to the end that he might prolong his days
in, etc.
, with diligence Act. 17. 11. These (Bercans) were more noble then those in
Thessalonica; in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the scriptures daily whether these things were so.
, and attention to the matter and scope of them Act. 8. 30-34. And Philip ran
thither to him, and heard him read the Prophet Esaias; and he said,
understandest thou what thou read? -- v. 34.] And the Eunuch said to Philip,
I pray thee of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself, or of some other
man? Luke 10. 26, 27, 28. What is written in the law? how read thou? v. 27.]
And he answering, said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and
thy neighbor as thy self. v. 28.] And he said to him, Thou have answered
right; this do, and thou shall live.
; with meditation Psalm. 1. 2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in
that law does he meditate day and night. Psalm. 119. 97. O how love I thy Law!
it is my meditation all the day.
, application 2 Chr. 34. 21. Go, enquire of the Lord for me, and for them that
are left in Israel, and Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found;
for great is the wrath of the Lord that is poured out upon us, because our
fathers have not kept the word of the Lord, to do all that is written in this
book.
, self-denial Prove. 3. 5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not
to thine own understanding. Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Yea he loved the people; all his
saints are in thy hand; and they sat down at thy feet, every one shall receive
of thy words.
, and prayer Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. My son, if thou will receive my words,
and hide my commandments with thee. v. 2] So that thou incline thine ear to
wisdom and apply thy hear^ to understanding, v. 3.] Yea if thou cryest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, v. 4.] If thou seek
her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures. v. 5.] Then shall
thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God -- v. 6.]
For the Lord gives wisdom; out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding.
Psalm. 119. 18. Open my eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.
Neh. 8. 6-8. And Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God, and all the people
answered Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands; and they bowed their heads,
and worshipped the Lord, with their faces to the ground -- v. 8.] So they read
in the book, in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them
to understand the reading. --


Q. By whom is the Word of God to be preached?

A. The Word of God is to be preached only by such as are sufficiently gifted
1 Timothy 3. 2.-6. A bishop then must be. blameless, the husband of one wise,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality apt to teach -- v. 6]
Not a novice, least being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation,
etc. Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men v. 9.] (Now that he ascended,
what is it but that he also descended, etc. --) v. 11.] And he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, etc* Hos. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because
thou have rejected knowledge, I will reject thee, that thou shall be no priest
to me; seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy
children. Mal. 2. 7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should
seek the Law at his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. 2 Cor.
3. 6. Who also has made us able ministers of the new Testament not of the
letter, but of the Spirit, for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
, and also duly approved and called to that office Ier. 14. 13. Therefore thus
says the Lord concerning the Prophets that prophecy in my Name, and I sent
them not, yet they say, etc. Romans 10. 15. And how shall they preach except they
be sent? as it is written, How beautiful, etc. Heb. 5. 4. And no man takes
this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. 1 Cor.
12. 28, 29. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then gifts of healing, Helps,
Governments, diversities of tongues. v. 29,] Are all Apostles? are all P^opets?
are all Teachers? are all workers of Miracles? 1 Timothy 3. 10. And let these also
first be proved; then let them use the office of a Deacon, being found
blameless 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect no^ the gift that is in thee, which was given
thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. 1 Timothy 5.
22. Lay hands suddenly on no man; neither be partaker of other men's sins, etc.
.

Q How is the Word of God to be preached by those that are called thereunto?

A. They that are called to labor in the ministry of the Word, are to preach
sound doctrine Tit. 2. 1.-8. But speak thou the things that become sound
doctrine. -- v. 8.] Sound speech that cannot be condemned, that he who is of
the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.
, diligently Act. 18. 25. This man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and
being servent in the Spirit, he spoke and taught diligently the things of the
Lord, etc.
; in season, and out of season 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the word: be instant in
season, out of season; rebuke, reprove, exhort, with all long suffering, and
doctrine.
; plainly 1 Cor. 14. 19. Yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with
my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousand
words in an unknown tongue.
, not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit,
and power 1 Cor. 2. 4. And my speech, and my preaching was not with enticing
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power.
; faithfully Jer. 23. 28. The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream,
and he that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully: What is the chaff
to the wheat, says the Lord? 1 Cor 4. 1, 2. Let a man so account of us as of
the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. v. 2.] Moreover
it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.
, making known the whole counsel of God Act. 20. 27. For I have not shunned to
declare unto you the whole counsel of God.
; wisely Col. 1. 28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man
in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 2.
15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
, applying themselves to the necessities and capacities of the hearers 1 Cor.
3. 2. I have sed you with milk, and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not
able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14. For when for
the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which
be the first principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as have need
of milk, and not of strong meat. v. 13.] For every one that uses milk is
unskilful in the word of righteousness; for he is a babe. v. 14.] But strong
meat belongs to them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use,
have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil. Luke 12. 42. And the
Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make
ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season?
zealously Act. 18. 25. This man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and
being fervent in the Spirit he spoke and taught diligently the things of the
Lord, etc.
, with fervent love to God 2 Cor. 5. 13, 14. For whether we be besides our
selves, it is to God, or whether we be sober, it is for your cause. v. 14.] For
the love of Christ constrains us; because we thus judge, that if one dyed for
all, then were all dead. Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17. Some indeed preach Christ out of
envy and strife, and some also of good will. v. 16.] The one preach Christ of
contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds. v. 7.] But
the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the Gospel:
, and the souls of his people Col. 4. 12. Epaphras who is one of you, a servant
of Christ, saluteth you; always laboring servently for you in prayers, that
ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. 2 Cor. 12. 15. And I
will very gladly spend, and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love
you; the less I be loved.
; sincerely 2 Cor. 2. 17. For we are not as many, who corrupt the word of God,
but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speak we in Christ. 2
Cor. 4. 2. But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
, aiming at his glory 1 These. 2. 4, 5, 6. But as we are allowed of God to be
put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God,
who tries the hear^s. v. 5.] For neither at any time used we flattering words,
as ye know, not a cloak of covetousness, God is witness. v. 6.] Nor of men
sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been
burdensome, as the Apostles of Christ. Joh. 7. 18. He that speaks of himself,
seeks his own glory: but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is
true and no unrighteousness is in him.
, and their conversion 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22. For though I be free from all
men, yet have I made my self servant unto all, that I might gain the more. v.
20.] And unto the Jews, I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to
them that are under the Law as under the Law, that, etc. v. 21.] To them that
are without Law, as without Law, that, etc. v. 22.] To the weak, became I as
weak that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, etc.
, edification, 2 Cor. 12 19. Again, think you that we excuse our selves unto
you; we speak before God in Christ: but we do all things, dearly beloved, for
your edifying. Ephesians. 4. 12. For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of
the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.
, and salvation 1 Timothy 4. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and to the doctrine;
continue in them: for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them
that hear thee. Act. 16. 16, 17, 18. But rise and stand upon thy feet; for I
have appeared unto thee, for this purpose, to make thee a minister, and a
witness, etc. v. 17.] Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles
unto whom I now send thee, v. 18.] To open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith
that is in me.
.

Q. What is required of those that hear the Word preached?

A. It is required of those that hear the Word preached, that they attend upon
it with diligence Prove. 8 34. Blessed is the man that hears me watching daily
at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
, preparation 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Wherefore laying aside all malice and all guile,
and hypocrisy, and envies, and evil-speakings. v. 2.] As new born babes, desire
the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow thereby. Luk 8. 18. Take beed
therefore how ye hear; for whosoever has, to him shall be given, and whosoever
has not, from him shall be taken, etc.
, and prayer Psalm. 119. 18. Open mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things
out of thy law. Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and
supplication for all saints, v. 19.] And for me, that utterance may be given
unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the
Gospel.
, examine what they hear by the Scriptures Act. 17. 11. These were more noble
then those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness
of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so.
, receive the truth with faith Heb. 4. 2. For unto us was the Gospel preached
as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them; being not
mixed with faith in them that heard it.
, love 2 These. 2. 10. And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them
that perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they might
be saved.
, meekness Jam. 1. 21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of
naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to
save your souls.
, and readiness of mind Act. 17. 11. These were more noble then those in
Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so.
, as the Word of God 1 These. 2. 13. For this cause also thank we God without
ceasing, because when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye
received it not as the word of men, but, as it is in truth, the word of God,
which effectually works also in you that believe.
; meditate Luke 9. 44. Let these sayings sink down into your ears; for the Son
of man shall be delivered, etc. Heb. 2. 1. Therefore we ought to give the more
diligent heed to the things we have heard, left at any time we should let them
slip.
, and confer of it Luke 24. 14. And they talked together of all these things
which had happened. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day
shall be in thine heart; v. 7.] And thou shall teach them diligently to thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.
; hide it in their hearts Prove. 2. 1 My son, if thou will receive my words, and
hide my commandments with thee. Psalm. 119. 11: Thy word have I hid in my heart,
that I might not sin against thee.
, and bring forth the fruit of it in their lives Luke 8. 15. But that on the
good ground are they which with an honest and good heart having heard the word,
keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Jam. 1. 25. But whosoever looks
into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, being not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the word, this man shall be blessed in his deed.


Q. How do the Sacraments become effectual means of salvation?

A. The Sacraments become effectual means of salvation; not by any power in
themselves, or any virtue derived from the piety and intention of him by whom
they are administered; but only by the working of the holy Ghost, and the
blessing of Christ by whom they are instituted 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like figure
whereunto even Baptism does also now save us, (not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Act. 8. 13 Then Simon himself believed also: and
when he was baptized, he continued with Phil^p, and wondered, beholding the
miracles and signs which were done. Compared with v. 23.] For I perceive (said
Peter to Simon) that thou art in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of
iniquity. 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. I have planted, Apollo watered: but God gave the
in^rease. v. 7.] So then neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. 1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one Spirit
are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jew^^, ^^ Gentil^^; bond, or
free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.


Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is an holy ordinance instituted by Christ in his Church Genesis
17. 7.-10 And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and their seed
after thee in their generations* for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee. -- v. 10.] This is my Covenant which ye shall
keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee: Every man-child among you
shall be circumcised. Exodus Cap. 12. Containing the institution of the
Passover. Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, Baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Mat. 26. 26, 27,
28, And as they were earing, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it,
and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, This is my body. v. 27.] And
he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of
it; v. 28.] For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many
for the remission of sins.
, to signify, seal, and exhibit Romans 4. 11. And he received the sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had, yet being
uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all them that believe, though
they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed unto them also. 1
Cor. 11. 24, 25. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take,
eat, this is my body which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. v.
25.] After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my blood: this do ye, as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me.
, unto those that are within the Covenant of grace Romans 15. 8. Now I say, that
Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision, for the truth of God, to
confirm the promises made unto the fathers. Exodus 12. 48. And when a stranger
shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his
males he circumcised, and then let him come near, and keep it: and he shall be
as one that is born in the land; for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.
, the benefits of his meditation Act. 2. 38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent,
and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 10. 16. The
Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ?
The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ?
; to strengthen and increase their faith, and all other graces Romans 4. 11. See
in [u] above. Gal. 3. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ.
; to oblige them to obedience Romans 6. 3, 4. Know ye not that so many of us as
were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? v. 4.] Therefore
we are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up
from the dead by the glory of the father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life. 1 Cor. 10. 21. Ye cannot drink of the Cup of the Lord, and the
cup of Devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and the table of
Devils.
; to testify, and cherish their love and communion one with another Ephesians. 4. 2,
3, 4, 5. With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
another in love. v. 3.] endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace. v. 4.] There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called
in one hope of your calling. v. 5.] One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, 1 Cor.
12. 13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one
spirit.
, and to distinguish them from those that are without Ephesians. 2. 11. 12. Wherefore
remember that ye being in time passed Gentiles in the flesh, who are called
Uncircumcision by that which is called the Circumcision in the flesh made by
hands. v. 12.] That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world. Genesis 34. 14. And they said unto them, We
cannot do this thing to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised, for that
were a reproach to us.


Q. What are the parts of a Sacrament?

A. The parts of a Sacrament are two; the one, an outward and sensible sign,
used according to Christ's own appointment; the other an inward and Spiritual
grace, thereby signified Mat. 3. 11. I indeed baptize you with water unto
repentance, but he that comes after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am
not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. 1
Pet. 3. 21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism does also now save us (not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Romans 2. 28, 29. For he is not
a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in
the flesh: v. 29.] But he is a Jew, who is one inwardly, and circumcision is
that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of
men, but of God.


Q How many Sacraments has Christ instituted in his Church under the New
Testament?

A. Under the New Testament Christ has instituted in his Church only two
Sacraments; Baptism, and the Lords Supper Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 11. 20.-23. When ye come together therefore into
one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. -- ver* 23.] For I have
received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus
the same night wherein he was betrayed, took bread; etc. Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28.
And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and -- etc. See above in [t]


Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, wherein Christ has ordained
the washing with water, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost
, to be a sign and seal of ingrafting into himself Gal. 3. 27. For as many of
you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.
, of remission of sins by his blood Mark. 1. 4. John did baptize in the
wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins.
Rev. 1. 5. -- Unto him that loved us, and wished us from our sins in his own
blood.
, and regeneration by his Spirit Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which
we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Ephesians. 5. 26. That he might
sanctify, and cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word.
; of Adoption Gal. 3. 26, 27. For ye are all the children of God, by faith in
Christ Jesus. v. 27.] For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have
put on Christ.
and resurrection unto everlasting life 1 Cor. 15. 29. Else what shall they do
that are baptized for the dead? if the dead rise not at all, why are they then
baptized for the dead? Romans 6. 5. For if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.
, and whereby the parties baptized are solemnly admitted into the visible
Church 1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews, or Gentiles; bond, or free; and are all made to drink into
one Spirit.
, and enter into an open and professed engagement to be wholly and only the
Lords Romans 6. 4. Therefore we are buried by baptism with him into death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of his father, so we
also should walk in newness of life.
.

Q. Unto whom is Baptism to be administered?

A. Baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the visible
Church, and so strangers from the Covenant of promise, till they profess their
faith in Christ, and obedience to him Act. 8. 36, 37. And as they went on their
way they came to a certain water; and the Eunuch said, see here is water; what
hinders me to be baptized? v. 37. And Philip said, If thou believe with all
thine heart, thou may; And he answered, and said, I believe that Jesus is
the Son of God -- and he baptized him. Act. 2 38. Then Peter said, repent and
be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
, but infants descending from parents, either both, or but one of them,
professing faith in Christ, and obedience to him, are in that respect within
the Covenant, and to be baptized Genesis 17. 7-9. And I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, for an
everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. -- And
God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy seed
after thee in their generations; this is my Covenant, etc. Compared with Gal.
3. 9.-14. So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. --
v. 4. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. And with
Col. 2. 11, 12. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made
without hands, in cutting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
circumcision of Christ. v. 12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also ye are
risen with him through the faith of the operation of God who has raised him
from the dead. And with Act. 2. 38, 39. Then Peter said, repent, and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. v. 39. For the promise
is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many
as the Lord our God shall call. And with Romans 4. 11, 12. And he received the
sign of Circumcision, a seal of the Righteousness of faith which he had being
yet uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all them who believe, though
they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed unto them also.
v. 12. And the father of Circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision
only, but also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he
had being yet uncircumcised. 1 Cor. 7. 14. For the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband;
else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. Mat 28. 19. Go ye
therefore tea^h all nations baptizing them in the name, etc. Luke 18. 15, 16.
And they brought unto him also infants, that he should touch them; but when his
discsples saw it, they rebuked them. v. 16. But Jesus called them unto him, and
said, suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not, for of such
is the kingdom of heaven. Romans 11. 16. For if the first fruits be holy, the
lump is also holy; and if the root be holy, so are the branches.
.

Q. How is our Baptism to be improved by us?

A. The needful but much neglected duty of improving our Baptism, is to be
performed by us all our life long; especially in the time of temptation, and
when we are present at the administration of it to others Col. 2. 11, 12. In
whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ. V.
12.] Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through
the faith of the operation of God who has raised him from the dead. Romans 6.
4-6-11. Therefore we are buried by baptism with him into death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of his father, so we also
should walk in newness of life -- V. 6.] Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin -- V. 11.] Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead
indeed unto sin, bu^ alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
, by serious and thankful consideration of the nature of it, and of the ends
for which Christ instituted it, the privileges and benefits conferred and
sealed thereby, and our solemn vow made therein Rom 6. 3, 4, 5. Know ye not
that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death? V. 4.] Therefore we are buried by baptism with him into death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of his father, so we
also should walk in newness of life, V. 5.] For if we have been planted
together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of
his resurrection.
, by being humbled for our sinful defilement, our falling short of, and walking
contrary to the grace of Baptism and our engagements 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12, 13. For
it has been declared unto me of you my brethren, by them which are of the
house of Ch^o^, tha^ there are contentions among you. V. 11.] Now this I say,
that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo, and I of Cephas,
and I of Christ. V. 13.] Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were
ye baptized in the name of Paul? Romans 6. 2, 3. -- God forbid. How shall we that
are dead to sin, live any longer therein? V. 3.] Know ye not that so many of us
as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death?
, by growing up to assurance of pardon of sin, and of all other blessings
sealed to us in that Sacrament Romans 4. 11, 12. And he received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of righteousness of faith, which he had, being yet
uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all them who believe, though they
be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed unto them also; V. 12.]
And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only,
but also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had
being yet uncircumcised. 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like figure whereunto even batpisme,
does also now save us, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
answer of a good conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
, by drawing strength from the death and resurrection of Christ, into whom we
are baptized, for the mortifying of sin, and quickening of grace Romans 6. 3, 4,
5. See above in [q]
, and by endeavoring to live by faith Gal. 3. 26, 27. For ye are all the
children of God by faith in Jesus Christ. V. 27.] For as many of you as have
been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
, to have our conversation in holiness and righteousness Romans 6. 22. But now
being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life.
, as those that have therein given up their names to Christ Act. 2. 38. Then
Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost.
, and to walk in brotherly love, as being baptized by the same Spirit into one
body 1 Cor. 12. 13, -- 25, 26, 27. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into
one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free; and are all made to
drink into one Spirit -- V. 25.] That there should be no Schism in the body,
but the members should have the same care one of another. V. 26.] And whether
one member suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one member be honored,
all the members rejoice with it. V. 27.] Now ye are the body of Christ and
members in particular.
.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament of the New Testament Luke 22 20. Likewise
also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the New Testament in my blood
which is shed for you.
, wherein, by giving and receiving bread and wine according to the appointment
of Jesus Christ, his death is showed forth; and they that worthily communicate,
feed upon his body and blood, to their spiritual nourishment and growth in
grace Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and
blessed it, and br^ke it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat,
this is my body. V. 27.] And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to
them, saying, Drink ye all of it. V. 28.] For this is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24,
25, 26. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you,
that the Lord Jesus in the same night wherein he was betrayed, took bread; V.
24.] And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my
body, which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me. V. 25.] After the
same manner also he took the Cup, when he had Supped, saying, This Cup is the
New Testament in my blood; this do ye as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of
me. V. 26.] For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come.
, have their union and communion with him confirmed 1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? and
the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? --
, testify and renew their thankfulness 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26. For I have
received of the Lord, etc. -- See above in [a]
, and engagement to God 1 Cor. 10. 14, 15, 16. 21. Wherefore, my dearly
beloved, flee from idolatry. V. 15.] I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I
say. V. 16.] The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? that bread which we break, is it not the communion of the
body of Christ? -- V. 21.] Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of
Devils;
ye cannot be partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of Devils. and
their mutual love and fellowship each with other, as members of the same
mystical body Cor. 10. 17. For we being many are one bread, and one body, for
we are all partakers of that one bread.
.

Q. How has Christ appointed bread and wine to be given and received in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

A. Christ has appointed the Ministers of his Word, in the administration of
this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to set apart the bread and wine from common
use, by the word of institution, thanksgiving, and prayer, to take and break
the bread, and to give both the bread, and the Wine to the Communicants, who
are, by the same appointment, to take, and eat the Bread, and to drink the
Wine, in thankful remembrance, that the body of Christ was broken and given,
and his blood shed for them 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. For I have received of the Lord;
that which, etc. See before under [a] Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28. And as they were
eating, Jesus* took bread, etc. See before at [a] Mark. 14. 22, 23, 24. And as
they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave to them,
and said, Take, eat, this is my body. V. 27.] And he took the cup, and when he
had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. V. 28.] And he
said unto them, This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many.
Luke 22. 19, 20. And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it
to them, saying, This is my body which it given for you; This ^^ in remembrance
of me. V. 20.] Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the New
Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.
.

Q. How do they that worthily communicate in the Lords Supper, feed upon the
body and blood of Christ therein?

A. As the body and blood of Christ are not corporally or carnally present in,
with, or under the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper Act. 3. 21. Whom the
heaven must receive until the time of the restitution of all things, which God
has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began.
, and yet are spiritually present to the faith of the receiver, no less truly
and really then the elements themselves are to their outward senses Mat. 26.
26-28. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it,
and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body. -- V. 28.]
For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins.
, so they that worthily communicate in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, do
therein feed upon the body and blood of Christ, not after a corporal, or
carnal, but in a spiritual manner, yet truly and really 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat,
this is my body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. V. 25.]
After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This
cup is the New Testament in my blood: This do ye as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me. V. 26.] For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup,
ye do show the Lords death till he come. V. 27.] Wherefore whosoever shall eat
this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. V. 28.] But let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. V. 29.] For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning
the Lords body.
, while by faith they receive and apply unto themselves Christ crucified, and
all the benefits of his death 1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we
break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?
.

Q. How are they that receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to prepare
themselves before they come unto it?

A. They that receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, are, before they come,
to prepare themselves thereunto, by examining themselves 1 Cor. 11. 18. But let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.
, of their being in Christ 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether you be in
the faith; prove your own selves; know ye not your own selves how that Christ
is in you, except ye he reprobates?
, of their sins, and wants 1 Cor. 5. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven,
that ye may be a dew lump, as ye are unleavened; for (...) Christ our Passover
is sacrificed for us. Compared with Exodus 12. 15. Seven days shall ye eat
unleavened bread, even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your
houses. For whosoever eats leavened bread from the first day until the
seventh, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
, of the truth and measure of their knowledge 1 Cor. 11. 29. For he that eats
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lords body.
, faith 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith, etc. See
above in [m] Mat. 26. 28. For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins.
, repentance Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour out upon the house of David, and
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of supplications, and
they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as
one that mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one
that is in bitterness for his firstborn. 1 Cor. 11. 31: For if we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged.
, love to God and the brethren 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. The Cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? V. 17. For we being many
are one bread, and one body: for we all partake of that one bread. Act. 2. 46,
47. And they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread
from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of
heart, V. 47. Praising God, and having favor with all the people; and the Lord
added to the Church daily such as should be saved.
, charity to all men 1 Cor. 5. 8. Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old
leaven, nor with the leaven of malice, and wickedness, but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth. 1 Cor. 11. 18-20. For first of all, when ye come
together in the Church, I hear that there be divisions among you, and I partly
believe it. -- V. 20. When ye come together therefore into one place, this is
not to eat the Lords Supper.
, forgiving those that have done them wrong Mat. 5. 23, 24. Therefore if thou
bring thy gift to the Altar, and there rememberst that thy brother has ought
against thee, v. 24. Leave there thy way, first be recnociled to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift.
, of their desires after Christ Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts come
ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come
buy milk and wine without money, and without price. Job. 7. 37. In the last
day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink.
, and of their new obedience 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. Purge out therefore the old
leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened; for even Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us. v. 8. Therefore let us keep the feast, not with
old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice, and wickednese, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
; and by renewing the exercise of these graces 1 Cor. 11. 25, 26, -- 28. After
the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This Cup is
the New Testament in my blood; this do ye, as often as ye do it in remembrance
of me. v. 26. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye show
the Lords death till he come -- v. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. Heb. 10 21, 22-24. And having
an High Priest over the house of God, v. 22. Let us draw near with a true
heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water: -- v. 24. And let us
consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works. Psalm. 26. 6. I
will wash mine hands in innocence, so will I compass thine altar, O Lord.
, by serious meditation 1 Cor. 11. 24. 25. And when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you: this do
in remembrance of me. v. 25. After the same manner also he took the cup,
saying, This, etc. -- This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.
and fervent prayer 2 Ohr. 30. 18, 19. For a multitude of the people, even many
of Ephraim, and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves:
yet did they eat the Passover otherwise then it was written, but Hezekiah
prayed for them, saying, The good Lord pardon every one, V. 19.] That prepares
his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed
according to the purification of the Sanctuary. Mat. 26. 26. And as they were
eating Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, etc.
.

Q. May one who doubts of his being in Christ, and of his due preparation,
come to the Lords Supper?

A. One who doubts of his being in Christ, or of his due preparation to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, may have true interest in Christ, though he be
not yet assured thereof Isa 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord,
that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no
light? let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. 1 John 5.
13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the
Name of the Son of God. Psalm. 88. throughout. Psalm. 77 from ver. 1. to the 12.
I cried unto God with my voice, etc. -- V. 3.] I remembered God, and was
troubled, etc. -- V. 4.] Thou boldest mine eyes waking, etc -- V. 7.] Will the
Lord cast off for ever* -- Is his mercy clean gone for ever! Does his promise
fail for evermore? -- V. 10] And I said, This is mine infirmity: but I will
remember the years of the right hand of the most High, etc. -- Jonah 2. 4.-7.
Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again toward thine
holy Temple. -- V. 7.] When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord,
and my prayers came in unto thee into thine holy Temple.
; and in Gods account, has it, if he be duly affected with the apprehension of
the want of it Isa. 54. 7, 8, 9, 10. For a small moment have I forsaken thee,
but with great mercies will I gather thee. V. 8.] In a little wrath I hid my
face from thee, but with everlastinng kindness will I have mercy on thee, says
the Lord thy redeemer. V. 9] For this is as the waters of Noah unto me; for as
I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have
I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. V. 10.] For the
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, nor shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee. Mat. 5. 3, 4. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. V. 4.] Blessed are they that mourn: for they
shall be comforted. Psalm. 31. 22. For I said in mine have, I am cut off from
before thine eyes; nevertheless, thou heardest the voice of my supplication,
when I cried unto thee. Psalm. 73. 13.-22, 23. Verily I have cleansed my heart
in vain, and washed mine hands in innocence. -- V. 22.] So foolish was I and
ignorant; I was as a beast before thee. V. 23.] Nevertheless I am continually
with thee; thou have holdenn me by my right hand.
, and unfainedly desires to be found in Christ Phil. 3. 8* 9. Yea doubtless,
and I account all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung, that I may win Christ. V. 9.] And be found in him, 10: having
mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Psalm. 10. 17. --
Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble; thou wi^t prepare their heart,
thou will cause thine ear to hear. Psalm. 43. 1, 2-5 -- Judge me, O God, and
plead my cause against etc. -- V. 2.] For thou art the God of my strength, why
do thou cast me off? etc. -- V. 5.] Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and
why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God; for I shall yet praise him who
is the health of my countenance and my God.
, and to depart from iniquity 2 Timothy 2. 19. Nevertheless the foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them that are his, and let
every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity. Isa 50. 10. Who
is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that
walks in darkness and has no light? let him trust in the Name of the Lord,
and stay him upon his God. Psalm. 66. 18, 19, 20. If I regard iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me. V. 19.] But verily God has heard me, he has
attended to the voice of my prayer. V. 20.] Blessed be God who has not turned
away my prayer nor his mercy from me.
: in which case (because promises are made, and this Sacrament is appointed for
the relief even of weak and doubting Christians Isa. 40. 11.-19.-31. He shall
feed his flock like a Shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and
carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those which are with young. -- V.
29.] He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases
strength. V. 31.] But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary;
they shall walk, and not faint. Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor,
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Mat. 12. 20. A bruised read
shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth
judgment unto victory. Mat. 26. 28. For this is my blood of the New Testament
which is shed for many, for the remission of sins.
, he is to bewail his unbelief Mar. 9. 24. And straitway the father of the
child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief.
; and labor to have his doubts resolved Act. 2. 37. Now when they heard this,
they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Act. 16. 30. -- And he brought
them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?
, and so doing he may and ought to come to the Lords Supper, that he may be
further strengthened Romans 4. 11. And he received the sign of Circumcision, a
Seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had being yet uncircumcised,
that he might be the father of all them that believe, though they be not
circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed unto them also. 1 Cor. 11. 28.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup.
.

Q. May any who profess the faith, and desire to come to the Lords Supper, be
kept from it?

A. Such as are found to be ignorant, or scandalous, notwithstanding their
profession of the Faith, and desire to come to the Lords Supper, may and ought
to be kept from that Sacrament by the power which Christ has left in his
Church 1 Cor. 11. 27 to the end. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord. V. 28.] But let a man examine himself, and so, etc. -- V. 29.] For he
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself,
not discerning the Lords body. V. 30] For this cause many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep V. 31.] For if we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged, etc. -- Compared with Mat. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy
unto the dogs, neither cast you your pearls before swine, least they trample
them under their feet, and turn again and rent you. And with 1 Cor. 5. to the
end. And with Jude v. 23. And others save with fear, pulling them out of the
fire, hating even the garment spotted with the flesh. And with 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partakers of other man's sins. Keep thy
self pure.
, until they receive instruction, and manifest their reformation 2 Cor. 2. 7.
So that contrariwise ye ought to forgive him, and comfort him, least perhaps
such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.
.

Q. What is required of them that receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in
the time of the administration of it?

A. It is required of them that receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that
during the time of the administration of it, with all holy reverence and
attention they wait upon God in that Ordinance Lev. 10. 3. Then Moses said unto
Aaron, This is that which the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them
that come nigh me, and before all the people will I be glorified. Heb. 12. 28.
Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom that cannot be moved, let us have grace
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence, and godly fear. Psalm. 5. 7.
But as for me, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies, and
in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple. 1 Cor. 11. 17-26, 27. Now
i^ this that I declare unto you I praise you not, that ye come together not for
the better, but for the worse. -- V. 26. For as often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come V. 27. Wherefore,
whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
, diligently observe the sacramental Elements and actions Exodus 24. 8. And
Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood
of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you concerning all these words.
Compared with Mat. 26. 28. For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins.
, heedfully discern the Lords body 1 Cor. 11. 29. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning
the Lords body.
, and affectionately meditate on his death and sufferings Luke 22. 19. -- This
do in remembrance of me.
, and thereby stir up themselves to a vigorous exercise of their graces 1 Cor.
11. 26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come. 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5-11-14. And did all eat the same
Spiritual meat; V. 4. And did all drink the same Spiritual drink; for they
drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. V. 5
But with many of them God was not well pleased; for they were overthrown in the
wilderness* -- V. 11. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and
they are written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come.
V. 14 Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idolatry.
, in judging themselves 1 Cor. 11. 31 i. For if we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged.
, and sorrowing for sin Ze^h. 12. 10. And I will pour out upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and
supplication, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son; and be in bitterness
for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.
, in earnest hungring and thirsting after Christ Rev. 22. 17. And the Spirit,
and the Bride say, Come. And let him that hears, say, Come. And let him that
is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the waters of life freely.
, feeding on him by faith Jo^ 6* 35. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread
of life. He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me
shall never thirst.
, receiving of his fullness Joh. 1. 16. And of his fullness have we all received,
and grace for grace.
, trusting in his merits Phil. 3. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith
, rejoicing in his love (x), giving thanks for his grace Psalm. 22. 26. The meek
shall eat and be satisfied, they shall praise the Lord that seek him; your
heart shall live for ever.
, in renewing of their covenant with God Ier. 50. 5. They shall ask the way to
Zion, with their faces thitherward, saying, come and let us join our selves to
the Lord in a perpetual covenant, that shall not be forgotten. Psalm. 55. Gather
my Saints together unto me, those that have made a covenant with me by
sacrifice.
, and love to all the Saints Act. 2. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and in prayers.
(*) Psalm. 63. 4, 5. Thus will I bless thee while I live, I will lift up mine
hands in thy name. v. 5.] My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness
and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. 2 Cor. 30. 21. And the
children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem, kept the feast of unleavened
bread seven days, with great gladness; and the Levites, and the Priests
praised the Lord day by day, singing with loud instruments to the Lord*


Q. What is the duty of Christians after they have received the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper?

A. The duty of Christians after they have received the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, is, seriously to consider how they have behaved themselves therein, and
with what success Psalm. 28. 7. The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart
trusted in him, and I am helped, therefore my heart greatly rejoices, and with
my song will I praise him. Psalm* 85. 8. I will hear what the Lord will speak,
for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not
turn again to folly. 1 Cor. 11. 17-30. 31. Now in this that I declare unto you,
I praise you not, that ye come together, not for the better, but for the worse
-- v. 30.] For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.
v. 31.] For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.
; if they find quickening and comfort, to bless God for it 2 Chr. 30. 21. 22,
23-25, 26. And the children of Israel that was present at Jerusalem kept the
feast of Unleavened bread seven days with great gladness: and the Levites and
the priests praised the Lord day by day; singing with loud instruments to the
Lord, -- etc. -- Act. 2. 42-46, 47. And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and in prayer -- v.
46.] And they continuing daily with own accord in the Temple, and breaking
bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of
heart; v. 47.] Praising God, and having favor with all the people, etc.
, beg the continuance of it Psalm. 36. 10. O continue thy loving kindness unto
them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart. Cant. 3.
4. It was but a little that I passed from them, bu^ I found him whom my soul
loves, I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my
mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me. 1 Cor. 29. 18. O
Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel our fathers, keep this for ever in the
imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and pepare their heart
unto thee.
, watch against relapses 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5-11. And did all eat the same
spi^itual meat, v. 4.] And did all drink the same spiritual drink; (for they
drink of that same spi^itual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ)
v. 5.] But with many of them God was not well pleased, for they were overthrown
in the wilderness. -- v. 1^.] Wherefore let him that thinks he stands take
heed lest be fall:
, fulfill their vows Psalm. 50. 14. Offer unto God, thanksgiving, and pay thy
vows unto the most High.
, and encourage themselves to a frequent attendance on that ordinance 1 Cor.
11. 25, 26 -- Do this as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. v. 26.] For
as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till
he come. Act. 2. 42.-46. And they continued sted fastly in the Apostles
doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and in prayer -- v. 46.] And
they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from
house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart.
, but if they find no present benefit, more exactly to review their preparation
to, and carriage at the Sacrament Cant. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Keep thy foot when
thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear, then to give the
sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that they do evil. v. 2.] Be not rash
with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God,
etc. v. 3.] For a dream comes through multitude of business, and a fools voice
is known by multitude of words. v. 4.] When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer
not to pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools, pay that thou have vowed. v.
5.] Better is it that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow, and
not pay. v. 6*] Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say
thou before the Angel, that it was an error; wherefore should God be angry at
thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?
; in both which if they can approve themselves to God and their own
consciences, they are to wait for the fruit of it in due time Psalm. 123. 1, 2.
Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens. v. 2.]
Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and as the
eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistress; so wait our eyes upon the Lord
our God, until he have mercy upon us. Psalm 42. 5-8. Why art thou cast down, O
my soul? and why art thou disquieted with me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet
praise him for the help of his countenance -- v. 8.] For the Lord will command
his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night his song shall be with
me, and my prayer unto the God of my life. Psalm. 43. 3, 4, 5. O send ou^ thy
light and thy truth; let them lead me, let them bring me into thy holy hill,
and to thy tabernacles. v. 4.] Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God,
my exceeding joy; yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God -- v. 5]
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope
in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my
God.
, but if they see they have failed in either, they are to be humbled 1 Chr. 30.
18, 19. For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim, and Manasseh,
Issachar, and Zebulon, bad not cleansed themselves; yet did they eat the
Passover, otherwise then it was written. But H^zekiah prayed for them, saying,
The good Lord pardon every one, v. 19.] That prepares his heart to seek God,
the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the sanctuary. Isai. 1. 16-18. Wash you, make you clean, put
away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil -- v. 18.
Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as
skarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they
shall be as wool.
, and to attend upon it afterward with more care and diligence 2 Cor 7. 11. For
behold this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carefulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea what
indignation, yea what fear, yea what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea what
revenge? in all things ye have approved your selves to be clear in this matter.
1 Chr. 15. 12, 13, 14. And David said unto them, ye are the chief of the
Fathers of the Levites, sanctify your selves, both ye, and your brethen, that
ye may bring up the ark of the Lord God of Israel unto the place that I have
prepared for it. v. 13.] For because ye did it not at the first, the Lord our
God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order. v.
14.] So the Priests and Levites sanctified themselves, to bring up the Ark of
the Lord God of Israel.
.

Q. Wherein do the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper agree?

A. The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, agree, in that the author
of both is God Mat. 28. 19. Go therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them
in the name, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 23. For I have received of the Lord that which I
also delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus in the same night wherein he was
betrayed, took bread, etc.
, the spiritual part of both is Christ and his benefits Romans 6. 3, 4. Know ye
not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into
his death? v. 4.] Therefore we are buried with him by bapitsme into death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of his Father, even so
we also should walk in newness of life. 1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which
we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?
, both are seals of the same Covenant Romans 4. 11. And he received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith, which he had, being yet
uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all them who believe, though they
be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed unto them also;
Compared with Col. 2. 11, 12. In whom also ye were circumcised with the
Circumcision made without hands, in putting away the body of the sins of the
flesh, by the cirumcision of Christ, buried with him in baptism, wherein also
ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God who has raised
him from the dead. Mat. 26. 27, 28. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and
gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this; v. 28. For this is my blood of
the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
, are to be dispensed by Ministers of the Gospel and by none other Joh. 1. 33.
And I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said
unto me, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, etc. -- Mat. 28. 19.
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 11. 23. For I have received
of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same
night wherein he was betrayed, took bread, etc. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so
account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of
God. Heb. 5. 4. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron.
, and to be continued in the Church of Christ until his second coming Mat. 28.
19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing, etc. -- v. 20.
Teaching them to observe all things which I command you; and lo, I am with you
even to the end of the world. 1 Cor. 11. 26. For as often as ye eat this bread,
and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come.


Q. Wherein do the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper differ?

A. The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper differ, in that, Baptism
is to be administered but once, with water; to be a sign and seal of our
regeneration and ingrafting into Christ Mat. 3. 1^. I indeed baptize you with
water unto repentance, but he that comes after me, etc. Tit. 3. 5. Not by
works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost. Gal. 3. 27.
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
, and that even to infants Genesis 17. 7.-9. And I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations for an
everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and thy seed after thee. -- v. 9.]
And God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy
seed after thee in their generations. Act. 2. 38, 39. Then Peter said unto
them, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus for the
remission of sin, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. v. 39.] For
the promise is unto you and to your children, and to all that are afar off,
even as many as the Lord our God shall call. 1 Cor 7. 14. For the unbelieving
husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by
the husband; else were your children unclean, but now they are holy.
whereas the Lords Supper is to be administered often, in the Elements of bread
and wine, to represent and exhibit Christ as spiritual nourishment to the soul
1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26. I have received of the Lord that which also I
delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night wherein he was betrayed
took bread. v. 24.] And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take,
eat, this is my body which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. v.
25.] After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my blood: this do ye, as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me. v. 26.] For as often as ye eat this bread, etc.
, and to confirm our continuance and growth in him 1 Cor. 10. 16. The Cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of The bread which we break,
is it not the Communion of the body of Christ?
, and that only to such as are of years and ability to examine themselves 1
Cor. 11. 28. 29. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup. v. 29.] For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords
body.
.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. Prayer is an offering up of our desires unto God Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in him
at all times ye people, pour out your hearts before him: God is a refuge for us.
, in the Name of Christ Joh. 16. 23. And in that day ye shall ask me nothing,
verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will
give it you.
, by the help of his Spirit Romans 8. 26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings that cannot be
uttered.
, with confession of our sins Psalm. 32. 5, 6. I acknowledged my sin unto thee,
and mine iniquity have I not hid; I said I will confess my transgressions, and
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. v. 6.] For this shall every one that is
godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou may be found, surely, etc. Dan. 9.
4. And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord,
the great and dreadful God, etc.
, and thankful acknowledgment of his mercies Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let
your requests be made known to God.
.

Q. Are we to pray unto God only?

A. God only being able to search the hearts King 8. 39. Then hear thou in
heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, and give to every man according
to his ways, whose heart thou know: for thou, even thou only know the
hearts of all the children of men. Act. 1. 24. And they prayed, and said, Thou
Lord who know the hearts of ^oll men, show whether of these two thou have
chosen. Romans 8. 27. And he that sea^cheth the hearts knows what is the mind
of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the
will of God.
, hear the requests Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that hear prayers, to thee shall all
flesh come.
pardon the sins Mic. 7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression, of the remnant of his inheritance,
etc.
, and fulfill the desires of all Psalm. 145. 18, 19. The Lord is nigh unto all
them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. v. 19.] He will
fulfill the desires of them that fe^r him, he also will hear their cry, and will
save them.
and only to be believed in Romans 10. 14. How then shall they call on him in
whom they have not believed? etc.
and worshipped with religious worship Mat 4. 10. Then says Jesus unto him,
Get thee hence Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve.
, prayer, which is a special part thereof 1 Cor* 1. 2. Unto the Church of God
which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
Saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our
Lord, both theirs, and ours.
, is to be made by all to him alone Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
, and to none other Romans 10. 14. How then shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? etc.


Q. What is it to pray in the name of Christ?

A. To pray in the Name of Christ, is, in obedience to his command, and in
confidence on his promises to ask mercy for his sake Ioh. 14. 13, 14. And
whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I will do, that the Father may be glorified
in the Son^ v. 14.] If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. Ioh.
26. 24. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and receive, that your
joy may be full. Dan. 9. 14. Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy
servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary
that is desolate, for the Lords sake.
, not by bare mentioning of his Name Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that says unto
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the
will of my father which is in heaven.
, but by drawing our encouragement to pray, and our boldness, strength, and
hope of acceptance in prayer from Christ and his mediation Heb. 4. 14, 15, 16.
Seeing then that we have a great High Priest, that is passed into the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God; let us hold fast our profession. v. 15.] For we have not
an High Priest which cannot be touched with a feeling of our infirmities, but
was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. v. 16.] Let us
therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need. 1 Ioh. 5. 13, 14, 15. These things have I
written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know
that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of
God. v. 14.] And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us. v. 15.] And if we know that he
hears whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired
of him.


Q. Why are we to pray in the name of Christ?

A. The sinfulness of man, and his distance from God by reason thereof, being
so great as that we can have no access into his presence without a Mediator
Ioh. 14. 6. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man
comes unto the Father, but by me: Isa. 59. 2. But your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you,
that he will not hear. Ephesians. 3 12. In whom ye have boldness, and access with
confidence, by the faith of him.
; and there being none in heaven or earth appointed to, or fit for that
glorious work, but Christ alone Ioh. 6. 27 Labor not for the meat that
perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the
son of man shall give unto you, for him has God the Father sealed. Heb. 7. 25,
26, 27. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come unto
God by him, seeing that he ever lives to make intercession for them. v. 26.]
For such an high Priest became us who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate
from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, v. 27.] Who needs not daily
as those high Priests, to offer up sacrifice first for his own sins, and then
for the peoples; for this he did once, when he offered up himself. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
For there is one God, one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
; we are to pray in no other name but his only Col. 3. 17. And whatsoever ye
do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God
and the Father by him. Heb. 13. 15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice
of praise to God continually, that is the fruits of our lips, giving thanks in
his name.


Q. How does the Spirit help us to pray?

A. We not knowing what to pray for as we ought, the Spirit helps our
infirmities, by inabling us to understand both for whom, and what, and how
prayer is to be made, and by working and quickening in our hearts (although not
in all persons, nor at all times in the same measure) those apprehensions,
affections, and graces, which are requisite for the right performance of that
duty Romans 8. 26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. v. 27.] And he that
searches the hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because he makes
intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. Psalm. 10. 17. Lord,
thou have heard the desire of the humble; thou will prepare their heart; thou will cause thine ear to hear. Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and
Supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and mourn,
etc. --
.

Q. For whom are we to pray?

A. We are to pray for the whole Church of Christ, upon earth Ephesians. 6. 18.
Praying also always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication, for all Saints.
Psalm. 28. 9. Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance; feed them also, and
lift them up for ever.
, for magistrates 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort therefore; that first of all,
supplication, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men.
v. 2.] For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
and Ministers Col. 4. 3. Withal praying also for us, that God would open to
us a door of utterance, to speak the Mysteries of Christ, for which I am in
bonds.
, for our selves Genesis 32. 11. Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my
brother, from the hand of Esau; for I fear him, least he will come and smite
me, etc.
, our brethren Jam. 5. 16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for
another, that you may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous
man avails much,
, yea our enemies Mat. 5. 44. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despightfully use you, and persecute you.
, and for all sorts of men living 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. See above in [u]
, or that shall live hereafter Joh. 17. 20. Neither pray I for these alone, but
for them also which shall believe on me through their word. 2 Samuel 7. 29.
Therefore now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may
continue for ever before thee, for thou, O Lord God have spoken it, and with
thy blessing let the house of thy sevant be blessed for ever.
but not for the dead 2 Samuel 12. 21, 22, 23. Then said his servants unto him,
What thing is this that thou have done? thou did fast and weep for the child
while it was alive, but when the child was dead, thou did rise and eat bread.
v. 22.] And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I
said, Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may live?
v. 23.] But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back
again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.
nor for those that are known to have sinned the sin unto death 1 Ioh. 5. 16.
If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and
he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto
death: I do not say that he shall pray for it.


Q. For what things are we to pray?

A. We are to pray for all things tending to the glory of God Mat. 6. 9. After
this manner therefore pray ye, Our father which art in* heaven, hallowed be thy
Name.
, the welfare of the Church Psalm. 51. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto
Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee.
, our own Mat. 7. 11. If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more shall your father which is in heaven give good things
to them that ask him?
, or others good Psalm. 125. 4. Do good, O Lord, to those that be good; to them
that are upright in their heart.
, but not for any thing that is unlawful 1 John 5. 14. And this is the
confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will,
he heateth us.


Q. How are we to pray?

A. We are to pray with an awful apprehension of the Majesty of God Eccl. 3. 1.
Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear,
then to offer the sacrifice of fools; for they consider not that they do evil.
, and deep sense of our own unworthiness Genesis 18. 27. And Abraham said, Behold
now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord who am but dust and ashes. Genesis
32. 10 I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth
which thou have shown unto thy servant, etc.
necessities Luke 15. 17, 18, 19. And when he came to himself, he said, How
many hired servants in my fathers house have bread enough, and to spare, and I
perish with hunger. v. 18.] I will arise and go to my father, and say unto him,
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee v. 19.] And am no more
worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants.
, and sins Luke 18. 13, 14. And the Publican standing afar off, would not lift
up so much as his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, Lord, be
merciful to me a sinner. v. 14.] I tell you, This man went down to his house
justified rather then the other: for every one that exalts himself shall be
abased, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.
with penitent Psalm. 51. 17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a
broken and a contrite heart, O God, will thou not despise.
, thankful Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing; but in every thing, by prayer,
and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God.
, and enlarged hearts 1 Samuel 1. 15. And Hannah answered, and said, No, my Lord,
I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit; I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink,
but have poured out my soul before the Lord.
with understanding 1 Cor. 14. 15. What is it then? I will pray with the
Spirit, and will pray with understanding also.
faith Mar. 11. 24. Therefore I say unto you, Whatsoever things ye desire when
ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. Jam, 1. 6. But
let him ask in faith, nothing doubting; for he that wavereth is like a wave of
the sea, driven with the wind and tossed.
sincerity Psalm. 145. 18, The Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him, to all
that call upon him in truth. Psalm. 17. 1. Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto
my cry, give ear unto my prayer, that goes not out of fained lips.
fervency Jam. 5. 16. -- the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much.
, love 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy
hands without wrath, and doubting.
, and perseverance Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication
in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplicotion
for all Saints.
, waiting upon him Mic. 7. 7. Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait
for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me.
, with humble submission to his will Mat. 26. 39. And he went a little farther
and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, If it be possible, let
this cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will*


Q. What rule has God given for our direction in the duty of Prayer?

A. The whole word of God is of use to direct us in the duty of praying 1 John
5. 14. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us.
; but the special rule of direction, is that form of Prayer, which our Savior
Christ taught his Disciples, commonly called the Lords Prayer Mat. 6. 9, 10,
11, 12, 13. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our father, etc. -- Luke 11.
2, 3, 4. And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our father, etc. --


Q. How is the Lords Prayer to be used?

A. The Lords Prayer is not only for direction, as a pattern according to
which we are to make other prayers, but may also be used as a prayer, so that
it be done with understanding, faith, reverence, and other graces necessary to
the right performance of the duty Mat. 6. 9. Compared with Luke 11. 2. See
above in the letter [b.]


Q. Of how many parts does the Lords Prayer consist?

A. The Lords Prayer consists of three parts, a Preface, Petitions, and a
Conclusion.

Q. What does the Preface of the Lords Prayer teach us?

A. The Preface of the Lords Prayer [contained in these words, Our Father which
art in heaven Mat. 6. 9.
] teaches us, when we pray, to draw near to God with confidence of his
fatherly goodness, and our interest therein Luke 11. 13. If you then being evil
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
heavenly father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Romans 8. 15. For ye
have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
, with reverence, and all other child-like dispositions Isa. 46. 9. Be not
wrath very sore, O Lord, neither remember our iniquities for ever: behold, see,
we beseech thee, we are all thy people.
, heavenly affections Psalm. 123. 1. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that
dwell in the heavens. Lam. 3. 41. Let us lift up our heart, and our hands
unto God in the heavens.
, and due apprehensions of his sovereign power, Majesty, and gracious
condescension Isa. 63. 15, 16. Look down from heaven, and behold from the
habitation of thy holiness, and of thy glory* Where is thy zeal, and thy
strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and thy mercies toward me? are they
restrained? v. 16.] Doubtless thou art our Father; though Abraham be ignorant
of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, thou, O Lord, art our Father, our
redeemer; thy Name is from everlasting. Neh. 1. 4, 5, 6. And it came to pass
when I heard these words, that I sa^e down and wept, and mourned certain days,
and fasted, and prayed before the God of heaven. v. 5.] And said, I beseech
thee, O Lord God of heaven, the God, that keeps Covenant and mercy for them
that love him, and observe his commandments. v. 6.] Let thine eat be now
attentive, and thine eyes op^n, that thou may hear the prayer of thy
servant, which I pray before thee now, day and night for the children of Israel
thy servants, etc.
; as also to pray with and for others Act. 12. 5. Peter therefore was kept in
prison; but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the first Petition?

A. In the first petition, [which is, Hallowed be thy name Mat. 6. 9.
,] acknowledging the utter inability and indisposition that is in our selves
and all men to honor God aright 2 Cor. 3. 5* Not that we are sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God.
Psalm 51. 15. O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy
praise.
we pray that God would by his grace enable and incline us and others to know,
to acknowledge, and highly to esteem him Psalm. 67. 2, 3. That thy way may be
known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations. v. 3.] Let the people
praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee
his titles Psalm. 83. 18. That men may know that thou whose Name alone is
Jehovah, art the most High over all the earth.
attributes Psalm. 86. 10, 11, 12, 13.-15. For thou art great, and do wondrous
things; thou art God alone. v. 11.] Teach me thy way, O Lord; I will walk in
thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name. v. 12.] I will praise thee, O Lord
my God, with all my heart, and will glorify thy Name for evermore. v. 13.] For
great is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest
hell. -- v. 15.] But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious,
long suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.
ordinances, word 2 These. 3. 1. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word
of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you.
Psalm. 147. 19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and judgments
unto Israel. v. 20.] He has not dealt so with any nation; and as for his
judgments, they have not known them. Praise ye the Lord. Psalm. 138. 1, 2, 3. I
will praise thee with my whole heart; before the Gods will I sing praise unto
thee. v. 2.] I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy Name, for
thy loving kindness, and for thy truth; for thou have magnified thy word above
all thy Name v. 3.] In the day when I cried thou answerest me, and
strengthnedst me with strength in my soul. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15. Now thanks be to
God, who always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the
savor of his knowledge by us in every place. v. 15.] For we are to God a sweet
savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish.
works, and whatsoever he is pleased to make himself known by Psalm. 145.
throughout. I will extol thee O God, my King, etc. -- Psalm. 8. throughout. O
Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth! etc. --
, and to glorify him in thought, word Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the Lord, O my Soul,
and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Psalm. 19. 14. Let the words of
my mouth, and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord
our strength, and our Redeemer.
, and deed Phil. 1. 9.-11. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more
and more in knowledge, and in all judgment. -- v. 11.] Being filled with the
fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of
God.
; that he would prevent and remove Atheism Psalm. 67. 1, 2, 3, 4. God be
merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine upon us. v. 2.]
That thy way may be known upon earth, and thy saving health among all Nations.
v. 3.] Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee. v.
4.] O let the Nations be glad and rejoice; for thou shall judge the people
righteously, and govern the Nations upon earth.
, ignorance Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of Glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
of him. v. 18.] The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints.
, idolatry Psalm. 97. 7. Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, that
boast themselves of Idols: worship him all ye gods.
, profaneness Psalm. 74. 18.-22, 23. Remember this, that the enemy has
reproached, O Lord, and that the foolish people have blasphemed thy Name. -- v.
22.] Arise, O God, plead thine own cause; remember how the foolish man
reproacheth thee daily. v. 23.] Forget not the voice of mine enemies, the
tumult of those that rise up against thee increases continually.
, and whatsoever is dishonorable to him 2 Kings 19. 15, 16. And H^z^kiah
prayed unto the Loid, and said, O Lord God of Israel, which dwell between
the Cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the Kingdoms of the
earth: thou have made heaven and earth. v. 16.] Lord bow down thine ear and
hear, open, Lord, thine eyes and see, and hear the words of Sennacherib which
has sent him to reproach the living God.
; and by his overruling providence, direct and dispose of all things to his
own glory 2 Chronicles. 20. 6.-10 11, 12. And [Jehoshaphat] said, O Lord God of our
fathers, Art not thou God in heaven, and rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms
of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is
able to withstand thee? -- v. 10.] And now behold the children Ammon, and Moab,
etc. v. 11.] Behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of our
possessions which thou have given us to inherit. v. 12.] O our God, will thou
not judge them? for we have no might against this great company that comes
against us; neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. Psalm. 83.
throughout. Keep thou not silence, O God, hold not thy peace, etc. -- Psalm.
140. 4.-8. Reep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked, preserve me from the
violent man, who have purposed to overthrow my goings. -- v. 8.] Grant not, O
Lord, the desires of the wicked; further not his wicked devices, lest they
exalt themselves.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the second Petition?

A. In the second Petition, (which is, Thy Kingdom come Matthew. 6. 10.
,) acknowledging our selves and all mankind to be by nature under the dominion
of sin and Satan Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Wherein in times past ye walked according to
the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the
Spirit that now works in the children of disobedience. v. 3.] Among whom also
we all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the
children of wrath, even as others.
; we pray, that the kingdom of sin and Satan may be destroyed Psalm. 68. 1.-18.
Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered; let them also that have him flee
before him. -- v. 18.] Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity
captive, thou have received gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious also; that
the Lord God might dwell among them. Rev. 12. 10, 11. And I heard a loud voice,
saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the Kingdom of our
God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast out,
which accused them before God day and night. v. 11.] And they overcame by the
blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their
lives unto the death.
, the Gospel propagated throughout the world 2 These. 3. 1. Finally, brethren,
pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified,
even as it is with you.
, the Jews called Romans 10. 1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God is,
That they might he saved.
, the fullness of the Gentiles brought in John 17 9.-20. I pray for them, I pray
not for the world; but for them that thou have given me, for they are thine. --
v. 20.] Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe
on me through their word. Romans 11. 25, 26. For I would not brethren, that ye
should be ignorant of this mystery, (^est ye should be wise in your own
conceits) that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in. v. 26.] And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is
written, There shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob. Psalm. 67. throughout. God be merciful unto us, and
bless us, and cause his face, etc --
, the Church furnished with all Gospel officers and ordinances Matthew 9. 38.
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he will send forth laborers
into his harvest 2 These. 3. 1. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of
the Lord may have a free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you.
, purged from corruption Mal. 3. 1, 11. For from the rising of the sun, even to
the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offered up unto my Name, and a pure offering: for
my Name shall be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of hosts. Zeph. 3. 9.
For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon
the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.
, countenanced and maintained by the civil magistrate 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort
therefore, that first ^f all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
thanksgivings be made for all men. v. 2.] For Kings, and for all that are in
au^hority, that me may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.
, that the ordinances of Christ may be purely dispensed, and made effectual to
the converting of those that are yet in their sins, and the confirming,
comforting and building up of those that are already converted Act. 4. 29, 30.
And now, Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servan^s, that with
all boldness they may speak thy word; v. 30.] By stretching forth ^hine hand to
heal, and that signs and wonders may be done by the Name of thy Holy Child
Jesus. Ephesians. 6. 18, 19, 20. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in
the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for
all saints. v. 19.] And for me, that utterance may be given me, that I may open
my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gentiles. v. 20.] For which I
am an Ambassador in bonds. that therein I may speak boldly as I ought to speak.
Romans 15. 29, 30.-32. And I am sure that when I come unto you, I shall come in
the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ. v. 30.] Now I beseech you,
brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that
ye strive together with me, in your prayers to God for me. -- v. 32.] That I
may come unto you with joy, by the will of God, and may with you be refreshed.
2 These. 1. 11. Wherefore we pray always for you, that our God would count you
worthy of his calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and
the work of faith with power. 2 These. 2. 16, 17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and God even our Father, which h^th loved us and given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope through grace. v. 17.] Comfort your heart and
stablish you in every good word and work.
; that Christ would rule in our hearts here Ephesians. 3. from ver. 14. to the 21.
For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. v. 15.
Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named. v. 16.] That he would
grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might
by his spirit in the inner man. v. 17.] That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love. v. 18] May be able to
comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height; v. 19. And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge; that ye
might be filled with the fullness of God. v. 20.] Now unto him that is able to
do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, etc. --
, and hasten the time of his second coming, and our reigning with him for ever
Rev. 22. 20. He which testifies these things says, surely I come qu^ckly,
Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.
; and that he would be pleased so to exercise the kingdom of his power in all
the world, as may best conduce to these ends Isai. 64. 1, 2. O that thou
would rend the heavens, that thou would come down, that the mountains might
flow down at thy presence! v. 2.] As when the melting fire burns, the fire
causes the waters to boil to make thine name known to thine adversaries, that
the nations may tremble at thy presence. Rev. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. And the four
beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they were full of eyes within,
and they rest not day and night saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come. v. 9.] And when those beasts give glory, and
honor and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who lives for ever and ever.
v. 10.] That four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on the
throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns
before the throne, saying. v. 11.] Thou art worthy, O Lord to receive glory,
and honor and power; for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure
they are, and were created.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the third Petition?

A. In the third petition, [which is, Thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven Matthew. 6. 10.
] acknowledging that by nature we and all men are not only utterly unable and
unwilling to know and to do the will of God Romans 7. 18. For I know that in me,
that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me;
but how to perform that which is good I find not. Job 21. 14. Therefore they
say unto God, Depart from us: we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. 1 Cor.
2. 14. But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him; neither can be know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.
, but prone to rebel against his word Romans 8. 7. Because the carnal mind is
enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
be.
, to repine and murmur against his Providence Exodus 17. 7. And he called the
name of the place Massah and Meriba^; because of the chiding of the children of
Israel, and because they tempted the Lord, saying, is the Lord among us, or
not? Number. 14. 2. And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and
Aaron: And the whole Congregation said unto them, would God that we had died in
the land of Egypt, would God that we had died in this wilderness.
, and wholly inclined to do the will of the flesh, and of the devil Ephesians. ^. 2.
Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according
to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now wo^keth in the
children of disobedience.
: We pray, that God would by his Spirit take away from our selves and others,
all blindness Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father
of glory may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
of him; v. 18.] The eyes of your understanding being enlightened that ye may
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints.
, weakness Ephesians. 3. 16. That he would grant you, according to the riches of his
glory, to be strengthened with might, by the Spirit in the inner man
, indisposedness Mat. 26. 40, 41. And he comes to the Disciples, and finds
them asleep, and says unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?
v. 41.] Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation, the Spirit indeed is
willing but the flesh is weak.
, and perverseness of heart Jer. 31. 18, 19. I have surely heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a
bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou
art the Lord my God. v. 19.] Surely, after that I was turned, I repented; and
after that I was instructed I smote upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.
, and by his grace make us able and willing to know, do, and submit to his will
in all things Psalm. 119. 1.-8-35, 36. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who
walk in the law of the Lord. -- v. 8.] I will keep thy statutes, O forsake me
not utterly -- v. 35.] Make me to go in the paths of thy commandments, for
therein do I delight. v. 36.] Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to
covetousness. Act. 21. 14. And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased,
saying, The will of the Lord be done.
, with the like humility Mic. 6. 8. He has showed thee O man, what is good,
and what does the Lord require of thee but to do justly, and to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with thy God.
, cheerfulness Psalm. 100. 2. Serve the Lord with gladness; come before his
presence with singing. Job. 1. 21. And [Job] said, Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. And the
King said unto Zadok, Carry back the Ark of God into the City; if I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it,
and his habitation. v. 26.] But if he say thus, I have no delight in thee,
behold, here I am, let him do to me as seems him good.
, faithfulness Isa. 38. 3. And said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how
I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done
that which is good in thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore.
, diligence Psalm. 119. 4, 5. Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts
diligently. v. 5.] O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.
, zeal Romans 12. 11. Not slothful in business, fervent in Spirit, serving the
Lord.
, sincerity Psa. 119. 80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not
ashamed.
, and constancy Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy
statutes always even to the end.
, as the Angels do in heaven Isa. 6. 2, 3. Above it stood the Seraphims each
one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, with twain he covered his
feet, and with twain he did fly. v. 3.] And one cried unto another, and said,
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory.
Psalm. 103. 20, 21. Bless the Lord ye his Angels that excel in strength, and do
his commandments harkening unto the voice of his word. v. 21.] Bless ye the
Lord all ye his hosts, ye ministers of his that do his pleasure. Mat. 18. 10.
Take heed ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, in
heaven there Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the fourth Petition?

A. In the fourth Petition, [which is, Give us this day our daily bread Mat. 6.
11.
,] acknowledging that in Adam, and by our sin, we have forfeited our right to
all the outward blessings of this life, and deserve to be wholly deprived of
them by God, and to have them cursed to us in the use of them Genesis 2. 17. But
of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it: for in the
day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye. Genesis 3. 17. And unto Adam he
said, because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of
the Tree, of the which I commanded thee, saying, thou shall not eat of it;
cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days
of thy life. Romans 8. 20, 21, 22. For the Creature was made subject to vanity,
not willingly, but by reason of him who have subjected the same in hope. V.
12.] Because the Creature of it self also shall be delivered from the bondage
of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God. V. 22] For we
know that the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain together until
now. Jer. 5. 25. Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins
have withholden good things from you. Deuteronomy 28. from ver. 15. to the end. But it
shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, to observe to do all his Commandments and statutes which I command thee
this day, that all these curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee. V. 16.
Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed in the field, and cursed in thy
basket, and in thy store, etc. To the end of the chap.
; and that neither they of themselves are able to sustain us Deuteronomy. 8. 3. And he
humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with Mann^, which thou
knew not, neither did my fathers know: that he might make thee know that man
does not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of the Lord does man live.
, nor we to merit Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies,
and of all the truth which thou have showed to thy servant etc.
, or by our own industry to procure them Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 9. And thou say in thine
heart, My power, and the might of mine hand has gotten me this wealth; V. 18.
But thou shall remember the Lord thy God; for it is be that gives thee power
to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he swear unto thy
fathers, as it is this day.
, but prone to desire Jer. 6. 1^. For from the least of them, to the greatest,
every one of them is given to covetousness, etc. Mark 7. 21, 22. For from
within, out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, murders, V. 22. Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, etc. --
, get Hos. 12. 7. He is a merchant, the balance of deceit are in his hand, he
loves to oppress.
, and use them unlawfully Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask and receive not because ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.
; we pray for our selves and others, that both they and we, waiting upon the
providence of God from day to day in the use of lawful means, may, of his free
gift, and as to his fatherly wisdom shall seem best, enjoy a competent portion
of them Gen 43. 12, 13, 14. And take double money in your hand, and the money
that was brought again in the mouth of the sacks; p^r^dven^ure it was an
oversight. V. 13. Take also your brother, and arise, go unto the man. V. 14.
And God Almighty gave you mercy before the man, that he may send, etc. -- Genesis
28. 20. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, if God will be with me, and keep me in
this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, etc
Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him labor,
working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him
that needs. 2 These. 3. 11, 12. For we hear that there are some who walk among
you disorderly working not at all, but are busy-bodies. V. 12. Now they that
are such, we command and ex^ort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness
they work, and eat their own bread. Phil. 4. 6. Be careful f^r nothing; but in
every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be
make known unto God.
, and have the same continued and blessed unto us in our holy and comfortable
use of them 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain
from meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them
which believe, and know the truth. V. 4. For every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. V. 5. For it is
sanctified by the word of God, and prayer.
, and contentment in them 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8. But goodness with contentment is
great gain. V. 7.] For we brought nothing into this world; and it is certain we
can carry nothing out. V. 8.] And having food and raiment, let us be therewith
content.
; and be kept from all things that are contrary to our temporal support and
comfort Prove. 30. 8, 9. Remove from me vanity and lies; give me neither
poverty, nor riches: feed me with food convenient for me. V. 9.] Lest I be
full, and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? and lest I be poor, and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the fifth Petion?

A. In the fifth Petition, which is, [Forgive us our debts as we forgive our
debtors Mat. 6. 12.
] ackowledging that we and all others are guilty both of original and actual
sin, and thereby become debtors to the justice of God, and that neither we, nor
any other creature can make the least satisfaction for that debt Romans 3. from
v. 9. to 22. What then? are we better then they? no in no wise; for we have
before proved, both Jew and Gentiles, that they are all under sin; V. 10.] As
it is written, There is none righteous, no not one. V. 11.] There is none that
understands, none that seeks after God. They are all gone out of the way,
etc. -- V. 19.] -- that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God. etc. -- Mat. 18. 24, 25. And when he had begun to
reckon, one was brought unto him who owed him ten thousand talent. V. 25.] But
forasmuch as he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his
wife, and his children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. Psalm. 130.
3, 4. If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? V. 4.]
But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared
; we pray for our selves and others, that God of his free grace would, through
the obedience and satisfaction of Christ apprehended and applied by faith,
acquit us both from the guilt and punishment of sin Romans 3. 14. 25, 26. Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
V. 25.] Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remision of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God. V. 26.] To declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes
in Jesus. Heb. 9. 22. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood,
and without shedding of blood is no remission.
, accept us in his beloved Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. To the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved. V. 7.] In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of his grace.
, continue his favor and grace to us 2 Pet. 1. 2. Grace and peace be
multiplied unto you, through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord.
, pardon our daily failings Hos. 14. 2. Take with you words, and turn to the
Lord, say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously; so will
we render the calves of our lips. Jor. 14. 7. O Lord, though our iniquities
testify against us, do thou it for thy names sake; for our backslidings are
many, we have sinned against thee,
, and fill us with peace and joy in giving us daily more and more assurance of
forgiveness Romans 15. 13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost.
Psalm. 51. 7, 8, 9, 10* -- 12. Purge me with hysop, and I shall be clean; wash
me, and I shall be whiter then snow. V. 8.] Make me to hear joy and gladness,
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. V. 9.] Hide thy face from my
sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. V. 10.] Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within me. -- V. 12. Restore unto me the joy of
my salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit.
, which we are the rather imboldened to ask, and encouraged to expect when we
have this testimony in our selves, that we from the heart forgive others their
offenses Lu. 11. 4. And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that
is indebted to us, etc. Mat. 6. 14, 15. For if ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you. V. 15. But if ye forgive not men
their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive your trespasses.
Mat. 18. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from
your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the sixth Petition?

A. In the sixth Petition, [which is, And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil Mat. 6. 13.
,] acknowledging that the most wise, righteous, and gracious God, for diverse
holy and just ends, may so order things, that we may be assaulted, foiled, and
for a time led captive by temptations 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. Howbeit, in the business
of the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon who sent unto him to enquire of
the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that he might
know all that was in his heart.
, that Satan 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked
David to number Israel.
, the world Luke 21. 34. And ^ake heed to your selves, lest at any time your
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and acres of this life,
and so that day come upon you unawares. Mark* 4. 19. And the cares of this
world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering
in, choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
and the flesh are ready powerfully to draw us aside and in snare us Jam 1. 14.
But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.
, and that we, even after the pardon of our sins, by reason of our corruption
Gal. 5. 17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do
the things that ye would.
, weakness and want of watchfulness Mat. 26. 41. Watch and pray that ye enter
not into temptation, the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.
, are not only subject to be tempted, and forward to expose our selves unto
temptations Mat 26. 69, 70, 71, 72. Now Peter sat without in the Palace, and a
damsel came to him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. V. 70. But he
denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou say. V. 71. And when he
was gone into the porch, another maid saw him, and said to them that were
there: This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. V. 72. And again he denied
with an oath, saying, I do not know the man. Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. But when
Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be
blamed. V. 12. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the
Gentiles; but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing
them of the circumcision. V. 13. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with
him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation. V
14. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of
the Gospel, I said to Peter, etc. 2 Chr. 18. 3. And Ahab king of Israel said
unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, will thou go with me to Ramoth Gilead? And he
answered him, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people, and we will be
with thee in the war. Compared with 2 Chronicles* 19. 2. and Jehu the son of Hanani
the Seer, went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, should thou
help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon
thee before the Lord.
, but also of our selves unable and unwilling to resist them, to recover out of
them and to improve them Romans 7. 23, 24. But I see another law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law
of sin that is in my members. V. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? 1 Chronicles. 21. 1, 2, 3, 4. And Satan stood up
against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. V. 2. And David said to
Joab, and the rulers of the people, go number Israel from Bersheba to Dan, etc.
V. 3. And Joab answered, The Lord make his people an hundred times so many more
as they be; but my lord the King, are they not my lords servants? why then does
my lord require this thing? why will he be a cause of trespass to Israel? V. 4.
Nevertheless the Kings word prevailed against Joab; wherefore Joab departed,
and went, etc. 2 Chr. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10. And at that time Hanani the seer came to
As^ King of Judah, and said to him, because thou have rested on the King of
Syria, and not relied on the Lord thy God, therefore is the host the King of
Syria escaped out of thine hand. V. 8. Were not the Ethiopians and Lubins a
huge host? etc. and yet because thou did rely on the Lord, he delivered them
into thine hand. V. 9. For the eyes of the Lord run too and fro, throughout the
earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose hearts is perfect
toward him; herein thou have done foolishly, therefore from henceforth thou
shall have wars. V. 10. Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him into a
prison house; for he was in a rage with him because of this thing, and Asa
oppressed some of the people the same time.
, and worthy to be left under the power of them Psalm. 81. 11, 12. But my people
would not hearken unto my voice, and Israel would have none of me. V. 12. So I
gave them up unto their hearts lust, and they walked in their own counsels.
, we pray that God would so overrule the world, and all in it Joh. 17. 15. I
pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou should
keep them from the evil.
, subdue the flesh Psalm. 51. 10* Create in me a clean, O God, and renew a right
spirit within me. Psalm. 119. 133. Order my steps in thy word, and let not any
iniquity have dominion over me.
, and restrain Satan 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. And lest I should be exalted above
measure, trhough the abundance of revelations, there was given to me a throne
in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted
above measure. V. 8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice that it might
depart from me
, order all things 1 Cor. 10. 12, 13. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands
take heed lest he fall. V. 13. There has no temptation taken you but such as
is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to he tempted
above what ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it.
, bestow and bless all means of grace Heb. 13. 20. 21. Now the God of peace,
that brought again from the dead, our Lord Je^us Christ that great shepherd of
the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant. V. 21. Make you
perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, etc.
, and quicken us to watchfulness in the use of them, that we and all his
people may by his providence be kept from being tempted to sin Mat. 26. 21.
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation, etc. Psalm. 13. 9. Keep back
thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let not them have dominion over me,
then shall I be upright, and innocent from the great transgression.
, or, if tempted, that by his Spirit we may be powerfully supported and enabled
to stand in the hour of temptation Ephesians. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. For this cause I bow
my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, V. 15. O^ whom the whole
family of heaven and earth is named, V. 16. That he would grant you, according
to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man; V. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being
rooted, etc. 1 These. 3. 13. To the end he may establish your hearts unblameable
in holiness before God, even our Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
with all his saints. Jude. v. 24. Now unto him that is able to keep you from
falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with
exceeding joy.
, or, when fallen, raised again and recovered out of it Psa. 5^. 12. Restore
unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit.
and have a sanctified use and improvement thereof 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9, 10. Be
sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks
about seeking whom he may devour. v. 9. Whom resist steadfast in the faith,
knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in
the world. v. 10. But the God of all peace, who has called us into his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you.
; that our sanctification and salvation may be perfected 2 Cor. 13. 7-9. Now I
pray to God that ye do no evil, not that we should appear approved, but that ye
should do that which is honest, though we be as reprobates. -- V. 9. For we are
glad when we are weak, and ye are strong; this also we wish, even your
perfection.
, Satan trodden under our feet Romans 16. 20. And the God of peace shall bruise
Satan under your feet shortly, etc. Zech. 3. 2. And the Lord said unto Satan,
The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke
thee. Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? Luke 22. 31, 32. And the Lord
said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you
as wheat. v. 32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; and when
thou art converted, etc.
, and we fully freed from sin, temptation, and all evil for ever Joh. 17. 15. I
pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou should
keep them from the evil. 1 These. 5. 23. And the very God of peace sanctify you
wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
.

Q. What does the conclusion of the Lords Prayer teach us?

A. The conclusion of the Lords Prayer, [which is, For thine is the Kingdom,
the power and the glory for ever, Amen Mat. 6. 13.
,] teaches us to enforce our petitions with arguments Romans 15. 30. Now I
beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the
Spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for me.
, which are to be taken not from any worthiness in our selves, or in any other
creature, but from God Dan. 9 ^ -- 7, 8, 9.-16, 17, 18, 19. And I prayed unto
the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and
dreadful God, keeping the Covenant and mercy to them that love him and keep his
Commandments. -- v. 7.] O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
confusion of face, as at this day, etc. v. 8. O Lord, to us belongs confusion
of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, to our Fathers, because we have
trespassed against thee. v. 9. To the Lord our God belongs mercies, and
forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him. -- v. 16. O Lord, according
to all thy rigteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned
away from thy City Jerusalem, etc. v. 17. Now therefore, O our God, hear the
prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon
the Sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lords sake. v. 18. O my God, incline
thine ear, and behold our desolation, and the city that is called by thy Name;
for we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but
for thy great mercies. v. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord heatken and
do? defer not for thine own sake, O my God, for thy city and thy people are
called by thy Name.
; and with our prayers to join praises Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing, but
in every thing, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests
be made known unto God.
, ascribing to God alone eternal sovereignty, omnipotency, and glorious
excellency 1 Chronicles. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. Wherefore David blessed the Lord before
all the Congregation, and said, Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel, our Father
for ever. v. 11. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the
glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heavens, and in
the earth is thine: thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head
above all. v. 12. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over
all, and in thine hand is power, and might, -- etc. v. 13. Now therefore, our
God, we thank thee, and bless thy glorious Name.
; in regard whereof, as he is able and willing to help us Ephesians. 3* 20, 21. Now
unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or
think, according to the power that works in us. v. 21. Unto him be glory in
the Church of Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. Amen. Luke
11. 13. If we then being evil know how to give good gifts unto our children,
how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him.
, so we by faith are imboldned to plead with him that he would 2 Chronicles. 20.
6.-11. *And said, O Lord God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and
rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is
there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? -- v. 11.
Behold I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of the possession
which thou have given us to inherit.
, and quietly to rely upon him that he will fulfill our requests 2 Chr. 14. 11.
And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to
help, whether with many, or with them that have no power. Help us, O Lord our
God, for we rest on thee, and in thy Name we go out against this multitude. O
Lord, thou art our God, let not man prevail against thee.
, and to testify this our desire and assurance, we say, Amen 1 Cor. 14. 16.
Also when thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the
room of the unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say? Rev. 22 20, 21. He which testifies these
things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus. v. 21.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. AMEN.
.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: The
Humble Advice of the ASSEMBLY of DIVINES, Sitting at WESTMINSTER: Concerning A
Shorter Catechism.
Quest. WHat is the chief end of man?

A. Man's chief end is to glorify God 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether therefore ye eat
or drink, or whatsoeever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Romans 11. 36. For of
Him, and through Him, and to Him are all things, to whom be glory for ever,
Amen.
, and to enjoy him for ever Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. v. 26. My flesh and my
heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever. v.
27. For lo they that are far from thee shall perish, thou have destroyed all
them that go a whoring from thee. v. 28. But it is good for me to draw near to
God, I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works.
.

Q. What rule has God given to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him?

A. The Word of God (which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness. Ephesians. 2. 20. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner stone.
, is the only rule to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him 1 John 1. 3.
That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
son Jesus Christ. v. 4. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may
be full.
.

Q. What do the Scriptures principally teach?

A. The Scriptures principally teach, what man is to believe concerning God,
and what duty God requires of man 2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold f^st the form of found
words which thou have heard of me, in faith, and love, which is in Christ
Jesus. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Vide supra.
.

Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit Ioh. 4. ^4. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in Spirit and in Truth
, Infinite Ioh 11. 7. Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out
the Almighty unto perfection? v. 8. It is as high as heaven, what can thou
do? deeper then hell, what can thou know? v. 9. The measure thereof is longer
then the earth, and broader then the sea.
, Eternal Psalm. 90. 2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou
had formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting, to everlasting,
thou art God.
, and Unchangeable Jam. 1. 17. Every good and perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variableness,
either shadow of turning.
, in his Being Exo. 3. 14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am, and he
said, thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I A M has sent me unto
you.
, Wisdom Psalm. 147. 5. Great is our Lord, and of great power, his understanding
is infinite.
, Power Rev. 4. 8. And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him,
and they were full of eyes within, and they rest not day and night, saying,
Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty; which was, and is, and is to come.
, Holiness Rev. 15. 5. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name?
for thou only art holy, for all nations shall come and worship before thee,
for thy judgments are made manifest.
, Justice, Goodness and Truth Exodus 34. 6. And the Lord passed before him and
proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God merciful and gracious, long suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth. v. 7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin; and tha^ will by no means clear the
guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the child, and upon the
children^ chil^ren, unto the third and for it a generation.
.

Q. Are there more Gods then one?

A. There is but one only, the living and true God Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear O Israel,
the Lord our God is one Lord. Jer. 10. 10. But the Lord is the true God, he is
the living God, and an everlasting King: at his breath the earth shall tremble,
and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.
.

Q. How many persons are there in the Godhead?

A. There are three persons in the Godhead; the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; and these three are one God, the same in substance, equal in power and
glory 1 John 5. 7. For there are three that bare record in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. Mat. 28. 19. Go ye
therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
.

Q. What are the decrees of God?

A. The deerees of God, are his eternal purpose according to the counsel of his
Will, whereby, for his own glory, he has foreordained whatever comes to pass
Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundations of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love. v. 11. In
whom also we obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the
purpose of him who works all things after the purpose of his own will. Romans
9. 22. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much long-suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.
v. 23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of
mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory.
.

Q. How does God execute his decrees?

A. God executes his decrees in the works of Creation and Providence.

Q. What is the work of Creation?

A. The work of Creation is Gods making all things of nothing, by the Word of
his Power, in the space of six days, and all very Good Genesis 1. throughout Heb.
11. 3. Through Faith we understand that the world were framed by the Word of
God, so that things which were seen were made of things that do appear.
.

Q. How did God create man?

A. God created man male and female after his own image, in knowledge,
righteousness, and holiness, with dominion over the creatures Genesis 1. 26. And
God said, let us make man in our own image, after our likeness; and let them
have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over
the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps
upon the earth. v. 27. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him, male and female created he them. v. 28. And God blessed them,
and God said unto them, be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth and
subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the
air, and over every living thing that creeps upon the earth. Col. 3. 10. And
have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him
that created him. Ephesians. 4. 24. And that ye put on that new man, which after God
is created in righteousnesle and true holiness.
.

Q. What are Gods works of Providence?

A. Gods works of Providence are his most holy Psalm. 145. 17. The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
, wise ( Psalm. 104. 24. O Lord how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou
made them all, the earth is full of thy riches. Isa. 28, 29. This also comes
from the Lord of hosts which is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working.
), and powerful preserving Heb. 1. 3. Who being the brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of
his power; when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand
of the Majesty on high.
, and governing all his creatures, and all their actions Psalm. 103. 19. The
Lord has prepared his throne in the heaven, his kingdom rules over all.
Matthew. 10. 29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing, and one of them shall
not fall to the ground without your Father? v. 30. But the very hairs of your
head are all numbered. v. 31. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value then
many sparrows.
.

Q. What special act of Providence did God exercise toward man in the estate
wherein he was created?

A. When God had created man, he entered into a Covenant of life with him, upon
condition of perfect obedience: forbidding him to eat of the tree of knowledge
of good and evil, upon pain of death Gal. 3. 12. And the law is not of faith,
but the man that does them, shall live in them. Genesis 2. 17. But of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil thou shall not ^^^ ^f it, for in the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die*
.

Q. Did our first Parents continue in the state wherein they were created?

A. Our first Parents, being left to the freedom of their own will, fell from
the estate wherein they were created, by sinning against God Genesis 3. 6. And
when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to
the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise; she took of the fruit
thereof and did eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat. v.
7*] And the eyes of them both were opened; and they knew that they were naked,
and they sewed fig leaves together and made themselves aprons. v. 8.] And they
heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day,
and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God, amongst
the trees of the garden. v. 13.] And the Lord God said unto the woman, what is
this that thou have done? and the woman said, the Serpent beguiled me, and I
did eat. Eccles. 7. 29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made man
upright, but they have sought out many inventions.
.

Q. What is sin?

A. Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of the Law of God 1
John 3. 4. Whosoever commits sin transgresses also the law, for sin is the
transgression of the law
.

Q. What was the sin whereby our first Parents fell from the estate, wherein
they were created?

A. The sin whereby our first Parents fell from the state, wherein they were
created, was their eating the forbidden fruit Genesis 3. 6. vide supra V. 12.] The
woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat.
.

Q. Did all mankind fall in Adams first transgression?

A. The Covenant being made with Adam not only for himself, but for his
posterity, all mankind descending from him by ordinary generation, sinned in
him, and fell with him in his first transgression Genesis 2. 16. And the Lord God
commanded the man saying, of every tree of the garden thou may freely eat. v.
17] But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it,
for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Romans 5. 12. Wherefore
as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed
upon all men for that all have sinned. 1 Cor. 15. 21. For since by man came
death, by man also came the resurrection of the dead. v. 22.] For as in Adam
all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive.
.

Q. Into what estate did the fall bring mankind?

A. The Fall brought mankind into an estate of sin and misery Romans 5. 12.
Wherefore as by one man sin entered in to the world, and death by sin, and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.
.

Q. Wherein consists the sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell?

A. The sinfulness of that estate whereinto man fell, consists in the guilt of
Adams first sin, the want of Original righteousness, and the corruption of his
whole nature, which is commonly called Original sin, together with all actual
transgressions which proceed from it Rom 5. 10. to the 20. Ephesians. 2. 1. And you
has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins. V. 2. Wherein in times
past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the Prince
of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience. V. 3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past,
in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desi^es of the flesh, and of the
mind, and were by nature children of wrath even as others. Jam. 1. 14. But
every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. V. 15.
Then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished
brings forth death. Mat. 15. 19. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies.
.

Q. What is the misery of that estate whereinto man fell?

A. All mankind by their fall lost communion with God Genesis 3. 8. Adam and his
wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the
garden. V. 10. And he said, I heard the voice in the garden, and I was afraid,
because I was naked, and I hid my self. V. 24 So he drove out the man, and he
placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword, which
turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life.
, are under his wrath and curse Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. -- And by nature the children of
wrath, even as others Gal. 3. 10. For as many as are of the works of the Law
are under the curse, for it is written, Cursed is every one which continues
not in all things which are written in the Law to do them.
, and so made liable to all miseries in this life, to death it self, and to the
pains of hell for ever Lam. 3. 39. Wherefore does the living man complain? a
man for the punishment of his sins. To. 6. 23. For the wages of sin is death,
but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Mat. 25.
41. Then shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels. V. 46. And these shall
go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.
.

Q. Did God leave all mankind to perish in the state of sin and misery?

A. God having out of his mere good pleasure from all eternity, elected some to
everlasting life Ephesians. 4. According as he has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in
love.
, did enter into a covenant of grace, to deliver them out of the estate of sin
and misery, and to bring them into an estate of Salvation by a Redeemer Rom 3.
21. But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being
witnessed by the law and the Prophets. V. 22.] Even the righteousness of God
which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe, for
there is no difference. Gal. 3. 21. Is the law then against the promises of
God? God forbid; for if there had been a law given which could have given life,
verily righteousness should have been by the law. V. 22. But the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might he
given to them that believe.
.

Q. Who is the Redeemer of Gods Elect?

A. The only Redeemer of Gods Elect, is the Lord Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 25. For
there is one God and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. V.
6. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.
, who being the eternal Son of God, became man 1 John 1. 14. And the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. Gal. 4. 4. But when the
fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made
under the Law,
, and so was, and continues to be God and man in two distinct Natures, and one
Person for ever Romans 9. 5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Luke 1. 35. And the
Angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the Highest shall over shadow thee, herefore also that Holy thing
which shall be born of thee, shall be called, The Son of God. Col. 2. 9. For in
him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Heb 7. 24. But this man
because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. V. 25. Wherefore
he is able to save them to the uttermost that come to God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them.
.

Q. How did Christ being the Son of God become man?

A. Christ the Son of God became man, by taking to himself a true body Heb. 2.
14. For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood he also
himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is the Devil. V. 16. For verily he took not
on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. Heb. 10 5*
Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared me.
, and a reasonable soul Mat. 26 38. Then says he unto them, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; tarry you here and watch with me.
, being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin
Mary, and born of her Luke 1. 31. Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and
bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus. V. 35. vide supra V. 42. And
she spoke out with a loud voice and said, Blessed art thou among women, and
blessed is the fruit of thy womb. Gal. 44. vide supra.
, yet without sin Heb. 4. 15. For we have not an High Priest which cannot be
touched with a feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted as we
are, yet without sin. Heb. 7. 26. For such an High Priest became us, who is
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the
heavens.
.

Q. What offices does Christ execute as our Redeemer?

A. Christ as our Redeemer, executes the Offices of a Prophet, of a Priest,
and of a King, both in his estate of humiliation and exaltation Act. 3. 22. For
Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up
unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall you hear in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you. Heb. 12. 25. See that ye refuse not him that
speaks, for if they escaped not who r^fused. him that spoke on earth, much
more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven.
Compared with 2 Cor. 13. 3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me,
which to you ward is not weak, but is mighty in you. Heb. 5. 5. So also Christ
glorified not himself to be made an High*Priest, but he that said unto him,
thou art my Son to day have I begotten thee. v. 6.] As he says also in another
place, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck. v. 7.] Who
in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplicitions
with strong crying and tears unto him who is able to save him from death, and
was heard in that he feared. Psalm. 2. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy
hill of Sion. Isa. 9. 6. For unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given,
and the government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called,
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace. v. 7.] Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no
end, upon the throne of David and upon his Kingdom to order it and to establish
it with judgment and justice, from henceforth even for ever, the zeal of the
Lord of hosts will perform this. Mat. 21. 5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion,
behold thy King comes unto thee, meek and sitting upon an ass and a coalt the
foal of an ass. Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for
thine inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession, thou
shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
Potters vessel. v. 10.] Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye
judges of the earth. v. 11.] Serve the Lord with fear and rejoice with
trembling.


Q. How does Christ execute the office of a Prophet?

A. Christ executes the office of a Prophet, in reveleing to us by his word
and Spirit the will of God for our salvation Ioh. 1. 18. No man has seen God
at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him. 1 Pet. 1. 10. Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired, and
searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you. v.
11.] Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which was in
them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and
the glory which should follow. v. 12.] Unto whom it was reveled, that not unto
themselves, but unto us they did minister the things, which are now reported
unto you, by them that have preached the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost
sent down from heaven, which things the Angels desire to look into. Ioh. 15.
15. Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knows not what his
Lord does; but I have called you friends, for all things that I have heard of
my Father I have made known unto you Ioh. 20. 3^. These things are written,
that you might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that
believing you might have life through his name.
.

Q. How does Christ execute the office of a Priest?

A. Christ executes the office of a Priest in his once offering up of himself
a sacrifice to satisfy divine Justice Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the
blood of Christ. who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God. v. 28.] So
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for
him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.
, and reconcile us to God Heb. 2 17. In all things it behoved him to be made
like unto his brethren, that he might be a marciful and faithful High Priest in
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.
, and in making continual intercession for us Heb. 7. 24. But this man because
he continues ever has an unchangeable Priesthood. v. 25.] Wherefore he is
able to save to the uttermost those that come to God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them.
.

Q. How does Christ execute the office of a King?

A. Christ executes the office of a King, in subduing us to himself Act. 15.
14. Simeon has declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take
out of them a people for his name. v. 15.] And to this agree the words of the
Prophet, as it is written. v. 16.] After this I will return and build again the
tabernacle of David, which is fallen down, and I will build again the ruins
thereof and I will set it up.
, in ruling Isa. 33. 22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the
Lord is our King, he will save us.
, and desending us Isa. 32. 1. Behold a King shall reign in righteousness, and
Princes shall rule in judgment. v. 2.] And a man shall be as an hiding place
from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, as rivers of waters in a dry
place, as the shadow of a rock in a weary land.
, and restraining and conquering all his and our enemies 1 Cor. 15. 25. For he
m^st reign, till he has put all enemies under his feet. Ps. 110. throughout.
.

Q. Wherein did Christ's humiliation consist?

A. Christ's humiliation consisted in his being born, and that in a low
condition Luke 2. 7. And she brought forth her firstborn Son and wrapped him in
swadling-clothes and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them
in the Inn.
, made under the law Gal. 4. 4. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent
forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law.
, undergoing the miseries of this life Heb. 12. 2. Looking unto Jesus the
author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God. v. 3.] For consider him that endured such contradiction of
sinners against himself; lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Isa. 53.
2. For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a
dry ground, he has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him there is
no beauty that we should desire him. v. 3.] He is despised and rejected of men,
a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs, and we hid as it were our faces
from him, he was despised and we esteemed him not.
, the wrath of God Luke 22. 44. And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly,
and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.
Mat. 27. 46. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,
ELI ELILAMA-SABACTHANI: that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me?
, and the cursed death of the cross Phil. 2. 8. And being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross.
, in being buried 1 Cor. 15. 4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again
the third day according to the Scriptures.
and continuing under the power of death for a time Mat. 2. 40. As Jonas was
three days and three nights in the whales belly, so shall the Son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. Act. 2. 24, 25, 26,
27.-31. v. 24.] Woom God bath raised having loosed the pains of death; because
it was not possible that he should be holden of it. v. 25.] For David speaks
concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on my
right hand, that I should not be moved. v. 26.] Therefore did my heart rejoice,
and my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope. v. 27.]
Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine
holy One to see corruption. v. 31.] He seeing this before spoke of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither did his
flesh see corruption.
.

Q. Wherein consists Christ's Exaltation?

A. Christ's exaltation consists in his rising again from the dead on the
third day 1 Cor. 15. 4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the
third day according to the Scriptures.
, in ascending up into heaven Mark. 16. 19. So then after the Lord had spoken
to them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.
, in sitting at the right hand of God the Father Ephesians. 1. 20. Which he wrought
in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand
in the heavenly places.
, and in coming to judge the world at the last day Act. 1. 11. Which also said,
Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye g^zing up into heaven? this same Jesus which is
taken up from you into heaven, shall come in like manner, as ye have seen him
go into heaven. Chap. 17. v. 31. He has appointed a day, in the which he shall
judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof
he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.
.

Q. How are we made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. We are made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, by the
effectual application of it to us John 1. 11, 12. v. 11. He came unto his own,
and his own received him not. v. 12. But as many as received him, to them gave
he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.
, by his holy Spirit Tit. 3. 5, 6. v. 5. Not by works of righteousness which
we have done, but according to his mercy ^e saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost. v. 6. Which be shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our S^viour.
.

Q. How does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. The Spirit applies to us the Redemption purchased by Christ, by working
faith in us Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. v. 13. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard
the Word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation; in whom also after that ye
believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise. v. 14. Which is an
earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession
unto the praise of his glory. Joh. 6. 37, 39. v. 37. All the Father gives me
shall come unto me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. v.
39. And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has
given, I should lose nothing, but should raise it again at the last day Ephesians. 2.
8. By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God.
, and thereby uniting us to Christ in our effectual Calling Ephesians. 3. 17. That
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in
love 1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of
his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
.

Q. What is effectual Calling?

A. Effectual calling is the work of Gods Spirit 2 Timothy 1 9. Who has saved us
and called us with an holy calling not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world
began. 2 These 2. 13, 14. v. 13.] But we are bound to give thanks always to God
for you brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning
chosen you to salvation through Sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the
truth. v. 14.] Whereunto he called you by our Gosp^l to the obtaining of the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
, whereby, convincing us of our sin and misery Act. 2. 37. Now when they heard
this they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and to the rest of
the Apostles, men and brethren what shall we do?
, inlightning our minds in the knowledge of Christ Act 26. 18. To open their
eyes and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them which
are sanctified by faith that is in me.
and renewing our wills Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. v. 26.] A new heart also will I give
you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony
heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. v. 27.] And I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them.
, he does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ, freely offered to us
in the Gospel John 6. 44, 45. v. 44.] No man can come unto me except the Father
which has sent me draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day. v. 45.]
As it is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God, every
man therefore that has heard and has learned of the Father comes unto me.
Phil. 2. 13. For it is God that works in you, both to will and to do of his
good pleasure.
.

Q. What benefits do they that are Effectually called partake of in this life?

A. They that are effectually called do in this life partake of Justification
Romans 8. 30. Moreover whom he did predestinate them he also called, and whom he
called them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
, Adoption Ephesians. 1. 5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.
, Sanctification, and the several benefits which in this life do either
accompany or flow from them 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus who of
God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption.
.

Q* What is Justification?

A. Justification is an act of Gods free grace wherein he pardons all our
sins To. 3. 24, 25.] v. 24 Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ. v. 25.] Whom God has set forth to be a
propiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. Romans 4. 6.
Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works. v. 7.] Saying, blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. v. 8.] Blessed is the man to whom the
Lord will not impute sin.
, and accepts us as righteous in his sight 2 Cor. 5. 19. To wit that God was
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. v. 21.] For he
has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.
, only for the righteousness of Christ imputed to us Romans 5. 17. For if by one
man's offense, death reigned, by one much more, they which receive abundance of
grace and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus
Christ. v. 18.] Therefore, as by the offense of one, judgment came upon men
unto condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life. v. 19.] As by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners: so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
, and received by Faith alone Gal. 2. 16. Knowing that man is not justified by
the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by
the works of the law, for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.
Phil. 3. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of
the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which
is of God by faith.


Q. What is Adoption?

A. Adoption is an act of Gods free grace 1 Ioh. 3. 1. Behold what manner of
love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of
God, therefore the world knows us not, because it knew him not.
, whereby we are received into the number, and have a right to all the
privileges of the sons of God Ioh. 1. 12. As many as received him, to them
gave be power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.
Romans 8. 17. And if children, then heirs, heirs of God and joint-heires with
Christ, if so be we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.
.

Q. What is Sanctification?

A. Sanctification is the work of Gods free grace 2 These. 1. 13. God has from
the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and
the belief of the truth.
, whereby we are renewed in the whole man after the image of God Ephesians. 4. 23.
And be renewed in the Spirit of your mind. v. 24.] And that ye put on that new
man which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
, and are enabled more and more to die unto sin, and live unto righteousness
Romans 6. 4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like
as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we
also should walk in newness of life. v. 6.] Knowing this that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin. Rom 8. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
.

Q. What are the benefits which in this life do accompany or flow from
Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification?

A. The benefits which in this life do accompany or flow from Justification,
Adoption, and Sanctification are assurance of Gods love, peace of conscience
Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ. V. 2.] By whom also we have access by faith into this
grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. V. 5. And hope
makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the
holy Ghost which is given unto us.
, joy in the holy Ghost Romans 14. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink: but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
, increase of grace Prove. 4. 18. The path of the just, is as the shining light,
that shines more and more unto the perfect day.
and perseverance therein to the end 1 John 5. 13. These things have I written
unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that you may know that ye
have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. 1
Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation,
ready to be revealed in the last times.
.

Q. What benefits do believers receive from Christ, at death?

A. The souls of believers are at their death made perfect in holiness Heb. 12.
23. To the general assemby and Church of the firstborn which are written in
heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect.
, and do immediately pass into glory 2 Cor. 5. 1. For we know that if our
earthly houses of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. V. 6.] Therefore we are
always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord. V. 8.] We are confident I say, and willing, rather to be
absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. Phil. 1. 23. For I am in
a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which
is far better. Luke 23. 43. And Jesus said unto him, verily, I say unto thee,
to day shall thou be with me in paradise.
, and their bodies being still united to Christ 1 These. 4. 14. For if we
believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus,
will God bring with him.
, do rest in their graves Isa. 57. 2. He shall enter into peace, they shall
rest in their beds, each one walking in uprightness.
, till the resurrection Job. 19. 26. And though after my skin, worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. V. 27.] Whom I shall see for my
self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed
within me.
.

Q. What benefit do believers receive from Christ at the resurrection?

A. At the resurrection, believers being raised up in glory 1 Cor. 15. 43. It
is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, it is sown in weakness, it is
raised in power.
, shall be openly acknowledged, and acquitted in the day of judgment Mat. 25.
23. His Lord said unto him, well done, thou good and faithful servant thou have
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things; enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord. Mat. 10. 32. Whosoever shall confess me before
men, him will I confess also before my father which is in heaven.
, and made perfectly blessed in full enjoying of God 1 Ioh. 3. 2. Beloved now
are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is, 1 Cor. 13. 12. For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face; now I know in part, but then shall I know even as I am also known.
, to all eternity 1 These. 4. 17. Then we which are are alive and remain, shall
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air and
so shall we be ever with the Lord. v. 18.] Wherefore comfort one another with
these words.
.

Q. What is the duty which God requires of man?

A. The duty which God requires of man, is obedience to his revealed will Mic.
6. 8. He has showed thee, O man what is good, and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.
1 Samuel* 15. 22. And Samuel said, has the Lord as great delight in
burnt-offering and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the Lord, Behold, to
obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of rams.
.

Q. What did God at first reveal to man for the rule of his obedience?

A. The rule which God at first revealed to man for his obedience, was the
Moral Law Romans 2. 14. For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by
nature the things contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law
unto themselves v. 15.] Which show the work of the law written in their hearts,
their consciences also beating witness, and their thoughts the mean while
accusing or else excusing one another. Romans 10. 5. For Moses describes the
righteousness which is of the law, that the man which does those things shall
live by them.
.

Q. Where is the Moral Law summarily comprehended?

A. The moral law is summarily comprehended in the ten Commandments Deuteronomy. 10.
4. And he wrote on the Tables according to the first writing, the ten
Commandments which the Lord spoke unto you in the mount, out of the midst of
the fire, in the day of the assembly, and the Lord gave them unto me. Mat. 19.
17. And he said unto him, why call thou me good, there is none good but one,
that is God, but if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.
.

Q. What is the sum of the ten Commandments?

A. The sum of the ten Commandments is, To love the Lord our God with all our
heart, with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our mind; and our
neighbor as our selves Mat. 22. 37. Jesus said unto him thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
v. 38.] This is the first and great Commandment. v. 39.] And the second is like
unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. v. 40.] On these two
Commandments hang all the law and the Prophets.
.

Q. What is the Preface to the Ten Commandments?

A. The Preface to the ten Commandments is in these words [I am the Lord thy
God which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage Exodus 20. 2.
.]

Q. What does the Preface to the ten Commandments teach us?

A. The Preface to the ten Commandments teaches us, that because God is the
Lord, and our God, and Redeemer; therefore we are bound to keep all his
Commandments Luke 1. 74. That he would grant unto us that we being delivered
out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear. v. 75.] In
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives. 1 Pet. 1:
15.] But as he that has called you, is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. v. 16.] Because it is written, be ye holy for I am holy. v. 17.]
And if you call on the father, who without respect of persons judges according
to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. v. 18.] For
as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things as silver
and gold from your vain conversation, received by tradition from your fathers.
v. 19.] But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish,
and without spot:
.

Q. Which is the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment is [Thou shall have no other Gods before me Exodus 20.
3.
.]

Q. What is required in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment requires us to know, and acknowledge God to be the
only true God, and our God 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my son know thou
the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing
mind; for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him he will be found of thee, but if
thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou have
avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep
his statutes, and his Commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto his
voice.
, and to worship and glorify him accordingly Mat. 4. 10. Then says Jesus unto
him, Get thee hence Satan, for it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy
God and him only shall thou serve. Psalm. 29. 2. Give unto the Lord the glory
due unto his name, worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.


Q. What is forbidden in the first Commandment?

A. The first Commandment forbids the denying Psalm. 14. 1. The fool has
said in his heart there is no God, they are corrupt, they have done abominable
works, there is none that does good.
, or not worshipping and glorifying the true God, as God Romans 1. 21. Because
that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were they
thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened.
, and our God Psalm. 81. 10. I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the
land of Egypt, open thy mouth wide and I will fill it. v. 11.] But my people
would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me.
, and the giving that worship and glory to any other which is due to him alone
Romans 1. 25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served
the creatures more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen. v. 26.] For
this cause God gave them up unto vile affections, for even their women did
change the natural use into that which is against nature.
.

Q. What are we especially taught by these words [before me] in the first
Commandment?

A. These words before me, in the first Commandment, teach us, that God who
sees all things, takes notice of, and is much displeased with the sin of
having any other God Ezekiel. 8. 5. to theend Psalm. 44. 20, 21. But if we have
forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange God; v.
21.] Shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of the heart.
.

Q. Which is the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment is, [Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image,
or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; thou shall not bow down thy
self to them nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands, of them that
love me, and keep my Commandments Exodus 20: 4, 5, 6.
.]

Q. What is required in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment requires, the receiving, observing, and keeping
pure and entire, all such religious worship and Ordinances as God has
appointed in his word Deuteronomy. 32. 46. And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto
all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your
children to observe to do all the words of this law. Mat. 28. 20. Teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo I am with you
always unto the end of the world. Act. 2. 42. And they continued steadfastly in
the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment forbids the worshipping of God by Images Deuteronomy. 4.
15, 16, 17, 18, 19.] v. 15. Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves (for
ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb, out of the midst of the fire) v. 16. Lest you corrupt your selves, and
make you a graven Image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or
female. v. 17.] The likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of
any winged fowl that flies in the air, v. 18.] The likeness of any thing that
creeps on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath
the earth. v. 19.] And least thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou
feast the Sun, Moon, and Stars, even all the host of heaven, should be
driven to worship them, and serve them, which the Lord God has divided unto
all nations under the whole heaven. Exodus 32. 5-8. And when Aaron saw it, he
built an Altar before it, and Aaron made proclamation, and said, Tomorrow is a
feast to the Lord. -- v. 8.] They have turned aside quickly out of the way
which I commanded them; they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped
it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy Gods, O Israel, which
have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
, or any other way, not appointed in his word Deuteronomy. 12. 31, 32. Thou shall not
do so unto the Lord thy God, for every abomination to the Lord which he hates,
have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters have
they burnt in the fire to their gods. v. 32.] What thing soever I command you,
observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.
.

Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the second Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the second Commandment are, Gods sovereignty over us
Psalm. 95. 2, 3, 6 Let us come before his prefence with thanksgiving, and make a
joiful noise unto him with Psalms. v. 3.] For the Lord is a great God, and a
great King above all Gods. v. 6.] O come let us worship and bow down, let us
kneel before the Lord our maker
, his property in us Psalm. 45. 11. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty,
for he is thy Lord and worship thou him
, and his zeal he has to his own worship Exodus 34. 13, 14. But ye shall
destroy their altars break their images, and cut down their groves. V. 14.] For
thou shall worship no other God, for the Lord whose name is Jealous, is a
jealous God.
.

Q. Which is the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment is, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain
Exodus 20. 7.
.

Q. What is required in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment requires the holy and reverend use of Gods Name Mat.
6. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy Name. Deuteronomy. 28. 58. If thou will not observe to do all the
words of this law, that are written, in this book, that thou may fear this
glorious and fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD.
, Title Psalm. 68. 4. Sing unto God, sing praises to his name, extol him that
rides upon the heavens by his name JAH, and rejoyc^ before him.
, Attributes Rev. 15. 3, 4. And they sing the Song of Moses, the servant of
God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, great and mavelous are thy words, Lord
God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. V. 4.] Who
shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name, for thou only art holy; for
all nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made
manifest.
, Ordinances Mal. 1. 11, 14. For from the rising of the Sun even unto the going
down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place
incense shall be offered unto thy name, and a pure offering, for my name shall
be great among the heathen, says the Lord of hosts. V. 14.] But cursed be the
deceiver that has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the
Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts, and my
name is dreadful among the heathen.
, Word Psalm. 138. 1, 2. I will prai^^ thee with my whole heart, before the gods
will I sing praise unto thee. V. 2.] I will worship toward thy holy Temple,
and praise thy name for thy loving Kindness, and for thy truth; for thou have
magnified thy word above all thy name.
, and Works Job. 36. 24. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment forbids all profaning or abusing of any thing,
whereby God makes himself known Mal. 1. 6, 7-12. A son honors his father,
and a servant his Master. If then I be a father, where is mine honor? and if I
be a Master, where is my fear, says the Lord of hosts unto you, O Priests,
that despise my Name? and ye say, Wherein have we despised thy Name? V. 7.] Ye
offer polluted bread upon mine Altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted
thee? in that ye say, The Table of the Lord is contemptible. V. 12.] But ye
have profaned it, in that ye say, the Table of the Lord is polluted, and the
fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible. Chap. 2. v. 2. If you will not
hear, and if you will not lay it to heart to give glory to my Name, says the
Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your
blessings, yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart.
Chap. 3. 14. Ye have said, it is vain to serve God; and what profit is it that
we have kept his Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord
of hosts?


Q. What is the Reason annexed to the third Commandment?

A. The Reason annexed to the third Commandment is, that however the breakers
of this Commandment may escape punishment from men, yet the Lord our God will
not suffer them to escape his righteous judgment 1 Samuel 2. 12.-17-22.-24. Now
the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the Lord -- v. 17.]
Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord; for men
abhorred the offering of the Lord -- v. 22.] Now E^i was very old, and heard
all that his sons did unto all Israel, and how they lay with the women that
assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. -- v. 24.] Nay, my
sons, for it is no good report that I hear; ye make the Lords people to
transgress. 1 Samuel 3. 13.* For I have told him that I will judge his house for
ever, for the iniquity which he knows; because his sons made themselves vile,
and he restrained them not. Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59. If thou will not observe to do
all the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou may fear
this glorious and fearful Name The Lord thy God. v. 59.] Then the Lord will
make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed even great plagues, and
of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.
.

Q. Which is the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment is, [Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: six
days shall thou labor and do all thy work: but the seventh day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore
the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it Exo. 20. 8, 9, 10, 11
.]

Q. What is required in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment requires the keeping holy to God, such set time as
he has appointed in his Word; expressly, one whole day in seven, to be a holy
Sabbath unto the Lord Deuteronomy. 5. 12, 13, 14. Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify
it, as the Lord thy God has commanded thee. v. 13.] Six days shall thou
labor, and do all thy work. v. 14.] But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine
ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates, that thy
manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.
.

Q. Which day of the seven has God appointed to be the weekly Sabbath

A. From the beginning of the world to the Resurrection of Christ, God has
appointed the seventh day of the week to be the weekly Sabbath: and the first
day of the week, ever since, to continue to the end of the world, which is the
Christian Sabbath Genesis 2. 2, 3. And on the seventh day God ended his work which
he had made: and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he made.
V. 3.] And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; because that in it
he rested from all his work which God created and made. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Now
concerning the collection for the Saints, as [have given order to the Churches
of Galatia, even so do ye, V. 2. 7.] Upon the first day of the week, let every
one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no
gatherings when I come. Act. 20. 7.] And upon the first day of the Week, when
the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to
depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight.
.

Q. How is the Sabbath to be sanctified?

A. The Sabbath is to be sanctified, by an holy resting all that day Exodus 20.
8.-10. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy -- V. 10.] But the seventh day
is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it thou shall do no manner of work,
thou, nor thy son, etc.
, even from such worldly employments and recreations, as are lawful on other
days Neh. 13. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.-21, 22. In those days saw I in Judah, some
treading wine-presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading
asses, also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they
brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day; and I testified against them in the
day wherein they sold victuals. V. 16.] There dwelt men of Tire also therein,
which brought fish, and all manner of wares, and sold on the Sabbath day, unto
the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem. V. 17.] Then I contended with the
Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and
profane the Sabbath day? V. 18.] Did not your fathers thus, and did not God
bring all this evil upon us, and upon this Ci^y? Yet ye bring more wrath upon
Israel, by profaning the Sabbath. V. 19.] And it came to pass that when the
gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the
gates should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened till after the
Sabbath; and some of my servants I set at the gates, that there should be no
burden brought in on the Sabbath day. V. 21.] Then testified I against them,
and said unto them, Why lodge ye about the wall? If ye do so again, I will lay
hands on you. From that time forth came they no more on the Sabbath. V. 22] And
I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves, and that they
would come and keep the gates, to sanctify the Sabbath day. Remember me, O my
God, concerning this ^lso, etc. --
, and spending the whole time in the public and private exercises of Gods
worship Luke 4. 16. And he came to Nazareth where he had been brought up, and
as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up
for to read. Act. 20. 7. And upon the first day of the week, etc. See letter
[i] Psalm. 92. Title, A P^alm, or song for the Sabbath day. Isa. 66. 23. And it
shall come to pass that from one new Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to
another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord.
, except so much as is to be taken up in the works of necessity and mercy Mat.
12. from ver. 1. to ver. 13. At that time Jesus went on the Sabbath day through
the corn, and his Disciples were an hungry, and began to pluck ears of corn and
to eat. But when the Pharisees, etc. -- ver. 12. Is it lawful to do well on the
Sabbath days.
.

Q. What are the sins fordiden in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment forbids the omission of careful performance of
the duties required Ezekiel. 22. 26. Her Priests have violated my law, and
profaned mine holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and
profane, neither have they showed difference between the unclean and clean; and
have hid their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them. Amos 8. 5.
Saying, When will the New Moon be gone, that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath
that we may set forth wheat? making the Ephah small, and the shekel great, and
falsifying the balances by deceit. Mal. 1. 13. Ye said also, Behold, what a
weariness is it! and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord of hosts; and ye
brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an
offering: Should I accept this of your hand, says the Lord?
, and the profaning the day by idleness Act. 20. 7.-9. And upon the first day
of the week, when the Discip^es came together to break bread, Paul preached
unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until
midnight. -- v. 9.] And there sat in a window a certain young man named
Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep; and as Paul was long Preaching he
sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.
, or doing that which is in it self sinful Ezekiel. 23. 38. Moreover, this they
have done to me, They have defiled my Sanctuary in the same day, and have
profaned my Sabbaths.
, or by unnecessary thoughts, words, or works about our worldly employments or
recreations Jer. 17. 24, 25, 26. And it shall come to pass if ye diligently
hearken unto me, says the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of
this city on the Sabbath day, but hallow the Sabbath day, to do no work
therein. v. 25.] Then shall there enter into the gates of this City Kings and
Princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses,
they and their Princes, the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and
this City shall remain for ever. V. 26.] And they shall come from the City of
Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and
from the Plain, and from the mountains, and from the South, bringing
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and incense, and bringing
sacrifices of praise unto the house of the Lord. Isa. 58. 13. If thou turn away
thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not
doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own
words.
.

Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment are, Gods allowing us six
days of the week for our own employment Exodus 20. 9. Six days shall thou
labor and do all thy work.
, his challenging a special property in the seventh, his own example, and his
blessing the Sabbath day Exodus 20. 11. For in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day;
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day and hallowed it.
.

Q. What is the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment is, [Honour thy father and thy mother that thy days
may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God gives thee Exodus 20. 12.
.]

Q. What is required in the fifth Commandment.

A. The fifth Commandment requires the preserving the honor, and performing
the duties, belonging to every one in their several places and relations, as
superiors Ephesians. 5. 21. Submitting your selves one to another* in the fear of God.
, inferiors 1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor all men, Love the brotherhood. Fear God.
Honor the King.
, or equals Romans 12. 10.] Be kindly affectioned one to another, with brotherly
love in honor preferring one another.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment forbids the neglecting of, or doing any thing
against the honor and duty which belongs to every one in their several
places and relations Mat. 15. 4. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy Father,
and mother, and he that curses father or mother let him die the death. v. 5.]
But ye say whosoever shall say to his father or his mother, it is a gift by
whatsoever thou might be profi^ed by me, v. 6.] And honor not his father or
his mother, he shall be free, thus have ye made the Commandments of God of none
effect by your traditions. Ezekiel* 34. 2, 3, 4. Son of man prophecy against the
shepherds of Israel; prophecy, and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God unto
the shepherds, woe be to the shepherds of Israel, that do feed themselves;
should not the shepherds feed the flocks? v. 3.] Ye eat the fat and cloth you
with the wool, ye kill them that are fed; but ye seed not the flock. v. 4.] The
diseased have ye not strengthened, nor have ye healed that which was sick, nor
bound up that which was broken, nor brought again that which was driven away,
nor sought that which was lost, but with force and cruelty have ye ruled them.
Romans 13. 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loves
another has fulfilled the Law.
.

Q. What is the Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment?

A. The Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment, is a promise of long life and
prosperity, (as far as it shall serve for Gods glory, and their own good) to
all such as keep this Commandment Deuteronomy. 5. 16 Honor thy father and thy mother,
as the Lord thy God has commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and
that it may go well with thee, in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. Honor thy father and mother (which is the first Commandment with
promise.) v. 3.] That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on
the earth.
.

Q Which is the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment is, [Thou shall not kill Exodus 20. 13.
.]

Q. What is required in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment requires all lawful endeavors to preserve our own
life Ephesians. 5. 28, 29. So ought men to love their own wives as their own bodies.
He that loves his wise, loves himself. v. 29.] For no man ever bated his own
flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church?
, and the life of others 1 King. 18. 4. For it was so, when Jezebel cut off the
Prophets of the Lord, that Obadiah took an hundred Prophets, and hid them by
fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment forbids the taking away of our own life, or the
life of our neighbor unjustly, or whatsoever tends thereunto Act. 16. 28.
But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm for we are all
here. Genesis 9. 6. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed;
for in the image of God made he man.
.

Q. Which is the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment is [Thou shall not commit adultery Exodus 20. 14.
.

Q. What is required in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment requires the preservation of our own and our
neighbors chastity in heart, speech and behavior 1 Cor. 7. 2.-3,* 5. 34-36.
Nevertheless to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband. v. 3.] Let the husband render unto the wife due
benevolence; and likewise also the wife unto the husband -- v. 5.] Defraud you
not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give, etc.
v. 34.] There is difference also between a wife and a virgin; the unmarried
woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy, both in ^o^y and
in spirit; but she that is married cares for the things of the world how she
may please her husband -- v. 36.] But if any man think that he behaveth himself
uncomely toward his virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so
require; let him do what he will; he sins not; let them marry. Col. 4. 6.
Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt; that ye may know how
ye ought to answer every man. 1 Pet. 3. 2. While they behold your chaste
conversation coupled with fear.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment forbids all unchaste thoughts, words and actions
Mat. 15. 19. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies. Matt. 5. 28. But I say unto
you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed
adultery with her already in his heart. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4. But fornication and all
uncleannnss; or coveteousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as
becomes Saints: V. 4.] Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting,
which are not convenient; but rather giving of thanks.
.

Q. Which is the eighth Commandment?

A. The eight Commandment is, [Thou shall not steal Exodus 20. 15.
.]

Q. What is required in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment requires the lawful procuring, and furthering the
wealth and outward estate of our selves, and others Genesis 30 30. For it was
little which thou had before I came, and it is now increased unto a
multitude, and the Lord has blessed thee since my coming, and now when shall I
provide for my own house also? 1 Timothy 5. 8. But if any provide not for his own,
and especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is
worse then an infidel. Lev. 25. 35. And if thy brother be waxen poor, and
fallen in decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him; yea though he be a
stranger or a sojourner, that he may live with thee. Deuteronomy. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Thou shall not see thy brothers ^x, or his sheep go astray, and hide thy self
from them; thou shall in any case bring them back again unto thy brother. V.
2.] And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him nor, then
thou shall bring it unto thy own house, and it shall be with thee until thy
brother seek after it, and thou shall restore it to him again. v. 3. In like
manner shall thou do with his Ass, and so shall thou do with his raiment, and
with all lost things of thy brothers which he has lost, and thou have found;
thou may not hide thy self. v. 4.] Thou shall not see thy brothers ox or his
ass fall down by the way, and hide thy self from them; thou shall surely help
him to lift them up again. v. 5.] The woman shall not wear that which
pertains unto a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment; for all
that do so are abomination unto the Lord thy God. Exodus 23. 4, 5. If thou meet
thine enemies ox or his ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to
him again. v. 5.] If thou see the ass of him that hates thee lying under his
burden, and would forbear to help him; thou shall surely help with him. Genesis
47. 14* 20. And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of
Egypt, and Canaan, for the corn which they bought, and Jos^ph brought the money
into Pharaohs house. v. 20.] And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for
Pharaoh; for the Egyp^ians sold every man his field, because the famine
prevailed over them; so the land became Pharaoh's.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment forbids whatsoever does or may, unjustly hinder
our own, or our neighbors wealth, or outward estate Prove. 23. 20, 21. Be not
amongst wine bibb^rs, amongst riotous eaters of flesh, v. 21. for the drunkard
and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall cloth a man with
rags. Prove. 28. 19. He that tilleth his land shall have plen^y of bread, but he
that follows after vain persons shall have poverty enough. Ephesians. 4. 28. Let
him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his
hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.
.]

Q. What is the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment is [Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor Exodus 20. 16.
.]

Q. What is required in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment requires the maintaining and promoting of truth
between man and man Zech. 8. 16. These are the things that ye shall do, speak
ye every man the truth to his neighbor, execute the judgment of truth and peace
in your gates.
, and of our own, and of our neighbors good names 3 John v. 12. Demetrius had
good report of all men and of the truth it self; yea, and we also bear record,
and ye know that our record is true.
, especially in witness*bearing Prove. 14. 5. A faithful witness will not lie,
but a false witness will utter lies. V. 25.] A true witness delivers souls,
but a deceitful witness speaks lies.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment forbids whatsoever is prejudicial to truth, or
injurious to our own or our neighbors good name 1 Samuel 17. 28. And Eliab his
eldest brother heard when he sp^ke unto the men, and Eliabs anger was kindled
against David, and he said, why came thou down hither? and with whom have
thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride and the
naughtiness of thy heart, for thou are come down that thou might see the
battle. Lev. 19. 16. Thou shall, not go up and down as a tale bearer among thy
people, neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor, I am the
Lord. Psalm. 15. 3. He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his
neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor.
.

Q What is the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment is, [Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant,
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors Exodus 20 17.
.]

Q. What is required in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment requires full contentment with our own condition
Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with
such things as you have, for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. 1 Timothy 6. 6. But godliness with contentment is great gain.
, with a right and charitable frame of spirit toward our neighbor, and all
that is his Job 31. 29. If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me,
or lift up my self when evil found him. Romans 12. 15. Rejoice with them that do
rejoice, and weep with them that weep. 1 Timothy 1. 5. Now the end of the
Commandment is, charity out of a pure beart, and of a good conscience, and of
faith unfeigned. 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. Charity suffers long, and is kind;
charity envieth not, charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up. V. 5.]
Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
thinks no evil. V. 6.] Rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth;
V. 7.] Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things.
.

Q. What is forbidden in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment forbids all coffeehouse with our own estate 1
Kin. 21. 4. And Ahab came into his house, heavy and displeased. because of the
word which N^both the Jezreelite had spoken to him; for he had said, I will not
give thee the inheritance of my fathers; and he laid him down upon his bed, and
turned away his face, and would eat no bread. Esth. 5. 13. Yet all this
avails m^ nothing, so long as I see Mordecal the Jew sitting at the
Kingsgate. 1 Cor. 10. 10. Neither murmur ye as some of them also murmured and
were destroyed of the destroyer.
, envying or grieving at the good of our neighbor ( Gal. 5. 26. Let us not be
desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another. I am. 3.
14. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie
not against the truth. V. 16.] For where envying and strife is, there is
confusion and every evil work.
), and all inordinate motions and affections to any thing that is his Romans 7.
7. What shall we say then, is the law sin? God forbid: nay, I had not known sin
but by the law; for I had not known lust except the law had said, thou shall
not covet. V. 8.] But sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence, for without the law sin was dead. Romans 13. 9. For
this, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not
steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not covet, and if there be
any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Deuteronomy. 5. 21. Neither shall thou desire
thy neighbors wife, neither shall thou covet thy neighbors house, his field,
or man servant, or his maidservant, his ^xe, ^r his ass or any thing that is
thy neighbors.
.

Q. Is any man able perfectly to keep the Commandments of God?

A. No mere man since the fall, is able in this life, perfectly to keep the
Commandments of God Eccl. 7. 20. For there is not a just man on earth that does
good and sins not. 1 John 1. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us. V. 10.] If we say that we have not
sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. Gal. 5. 17. For the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these
are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye
would.
, but does daily break them in thought, word, and deed Genesis 6. 5. And God saw
that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination
of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. Genesis 8. 21. And the
Lord smelled a sweet favor, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again
curse the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is
evil from his (...); neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as
I have done. Romans 3. 9. What then* are we better then they? no, in no wise, for
we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin --
and so on to verse 21. Jam. 3. 2. For in many things we offend all. If any man
offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the
whole body -- and so on to verse 13.
.

Q. Are all transgressions of the Law equally heinous?

A. Some sins in themselves, and by reason of several aggravations, are more
heinous in the sight of God then others Ezekiel. 8. 6. He said furthermore unto
me, Son of man, see thou what they do? even the great abominations that the
house of Israel commits here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary?
but turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations. V. 13.] He
said also unto me, turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations
that they do. V. 15.] Then said he unto me, have thou seen this, Oh son of man,
turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations then these. 1 John
5. 16. If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall
ask, and he shall give him life, for them that sin not unto death; there is a
sin unto death, I do not say that he shall pray for it. Psalm. 78. 17. 32, 56:
And they sinned yet more against him; by provoking the most High in the
wilderness. V. 32.] For all this they sinned still, and believed not for his
wondrous works. V. 56.] Yet they tempted and provoked the most High God; and
kept not his testimonies.
.

Q. What does every sin deserve?

A. Every sin deserves Gods wrath, and curse, both in this life, and that
which is to come Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words for because
of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Gal
3. 10. For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse; for it
is writtted, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law to do them. Lam. 3. 39. Wherefore does a living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins. Mat. 25. 41. Then shall he
also say unto them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
.

Q. What does God require of us that we may escape his wrath and curse, due to
us for sin?

A. To escape the wrath and curse of God due to us for sin, God requires of us
Faith in Jesus Christ, repentance unto life Acts 20. 21. Testifying both to the
Jews and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ.
, with the diligent use of all the outward means, whereby Christ communicates
to us the benefits of Redemption Prove. 2. 1.-5. v. 1. My son if thou will
receive my words, and bide my commandments with thee, etc. v. 5. Then shall
thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. Chap. 8.
33, 34, 35] v. 33. Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not; v. 34.
Blessed is the man that heaveth me, waiting daily at my gates, waiting at the
posts of my doors. v 35, but who so finds me, finds life, and shall obtain
favor of the Lord. Isai. 55. 3. Incline your ear and come unto me, hear, and
your soul shalllive, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the
sure mercies of David.
.

Q. What is faith in Jesus Christ?

A. Faith in Jesus Christ is a saving grace Heb. 10. 39. But we are not of them
who draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the
soul.
, whereby we receive, and rest upon him alone for salvation, as he is offered
to us in the Gospel Joh. 1. 12. But as many as received him to them gave he
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. Isa.
26. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. V. 4.] Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. Phil. 3. 9. And be found in him not
having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Gal. 2. 16.
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, for by the
works of the law shall no flesh be justified.
.

Q. What is repentance unto life?

A. Repentance unto life is a saving grace Act. 11. 18. When they heard these
things they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, then has God also to
the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.
, whereby a sinner out of true sense of his sin Acts 2. 37. Now when they heard
this they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and to the rest of
the Apostles, Men and brethren what shall we do? V. 38.] Then said Peter unto
them, repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
, and apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ Joel 2. 12. Therefore also now
says the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning. Ier. 3. 22. Return ye backsliding children,
and I will heal your backslidings; behold we come unto thee for thou art the
Lord our God.
, does with grief and hatred of his sin, turn from it unto God Ier. 31. 18. I
have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, thou have chastised me, and I
was chastised as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me, and I shall
be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. V. 19.] Surely after that I was
turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I sm^te upon my thigh; I
was ashamed, yea, even confounded; because I did bear the reproach of my youth.
Ezekiel. 36. 31. Than shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings which
were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your
iniquities, and for you abominations.
, with full purpose of, and endeavor after, new obedience 2 Cor. 7. 11. For
behold this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what
indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea,
what revenge, in all things you have approved your selves to be clear in this
matter. Isa. 1. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, V. 17.] Learn to do well, seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.
.

Q. What are the outward means whereby Christ communicates to us the benefits
of Redemption?

A. The outward and ordinary means whereby Christ communicates to us the
benefits of Redemption, are his Ordinances, especially the Word, Sacraments and
Prayer, all which are made effectual to the Elect, for salvation Mat. 28. 19.
Go ye therefore teach all nations baptizing them in ^he Name of the father, and
of the son, and of the holy Ghost. V. 20.] Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, and low I am with you always even unto the end
of the world, Amen. Acts 2. 42.-46, 47. And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers. V.
46.] And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking
bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart; V. 47.] Praising God, and having favor with all the people. And the
Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.
.

Q. How is the Word made effectual to salvation?

A. The Spirit of God makes the reading, but especially the preaching of the
word, an effectual means of convincing and converting sinners, and of building
them up in holiness and comfort, through faith unto salvation Neh. 8. 8. So
they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused them to understand the reading. 1 Cor. 14 24. But if all prophecy, and
there come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all,
he is judged of all. V. 25.] And thus are the secrets of his heart made
manifest, and so falling down on his face he will worship God, and report that
God is in you of a truth. Acts 26. 18. To open their eyes and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctifi^d by faith
that is in me. Psalm. 19. 8. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the
heart, the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. Acts 20. 32.
And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified. Romans 15 4. For whatsoever things were written afore-time, were
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. 2 Timothy 3. 15. And that from a child thou have known
the holy Scriptures which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus. V. 16.] All Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof for correction, etc. V.
17.] That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto good works.
Romans 10. 14. 15. ver. 14. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? ver. 15. and how shall they
preach except they be sent? etc. and 1. 16. for I am not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that
believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
.

Q. How is the Word to be read and heard, that it may become effectual to
salvation?

A. That the Word may become effectual to salvation, we must attend thereunto
with diligence Pro. 8. 34. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily
at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors
, preparation 1 Pet. 2. 1. Wherefore laying aside all malice and all guile, and
hypocrisies, and envies, evil speakings. V. 2.] As new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the word that ye may grow thereby.
and prayer Psalm. 119. 18. Open thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous
things out of thy law
, receive it with faith and love Heb. 4. 2. For unto us was the Gospel preached
as well as unto them, but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed
with faith in them that heard it. 2 These. 2. 10. With all deceiveableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the love of the
truth that they might be saved.
, lay it up in our hearts Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that
I might not sin against thee.
, and practice it in our lives Luke 8. 15. But that on the good ground are they
which in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience. Iam. 1. 25. But whosoever looks into the perfect law
of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer
of the word, this man shall be blessed in his dealing.
.

Q. How do the Sacraments become effectual means of salvation?

A. The Sacraments become effectual means of salvation, not from any virtue in
them, or in him that does administer them, but only by the blessing of Christ 1
Pet. 3. 22. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us,
not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Mat. 3. 11. I
indeed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that comes after me is
mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with
the holy Ghost, and with fire. 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. I have planted, Apollo watered,
but God gave the increase. V. 7.] So then neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase.
, and the working of his Spirit in them that by faith receive them ( 1 Cor. 12.
13. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been made all to drink into one
Spirit.
).

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance instituted by Christ; wherein, by sensible
signs, Christ and the benefits of the new Covenant are represented, sealed and
applied to believers Genesis 17. 7. And I will establish my covenant between me
and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting
covenant to be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee. V. 10.] This is my
covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee, every
man-child among you shall be circumcised. Exodus 12. throughouts 1 Cor. 11. 23.
For I have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, that the
Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread. V. 26.] For as
often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he
come.


Q. Which are the Sacraments of the New Testament?

A. The Sacraments of the New Testament are Baptism Mat. 28. 19. Go ye
therefore and teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
, and the Lords Supper Mat. 26. 26. 27. 28. v. 26. And as they were eating,
Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples,
and said, Take eat this is my body. v. 27. And he took the cup and gave thanks,
and gave it to them, saying, drink ye all of i^. v. 28. For this is my blood of
the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins.
.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament wherein the washing of Water, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost Mat. 28. 19. See in letter [y].
, does signify and seal our ingrafting into Christ, and partaking of the
benefits of the Covenant of Grace, and our engagement to the Lords Romans 6. 4.
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life. Gal. 3. 27. For as many of you as have been Baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ.
.

Q. To whom is Baptism to be administered?

A. Baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the visible
Church, till they profess their faith in Christ, and obedience to him Act. 8.
36. And as they went on their way they came unto a certain water, and the
Eunuch said, see, here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? V. 37.]
And Philip said, if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may, and he
answered, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Acts 2. 38. Then Peter
said unto them, repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost.
, but the infants of such as are members of the visible Church are to be
baptized Acts 2. 38. See before V. 39.] For the promise is unto you, and to
your children, and to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call. Genesis 17. 10. See in letter [x] Col. 2. 11, 12. In whom also ye are
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ. V. 12.] Buried with
him in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the
operation of God, who has raised him from the dead. 1 Cor. 7. 14. For the
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is
sanctified by the husband; else were your children unclean, but now are they
holy.
.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament, wherein, by giving and receiving Bread and
Wine according to Christ's appointment, his death is showed forth; and the
worthy receivers are, not after a corporal and carnal manner, but by faith,
made partakers of his Body and Blood, with all his benefits to their spiritual
nourishment, and grows in grace 1 Cor. 11. 23, 34, 25, 26. I have received of
the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same
night wherein he was betrayed, took bread; V. 24.] And when he had given thanks
he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you: this
do in remembrance of me. V. 25.] After the same manner also he took the Cup,
when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood: this do
ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. V. 26. For as often as ye eat
this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor.
10. 16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body
of Christ?
.

Q. What is required to the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper?

A. It is required of them that would worthily partake of the Lords Supper,
that they examine themselves, of their knowledge to discern the Lords body 1
Cor. 11. 28, 29. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup. V. 29.] For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords
body.
, of their faith to feed upon him 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye
be in the faith, prove your own selves, know you not that Jesus Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates?
, of their repentance 1 Cor. 11. 31. For if we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged.
, love 1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? V. 17.] For we being many are one bread, and
one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread.
, and new obedience 1 Cor. 5. 7. P^rge out therefore the old leaven, that ye
may be a new lump as ye are unleavened: for even Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for us. V. 8.] Therefore let us keep the feast not with old leaven,
neitheir with the leaven of malice, and wickedness, but with the unleavened
bread, of sincerity and truth.
, lest coming unworthily, they eat and drink judgment to themselves 1 Cor. 11.
28, 29. See in letter [f]
.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. Prayer is an offering up of our desires unto God Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in him
at all times ye people; pour out your hearts before him: God is a refuge for
us. Selah.
, for things agreeable to his will 1 Ioh. 5. 14. And this is the confidence
that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears
us.
, in the Name of Christ Ioh. 16. 23. And in that day he shall ask me nothing,
verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name,
he will give it you.
, with confession of our sins Psalm. 32. 5, 6 I acknowledged my sins unto thee,
and mine iniquity have I not hid; I said, I will confess my transgressions unto
the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. V. 6.] For this
shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou may be
found: surely in the fl^ods of great waters they shall come nigh unto him. Dan.
9. 4. And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said, O
Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy to them that
love him, and to them that keep his commandments.
, and thankful acknowledgment of his mercies Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing
but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your
requests be made know unto God.
.

Q. What rule has God given for our direction in Prayer?

A. The whole word of God is of use to direct us in Prayer 1 Job. 5. 14. And
this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing, according
to his will, he hears us.
, but the special rule of direction is, that form of Prayer, which Christ
taught his Disciples, commonly called the Lords Prayer Mat 6. 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our father, etc. -- Luke 11. 2. And he
said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our father, etc. --
.

Q. What does the Preface of the Lords Prayer teach us?

A. The Preface of the Lords Prayer which is, [Our Father which art in heaven
Matthew. 6. 9.
,] teaches us, to draw near to God with all holy reverence and confidence as
children to a father ready to help us Romans 8. 15. For we have not received the
Spirit of bondage again to fear, but we have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereb^y we cry, Abba, Father. Luke 11. 13. If ye then being evil know how to
give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly father
give the holy Spirit to them that a^k him?
, and that we should pray with and for others Act. 12. 5. Peter therefore was
kept in prison; but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for
him. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. v. 2.] For
Kinks, and for all that are in authority, etc.


Q. What do we pray for in the first Petition?

A. In the first petition, [which is, Hallowed be thy name Mat. 6. 9.
] we pray, that God would enable us and others, to glorify him in all that
whereby he makes himself known Psalm. 67. 2, 3. That thy way may be known upon
earth, thy saving health among all nations. v. 3] Let the people praise thee, O
God, let all the people praise he.
, and that he would dispose all things to his own glory Psalm. 83. throughout.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the second Petition?

A. In the second Petition, [which is, Thy Kingdom come Mat. 6. 10*
,] we pray that Satan's Kingdom may be destroyed Psalm. 68. 1.-18. Let God arise,
let his enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him f^^e before him. --
v. 18.] Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captiviy captive, thou have
received gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious also; that the Lord God might
dwell among them.
, and that the Kingdom of Grace might be advanced Rev. 12. 10, 11. And I heard
a loud voice, saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the
Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our
brethren is cast down which accused them before God day and night. v. 11.] And
they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony,
and they loved not their lives unto the death.
, our selves and others brought into it, and kept in it 2 These. 3. 1. Finally
brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be
glorified, even as it is with you. Romans 10. 1. Brethren, my hearts desire and
prayer to God for Israel is, That they might be saved. Joh. 17. 9.-20. I pray
for them, I pray not for the world; but for them that thou have given me, for
they are thine. -- v. 20.] Neither pray I for th^se alone, but for them also
which shall believe on me through their word.
, and that the Kingdom of glory may be hastened Rev. 22. 20. He which
testifies these things says, surely I come quickly Amen, even so, come Lord
Jesus
.

Q. What do we pray for in the third Petition?

A. In the third petition, (which is, Thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven Mat. 6. 10.
, We pray, that God would make us able and willing to know, obey, and submit to
his will in all things Psalm. 67. throughout Psalm. 119. 36. Incline my heart
unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness. Mat. 26. 39. And he went a
little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be
possible let this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. 2 Samuel 15. 25. And the King said unto Zadok carry back the Ark of God
into the city, If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring
me again and show me both it and his habitation? -- Job. 1. 21. And said, Naked
came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither, the Lord gave
and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
, as the Angels do in heaven Psalm. 103. 20, 21. Bless the Lord ye his Angels
that excel in strength, and do his commandments, harkening unto the voice of
his word. v. 21.] Bless ye the Lord all ye his hosts, ye ministers of his that
do his pleasure.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the fourth Petition?

A. In the fourth Petition, (which is, Give us this day our daily bread Mat. 6.
11.
, we pray, that of Gods free gift, we may receive a competent portion of the
good things of this life and enjoy his blessing with them Prove. 30. 8, 9.
Remove far from me vanity and lies, give me neither poverty, nor riches: feed
me with food convenient for me. v. 9.] Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say,
who is the Lord? and lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain. Genesis 28. 20. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, if God will be with me, and
keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to
put on. 1 Timothy 1. 4, 5. For every creature of God is good and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. v. 5.] For it is sanctified, by
the word of God, and prayer.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the fifth Petition?

A. In the fifth Petition, which is, [and forgive us our debts as we forgive
our debtors Mat*. 6. 12.
,] we pray that God for Christ's sake would freely pard on all our sins Psalm.
51. 1, 2.-7, 9. Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy loving kindness,
according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.
v. 2.] Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. v. 7]
Purge me with hysop, and I shall be clean: wash me, (...) I shall be whiter
then snow. v. 9.] Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
Dan. 9. 17, 18, 19. Now therefore our God, hear thou the prayer of thy servant,
and his supplication v. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive for thine own sake.
, which we are the rather encouraged to ask, because by his grace we are
enabled from the heart to forgive others Luke 11. 4. And forgive us our sins;
for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. Mat. 18. 35. So likewise
shall my heavenly Father do also to you, if ye from your hearts forgive not
every one his brother their trespasses.
.

Q. What do we pray for in the sixth Petition?

A. In the sixth Petition, [which is, And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil Mat. 6. 13.
,] we pray, that God would either keep us from being tempted to sin Mat. 26.
41. Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation, the Spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak*
, or support and deliver us when we are tempted 2 Cor. 12. 8. For this thing I
besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me.
.

Q. What does the conclusion of the Lords Prayer teach us?

A. The conclusion of the Lords Prayer, (which is, For thine is the Kingdom,
the power and the glory for ever, Amen Mat. 6. 13.
, teaches us to take our encouragement in prayer from God only Dan. 9. 4-7,
8, 9.-16, 17, 18, 19. And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my
confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the Covenant
and mercy to them that love him and keep his Commandments. -- v. 7.] O Lord,
righteousuess belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this
day, to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all
Israel, that are near and that are far off, through all the countries whither
thou have driven them, because of their trespass, that they have trespassed
against thee. v. 8. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to
our Princes, to our Fathers, because we have trespassed against thee. v. 9. To
the Lord our God belongs mercies, and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him. -- v. 16. O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech
thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy City Jerusalem, thy
holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers,
Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us. v.
17.] Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon the Sanctuary that is desolate,
for the Lords sake. v. 18.] O my God, incline thine ear, and hear, open thine
eyes and behold our desolation, and the City that is called by thy Name; for we
do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy
great mercies. v. 19.] O Lord, hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do;
defer not for thine own sake, O my God, for thy City and thy people are called
by thy Name.
, and in our prayers to praise him, ascribing Kingdom, power and glory to him 1
Chr. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the
Congregation, and David said, Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel, our Father
for ever. v. 11.] Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the
glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heavens, and in
the earth is thine: thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head
above all. v. 12.] Both riches and honors come of thee, and thou reignest over
all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make
great, and to give strength unto all. v. 13. Now therefore, our God, we thank
thee, and praise thy glorious name.
: And in testimony of our desire and assurance to be heard, we say, Amen 1 Cor.
14. 16. Else when thou shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he that ocupieth
the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks; seeing he
understands not what thou say? Rev. 22. 20, 21. He which testifies these
things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus. v. 21.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. AMEN.
.

The Ten COMMANDMENTS EXODUS, XX.
GOD spoke all these words, saying, I am the LORD thy God, which have brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

I. Thou shall have no other Gods before me. II. Thou shall not make unto thee
any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that
is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; thou shall
not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them: For I the LORD thy God am a
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me: and showing mercy unto
thousands of them that love me and keep my Commandments. III Thou shall not
take the name of the LORD thy God in vain. For the LORD will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain. IV. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy: Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work; but the seventh day is
the Sabbath of the LORD thy God, in it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor
thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy
cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: For in six days the LORD
made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh
day; wherefore the LORD blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. V. Honor thy
father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the LORD
thy God gives thee. VI. Thou shall not kill. VII. Thou shall not commit
adultery. VIII. Thou shall not steal. IX. Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor. X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall
not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor
his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.
FINIS.
The LORDS PRAYER, Matthew. 6.
Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
will be done on earth, as it is in heaven, Give us this day our daily bread,
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power,
and the glory, for ever. Amen.

The CREED.
I BELIEVE in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried,
he descended into hell i. e. Continued in the state of the dead, and under the
power of death till the third day.
, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended into heaven, and
sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty, from thence he shall come
to judge the quick and the dead: I believe in the holy Ghost: the holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the
resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.

Amen.
SO much of every Question both in the Larger and Shorter Catechism, is
repeated in the Answer, as makes every Answer an entire Proposition, or
sentence in it self: to the end the Learner may further improve it upon all
occasions, for his increase in knowledge and piety, even out of the course of
catechizing, as well as in it.

And albeit the substance of the doctrine comprised in that Abridgement
commonly called, The Apostles Creed, be fully set forth in each of the
Catechismes, so as there is no necessity of inserting the Creed it self, yet it
is here annexed, not as though it were composed by the Apostles, or ought to be
esteemed Canonical Scripture, as the Ten Commandments, and the Lords Prayer,
(much less a Prayer, as ignorant people have been apt to make both it and the
Decalogue) but because it is a brief sum of the Christian faith, agreeable to
the Word of God, and anciently received in the Churches of Christ.

Cornelius Burges Prolocutor pro tempore. Henry Roborough Scriba. Adoniram
Byfield Scriba.


To the Right Honorable THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament: The
Humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines, now sitting by Ordinance of
Parliament at Westminster, Concerning CHURCH GOVERNMENT
The Preface.
JEsus Christ, upon whose shoulders the Government is, whose name is called
Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace, of the increase of whose Government and Peace there shall be no end, who
sits upon the throne of David, and upon his Kingdom to order it, and to
establish it with Judgment and Justice, from henceforth even for ever, having
all power given unto him in Heaven and Earth by the Father, who raised him from
the dead, and set him on his own right hand, far above all Principalities and
Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come; and put all thing under his feet, and
gave him to be the head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all: He being ascended up far above all
Heavens, that he might fill all things, received gifts for his Church, and gave
offices necessary for the edification of his Church, and perfecting of his
Saints. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. v. 18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying,
All power is given unto me in Heaven, and in Earth; v. 19. Go ye therefore and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, v. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you, and lo I am with you always even unto the end of the world. Amen.
Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. v. 20. Which he wrought in Christ when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, v. 21.
Far above all Principality and Power, and Might, and Dominion; and every name
that is named, not only in this world but also in that which is to come. v. 22.
And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all
things to the Church. v. 23. Which is his body, the fullness of him that fills
all in all. -- compared with Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. v. 8. Wherefore he says, when he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. v. 11.
And he gave some Apostles: and some Prophets: and some Evangelists: and some
pastors and teachers. And with Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou
have led captivity captive, thou have received gifts for men: yea, for the
rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

Of the Church.
THere is one General Church visible, held forth in the New Testament.] 1 Cor.
12. 12, 13, 28. For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the
members of that one body being many, are one body: so also is Christ. v. 13.
For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free: and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit. v. 28. And God has set some in the Church: First Apostles, Secondarily
Prophets, Thirdly Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings* helps,
governments, diversities of tongues. Together with the rest of the Chapter.

The Ministry, O^acles and Ordinances of the New Testament, are given by Jesus
Christ to the General Church visible, for the gathering and perfecting of it in
this life, until his second coming.] 1 Cor. 12. 28. See before. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5.
v. 4. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of
your calling. v. 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, -- Compared with ver. 10.
11, 12, 13, 15, 16. v. 10. He that descended is the same also that ascended up
far above all heavens that he might fill all things. v. 11. And he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some pastors and
teachers. v. 12. For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. v. 13. Till we all come in
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. v. 15. But
speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the
head, even Christ. v. 16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body unto the
edifying of it self in love.

Particular visible Churches, Members of the General Church, are also held
forth in the New Testament.] Gal 1. 21, 12. v. 21. Afterward I came into the
regions of Syria and Cilicia. v. 22. And was unknown by face unto the Churches
of Judea, which were in Christ. Rev. 1. 4, 20. John to the seven Churches in
Asis, Grace be unto you, and peace from him which is, and which was, and which
is to come, and from the seven spirits which are before his throne. v. 20. The
mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right hand, and the seven
golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the Angels of the seven Churches. Rev.
2. 1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write, These things says he
that holds the seven stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the
seven golden candlesticks.

Particular Churches in the primitive times were made up of visible Saints.
viz. Of such as being of age, professed faith in Christ, and obedience unto
Christ, according the Rule of Faith and Life taught by Christ and his Apostles;
and of their children. Acts 2. 38, 41, 47. v. 38. Then Peter said unto them,
Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. v 41. Then
they that gladly received his word were baptized; and the same day there were
added unto them about three thousand souls. v. 47. Praising God, and having
favor with all the people; and the Lord added to the Church daily such as
should be saved. -- Compared with Acts 5. 14. And believers were the more added
to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Unto ^he Church of
God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to
be saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our
Lord, both theirs and ours. -- Compared with 2 Cor. 9 13. Whiles by the
experiment of this ministration, they glorify God for your professed
subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto
them, and unto all men. Acts 2. 39 For the promise is unto you and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call. 1 Cor. 7. 14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and
the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy. Romans 11. 16. For if the first-fruit be holy,
the lump is also holy; and if the root be holy, so are the branches. Mar. 10.
14. But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them, suffer
the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the
Kingdom of God. -- Compared with Mat. 19. 13, 14* v. 13. Then were there
brought unto him little children, that he should put his hand on them and pray,
and the disciples rebuked them. v. 14. But Jesus said suffer little children,
and forbid them not t^ come unto me; for of such is the Kingdom of heaven.
Luke 18. 15, 16. v* 15. And they brought unto him also infants* that he would
touch them; but when his disciples saw it, they rebuked them. v. 16. But jesus
called them unto him, and said, suffer little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of God.

Of the Officers of the Church.
THe Officers which Christ has appointed for the edification of his Church,
and the perfecting of the Saints, are,

Some extraordinary, as Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets which are ceased.

Others ordinary and perpetual, as Pastors, Teachers, and other
Church Governors, and Deacons.

Pastors.
THe Pastor is an ordinary and perpetual officer in the Church.] Jer. 3. 15.
16, 17. v. 15. And I will give you pastors according to mine heart* which shall
feed you with knowledge and understanding. v. 16. And it shall come to pass when
ye he multiplied and increased in the land; in those days says the Lord, they
shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the Lord; neither shall it come
to mind, neither shall they remember it, neither shall they visit it, neither
shall that be done any more. v. 17. At that time they shall call Jerusalem the
throne of the Lord* and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name
of the Lord, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more after the
imagination of their evil heart.

Prophesying of the time of the Gospel.] 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4. v. 2. Feed the
flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. v. 3.
Neither as being lords over Gods heritage; but being ensamples to the flock. v.
4. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory
that fades not away. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. v. 11. And he gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers. v. 12. For
the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ* v. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of
the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ.

First, It belongs to his office;

To pray for, and with his flock, as the mouth of the people unto God.] Acts 6.
2, 4. v. 2 Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them, and
said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve Tables.
v. 4. But we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of
the word. Acts 20. 36. And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down and prayed
with them all.

Where preaching and prayer are joined as several parts of the same Office.]
Jam. 5. 14, 15. Is any man sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the
Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the
Lord. v. 15. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

The Office of the Elder, that is the pastor, is to pray for the sick, even in
private, to which a blessing is especially promised, much more therefore ought
he to perform this in the public execution of his Office as a part thereof.

To read the Scripture publicly; For the proof of which;

1. That the Priests and Levites in the Jewish Church were trusted with the
public reading of the Word,] as is proved, Deuteronomy. 31. 9, 10, 11. v. 9* And
Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, which
bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and unto all the elders of Israel. v.
10. And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years, in the
solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of Tabernacles, v. 11. When all
Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall
choose; thou shall read this law before all Israel in their hearing. Neh. 8. 1,
2, 13. v. 1. And all the people gathered themselves together as one man, into
the street that was before the watergate, and they spoke unto Ezra the scribe,
to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the Lord had commanded to Israel.
v. 2. And Ezra the priest brought the law before the congregation, both of men
and women, and all that could hear with understanding, upon the first day of
the seventh month. v. 3. and he read therein. v. 13. And on the second day
were gathered together the chief of the fathers of all the people, the priests
and the Levites unto Ezra the s^r the, even to understand the words of the law.

2. That the Ministers of the Gospel have as ample a charge and commission to
dispense the Word, as well as other Ordinances, as the Priests and Levites had
under the law] proved, Isa 66. 21. And I will also take of them for Priests,
and for Levites, says the Lord. Mat. 28. 34. Wherefore behold, I send unto you
Prophets, and wise men, and scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and
crucify, and some of them shall ye scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute
them from City to City. Where our Savior intituleth the Officers of the New
Testament, whom he will send forth by the same names of the teachers of the Old.

Which Propositions prove, that therefore (the duty being of a moral nature) it
follows by just consequence, that the public reading of the Scriptures
belongs to the Pastors Office.

To feed the flock by preaching of the Word, according to which he is to teach,
convince, reprove, exhort, and comfort. 1 Timothy 3. 2. A Bishop then must be
blameless, the husband of one wise, vigilant, sober of good behavior, given to
hospitality, apt to teach. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. v. 16. All scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in righteousness. v. 17. That the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Tit. 1. 9. Holding fast the
faithful word as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine
both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.

To Catechize, which is a plain laying down the Principles of the Oracles of
God, Or of the Doctrine of Christ, and is a part of preaching. Heb. 5. 12. For
when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you
again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such
as have need of milk and not of strong meat.

To dispense other Divine Mysteries.] 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. v. 1. Let a man so
account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of
God. v. 2. Moreover, it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.

To administer the Sacraments.] Mat. 28. 19, 20. v. 19. Go ye therefore and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost; v. 20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always even unto the end of the world.
Amen. Mar. 16. 15, 16. v. 15. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world
and preach the Gospel unto every creature. v. 16. He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. 1 Cor. 11.
23, 24, 25. v. 23. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered
unto you, That the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took
bread. v. 24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take eat,
this is my body which is broken for you* this do in remembrance of me. v. 25.
After the same manner also he took the cup when he had supped, saying, This cup
is the New Testament in my blood, this do ye as often as ye drink it in
remembrance of me. Compared with 1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup of blessing which we
bless; is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break
is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

To bless the people from God]. Numb. 6. 23. 24, 25, 26. v. 23. Speak unto
Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of
Israel, saying, unto them, v. 24. The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, v. 25.
The Lord make his face to shire upon thee, v. 26. The Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. Compared with Rev. 1. 4, 5. v. 4.
John, to the seven Churches which are in Asia, grace be unto you, and peace
from him which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven
spirits which are before his throne; v. 5. And from Jesus Christ who is the
faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the prince of the
Kings of the earth: unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his
own blood. (Where the same blessings and persons from whom they come are
expressly mentioned)] Isa 66. 21. And I will also take of them for Priests, and
for Levites, says the Lord. [Here under the names of the Priests and Levites,
to be continued under the Gospel, are meant Evangelical Pastors, who therefore
are by office to bless the people. Deuteronomy. 10. 8. At that time the Lord separated
the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the Covenant of the Lord, to stand before
the Lord, to minister unto him, and to bless in his name unto this day. 2 Cor.
13, 14. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen. Ephesians. 1. 2. Grace be to you
and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

To take care of the poor.] Act. 11. 30. Which also they did, and sent it to
the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. Act. 4. 34, 35, 36, 37. v. 34.
Neither was there any among you that lacked, for as many as were possessors of
lands or houses sold them and brought the prises of the things that were sold.
v. 35. And laid them down at the Apostles feet: and distribution was made unto
every man according as he had need. v. 36. And Joses, who by the Apostles was
surnamed Barnabas (which is being interpreted, the son of conselation) a Levite
and of the country of Ciprus, v. 37. Having land, sold it, and brought the
money and laid it at the Apostles feet. Act. 6, 2, 3, 4. v. 2. Then the twelve
called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, It is not reason
that we should leave the word of God and serve Tables. v. 3. Wherefore,
brethren look you out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy
Ghost and wisdom, whom ye may appoint over this business. v. 4. But we will
give our selves continually to prayer and to the ministry of the Word. 2 Cor.
16. 1, 2, 3, 4. v. 1. New concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have
given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye, v. 2. Upon the first day
of the week let every one of you lay by him in st^re as God has prospered him,
that there be no gatherings when I come. v. 3. And when I come, whomsoever you
shall approve by your letters, them will I send to bring your liberality to
Jerusalem. v. 4. And if it be meet that I go also they shall go with me. Gal.
2. 9, 10. v. 9. And when James, Cepl as and John, who seemed to be pillars,
perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the
right hands of fellowship, that we should go unto the heathen, and they unto
the circumcision. v. 10. Only they would that we should remember the poor, the
same which I also was forward to do.

And he has also a ruling power over the Flock as a Pastor.] 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let
the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they
who labor in the word and doctrine. Act. 20. 17. And from Miletus he sent to
Ephesus, and called the elders of the Church. v. 28. Take heed therefore unto
your selves, and to all the flock over thee which the Holy Ghost has made you
over-^eers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. 1 These. 5. 12. And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you. Heb. 13. 7, 17. v.
7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the
word of God: whose faithf follow, considering the end of their conversation. v.
17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account: that they may do it with
joy and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

Teacher or Doctor.
THe Scripture does hold out the name and Title of a Teacher, as well as of the
Pastor.] 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the Church, First Apostles,
Secondarily Prophets, Thirdly Teachers after that miracles, then gifts of
healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. Ephesians. 4. 11. And he gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some pastors and
teachers.

Who is also a Minister of the Word as well as the Pastor, and has power of
administration of the Sacraments.

The Lord having given different gifts, and diverse exercises according to these
gifts in the ministry of the word.] Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. v. 6. Having then gifts
differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us
prophecy according to the proportion of faith. v. 7. Or ministry, let us wait
on our ministering: or be that teaches, on teaching. v. 8. He that exhorts,
on exhortation: he that gives let him do it with simplicity, he that rules
with diligence, he that shows mercy with cheerfulness. 1 Cor. 11. 1, 4, 5.]
v. 1. Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant.
v. 4. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit, and there are
diversities of operations, but it is the same God, which works all in all. v.
5. And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord. v. 7. But
the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit with all.

Though these different gifts may meet in, and accordingly be exercised by one
and the same minister.] 1 Cor. 14. 3. But he that prophesies speaks unto men
to edification, and exhortation, and comfort. 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the Word, be
instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and Doctrine. Tit. 1. 9. Holding fast the faithful word as he
has been taught that he may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort and to
convince the gainsayers.

Yet where be several Ministers in the same Congregation, they may be designed
to several employment, according to the different gifts, in which each of them
do most excel] Romans 12. 6, 7. 8. v. 6. Having then gifts differing according to
the grace that is given to us, whether prophefie, let us prophecy according to
the proportion of faith. v. 7. Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering, or
be that teaches on teaching. v. 8. Or he that exhorts on exhortation: he
that gives let him do it with simplicity: he that rules with diligence he
that shows mercy, with cheerfulness. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. v. 10. As every man
has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good
stewards of the manifold grace of God v. 11. If any man speak let him speak as
the Oracles of God; if any man minister let him do it as of the ability which
God gives, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to
whom be praise and dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

And he that does more excel in exposition of Scripture, in teaching sound
Doctrine, and in convincing gainsayers, then he does in application, and is
accordingly employed therein, may be called a teacher or Doctor, (the places
alleged by the Notation of the Word does prove the Proposition;) Nevertheless,
where is but one Minister in a patticular Congregation, he is to perform so far
as he is able, the whole work of the Ministry, as appears in 2 Timothy 4. 2.
Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort
with all long-suffering and doctrine. Tit. 1. 9. Holding fast the faithful word
as he has been taught, that, he may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort
and to convince the gainsayers. 1 Timothy 6. 2. And they that have believing
masters let them not despise them, because they are brethren, but rather do
them service, because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit:
these things teach and exhort.

A Teacher or Doctor is of most excellent use in Schools and Universities, as
of old in the Shools of the Prophets, and at Jerusalem, where Gamaliel and
others taught as Doctors.

Other Church Governors.
As there were in the Jewish Church Elders of the people, joined with the
Priests and Levites in the Government of the Church,] as appears in 2 Chronicles.
19. 8, 9, 10. v. 8. Moreover, in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites,
and of the Priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment
of the Lord, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem. v. 9. And
he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully,
and with a perfect heart. v. 10. And what cause soever shall come to you of
your brethren that dwell in their Cities, between blood and blood, between law
and commandment and statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they
trespass not against the Lord, and so wrath come upon you, and upon your
brethren, this do and ye shall not trespass.

So Christ, who has instituted a Government, and Governors Ecclesiastical in
the Church, has furnished some in his Church, beside the Ministers of the
Word, with gifts for governments, and with commission to execute the same, when
called there unto, who are to join with the Minister in the government of the
Church.] Romans 12. 7, 8. v. 7. Or Ministry, let us wait on our ministering; or he
that teaches, on teaching. v. 8. Or he that exhorts on exhortation, he that
gives let him do it with simplicity, he that rules with diligence, he that
shows mercy, with cheerfulness. 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the
Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that
miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.

Which Officers reformed churches commonly call Elders.

Deacons.
THe Scripture does hold out Deacons as distinct officers in the church.] Phil.
i. ^. Paul and Timotheus the servant of Jesus Christ, to all saints in Christ
Jesus, whith are at Philippi with the Bishops and Deacons. 1 Timothy 3. 8.
Likewise must the Deacons be grave not double-tongued, not given to much wine,
not greedy of filthy lucre.

Whose Office is perpetual.] 1 Timothy 3. 8. Likewise must the Deacons be grave,
not double-tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre; to ver.
15. see in the Bible. Act. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. v. 1. And in those days, when the
number of the Disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians
against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily
manistration. v. 2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto
them, and said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God and serve
tables. v. 3. Wherefore brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest
report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this
business. v. 4. But we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
Ministry of the word.

To whose Office it belongs not to preach the Word or administer the
Sacraments, but to take special care in distributing to the necessities of the
poor.] Act. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. see before

Of Particular Congregations.
IT is lawful and expedient that there be fixed congregations, that is, a
certain company of christians to meet in one Assembly, ordinarily for public
Worship. When believers multiply to such a number, that they cannot
conveniently meet in one place, it is lawful and expedient that they should be
divided into distinct and fixed congregations, for the beter administration of
such ordinances as belong unto them, and the discharge of mutual duties. 1 Cor.
14. 26, 33, 40. v. 26. Let all things be done unto edifying. v. 33. For God is
not the author of confusion but of peace, as in all Churches of the Saints. v.
40. Let all things be done decently, and in order.

The ordinary way of dividing Christians into distinct Congregations, and most
expedient for edification, is by the respective bounds of their dwellings.

First, Because they who dwell together, being bound to all kind of moral
duties one to another, have the better opportunity thereby to discharge them,
which moral tie is perpetual, for Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it.] Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 11. If there be among you a poor man of one of thy
brethren within any of thy gates, in the land which the Lord thy God gives
thee, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother.
v. 11. For the poor shall never cease out of the land; therefore I command
thee, saying, Thou shall open thy hand wide unto thy brother, to the poor, and
to the needy in the land. Mat. 22. 39. And the second is like unto it, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Mat. 5. 17. Think not that I am come to
destroy the law or the prophets. I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.

Secondly, The communion of saints must be so ordered, as may stand with the
most convenient use of the Ordinances, and discharge of moral duties without
respect of persons. 1 Cor. 14. 26. Let all things be done unto edifying. Heb.
10. 24, 25. v. 24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and
to good works. v. 25. Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as
the manner of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye
see the day approaching. Jam. 2. 1, 2. v. 1. My brethren, have not the faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. v. 2. For if
there come into your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and
there come in also a poor man in vile raiment.

Thirdly, The pastor and people must so nearly cohabite together, as that they
may mutually perform their duties each to other with most convenience.

In this company some must be set apart to bear office.

Of the Officers of a particular Congregation.
FOr Officers in a single Congregation, there ought to be one at the least,
both to labor in the Word and Doctrine, and to rule. Prove. 29. 18. Where there
is no vision the people perish; but he that keeps the law, happy is he. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. Heb. 13. 7. Remember them
which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God, whose
faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.

It is also requisite that there should be others to join in Government. 1 Cor.
12. 28. And God has set some in the Church, First Apostles, Secondarily
Prophets, Thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then gifts of healings, helps,
governments, diversities of tongues.

And likewise it is requisite, that there be others to take special care for
the relief of the poor Act 6. 2, 3. v. 2. Then the twelve called the
multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, It is not reason that we should
leave the Word of God, and serve tables. v. 3. Wherefore, brethren, look ye out
among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom
ye may appoint over this business.

The number of each of which is to be proportioned according to the condition
of the Congregation.

These officers are to meet together at convenient and set times, for the well
ordering of the affairs of that Congregation, each according to his office.

It is most expedient, that in these meetings one, whose office is to labor in
the Word and Doctrine, do moderate in their proceedings. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the
elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the Word and Doctrine.

Of the Ordinances in a particular Congregation.
THe Ordinances in a single Congregation, are Prayer, Thanksgiving, and singing
of Psalms.] 1 Timothy 2. 1. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. 1 Cor. 14.
15, 16. v. 15. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with
understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also v. 16. Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall
he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen as the giving of thanks,
seeing he understands not what thou say?

The Word read (although there follow no immediate explication of what is read)
the Word expounded and applied, Catechizing, the Sacraments administered,
Collection made for the poor, dismissing the people with a blessing.

Of Church Government, and the several sorts of Assemblies for the same.
CHrist has instituted a Government, and Governors Ecclesiastical in the
Church, to that purpose the Apostles did immediately receive the keys from the
hand of Jesus Christ, and did use and exercise them in all the Churches of the
world upon all occasions.

And Christ has since continually furnished some in his Church with gifts of
Government, and with commission to execute the same when called thereunto.

It is lawful and agreeable to the word of God, that the Church be governed by
several sorts of Assemblies, which are Congregational, Classical, and Synodical.

Of the Power in common of all these Assemblies.
IT is lawful and agreeable to the Word of God, that the several Assemblies
before mentioned, have power to convent and call before them any person within
their several bounds, whom the Ecclesiastical business which is before them,
does concern, proved by, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. v. 15. Moreover, if
thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. v. 16. But
if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be est^blished. v. 17. And if he
shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear
the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a publican. v. 18.
Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. v.
19. Again, I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth, as touching
any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is
in heaven. v. 20. For where two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the midst of them.

They have power to hear and determine such causes and differences as do
orderly come before them.

It is lawful and agreeable to the Word of God, that all the said Assemblies
have some power to dispense Church Censures.

Of Congregational Assemblies, that is, The meeting of the Ruling Officers of a
particular Congregation for the Government thereof.
THe Ruling Officers of a particular Congregation, have power Authoritatively,
to call before them any member of the Congregation, as they shall see just
occasion.

To enquire into the knowledge and spiritual estate of the several members of
the Congregation.

To admonish and to rebuke.

Which three branches are proved by Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule
over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that
must give account that they may do it with joy and not with grief: for that is
unprofitable for you. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. v. 12. And we beseech you, brethren,
to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you: v. 13. And to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and be
at peace among your selves. Ezekiel. 34. 4. The diseased have ye not strengthened,
neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which
was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither
have ye sought that which was lost: but with force and with cruelty have ye
ruled them.

Authoritative suspension from the Lords Table, of a person not yet cast out of
the Church, is agreeable to the Scripture.

First, Because the Ordinance it self must not be profaned.

Secondly, Because we are charged to withdraw from these that walk disorderly.

Thirdly, Because of the great sin and danger, both to him that comes
unworthily, and also to the whole Church.] Mat. 7. 6. Give not that which is
holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample
them under their feet, and turn again, and rent you. 2 These. 3. 6, 14, 15. v.
6. Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the tradition which he received of us. v. 14. And if any man obey not our word
by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed. v. 15. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. 1
Cor. 11. 27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. So on
to the end of the chap. Compared with Jude v. 23. And others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's
sins. Keep thy self pure,

And there was power and Authority under the Old Testament, to keep unclearn
persons from holy things.] Lev. 13. 5. And the priest shall look on him the
seventh day; and behold, if the plague in his sight be at a stay, and the
plague spread not in the skin, then the priest shall shut him up seven days
more. Numb. 9. 7. And those men said unto him, We are defiled by the dead body
of a man; wherefore we are kept back, that we may not offer an offering of the
Lord in his appointed season among the children of Israel. 2 Chr. 23. 19. And
he sets porters at the gates of the house of the Lord, that none that was
unclean in any thing should enter in.

The like power and Authority by way of Analogy continues under the New
Testament.

The Ruling Officers of a particular Congregation, have power authoritatively
to suspend from the Lords Table, a person not yet cast out of the Church.

First, Because those who have Authority to judge of, and admit such as are fit
to receive the Sacrament, have Authority to keep back such as should be found
unworthy.

Secondly, Because it is an Ecclesiastical business of ordinary practice
belonging to that Congregation.

When Congregations are divided and fixed they need all mutual help one from
another, both in regard of their intrinsecal weaknesses, and mutual dependence;
as also in regard of enemies from without.

Of Classical Assemblies.
THe Scripture does hold out a Presbytery in a Church, both in 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. And in Acts 15. 2, 4, 6. v. 2.
When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation with
them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them should
go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders about this question. v. 4. And
when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the Church and of the
Apostles and Elders, and they declared all things that God had done with them.
v. 6. And the Apostles and Elders came together, for to consider of this matter.

A Presbytery consists of Ministers of the Word, and such other public
Officers as are agreeable to, and warranted by the Word of God, to be
Church Governors, to join with the Ministers in the Government of the Church,
as appears. Romans 12. 7, 8. v. 7. Or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering;
or he that teaches on reaching. v. 8. Or he that exhorts on exhortation: he
that gives let him do it with simplicity, he that rules with diligence, he
that shows mercy with cheerfulness. 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in
the Church, first Apostles, secondarily, Prophets, thirdly teachers, after that
miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.

The Scripture does hold forth, that many particular Congregations may be under
one Presbyterial Go ernment.

This proposition is proved by instances.

1. First, Of the Church of Jerusalem, which consists of more Congregations
then one, and all these Congregations were under one Presbyterial Government.

This appears t^us.

^. First, The Church of Jerusalem consists of more Congregations then one,
as is manifest,

1. By the multitude of believers, mentioned in diverse.

Both before the dispersion of the believers there, by means of the
persecutions, (mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. chap. 8. in the beginning
thereof,) witness. Acts 1. 15. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst
of the Disciples, and said, The number of the names together were about an
hundred and twenty. Acts 2. 41, 46. 47. v. 41. Then they that gladly received
his word, were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about
three thousand souls. v. 46. And they continuing daily with one accord in the
temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness and singleness of heart. v. 47. Praising God, and having favor with
all the people. And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.
Acts 5. 14. And believers were the more added unto the Lord, multitudes, both
of men and women. Acts 6. 1. 7. v. 1. And in those days, when the number of
the Disciples was multiplied, there a rose a murmuring of the Grecians against
the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration. v.
7. And the Word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplied in
Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the priests were obedient to the
faith.

And also after the dispersion] Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest
throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified, and walking
in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplied.
Acts 12. 24. But the Word of God grew and multiplied. Acts. 21. 20. And when
they heard it, they glorified the Lord, and said unto him, Thou see, brother,
how many thousand of Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of
the law.

Secondly, By the many Apostles and other Preachers in the Church of Jerusalem:
And if there were but one Congregation there, then each Apostle preached but
seldom, which will not consist with Acts 6. 2. Then the twelve called the
multitude of the Disciple^ unto them, and said, It is not reason that we should
leave the Word of God and serve tables.

Thirdly, The diversity of Languages amongst the Believers, mentioned both in
the second and sixth chapters of the Acts, does argue more Congregations then
one in that Church.

2. Secondly, All those congregations were under one Presbyterial government;
because, First, They were one Church. Acts 8. 1. And Saul was consenting unto
his death. And at that time there was a great persecution against the church
which was at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad throughout the
regions of Judea and Samaria, except the Apostles. Acts 2. 47. Praising God,
and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added unto the church daily
such as should be saved. Compared with chap. 5. 11. And great fear came upon
all the church, and upon as many as heard these things. and chap. 12* 5. Peter
therefore was kept in prison, hut prayer was made without ceasing of the church
unto God for him. and chap. 15. 2. When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no
small dissension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul and
Barnabas, and certain other of them should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles
and Elders about this question.

Secondly, The Elders of the Church are mentioned. Act. 11. 30. Which also they
did, and sent it to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. Acts 15. 4,
6, 22. v. 4. And when they were come to Jerusalem, they mere received of the
Church, and of the Apostles and Elders, and they declared all things that God
had done with them. v. 6. And the Apostles and Elders came together to consider
of this matter. v. 22. Then it pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole
Church, to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch with Paul and
B^rnabas, namely Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silus, chief men among the
brethren. And chapter 21. 17, 18. v. 17. And when we were come to Jerusalem the
brethren received us gladly: v. 18. And the day following Paul went in with us
unto James, and all the Elders were present.

Thirdly, The Apostles did the ordinary Acts of Presbyters, as Presbyters in
that Church, which proves a Presbyterial Church before the dispersion. Act. 6

Fourthly, The several Congregations in Jerusalem being one Church, the Elders
of that Church are mentioned as meeting together for acts of Government. Act.
11. 30. Which also they did and sent it to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas
and Saul. Acts 15. 4, 6, 22. v. 4. And when they were come to Jerusalem they
were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Ellers, and they declared
all things that God had done with them. v. 6. And the Apostles and Elders came
together for to consider of this matter. v. 22. Then it pleased the Apostles
and Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen men of their own company to
Antioch with Paul and Barnabas, namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas,
chief men among the brethren. Acts 21. 17, 18. v. 17. And when they were come
to Jerusalem the brethren received us gladly: v. 18. And the day following Paul
went in with us unto James, and all the Elders were present; and so forward:
Which proves that those several Congregations were under one Presbyterial
Government.

And whether these Congregations were fixed or not fixed, in regard of Officers
or Members, it is all one as to the truth of the Proposition.

Nor does there appear any material difference betwixt the several
Congregations in Jerusalem, and the many Congregations now in the ordinary
condition of the Church, as to the point of fixednesse required of Officers or
Members.

3. Thirdly, Therefore the Scripture does hold forth, that many Congregations
may be under one Presbyterial Government.

II. Secondly, By the instance of the Church of Ephesus, for

1. That they were more Congregations then one in the Church of Ephesus,
appears by Act 10. 31. Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three
years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. Where is mention
of Paul's continuance at Ephesus in preaching for the space of three years: And
Acts 19. 18. And many that believed came and confessed, and showed their deeds;
v. 19. Many also of them which used curious arts brought their books together
and burned them before all men, and they counted the price of them and found it
fifty thousand pieces of silver: v. 20. So mightily grew the Word of God and
prevailed. Act. 19. 10. And this continued by the space of two years, so that
all they who dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and
Greeks. v. 17. And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at
Ephesus, and fear fell on them all, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was
magnified. 1 Cor. 16. 8. But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost. v. 9. For
a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries.
v. 19. The Churches of Asia salute you, Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in
the Lord, with the Church that is in their house. Where the special effect of
the Word is mentioned; and verse 10 and 17 of the same Chapter, where is a
distinction of Jews and Greeks, and 1 Cor. 16. 8, 9. where a reason of Paul's
stay at Ephesus until Pentecost, and verse 19 where is mention of a particular
Church in the house of Aquila and Priscila then at Ephesus, as appears Acts 18.
19. And he came to Ephesus and left them there, but he himself entered into the
Synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews. v. 24. And a certain Jew named Apollos,
born at Alexandria an Eloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures, came to
Ephesus; v. 26. And he began to speak boldly in the Synagogue, whom when
Acquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto
him the way of God more perfectly.

All which laid together does prove, that the multitudes of believers did make
more Congregations then one in the Church of Ephesus.

2. That there were many Elders over these many Congregations, as one flock,
appears, Act. 20. 17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the
Elders of the Church. v. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all
the flock over the which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

3. That these many Congregations were one Church, and that they were under one
Presbyterial Government, appears, Rev. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. v. 1. Unto the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write, These things says he that holds the
seven Stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the seven golden
candlesticks: v. 2. I know thy works and thy labor, and thy patience, and how
thou can not bear them which are evil; and thou have tried them which say
they are Apostles, and are not, and has found them liars. v. 3. And have horn,
and have patience, and for my names sake have labored, and have not fainted.
v. 4. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love. v. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
and do the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove
thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. v. 6. But this thou have,
that thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. Joined with
Act. 20. 17, 28. of which see before.

Of Synodical Assemblies.
THe Scripture does hold out another sort of Assemblies for the Government of
the Church, beside Classical, and Congregational, all which we call Synodical.
Acts 15. 2, 6, 22, 23. v. 2. When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small
dissension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas:
and certain other of them should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and
Elders about this question. v. 6. And the Apostles and Elders came together,
for to consider of this matter. v. 22. Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders,
with the whole Church, to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch, with
Paul and Barnabas: namely, Judas, surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among
the brethren. v. 23. And wrote letters by them after this manner: The Apostles,
and Elders, and Brethren, send greeting unto the brethren which are of the
Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia.

Pastors and Teachers, and other Church Governors, (as also other fit persons,
when it shall be deemed expedient) are members of those Assemblies which we
call Synodical, where they have a lawful calling thereunto.

Synodical Assemblies may lawfully be of several sorts, as Provinical,
National, and Occumenical.

It is lawful and agreeable to the word of God, that there be a subordination
of Congregational, Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies for the
Government of the Church.

Of Ordination of Ministers.
UNder the head of Ordination of Ministers is to be considered either the
Doctrine of Ordination, or the power of it.

Touching the Doctrine of Ordination.
NO man ought to take upon him the Office of a Minister of the Word without a
lawful calling.] Joh. 3. 27. John answered and said, a man can receive nothing,
except it be given him from heaven. Romans 10. 14, 15. v. 14. How then shall they
call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him,
of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? v. 15.
And how shall they preach except they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful
are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of
good things. Jer. 14. 14. Then the Lord said unto me, The prophets prophecy
lies in my name, I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither sake I
unto them; they prophecy unto you a false vision and divination, and a thing
of naught, and the deceit of their heart. Heb. 5. 4. And no man takes this
honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

Ordination is always to be continued in the Church.] Tit. 15. For this cause
left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the things that are
wanting, and ordain elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. 1 Timothy 5.
21, 22. v. 21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
elect Angels, that thou observe these things, without preferring one before
another, doing nothing by partiality. v. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man,
neither be partaker of other men's sins. Keep thy self pure.

Ordination is the solemn setting apart of a person to some public
Church-office.] Numb. 8, 10, 11, 14, 19, 22. v. 10. And thou shall bring the
Levites before the Lord* and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon
the Levites. v. 11. And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord, for an
offering of the children of Israel, that they may execute the service of the
Lord. v. 14. Thus shall thou separate the Levites from among the children of
Israel; and the Levites shall be mine. v. 19. And I have given the Levites as a
gift to Aaron, and to his sons, from among the children of Israel; to do the
service of the children of Israel, in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and
to make an atonement for the children of Israel; that there be no plague among
the children of Israel, when the children of Israel come nigh unto the
Sanctuary. v. 22. And after that went the Levites in, to do their service in
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, before Aaron, and before his sons; as the
Lord had commanded Moses, concerning the Levites, so did they unto them. Acts
6. 3, 5, 6 v. 3. Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest
report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this
business. v. 5. And the saying pleased the whole multitude, and they those
Stephen, a man full of faith, and of the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus,
and Nicanor, and Timon, and Permenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch. v. 6.
Whom they had set before the Apostles; and when they had prayed, they laid
their hands on them.

Every Minister of the Word is to be ordained by imposition of hands, and
prayer with fasting, by those preaching Presbyters to whom it does belong. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's
sins. Keep thy self pure. Acts 14. 23. And when they had ordained them Elders
in every Church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord,
on whom they believed. Acts 13. 3. And when they had fasted and prayed, and
laid their hands on them, they sent them away.

It is agreeable to the Word of God, and very expedient, that such as are to be
ordained Ministers, be designed to some particular Church, or other ministerial
charge*] Acts 14. 23. See before. Tit. 1. 5. For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain
Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. Acts 20, 17, 28. v. 17. And from
Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church. v. 28. Take
heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over the which the holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood.

He that is to be ordained Minister, must be duly qualified both for life and
Ministerial abilities, according to the Rules of the Apostles.] 1 Timothy ^3. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. v. 2. A Bishop hen must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach. v. 3.
Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient; not a
brawler, not covetons: v. 4. One that rules well his own house, having his
children in subjection with all gravity: v. 5. (For if a man know not how to
rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God?) v. 6. Not a
novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the
Devil. Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. v. 6. If any man be blameless, the husband of one
wife, having faithful children, not accused of riot, or unruly. v 7. For a
Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of God; not self-willed, not soon
angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre: v. 8. But a
lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate. v. 9.
Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound doctrine, both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers.

He is to be examined and approved by those by whom he is to be ordained. 1 Timothy 3. 7, 10. v. 7. Moreover, he must have a good report of them which are
without, l^st he fall into reproach, and the snare of the Devil. v. 10. And let
these also first be proved, then let them use the office of a Deacon, being
found blameless. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be
partaker of other men's sins. Keep thy self pure.

No man is to be ordained a Minister for a particular Congregation, if they of
that Congregation can show just cause of exception against him. 1 Timothy 3. 2. A
Bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of
good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach. Tit. 1. 7. For the Bishop
must be blameless as the Steward of God, etc.

Touching the Power of Ordination.
ORdination is the Act of a Presbytery. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not the gift that
is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery.

The power of ordering the whole work of Ordination is in the whole Presbytery,
which, when it is over more Congregations then one, whether those Congregations
be fixed or not fixed, in regard of Officers or Members, it is indifferent as
to the point of Ordination. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee,
which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery.

It is very requisite that no single Congregation that can conveniently
associate, do assume to it self all and sole power in Ordination.

1. Because there is no Example in Scripture, that any single Congregation
which might conveniently associate, did assume to it self all and sole power
Ordination, neither is there any rule which may warrant such a practice.

2. Because there is in Scripture Example of an Ordination in a Presbytery over
diverse Congregations, as in the Church of Jerusalem, where were many
Congregations, these many Congregations were under one Presbytery, and this
Presbytery did ordain.

The Preaching Presbyters orderly associated either in Cities or neighboring
Villages, are those to whom the imposition of hands does appertain for those
Congregations within their bounds respectively.

To the Right Honorable THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament: The
Humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines, now sitting by Ordinance of
Parliament at Westminster, Concerning The Doctrinall part of Ordination of
MINISTERS.
1 NO man ought to take upon him the office of a Minister of the Word without a
lawful calling, John 3. 27. Romans 10. 14, 15. Jer. 14. 14. Heb. 5. 4.

2. Ordination is always to be continued in the Church, Titus 1. 5. 1 Timothy 5.
21, 22.

3. Ordination is the solemn setting apart of a person to some public Church
Office, Numb. 8, 10, 11, 14, 19, 22. Acts 6. 3, 5, 6.

4. Every Minister of the Word is to be ordained by imposition of hands, and
Prayer with Fasting, by those preaching Presbyters to whom it does belong, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Acts 14. 23. and 13. 3.

5. The power of ordering the whole work of Ordination, is in the whole
Presbytery, which, when it is over more Congregations then one, whether those
Congregations be fixed or not fixed, in regard of Officers or Members, it is
indifferent as to the point of Ordination, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

6. It is agreeable to the Word of God, and very expedient, that such as are to
be ordained M^nisters, be designed to some particular Church or other
Ministerial charge, Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. Acts 20. 17. and 28.

7. He that is to be ordained Minister, must be duly qualified both for life
and Ministerial abilities, according to the rules of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. Tit. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

8. He is to be examined and approved by those by whom he is to be ordained, 1 Timothy 3. 7. 10 and 5. ^2.

9. No man is to be ordained a minister for a particular Congregation, if they
o^ that Congregation can show just cause of exception against him, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
Tit. 1. 7.

10. Preaching Presbyters orderly associated, either in Cities, or neighboring
Villages, are those to whom the imposition of hands does appertain, for these
Congregations within their bounds respectively, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

11. In extraordinary cases, something may be done, until a settled order may
^e had, yet keeping as near as possible may be to the rule, 2 Chronicles. 19. 34,
35, 36. 2 Chronicles. 30. 2, 3, 4, 5.

12. There is at this time (as we humbly conceive) an extraordinary occasion
for a way of Ordination for the present supply of Ministers.

The Directory for Ordination of Ministers
IT being manifest by the Word of God, that no man ought to take upon him the
Office of a Minister of the Gospel, until he be lawfully called and ordained
thereunto: And that the work of Ordination is to be performed with all due
care, wisdom, gravity and solemnity, we humbly tender these directions as
requisite to be observed.

1. He that is to be ordained, being either nominated by the people, or
otherwise commended to the Presbytery for any place, must address himself to
the Presbytery, and bring with him a Testimonial of his taking the Covenant of
the three Kingdoms, of his diligence and proficiency in his Studies; What
degrees he has taken in the University, and what has been the time of his
abode there; and withal of his age, which is to be twenty four years, but
especially of his life and conversation.

2. Which being considered by the Presbytery, they are to proceed, to enquire
touching the Grace of God in him, and whether he be of such holiness of life
as is requisite in a Minister of the Gospel, and to examine him touching his
learning and sufficiency, and touching the evidences of his Calling to the holy
Ministry, and in particular his fair and direct Calling to that place.

The Rules for Examination are these.
1. That the party examined be dealt withal in a brotherly way, with mildness
of spirit, and with special respect to the gravity, modesty, and quality of
every one.

2. He shall be examined touching his skill in the Original Tongues, and his
trial to be made by reading the Hebrew and Greek Testaments, and rendering some
portion of some into Latin; and if he be defective in them, enquiry shall be
made the more strictly after his other Learning, and whether he has skill in
Logic and Philosophy.

3. What Authors in Divinity he has read, and is best acquainted with, and
trial shall be made in his knowledge of the grounds of Religion, and ability
to defend the Orthodox Doctrine contained in them, against all unsound and
erroneous opinions, especially these of the present age; of his skill in the
sense and meaning of such places of Scripture as shall be proposed unto him in
cases of Conscience, and in the Chronology of the Scripture, and the
Ecclesiastical History.

4. If he has not before preached in public, with approbation of such as are
able to judge, he shall, at a competent time assigned him, expound before the
Presbytery such a place of Scripture as shall be given him.

5. He shall also, within a competent time frame a discourse in Latin upon such
a common place or Controversy in Divinity as shall be assigned him, and
exhibit to the Presbytery such Theses as express the sum thereof, and
maintain a Dispute upon them.

6. He shall preach before the people, the Presbytery, or some of the Ministers
of the Word appointed by them, being present.

7. The proportion of his gifts in relation to the place unto which he is
called, shall be considered.

8. Beside the trial of his gifts in Preaching, he shall undergo an examination
in the Premises two several days, and more, if the Presbytery shall judge it
necessary.

9. And as for him that has been formerly ordained a Minister, and is to be
removed to another Charge, he shall bring a Testimonial of his Ordination, and
of his abilities and Conversation, whereupon his fitness for that place shall
be tried by his Preaching there, (if it shall be judged necessary) by a further
examination of him.

3. In all which he being approved, he is to be sent to the Church where he is
to serve, there to preach three several days,, and to converse with the people,
that they may have trial of his gifts for their edification, and may have time
and occasion to enquire into, and the better to know his life and conversation.

4. In the last of these three days, appointed for the trial of his gifts in
preaching, there shall be sent from the Presbytery to the Congregation, a
public intimation in writing, which shall be publicly read before the people;
and after affixed to the Church door, to signify, tha^ such a day a competent
number of the Members of that Congregation nominated by themselves, shall
appear before the Presbytery, to give their consent and approbation to such a
man to be their Minister, or otherwise to put in with all Christian discretion
and meekness what exceptions they have against him, and if upon the day
appointed there be no just exception against him, but the people give their
consent, then the Presbytery shall proceed to Ordination.

5. Upon the day appointed for Ordination, which is to be performed in that
Church, where he that is to be ordained is to serve, a solemn Fast shall be
kept by the Congregation, that they may the more earnestly join in Prayer for a
blessing upon the Ordinance of Christ, and the labors of his Servant for their
good. The Presbytery shall come to the place, or at least three or four
Ministers of the Word shall be sent thither from the Presbytery of which one
appointed by the Presbytery, shall preach to the People, concerning the office
and du^y of Ministers of Christ, and how the People ought to receive them for
their work sake.

6. After the Sermon, the Minister who has preached, shall in the face of the
Congregation demand of him who is now to be ordained concerning his faith in
Christ Jesus, and his persuasion of the truth of the Reformed Religion
according to the Scripture; His sincere intentions and ends in desiring to
enter into this Calling; His diligence in Praying, Reading, Meditation,
Preaching, Ministering the Sacraments, Discipline and doing all Ministerial
Duties toward his Charge; His Zeal and Faithfulness in maintaining the Truth
of the Gospel, and Unity of the Church against Error and Schism; His care that
himself and his Family may be unblameable and examples to the Flock; His
willingness and humility in meekness of Spirit, to submit unto the
admonitions of his Brethren, and Discipline of the Church; And his resolution
to continue in his duty against all trouble and persecution

7. In all which having declared himself, professed his willingness, and
promised his endeavors by the help of God; The Minister likewise shall demand
of the people, concerning their willingness to receive and acknowledge him as
the Minister of Christ, and to obey and submit unto him, as having rule over
them in the Lord, and to maintain, encourage and assist him in all the parts
of his Office.

Which being mutually promised by the people, the Presbytery, or the Ministers
sent from them for Ordination, shall solemnly set him apart to the Office and
work of the Ministry, by laying their hands on him, which is to be accompanied
with a short Prayer or Blessing, to this effect

8. Thankfully acknowledging the great mercy of God, in sending Jesus Christ
for the redemption of his people, and for his ascension to the right hand of
God the Father, and thence pouring out his Spirit, and giving gifts to Men,
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering and
building up of his Church, and for fitting and inclining this man to this great
work; To entreat him to fit him with his holy Spirit, to give him (who in his
name we thus set apart to this holy service) to fulfill the Work of his Ministry
in all things, that he may both save himself and his people committed to his
charge.

9. This or the like form of Prayer and Blessing being ended, let the Minister
who preached, briefly exhort him to consider of the greatness of his Office
and Work, the danger of negligence both to himself and his people, the blessing
which will accompany his faithfulness in this life, and that to come; and
withal exhort the people to carry themselves to him as to their Minister in the
Lord, according to their solemn promise made before; and so by Prayer
commending both him and his Flock to the Grace of God, after singing of a
Psalm, let the Assembly be dismissed with a Blessing.

10. If a Minister be designed to a Congregation, who has been formerly
ordained Presbyter according to the form of Ordination which has been in the
Church of England, which we hold for substance to be valid, and not to be
disclaimed by any who have received it; Then there being a cautious proceeding
in matters of Examination, let him be admitted without any new Ordination.

11. And in case any Person already ordained Minister in Scotland, or in any
other reformed Church, be designed to a Congregation in England, he is to bring
from the Church to that Presbytery here, within which that Congregation is, a
sufficient testimonial of his Ordination, of his life and conversation while he
lived with them, and of the causes of his removal; And to undergo such a trial
of his fitness and sufficiency, and to have the same course held with him, in
other particulars, as is set down in the rule immediately going before touching
Examination and Admission.

12. That Records be carefully kept in the several Presbyteries, of the names
of the Persons ordained, with their testimonials, the time and place of their
Ordination, of the Presbyters who did impose hands upon them, and of the charge
to which they are appointed.

13. That no money or gift, of what kind soever, shall be received from the
Person to be ordained, or from any on his behalf, for Ordination, or ought else
belonging to it, by any of the Presbytery, or any appertaining to any of them,
upon what pretense soever.

Thus far of ordinary rules and course of Ordination in the ordinary way; That
which concerns the extraordinary way, requisite to be now practiced,
follows.

1. In these present exigencies, while we cannot have any Presbyteries formed
up to their whole power and work, and that many Ministers are to be ordained
for the service of the Armies and Navy, and too many Congregations where there
is no Minister at all; and where (by reason of the public troubles) the people
cannot either themselves enquire out and find out one who may be a faithful
Minister for them, or have any with safety sent unto them for such a solemn
trial as was before mentioned in the ordinary Rules, especially when there can
be no Presbytery near unto them, to whom they may address themselves, or which
may come or send to them a fit man to be ordained in that Congregation, and for
that people; And yet notwithstanding, it is requisite that Ministers be
ordained for them, by some; who being set apart themselves for the work of the
Ministry, have power to join in the setting apart of others, who are found fit
and worthy. In those cases, until by Gods blessing the aforesaid difficulties
may be in some good measure removed; let some godly Minister in or about the
City of London, be designed by public authority; who being associated, may
ordain Ministers for the City, and the Vicinity, keeping as near to the
ordinary Rules forementioned, as possible they may; And let this association be
for no other intent or purpose, but only for the work of Ordination.

2. Let the like association be made by the same authority in great Towns, and
the neighboring Parishes in the several Counties, which are at the present
quiet and undisturbed, to do the like for the parts adjacent.

3. Let such as are chosen or appointed for the service of the Armies or Navy
be ordained, as aforesaid, by the associated Ministers of London, or some
others in the country.

4. Let them do the like, when any man shall duly and lawfully be recommended
to them for the Ministry of any Congregation, who cannot enjoy liberty to have
a trial of his parts and abilities, and desire the help of such Ministers so
associated, for the better furnishing of them with such a Person, as by them
shall be judged fit for the service of that Church and People.

The STATIONER to the Reader.
THe good acceptance, that the Confession of Faith, and Catechismes with
Scriptures at large has found, has encouraged me to have them again revised,
and to procure the Emphasis of the Scriptures to be printed in a different
Character, that thou may see the reason why the texts are inserted.

As also by advice of some Ministers in the City, there is annexed that form of
Church Government, with Scriptures at large, which we find at the end of the
little volume, of the Confession, and Catechismes printed by the Company of
Stationers.

FINIS.
THose Ministers in the City (expressed at the foot of the foregoing page)
that desired this form to be annexed, with Scriptures at large, for the good of
Families, were some of those whose names are subscribed to the Epistle of the
Presbyterian judgment.
Whereas there is a report raised and fomented by diverse persons, as if the
Presbyterian Government was established only for three years and no more,
which three years being expired, they suppose that Establishment is now out of
date: and this as some are obliged to suggest by their interest, so others
through their inadvertency receive: 'Twas thought fit to disabuse the Nation,
to give them to understand, and they are hereby desired to take notice that the
Presbyterian Government is that Church Government which is established by the
Law of the Land, as no man can either deny or doubt, who knows that though
there was an Ordinance about 1645. for the settling of this Government only for
three years, unless the Houses thought fit to order otherwise; yet it pleased
the two Houses the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Die Martis Aug.
29 1648. to order and ordain this form of Church Government to be used in the
Churches of England and Ireland, without limitation of time for it is duration;
beginning thus;

Be it Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament* assembled,
and by authority of the same; That all Parishes and places whatsoever within
the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales (as well privileged places and
exempt Jurisdictions, as others) be brought under the Government of
Congregationall, Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies, Provided
that the Chapels or places in the Houses of the King and his Children, and the
Chapels or places in the Houses of the Peers of this Realm, shall continue free
for their exercise of divine duties to be performed according to the Directory,
and not otherwise, etc.

Where you may read the full extent of the Presbyterian Government, as it is
appointed to continue, with Rules about Ordination of Ministers, Examination,
Censures, Suspension, and Excommunication, in their Classical Assemblies; as
you have it recited and reprinted at large, in the great new Book of Statutes
(Chap. 118. of Ordinances, 1648. Page 165, 166, etc.) being called in the title
page, A Collection of Acts and Ordinances of General use (for in his Preface
he writes that he omits all such as were only Temporary and already Expired) as
a Continuation of Poltons Collections or Statutes, by Henry Scobell Esquire,
Clarke of the Parliament and Council, who writes that he published these Acts
and Ordinances in his Book by special Order of Parliament. Printed by the
Printers to his Highness this present year 1658.

A TABLE Of the Chief Points spoken to in the Confession of Faith, and the
Larger Catechism, wherein the substance of the shorter is comprehended. Con:
signifies the Confession; and Cat: the Cathechism; the figures denote the Page.
A.
Actual sin a fruit of Original. Con. 24. Adoption, the Nature and
Privileges of it. Con. 45, 46. Cat. 40. Adultery after Marriage a just cause
of Divorce. Con. 95. Aggravations of sins from the Person offending. Cat. 112.
from the Party offended. Cat. 112, 113. from the Quality of the offense. Cat.
114. from the Circumstance of Time and Place. Cat. 117. AMEN, the meaning of
it. Cat. 155. Angels how created. Cat. 8. not to be worshipped. Con. 78.
Apocrypha not of Divine inspiration nor authority. Con 3. Ascension of Christ.
Cat. 27. Assurance attainable in this life. Con. 62. Cat. 44, 45. What this
assurance is, and whereupon grounded. Con 62. 63. Believers may want it. Con.
63. Cat. 45. Believers may attain it without extraordinary Revelation. Con. 63,
64. It is the duty of all to endeavor after Assuranc^. Con. 64. The use and
fruits of Assurance. ibid. Assurance inclines not men to loosnesse Con. 64.
Assurance may be weakened, and lost. Con. 65. How it comes to be lost. ibid. It
may be recovered again. ibid. Atheism confuted* Cat. 1, 2. Attributes of God.
Con. 7, 8, 9.
B.
B^ptisme what. Con. 104. Cat* 128, 129. To continue to the end of the world.
ibid. Baptism rightly administered by sprinkling. Con. 105. To whom Baptism is
to be administered. Con. 105. Cat. 129. A sin to neglect Baptism. Con. 106. Yet
not absolutely necessary to salvation. ibid. Baptized persons may possibly be
unregenerate. ibid. The efficacy of Baptism. Con. 106. Baptism but once to be
administered. ibid. How our Baptism is to be improved by us. Cat. 130.
Believers; by what Righteousness they are justified. See [Justification] and
[Faith] Believers cannot fall away wholly, nor finally. Cat. 44. Why they
cannot. ibid. and Con. 59. How far they may fall away. Con. 61. They can never
utterly despair. Con. 66. The condition of Believers in Judgment, and after
Judgment. Cat. 50, 51. Body of Christ how present in the Sacrament, Con. 110.
Cat. 132.
C.
Calling Effectual what. Con. 37, 38. Cat. 34, 35. Effectual Calling is of
Gods free grace, not from any thing foreseen in man. Con. 39. The Elect enabled
by the Spirit to answer this Call. Con. 29. Catholic Church. See [Church]
Christ why so called. Cat. 20. Christ's God* head proved. Cat. 5. Christ the
Mediator between God and Man. Con. 29, 30. Cat. 17. Ordained to this Office by
God from eternity. Con. 29, 30. Christ's Incarnation. Con. 30. Cat. 17, 18. His
two Natures how united. Con. 30, 31. How he was Anointed and Called to his
Office. Con. 31. How he discharged his Office. Con. 32. Why requisite Christ
should be God. Cat. 16. Why Man. Cat. 17. Why God-man. Cat. 20. How Christ
exercises the Office of a Prophet. Cat. 21. How of a Priest, ib^d. How of a
King. Con. 22. Christ's Humiliation, and the degrees of it. See [Humiliation]
Christ's Exaltation, and the Degrees of it. See [Exallation] How Christ makes
Intercession. Cat. 28. Christ how present in Sacrament. Con. 110. Cat. 132
Christian liberty. See [Liberty] The Church, the object of Gods special
Providence. Con. 21, 22. The Church given to Christ from all eternity. Con. 30.
Church visible what. Con. 97. Cat. 32. Church invisible what. Cat. 33. The
privileges of the Church visible, Con. 97. Cat. 32, 33. The privileges of the
Church Invisible. Cat. 34. Church Catholic what. Con. 96. It has been
sometimes more, sometimes less visible. Con. 98. The best Churches on earth
subject to mixture and error. ibid. Church Government committed by Christ to
Church Officers, distinct from the Civil Magistrate. Con. 111. Church Officers
instrusted with the power of the Keys, and what that power is. Con. 111, 112.
Church Censures; their use, and necessity. Con. 112. Civil-Magistrate. See
[Magistrate] The Ten Commandments a Rule of Righteousness. Con. 67. Rules for
understanding the Ten Commandments. Cat. 56, 57, 58, 59. No man in this life
able perfectly to keep them. Cat. 111. The Duties of each Commandment. See
[Commandment] The Sins against each Commandment. See [Commandment]
Communication of Properties in Christ. Con. 34. Communication of Saints, what.
Con. 99, 100. Communion in Grace which Saints have with Christ. Cat. 36.
Communion in Glory, which they have with Christ in this life. Cat. 46.
Immediately after Death. Cat. 48. After Judgment. Cat. 51. This Communion
makes them not equal with Christ. Con. 101. What Communion we ought to have
one with another. Con. 100, 101. This Communion infringes not Propriety in
goods or possession. Con. 101. The Communion. See [Lords Supper] Confession of
sins to men, when necessary. Con. 53. Upon Confession the offending brother is
to be received. ibid. Liberty of Conscience. See [Liberty] No enjoying of God
but by way of Covenant. Con. 25. Covenant of works, or First Covenant, what.
Con. 26. Covenant of Grace, or Second Covenant, what. Con. 26, 27. Cat. 14.
With whom made. Cat. 15. How the Grace of God is manifested in the Second
Covenant. Cat. 55. How the Covenant of Grace was administered under the Law.
Con. 27. Cat. 16. How under the Gospel. Con. 28. Cat. 16, 17. Councils to be
called. Con. 113. By whom. Con. 90. 113. What power Councils have. Con. 114.
What submission due to their Determinations, and Decrees. ibid. Counc^ls not
infallible since the Apostles time. Con. 114. Therefore Councils no Rule of
Faith. ibid. How far only Councils may meddle with Civil affairs. Con. 114.
Corruption of Nature, what. Con. 22, 23. Cat. 12. How propagated. Con. 23. Cat.
12, 13. Creation. Con. 15. Cat. 7. Creation of Man in particular. Con. 15, 16.
Creation of Angels. Cat. 8. The Curse and wrath of God, how it may be escaped,
Cat. 119.
D.
Damnation how to be escaped. Cat. 119. Dead not to be prayed for. Con. 80.
Death appointed for all. Cat. 47. How Death is an advantage to Believers. Cat.
47. The state of Believers after Death, till the Resurrection. Cat. 48. Of
Unbeleevers. Con. 115. The Decalogue, the sum of the Moral Law. Cat. 56.
Rules for understanding it. Cat. 56, 57, 58, 59. The Decrees of God; the
nature, extent, and properties of them, in general. Con. 10, 11. Cat. 6. The
Decree of p^ed^st^nation. Con 11, 12. The Decree of Election and Reprobation.
Con. 12, 13. Cat. 6, 7. The Doctrine of the Decrees, how to be handled, and
what use to be made of them. Con. 14. True Believers can never utterly Despair.
Con. 66 Dipping in Baptism not necessary. Con. 95. Divorce, in what cases
lawful. Con. 95. Divorce, if lawful, dissolves the bond of Marriage. ib.
Doubting may consist with an Interest in Christ, Cat. 134. And therefore should
not hinder us from partaking of the Lords Supper. ibid. Duties of the First
Commandment. Cat. 61. etc. of the Second, Cat. 66. etc. Of the Third. Cat. 72.
etc. Of the Fourth. Cat. 78. etc. Of the Fifth. Cat. 58. etc. Of the Sixth.
Cat. 91. etc. Of the Seventh Cat. 95. etc. Of the Eighth. Cat. 99. etc. Of the
Ninth. Cat. 103. etc. Of the Tenth. Cat. 109. etc.
E.
Ecclesiastical powers, if lawful, not to be opposed on pretense of Christian
Liberty. Con. 74. Ecclesiastical persons not exempted from obedience to the
Civil Magistrate. Con. 92. Effectual Calling. See [Calling] Election not out
of Faith or Works foreseen. Con. 12. The properties of it. ibid. Election to
the means as well as to the end. Con. 13. What use to be made of the Doctrine
of Election. Con. 14. The Elect only can be saved. Con. 40. Elect Infants how
saved. Con. 39. Eucharist. See [Lords Supper] Exallation of Christ what. Cat.
25. In his Person. Cat. 26. In his Ascension. Cat. 27. In his sitting at the
right hand of God. Cat. 28. In his coming to Judgment. Cat. 29.
Excommunication by whom to be managed, and to what end. Con. 112.
F.
Faith the alone Instrument of Justification. Con. 42, 43. Cat. 37, 38, 39. How
Faith justifies in the sight of God. Cat. 33. The nature of Justifying Faith.
Con. 49. Cat. 38, 39. The chief Acts of it. Con. 49. How Faith is wrought, and
how increased. Con. 48. Faith may be without Assurance. Cat. 45, 46. Fall of
Man; the Nature and Effects of it. Con. 22, 23. Cat. 11. How all Mankind
concerned in the Fall. Con. 23. Cat. 11. No Falling away totally and finally
from true Grace. Cat. 44, 45. Con. 59. Why true Believers cannot so fall away,
but must needs persevere. Con. 59, 60. How far they may Fall away. Con. 61.
Family worship required by God. Con. 82* Fasting a part of Religious Worship.
Con. 81. Forgiveness of sin, how to be prayed for. Cat. 151, 152. Free Will.
See [Will]
G.
Gods Nature and Attributes. Con. 7, 8, 9. Cat. 4. God but one in Essence. Cat.
4. Persons of the Godhead. Con. 10. Cat. 5. How it appears there is a God.
Cat. 1, 2. God alone to be worshipped, and that through Christ only. Con. 78.
God to be worshipped in that way only that is prescribed in Scripture. Con. 77,
78 Good Works. See [Works] The Gospel dissolves not the Moral Law, but
establishes it. Con. 69. Without the Gospel no salvation. Cat. 30, 31. No
Falling from Grace. See [Falling] Government of the Church. See [Church]
H.
Why and how God Hardens sinners. Con. 20, 21. How we are to Hear the Word
preached. Cat. 125, 126. The Holy Ghost's Godhead, and Equality with the Father
proved. Cat. 5. The Humiliation of Christ, what. Cat. 23. The Humiliation of
Christ in his Conception, and Birth. Cat. 23. In his Life. Cat. 24. In his
Death. Cat. 24, 25. After his Death. Cat. 25. Hypostaticall Union. See
[Personall Union]
I.
Ignorant persons not to be admitted to the Lords Supper. Con. 110. Cat. 105.
Incarnation of Christ. See [Christ] Incestuous Marriages. Con. 94, 95. Infants
of Believers to be Baptized. Con. 105. Cat. 129. Day of Judgment for Angels
and men. Cat. 49. Con. 117. The time concealed, and why. Cat. 50. Con. 118. The
end of it. Con. 117. The manner of it as to the wicked. Cat. 50. Con. 117. As
to the Righteous. Cat. 50, 51. Con. 117. Judicial Law, when it expired, and
how far any part of it binds now. Con. 68. Justification, the nature of it.
Con. 41. Cat. 37, 38. The Instrument of it. Con. 42. How it is an Act of Gods
free grace. Con. 43. Cat. 37, 38. Justification not from Eternity. Con. 44. Not
by Works. Cat. 39. Justification the same under the Old Testament, as under
the New. Con. 45. How Justification dist^rs from sanctification. Cat. 42.
K.
The Kingly Office of Christ, how executed. Cat. 22. What meant by the Coming
of his Kingdom. Cat. 146, 147.
L.
The Law Moral given to Adam as a Covenant of Works, with Ability to keep it.
Con. 66. Cat. 52. The Nature of it. ibid. The Law continues still to be a
perfect Rule of Righteousness. Con. 67. and to bind Believers as well as
others. Con. 68, 69. Being not abolisht but established by the Gospel. Con. 69.
No man able now to keep it perfectly. Cat. 11. How Believers are freed from
the Law. Con. 69. The Uses of the Law to all men. Cat. 53, 54. The Uses of it
to the Unregenerate. Cat. 54. The several excellent Uses of the Law to
Believers. Con. 69, 70. Cat. 55. How sweetly concordant with the grace of the
Gospel. Con. 71. Comprised in the Ten Commandments. Cat. 56. Rules for
understanding the Moral Law. Cat. 56, 57, 58, 59. The Ceremonial Law, what.
Con. 67. Abrogated under the New Testament. Con. 68. The Judicial Law. See
[Judiciall] What Liberty Christ has purchased for Believers. Con. 71, 72.
Wherein it is enlarged under the New Testament. Con. 72, 73. The ends of
Christian Liberty. Con. 74. How it is abused. Con. 74, 75. Not intended to
destroy Ecclesiastical or Civil powers, but to uphold them. Con. 74. This
Liberty no plea for an Universal Toleration. Con. 74, 75. Liberty of
Conscience what it is, and what is repugnant to it. Con. 73. No Liberty to sin.
Con. 74. Light of Nature not sufficient to make wise to salvation. Con. 1. Cat.
30, 31. Lords Supper. See [Supper] Lords Prayer. See [Prayer]
M.
Magistracy an Ordinance of God. Con. 88, 89 Lawful for Christians to be Civil
Magistrates. Con. 89. The Civil Magistrate not to be resisted upon pretense of
Christian Liberty. Con. 74. The Civil Magistrates power in Church-affaires
stated. Con. 90. Magistrates authority not nulled by Infidelity, or difference
in Religion. on. 91. 92. Ecclesiastical persons not execmpted from obedience
to the Civil Magistrate. Con. 92. The duty of people to their Magistrate. Man
how created at first. Con. 15, 16. Cat. 8. Gods providence toward Man in the
state of Innocence. Cat. 10. Man's chief end. Cat. 1. The Mass an abominable
abuse of Christ's sacrifice. Con. 108. Marriage, the ends of it. Con. 93.
Lawful for all sorts. ibid. Whom Christians should not Marry with. Con. 94.
Marriage within the degrees of Consanguinity or Affinity unlawful. Con. 94,
95. In what cases Marriage may be dissolved. Con. 95. Marriage between more
then one Man, and one Woman at a time unlawful. Con. 93. The Means of
salvation what. Cat. 119. The Mediator of the Covenant of Grace. Con. 29, 30.
Cat. 17. No Merit in good works. Con. 56. The Ministry given by Christ to the
visible Church. Con. 97.
N.
The Name of God how to be used, Cat. 72, 73. How it is abused. Cat. 73. What
meant by the Name of God. Cat. 145, 146. New Testament or Covenant what. Con.
28.
O.
Oaths part of Religious Worship. Con. 81, 84. The nature of an Oath. Con. 84.
Oaths warrantable under the New Testament. Con. 85. A lawful Oath not to be
refused if imposed by lawful Authority. Con. 85, 86. What to be considered
before taking of an Oath. Con. 85 How an Oath is to be taken. Con: 86. An Oath
binds to performance (whoever it be made to) if the performance be not sinful.
Con. 86. Offices of Christ, Prophetical Office. See [Propheticall] Priestly
Office. See [Priestly] Kingly Office. See [Kingly] Old Testament what. Con. 27,
28. Ordinances given by Christ to the visible Church. Con. 97. How they are
effectual. Con. 97, 98. Original sin what* Con. 23. Cat. 12. The root of
Actual. Con. 24. Not wholly abolished in this life. Con. 24. The gu^lt of
Original sin. Con. 24, 25. How propagated. Con. 23. Cat. 12, 13. Original
Text of Scripture the Authentical. Con. 6.
P.
Pardon of sin how to be prayed for. Cat. 151, 152. Poedobaptisme lawful. Con.
105. Cat. 129. Perseverance of the Saints proved. Cat. 44. Con. 59. What it
depends upon. Con. 59, 60. The certainty and infallibility of perseverance
whence. Con. 60. The Persons of the Godhead. Con. 10. Cat. 5. The Coequality of
the Divine Persons proved. Cat. 5, 6. The Personal Union of the two Natures in
Christ. Con. 30, 31. Why requisite. Cat. 20. Polygamy unlawful. Con 93. The
Pope has no jurisdiction over Civil Magistrates in their Dominions, nor over
their people. Con. 92. The Pope in no sense Head of the visible Church. Con 99.
The Pope Antichrist. Con. 99. Powers Ecclesiastical and Civil, not to be
opposed upon pretense of Christian Liberty Con. 74 Power of the Keys what, and
to whom committed. Con. 111, 112. Prayer what, Cat. 140. To be made to God
alone* ibid. Prayer and Thanksgiving the duty of all men. Con. 78. How Prayer
is to be made. Con. 78. Cat. 143, 144. For what and for whom we are to Pray,
and for whom nor. Con. 79, 80. Cat. 142, 143. Prayer now not more acceptable in
one place then in another. Con. 81. What it is to Pray in the Name of Christ.
Cat. 141. Why we are to Pray in the Name of Christ. ibid. How the Spirit helps
in Prayer. Cat. 142. The Rule of Prayer. Cat. 144 The Lords Prayer how to be
used. Cat. 144. The meaning of the First Petition. Cat. 145, etc. of the
Second. Cat. 146, etc. of the Third. Cat. 148, etc. of the Fourth. Cat. 149,
etc. of the Fifth. Cat. 151, etc. of the Sixth. Cat. 152, etc. of the
Conclusion, Cat. 154, etc. Preaching a part of Religious Worship. Con. 80. Who
are to Preach the Word. Cat. 123, 124. How Ministers are to Preach the Word.
Cat. 124, 125. Predestination, the properties of it. Con. 12. Predestination
unto life. Con. 12, 13. Predestination unto Wrath. Con. 13, 14. The Doctrine of
Predestination how to be handled, and what use to be made of it. Con. 4.
Preparation to the Sabbath requisite. Cat. 82. To the Lords Supper. Cat. 133.
Priestly Office of Christ how ex^cuted. Cat 21. Privileges of the Church
Visible. Cat. 32. Of the Church Invisible. Cat. 34. Prophetical Office of
Christ how executed. Cat. 21 Propriety of Goods not taken away by Communion of
Saints. Con. 101. Providence, the Nature and Extent of it, Con. 16, 17. Cat. 9.
How Providence is exercised about Sin. Con. 18, 19, 20, 21. Gods Providence in
especial manner over his Church. Con. 21, 22. Gods Providence toward Angels.
Cat. 9, 10. Gods Providence toward Man in Innocence. Cat. 10. Public Worship
not to be neglected. Con. 82. Punishments of sin in this world. Cat. 13, 14. In
the world to come, Cat. 14.
R.
Reading the Scripture a part of Religious Worship. Con. 80. Rules for Reading
the Scriptures. Cat. 122, 123. Redemption how wrought by Christ. Con. 33. The
virtue of it and efficacy from the beginning of the world. Con. 34. Redemption
how applied, and to whom. Con. 34, 35. Cat. 30. Repentance unto life what. Con.
50. Repentance not satisfactory for sin, nor cause of pardon. Con. 51. Yet no
pardon without Repentance, nor Condemnation where it is. Con. 52. A particular
Repentance required of all for particular sins. Con. 52. When Repentance is
necessary to be testified to others. Con. 53. Reprobation, the Nature of it.
Con. 13, 14. Resurrection of the Just and Unjust; the manner of it. Con. 116.
Cat. 49. Righteous. See [Beleevers] Righteousness of Justification. See
[Justification] Righteousness of Sanctification. See [Sanctification]
S.
Sabbath to be kept. Con. 83. And that the first day of the week. Cat. 78. Con.
83. What it is to keep the Sabbath aright. Con. 83, 84 Cat. 79. How the Sabbath
is profaned. Cat. 80, 81. Sacraments the nature and ends of them. Con. 112.
Cat. 127. The parts of them. Cat. 128. They confer not grace by any power in
themselves. Con. 103. Upon what the efficacy of Sacraments depends. ibid.
Sacraments to be dispensed only by the Ministers of the Word. Con. 103. The
Sacraments of the Old and New Testament the same for substance. Con. 104. How
the Sacraments are made effectual to salvation. Cat. 126. The Sacrament of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, wherein they agree* Cat. 138, 139. Wherein they
differ. Cat. 139, 140. Sacrament of Baptism. See [Baptisme] Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. See [Supper] Saints. See [B^leevers] Saints not to be worshipped.
Con. 78. Salvation not to be attained by living up to the Light of Nature, nor
by any other but the Christian Religion. Con. 40. Cat. 31. Salvation in Christ
alone. Cat. 31. No larger then Election. Con 40. Cat. 35. What required of us
in order to salvation. Cat. 119. The outward means of salvation. ibid.
Sanctification what. Con. 46, 47. Cat. 40, 41. Universal, but imperfect, in
this life. Con. 47. The reason why Sanctification is imperfect here. Cat. 43.
How Sanctification differs from Justification. Cat. 42. Scandalous not to be
admitted to the Lords Supper. Cat. 135. Scriptures, why necessary Con 2* What
Books to be owned for Scripture* ibid. Scripture the only Rule of Faith and
Obedience. Con 3. Cat. 2. The only Rule of Worship, Con. 77, 78. Upon what
Authority the Scriptures are to be received and obeyed. Con. 4. Scriptures how
proved to be the Word of God. Con. 4. Cat. 2, 3. How we are fully assured of
it. Con. 4. Cat. 3. Of the Scriptures Sufficiency, Perfection, and Perspicuity.
Con. 5. What necessary to the saving understanding of the Scriptures. Con. 5.
The Original Text of Scripture the Authentical. Con. 6. The Scripture ought
to be Translated. Con. 6. Cat. 122. and read by all. Cat. 121. The infallible
Rule of interpreting Scripture Con. 6. The Spirit speaking in Scripture the
Supreme Judge of all Controversies in Religion. Con. 7. Scripture how to be
read. Cat. 122, 123. Sin what. Cat 12. The guilt of it. Con. 24. Sin how the
object of Gods providence. Con. 18, 19 20, 21. God not the Author, nor
Approver of Sin. Con. 19. Why God suffers his children to fall into Sin. Con.
20. Original Sin* See [Originall] Actual Sin. See [Actuall] Sin how punished
in this world. Cat. 13, 14. How in the world to come. Cat. 14. Sins when to be
confessed to men. Con. 53. Sin not pardoned without Repentance. Con. 52. The
greatest Sin cannot damn men if they truly Repent. ib All Sins not equally
heinous. Cat. 111. The demerit of every Sin. Cat. 118. Sins against the First
Commandment. Cat. 62* etc. against the Second. Cat. 68, etc. against the Third.
Cat. 73, etc. against the Fourth Cat. 80, etc. against the Fifth. Cat. 87, 89,
90. against the Sixth. Cat 94, etc. against the Seventh. Cat 97, etc. against
the Eighth. Cat. 101, etc. against the Ninth. Cat. 105, etc. against the Tenth.
Cat. 110, etc. Aggravations of Sin under several Heads. See [Aggravat^ons.]
Singing of Psalms a part of Religious Worship. Con. 80. Soul's state after
Death. Con. 115. The Spirit's illumination necessary to the saving
understanding of the Scripture. Con. 5. The Spirit speaking in the Scripture
the supreme Judge of Controversies. Con. 7. Supererogation impossible. Con. 56.
Superiors how to be honored. Cat. 85, 86. How to carry themselves toward
their Inferiors. Cat. 87, 88. Supper of the Lord; the Institution, Nature and
ends of it. Con. 107. Cat. 131. Christ not offered up to his Father in the
Supper* nor any real sacrifice for sin made. Con. 107. The Ministers duty in
administering it. Con. 108. Not to be received alone. ibid. To be received in
both kinds. ibid. The Elements in the Supper not to be adored. ibid. What
relation the Elements in the Supper have to Christ. Con. 109. How Christ is
present in the Supper. Con. 110. Cat. 132. How believers feed upon Christ in
the Supper. Con. 109, 110. Cat. 132. Ignorant and scandalous not to be admitted
to the Supper. Con. 110. Cat. 135. What preparation required before receiving
the Lord's Supper. Cat. 133. What duties requi^ed in time of receiving. Cat.
136, 137. What duties after receiving. Cat. 137, 138. The Agreement and
difference between the Lords Supper and Baptism. Cat. 138, 139, 140.
Suspension from the Lords Supper. Con. 112. Swearing. See [Oath] Synods may be
called by the Civil Magistrate. Con. 90. 113. In what cases Ministers may meet
in a Synod without the Call of the Civil Magistrate. Con. 113. What power
belongs to Synods and Councils. Con. 114 What submission due to their Decrees,
and Determinations. ibid. Synods not infallible since the Apostles days. Con.
114. How far Synods may meddle in State-affaires. ibid.
T.
Temptation how to be prayed against. Cat. 152, 153, 154 Testament Old and New.
Con. 27, 28. Thanksgiving the duty of every man. Con. 78. What Toleration
Christian Liberty is no friend to. Con. 74, 75. Transubstantiation an absurd
fiction. Con. 109. Of the Trinity. Con. 10. Cat. 5. The Coequality of the
Persons in Trinity proved. Cat. 5, 6.
V.
Vocation. See [Calling] Vows a part of Religious Worship. Con. 81. A Vow,
what, how, and to whom to be made. Con. 87. What Vows are unlawful. Con. 88.
Union of the two Natures in Christ. Con. 31, 32. Union of the Elect with
Christ, what. Cat. 34. Unregenerate men's best works sinful. Con. 57, 58.
W.
War may be waged by Christians under the New Testament. Con. 89. Wicked men's
condition in Judgment, and after Judgment. Cat. 50. The Will of God how to be
done, and submitted. to. Cat. 149. The Will of Man renewed in Effectual
Calling. Cat. 35. Free Will, what. Con. 35. Free Will to good in the state of
Innocence. Con. 36. Wholly lost by the Fall. ibid. Restored in part by
Regeneration. Con. 36, 37. Perfectly and immutably in the state of Glory only.
Con. 37. Word of God, what. Cat. 2. The Word how made effectual to salvation.
Cat. 119, 120. To be read by all. Cat. 121, 122. How to be read. Cat. 122, 123.
How to be preached. Cat. 124, 125. How to be heard. Cat. 125, 126. Works not
the cause of Justification. Con. 41 Cat. 39. What are Good Works, and what not.
Con. 53, 54. The excellent uses and ends of Good Works. ibid. Ability to do
Good Works is wholly from Gods Spirit. Con. 55. The actual influence of the
Spirit required to the performing of every Good Work. Con. 55. Yet this no plea
at all for negligence. ibid. Good Works neither merit nor satisfy, and why.
Con. 56. Yet they are accepted by God in Christ, and rewarded. Con. 57. The
best Works of the Unregenerate sinful, and why. Con. 57, 58. Yet the neglect
of the more sinful. ibid. Worship to be given to God alone. Con. 78. And that
through Christ. ibid. The Worship that is acceptable to God is instituted by
himself, and not left to the Devices of men. Con. 77, 78. The parts of
Religious Worship. Con. 80, 81. Religions Worship not tied now to any place.
Con. 81. God to be Worshipped in private and in public. Con. 81, 82.
FINIS.

