A MANIFEST AND BREIFE DISCOVERY Of some of the Errors contained in a Dialogue
called the Marrow of Modern Divinity.

Wherein is shown, especially the Authors error in the manner of the
Justification of a Sinner, and the Truth cleared from all the falsehoods
contained in that Book concerning the same, with some other of his Errors.

Jude the 3. Contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints. 2.
Epistle of John verse 9. whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God; he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he
has both the Father and the Son. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Joshua Kirton,
and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the White Horse in Paul's
Churchyard. 1646.

To the Christian Reader that desires to know the ways of God in the Gospel
touching the way that he has set forth, to bring Poor Sinners to Christ to be
justified by him, and desires to walk therein, Grace and Peace, etc.
CHristian Reader there came lately to my sight, a Book called the marrow of
modern divinity, which when I had read the title page my heart rejoiced within
me, hoping that now God had stirred up some man to compose the differences that
are between the legalist and the Antinomist (they both erring from the truth)
which was the thing I exceedingly desired, But after I had read it over two or
three times and considered well of it, I found I was much deceived in my
expectation, And then I began to wonder, that this Book should come to the
third Edition, and be received so generally, I finding so many mistakes in it,
especially in the manner of the Justification of a Sinner, wherein be has gone
the direct way with the Antinomist, Therefore I could not choose but set my
self to work to vindicate the truth of God seeing others are silent herein,)
and according to my poor ability to set forth the truth, which I have been
taught of God. I do not intend to write of all his mistakes, for that were too
great work for me, but only of some of them, and briefly also (except one
which I chiefly intend.) I know not the Author but by his Book, nor ever heard
so much as his name, Therefore I cannot do this in any spleen toward him,
nay this I will say for him, he has set down many excellent truths, and has
showed himself a painful and laborious man in collecting the opinions of so
many Divines, yet if he err from the truth, I hold my self, bound to let him
and others know his error, and I deal no otherwise by him, then I desire to
be dealt withal my self. If I err from the truth; for it is the glory of God
and his truth that I seek above all, if my heart deceive me not. Christian
Reader, I beseech the seriously to consider of the exceptions here taken by me,
and weigh them by the Scriptures, and if there be truth in them, receive them
with meekenes of Spirit.

I shall be breife in the examination of the Book, for my ability of body will
not serve me to be so large as otherwise I would; the Lord give thee wisdom to
understand his truth and a willing heart to obey and yield unto it. And so now
I direct my self to the Author of the Book, commending thee to the Grace of
God, I remain.

Thy Poor servant in the Lord Jesus Christ. I. A.

A manifest and breife discovery of some of the errors, contained in a
dialogue, called the marrow of modern divinity.
HAving of late read over your Book called the marrow of modern divinity, and
by often perusal thereof, found many things in it, which I conceive is not
truth, I have presumed in the defense of the truth, which I have learned out of
the Scriptures to examine some things delivered by you in your Book, not
doubting but you will be ready to hearken to the truth, from any that shall
make it appear unto you.

I shall take some small exceptions at diverse things therein, because I intend
one special thing, which is the greatest matter of all, and wherein any one
being deceived, the greatest damage consists. But before I come to that which I
chiefly intend, I take notice of some things, in the fourth page of your Book;
you say the new Testament mentions a threefold law, you might have added more
if you had pleased, what say you to the law of the Spirit of life, Romans 8.2.

It is very necessary for us to consider how you have distinguished the law of
works and the law of Christ, for you say the ten Commandments may be said to
be the matter of the law of works, or the matter of the law of Christ.

You have here made a distinction that neither the Scriptures set forth, nor
any Author that ever I heard of.

But to answer you directly, the law of the ten Commandments is all one and
the same, not differing in it self, but is a holy, just and perfect law,
proceeding from a holy God, and binds all men to the obedience of it, and
condemns every transgression against it, yea the most holiest man, and he that
is in greatest favor with God, if he transgress, it condemns him, as justly
as the most ungodly wretch living.

But the difference lies in this, That the one namely true believers are
justified by Christ from the Curse and penalty of the law, and unbeleevers lie
under the condemning power, penalty and curse of the law.

But you and I differ only in your distinction, for I do not find throughout
all the New Testament, that the law of the ten Commandments are called, the
law of Christ, There are other laws of Christ, as the law of grace, the law of
Faith or beleiving in him, and many other Commandments or laws of Christ,
which are not contained in the law of the ten Commandments, and so are none of
the matter thereof. As for the text, Gallat. 6.2. It is set down by the
Apostle as one special law of Christ to bear one another burden, But this
will not prove your assertion that the law of the ten Commandments is the
matter of the law of Christ, I mean as he is the Mediator of the New Covenant.

Yet do I not deny, but that the law of the ten Commandments, may be a rule
and direction to true beleivers, to walk by, yet believers do not work by
any compulsion of that law, but after a more free way, of love unto God and
Christ, arising from the love of God in Christ unto them, the love of God
constrain them to holiness of life, to labor to honor God; And the Apostles
generally do urge and press believers to holiness from the free grace of
God, and from the mercies of God, extended toward them in Jesus Christ as we
may see, Titus. 2.11.12. Romans. 12.1.

The law of the ten Commandments is an absolute perfect holy and just law, yet
it setts not forth Christ, neither is faith required therein, nothing but
absolute and perfect obedience to the same is required therein. It brings us
not to Christ, but wounds us, and leaves us destitute in respect of any help
it can afford, It is the law of the Gospel that releeves us.

Page 7.8. I let pass your fine distinction of the law of the ten
Commandments, calling it the matter of the Covenant of works, and not the
Covenant it self, your reason is weak, for had not the Lord absolute
authority to lay a command upon the Creature, and man bound to obey, though he
gave no assent?

And now I come to examine whether this law of the ten Commandments was given
to Adam, and writ in his heart in Paradise before his fall.

You have affirmed that it was written in his heart before his fall, page 7.
and the 10. and indeed throughout your whole Book; I deny it, and I demand
your proof, for your opinion out of Scripture.

We read but of one Commandment given to Adam in Paradise, But you tell us of
ten more, you will be wise above that which is written; I acknowledge that Adam
was Created a perfect Creature, full of holiness purity and uprightnes, But yet
that it was in respect of the writing of the ten Commandments in his heart
before his fall I cannot see, neither find I any Scripture to lead me to
believe it.

I acknowledge that as soon as ever Adam had transgressed he came to know good
and evil, which he did not know before, And this law of the ten Commandments
was then writ in his heart, and he that could not keep one Commandment, had
many more given him, so that now by his fall, the very flood gates of Sin,
were set open through his transgression to the drowning of himself and his
posterity in misery.

But because this opinion is so often repeated by the Author in his Book, I
desire to know to what it tends, and what use; we may make of it, does it serve
to illustrate or set forth, any point of Doctrine in the Scriptures? or does
the contrary, which I have affirmed, oppose or gain say any truth? If it be so
that neither is done hereby, Then I say you have troubled your Readers with
needles doctrine, no way tending to edification, but is a mere fancy of your
own Brain.

You tell us it is the opinion of all Authors and Interpreters that you know,
but you tell us none of their names, nor none of the Scriptures, they have so
interpreted for the proof thereof, And so I take it as your own opinion,
which I dare not receive, until I see better ground for it.

I take notice also how finely you would insinuate unto us, that Adam in eating
the forbidden fruit, did break all the ten Commandments; and have you gone
through them all? doubtless you have pleased your self therein, but what
content you have given to your Reader in it, I leave it to the judicious to
consider of, and so pass it over, and come to something that remains.

Page. 28. and 29. You affirm that Adam fell the very same day, that he was
created; and the ground of your opinion is, Psalm. 49.12. which text in the
Hebrew, you say is thus read; Adam being in honor did not lodge a night in it;
you have a good art in adding to the Scripture, as I shall show hereafter.

And you have quoted Mr. Aynsworth in the Margent to help you, but he does
not; I have examined Mr. Aynsworth upon that Psalm, but he affirms no such
thing, he says this may be minded both for the first Adam, who continued not
in his dignity, And so for all his Children, these are his own words.

Now how can you gather from hence that Adam fell the same day he was created,
I wish you to observe that the holy Ghost in that Psalm intends no such thing
as Adams fall, but of man's being in honor the instability thereof and the
short continuance of it; And I suppose you know (Adam) to be the common name of
man, and therefore the first man Adam cannot be here meant.

Leave these your fained devises, and keep close to the Scriptures, and seek
not to know in divine things, anything, but what is there written, To the law
and to the Testimony if they speak not, it is because there is no truth in
them, Be not wise above that which is written, and do not you publish that for
truth, which you have no ground for, secret things belong unto God, but thins
revealed unto us, etc.

So likewise is your conjecture of Adams sacrificing on the same day that he
was created, and that God clothed him with the skins of those beasts, which he
offered in sacrifice.

But I leave these things as your own imaginations, yet this I say that it is
not probable that he fell the same day that he was created, for there were many
things passed after man was created, which are set down in the second Chapter
of Genesis, which is not likely were done all in one day, neither do I know of
what use this opinion is, but I leave it to the Reader to consider off.

And although I freely confess that Christ offered up himself the sixth day
of the week, And that Adam was created the sixth day, But must it therefore
needs follow, that Adam fell the very same day that he was created, I know no
necessity thereof.

Page 43. I wonder you durst be so bold as to alter the words and so the fence
and meaning of the Apostle, Romans 5.13. Your words are thus, before the time of
the law sin was in the world, yet did they not impute it to themselves,
because there was no law, But the Apostle has it thus, for until the law sin
was in the world, but sin is not imputed where there is no law, The Apostle
proves plainly here, that there was a law written in men's hearts, before the
giving of the law upon mount Sinai, the breach whereof was imputed unto them,
for there was not any time, since Adams fall, wherein, there was nor a law to
condemn man for sin, and so their sin was imputed unto them at all times,
And not as you say, they did not impute it to themselves, I pray you take
knowledge what the same Apostle says, in the second Chapter of his Epistle to
the Romans verses 14 and 15. For when the Gentills which have not the law do by
nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the law, are alaw unto
themselves, which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience bearing also witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing
or else excusing one another. Take heed how you alter any text of Scripture to
maintain your own opinions it is very daingerous to add or to detract from
Scripture.

And now having gone over some of those things I intended with a great deal of
brevity, and passing by many things which I might justly have taxed as mistakes
in that book, I come now to that which I chiefly intended, and without which I
had never set upon this work, for there is less danger in those I have
already taken notice of, then in that which follows, and the Lord asist me in
discovering of the truth and in laying open the palpable error of the Author.

Indeed it greived my heart to consider how men in these late days are fallen
into error, and cannot understand the very first principles and beginnings of
Christ, but they are at the top at first, before they have laid the first
stone of the foundation of the building, and indeed it proceeds from an error
in the understanding in the ways of God.

They conceive that if there should be any preparations to Faith in Christ,
that it would much derrogate from free grace and therefore will admit of none,
for says this Author it is to bring money in the hand; and Christ bids come buy
wine and milk without money, that is Grace and salvation without money or price;
I confess it is truth, for we must receive all freely even of free grace.

But yet I pray you call to mind who they are that are called to this feast, it
is only the thirsty; Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye etc. It is not
every one, but only the thirsty, the broken in heart, namely the repentant Soul
which thirsts for mercy.

When I consider the Author in the pages of his book 135 136. 137. 138. 139. I
cannot but wonder at the blindness of the man in the ways of God as touching
his working upon the hearts of poor Sinners in bringing them to believe in
Christ, to be justified by him.

He seems not to know what Regeneration is, for he has never mentioned it in
all his book, nor what Repentatce is, nor how we come to this excellent gift
of Faith, nor tells us what it is, but only that we must belive in Christ, and
take Christ, but who is the work of this Faith he tells us not, but speaks of
it as if it were in our own power to believe, whereas it is not, for the
Apostle says to you it is given to believe etc.

I shall have occasion to speak of these things more at larg and to let thee,
Christian Reader, understand his great errors, and the wrong he has done the
people of God in publishing his book, in these particulars.

But first I will note some things out of his book in those pages I have
mentioned, and I will do it briefly.

In page 136. he says That the Lord justifies his children before they
repent, or truly humble themselves etc. But he has not set down any place of
Scripture for the proof thereof, we must take his own word, I shall prove the
contrary very shortly. I mean in their own fence and feeling God does never
justify any before they repent and humble themselves in seeking mercy from him.

Page 137. where it is objected by himself, that the Scriptures hold forth
that the Lord has appointed Repentance to go before Faith; for it is said
Mark 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel.

He answers indeed, sometimes the name of repentance is given to those
preparatory beginnings, which he calls Legal fits and terrors, which are both
in nature and time before Faith, and thus, he says, Judas is said to repent,
and says that it is all the repentance that goes before Faith in Christ.

O horrible wickedness, how dare this man affirm such a thing, that our Savior
Christ in this place should Preach, and call for no other repentance before
beleiving, but such as Judas had.

But he goes on and tells you, that true and Evangelicall repentance is a fruit
of Faith, and cannot be before Faith in Christ.

I shall show you the contrary very speedily, and that it is not a fruit of
justifying Faith, but a work of the Spirit, to prepare the heart to the
beleiving of the promise.

He says also that he holds, that repentance is a consequent of Faith, and
that it follows after.

But why did you not set down unto us, what this repentance is, which you
mean and say follows Faith, I am glad yet, that you do not cast repentance
quite away, but will let it have a little place in your thoughts, God grant you
true repentance in your heart, for so violating the ways of God, so plainly
set down in the Scriptures.

Page. 138. He confesses that legal fitts of fear and terror do go before
Faith in Christ ordinarily and in some measure in some, but not in all, and he
instanceth in Zacheus and Lidia.

To which I answer, that, that which he calls legal fitts of fear and
terror, we shall find them to be another thing, and to be true repentance
toward God, And for Zacheus we cannot conceive, but that his heart was truly
broken and humbled at that very time, And there was a manifest sign thereof
expressed in his present resolution to make restitution.

And for Lidia, she is said to be a worshipper of God, and doubtless, one that
with Simeon, waited for the consolation of Israel, her heart being fitted and
prepared to receive Christ, And to this truth Doctor Gouge gives testimony in
his Book called the whole Armor of God, And indeed no sooner did Lidia here
Paul Preach Christ come in the flesh dead, and risen again, but she received
him in her heart, Thus far I have gone in setting down some of the Authors
errors.

I shall now come (the Lord assisting me) to discover the truth of the ways of
God, laid down in the Scriptures concerning his working upon poor Sinners, in
bringing them unto Christ to be justified by him, through Faith, And I shall
show you what repentance is, and what that special Faith is, and how they are
wrought, A work of great worth and very needful, And yet altogether omitted
by the Author of the Book, and I shall further discover his errors, by
setting forth the truth.

The Author has often alleged in his Book that famous and godly Martyr Mr.
William Tindall, And I do wonder that he could not see his doctrine concerning
repentance and Faith, He tells us plainly in many places, that repentance must
of necessity go before that Faith that justifies, and that the Faith that
justifyeth, all ways follows repentance, as page 32. and 96. and 146. of Mr.
Tindalls works, and in the last page here mentioned, he says, repentance
goes before Faith and prepares the way to Christ and to the promises.

But the Author had no mind to take notice of this truth which was so contrary
to his opinion, for he has found a nearer way to Heaven, then all the Saints
and Servants of God did in former times.

Christian Reader take knowledge of this one thing, which may help thee in the
understanding of the truth of God, and may deliver thee from some of the
errors of these times, namely that there is a twofold administration or
dispensation of the Gospel, The one general, the other more special.

The first is the publication or preaching of the Gospel to all sorts and
conditions of people, whereby Christ is set forth to have taken our nature upon
him, and in our nature has suffered death, and paid the ransom for sin, and
is risen again, assended into Heaven and sits at the right hand of God in
Majesty and Glory, and shall come again at the end of this world to judge all
men: with many more excellent things which the Scriptures set forth: Which
general truths are believed by thousands that never enjoy the special
benefit; which belief is very fitly called, by Divines, Historical Faith, and
they believers.

Secondly there is a more special preaching of the Gospel of Christ, and that
is to certain persons distinguished from the general sort of believers
(although they believe the same general truths with the other) by certain
quallifications, which the Scriptures set forth unto us, as the poor in
spirit, the morners, the broken hearted, namely the repentant; And to such only
is Christ sent unto Esaias 61.1.2.3. to heal and comfort their poor souls, and
such Christ invites to come unto him, and he invites to other but such as
labor and are weary and heavy laden, unto such only Christ has promised rest
Math. 11.28. and to such poor souls only is Christ sent, and they and non but
they can believe in him and enjoy the special grace and favor of God through
Christ.

And yet the free grace of God in Christ is not any way lessened, but runs
out freely to poor sinners.

For I pray you consider who it is that works these preparations or
qualifications in the Elect. Is it not the Lords own work to take away the
stony heart and to give a heart of flesh? Is it not of his free goodness that
does so prepare their hearts and fit them to receive his special promise of
grace and mercy in Christ? The ground of the heart must be tilled, before that
precious seed be sown in it, ye must not sow among thorns but in the ground
fitted and prepared, It is not in man's power to prepare his heart, by any
natural power left in him, no more then a dead man can raise himself, but it
is only the work of God himself.

So that though we come to Christ with these qualifications before spoken of,
yet we bring nothing of our own, but that which God has wrought in us,
neither is the grace of justification given to any, for the worthiness of
repentance but only for the truth of the promiser, who has promised pardon,
mercy, and peace only to such as are so prepared by him and to no other.

And that there is a preparation to the justification of a Sinner, and to the
receiving of Christ, the Scriptures are manifest, John the Baptist was sent to
prepare the way of the Lord, to make ready a people to receive the Lord,
Christ, and what was his Ministry, but the Baptism of repentance?

And that repentance is a preparation to Faith or to the justification of a
Sinner, and must of necessity be before that Faith that justifyeth, and gives
assurance of the forgivenes of Sin and peace and reconciliation with God is
manifest.

But because it is denied by many in these days, I will give you a few
reasons, for the proof thereof.

But first least I should be mistaken, I will set down in a short definition,
what true repentance is, a thing altogether omitted by this Author, neither
has he told us what Regeneration is, nor whereof it consists, which are the
maine things that tend to the making of a Christian and true Believer.

I say that repentance may be thus breifely and truly defined: Repentance is a
powerful work of Gods Spirit (wrought in the hearts of such as shall be
saved) whereby the heart is broken and turned from all the pleasing delights of
Sin, into a great fear and sorrow for them, and confession of them unto God,
and into an exceeding desire of pardon, peace, and reconcilliation with God,
Luke 15. you may see all the parts of repentance in the prodigal Son.

And let the Author take notice, that it is a work of Gods Spirit, it is no
money of our own.

This repentance here laid down; is a work of the Gospel, yea the beginning
of the Gospel, Mark. 1.1. It is no legal work, wrought by the law, for I
know neither legal repentance, nor legal Faith, which some men talk of very
much, I know the law of the ten Commandments admitts of no repentance, neither
does it receive Faith in Christ.

And now I come to the reasons to prove that God does always work repentance
in them whom he has a purpose to save for ever, before he bestow on them that
Faith which does justify or assure them of the pardon of their Sins in the
blood of Jesus Christ.

First reason is from the constant and unchangeable order the Holy Ghost has
observed throughout the Scriptures in requiring repentance and Faith, always
requiring repentance in the first place, Mark. 1.15. Math. 3.2. Luke. 3.3.
Acts. 2.38. and the 3.19. So that I infer hence, the Holy Ghost always
requiring it in the first place, it is that work which he pleases first to
work.

Second reason because until we have true repentance wrought in us, we have no
right unto any special promise for the special promises of grace and mercy
are made only to the penitent and broken hearted, to such as mourn, Esaias.
6.1.2.3. and Acts. 3.19. Therefore before repentance we cannot have faith in
any of those special promises.

Third reason, Because no man before he have repentance truly wrought in him,
can receive the forgivenes of his Sins, For repentance is required that men may
have their Sins done away, Acts. 3.19.

And therefore forgivenes of Sin following repentance in the work of it, it
does necessarily follow that Faith does follow repentance, Acts. 2.38. For
justifying Faith does always bring with it to the soul, the forgivenes of
Sins.

Fourth reason, Whosoever is justified by Faith, is at Peace with God, Romans
5.1. But no man is at Peace with God, until he have truly repented and his
Sins done away therefore no man is justified by faith, until he have truly
repented.

I do not say that Repentance is the condition required in our parts to our
justification, as being our own work; But yet I affirm that it is that way
which God does always take in the conversion of poor sinners unto himself;
First to humble them, by making them see their misery and lost condition, and
to cause them to seek with strong desires after grace and favor purchased by
Christ, for such poor penitent souls, and none else shall ever obtain that
grace and favor with God through Christ.

For Christ calls none but such unto him, neither ought any Minister to apply
the promises of mercy to any other but such as are weary, heavy laden, mourn,
and earnestly desire mercy and pardon of sin, through the apprehension of their
misery and lost condition, none but such as are wounded will look for, and
highly prize the Physician, to cure their poor souls.

Now this Grace of Repentance is purchased by Christ, and admitted to poor
Sinners, through him, and to be preached in his Name, and it is wrought in the
hearts of the Elect by the holy Ghost, through the free grace of God, and is
not wrought or produced by any power that is in the creature; For the truth is,
we are all passive in every thing that concerns our salvation, we cannot
repent unless God give us repentance, we cannot believe unless God give us
faith to believe; And therefore I do the more wonder at the Author, that has
so much urged Faith and believing, and yet never tells us how this so precious
Faith is wrought, or how we may attain thereunto, but speaks of it, as if it
were in our own power.

I acknowledge freely that Repentance is wrought by the Word preached, and
Faith also; But yet it is the Lord that works by the means, and without which
all would be unprofitable, and so all is of free Grace, for there is no work
that we can do before Justification, or after Justification, can merit any
grace for us before God; Ephesians. 2.10. for we are his workmanship, created in
Jesus Christ, etc. And whatsoever gift of grace any man receives, it is from
the free bounty and grace of God in Christ; And every gift so received, is to
be put forth by us, to the glory of our God, and the good of our brethren; And
to so forth to all men the goodness of our God toward us, through Christ, by
way of thankfulness, for mercy received, and to no other end whatsoever.

And thus you may see I am no enemy to the doctrine of Free Grace, nor to the
Teachers thereof, if they publish only the truth thereof, without running into
by ways for fear of something which they need not, if they did truly
understand the truth; But I desire above all things to advance the Free grace
of God in Christ, and by Gods help will do it.

And now because the Author has so much spoken of Faith and of believing, yet
has not told us what this Faith is, I will, Christian Reader, for thy help and
the Authors information, for down what this precious Faith is; for other
Faiths mentioned in Scripture I let pass; This only is to our purpose at this
time, and I suppose may be thus defined.

To be, a gracious work of Gods Spirit wrought in the hearts of such as are
Penitent, whereby they are assured in their souls of the free pardon and
remission of all their sins, and of peace and reconciliation with God through
Jesus Christ, Ro^. 5.1.

This is that special faith, which none but the Elect are partakers of, and
therefore called the faith of Gods elect, other faiths are common to all, this
only to the redeemed in Christ, and this faith is never given to any, but to
the repentant only.

And this repentance and this faith are the parts of Regeneration the new birth
from above, spoken of by our Lord Christ, John 3.5. Water and the Spirit; The
first prepares, the other purges, and without which work, no man shall enter
into the Kingdom of heaven, according to that eternal decree, never to be
called back, which says, Except a man de borne again of Water and the Spirit,
be cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

I wonder the Author could not see this, or if he saw it, would not so much as
mention it, in the bringing of a poor sinner home to Jesus Christ, but
presses men to believe, as if Faith were in man's power, whereas indeed, it is
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.

Mortification of sin, and Sanctification or newness of lise does always
follow the Justification of a sinner by faith, and are some of the fruits,
proceeding from one that is justified and reconciled unto God through Jesus
Christ, for they must be first ingrafted into Christ, before they can bring
forth fruit in him.

Now the parts of Regeneration, Repentance, and Faith, are but the ingrafting,
and no part of the fruit, the Fruit always follows the ingrafting, and these
are no part of Repentance, if truly considered, for every grace of the Spirit,
may be clearly distinguished each from other by the Scriptures, and must not be
confounded together, as the manner of some is to do, who would make Repentance
to consist of Mortification to sin and newness of life, nay, some have said
that Repentance consists of Faith also, and so they make a great confusion, and
are never able to find out the truth.

For though Repentance does continue in a time believer and justified person so
long as he lives here, for he sins daily, and therefore must repent daily; And
it is required of them, Ephesians 6.15. that they should have their feet shod with
the preparation of the Gospel of peace, namely Repentance, yet is Repentance
truly to be distinguished from other the effects of the spirit, as Faith, Hope,
Patience; Love and Joy, and not to be confound one with another, as some do.

And by the way let this be considered, that howsoever Christ has wrought
perfect Redemption for us, yet the application, and the making this Redemption
effectual unto us, is done by the holy Ghost every one in the undivided
Trinity, having his special work appropriated unto him, to make perfect the
salvation of poor Sinners, which several works must of necessity be
distinguished.

And take notice of this, that this special Faith that justifies the
believer, apprehending the grace of God in Christ, is always grounded upon
some special promise in Scripture; For there cannot be this special faith in
any soul, where there is not first a promise; And the promises (as I have
said) are made only to the Penitent, the brokenhearted the mourners, such as
are heavy laden, etc. Christ calls only such to him; And the holy Spirit of
God, does never write the Covenant of Peace with God in other hearts, but only
in the broken and contrite heart, namely, the repentant soul, and they only
can and do believe with this special Faith; for none else can work, that
work, to believe in him whom God has sent, John 6.29. but only such poor
souls: for where there is no promise, there can be no faith, for though faith
be the ground of things hoped for, yet there must be a promise to ground that
Faith on; For though Abraham believed beyond hope, yet he had a promise first
made unto him by a faithful God.

And therefore I pray the Christian Reader, to observe what I have before set
down, for it is not our believing, till we be persuaded that we do believe,
for as I have said before, so I say again, there must be first a promise for
such poor Sinners to lay hold on, and then they finding themselves to be such
penitent and broken hearted, to whom the special promises do pertain, the holy
Ghost in his good time does persuade the heart and evidence to the soul, his
peace and reconciliation with God, and his interest in the promise of Grace
through Christ, Faith is the gift of God, to you it is given to believe; It is
not in man's power to believe.

Believe it for a truth no man can possibly believe to justification of life,
nor shall ever rejoice with the Bridgroome, that has not first mourned with
the mourner.

I wonder these things should be unknown to men in these days, and that so
much confusion should be amongst them in the matter and manner of the
justification of a Sinner.

So that we cannot certainly learn by them what repentance is, not what Faith
is, nor how it is wrought in the heart; Some teaching outward duties and
obedience to the law, to the begetting of Faith, and rejoicing therein that
they are called legal Preachers, as I my self have heard.

Others again would be so fame from them, that they will teach only (as they
pretend) the Gospell-way, and that they will do, by teaching only believing.

And as for repentance, the beginning of the Gospel, they will not mention or
very little, and that then it follows justifying Faith, and never goes before
it, and what is their reason, Because say they the Gospel setts forth free
Grace, and requires no act of ours at all but only believing.

Well then believing is an act of ours, here is something for us to do.

But I would know of them whether believing to life be in their power, The
Apostle says, to you it is given to believe and that Faith is the gift of God,
Then there is no power in us to believe, the very act of believing is of free
grace, And so is repentance of free grace, God is the giver of repentance as
well as Faith, Acts. 11.18. 2. Tim. 2.25.

For although repentance be wrought in us, and we act it, yet it is God that
gives it, and it is nothing else, but the free grace of God, to perpare the
hearts of Sinners, for the receiving of the forgivenes of Sins and peace and
reconciliation with God by Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

All the Prophets in the old Testament have called for repentance in the first
place, that so they might be prepared to receive mercy, John the Baptist
Preached it to prepare them to receive the Lord Christ, Our Savior himself
Preached it in the first place before believing, The Apostles Preached it
before Faith in Christ to the forgivenes of Sins: The very truth is, that the
same way which was formerly to others, the same way to salvation is for us now,
and we must go the same way that they went, which were before us, new ways
are dangerous.

We must not look for a nearer way to Heaven, then the Saints and people of
God have gone before us, and though it be a narrow and a straight way, yet it
is a sure way, it leads to happiness.

Page. 113. I may also justly except against his exposition on the 11. to the
Hebrews, verse 6. without Faith it is impossible to please God that is says
he, As Calvin says, whatsoever a man thinks, purposes or does, before he be
reconciled to God in Christ is accursed, and not only of no value to
righteousness, but of certain deserving to damnation.

I must confess I am amazed to think such things should be published, I
honor the memory of that Holy Man Mr. Calvin, yet if it were his opinion, I
must needs say it was an error in him, for there be many things done by men
before reconciliation with God, that are not Sin.

For Sin is the transgression of some law, but what law forbids a man to hear
and read the Scriptures, may it is commanded by Christ himself, search the
Scriptures, Io. 5.39. Men may Sin and do Sin in hearing and reading the word,
but the work it self is no Sin, For we must distinguish between the work and
the manner of the doing it.

It is no Sin for a man to humble his soul in seeking mercy and grace and
favor with God, which must be done before we can come to that Faith, which
makes our persons acceptable to God, and we well pleasing unto him through
Christ, as Enochs Person was, And indeed it is impossible our persons should be
accepted, or we become pleasing to God by any other way then by Faith in Christ.

And the reason is rendered by the Apostle in the words following; For he that
comes to God must believe that he is a rewarder of them that dilligently
seek him, which is a lesser degree of Faith, then that which makes us to
become pleasing in his sight through Christ Jesus.

Nor can we truly say that all the actions of unregenerate men are Sin, Ahabs
repentance was not Sin, it was no breach of any law of God, nay God takes
notice of it and bids the Prophet to take notice of it, yea and rewards him for
it, in deferring the judgment pronounced, but he never rewards any man for
Sin, but denounces judgment against them.

Thus have I endeavored to pick out some of the Bones that the Author has
left in amongst the marrow of modern divinity, and I hope I have performed it
with plainnes, and I have done it after a loving manner, without malice to the
Author, whom I know not, nor yet could ever perfectly hear of by any man: But
that which I have writ, is in the defense of the truth, so much oppugned by the
Author, which truth is dear unto me, and so should be to all Gods people.

I must confess, and do it freely, that I love the Author, and am persuaded
of the truth of many things delivered by him in his Book, and for which grace
bestowed on him, I bless God, and pray the Lord for a further increase upon
him, but the truth I value above all.

I find the Book commended by worthy Divines, whom I honor, but yet my Faith
is not to depend upon man, but only upon the Scriptures, the written word of
God. And I desire that this which I have written, may be tried by that touch
stone and none else, And then I am confident it will be found truth, when that
opinion of the Antinomians maintained by this Author will be found an error,
For he has directly gone along with them in this thing, namely that there is
no Evangelicall preparations to Faith in Christ, which is the maine thing I
have now disproved and have (I hope) sufficiently proved, that there must be
such preparations to Faith in Christ, And it is impossible for any other to
believe in Christ to the saving of the soul, but only such as are so prepared.

Christ himself says non can come to me except the Father which has sent me
draw him, John. 6.44.

Error is very dangerous, especially in the foundation and principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, whereof repentance and Faith are two of the maine, Heb.
6.1. And therefore with great care to be looked into, and to be truly known,
and how they are to be distinguished from other the effects of the Spirit.

Christian Reader, what I have done herein I commend unto thy wisdom, and I
desire the Lord to give both thee and me such understanding in the truth and
ways of God, that we may not be carried away with every wind of Doctrine from
the truth to the errors of these times. Now to him that is able to keep and
preserve us in his truth, be all praise honor and glory through Christ Jesus
for ever Amen.

James. 2.1. My Brethren have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord
of glory with respect of persons.
FINIS.

