THE Rules of Dispute, practiced by CHRIST and his APOSTLES, For deciding the
controversies of that Age, and our Rule for the determining of our own.

Or, The right use of spiritual weapons, against spiritual wickedness, and the
darkness of this world in the Christians warfare against Heretics,
Schismatics, Ephesians. 6.12 with false Prophets and deceivers.

Herein are also briefly contained, and explained, I. The Terms set down in
Scripture, or the grounds of Christian Dispute. II. That the form thereof may
appear more clear, you have herein several cases in Scripture debated under the
same form, and the places whence the Arguments are drawn.


By an unworthy witness of the Name and Gospel of Christ, JOHN BRAIN.

Tertul. advers. Haeres. Quid ergo Athenis and Hierosolymis, quid Academiae and
Ecclesiae, quid Haereticis and Christianis est? Donatus in Hist. Affricae, p.
208. Dialecticas disputationes non convenire Christianae religioni, and
Augustinum nil aliud esse quam contentiosum dis^utatorem, qui ^ugiendus aut
cavendus magis quam refellendus revincendusque esset. Lev. 18.3. Ye shall not
walk according to the customs of them I have brought you from. Lactantius de
Justitia, lib. 5. cap. 3. Quis possit indoctus inter se apta, and cohaerentia
fingere, quum Philosophorum Plate, and Aristo^eles, and Epicurus, and Zenon,
ipsi sibi repu^nantia and contraria dixerint? haec enim est mendaciorum natura,
ut Cohaerere non ^ossint illo um, viz. Apostolorum traditio, quia vera est,
quadra^ undique ac sibi tot^ consentit, 1 Cor 15.32. Paul speaks of dispute at
Ephesus. London, Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven Stars near the great
north door of Paul's, 1653.

The Rules for Disputes, practiced by Christ and his Apostles.
THe exerience I have had of the admiration the wise and unwise have been taken
up with humane and natural learning, and the indignity and contempt God and his
wisdom have, and do daily suffer amongst us thereby, invited me to undertake
the writing on this subject.

1 Say the learned, The advance of learning and Universities in the Nations was
that by which they came to be civilized and reduced into order and frame of
good policy and government.

2 Learning slighted, Religion decayed: it being revived by Erasmus, Luther,
Melancthon, and others, Religion came to be restored.

3 Say the vulgar, Can men that have not Arts and Sciences, men that never were
at the University, be as good preachers as those that studied seven years
therein, or as such as are Doctors, Batchelors, Masters? etc.

1 The learned know, That Gods word taught a people, civilizeth them by a more
stronger conviction and cleerer light then Natures Law and power can do; yea,
it does not only civilize, but sanctify a people.

2 It was not University-learning in Luthers days, undeceived the Nations, but
the knowledge of the Scriptures. Lombard* Aquinas* Scotus and their Disciples,
hindered the truth then and now also.

3 As Universities ci^ilize or benefit a Nation, so they corrupted and hindered
the Church, and truth of God. Athens the mother of them, gave little
entertainment to truth, when preached to them; Dam^^ and a f^w others only,
believed therein: so that indeed and truth, Academical learning, or Philosophy
falsely so called, is no friend to Christ or his truth, nor no help to a Nations
happiness before God, nor no fit instrument for Gods work. Christ chose not men
so qualified.

4 As for Tongue, since the gift thereof failed, God has sanctified the study
of them so, as they serve to reveal the truth of God; which is not accounted
among Academical learning.

5 Hence God, as by Jeremy may complain of us, that we have left the fountain
of living waters (God and his truth) and dug to our sel^es broken Cisterns
(of humane and heathenish wit) which will hold no water.

6 It was the written truth of God, Christ prayed to sanctify men by, Joh
17.17. and no other wisdom; nay, the wisdom of the world, that is, of natural
wise men, is enmity with God. So that that is fulfilled i^ us, is mentioned by
Paul, 1 Cor. 1.21. after that in the wisdom of God, that is, of the word, the
world by wisdom (that is, of their own) knew not God: so that indeed Academical
learning befits a Saint no better then Saul's Armor did D^vi^, 1 Samuel 17.39,
40, 51. which is that Goliath defied the Hoasts or Church of God, was over come
by the shepherds sling, and stones out of the Brook, or Arguments out of
Scripture, deduced in the plain way of Truth.

Conclusion of this, is briefly thus: That as there is a rule in the Word to
walk by, to talk by, to love, to teach by, to rule, to submit by: so there is
in the Word a rule to dispute by, and convince gainsayers: from which should
men recede in the trial of controversies, they should no less sin against the
Gospel, then those that would not live by it; and must deny 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
and say, The word is not sufficient to make perfect the man of God.

Tertul. speaking of Aristotle the Disputen of the world, his Disciples and
learning, in his book against heresies, says,

Qui illis instit^^t dialecticam Artificem struendi and destruends versipellem,
in sententiis c^actam, in conjecturis duram in argument is operariam,
contentione molestam etiam sibi ipsi omnia retract antem, ne quid omnino tract
^verit: Hui^ illae fabulae and geneologia indeterminabiles and quaestiones
infructuosae and sermones serpents velut cancer, a quibus nos Apostolus
refraenans nominatim philosophiam and inanem seductienem contestatus caveri
oportere, scribens ad Colossenses cap. 2. ver. 8.

Ibid. Fuerat Athenis istam saptentiam humanam adfecta^ricem and
in^er^^lla^^icem veritatis, etc. And it is not to be pretermitted, that with
the fall of the Truth and true Church was erected the University of Boront,
about the year 430 by the Po^e, Cardinals, Bishops, Emperor, and Senate of
Rome. Of which, see my book of Fallen Churches restored, page 47.

Now that Disputes ought to be managed according to the institution of the
Lord, and not the way and wisdom of men, (besides this) that Christ prayed for
the sanctification of it to its end, viz. that error might be subverted by it,
the Apostle further confirms it, 1 Cor. 1.25. saying, that The foolishness of
God is wiser then men; and the weakness of God is stronger then men: in which
only it will be given men to overcome error, and in ^o way else.

To prepare the several differences among us for debate, and procure unity,

1 Let the general heads in matters of Faith, wherein all agree, be first
declared.

2 That the most material points in which we dissent, he first debated, and the
rest in their order.

3 That the question be rightly stated and agreed on, of points as they are to
be debated.

4 That these Questions, and the day and time in which they are to be debated,
with the place, be published fourteen days before, that discourse may be had
with the men professing or opposing the same.

1 That so none may be surprised.

2 That none may pretend delays.

3 That truth may have a door opened to it to appear among men.

4 That order be observed in the debate; and such only to speak, as are
delegated by men of the differing judgments or Churches.

5 That Notaries of both sides be appointed to write the Arguments, etc. of
both sides; and, on examination, to print them.

6 That such things that are not thought sufficiently determined on its day
appointed, be deferred for future time to be appointed.

1 That the points to be next debated, be not delayed.

2 That the things concealed may be the more premeditated, and in the ensuing
discourse cleared, and each party may say what they can for themselves and
practice, or against that they judge unlawfully practiced by others.

For the Terms of the grounds of Christian Dispute,

1 (...), signifies the Question about which the difference arises, Joh.
^.25. Act. 25.20. 1 Timothy 6.4.

2 (...), in which is comprehended, both the Affirmation and the Negation of
the Question, the Opponent and Defendant, 1 Cor. 1.20. Act. 9.29. and 15.1, 2.
and 28.29.

3 (...), Act 17.2. and 19.9, ^0.

1 Some Scripture from the Old or New Testament is to be produced, that serves
either to deny or maintain the point in controversy.

2 From which Scripture is to arise Dialexis, reasoning by Argument, to assert
or gainsay the thing it is brought to maintain, either Negatively or
Affirmatively.

3 Whence men are confined to what the Scriptures say of the Argument, and are
not left so to invention, to object what he please; nor shall the mind herein
want matter to exercise his invention withal, but abundantly assisteth it
against the delusions of men.

4 (...), Act. 17.^ That is, in dispute if there arise any difference about the
letter or sense of the Scripture propounded, that is first to be cleared in its
sense, and opened.

Under this word (...), is comprehended,

1 (...), An interpretation or ope^ing of the true sense of the letter, if
difference arise therefrom, 1 Cor. 12.10.

2 (...), which relates to an opening of the sense of the Text and context that
are before and after; which is more signified in the word (...), in which is
intended a through opening of the Scriptures.

3 That these are both herein intended, appears,

In that that which Christ calls, Luke 24.32. (...), that in verse 27. he is
said (...), to interpret the Scriptures.

By these means the deceitful handling of the truth by men of corrupt minds,
are easily to be enquired into, as Satan's corrupt handling, Psalm. 91.11. in
Matt 4.6. leaving out part of the truth; and Evahs adding to, and her taking
from the truth, Genesis 3.3. compared with cap. 2.17.

5 (...), an apposing or adding of other Scriptures to the former, for proof of
what is affirmed or denied concerning the position, Act. 17 3. that so under
two or three witnesses every thing may be confirmed, 1 Cor. 2.13.

1 The Scriptures rightly applied and compared, like faithful witnesses, agree
in the same thing, or they are misapplyed.

2 As many Scriptures as relate thereunto, they all have diversely matter in
them to demonstrate the truth by; so that what is not found in one, is to the
full to be seen in the other.

3 This work is not to be judged grievous: for though of all truths, none is so
much spoke of, as that that describes the Messiah, in the book of God; yet
Christ, Luke 24.27. began at Mose, and all the Prophets, and expounded to them
in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself.

4 Until the Script^res are faithfully and thoroughly searched men can never be
satisfied nor reconciled in their differing judgments, nor can the mouths of
unruly deceivers be stopped, Tit. 1.10, 11.

5. If men impertinently allege Scriptures, and pervert their sense, they are
the men (1 Pet. ^.^6.) that wrest and rack the Scripture, as Christ was on the
Cross: in which they manifest,

1 either their ignorance and inability to manage the spiritual war of Christ.

2 Or their fallaciousness and dishonesty, who as Jannes and Jambres resisted
Moses, so these the truth; who are men of corrupt minds, 2 Timothy 3.8.

3 There sensibly appears in him also a weakness of his cause.

4 The letter and sense of the Scripture being cleared, the Arguments strongly
prove themselves to every cap^^ity: by which Amphibol^gies, with all the
intricateness, and knotty terms and rules of vain Philosophy and wisdom of
men, prove their declared ^nmity against God, ^am. 3.15.

The Conclusion deduced from the premises is, That Truth in it self is
sufficient to clear it self, and con^ince the enmity and error of its enemies,
without the device of Aristotle.

The second general, that appertains to the dispute, concerns the hearers;

1 Who having heard the Scriptures searched according to its true method, who
having their understanding rightly fitted, thereby they come to be enabled to
judge the truth of the question by the help of the Word, Joh. 7.24. and is
called, (...), Act, 17.11. a searching, or rather a reconsidering of the
Scriptures; that is, examining the Scriptures, and the Arguments, whether
naturally deduced thence or not, by which they may come to know who was for
truth, and who against it in the dispute. So that it is the Scriptures are the
main things concern the disputants to prove by, and the people in their
Consciences to be satisfied by, as being the foundation of Faith, and the rule
and measure of things, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they
speak not according to this word it is because there is no light in them, Romans
10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

2 To further this, the Apostle usually at the end of disputes converted his
speech to the hearers; and so Christ, in that dispute he had with the Pharisees
about the Tradition of the Elders, Matt. 7.5, 14 15.

3 Academicks are disputers of the world, not the Church, Peripateticks, and
their wisdom is of the world, who in the days of Paul flourished; who were in
that time corruptors, enemies, and the alone contemners of the grace and glory
of the Gospel.

4 (...), Order being observed, according to 1 Cor. 14.30, 31.40. truth will
have preserved to it its strength and freedom, which by the subtilty and
sophistry of men's deceitful ways and wit, is weakened and captivated: and men
contending for truth denied this, are disarmed; and the people, as Samoson,
have their eyes put out, and made grind in the Mills of error and ignorance.

5 In disputes laid down in Scripture, these two generals are observable.

1 That in some cases, when need so required, the whole practice is made use of
to set forth the truth by, and convince the gainsayers.

2 At other times, when truth was plain, and the enemy silenced, there was made
use but of a part of the practice only. Nature telling us,

Frustra fit per plura, quod fiere potest per pauciora.

3 In these few forecited heads, you have the full ground for dispute, the
Scriptures themselves furnishing you with Arguments, God having not left you to
Inventions: nay, to Invent an Argument that is not in the Text, God nor Saints
allow not of; which in less then seven years study is easily to be attained. If
the Spirit teach the Topics, they need not Aristotle's instructions.

(...) 1.
1 Cor. 9.4, 5. Whether Paul had not (...), authority to require meat and drink
of the Church or people he taught, both for himself and wife, a sister (if he
had had any) without laboring for it?

(...), Ver. 3. This is my apology to those that judge otherwise. In which is
the dispute of the Question: Paul he Apologizeth and speaks to maintain it;
others judge the contrary and are against it.

(...), The Scripture ver. 9. out of Deuteronomy. 25.4. Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the ox that treads out the Corn: which he lays as a ground to
prove his Assertion by. A Disparatis.

(...), ver. 9. Does God take care for Oxen? ver. 10. or says he it al^ogether
for our sakes? The Scripture was obscure: for God speaks of Oxen, and yet
intends altogether the Ministry, and therefore needs opening.

(...), ver. 10. it was written for us: Erge, You are not to muzzle our mouths,
and deny us meat for our labor.

2 That he that ploweth should plow in hope; which is the (...) signifying,
that if the Ox was to eat of his labor, the plowman much more of his.

3 Ver. 11. If we (the Church-Ministry) have sown to you spiritual things, is
it a great matter if we reap your carnal things? in which he shows, there was
nothing but reason, that he that sows should reap the same, when they reaped
but inferior things, the people reaping better from what they sowed by far. A
Minore ad Majus.

4 Ver. 12. If others are partakers of this authority over you are not we
rather? As in ver. 5, 6. (a Comparatis) in the Ore treading out of the Corn,
was comprehended the Preachers Ministry in plowing; the Evangelist, Pastor, and
Teachers Ministry, in sowing; and in the not muzling of his mouth, their
reaping or maintenance.

(...), Ver. 13. from Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. Do ye not know that they which
minister about holy things, are fed from the Temple, and they that wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? that is, as part of the sacrifice was by
fire to be devoured on the Altar, so God appointed other part thereof to the
Priests.

Conversion of speech to the Corinthians, in the word [ye]: Do ye not know?
ver. 13.

Conclusion, ver. 14. Even so the Lord appointed, that those which preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel.

Ver. 4. the Apostle from Deuteronomy. 20.6. and other Scriptures proves the point
from men's not planting a Vineyard, but they eat the fruit of it, nor go to war
on their own charge, etc. and then confirms his Arguments, and reproves the
humane arguings of men.

He proves his Arguments thus;

Ver. 8. Say I this as a man? Signifying, that in the judgment or trial of
divine truth, we are not to argue from reasons of our own. As God, so truth is
above Reason.

1 Noting, that there is a great deal of difference between disputes drawn from
Reason, after the way of men; and such as are taken from God and his Word.

2 That if the word had not said the same, his saying had been neglected.

Quest. 2.
Whether there be any Resurrection of the dead or not? Matt. 22.23.

The Question is disputed, the Sadduces deny it, ver. 23. Christ affirms it,
ver. 29, 30.

1 In his affirmation of the point, he shows the nature of it, a Refutatione
res, ver. 30.

2 He shows the ground of their error, ver. 29. a Refutatione doctrinae.

Scripture, ver. 32. from Exodus 3.6. I am the God of Abraham. and of Isaac, etc.

Argument, ver. 32. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: which is
excellently cleared, Luke 20.58. for all live unto him.

Effect. 1 On the gainsayers, the Scripture and Argument stopped their mouths, as
in ver. 34.

2 On the hearers; the multitude are astonished at his doctrine, ver. 33.

Now how that Jacob dyed, and yet lives to God, is above the predicaments.

Question 3.
Matt. 22.42. Whose son is Christ?

The question disputed, ver. 42. the Pharisees say, He is David's, ver. 43.
Christ questions it, saying, How then does David in spirit call him Lord?

Scripture, Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said to my Lord, ver. 44.

The Argument is deduced from the Scripture, ver. 45. If David call him Lord
how is he then his son? Ab absurd; the son usually calls his father Lord, not
the Father the son.

Effect: No man was able to answer him a word, ver. 46.

Note. The Lord raises the Argument from Scripture, moves the question, and
silenceth the adversary from it; and signifies to us, that questions or
scruples of Conscience that arise not from Scripture, or oppose it, they are
needless questions: and Arguments not deduced thence, are ineffectual, and
unwarrantable in Christian dispute.

2 In this, Christ trying their Faith, proved their ignorance of Christ.

3 1 Cor. 11.2. as Paul; Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ; so we in
dispute must follow Christ and the Word, not Aristotle and the Heathens. We are
bound to this rule, as to the obedience of any other in the Gospel.

4 If the question of the dispute be not grounded on express Scripture, it is
usually about Customs or humane constitutions, and, like needless questions to
be avoided, as genderers of strife and contention.

5. Matt. 3.12. His fan is in his hand, he will thoroughly purge his floor.

1 The floor is Jesus Christ's, which must be purged.

2 The Fa^^ (the Word) is that by which it must be purged.

3 It purges not but as in the hand, that is, (in the way and means that
Christ instituted,) to separate error from truth, as dross from gold, and
unbelievers and deceivers from true professors, men that are approved of the
truth it self, 1 Cor. 11.19. 3 John 12.

6 Carnal reason, worldly wisdom and learning, they are the weapons of
spiritual wickedness; that is, of error, heresy, and spiritual delusions, to
deceive by.

Question 4.
From Romans 9.6. If God in rejecting the unbelieving Jews, did not fail of his
promise to Abraham.

Question disputed by some Affirming it, ver. 19, 20. Paul ver. 6. denies it.

Scripture, Ver. 7. taken from Genesis 21.12. Neither because they are the seed of
Abraham are they all children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called. In which,
as the schools say, Qui been distinguit been docet.

Opening of the Scripture, Ver. 8. as in the words, that is: that is, they
which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God: but the
children of the Promise are accounted for the seed, ver. 9. A distributione.

Scriptures added to prove the point, as is signified in the words, Not only
this etc. ver. 10.

Ver. 12. Taken from Genesis 25.23. The elder shall serve the younger.

Ver. 13. From Mal. 1.2. Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated: having not done
good nor evil: both which, according to the flesh, were of Abrams seed. Ab
exemplo; not deduced after the manner of men.

Arg. 1. Ver. 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. Supra causas.

Arg. 2. Ver. 20. Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it? Ab absurd.

Arg. 3. Ver. 21. Has not the Potter power over the clay? etc. A comparatis.

The end of God herein, ver. 11. that the Election of God might stand, not of
works but of him that calls.

Conclusion, ver. 8. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy: and
whom he will, he hardens. Ergo signifies the note of his conclusion on the
premises.

Note, that of Pharaoh, ver. 17. is brought only to clear the case, as the
Apostles conversion of speech proves it, ver. 17. the Question being only made
concerning Gods proceeds with Abraham's seed.

Ver. 14, 19, 20. the Apostle by Preoccupation refutes such Objections as may
be made.

Quest. 4.
From 1 Cor. 1.17. Whether the Gospel be to be preached (...), not (...), in
the wisdom of Reason or speech, or not?

Question disputed, ver. 22. the Greeks seek for wisdom, Paul denies it, ver.
17. not in the wisdom of Reason, or of the Word, lest the Cross of Christ
should be made of none effect.

Scripture, ver. 19. from Isa. 33.18. It is written, I will destroy the wisdom
of the wise. etc.

Scripture added, ver. 20. from Isa. 33.18. Where is the Scribe? Where is the
wise? Where is the disputer of this world? Showing God needed them not, and
would confound them by his truth and its simplicity.

Arg. 1. ver. 21. In the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God: that
is, men by wisdom of the world could never attain the knowledge of God in the
word, or wisdom of God.

Arg. 2. ver 25. The foolishness of God is wiser then men, and weakness of God
is stronger then men. Comparata sunt potentia and impotentia, and argumentum
est a fortiori.

Arg. 3. ver. 26, 27. From the sufficiency of the word so preached on the
foolish, they themselves having been such, and made wise, Ab exemplo.

Arg. 4. From the work of God on the wise, confounding them, with the mighty
also, by foolish and base things, ver. 27, 28. A debilitate instrumenti.

Arg. 5. ver. 29. From the end of God herein, that no flesh should glory in his
sight. It is a shame for the learned and wise to be silenced in things they
profess to know, by foolish and unlearned men: in which work the foolish have
nothing to glory of; for they are but fools; that in Gods service the unlearned
and unwise in the way of the world, may be no less accepted then the worldly
learned.

Note, God will silence the disputers of this world, and confound the learned
in this age, by unconsiderable men and means; that, as a candle, they will be
eclipsed when it stands in the Sun, Rev. 3.8. one by a little strength, wisdom,
or knowledge, will op^n such a door of truth, that the wise of the world shall
not shut, but at last fall at his feet, and worship him; and know God has
loved him.

2 This must come to pass before the restoration of the Churh to him, called
the sixth Angel, Rev. 3.12.

3 As in the time of Christ, the then controversies were aabout Christ and the
Law, so now our controversies are about grace and the Gospel. They then went to
the Law and to the Prophets; we to them and the Gospel: which are the new
things, and the old, the wise scribe brings out of his treasury.

Question 6.
If the institution of the Lords d^y be distinct from that of the seventh day
Sabbath, and whether the Jews have not the same testified in the Prophets to
them, is the case Paul handles, Heb. 4.

1 Ver. 4. mentions the seventh day Sabbath, instituted for a Rest on the work
of Creation, from Genesis 2.2, 3. Exodus 20.10.

2 Ver. 5. Is another Rest: In this place again, If they shall enter into my
Rest: in which Christ speaks of the Rest under the Gospel-estate on the
Redemption, into which Rest the believing Jew entered then, as we do now; though
the day of its celebration was not instituted as yet.

3 As God upon the Creation instituted a day for the creatures to celebrate the
Rest, they rested with him: so Christ on the accomplishing the work of the
Redemption, instituted a day, called the Lords day, in which his redeemed ones
should rest with him therein.

Scripture, Ver. 7. from Psa. 95.7. To day if ye will hear his voice etc.

Arg. 1. He limiteth a certain day: that is, to believers under the Gospel, the
Lord puts an end to the observation of the seventh-day Sabbath.

2 This putting an end to the seventh day, was to be after the first
institution and observation of the seventh day Sabbath a long time; that is,
after Christ's Resurrection. To which the Prophet alludes, saying, To day if ye
will hear his voice: the voice of Christ being heard in the doctrine of the
Apostles.

3 In that Jews enjoyed not this Sabbath, nor under Moses or Joshua, then David
so long time after them would not have spoken of another day, ver. 8.

4 It is another day; in which he speaks of a day, not eternity; and another
day, as opposing it to the seventh day instituted to a Rest, as the seventh
day, though different in its institutors, grounds, time, institution, and
sanctification: the one sanctified to believers only, the other to all
creatures.

Conclusion, Ver. 9. Therefore, there remains a Sabbatism to the people of God.
It is the people of God, not unbelievers, they ars under the Law: nor Ox, nor
Ass, nor earth, etc. have no right to it, because not redeemed.

2 God distinguishes the seventh day from the first, calling it a Sabbatism;
in which is a rest to the Saints: they Sabbatize, though not as the world keep
the Law-day-Sabbath.

Opening of the Rest, ver. 10.

1 He calls it his Rest, viz. Christ's, distinguishing it from the
seventh-day-Rest, by saying, As God did from his.

2 He that enters into his, that is, Christ's Rest, cease from his own works,
of legal actings and righteousness, and rests in Christ's work for him and
his, being to him by grace for salvation; which according to the Law men are
not to do.

3 As God did from his: God rested from the creature in Christ, so man rests
with God in Christ, leaving all for him.

Conversion of speech to the believing Jews, ver. 11.

1 Let us therefore be diligent to enter into this rest: signifying, that men
by believing in Christ, and thereby came to be partakers of him, they entered
into this Rest.

2 Not to believe in Christ for Justification, without works of the Law; and
not to celebrate this Rest in the day thereof, is to fall after the same
example of unbelief.

That which obscures the mind of God herein, is from

Ver. 6. They to whom it was first preached, entered not in, because of
unbelief. Therefore, this rest was long before the birth of Christ in being
among the Jews.

Resp. The Rest was to them then, as well as to us now; so that they that
believed then, entered into the Rest.

2 But the day of the Rest was instituted upon the resurrection of Christ, and
celebrated by Believers under the Gospelestate only, and not before.

3 They entered not in because of unbelief^, which shows, that the Rest was
Christ's: Faith being toward our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom men rest from their
own works and Law-righteousness, by Faith.

Quest. 7.
Matthew. 12.1. Whether it be lawful on the Sabbath day, when a man is hungry,
for him to pluck the ears of Corn, rub them, and eat the Corn.

Question disputed, Ver. 2. The Pharisees say it is unlawful, Christ defends
the lawfulness of it, calling them blameless, ver. 7.

Scripture, ver. 3. from 1 Samuel 21.4, 5, 6. have ye not read what David being
an hungry, and those with him, how he went into the house of God, and cat of
the shewbread which it was not lawful for him nor those with him to eat, but
the Priests only?

Scripture added, ver. 5. have ye not read in the Law that the Priests in the
Temple do profane the Sabbath, and yet are blameless?

Arg. 1. Ver. 6. One greater then the Temple is here; to whom the Apostles now
ministered, and therefore their profanation of the Sabbath was no sin to them. A
minore ad majus.

Arg. 2. Mark 2.27. the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath;
which Argument was given to the same persons, on the same occasion, though
Matthew recorded it nor. A fine institutionis Sabbati.

Arg. 3. ver. 7. Had ye known what that meant, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned those blameless ones. From Gods
dispensing with men's obedience to him in their necessity.

Arg. 4. ver. 8 He is Lord of the Sabbath, who is the Son of man: Ergo, The
evil committed thereon, was against him, not them: if he justified his
disciples, they had nothing to do to condemn them.

Quest. 8.
From Mark 10.2. Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife?

Christ would not admit the Question to him, but sends them to the Scripture
with What did Moses command? ver. 3.

Scripture, ver. 4. From Deuteronomy 24.1, 2. Moses ordained a Bill of divorce to be
writ, and to send her away.

Scripture opened, ver. 5. he wrote you this command, for the hardness of your
hearts. He proves the contrary.

Scripture, ver. 6, 7, 8. from Genesis 2.24. God has said, A man shall forsake
father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and they two shall be one
flesh.

Arg 1. ver. 9. Those whom God has joined, let no man put asunder. Ab
imparibus, the inferior cannot dissolve the superior acts of authority.

Conclusion, ver. 11, 12. therefore to marry he or she that is divorced, is to
commit Adultery; they acting by that inferior, and against the supreme will and
authority.

In this are these rules for dispute to be observed:

1 That an adversary moving a controversy without citing Scripture as the
ground of it, he is to be forced thereto.

2 The opponent is not to answer until that be done.

3 All Questions, until the Scripture owns them, are but those needless
disputes, 1 Timothy 6.4.

4 The Adversary is to have liberty to deduce his Argument from the Text, which
being well observed, is that by which he is to be o^ercome: for their own
tongue shall make them fall.

5 In dispute, if you cannot show how by his Arguments he abuses the Scripture
made use of by him, ye then are driven to confess the adversaries Arguments,
and are silenced: for it is not you, but the Scripture, that must deny them.

6. In denying the adversary liberty to frame his Argument by the Scripture,
you seem to deny Truth its liberty, and to prejudice it, as an enemy thereunto.

7. From this of Mark 10. and Matthew. 22.24. these general Rules are held out
for Dispute.

1. That in judging differences that are about the worship and knowledge of
God, the written Word is alone to be judge; and that the judgment is to be
given in the way thereof, because that only agrees with the mind of God.

2. That in disputes, to silence the enemy or gainsayer,

Note, The corrupt interpretation given of the Scripture by the gainsayer, is
to be cleared, that he withstand it not.

1. The Scripture being taken from the Argument, is as the taking away the
foundation from the house, which makes it fall.

2. Which proves you are not (as men now corruptly practice) to argue against
the Argument, further then the Argument relates to the Scripture, in its
opposing it self against the truth and mind of God therein. In which, a speedy
end only is to be put to our otherwise-endless Disputes.

3. Our material Errors, as that of the Sadduces, arising from our not
understanding the Scriptures, proves that it is only the opening of the
Scriptures that only can and must undeceive the people, and remove our
spiritual distempers and differences; as in Christ's opening the nature and
state of men partakers of the resurrection, verse. 30. most excellently
evidenceth.

4. Whereas disputes of this kind are a spiritual War, it proves that the
weapons of this war are the Word and Wisdom of God, and not carnal, of the way
and wisdom of men, which never can, nor does it ever intend to subject every
high thought that exalts it self in men against Christ and his Sovereignty.
Satan's sophistry, Matthew. 4.6. was easily made manifest from the Scripture he
corrupted; he not arguing from the whole thereof, but part only, whereby he
became a tempter, and proved himself a deceiver.

The devil, the Sadduces, and deceivers, argued from Scriptures.

1. So men now bring Scripture to uphold destructive and deceitful doctrine;
whom men are to beware of.

2. Those that trouble the consciences of men with unnecessary Questions that
are not owned by Scripture, are worse then seducers. Satan would not do it.
Their words (says Paul) eat like a canker.

Quest. 9. From Joh. 7.21. Whether it be lawful to do a work of charity on the
Sabbath day, or not.
Scripture, verse. 22. Moses gave to you Circumcision.

Opening of Scripture: For this cause; viz. though the institution was first
given Abraham, yet Moses enjoyed it not as given to him; but as he gave the
Jews the Law of the Sabbath, so did he that of Circumcision, that there should
not arise any doubt to the Jews about the lawfulness of circumcising a child
on the Sabbath day.

Argument, verse. 23. If a man receive circumcision on the Sabbath, that the law
of Moses be not broken, are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every
whit whole on the Sabbath day? Signifying, If the law of the Sabbath give way
to the law of Circumcision, a ceremony signifies only the spiritual healing,
how then shall it give way to the healing of a man every whit?

Conversion of speech, verse. 24. Judge not therefore according to outward
appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

Rules in Dispute hence to be observed:

1 The Scripture produced must be opened, and the differences be debated,
before the Question can be fit for judgment.

2 Until that be done, Error is seeming Truth, and Truth seeming Error; which
is unrighteous judgment.

3 Men neglecting a diligent search of the mind of God in the Word, they
easily come by rash judgment to condemn Christ and his Truth, and justify
Error. When men apprehend and justify Truth, they are her children, Matthew.
11.18, 19.

Quest. 10.
From Romans 4.1. Whether salvation be obtainable by faith or works.

Scripture, verse. 3. Abraham believed, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness.

Argument, verse. 4. Now to him that works, the reward is not reckoned of
grace, but of debt; by commutative justice.

Argument, verse. 5. But to him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness: non jure
legali.

Scripture added, verse. 6, 7. from Psalm. 32.1, 2. in which he describes the
man's blessedness to whom God imputeth-righteousness without works.

1. Rules in Dispute, That in the natural opening of Scripture, Arguments of
themselves arise, to prove the intent of God therein, and prove the same, if
well observed.

2. That to satisfy Objections, many Questions may arise out of one Scripture,
and belong to one case.

Quest. 11. Whether Justification be on the Circumcision only, or the
Circumcision also.
Romans 4. verse. 9. is the ground of the dispute: We say, Abraham's faith was
reckoned for Justification to him who was a Jew.

Scripture, Genesis 15.5, 6.

Paul proves it to pertain to the Uncircumcision.

Argument, verse. 10. Abraham received the promise in uncircumcision, and not in
circumcision. Quando?

Argument, verse. 11. He received it in uncircumcision, that he might be the
father of them that believe, though uncircumcised. A fine.

In which is the end of his so receiving it, in the state or time of
uncircumcision, held out.

Argument, verse. 12. That he might be the father of circumcision to them who
are not of the circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of that faith of
our father Abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised: and so believing
Gentiles had Abraham's first and best circumcision of the heart, though not that
of the flesh.

Argument, verse. 13. For the promise that he should be the heir of the world,
was not to Abraham or to his seed by the law, but through the righteousness of
faith. Signifying, that the promise was not tied to the Law and Circumcision,
but faith in Christ.

Argument, verse. 14. If they of the Law are heirs, faith is made void, etc.
That is, the Gospel is no way necessary: ex appositis.

Conclusion, verse. 16. Therefore it is by faith, that it may be by grace, that
the promise may be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the Law,
but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.

1. The wisdom of the Apostles was admirable, in that they answered all
objections from the Law and Prophets: we having their writings also to resolve
our doubts, have greater help and freedom.

2. Most of our Differences now arise from the New, as their; from the Old
Testament.

3. The form of Gospel-dispute at large is drawn out by the Apostle, in his
proving the resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15. which I have omitted, to spare
cost, and to put you on practice.

4. With these Disputes, the Gospel abounds with Cases of Conscience; which are
of less concernment, and are handled after another way.

5. Or, in the Gospel are contained several rules how men in their several
relations may keep a good Conscience, void of offense to God and men; whether
parents and children, master and servant, husband and wife, etc.

1. The natural man's light is darkness in him, Matthew. 6.2^. and his acquired
habits are but falsely called knowledge, 1 T^m. 6.20. and is that false balance
God abhors, Prove. 11.1. Hos. 12.7. Mic. 6.11. God spoke this, not for weights
and balances only, or for money, but the word and consciences of men. Dan.
5.27. Thou, thy works, thy judgment in doctrine or practice, is to be weighed
in the balance of the Sanctuary.

2. Christ prayed for the Word, that it might satisfy and sanctify men, and
overcome the world; and in that, prayed against the wisdom of the world, that
it has no virtue to satisfy men: nor will God suffer the world long to be
seduced by it. 1 Cor. 1.20. In time, it will be said, on the overthrow and
removal thereof, Where is the disputer of this world?

3. The end of Disputes being, to stop the mouths of gainsayers, to undeceive
the seduced and unbelieving, and to stablish the weak, proves that it is to be
done by the Word; faith coming by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God:
which is a work never to be done by the wit and principles of rotten and
corrupted Nature.

4. The plea made for Arts and Sciences, is, that they are handmaids to
Divinity; which are no less to be cast out of the house of the faithful, then
Hagar out of Abraham's. Nature and her wit is in bondage to sin and Satan, and
so is not fit to sit and judge the privileges of Saints.

Truth in the hand of Humane knowledge and learning, is as the Lord Jesus in
the hands of the Jews when the crucified him.

1. The one is no less envied by the one, then the other by the other. The
wisdom of the world is enmity with God.

2. Humane learning seduces the people, as the Priests did, when they made the
Jews cry Crucify him: so men now destroy Truth, and are brought to choose
Error, as the Jews Barablas before Christ.

3. The men that advance natural learning, cry down the Truth, and say, That
such as own it, are no friends to Caesar, States, their rule and government.

4. They wrest the Truth, and rack it, as Christ was rackt on the Cross, 2 Pet.
3.16. making it speak to their own sense, far from the mind of God.

5. As they buffeted Christ, so these persecute Truth.

6. As they mocked Christ, so these call Truth Heresy, Schism, deceit.

7. As the Priests cried Crucify Christ, so these cry, Suppress the Truth,
make Laws against it, bind up Truth as Christ was bound, not suffering it to
be preached.

8. As Christ had a reed put in his hand, and was called King; so Truth is
mocked and derided by men that seemingly profess it.

9. As Christ has been buried, so the Truth: at the time of whose rise, God
shall send an Angel or Messenger to roll away the stone thereon; whose wisdom
shall make the keepers to tremble, and become as dead men. A work shortly to be
done.

These keepers will tell the people lies, and say Truth was stolen out of the
grave, and not raised by the power of God. You that are learned, take heed
hereto, and consider what I say.

Illustr. As Aarons Priesthood died with Christ's ascension, so Truth rising,
puts an end to Romes Priesthood; who, as Mat. 3.10. will prove that ax that
roots up the corrupt trees of Error among men.

Reasons why I compare Christ's handling to Truth's by us, are,

1 Christ faith he is the Truth: what is done in one, is done in the other.

2. As Christ suffered for witnessing to Truth, so now Truth suffers for
witnessing to Christ.

In a word, look what Christ was to the disciples or Church, that Aristotle is
to the Scholars in the Academies: whose opposition one to the other, appears
from these principles:

1. Aristotle teaches, and by dispute maintains, that Man consists only of a
soul and body; whom all the now Academicks follow, against the doctrine of the
Gospel, 1 These. 5.23.

2. Say Aristotle's now-disciples, The souls go to heaven or hell immediately
after death. Says Christ and the Word, It is the spirit that returns to God,
and the soul goes to the grave, Acts 2.

3. Aristotle says, A privatione ad habitum, non datur regressus; against the
doctrine of the resurrection held out in the Gospel.

4. Says Aristotle, Ex nihilo nihil fit; which denies the doctrine of the
Creation. Et quod honestate and virtute est summum bonum. Vide Lactant. de
falsa sapientia, cap. 6.

5. Says he, The World is eternal, and Nature the God of it.

Aristotle, out of his Learning and Wit, brought forth this deadly fruit, with
much more like this, which tends only to Atheize men, whose writings like a
filthy dunghi^ sending forth rotten savours is to be abominated, and his
practice and rules of dispute, as the weapons of the darkness of this world, to
be laid aside by all that love God, and profess subjection to Jesus Christ and
the Gospel, and desire to be made wise thereby to salvation; or otherwise they
do by Truth, as the Philistine Harlot by Sampson, cut off his hair, rob him of
his strength, at last put out its fight, and make way to make it grind in the
mill of error: the best of them not making their Arguments speak from the
Scripture, but endeavor to make the Scripture speak from their Arguments,
which is no less then abomination before God, and is usually done without show
of reason or shadow of truth.

My necessity disables me, or I could clear how the very places from whence God
takes the Scripture-Arguments in the proof of truth, and seem to agree with
Aristotle's Philosophy, do yet in the nature and use of them so differ, that the
one is never to be understood in the other. O therefore that men would search
the Scriptures, and learn learning and wisdom thence, by which only men may be
made wise to God, and be saved.

In Answer to some, who (in opposition to a late Treatise written by me)
question whether the Judicial Law of God be binding to Gentiles, as well as
Jews;
I Only propose, in stead of much else that may be said, this one thing, That
if the Ten Commands are binding to all, then the Judicials are no less binding.

1 The Judicials being comprehended in one of the Ten Commands, so as that they
are in and of the same, and not to be by any destroyed, but it proves a
destruction in part to the Decalogue, and are as branches issuing from their
root.

2 The punishments are as the life of the Law, the Law being indeed no Law
longer then its Judgments are put in execution.

3 The punishments are not (as men's) exceeding the offense, or less then the
offense; in which is its Justice or injustice: as, What equality is there
between a few pence and a man's life, or a few shillings and a man's liberty, the
maintenance of his family?

I farther commend the necessity, in execution of malefactors, that the
witnesses be the prime executioners, on whom the blood of the executed was to
fall; and so alone the Nation to be free from the guilt thereof: which now this
Nation is liable to the gui^t of all blood unjustly spilt, because shed by
others then the witnesses, contrary to Gods institution; It being the custom of
the witnesses to say (in execution of malefactors) His blood be on us, and on
our children; and so the Nation to be free thereby from it.

In the last place, I wish the now form of swearing men in judgment may be
considered of by these Queries:

First, Whether God gave his Name in judgment to be sworn by, but in that
judgment his own Law prescribes.

2 Or whether the Name of God may be administered by men judging by humane Laws.

3 Whether if men swear, they are to swear by lifting up the hand to God, and
by God, or his Name, on or by a book.

4 If by a book, whether by the Gospel or the Law, which is the rule of
judgment.

5 Whether the now swearing upon the book be not a Popish idol, and a mere
delusion.

1 As it is distinct from God, and contrary to his institution.

2 As it is a corrupt translation, and not indeed the truth of God.

All which its high time for the now Magistrate (professing the knowledge of
the true God) to look into, who has so delivered, and does so deliver them;
that they may deliver the Nation from bondage, and make them free according to
God and his Truth in all things: To whom be praise and glory.

FINIS.

