THE REFORMED VIRGINIAN SILKWORM, Or, a Rare and New DISCOVERY OF A speedy
way, and easy means, found out by a young Lady in England, she having made
full proof thereof in May, Anno 1652. For the feeding of Silkworms in the
Woods, on the Mulberry-Tree-leaves in Virginia: Who after forty days time,
present their most rich golden-coloured silken Fleece, to the instant wonderful
enriching of all the Planters there, requiring from them neither cost, labor,
or hindrance in any of their other emploments whatsoever. And also to the good
hopes, that the Indians, seeing and finding that there is neither Art, Skill,
or Pains in the thing: they will readily set upon it, being by the benefit
thereof enabled to buy of the English (in way of Truck for their Silk-bottoms)
all those things that they most desire.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle
at the West end of Paul's, 1655.

TO THE Reader.
Ingenious Reader,
I Have in my Legacy of Husbandry bequeathed something unto thee concerning
Silkworms, which has wakened many to search after the means to advance that
part of Husbandry. But because the Letter of King James to the Lords
Lievtenants of the several Shires of England, for the increasing of Mulberry
Trees, and the breeding of Silkworms, for the making of Silk in this Nation,
had not annexed unto them in that Treatise the Instructions tending to that
purpose, and being but few, wholly out of print, and very much desired: I
thought good upon the occasion of the printing of this Letter to those of
Virginia, to publish it also for the benefit of those who shall be willing to
employ themselves in this way of industry, which seems to be brought unto a
more perfect and speedy accomplishment than heretofore has been known either
here or in France, as by the contents of this adjoined Letter (wherein the
Experiment of a virtuous Lady of this Nation for the breeding of Silkworms, is
addressed unto the Planters of Virginia) is set forth to encourage both them
and others to set upon this work, to benefit themselves and the Nation thereby.
And truly the Gentleman who does address this Letter to the Planters of the
Virginian Colonie is much to be commended for his affection to the public,
because he does not conceal (as some Muck-worms do for private ends) the
Advantages which may be reaped by singular industrious Attempts or experiments
of profit; but desires the benefit of others, even of all, to be increased. And
it were to be wished, that every one to whom God (from whom comes every good
and perfect gift) does impart any rare and profitable Secret of Industry, would
open himself toward his Brethren, as this publick-hearted Gentleman does;
then would all hands be set a work, and every one would become isntrumental to
serve himself and his Neighbors in Love, and overcome the burden of poverty,
which for want of employment and decay of Trade, does lie so heavy upon very
many, whose burdens might be either born, or made easy, if all the gifts of
God were made use of, for the end for which he does bestow them, namely, to
profit withal toward others, as it becomes the Members of the same
Christian, and Human, and National Society; for the same rule holds in all
these respects among such as understand what it is to be a good
Commonwealths-man in the State, as well as in the Communion of Saints: And to
this good and generous inclination, which I wish may more and more abound in
them with the grace of God, I shall leave thee and rest,

Thy most assured and faithful servant, SAMUEL HARTLIB.

Instructions for the increase and Planting of Mulberry-trees.
What ground is fit for the Mulberry-seeds, how the same is to be ordered, and
in what sort the seeds are to be sowed therein.
THe ground which ought to be appointed for this purpose, besides the natural
goodness of it, must be reasonably well dunged, and withal so situated, as
that the heat of the Sun may cherish it, and the nipping blasts of either the
North wind or the East, may not annoy it: The choice thereof thus made; that
the seeds may the better prosper, and come up after they be sown, you shall dig
it two foot deep, breaking the clods as small as may be, and afterward you
shall divide the same into several Beds of not above five foot in breadth, so
that you shall not need to endanger the Plants by treading upon them, when
either you water or weed them.

The Mulberry seeds you shall lay in water for the space of 22 hours, and after
that you shall dry them again half dry, or some what more, that when you sow
them they may not cleave together: Thus done, you must cast them upon the
foresaid Beds, not altogether so thick as you use to do other garden Seed, and
then cover them with some fine earth (past through a Sive) about half an inch
thick. In dry weather you shall water them every two days at the farthest, as
likewise the plants that shall come of them; and keep them as clean from weeds
as possibly you can.

The time in which you ought to sow them for your best advantage, is either in
March, April, or May, when frosts are either altogether past, or at the least
not so sharp, or of so long continuance, as to endanger their upspring.

There is yet another way to sow them, and that is as follows: you shall
(being directed by a strait line) make certain furrows in the Beds above
mentioned, of some four fingers deep, and about a foot in distance the one from
the other: After this, you shall open the earth with your hands, on either side
of the aforesaid furrows, some two fingers from the bottom, and where you have
so opened it, shall you sow your seeds; and then cover them half a finger thick
with the earth which before you opened.

When the Plants that are sprung up of the Seeds, are to be removed, and how
they are to be planted the first time.
IN the months of September, October, November, December, March, or April the
next year after the Seeds are sown, you may remove their plants, (or in the
month of January, if it be not in frosty weather) and set them in the like
Beds as before, and about one foot the one from the other, but first you must
cut off their roots about eight inches in length, and their tops about half a
foot above their roots, more or less, according to the strength of the said
plaints, for the weaker they be the less tops you shall leave them. In this
sort you may suffer them to remain weeding and watering them (as need shall
require) till they be grown six foot in length above their roots, whereunto
when once they have attained, you may cut their tops, and suffer them to
spread, always having a care to take away the many branches or succors, that
may any way hinder their growth until they be come to their full length of six
foot, as aforesaid.

When, and how the Plants are to be removed the second time, and in what manner
they are to be planted where they shall remain.
IN the months aforesaid, (according as your plants are waxen strong) you may
remove them either into the hedges of your fields, or into any other grounds.
If in hedges, you must set them 16 foot the one from the other: if in other
ground, intending to make a Wood of them 18 foot at the least. But a month
before you do remove them, you must make the holes (wherein you purpose to set
them) about four foot in breadth, and so deep as that their roots may be well
covered, and some half a foot of loose earth left under them, having always a
special care so to place them, that they may receive the benefit of the Sun,
and not to be shadowed or overspread by any neighboring trees.

When and how the Eggs of the Silk-wormes are to be hatched, and how to order
the Worms that shall come of them.
When the leaves of Mulberry-trees begin a little to bud forth, take the eggs
of your Silkworms, and lay them in a piece of Say, or such like stuff, and in
the day time carry them in some warm place about you, in a little safe box, but
in the night either lay them in your bed or between two warm pillows, until
such time as the Worms begin to come forth: then take a piece of paper of the
wideness of the said box, and having cut it full of small holes, lay it within
the same upon the eggs, and upon that again some few Mulbery-leaves, to which
the Worms as they are hatched, will continually come. These leaves with the
Worms upon them, you must still remove into other boxes, laying fresh leaves
as well on those that are removed as on the paper where the eggs are; and this
is the course which must be duly kept and observed, until such times as all
the Worms be come forth of their shells, still keeping their boxes warm, as
aforesaid; but no longer about you, but until the Worms begin to come forth,
out of which boxes you may safely take them, when once they have past their
second sickness, and feed them upon shelves of two foot in breadth, and 18
inches one above the other.

The said shelves are not to be placed in any ground-room, nor yet next unto
the tiles, but in some middle room of your house which opens upon the North
and South, that you may the more conveniently give them either heat or air,
according as the time and season shall require. Besides you must not make them
close unto the Walls, but so as you may pass about them the better to look unto
the Worms, and keep them from Rats and Mice, which otherwise might devour
them. You must observe the times of their coming forth, and keep every one,
one or two days hatching by themselves, that you may the better understand
their several sicknesses or sleepings, which are four in the time of their
feeding. The first commonly some twelve days after they are hatched, and from
that time at the end of every eight days, according to the weather, and their
good or ill usage, during which time of every sickness, which lasts two or
three days, you must feed them but very little, as only to relieve such of
them, as shall have past their sickness before the rest, and those that shall
not fall into their sickness so soon.

The whole time that the Worms do feed, is about nine Weeks, whereof until
they come unto their first sickness, give them young Mulbery-leaves twice
every day, but few at a time; from thence until their second sickness, twice
every day in greater quantity; and so from their second to their third
sickness, increasing the quantity of the leaves, according as you perceive the
Worms to grow in strength, and clear of sickness: from the third until their
fourth sickness, you may give them leaves thrice every day, and the fourth
being past, you may let them have so many as they will eat, always having a
care that you give them none, but such as are dry, and well aired upon a Table
or cloth, before they be laid upon them, and withal gathered so near as may
be; at such times as either the Sun or Wind has cleared them of the dew that
falls upon them.

For the feeding of Worms you need observe no other order then this, lay the
Mulberry-leaves upon them, and every two or three days remove them, and make
clean their boxes, or shelves, unless in times of their sickness, for then
they are not to be touched; the leaves which you take from them when you give
them fresh to feed upon, you must lay in some convenient place, and upon them a
few new leaves, to which the Worms that lay hidden in the old, will come, and
then you may pass them with the said new leaves to the rest of the worms: And
now lest any thing should be omitted, which serves to perfect the discovery of
so excellent a benefit, I will advise you to be very diligent in keeping clean
their Boxes, or shelves, as being a special means whereby to preserve them;
wherefore when you intend to do it, you shall remove them together with the
uppermost leaves whereon they lie, unto other boxes or shelves, for with your
hands you may not touch them, till they have thoroughly undergone their third
sickness, and then may you pass them gently with clean hands, without doing
them any harm: provided that the party that comes near them smell not of
Garlic, Onions, or the like. The first five weeks of their age you must be
very careful to keep them warm, and in time of rain or cold weather, to set in
the room where they remain, a pan with coals, burning in it now and then some
Juniper, Benjamin, and such like, that yields sweet smells. But afterward
unless in time of extraordinary cold, give them air, and take heed of keeping
them too hot, being always mindful to store the room with herbs and flowers
which are delightful and pleasing to the smell. As the worms increase in
bigness, you shall disperse them abroad upon more boards, or shelvs, and not
suffer them to lie too thick together: and if you find any of them broken, or
of a yellow glistering color inclining to sickness, cast them away, lest they
infect the rest, and sort such as are not sick, the greatest and strongest by
themselves, for so the lesser will prosper the better.

When and how to make fit rooms for the worms to work their bottoms of silk in,
and in what sort the said bottoms are to be used.
AS soon as by the clear amber-coloured bodies of your worms, you shall
perceive them ready to give their silk, you must (with heath made very clean,
or with the branches of Rosmary, the stalks of Lavender, or such lik) make
Arches between the foresaid shelves.

Upon the branches and sprigs whereof, the worms will fasten themselves, and
make their bottoms, which in fourteen days after the worm begins to work
them, you may take away; and those which you are minded to use, for the best
silk, you must either presently wind, or kill the worms which are within them,
by laying the said bottoms two or three days in the Sun or in some Oven after
the bread baked therein is taken out, and the fierceness of the heat is alaid.
The other bottomes which you intend to keep for seed, you must lay in some
convenient warm place, until the worms come forth, which is commonly some
sixteen or twenty days from the beginning of their work: and as they do come
forth you must put them together upon some piece of old Say, Grogeran, the
backside of old Velvet, or the like, made fast against some Wall, or Hangings
in your house.

There they will engender, and the Male having spent himself, falls down,
and in short time after dies, as also does the Female when she has laid her
eggs, which eggs, when you perceive them upon the Say or Grogran, etc. to be
of a grayish color, you may take them off gently with a knife, and having put
them into a piece of Say or such like, keep them in a covered box amongst your
woollen clothes, or the like till the year following: But not in any moist
room, for it is hurtful for them, neither where there is too much heat, least
the worms should be hatched before you can have any food for them.

The making of a Wheel, as likewise the way to wind the said silk from the
bottoms, can hardly be set down so plainly, as to be rightly understood:
Wherefore when time shall serve, there shall be sent into every County of this
Kingdom, a Wheel ready made, and a man that shall instruct all such as are
desirous to learn the use thereof: Till when, I will commend these brief
instructions to be carefully considered of all such as are willing to benefit
either themselves or their Country, that being skillful in the Contemplation,
they may the readier, and with less error apply themselves to Action, which
painful industry, with Gods assistance, will quickly perfect.

An Extract of a Letter from Germany, concerning Silkworms, written to S. H,
Esquire.
AS for keeping of Silkworms I must confess I have spent likewise some time in
the ordering and observing of them in as much as this very year (1653) I have
had from them so much good Silk (and equal to that which is brought either out
of Persia or Italy) as have made me two pair of Stockings. And I have found
by experience that they may be kept as well in Germany as in other Countries,
and that Mulberry-trees will grow in abundance upon our Lands; wherefore I have
often wished that the Emperor (of Germany) would follow the most laudable
example of the K. of France, who having forbidden the importation of foraigne
Silk into his Kingdom has thereby so much obliged the industry of the People
of France, that they are come to a great perfection in this Silken Manufacture.
But concerning the Experiments of making Silk out of Nettles or out of Flax, I
never have tried either of them. Only I remember that I have seen once a very
fine and delicate yarne or thread, which was made purely out of Nettels. I do
not believe, that those Artist of Hamburg and Wolfenbuttel which you have named
unto me in your Letter, will communicate their Skill for a public good, as
long as they can get their own comfortable subsistence by it.

A Letter written by Mr. Ra. Austen, from Oxford, Febr. 18. 1654. Imparting his
Experiments about Silkworms and how to wind off the Silk from the Bottoms,
when the Worms have done spinning?
COncerning my experiences about Silkworms, I only say thus much. That I am
fully satisfied upon good and sure grounds that the keeping of them (store of
them) in these parts would be of very great profit, could we but get Mulbery
leaves sufficient to feed them. For upon my own knowledge and experience (last
year) upon some thousands of them, I see what might be by more. For my great
doubt and question was satisfied about the winding of the Silk from the
Bottoms, when the Worms have done spinning. I plainly see it is very easy,
Children of 6. or 7. years old can apprehend it, and do it. For the Worms
having done spinning, which is within 4. or 5. days of their beginning,
through out-mo^ silk is ravelled off, and the end is found immediately, which
runs on (5. or 10. or 16. or more bottoms together) in a basin of water, a
little gum drag mixed. Some Bottoms (if the Worms were strong and well fed) run
without breaking, scarce once or twice till all be off, and such as break, are
quickly found again. The truth is, if the Worms are scanted of leaves, their
silk is so small, that it holds not so well as that of lusty Worms. I saw many
brave Skains of Silk wound off the last year, and helped to do part of it my
self. Now the great matter is, How to propagate Mulberry-trees enough. As for
the ordinary way, by boughs, we can have but few that way. I am from time to
time experimenting other ways by Seed, Inoculating, Grafting, etc: what will
be the result, as yet I know not: I doubt not, but God will in his good time
bring to light and set on foot many good and worthy designs, more then are in
these Nations. We had need to labor to be of the like Principles of that
worthy person, whose Paper you enclosed, patiently and humbly to wait the
Lords season, and to design for God in all we go about, which will crown our
endeavors with comfort and success.

A Rare and new-discovered speedy way, and easy means of keeping of
Silkworms, being thus made known to the Colony in VIRGINIA.
HEarken well you beloved Planters, to what in these few lines I shall declare
unto you; and is thus sent you in Print, that all of you may communicate the
great and superlative good and benefit will be unto every one of you: who so is
wise, will ponder these things, and give the prai^e and glory to God, the
Author of all good Inventions, how Providence having brought this to pass for
^ll your exceeding great happiness and increase of store of wealth, with so
much ea^e, so little labor, no cost unto you; and in so short a time as forty
days, this wealth flows in upon you.

You now I conceive desire to know it, and I am as willing to impart it unto
you: thus then in brief, in a plain manner, that all may understand it,

The same Lady, who last year sent you her Books of Health and Wealth, (who
has the happiness to bear the honorable name of your incomparable Country)
continuing her sincere affections to the advancing of your welfares in all
kinds; and amongst the rest in this rich work of Silk, knowing Virginia to be
in all respects most proper for it, (as by a late Book ^ent you published by
Mr. Williams,) not only in regard of the Climate being the same with China,
from whence the infinite quantity of silk comes, but abounding (as it does)
with Mulberry-trees naturally growing there, and exceeding it by the
Silkworm-bottoms found in her Woods. She has I say this Spring found out (by
the special blessing of God upon her intentions) so rare, so speedy, and so
costless a way and means for the feeding of Silkwormes: by the trial and
experiment she so luckily made, to the admiration of all that have seen or
heard of it, as a thing scarce credible; because not heretofore thought of,
nay, as it were, held impossible by such Authors as have written of the
ordering and feeding of Silkworms: that this her invention being thus made
known unto you, her beloved friends in Virginia, she is most confident, and
assures herself you will all there instantly without further delay (which will
be the joy of her heart) become great and rich Masters of this noble Silk-work
to all your unspeakable wealth. The way to speedy wealth was by some hundreds
o^ you to remov^ some 60 mile^ miles South by land, and to attempt the
discovery of the Westerly Sea, on the border of Virginia, and both two ve^
easily achieved, etc. The lady ha^ of these Sil^ bottoms in h^ Cabinet as
Jewels to co^vince the i^credulous, they are ten times bigge^ then any in
Europe to a^miration, a^ of infinite incouragemen^ to the work.


Do but as she has done; follow but with good courage your cheerful leader,
and doubtless you shall find (what she desires you may,) namely, Great profit
and pleasure in an honest employment. This Silken-Mine will be to you of more
benefit then a Mine of silver.

In the beginning of May last 1652, when her young Mulberry-tree in her Garden
began to put out its buds, Contrary (...) Book Rule.
then her Silkworm-eggs began to hatch, These eggs were purposely ^posed to
^re, cold, winds, and ^ost, being said and spaw^ed on a wall (...) a chamber,
and there re^ained all ^inter long to ^y the virtue ^f the Eggs, ^c. And twice
before they ^me out of ^eir bottoms, ^x times in ^l. ^he seventh, ^ey appear,
^en come ^t, a gallant ^ken white-^nged Fly,
as the nature of this wise creature is, when her food begins once to appear,
she comes forth of her shell: she presently laying a Mulberry-leafe upon these
little crawling creatures, they came all upon it instantly; then she carried
the leaf and them upon it to the tree, upon whose leaves they made have to be;
and there they day and night fed themselves, creeping from leaf to leaf, and
branch to branch at their own liberties most pleasing to themselves; they grew
and thrived wonderfully, and surpassed in largness of body those other worms
she kept in her chamber (she having been many a year a Mistress of Silkworms,
and kept them by the Book-rules) this good and prosperous beginning heightened
her hopes. The worms, as their nature is, cast off or slipped out of their
skins four several times, still growing greater and greater to the singular
delight and content of their Mistress. About 45 days thus feeding upon the
leaves, they* began that rare and glorious work of spinning their Silk-bottomes
upon the leaves and branches of the tree; such a gallant sight to behold, it
ravished the Spectators, and their Mistress joy was crowned with excess of
happiness herein and hereby, apparently finding the incomparable felicity this
would prove to her dearly beloved Virginia, (for so you must give her leave to
call it,) for she concluded, and so must all you, that this being thus effected
in England, how much more with assured confidence will the worms live, feed,
and spin in Virginia? (...) weather it ^ms hurts ^m there; (...) heat and as
they ^ter them^es under (...) great ^ves as with ^eld, but ^ther do ^m them,
(...) easy is a ^vasse cove^ reared o^ the trees ^ave them (...) either of
(...).
she upon serious and due consideration of this thing, gave God hearty and
humble thanks.

And what can any of you now wish, for more encouragement? the full proof is
made, the work (or rather let me call it) the pleasure is effected with so much
ease, so little cost, hazard or pains, as all may admire it.

It Is not the hundredth part of your care, labor, or toil you take about your
Tobacco, and an hundred times (as I may say) all things put together more gain
and profit to you then you make by Tobacco, which in truth is but smoke and
vapor, but this a reall-royall-solid-rich-staple Commodity.

And yet if you will have still smoke, so this neither will nor can hinder your
labor in that, or take from you any other employment you have a mind unto.

Consider, consider I pray you (beloved friends) your incomparable happiness in
this thing, and bless God for it. Surely I should much wrong your judgments
and patience if I should spend any more arguments to persuade you to this so
great benefit to you, and should be like to him that to manifest the clear
Sunshine at noonday, brought in a candle.

In a word, there is nothing is or can be wanting but your true thankfulness to
God for completing this happy invention, and your present speedy putting it in
practice.

Yet give me leave, before I bid you adieu, to add the incomparable joy this
Lady has, who is confidently persuaded (her daily prayers are to God for it)
that this new invented way of thus keeping Silkworms on the Trees; it requiring
neither skill nor pains, (this last being the only Remora, in the Savages
nature, which witholds them from attempting any thing of labor) that when the
Indians shall behold and see you begin the business, they will with all
alacrity set upon it likewise, and imitate you. And that you to encourage them
(as well you may) do agree with them, that for every pound-weight of
Silk-bottoms they bring unto you, you give them (as well it deserves) 5 shil.
worth in any Commodities they desire.

And thus by the blessing of Almighty God, there may be good hope of their
civilizing and conversion; so that they may be likewise great gainers both in
body and soul by this thing. And if this prove so, (Gods mercies and works
being far beyond our capacities) how much then indeed will Virginia's happiness
be every way raised to the height of Bliss. The promise being made, That they
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn
many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever; which the God of
wisdom and power grant to you all in Virginia, and so, Lord, prosper this work
in their hands, Lord, prosper their handiwork; good luck I wish you all in the
name of the Lord, Amen, Amen, Amen.

Memorandum; that you take notice, that the Birds will eat up the Silkworms on
the trees, so that care must be had (and it is easily prevented by several
ways and means, as you will devise) to scare away the birds; if all fail, a
boy may be set that may affright them them al away with some noise, or by nets
encompa^sing the trees, and the birds will also carry the Silk-bottoms off the
trees, if they be let there remain; but that's soon pre^ented, by taking them
speedily away. And this of the birds is the chief reason, that Virginia abounds
not with plenty of the natural wild Silkworms, they devouring most of them:
and it is a wonder how any at all escape them, but that God preser^es some few
of the race, that his power and wisdom may be seen, and the aptness of the
Country to invite you to the work.

It will be good for you to encourage the Savages, when they find any bottoms
in the woods, to bring them to you, that you may get of the race, and seed to
increase it. For their Bot^om being ten ^imes bigger ^hen ours, that mighty
^reat Worms ^ust they be, and what in^ouragement (...) this to the ^usinesse,
and ^ow much ^ore silk they ^ake then ^rs, etc.
Some say, the original Silkworm is produced by the corruption of the old
Mulberry-tree and leaves, by the Sun and moisture. But that none of you may
want a stock to begin your Silk-work, the Lady aforesaid has sent you store of
Silkworm-eggs to be distributed amongst you: Till you can ^et and gain ^e Egg
and ^eed of your ^a^turall gal^nt large Silk ^orm: which (...)chiefly that ^u
must en^vour to store ^ur selves ^th, no Eggs ^mparable to (...), etc.
and if you begin but with an 100 eggs this year, they will next year be above
1000; for one female Silk-fly will lay 3, 4, 500 at a time, all things more and
more concurring to your encouragement.

Now the two Propositions that tend to infinite welfare, benefit, and
wonderful advantage both to England and the Colony jointly, are those that
follow, they which upon no terms are to be omitted to be published and effected.

First, that with all speed some kind of Coin be sent to Virginia, that may
be authorized to pass there for their Commerce and better trading. But whether
all silver somewhat valued above its worth, or part silver and part copper, is
left to the wi^e judgments in that case. But of this confidently be assured,
that without some kind of coin or other, that Colony can no way prosper or
thrive, nor any staple-commodities be set up, or Artificers in any kind follow
their professions: for Tobacco being now their money, and that with which all
Commerce is driven, and paiments made in, and passes from man to man; all men
are set upon that thing with the neglect of all other rich and solid
innumerable Commodities that are in that land to be had: and till this remedy
of Coin be applied, there can be no prosperity in that Colony. Were not the
thing as apparent to all men's understandings as light is from darkness; I
should allege many reasons for it, but it is so needless to spend time about
it, as it might well be thought a great absurdity. What then remains? but that
some public spirited Patriot that would immortalize his name and honor in
the procuring of this so necessary a thing to be speedily effected, wherein
also as the general good he shall do, so the benefit will be ever great to
those that shall undertake the carrying over this Coin; be it what it will be,
all men know it so well what the gain will be, as there is no need to name it in
particular manner, they cannot wish for more profit then that will be to the
undertakers, and the Colony will with all their hearts be content with it, and
esteem them happy and thrice happy Benefactours.

The second thing is, that a Publication be procured and sent to the Colony in
Virginia, declaring unto them, that there shall be liberty for all men to bring
from thence for the space of ten years to come, any commodity that they shall
there raise, into England, Custom and Excize free, (Tobacco only excepted,
which may pay double Custom, if so thought fit:) and further that to what
value of money such commodities shall be sold for here in England, (being rated
at the Custom House at their entry;) it shall be lawful to carry out to
Virginia any Commodities again to the same proportion and worth, Custom and
Excize free.

These two reasonable things granted; as they shall infinitily with all speed
advance the Plantation, so shall they (all things duly weighed in the scale of
prudence) be no less beneficial to England, as all men that have their eyes
in their heads, and English hearts in their bodies, see and apparently know,
nothing more sure and certain; and all stable and needful Commodities brought
out of all-liberall- Virginia into England at a very reasonable rate and price,
much cheaper then now we have them, and are fain to fetch them with great
hazard from doubtful friends, or Heathen Nations, to their great enriching and
our own impoverishing, as to all knowing men is most apparent; we shall be free
from the usurpation of foreign Princes and States in our Estates, Lives,
Liberties and shipping: and we may conclude boldly and rejoycingly, that
Providence has provided this all-sufficient Country of Virginia against these
times, and to these intents, that hence we may have all we want from our own
brethren, our Navy there increased to what number we please; for this
incomparable land affords naturally all whatever belongs to the building and
rigging of a Navy in all complete manner from top to toe, as may be said; and
by a safe, a sure, certain, easy, near at hand westerly disco^ery, (part by
land, and part by Rivers and Seas) contract all the riches of the South Sea,
the Molocos, Philipines, China, etc. by 3000 leagues nearer to us, without
molestation by any Prince or Pirat, and shall not need at all to be troubled,
if Rushia, Poland, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Germany, yea France Spain, Italy,
Constantinople were removed 5000 times more distant from us: Sir Francis Drake
was An. 1577 in a Westerly Sea one the back of Virginia, in 37 degrees in
opposite to the head of James Town in Virginia and he failed from that Country
which he called Nova Albion, in an open Sea to the Molocos and China, and so
that also this way a trade may be made to those places to the back of Virginia,
etc.
for in one word, what ever these Countries afford, either necessary or
superfluous, all-sufficient Virginia within its limits will produce unto us.
And shall there not I say then now be found a zealous Patriot, that will stand
up for his Country, and procure these things to be done out of hand? Now God
forbid; I commit the business to God, having done what I conceive my part is,
who only have good wishes, and daily prayers to attend this enterprise, which
God prosper, Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
At a friends importunity, (the former part sent to the Press) I am thus
enforced to make this Addition, and upon the great hopes that upon trial it
will be found, that you may have two Silk-harvests in one six months time; of
the eggs a second brood may be hatched in June, and so fed by Mulberry-leaves,
though then it may be it must be in an house, that then for the promoting of
such a good design nothing of encouragement may be wanting, nor any
obstructions in the business, under pretense of wanting needful housing for
to feed the worms in. Thus much I will assure you,

That the slightest and simplest kind of housing or coverture (though the
books are too superstitions and ceremonious in the rules which are many that
they give concerning the ordering of the worm, which are not so necessary as
they pretend;) I assure you, you will abundantly content and satisfy this,
though noble, yet most humble creature, even with any habitation to do her work
in. And to this intent I now declare unto you, (that all excuse may be taken
from you) that the poor simple people in Italy, Spain, Languedock, Provence,
etc. do keep and feed their Silkworms in the same low earthen-floored Rooms,
wherein themselves lodge and do all their houshould-affairs, feeding them on
shelves and on tables, giving them leaves without any more curiosity, and they
thrive and prosper with them as well as in the greatest Cities and stately
chambers of the greatest rich men's Palates.

Sicily.
And that in Sicilie and Calabria, the common Silk-Masters there do at time of
year in the Spring, set up only slight boarded houses in the fields round about
the Mulberry groves, and placing shelves in the inside of them, two foot one
above the other to the roof, and a table all a long the mid^ of the room, they
strowing their leaves on these shelves and table, there feed their worms, and
there they spin in the room their Master lies for the space of five or six
weeks time, and they have abundance of silk without more ado, and a man and a
boy will tend all the worms that come of six ounces of eggs, and those worms
will spin 60 pound-weight of silk, and that but at 20 shil. the pound, is worth
60 ls. in ready money, a sufficient gain to allure a man to the work I tro; The
great ga^ of the Silkworks in a house, how much more i^ the trees, will it be to
you. The simplest and slightest houses or covertures will be sufficient for the
Wor^ to feed in, a^ live and spin^ let no man doubt it, etc.
but the gain by the natural worm multiplying will far exceed it. And I may
not forget yet more that the Persian manner is to pitch up only tents of
Canvas, and Booths round their Mulberry-wood, and there-under they strew the
Mulberry-tree leaves on the ground there their worms feed and live and spin,
and do well in all kinds, the Persians living also the time of five weeks in
the tents. Thus all these examples do manifestly prove unto you that very
simple and slight housing and (...) coverture will content the Silkworms, and
they will thri^e we^ in them. And thus you see that very poor and slight houses
in Virginia will do the deed. Nay rest assured that the very Savages houses
built but with Poles Arbor-wi^e, and covered top and sides with mats, will be
abundantly satisfactory to the worms, and they will thrive in them as you
shall find upon trial. And let me tell you, being desirous that you may do
all things with the least cost and labor to you, and to invite also the
Savages to the work for their own gain; do but take your Reeds and small Canes
in Virginia, and run but a strong need^e and thread through the Reeds which will
hold them together, and so you may presently make shelves and tables with them
as narrow and as broad as you please; and in truth you shall find this kind
of shelf and tabling to feed your worms on much better in many respects then
boards: Concerning the winding off your Silk, this Lady has lent you one of
the wheels, so that by it all of ^ou may make ^he like to do that work, so ^ou
shall want nothing to ^peed the work
but you may make trial of the Persian way also by strowing your leaves on the
ground in these houses, and so feed them, and so your second brood of Silkworms
may also be thus kept and nourished in this kind of housing and coverture;
Experience is the Mistress of fools, says the Proverb: and it is not an unwise
man's part often to make trials, though to some men they may seem
impossibilities, yet rare and strange things have upon trial often been found
out; and if you would but show the Savages samples of all kind of things, you
should soon by them know more in a month what is in that Country to be had
then you have done these 40 years; and for reward they would bring in of all
kinds unto you, what they have and you desire to know, so a sudden discovery
may be made of all things in that land to your infinite gain.

To conclude with this Memento, that there are nine things that appear, are of
no or small difficulty to you and the Savages to enterprise, and get gain and
wealth to be produced from these Commodities; I will but name them and leave
them to your better judgments and thoughts.

1 This Silk, so easy, speedy, and profitable a thing. 2 The Silk-grasse
naturally there growing, which to the Indians the only labor is of putting it
up, and bringing it to you at such a price; a rich Commodity if known. 3 The
planting Vines, small labor, little cost, long enduring. 4 The multiplying of
Cunny-warrens, so easy a thing, the wool of a skin now worth 8 pence, which is
more then the body, yet the flesh is considerable meat; the wool is and will
be very vendible for this new Invention, not only of these fine light hats now
sold at 15 and 20 shil. but the spining of the wool, and making stockings of it
as fine as those of silk. 5 The increasing of abundance of Bees for wax and
honey, their food so plentiful in Virginia, as in no Land more, and if with an
hatchet you do but slash your Pine-trees, Firre-trees, Locus, and other trees,
there will store of liquor come out of them, on which the Be will gather
infinite store of honey and wax, as in Russia and other Countries they do. 6
The planting of Sugarcanes, that being no more laborious then the Indian
wheat, setting it, and once set in good Land they grow eight or ten years, and
the Indians pains will only be to cut them yearly down, and sell them to you.
7 That of the Cotton-tree is the like for many years, gathering of the cods of
woll from them, as we do Roses from the Rose-bushes. 8 That of Ginger soon
done, the planting and the gathering of it. 9 That of grafting your Crab-trees
with Apples and Pears for Sider and Perry, you knowing that a man in one day
will graft an 100 stocks, and they will grow night and day, while you eat,
sleep, and play, and last 100 years to your great gain and profit.
I may not further enlarge my self for the present, these are but tastes and
hints for your better wits to work on: so with a thousand good wishes, I bid
you adieu.

Floreat VIRGINIA.
The fashion of the Botome.
The Silk Bottom of the natural Worm in Virginia, found there in the Woods,
is ten Inches about, and six Inches in length to admiration: and whereas ours
in Europe have their Sleave and loose Silk on the outside; and then in a more
closer covering they intombe themselves. These rare Worms, before they enclose
themselves up, fill with Silk the great emptiness, and afterward enclose
themselves in the middle of it, so they have a double Bottom.

The loose Sleave Silk is all on the outside of this compass, for if that were
reckoned in, the compass of the Bottom would far exceed this proportion: But
this is sufficient to be the Wonder of the whole World: to the Glory of the
Creator, and Exaltation of VIRGINIA.

A Loving Advertisement to all the Ingenious Gentlemen-Planters in Virginia now
upon the Design of Silk.
By V. F.
Gentlemen,
SVch has bin the singular favor of Providence to you and the Lady, that
since the publishing of this Book; it has so happily lighted into the hands of
diverse worthy persons, being not only Gentlemen-Travellers of credit, and
Merchants of reputation; but likewise wonderfully taken with the love of
Virginia, and no less zealously affected to the advancement of the Silk-trade
in that Land, which they judge (not of their experience and knowledge of what
they have and observed in the Easterly parts of the World, where abundance of
Silk is made) that no part of the World is more proper for Silk then
All-sufficient- Virginia: In regard of the excellency of the temper of the
Climate, which naturally produces not only Mulberries for food; but the
Silk-worme it self, in that wonderful greatness of the wild Silk-bottom:
which as they say, The whole Universe affords not, nor brings forth the like to
their own small admiration. And that there is no greater quantities of them
found or seen they conclude, it is in regard of the birds who are their natural
enemies, and devour most of them. And these Gentlemen are confident, that you
did not know and practice those ways and means, for the feeding and
preservation of them, as in some far remote Regions is practiced by those
Nations, that are expert Masters of Silk-wormes, Virginia would instantly
abound with great store of Silk, and surpass all those Countries in that rich
commodity, and you all become with great speed and small cost, or l^tle labor
one of the happiest, wealthiest people that the World affords. And to the
intent that such a blessing may not be longer wanting to you, they have out of
their superlative benign affections, and public spirit, imparted to the Lady
these ensuing Relations, with their earnest desires and advises, that you all
in Virginia may out of hand be made partakers of them. And then knowing them,
you may no longer live in gross darkness and ignorance of so great a treasure
that you are possessors of, and may now have and enjoy the full use and benefit
of, which hitherunto has most straingely been hidden from the eyes of body and
mind; They conceiving that the chief cause thereof has been the pernicious
blinding smoke of Tobacco, that thus has dimmed and obscured your better
intellectuals; but when you begin to put these ways and means in practice,
they say you will bless your selves (as they do) that you have not in this
long time discovered the infinite wealth and happiness that will arise unto you
out of Silk. But not longer to detain from you this most precious eye salve,
for the speedy curing of your infirmity, and making you all rich (which is your
main aim in that new world).

Hearken well to these Informations, which the Lady earnestly desires may thus
be with all speed made known to you all.
THe one Traveller declared, That he passed a Country where he saw those
people had their Silkworms feeding on their Mulberry-trees in the fields and
there they live and spun their Bottoms on the trees, And to protect this noble
profitable creature and to defend it from the birds, they used a most slight,
simple, plain invention speedily effected and of no cost or labor to them,
which was certain great sheets of Reeds or Canes, that they hung over and about
their trees, tied to certain poles that encompassed them. And in this easy
manner they obtained great abundant quantities of silk, to their wonderful
enriching. The sheets of Reeds were joined together by a need^e and thread,
running through each Reed at several equal distances, and so drew them close
and firm together. This for you to imitate, is in every respect to your
wonderful happiness.

Another of these Travelers says, That he passed a Country where the
inhabitants did make large Tents or Boothes all of Reeds and Canes, and in them
placed shelves and tables made likewise of Reeds, on which they fed their
Worms, strewing leaves on them. These tents they set up round about their
Mulberry-Groves, and with much celerity, and no cost.

A third Gentleman and Merchant, that lived long in the farthest parts of
Turkey, affirms, That there the inhabitants begin every Spring, March, to
feed their Worms, and continue it till October, six months time: their Worms
hatching and re-hatching, one generation or brood succeeding the other: so that
they have three harvests of silk-bottoms, in that space of time, every five or
six weeks one: they feed their Worms in great long Barns made of Reeds or
Canes, the walls and roofs of them, and shelves as aforesaid, and the Worms
when they have done feeding, spin their bottoms upon the reedy walls and roofs;
and that they have two crops of leaves from their trees: for those trees that
have their leaves pulled off in March, April, and May, do re-leave again, and
have new and fresh leaves in June, July and August, wherewith they feed their
latter generation or brood of Worms very profitably.

And in confirmation of this, you shall know, the same has been found true in
England, that the Mulberry-tree will leave twice in a Summer, the Lady had the
experience of it, and therefore much more will it do with you, which will be a
most singular advantage to you.

I must not omit to add what these Gentlemen farther advise, that you can never
sufficiently augment the store of food for this Noble Creature: for store of
food is the main foundation, upon whose speeding the Silk-trade is to be
erected: for if that be not wanting, no obstruction can be in it. For the
glorious Worm is so infinite in multiplication, with that celerity as is
incredible, so that she will never be defective unto you: they therefore
counsel, that you graft your Mulberries with all care and speed upon these
several trees, upon which they will exceedingly thrive, viz. the Popler, the
Elm, the Chestnut, Beech, Quince, Medler, Fig, Pear, Apple, and Cornell-trees.
And also upon any other trees, of which upon a trial you find the Worm will
taste or eat their leaves. Likewise that you set of your Mulberry-slips as big
as your thumb, about two foot long: and put them into good wel-digg'd ground in
September, setting them a foot in the ground, bruising the ends of them, and
watering them the next Summer well, if need be: in the same manner as in Kent,
they set the Codling-slips. That you also cause the Indians to bring unto your
habitations all the young Mulberry-trees that are within an hundred miles of
your Colony. But let me acquaint you that they admire what some Gentlemen
Planters of credit tell them; that your brave Worms do not only live, feed,
and spin upon the Mulberry-trees in the Woods, but do the same upon the
Poplar-trees, Plum-trees, and Apple Trees:: such an encouragement to the
Silk-trade, the World (say they) never yet heard of before, which must needs
lift you up to a most speedy and incomparable height of wealth and riches, in a
moment of time.

And by your gentle patience and generosity, give me leave to propound unto
you, the earnest request the Lady has to all of you; that you please to inform
her (being also the desire of many others) how it comes to pass that your
Worms get to your several trees, not only to the Mulberry, but to others: For
in no other Countries the Silk-worme-flie does use her wings to fly with: so
that yours must either do it (and so at time of year couple and fly to sundry
trees; and there lay their eggs which remain till Spring again) or that your
trees do naturally engender and produce the Worms (as it is conceived, the
original of them so happened at first) but which way soever it be, it is rare and
remarkable; and proves Virginia to be one of the most superlative Countries in
all the Universe for the Silk-trade; and none comparable unto the excellency of
its natural temper for Silk.

Then that you also inform her all you can of the nature, actions, qualities
and dispositions in all kinds of this most wonderful Creature, every way so
admirable, what by any English or Savage has bin any way observed in her: when
her eggs first hatch, then how long time she is feeding before she spins, upon
what part of the trees she fastens her Bottom; How long she continues in her
Bottom before she comes out a Fly, then when they couple, where they lay their
eggs, upon what part of the trees? How long they live after that time? For
these in the old World never eat after they once begin to spin: how large in
bigness and compass are commonly their bottoms? if all of one color, or
diverse? In what part of the Country are most of them seen and found? what do
the Savages call them, or know any use of them; what birds are they that most
devour them? (for did they not, they would swarm all the Land over in a very
few years); if any thing besides birds be hurtful to them? Their greatness and
doubleness of their Bottoms are wonderful, none ever known to be so, which
argues the strength and richness of this noble Worm, her vigor and hardness
exceeds, that can endure all wethers and seasons both alive and in her eggs. A
great encouragement to you all that she is not a nice curious kind of
Silkworme; but stout and robustous, that will require little care or
attendance, of small cost unto you. But her food and protection is all she
requires, and pays you ten thousand-fold for what you bestow on her. That you
please to send of her Bottoms to satisfy all men, who are like the Queen of
Sheba, much better trust their eyes than ears; some of their eggs likewise
upon that which they lay them, and the Fly (though dead) which will many a year
retain her perfect form in a box: do not the worms hatch and spin twice or
thrice in a Summer?

Let me add one Petition more, and I have done. viz. That some of your precious
Silk-grass may be sent the Lady, who is confident upon the trial she will make
of it, she will give you so pleasing an account and so profitable unto you, in
making known unto you what an unknown wealth you have: she prays you (and all
is for your own gain) to bore and cut all your trees (a most easy thing) and
thereby you shall discover presently, what rich Gums, what Balsoms, what Oils,
and precious healthful Liquours they will yield you for profit and necessity:
For all men know that many kinds of trees do yield most pleasant and
healthsome Wines (as I may call them) for man to drink; so also you will find
out all sorts of Dies and Colors (instantly done): cut and bruise all kinds
of your Woods, Barks, and Leaves of Trees, Roots, Berries, Nuts, Fruits,
Plants, Weeds; and but boil them in a Skillet, and then put in a little piece
of white Woollen or Linen cloth with some Allom, and you shall instantly find
and see what rich Colors they will make. What is Indico but a Weed, so Woad
and Madder? What is Brasil, Fustick, Logwood, and many more kind of Dies, but
Woods? what Coucheneal the rich Scarlet die, but a Fly, or the excrements of
the Indian Fig Tree? what is the newfound rich dying stuff of 25. l. a Tun,
but of a tree that is brought from the Island of Liberty, near Cape Florida
where Captain Sails plants? And shall Virginia not yield a drop of good
Liquour or Color? It cannot be; if but a trial thus easy were made.

By burning of all kind of Woods and Gums, you will soon find by your nose what
sweet Perfumes they yield. And by the ponderousness or weight of earths, you
may know if Minerals or not? Let it be known also, if you have not Waters of
more than ordinary qualities; for taste, colors, smell, weight, hotness, or
coldness? there is much depends upon them. And you shall know if they proceed
out of any Minerals, by taking a glass full, and putting into it a Gall beaten
to powder, which will turn the water into a reddish color: and send samples of
all kind of strange earths, and of all other kind of things without fail. And
lastly, (if it be not too much presumption to beg the favor to receive that
honor from you) which she no ways deserves nor can hope to requite: To inform
her what be the things, the ways, the means to advance Virginia's Prosperity,
if they may be procured and effected. If any error be committed in telling you
all this: there is hope your pardon may be obtained, seeing your only good and
benefit has caused all this that has been said: and the zeal of your wealth
and happiness has drawn all to this length:

Sirs, you have the faithful testimonies of those aforesaid worthy Gentlemen,
and nothing can be now wanting unto you but putting all in practice, what they
have declared; and for your good are such invitations and encouragements unto
you, that more cannot be wished for. There remains nothing but humble thanks to
God, and to these Gentlemen your due respects, whom God has made such
Instruments for your happiness, hoping their noble courteous examples will
allure all other Gentlemen Travelers to cast into this good work some mites of
their further knowledges, and every man to contribute his prayers and help to
this or any other hopeful design: seeing the consequence of them may be so
good and great, not only to the English Nation at home and abroad; but to the
poor Savages their welfare of souls and bodies, which God grant.

An Other Advertisement.
THe Silk-Trade, (unless we will be deaf to Reason and Experience) cannot be
denied the precedence of all Trades that are at this day a foot, in either
World: And that in regard of its great and certain gain in so small a time; A
man and a Boy being able to tend as many Silkworms in two Months space, as
will yield you sixty pounds: According to that is made Sicille by a Man and Bo^
which done, they leave you ten Months free for any other employment. In
regard of its small skill, less pains, care and labor, no hazard, no cost or
charge, (more then a twelve-penny Reel) no troublesome tools or Implements: in
regard of its incredible ease and pleasure, as not requiring strength of Body,
of Wit, of Purse, any stock to begin with, only hands and eyes to gather leaves
and feed the Worms with, or protect them from the Birds: if kept on the Trees
(their natural Mansion:) Admitting of all Ages, (for a Child can do all that
belongs to it) all Sexes, all Qualities, (a most fit recreation for Ladies,
especially being begun and ended in the two pleasantest Months of the year,
March and April.) And all Callings too; for if Saint Paul made Tents, who can
plead exemption from tending Silkworms? A most prop^ employment (...) the lasie
In^ans.
Again, Silk is less chargeable in Warehouse, Freight, etc. then any other
Commodity, and yet none more durable, lasting, neat, vendible, nor more easily
transportable: for Fi^e hundred pounds worth of Silk, fraights less, and takes
up less room then ten pounds worth of Tobacco.

Now where Worms and Food abound naturally, and the Inhabitants are born with
Brains, the advancement of the Silk Trade must needs be proportionable: upon
which double score Virginia has the advantage of any place in the yet
discovered World; I mean for Worms and Food, which may be thus severally
demonstrated. Their Worms (partly annually produced by heat and moisture as our
Caterpillars and other Insects each Spring, partly by Eggs which have escaped
the Birds who are the greatest cause of their scarsity (which otherwise would
swarm over all the Land) devouring them when they are Worms, Eggs and Bottoms)
exceed ours not only in strength, hardiness and greatness, (being when Flies
as big as men's Thumbs) but also in the largeness of their Bottoms, which are
as big as Limons; (for Mr. William Wright of Nansamond found of them above
seven inches round) and one of them weighs more then a score of ours; insomuch
that whereas a Thousand of our Worms made but one pound of Silk, worth at most
here 30s. a pound, a thousand of their natural Worms will make ten pounds of
Silk, worth here twenty shillings the pound. And certainly they need not object
or be troubled at the somewhat more coursnesse of their Silk, since they from
the same number of Worms receive ten pounds in money for our thirty shillings.

As for their Food, the Virginia Worms feed not only on the Mulberry (their
sole food in all other parts of the World) but also on the Crab, Plum, Poplar;
Oak, Apple, Cherry and Pohickerry-tree leaves, with sundry other shrubs and
bushes. For proof whereof, Mistress Mary Ward sent over to her Cousen ten
bottoms taken from Apple trees. Esquire Ferrar her Kinsman likewise sent her
ten more, pulled off from Oaks and diverse shrubs. Mr Laurence Ward some taken
from the Pohickerry tree, Mr Wright from the Cherry tree. So Dr Russel and
others.

The Objection, or rather groundless surmise of the Worms being hurt by
Thunder in Virginia, is sufficiently cleared, not only by the Natural Worms
living so well, and thriving there so admirably on the trees; but also by trial
made there this Spring of our Worms. That ever to be honored Noble Squire
Diggs having (at his very great charge) sent for two Armenians out of Turkey
skilful men, and made ten pound of Silk, which had not want of Eggs hindered
him, would have been so many Thousand pounds.

Nothing then wants to make Virginia rival Peru for wealth, more then to
persuade the Planters to provide themselves this Winter (to lose no more time)
of as many of the Natural Worms bottoms as possibly they can. They will now be
found in the Woods on the dis-leaved trees, though most of them are spun by the
Worms on the tree leaves, which falling to the ground, they perish with them;
and this is another great cause that so few bottoms are to be found. The
Bottoms thus gotten must be carefully kept in some long boxes till the Flies
come forth, happily in February or March. For they remain in their bottoms 300.
days, ours but 20. so that their Eggs (whereof one female will lay a
spoonful, suppose 500.) lie unhatched but about nine days, ours nine months.

When your Worms are hatched, you may keep them either on the trees (being
assured that they will live on that kind of Tree whatsoever it be from whence
you took your Bottoms) and then you shall need only to protect them from the
Birds; or else in some slight kind of housing, Reedy arbors, Indian mansions,
or what else you can devise there cheapest and speediest, and then your only
labor and care is to give them leaves, which you may either strip off, or clip
from off your Trees, or if you will, lop off little branches (which may perhaps
prove a good way for you: for thereby the leaves will remain the longer fresh)
and give them to your Worms, who for the labor of every Man and Boy thus
inployed only in two months time, will repay you with threescore pounds worth
of Silk.

Your own Experience (Gentlemen) will I hope ere this time twelv-moneth
certify you of the truth that is here set down, unless you shall rather choose
to hugg your own poverty, and make much of that slavery and drudgery you wear
out your selves with, in toyling about that contemptible, beggarly Indian Weed,
TOBACCO.

The Copy of Esquire Diggs his Letter, to his much honored friend, John
Ferrar, Esquire at his house at little Gidding, in Huntingtonshire. From
Virginia, June 21. 1654.
Sir,
I Have received your many and several Letters, printed papers, and Quaeries;
and, would my occasions have permitted, I should ere this, have given you that
due thanks you deserve, and punctually have answered all your judicious and
pleasing Quaeries: But I was so taken up in sending daily for Mulberry-leaves,
as they are now so far scattered from my present Plantation, that I could not
possibly answer your expectations; That only difficulty made me to make but
400. pound weight of Silk-bottomes, which I caused to be wound of 7. or 8. l.
of Silk in a day: Sir, I do very well approve of your last well printed
Paper, sent the Colony for making trial of the Natural Silk-worme, but such
was my ill hap, that I could not this spring meet with any of those Bottoms,
but shall this next Winter procure of them, all I can; Sir, I am now confident,
I have conquered all the great feared difficulty of this rich commodity, and
made its sweet easy and speedy Profitt so evident to all the Virginians (and
that it does not at all hinder their too much beloved Tobacco, but that they
may proceed with both together) that now I doubt not (nor they) but that in a
short time here will be great quantities made of Silk; you in England will
reap much advantage, and gain many ways by it, (more then most men can pet
see) and I by Gods blessing the comfort and joy, in setting up so noble, so
beneficial, a staple vendible commodity. My people differ very little from the
rules set down in your, Mr. Williams his Book, and as Esquire Samuel Hartlib
has also directed in his advertizement of Silkworms unto us; only in the
hatching of the Worms-Eggs, they are more curious, of which I shall, when I
have more time, give you a more particular account: I made 10. l. of seed or
Eggs this spring to give away to diverse Planters, that are very earnest
(seeing so great a benefit before their eyes) to become also Silk-masters, you
need not fear it but that this next spring there will be diverse trials made
of the hopeful Natural Worms, that you so highly prize (and not without good
cause) and which is more, perhaps they may fall one after another and be
re-hatched that we may have a double Silk harvest in one summer (as you have
formerly hinted to us). Pray Sir will you be pleased at this time to excuse my
too much brevity in this great business of so much concernment, of so much
happiness to this Country, and attribute it to my great have, and much business
upon the ships sudden departure, having many more dispatches to make to
Friends; But in my next, I shall make you double amends; I pray present my
service to the virtuous Lady Virginia: Sir I daily pray for your long life, and
welfare, and now rest.

Sir your most humble Servant, Edward Diggs.

A Way Experimented by Mr. Farrar, to make the Gummy-hard Natural Virginia
Bottoms (which hitherto by no art could be be prepared to unwind by reason of
the Gummy hardness) to unwinde with ease, to the great advantage of the
Planters of the Silk-trade in Virginia.
YOu must take Sope-boylers lie or liquor, which is very sharp and strong, and
set that in a vessel over the fire till it be warm, then put in as many of
your hard gummy Bottoms as you please, and let them rest in that liquor, till
it be scalding-hot, and so remain half a quarter of an hour more or less, till
they be so dissolved that you may take out one and find it fit to unwind; which
you must thus do.

First put the Bottoms into scalding clean water, and having layen a while
therein, then take them out and proceed to unwind them as the custom is.

In case Sope-boylers lie or liquor be not to be had, you may make a strong
liquor of the Ashes of any Wood, with boiling water, the stronger the better,
and this may and will also perform the work. And this is just as you make a lie
to buck clothes withal. Only note it must be very strong made.

An Extract out of a very Ingenious Gentleman's Letter from Dublin, Concerning
the Reformed Virginian Silkworm.
I Thank you for your Virginian Paper. Me thinks the Experiment is most
Natural to my apprehensions, that the Worms should feed and thrive best upon
the leaves growing on the Trees, rather then in the Houses, and that they, like
other Caterpillars (of whom these are a sort) did at first breed so, and that
Houses were rather an Invention for expediency,

But their Proposition about Money to be carried to Virginia, I utterly
dislike; even so much as if it were possible, I would banish Money from Ireland.

An Animadversion upon the Letter from Dublin.
I like not the Gentleman's Reason why he likes the Proposition concerning
feeding o^ Silkworms upon the Trees.

For almost all Plants, even the most rare now in use were Originally (namely
since the deluge) wild and past muster amongst Weeds, and are improved to such
a degree of excellency to the eye, nose or palate, by industry and home-helps
and contrivances: So John Tradeskin by Lambeth, by the advantage of putting his
Trees, and other Plants into a warm house in winter or a stow, nurses up those
things fair and fragrant, which would without that help either dye or be
dwarft. This is the reason why tame Pigeons or Conies are larger, and breed
better, and oftener then wild. Yet I conclude not a against the thing it self;
for questionles, that the leaves have more heart, fresh and green, then half
withered, if the cause of their withering were known or considered, But I can
say little to this, as having no experience,

A new observation, concerning the feeding of Silkworms with Lettice, imparted
from Dublin.
I Have only to present you with some observations I made concerning the
feeding of Silkworms (meeting here accidentally with a kinswoman of mine that
keeps great store of them) which generally is believed only to be don, with
Mulberry leaves: the contrary of which is here by some pra^ctised. viz. to
feed them with Lettice; which the worms eat very readily, grow as those big as
that are fed with Mulberry leaves and spin as much Silk: They will also eat the
herb called Dantedelyon, but whether that will so well agree with them as
Lettice, I have not tried, but with Lettice they will thrive very well, eating
nothing else all the year.

More Observations concerning the feeding of Silkworms with Lettice,
SIR,
MY good Cosen Mr. W. sent me the letter, you wrote to him; and the note sent
you out of Ireland, that intimated the happy success the Gentlewoman had then
in keeping Silkworms, not only on the Mulberry-tree-leaves, but with Lettice
leaves, the thing you much desired that my Daughter should have made known unto
her. Truly Sir your singular humanity and goodness in all things more and more
extends it self for the public benefit of all, and I see to the particular
satisfaction of your Friends, though Strangers to you yet those that have daly
cause more and more to honor you, as we justly do. Sir, this your favor is
both by my-self and Daughter so much resented as it requires from us, very
hearty and particular thanks to be tendered to your worth. She is a lover of
Rarities in these kinds, and to try conclusions upon her Silkworms, and no way
envious, but much rejoices to hear that any have had that good success with
Lettis as you write of, and shall her-self again make a third trial in that
kind, for she has 2. years last past tried her-self to have kept some with
Lettice leaves and so did and they thrivd as well as they kept with Mulberrys,
but still when the time of spinning came they would not spin, but then dyed and
this put her out of heart to try further, yet I may tell you, she persuaded a
Gentleman near her to keep some with Lettice 25. days and then fed them with
Mulberrys at last, and these did very well and spun as good Bottoms as those
wholly kept with Mulberry leaves. But now she resolves upon your intimation of
the experiment made in Ireland to try a third time, and to give you an account
of her success in June next, if God permit.

And now Sir she presents this printed enclosed paper to your worthy judgment,
if you find not it matter of consideration and reason for her to send it as a
second new years gift to Virginia, hoping that it may do good there to the
Planters and inform them of much truth; and invite them to the business of
Silk, which God grant, Amen.

This other paper of Ryming lines (for Verses they deserve not the name) yet
being that what her Brother a young Scholar has collected out of Letters, that
were sent her from Virginia and given her, she also sends you to further
inform you of things done, last spring.

Thus worthy, Sir, with the due respects of both our kindest salutes, wishing
you all happiness in this and the better world, I rest ever.

Yours in all love and service JOHN FERRAR.
Littell Gidding Huntingshire. this 28. November. 1653. SIR,
She makes bold to present you with a sample of Virginia Silk-grass sent her by
a friend. It Is a rarity, and she hopes will delight you who have such a
public Spirit to rejoice, and further a Common good; as she has great hopes
this will prove a commodity next to the Silk there, as skillful men and Artists
do assure her of it, and thousands of poor people will be set a work with it,
if it prove there to be in quantity.



Upon the most Noble, Virginian natural Silkworm her wonderful, various,
plentiful food; The infinite, speedy, great wealth she will produce to her
protector; (in 45. days the time of her feeding) with small labor, cost, or
skill, (learnt in an hours space by any child.) The singular aptness of that
rare Superlative Climate, in Breeding them on so many several kinds of Trees in
her Woods where they live, Feed and Spin, their mighty large, strange,
double-bottoms of Silk: To the admiration of this our Old World; but to the
exaltation and glory of incomparable Virginia, in the New.
WHere Worms and Food do naturally abound,
A Gallant Silken Trade must there be found:
Virginia excells the World in both,
Envy nor Malice can gain say this troth.
Many a man the causes feign would hear,
How these rare Worms came first or still come there.
Insects produced are by heat and moisture
Who in strange shapes and forms do often appear.
In Spring our trees the Caterpillars rear;
Their trees likewise these noble creatures bear.
And some proceed from eggs that escaped are
From their enemies sight, which thing is rare.
They feed not only on the Mulberry
Which in our World sole food is held to be
For all such precious Worms of that degree:
But Popler, Plum, Crab, Oak, and Apple tree,
Yea Cherry, and tree called Pohickery:
So on the Shrubs and Bushes feed full many
Her Worms are huge whose bottoms dare
With Lemmons of the largest size compare.
And twenty one of ours will sure poize less
Then one of theirs for weight and ponderousness.
Master William Wright of Nansamound
Found Bottoms above seven Inches round.
And though the Silk prove not all out so fine
As Persian, that is no let to the design.
For since a thousand of our Bottoms make
But one pound of fine Silk, you will ten pounds take
From theirs. If we at Thirty shillings sell
Our pound, for twenty they will afford theirs well.
The pains that is taken is alike in either
But the gains by theirs eight times greater:
Then, we confined are to the Mulberry
For food, their Worms have great Variety.
Her dainty colored flies and large Worms
In length and bigness do surpass men's Thumbs.
Whereas ours short of little fingers come.
Our flies come out in twenty days and lay
Eggs, theirs not still three hundred as they say
O wondrous thing! a Worm to fast so long
And then come out a painted Fly so strong.
Nine mouths full out our eggs unhatch't remain
Nine days in Spring makes theirs revive again
A Planter (I wish they had him named)
A spoonful eggs from one fly he gained
Which to five hundred at least amounted
Lo shortly endless they must be counted.
In March they first begin to live and feed
In April they have done the Silken deed
The sweetest, pleasantst time in all the year.
You to this Wealth the chanting Birds will cheer
And ten months time they leave you with great ease
To spend it in what profit you shall please.
Rare Worms who feeding five and forty days
On leaves of sundry Plants and shrubs repaies
Their keepers with fine Silk which wants no strength
And yet extends it self some miles in lenght
And for the labor of a Man and Boy
They gain you Sixty pounds which is no toy.
If you from Birds protect them on the trees
(Their natural mansions) it will them best please
Your pains is spared in giving them the leaves
By which alone you gain their Silken sleaves
For non-parrel Virginia in her Woods,
Brings forth as all men know these precious goods:
Where thousand fleeces fit for Princes Robes
On Virgin-trees shall hang in Silken Globes.
The noble Worm so hardy, strong and stout
No weather ill is able them to rout.
The reasons why the numbers are so small
Less Cruel Birds devour most of them all
When they are Worms yea Eggs or Silken ball.
Most bottoms likewise on the leaves are spun
Both falling to the ground do perish soon
Those only found that spun are on the branch
Not by their care but providentiall chance
Which only show themselves when all is bare
To Find in Summer any it is most rare.
If to prevent both dangers you intend
A Reedy-Arbourwell will do it, you will find
Or slightest coverture in any kind
The skill and pains to all each Child can do:
As you shall find on trial it is most true.
And may in Wealth compare with rich Peru.
And for all Tools that appertain thereto
A Twelve-peny Reele is all it will cost you,
No wit, no strength, no purse, no stock will need
But Eyes and hands, the Worms to guard and feed.
And thus you see done is the Silken deed:
Which brings you so great wealth with so much speed.
Five hundred pounds worth of rich Silk, all know
Fraights less then ten pounds in poor Tobacco
Silks are no trash, no toy, nor Pedlars ware;
Staple, good, and ready chinke every where.
Twenty shillings a pound it will yield you clear
And Ships to fetch it will come flying there.
Queens of the best edition need not scorn
In her own Livery to serve this Worm:
Only to give her leaves is all she craves
And in reward with Silk she will make you brave.
Out of her rich belly by her mouth spun
Weaves it into a most curious bottom
Which by a Reele turning with hand of man
Is wholly wound off most neatly again.
To feed Silkworms no Caling can disdain
Seeing they yield you so much honest gain
No employment in the World so likely
To make so soon your lasie Savage Wealthy.
For his Silk bottoms in exchange shall have
From English, what he so needs, begs, and craves
Red coats, hose, shoes, knives, they highly deem
Jewes-Trumps, Bells, Beads, all toys, no less esteem.
If all be thus the cause you now demand
Why has this knowledge been thus long detained
And but now by the Ladies Books inflamed
Ignorance of Planters so strange has been
Till now never knew nor dreamt of this rich thing
Confessed it is, that often some they have seen
Regardlesly, but never did them esteem.
Which loss of Wealth and Honor they will regaine
And Virgins Counsel follow will amain.
The happy onset they this Spring have made
Assures them all a stately precious trade.
Sir Henry Chichly that Heroic Knight
Affirms there is not an ingenuous Wight.
In Virginia but makes all speed he can
To be e're long a Silken noble man.
And say, Colonel Ludlow certifies
That thence from Silk great profit will arise;
Yea worthy Bernard that stout Colonel
Informs the Lady the work most facile
And of rich Silken stuffs, made shortly there
He hopes that he and others shall soon wear.
So major John Westrope says, Silk will be
A gallant design for their brave Country.
Thunder was that, that some men only doubt
But trial made this Spring puts that fear out.
In all Lands where Worms are kept it is wonder
To hear that any were harmed by thunder.
Their natural Worm proves this more truer.
Mr. Gorge Lobs that prudent old Planter
Tells her that Worms never spun Silk daintier.
Lets give those Gentlewomen their full dues
Mistress Garret and Burbage for Silk clues
That Colonells Wife needs not far to rove
Her Court affords a pleasant Mulberry Grove:
But noble Diggs carries the Bell away
(Lass! want of eggs made so small the essay)
His two Armenians from Turkey sent
Are now most busy on his brave attempt
And had he stock sufficient for next year
Ten thousand pound of Silk would then appear
And to the skies his worthy deeds upreare.
Lo here what mistress Mary Ward has sent
And to her Lady Cousin she presents
Ten rare Bottoms took from her Apple Tree
That all England may it believe and see.
Her honored Kins-man Esquire F^rrar,
To confirm and make the wonder greater
Ten more likewise has sent her, which he found
On stately Oaks and Shrubs that kiss the ground
And Doctor Russell that learned Physician
Has with his, made a full addition.
For things more slowly do affect the mind
Which ears do hear then those that eyes do find.
Now from smoke Virginia shall be raised
And throughout the World be duly praised.
Ah Blessed be God that now in his due time
This Silken light apparently does shine
Then come, O come with sacred Days
Let us sound the Almightys praise
I. F.

To the most Noble deserving Esquire Diggs: upon the Arrival of his two
Armenians out of Turkey into Virginia.
Courage, brave Sir: since Aid from God is sent
Proceed, go on, drive forth thy great intent.
A Comparison between the gain and labor of TOBACCO and SILK.
TObacco requires 9 months time, much care and labor, both without and within
doors, and a man's Crop is commonly 15 hundred weight of Tobacco, and this at
two pence a pound is 14 pound gain.

Silk requires six weeks time, if done in a house, and by the labor of a man
and boy, in gathering leaves, and tending the worms that come of six ounces
seed, there is by so many worms spun as much Silk as will weigh sixty pound
weight, and this but at 20 shil. a pound, yields 60 l. in ready money.

Tobacco, leaves a man but 3 months in the year for other business.

Silk, leaves a man ten months time in the year, for any other employments.

14 pounds a man gains by his Crop of Tobacco. 60 pounds a man and boy gains
by his Crop of Silk.
Then let all men judge which is the more gainful.

But what will be the gain and profit, by the worms feeding and spinning on the
Trees is more considerable, and also the natural Virginia-Worms bottom
exeeding ours in Europe 20 times in bigness, and in weight: what a Treasure
then will this be, and no labor, cost, hazard, expense of time at all, a Boy
only to keep away the Birds from eating the Silkworms on the Trees, etc.

Thus learned Bartas upon this noble and admirable Creature.
YEt may I not this Wondrous Worm pass by,
Of fly urn'd Worm, and of a Worm a Fly.
Two Births, two Deaths, here Nature has assigned her,
Leaving a Posthum^, dead-live Seed behind her;
Which soon transforms the fresh and tender leaves
Of Thisbes pale tree, to those tender sleaves
(On Ovall Clues) of soft smooth silken Flax,
which more for us then for her self she makes.
O precious fleece! which only did adorn
The sacred loins of Princes heretofore:
But our proud age, with prodigal abuse
Has so profaned the old honorable use:
That Shifters now, that scarce have bread to eat
Disdain plain Silk, unless it be beset
With one of those brave Metals, whose desire
Burns greedy souls with an impartial fire.
Had Du Bartas fully known all the virtues and rarities in this incomparable
Creature, even a miracle in Nature, he would have enlarged his Poems in a more
ample manner in the praise of it, to the great honor of the Creator. Cui
Gloria, Amen.

Homo Vermis.
We all are creeping Worms of the earth,
Some are Silkworms great by birth,
Glowworms some that shine by night,
Slow-Worms others, apt to bite,
Some are muck-Worms slaves to wealth,
Maw-Worms some that wrong the health,
Some to the public no good willers,
Cancker-Worms and Cater-pillers;
Found about the earth wee'r crawling,
For a sorry life wee'r sprawling,
Putrid stuff we suck, it fills us,
Death then sets his foot and kills us.
FINIS.

