Excommunicatio Excommunicata.

OR, A CENSURE OF THE Presbyterian Censures And proceedings in the Classis at
MANCHESTER.

Wherein is modestly examined what Ecclesiastical or civil Function they
pretend for their new and usurped Power.

In a Discourse betwixt the Ministers of that Classis, and some dissenting
Christians.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Sign of the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

THE PREFACE.
IN such an age as this, when the heat of vain and unprofitable controversies
has bred more scriblers, Plautus.
than a hot summer (in the Comedians simile) does flies, it might seem more
rational, according to Solomon's rule, for prudent men to keep silence, then to
vex themselves and disquiet others with such empty discourses, as rather
enlarge then compose the differences of Gods people. It was a sad age, that of
Domitian, of which the Historian affirms, Tacitus.
that then Inertia pro sapientia erat, Ignorance was the best knowledge,
laziness and servility was the best diligence; and we could wish this age did
not too much resemble that: But when we see every Marsyas with an old Pipe of
Minerva's, dares contend with Apollo; that men of low and cheap abilities, are
too loud and too hard for men of the choicest and best design, certainly
Inertia pro sapientia erit, He Is the best Orator that dwells in silence, and
he is the wisest man that keeps the privacy and recluseness of his own ville.
Appion.
Hannibal once told Scipio, that it had been better both for Rome and Carthage,
if both of them had been contented within their own bounds; and possibly it had
been more honorable both for our brethren of the Presbytery, and our selves,
had we made our lists more private, and played our prizes only behind the
Curtains, for so we had confined and determined our ignorance to our own
sphere, and our defects had been visible to no eyes but our own. Plutarch.
But as Antalcidas objected to Agesilans, The Spartans have made the Thebanes
fight whether they would or no; the exasperations and bitterness of our
brethren, Pliny.
have lent cowards courage, and provoked us to combat whether we would or no;
Miserum est pati nec licere quert; It Is a hard case to be hurt, and to have our
mouths stopped; to suffer, and to be obliged not to complain; Qui unam patitur
iujuriam invitat aliam; Seneca.
It Is a certain rule with the men of this persuasion. If you take a blow from
them on one cheek, you cannot be Christians in their Calender unless you turn
the other also. We had well hoped, that what Tully notes to be the eloquence of
Atticus, Respondere sciat me sibi dum taceo, our silence and our patience might
have been good Orators for us to have answered the pretensions of their power,
the disguises of their popular discourses, and the harsh proceedings toward us
but the more we suffered, they triumphed the more; and because it was our
judgment and choice to dwell in silence; they thought we either could not or
durst not speak. But nemo nobis amicis uti potest and Adulatoribus. They shall
find we are their friends, but not their Parasites; we will speak that truth
which we understand, beseech the good spirit to lead them and us into all
truth; and in this mean and inconsiderable service, we appeal to the 1000
witnesses within us, that we speak nothing out of pride or envy, or with
unchristian reflections upon our sufferings; but with a hearty desire of peace,
that they or we may be convinced, and at last meet by a unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace.

We shall not present the Rooms and model of the whole house in the Porch, yet
we shall preface a recital of those grievances, which made us open our mouths
in this discourse, Ne extorqueretur nobis causa Lucii Cottae patrocinio, lest
we might seem to fear the Giant of Presbytery, and to think it were only that
Palladium that would preserve the City of God.

About 7 months since, the Classis of Manchester published their Breviats or
censures, against all that came not in to them for trial and examination,
wherein they go to the high ways, and compel all to come in and give
submission to their Government, by subjecting themselves to examination by the
Ministers and Elders, not only such as may be suspected to be ignorant or
scandalous, but all, of all elevations, of all judgments, must come under the
Inquisition, not so much we fear to fit them for the Sacrament, as to teach
them obedience, that they may know themselves, Tacitus.
as Tiberius said of the Senate, that they are homines ad servitutem nati, to
owe an obedience to their new Masters, which they must pay under the grand
penalties of suspension and excommunication.

I answer to these, Bruta fulmina, we with all meekness and humility sent them
one single sheet of paper, desiring satisfaction in some things wherein our
reason and religion obliged us to be of a different judgment from them; This
one sheet they returned in seven, an answer long enough, if it be sound enough.

To satisfy us in our scruples, and in their proceedings, they pretend for
what they do, both an Ecclesiastical and civil function, a Commission from
Christ and the State also: But that maxim of the ancient will here be found
true (...), Our own Laws built upon passion and interest, are commonly
lawless; It is apparent to us, that their new Lights have no light from
Antiquity or primitive forms; that their new Rules have no establishment,
either by the Laws of the Christan Church, or the Laws of this Land. St.
Jerome said of Origin, That ingenii sui acumina putat ecclesia esse Sacramenta,
an imagination sure of our Presbyters, that the placita of their own wills must
pass for civil and divine constitutions. We wonder that men pretending to
Learning and Religion, should not only call in the Lord of truth to abett the
phansies of men, but should also pretend to encouragement and Commissions from
the State to second their prevarications.

It has pleased his Highness in his wisdom and clemency, to secure all godly
and peaceable men professing Jesus Christ, from those Ordinances which the
rigor of Presbytery had mounted against them; but where he gives the least
encouragement for this power usurped by them, we find not; and therefore we
think it is friendly advice, that they take heed least their unguided zeal or
interest precipitate them into a praemunire, since under color of Authority,
they have made Laws and Canons, and published them openly in the Church for
all to obey upon pain of excommunication, not only against all the ancient
known Laws of elder date, but also contrary to the present establishment and
the Magistracy under which we now live.

It Is a trouble to us, to hear them cry out against Prelacy and Episcopacy, as
only an artificial and political device to Lord it over Gods inheritance,
whereas indeed their little fingers are heavier then the Prelates loins; though
they tell us their way is a friendly, meek, and social way, we find it not;
they make us only as Publicans and Heathens; it should seem that all that they
intended in the change of Church Government, was only to slice the Diocesan
into Parochial Bishops; and with him in Lucian, To cut out the old useless
Moons into fine new Stars, every one of which claim the same influence and
dominion over the people which the Prelates did.

It Is a trouble to us, to hear them inveigh against Heretics, and
Schismatics, against the Novatian and Donatists of old, when they walk in
their steps, maintain their principles, and espouse their quarrels. We are
told by the Church Historians, That the doctrine against mixt-communion, was a
brat begotten by Novatus, nursed up by Lucifer and Audius, but it grew not till
Donatus became its foster-Father, then indeed it flourisht and spread amain,
till St. Austin by his judicious and clear opposition did banish it, that, and
the subsequent Ages; the Anabaptists of the last age called it back into
Germany, Quod aruit in se refloruit in illis; they grafted upon the old stock,
and wanted nothing of the Donatists but to be called so. Now amongst other of
their dangerous and erroneous principles, Bullinger notes this for one of the
chief, De doctrina, caenae scrupulose quaerunt Anabaptistae, quorum causa caena
dominica sit instituta. They were nice and scrupulous, and inquisitive
concerning the Lords Supper, conluding it was only to be given to the Saints,
and concluding the Saints to their own folds.

This is the direct practice of the Scottish and English Presbytery; because
the Parliament formerly, and now his Highness, in their wisdom and prudence
have so blunted the edge of their secular power, that they cannot hurt us with
that, they fly to their religious shifts, and what David said of Goliah's
sword, surely they say of the holy Sacrament, There Is none like unto that; no
engine so likely to teach us obedience, and to give them the sovereignty as
that. They impale the supper of Christ to their own enclosures, and as absolute
Judges of all communicants, keep back all persons that have not their Shiboleth
ready, that will not fall down and worship that Idol which they have set up.
The Egyptians were hard Taskmasters, to expect the children of Israel should
make Bricks, and make straw too, to require the same number of bricks without
materials to make them of: this is something like the severity of our new
Masters, they censure for not doing that which they render to us impossible: If
we come not to the Lords Supper, we must be excommunicate; and they will not
permit us to come, because we are ignorant, or scandalous, or profane; and
it is proof enough we are so, because we are too stout to fall down and worship
their imaginations.

It Is a trouble to us, that men who impropriate to themselves the name of
Saints, and would have the world to think them the only Christians, should be
so far from that (...), that meekness and sweetness of the Gospel, that they
are still of the old legal spirit, to eradicate and destroy all that are not
of their way: Instead of sweetning and indearing the spirits of men, that they
may come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved, they irritate and imbitter
them by their two bold judging in private, and by their fierce and severe
censures in public, as if indeed it were their work to deliver them up unto
Satan.

These things have forced us contrary to our own dispositions and inclinations,
to appear in public, nor only for our own vindication, but in defense of
Ecclesiastical and civil constitutions, well hoping that these mean endeavors
will encourage some worthy and learned Champions to take up Arms for the
defense of that cause which we love: what we have done, quale quale sit, what
ever it be, inasmuch as in the sincerity of our hearts we profess it is done,
sine ullo studio contentionis, without any pleasure or delight in contention,
but only for the love of truth, we hope our good God will give it a more
gracious success, and good men will give it a more charitable reception.

Errata sic Corrigenda.
PAge 81. line 25. for whereas, read whereat. p. 82 l. 2 these, r. those. p. 83
l. 10 Answer as it is to, r. Answer it is to be. ibid. l. 16 pray, r. pay. p.
84 l. 32 See, r. So. p. 85 l. unaninous, r. unanimous. p. 87 l. 24 referring,
r. restoring. p. 88 l. 13. examination, r. excommunication. Ih the Preface, p.
3. l. 30. for I, r. In.

At the first Class at Manchester Septem. 8th 1657.
IN pursuance of an Order of the last Provincial, the first Class does humbly
represent to this Assembly their apprehensions in the case to them propounded
in a draught prepared for the several Congregations belonging to their own
Association, if it shall be approved of by this Assembly, and which they do
wholely submit to their Judgments.

It being represented to this Class, and much complained of, and offense being
taken, That in the several Congregations, (if not all) belonging to the
Association, there are many persons of all sorts, that are members of
Congregations, and publicly enjoy several privileges; as, the hearing of the
Word, prayers of the Church, and baptizing of their children; and satisfaction
for injuries done unto them, That yet live in a total and sinful neglect of
the Lords Supper, that are scandalous and offensive in their lives, drunkards,
unclean persons, swearers, Sabbath Breakers, neglecters of Family Duties, that
will not subject themselves to the present government of the Church, but live
as lawless persons, out of their rank and order, and there are sundry that are
grossly ignorant in the main points of Christian Religion. These are to give
notice, that this Class, laying these things to heart, and much grieved for
them, do publish and make known;

1. That every Minister belonging to this Association, shall set apart one or
two days, or more of the week days, in every month, for the catechizing of
the several families belonging to their respective Congregations; and for the
information of the ignorant in those families, and that the families to be
catechized on each of such days, set apart for that purpose, have notice the
Lords day before, to meet the Ministers either at the Church or Chapel, or the
Ministers house, or some other house within the Congregation, that may be
convenient for the neighboring families to meet at, that shall be appointed for
such a day, as may be judged meetest by the several Ministers.

2. That notice shall be taken of all persons that forsake the public
Assemblies of the Saints, and constantly turn their backs of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.

3. That like notice shall be taken of all scandalous persons.

4. That they shall be privately admonished, according to the order prescribed
by Christ, Mat. 18. once or twice, to see if they will reform; and that the
Minister, when he catechizeth the several families, shall exhort such persons
in them as he finds to be of a competent knowledge, and are blameless in
life, that they present themselves to the Eldership, that they may be admitted
to the Lords Supper.

5. That if they will neither hearken to private admonition, nor admonition of
the Eldership, their names shall be published openly in the several
Congregations, and they warned before all to reform.

6. That if after all this they shall continue obstinate, they shall be cast
out, and excommunicated.

These things this Class thought fit to give public notice of, being very
sensible, that, for the want of the vigorous exercise of Church discipline,
ignorance, Atheism, and licentiousness grows upon us, to the great dishonor of
God, scandal of Religion, the hazard and undoing of many precious souls, and
the laying a blot on several Congregations; and therefore they are resolved,
(seeing themselves necessitated, to this severity of discipline, for the
freeing themselves from the great guilt of neglect of their own duty, that
otherwise they shall be under) to make use of that power that Christ has
committed to them, for edification, and not for destruction; although it would
be their far greater joy, that there might not be occasion of using
sharpness: and therefore they do earnestly in the bowels of Jesus Christ
beseech all those that are ignorant, that they would apply themselves
diligently to the use of all public and private means for their information,
submitting themselves with all readiness to be instructed; and to consider,
that without knowledge the mind cannot be good: and they do also in the name of
Jesus Christ, exhort and warn all such as live scandalously, and in the
practice of open sins, that they break off their iniquities by repentance, and
turn unto God speedily with their whole heart, that they neither incurr the
censure of being cast out of the Church here, nor by continuing in their
sinful course, be kept for ever entering into the kingdom of Heaven hereafter.

And touching such as turn their backs of the Lords Supper constantly, this
Class does wish them seriously, to consider what an account they will be able
to give unto Jesus Christ, for their living in the daily neglect of an
ordinance that is so exceeding necessary for their own comfort and growth in
grace; and that they would lay aside all prejudice, whatever it is that
hinders, and submit themselves unto wholesome doctrine, for their own good, as
this Class has been ready on their part to express all tenderness toward
the weak, and a willingness to condescend to the meanest, for the removing all
occasions of stumbling, so far as lies in their power. And yet, considering
the fearful danger that all such do lay themselves open unto, that shall eat
and drink the Body and Blood of the Lord unworthily, they do warn whosoever
comes to the Lords Table, to take special care so often as they come, to
examine themselves, lest they eat and drink their own damnation.

But because the exercise of Church discipline must begin at private persons,
and that if they neglect their duty of watching over, and admonishing one
another, and bringing complaints to the Eldership as there is occasion, little
or nothing can be done for the through reformation of the several Congregations;
this Class does therefore warn all and every of the members belonging unto
them, to consider the great guilt they will lie under, if they through their
neglect, obstruct so needful and necessary a work, and does expect therefore
in all faithfulness, laying aside all partiality, slavishnesse, and
self-respects, they should address themselves to the discharge of their
duties, that if any walk disorderly, and will not be reclaimed by private
admonition, they making complaint thereof to the Eldership, course may be taken
for excommunicating of the obstinate, and thereby purging out the old leven, to
the glory of God, the delivering their own souls from that guilt they will
otherwise lie under, the preserving the Ordinances from profanation, and the
rest of the lump from being levened, the stopping of the mouths of such as
seek occasion against us, and finally the everlasting welfare and salvation of
the souls of those that go astray.

By the Provincial Assembly at Preston, October. 6. 1657. RICHARD HEYRICKE
Moderator pro tempore.
This Presentation is approved by the Provincial Assembly, THOMAS JOHNSON,
Moderator. EDWARD GEE, Scribe.


To the Eldership of the several congregations belonging to the Association of
the First Class at Manchester, within the Province of Lancaster; These.
Give us leave to salute you, in your own Terms.
WE have seen and seriously weighed that paper draught, Entitled A
presentation of the first Class at Manchester, dated the 8. of Sept. 1657.
confirmed by the Provincial Assembly at Preston, October. 6. and published at
Manchester Church the 22. of Nov. in the aforesaid year: and do publish this
our sense, and Apprehension of it, as far as is plain to us, not resting in the
Judgment and determination of any General Council contrary thereunto (if any
such should be) much less to one of your Provincial Assemblies; Though you seem
to submit to your Provincial, what you will hardly grant to a General Council:
In which we dissent from you; Though in other things we shall join, as first.

1. We join with you, in a deep sense of the several gross sins and errors of
the times, desiring earnestly to mourn, first for our own, next for the sins of
others of our Christian Brethren, and fellow members of that Church, whereof
Christ is the Head: We are grieved together with you, for the Scandalous and
offensive lives of such as live in drunkeness, uncleaness, swearing,
profanation of the Sabbath, etc.

2. We are also sensible with you, that there are sundry persons, grossly
ignorant, in the main points of Christian Religion.

3. You with us again (we hope) are sensible and grieved (though you do not at
all mention them) for the gross errors in judgment, and the damnable Doctrine
of many, who have rent themselves into as many several heresies, as they have
into Sects and Schisms.

Thus far we agree, nay more, touching the way of informing the ignorant, and
reforming the wicked and erroneous, we shall not much dissent.

1. And first for the information and instruction of the ignorant, by way of
Catechizing, before they be admitted to the Sacrament; The course by you
published (provided it be in public) little differs from the order
prescribed by the Church of England, and other reformed Churches abroad, before
any be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords supper.

2. For those who err so grossly, whether in Doctrinals, or points of
discipline, thereby renting from a true constituted Church: Though you speak
nothing either of their sin or punishment, yet we hope, you with us do hold,
That the Churches lawful Pastors, have the power of the Keys committed to
them, to excommunicate such offenders.

3. For such as are scandalous and wicked in their lives; Admonition, private
and public, is to be observed according to Christ's rule Mat. 18. but if they
still continue, and will not reform, the Churches lawful Pastors have power to
excommunicate such.

Thus far we accord in judgment, touching the way of informing the ignorant,
and reforming wicked persons, and schismatical; which course is so fully
warranted by the Word of God, and the constant practice of the Catholic
Church, that we are not so wavering and unsettled in our apprehensions of the
case, as to submit either it or them, either wholly or in part, to the contrary
judgment and determination of a General Council of the Eastern or Western
Churches; much less, to a new termed Provincial Assembly at Preston, wherein we
no little differ from you.

Other parts of your Paper are full of darkness, to which we cannot so fully
assent, till further explicated and unfolded by you. For,

1. Whereas you say, That in the several congregations (if not in all)
belonging to this Association, there are many persons of all sorts that are
members of congregations, etc. you seem to hint, that though your grief may be
general (as ours) for all offenders, yet your censures extend only to those
who have admitted themselves members of some Congregation within your
Association, and yet live inordinately, and will not be admonished: If so, then
we who never were any members or associates of yours, are not within the verge
and compass of your Presbyterian discipline; for what have you to do to judge
those that are without?

2. But whereas your complaint, and offense taken, is, That many there are of
all sorts, who will not submit themselves to the present Government of the
Church, but live like lawless persons out of their rank and order.

If by the present Government of the Church, you mean your own (as may strongly
be conjectured you do) then are we also comprehended therein, and must fall
within your censure, and not only we, but all Papists, Anabaptists, and all
other, of what Profession, and Religion soever, who live within the Parish,
must be taken for members of some one Congregation within your Association, and
so driven into the common fold of Presbytery, and be subject to your
Government: And this (as we suppose) is the chief design of you, in this, as in
other transactions of yours, to subject all to your Government, which you
garnish over with the specious title, of Christ's Government, Throne, and
Scepter. Presbytery is the main thing driven at here; and however she comes
ushered in with a Godly pretense of sorrow, for the sins and ignorance of the
times, and a duty incumbent upon you, to exercise the power which Christ has
committed to you, for edification, and not for destruction; yet these are but
as so many waste papers wherein Presbytery is wrapped, to make it look more
handsomely, and pass more currently; but beware we must, for latet anguis in
Herba.

Object. But you say, For want of the vigorous exercise of this Ecclesiastical
discipline, ignorance, Atheism, and Licentiousness grows upon us, and men live
as lawless persons, out of their rank and order, because not subject to your
present Government.

Sol. We pray for the establishment of such Church Government, throughout his
Highness Dominions, as is consonant to the will of God, and Universal practice
of primitive Churches, that Ecclesiastical discipline may be exercised, in the
hands of them, to whom it was committed by Christ, and left by him, to be
transferred from hand to hand to the end of the World; and shall readily join
with you in humble addresses, to his Highness, and his great Council, for the
establishment of such a Church Government.

In the mean time though there may be such, who (as you say) live as lawless
persons, out of their rank and order, yet are they subject to law, and
therefore subject to punishment, for though your Ecclesiastical sword cannot
take hold on them, the civil sword does reach them.

Your Class may do well then not to contemn (as in charity we hope you do not)
the authority of the civil Magistrate, but in stead of warning all and every
member belonging to them, to complain to the Eldership, of those that walk
disorderly, and will not be reclaimed, to the end they may excommunicate them,
That they exhort them to complain to the civil Magistrate, whose sword of
Justice is sharper and longer, and likely to work a greater reformation in the
lives, and manners of men, by a corporal and pecuniary Mulct, then any sword of
excommunication or other Church censure your Eldership can any way pretend unto;

There are other parts of your paper do remain likewise dark, which we desire
may be made plain unto us; for whereas you say,

There are many persons of all sorts, etc. That will not submit themselves to
the present Government of the Church, but live as lawless persons, out of their
rank and order: Our Quaeres thereupon are;

1. Why Government in singulari? is there no Ecclesiastical Government but
yours? may not another Church have its Government different from yours, yet not
different from that which Christ has prescribed in his Word? Calvin says,
yea; Scimus enim unicuique Ecclesiae, etc. And accordingly there are other
Churches in England different in Government from yours, and as good as yours.

But if you say yours is the Government, ((...)) by way of eminency, as Christ's
own Government more immediately, and jure divino, which you so much defend, then
why (the present) is there no present Government in any Church or Assembly of
Saints, but where your discipline is erected? Are all the rest at present
without Government? or where has yours been this 1500. years past till this
present? Has Antichristianism so overspread the face of the Church that
Christ's own Government could never get footing till this present? But now
subjection is required thereto of all, yet many of all sorts will not subject,
but live as lawless persons, out of their rank and order.

Our next Quaere is;

What? must all those that observe not your ranks and orders, subject not
themselves to your present Government, be taken for lawless persons, out of
their rank and order? Yea; for so this close connection of yours seems to
import, (viz.) many who do not subject but live, etc.

In your paper you further proceed, and make it an order, That notice shall be
taken of all persons, that forsake the public assembly of Saints.

We would gladly know how far you extend this Saintship, this Church and
assembly of Saints, if to your own Church only, and such as subject themselves
to your Government; then S. Augustines Answer against the Donatists, who would
not acknowledge a Church in the World but amongst themselves, may also be yours,
O Impudentem Vocem! (says he) Illa non est, Quia tu in illa non es: Vide ne tu
ideo non sis, nam illa erit etsi tu non sis.

But if your charity reach further, then to your own assemblies, then you make
lawless persons, such as will not subject themselves to your Government,
Saints, and members at least of the invisible Triumphant Church, though none of
your present visible militant Church; and then your charity over reaches.

Again, we are unsatisfied in the Word (Public) the public assemblies of
the Saints, What? do not private assemblies please you? We presume you are not
against private meetings, your own practice speaks the contrary? But you will
bind all (notwithstanding your private Assemblies) to frequent your public
also, other ways they shall be taken notice of: What? though they cannot
submit to your Government? Leave you no room for tender consciences? The Laws
of the Land have otherwise provided: And if you, under color of authority,
will make Laws and Edicts, and publish them openly in the Church, for all to
obey, upon pain of excommunication, contrary to the Laws in force, whether you
do it in contempt of the civil power, or through ignorance of the Laws; which
later is rather to be supposed, in a charitable and favorable construction,
yet in what sense soever it be taken, we much question, and it concerns you to
look to it, whether you have not run your selves into a praemunire.

Again, whereas you say, That like notice shall be taken of all scandalous
persons. Our next Quaere is; Whether those that forsake the public Assemblies
of Saints in the 2d order, may not be taken for scandalous, and so comprehended
in this 3d. If so, Quare oneramini ritibus? why do you lengthen out your paper,
and burden us with traditions, in multiplying of orders sine necessitate ad
Arthritim usque?

After the 2d and 3d orders against those that forsake the public Assemblies
of Saints, and such as are scandalous, comes in a fourth, touching the
Catechumenists in the first order mentioned; (viz.) That the Minister when he
Catechizeth the several Families, shall exhort such persons in them as he
finds, be of competent knowledge, and are blameless in life, that they present
themselves to the Eldership, that they may be admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lord supper: But what if they will not present themselves before the Eldership?
The Minister must exhort and admonish them. What if still they refuse? Their
names shall be published openly in the several congregations, and they warned
before all to reform. That Is the 9th. order. Mark! Men of blameless life and
knowledge must be warned before all to reform.

But what if after all this they will not reform, but continue obstinate? Then
no admission to the Sacrament; that is employed in the fourth order; There Is
their Excommunicatio minor: But that is not all, a higher censure yet; They
shall be cast out, and excommunicated; So says the 6th and last order, the
great Excommunication, which casts out of the Church also, and judges them
no better, then Heathens, and Publicans, notwithstanding all their piety and
knowledge.

So that, in brief, all wilfully ignorant and Scandalous are to be
excommunicated; and not only they, but the knowing, and blameless of life, if
they present not themselves to the Eldership. These things premised, lying
sadly on our spirits and consciences, as not sound and orthodox, for which we
cannot so readily join with you, till further satisfaction be given us, and
which the publisher of your Paper promised should be given to all that did
desire, We therefore thought fit to signify these our scruples to you, and
shall wait earnestly for a speedy satisfaction in the particulars, remaining

Your Brethren desirous of Truth, Unity and Peace in the Church. Isaac Allen.
Jo: Pollett. Tho: Prestwich. Leonard Egerton. Ferdinando Stanley. etc.


At Manchester, Feb. 23. 1657. The Answer of the First Classis within the
Province of Lancaster, unto a Paper presented unto them at their Classical
meeting, Jan. 12. 1657. by certain Gentlemen, subscribed by them and sundry
others within the bounds of this Association.
Gentlemen,
WE have perused your Paper, and do find in it sundry mistakes, and some
manifest wrestings of our plain meaning, in that Paper of ours, which was
published in our several Congregations: And we are also sensible of the sharp
reflections in it, upon the Government, that is committed to our mannagement,
and on our selves. But we shall not go about to answer you in that kind: and
therefore laying aside animosities, and putting away gall and bitterness, in
the spirit of love and meekness, however in faithfulness and plainness, we
shall endeavor to show you your Errors and rectify your mistakes. And we do
thus far acknowledge your fair dealing, (for which we give you hearty thanks)
that you address your selves unto us, giving us thereby the opportunity, both
to vindicate our selves, and give you a right understanding of the matters
wherein you are mistaken.

Our leisure will not permit us to spend time about impertinencies; but yet,
that you may not conceive we are destitute of Civil Authority, (which you in
your Paper mind us not to contemn, and we our selves do professedly testify
all due respects unto, as in duty we are bound) we entreat you to take
notice, That the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament having resolved to
establish the Presbyterian Government throughout the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, did August 19. 1645. publish their directions, after advice
had with the Assembly of Divines, for the electing and choosing of ruling Elders
in all the Congregations, and in the Classical Assemblies for the Cities of
London and Westminster, and the several Counties of the Kingdom, for the speedy
settling of the Presbyterian Government. In these directions, (as may be seen
page 8.) they did ordain, That in the several Counties certain persons,
Ministers and others, should be appointed by authority of Parliament, who
should consider, how the several Counties respectively might be most
conveniently divided into distinct Classical Presbyteries; and what Ministers
and others were fit to be of each Classis. And that they should accordingly
make such division and nomination of persons for each Classical Presbytery.
Which divisions, and persons so named for every division, the appointed should
be certified up to the Parliament. And they further appointed, That the said
several Classes respectively being approved by Parliament, within their several
precincts should have power to constitute Congregational Elderships.

According to these directions, the persons by them appointed for this County
met, and did consider, how it might be most conveniently divided into distinct
Classical Presbyteries, and what Ministers and others were fit to be of each
Classis: and also made such a division and nomination accordingly, and
certified the same up to the Parliament; All which being done according to
their directions and appointment, It was resolved by the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, Oct. 2. 1646. That they did approve of the division of
the County of Lancaster into nine Classical Presbyteries represented from the
said County. And it was further resolved, That the said Houses did approve of
the Ministers and other persons represented from the County of Lancaster, as
fit to be of the several and respective Classes, into which the said County was
divided. Which division of this County into nine Classical Presbyteries, and
the approval thereof by the said Lords and Commons was forthwith printed and
published. In this division so made and approved, The first Classis is to
contain Manchester Parish, Prestwich Parish, Oldham Parish, Flixton Parish,
Eccles Parish, and Ashton under-line Parish, as by what was then printed, and
is yet extant, is to be seen. Further, we wish you to take notice, That in
your forementioned Directions page 3. Direction 6. it is there thus ordained,
That all Parishes and places whatsoever (as well privileged places and exempt
Jurisdictions, as others) be brought under the government of Congregational,
Classical, and National Assemblies. Provided, that the Chapels or places in
the houses of the Peers of this Realm should continue free for the exercise of
Divine Duties, to be performed according to the Directory. And also, that it
was ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, December. 21. 1646.
That the several Classes in Lancashire should be one Province; As appears by
their Order to that purpose. As there is also another Order of theirs of October.
16. 1648. enabling the several Classes within this Province to send their
Delegates to meet in a Provincial Assembly in Preston, and appointing the time
of their first meeting; the number of the Delegates, that were to be sent to
the said Assembly; and the Quorum of the Assembly, according to the provision
that had been made before by the Parliament, before any Provincial Assembly
could by virtue of their Authority be enabled to act Provincially. By which
account thus given it is manifest, That the setting up the Presbyterian
Government in this County: The division of it into several Classes: The making
of those Classes into a Province, and their Acting Provincially: As also the
appointing this Classis to be the first, (that is, the first in regard of the
number only, the account beginning here) was all done by Authority of
Parliament. And that, when we call our selves the first Classis within the
Province of Lancaster, we are awarranted thereto by authority of Parliament.
And so your Saluting us in our own terms, (which we gave not to our selves,
till the Parliament had first given them to us) will not seem strange to them,
that then did, or now do, acknowledge that Authority and Power, which the
Parliament exercised in those times. Especially considering there was nothing
done since, either by that Parliament or any other, or by his Highness and the
last Parliament, that takes from us what was then granted, and as we shall
clear further anon.

In your Preface to what in your Paper you have to say unto us, there is in the
first place a mistake of that title, which was given by us unto ours; (which
you call a Paper draught) for it was not by us entitled a Presentation (as you
call it) but a Draught, that represented to the Provincial Assembly our
apprehensions in a case by them propounded unto us; And was approved by the
Provincial, under the Title of a Representation. But this perhaps was but the
mistake of the Scribe, and we insist not on it.

It is of greater weight and moment, to take notice of what you publish as your
sense and apprehensions of it, (not resting in the judgment or determination of
any general Council contrary thereunto) if any such should be, much less to
one of our Provincial Assemblies. Although you tell us, we seem to submit to
our Provincial, what we will hardly grant to a general Council; in which you
profess to differ from us.

We know very well, and have learned better from the Scriptures, then to
resolve our Faith into the determination of any company of men on Earth
whatsoever, or to build our Faith on the Judgment of Synods, Provincial or
National; or of General Councils, that have been heretofore, or that may be
hereafter. We are sure all men are fallible; and Faith, that is a sure and
certain grace, must have a sure and certain Foundation, which is only the
infallible and written Word of God. And if this only be your meaning, you have
not us differing from you. But yet when we consider, That Synods and Councils,
rightly constituted and regularly called, as they may be then of great use for
light and guidance, so also that they are the Ordinance of God, and by him
invested with authority, and so have an authoritative Judgment belonging to
them, and which is not in private persons, we dare not contemn them, nor speak
slightly of them. And seeing the higher Assemblies have greater Authority then
the lower, (as there is more power in the whole, then in the part; in the whole
body, then in any one, or some members) and that, however we are well enough
satisfied, that we have the Authority of a Class, yet we are under the
Authority of the Provincial Assembly; We see not wherein we offended, that
we submitted our apprehensions, in the Case propounded by that Assembly unto
us, unto their Judgment. There is concerning matters of Religion Judicium
Privatum, or a Private Judgment; and this belongs to all Christians, who are to
fee with their own eyes, and judge, concerning what is necessary for them to
know and believe in matters of this nature. This Judgment, as there is good
reason why we should allow it to our selves, so we should Lord it over men's
consciences, if we should deny it to any. There is also Judicium Publicum and
Authoritativum, A Public and an Authoritative Judgment; and this is either
Concional, which belongs to every lawful Minister (to whom the Key of Doctrine
is committed) by himself singly: or else it is Juridical, and this belongs to
Synods and Councils, who having the Key of Discipline, are invested with
authority to inquire into, try, examine, censure and judge of matters of
Doctrine and Discipline authoritatively, (although they be tied to the rule of
Gods Word in such proceedings, as Judges to the Law) and likewise to censure
offenders according to their merit, when such cases are regularly and orderly
brought before them. And in this sense it was, that we submitted our
apprehensions in the Paper published to the Judgment of the Provincial
Assembly. And we believe, when the Apostle tells us, 1. Cor. 14.32. That the
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: And our Savior Christ
says, Mat. 18. Tell the Church. And when we consider, what was practiced by
Paul and Barnabas, and certain others (who, upon occasion of a contest that
arose in the Church at Antioch about a matter of Doctrine, were sent up from
that Church to Jerusalem to the Apostles and Elders about that question) from
these and other Scriptural grounds we had sufficient ground for so doing. We
are sure also, That Whitaker de Conciliis questione quinta, and Chamierus in
his Panstratia de oecumenico. Pontifice, ubi de Authoritate Papae in Ecclesia,
cap. 13. and cap. 14. And generally all our Protestant Divines against the
Papists, alleging the Texts abovementioned and others, do prove abundantly,
that in the sense declared, the Pope is to be subject to a general Council,
wherein also sundry Papists do concur with them. And questionless, if in the
time of Augustine (who was no contemner of Synods and Councils) any in this
sense had declared, that they would not have submitted their apprehensions to
their judgment, he would have cried out against them as well as against the
Donatists, O impudentem vocem! And we hope, when you have weighed the matter
better, you will not in this sense see any reason to refuse to submit either
your sense and apprehensions of our Paper, or what you may publish as your own
private Judgments in other matters about Religion, to the Judgment of a general
Council, supposing it might be had.

We have now done with your Preface, and come to the matter it self, wherein
you profess,

(1.) To join with us in a deep sense of the several gross sins and errors of
the times, desiring earnestly to mourn first for your own sins, next for the
sins of others, etc. And here we do heartily pray, that neither we nor you
may any of us condemn our selves, either by professing our sorrow, for what
sins we may practice, or by refusing to help forward the good that we profess
to allow of, but may testify the truth of our sorrow for our own and other
men's sins, by suitable endeavors to reform what is amiss in our selves, and
helping forward every one in his place the reformation of others.

(2.) In the next place, you say, You are also sensible with us, that there are
sundry persons grossly ignorant in the main points of Christian Religion. And if
so, we hope you will acknowledge, that where, after the enjoying of plenty of
Preaching and the public Catechizing, that has been used for many years
together, (and much more where there has been less of this means) many
continue grossly ignorant in the main points of Religion, it is at least not to
be condemned in such Ministers, as shall be willing to take the pains by
private Catechizing to instruct such persons: This course being to the
Ministers a matter of pains only; and that hereupon, where the public
Catechizing attains not its desired end, the private may be good and useful,
that so poor souls perish not for lack of knowledge.

(3.) Lastly You hope, That we with you are sensible and grieved, though, you
say, we do not mention them, for the gross errors in judgment and damnable
Doctrine of many, who have rent themselves into as many several Heresies, as
they have into Sects and Schisms.

You may perceive by the title of our Paper, that it was a representation of
our apprehensions to the Provincial Assembly, in the Case to us propounded by
the said Provincial, and what that was, we shall particularly declare anon,
(although by what we say had been complained of, and represented unto us, it
might be gathered) and therefore we were chiefly to apply our selves to that,
which was therein our main work and business. That the gross and damnable
errors, that the loosnesse of these times have brought forth, are to be
bewailed (if it were possible) with tears of blood, is most freely to be
confessed. And whether we lay them not to heart in some poor measure, God the
searcher of all hearts he knows; as what complaints have been made of these by
the members of this Classis, both in their prayers and preaching, men can
witness; and likewise what testimonies have been given to the truth of Jesus
Christ, and against the errors of the times, subscribed with their hands and
published to the world, though therein but concurring with the rest of their
Reverend Brethren in this Province, in the Province of London, and other
Counties of the Land, posterity may read, when we are in our graves. But as
to the most of the Congregations belonging to this Classis, the great business
to be looked after was the use of our best endeavors, for the informing of the
ignorant, and the reforming of the scandalous, the numbers of these being
great, and of those that are so grossly erroneous as to maintain damnable
doctrines, and whereof you profess your selves to be so sensible, very
inconsiderable, in comparison of the former: and in sundry of our
Congregations, if not in most, (blessed be God for it) not any at all, that we
know of. And therefore there was not that reason to make any such express
mention of these as of the former, although in our Paper we were not herein
neither altogether silent, as will after appear.

Having professed your agreement with us thus far, yo go on to declare your
selves, That, touching the way of informing the ignorant, and reforming the
wicked and erroneous, you shall not much dissent. And

(1.) You say, For the Information and instruction of the ignorant by way of
Catechizing before they be admitted to the Sacrament, the course by us
published (provided, you say, it be in public) little differs from the Order
prescribed by the Church of England and other Reformed Churches abroad, before
any be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

That all Children and others, (so many as it is fit to instruct after that
manner) be publicly catechized, is that, which we heartily wish had been and
were more generally practiced in our own Church at home, as it is practiced by
the Reformed Churches abroad. And certainly, had the public catechizing of
Children and others been more generally and constantly practiced, there had not
been that cause to complain of the gross ignorance of sundry persons of ripe
years, and some of them governors of Families, as now there is. We do also
understand you by what you do here express, that you judge it not meet, that
the grossly ignorant should be admitted to the Lords Supper, in that you seem to
approve of the practice of the Reformed Churches abroad, (as of our own at
home) in taking course to inform the ignorant, before they admit them to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; And therefore we see not how you can in reason
deny, but there ought to be an examination and trial of all persons, before
they be admitted to the Lords Supper, that so the grossly ignorant may not be
admitted, as they might be, if all promiscuously were admitted without any
trial at all.

But whereas, in this concession about catechizing, you have a Proviso, that it
be in public, we do not see, why you should so limit it, if it be confessed,
that it is necessary, that the ignorant should be informed, and that
catechizing is an useful means to attain that end. You know how it would dash
sundry knowing persons to be catechized publicly in the Congregation. But as
for those that are conscious to themselves, that they are very ignorant, if
these should be called forth to public Catechizing, it were more likely to
drive them from the public Assembly, and so from the use of all means for
their information, then be availeable to this end. As touching what was
propounded by us in our paper, as the way for their information (though it was
not intended for any such a purpose as to exclude public Catechizing) it was
done in way of condescension to the weakest, and to show our willingness to
apply our selves to any course, so we might be isntrumental to bring poor dark
and blind Souls to the knowledge of Christ, and which in our Judgment is more
likely to be attained in many, as the case stands with them, in a more private
way of Catechizing in any of the ways propounded by us, then if we should
Catechize all the several Families publicly before the whole congregation.

(2) Touching those that err so grossly, whether in Doctrinals or points of
discipline, thereby renting from a true constituted Church, you say, we speak
nothing, either of their sin or punishment, yet you hope, we with you do hold,
that the Churches lawful Pastors have the power of the keys committed to
them, to excommunicate such offenders.

We have given you the reason already, why we made not such express mention of
these offenders, as of the former, although (as you will hereafter perceive) we
are not wholly silent touching eirher the sin or punishment of these. Only at
present, because you profess to allow of that previous course of admonition
prescribed by Christ, in reference to the scandalous Mat. 18. before they be
excommunicated, but here say nothing of any such course to be taken with the
heretical or schismatic; (though we hope also of you, that you disallow it
not) we shall briefly declare, what course is to be held by the rules of the
Presbyterian Government, before the sentence of excommunication pass against
these offenders, and whereof our paper was not silent. This Government, however
it gives no toleration to any such errors, as subvert the faith; or any other
errors, which overthrow the power of godliness; if the party, who holds them,
spreads them, seeking to draw others after him, or to any such practices, as in
their own nature manifestly subvert that order, Unity and Peace, which Christ
has established in his Church. These being offenses censured by this
Government, (and of which further afterward,) yet this Government prescribes
the exercise of patience and long suffering (even toward those that do grossly
err in Doctrine as well as toward those that are scandalous in life) in the
use of all means for the convincing them of their errors; by reasoning with
them out of the Scriptures: as we see was practiced in the Synod, that was held
at Jerusalem; and as we see the Fathers of the Nicene Council, did not disdain
to reason and dispute with Arrius (though he denied the Deity of Christ) before
they condemned him: And as also other Fathers did with other Heretics in the
Synods, although oftentimes in vain. That so none might have any just cause to
complain, that they were condemned, before they were fully heard. And as
touching such as run into such practices, as in their own nature tend
manifestly to the subverting of that order and unity which Christ has
established in the Church, it labors with these also in the use of all gentle
means to reclaim them, and bring them back again to the Church they have rent
themselves from, before it proceed to censure. As it does also put a difference
between the seducers, and ringleaders of a Sect, and those that are misled.
Having respect not only to the nature of the offense, but also to the quality
of the offender; and exercises patience and forbearance toward all, so long
as there is any hope of reducing them by mild correction: Being ever more
desireous to heal, then cut off any member. And thus having declared our selves
in this, we go an with you.

(3) For you say; For such as are scandalous and wicked in their lives,
admonition private and public is to be observed, according to Christ's rule
Mat. 18. But if they still continue, and will not reform, the Churches lawful
Pastors have power to excommunicate such.

In this you fully come up to what we hold, as to the means, that is to be used
for the reformation of these, and we are glad there is an agreement in
judgment betwixt you and us thus far. Neither can we see how, upon this
concession, you can in reason find fault with our proceedings, if there should
be occasion for our censuring any such persons, as for their notorious offenses
and their obstinacy therein, might justly merit the highest censure.

For however, perhaps you may say, you stumble chiefly at this, that our
ruling Elders (that in your judgment may be but mere Laymen) do join in the
Government with us; yet we see not how this can be any just ground of scruple
to any of you, who (if we mistake not) were all of you satisfied in your
consciences touching the lawfulness of the late Government of Episcopacy, as it
was then exercised, at least as to submission to it; and wherein
High-Commissioners, Chancelors and Commissaries (that were as much Laymen
then, as ruling Elders can be in your judgment now) had so great a share, as
to suspend Ministers from the exercise of their Ministry, upon such complaints
as, according to the orders, that were appointed in those days, they might
take cognizance of, and so far, as to decree the sentence of excommunication
against them and others, as there was occasion for it.

But here we must yet further profess, we do not know, whom you mean by lawful
Pastors, to whom you here grant the power of excommunication. Dr Hammond.
Some we know, there are, that would make the Diocesan Bishops the only
Pastors of the Church, and that other Ministers do but officiate by deputation
from them and under them. We hope you are not of the mind of these. For then,
as the dissent in judgment betwixt you and us would be far greater, then as
yet we apprehend it is; so hence it will follow, that, till Prelacy should be
restored, there must not (if you would provide for the safety of the persons
and estates of them that should manage the Government) be the dispencing of
any Church censures at all. For you may easily know, that not only by Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament before made for the abolishing of Archbishops and
Bishops, etc. (and which are confirmed by the late humble Advice assented unto
by his Highness sect. 12.) the office and jurisdiction of Diocesan Bishops is
taken away. But there is yet a further Bar put in against Prelacy in the 11.
sect. of the aforesaid humble Advice; where it is expressly cautioned, (and we
judge it was out of a conscientious mindfulness of what had been in those very
terms covenanted against) that the liberty, that is granted to some, be not
extended to Popery and Prelacy. And therefore if any Diocesan Bishop should
exercise his jurisdiction, and excommunicate any person within this Land,
wherein by Authority (as you may see afterward) there is also an appointment of
another Government, we leave it to those, that are learned in the Law to
determine, whether such Diocesan Bishops would not run themselves into a
praemunire.

But if you do not restrain lawful Pastors to these only, our doubt yet is,
Whether you mean not only such Ministers, as were ordained by Diocesan
Bishops, excluding those out of the number, that, since their being taken away,
have been ordained by Presbyters only?

If this be your sense, we shall only at present mind you, of what is
published, to be the Judgment of Dr Usher late Primate of Ireland, in a Book
lately put forth by Dr Bernard, Preacher to the Honorable Society of
Grayes-Inne; and whom, though a stranger to us, and one of a different
judgment from us in the point of Episcopacy, yet we reverence for his
moderation and profession of his desires for peace, wishing that such, as do
consent in substantials for matter of Doctrine, would consider of some
conjunction in point of Discipline. That private interests and circumstantials
might not keep them thus far asunder. See page 14^. of his last Book.
In which wish as we do cordially join our selves, so we heartily desire, that
all godly and moderate spirited men throughout the Land would also close. But
the book, which the said Doctor has lately published, is entitled. The
Judgment of the late Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland, etc. In this
Book this Doctor tells us, that the late Primate in Answer to a letter of his
(sent to him as it should seem for that purpose) declares his Judgment
touching the ordination of the Ministry in the Reformed Churches in France and
Holland. There he says, that Episcopus and Presbyter gradu tantum differunt,
non ordine. And consequently, that in places, where Bishops cannot be had, the
ordination by Presbyters stands valid. And in the close of his Answer about
this point he says; That for the testifiying of his Communion with the
Churches (of the Low-Countryes) of whom he had spoken immediately before: and
which he there professes, He does love and honor as true members of the
Universal Church: (notwithstanding the difference, that was betwixt him and
them about the point of Episcopacy) he does profess, That with like affection
he should receive the blessed Sacrament at the hands of the Dutch Ministers, if
he were in Holland, as he should do at the hands of the French Ministers if, he
were in Charenton. See page 125. and 126. Hence you may perceive, that the
Judgment of Dr Usher was; That the Ordination of Presbyters, where Bishops
cannot be had, stands valid. And consequently, if you be of his opinion, (and
you must have stronger reasons, then ever yet we have seen, to bear you out
therein if you judge otherwise) they ought to be esteemed lawful Pastors, to
whom you grant the power of Excommunication, Bishops being now taken away, and
may not therefore ordain according to the present Laws of the Land. The said Dr
Bernard has some animadvertisements upon that Letter (in which Dr Usher does
deliver his judgment, as above said) and there shows, that he was not in this
Judgment of his singular. He alleges Dr Davenant, that pious and learned
Bishop of Sarisbury, as consenting with him in it (in his determinations
quaest. 42.) and produces the principal of the Schooleman, Gulielmus
Parisiensis, Gerson, Durand, etc. and declares it to be the General opinion of
the Schoolmen; Episcopatum ut distinguitur a simplici sacerdotio non esse
alium ordinem, etc. see page 130. of the aforenamed Book, as also page 131.132.
Where the concurrence of Dr Davenant with Dr Usher in his judgment about this
matter is declared more fully. He adds also others, as in special, Dr Richard
Field in his learned Book of the Church lib. 3. cap. 39. and lib. 5. cap. 27.
And also that Book entitled A defense of the Ordination of the Ministers of
the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, maintained by Archdeacon Mason against
the Romanists. And further he says; He has been assured, it was not only the
Judgment of Bishop Overall, but that he had a principal hand in it. He tell
us, that the forementioned Author produces many testimonies; The Mr of the
Sentences, and most of the Schoolmen, Bonaventure, Thomas Aquinas, Durand,
Dominicus Soto, Richardus Armachanus, Tostatus, Alphonsus a Castro, Gerson,
Petrus Canisius, to have affirmed the same; and at last quoteth Medina a
principal Bishop of the Council of Trent, who affirmed, That Jerome, Ambrose,
Augustine, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact were of the
same judgment also. But you may see these things your selves in Dr Bernard,
page 132, 133, 134. We have been only at the pains to transcribe them.

We could alledg many more Testimonies to prove this: But we count these
sufficient; and do alledg these the rather, because brought by one that is of
the same Judgment with you, as we suppose.

But having declared how far you accord with us in Judgment, touching the way
of informing the ignorant, and reforming the wicked persons, and schismatical,
etc. you tell us; That you are not therein so wavering and unsettled in your
apprehensions of the Case, as to submit either it or them, either wholly or in
part, to the contrary Judgment and determination of a general Council of the
Eastern and Western Churches, much less to a new termed Provincial Assembly at
Preston; wherein you profess no little to differ from us.

That, which we submitted wholly to the Judgment of the Provincial Assembly,
was not, whether Catechizing was a way appointed by God in his Word, for the
information of the ignorant; but in what way of Catechizing (as is expressed in
our Paper) the ignorant in our Congregations, who never offered themselves unto
the Sacrament, were most like to be brought to some measure of knowledge; and
which is not a matter of Doctrine but of Order only. Neither was it by us
submitted to that Assembly; whether the censures of the Church were the means
appointed by Christ for the reforming of the scandalous? But whether it might
not be meet pro hic and nunc, and as the present case stood, to apply the
Censures? (and so put in practice at this time that, which in the General we
were sufficiently assured from the word of Truth, was the way for their
reformation) and with which we were both by God and Man entrusted to dispense
unto those that were openly scandalous in our Congregations; However they
contented themselves to live in the want of the Lords Supper, nor ever
presented themselves to the Eldership to be admitted to it. And this (because
merely circumstantiall, as to the dispencing of the Censures at this time and
to such Persons) we think herein we owed the Provincial Assembly (unto whose
Authority we profess our selves to be subject) so much respect and duty, as to
submit our apprehensions in a Case of this nature (which they had propounded
unto us to be seriously weighed, as they had done to the rest of the Classes
within this Province) unto their Judgment, and to take their concurrent
approvall along with us, before we proceeded to practice in a matter of this
weight. And yet we have declared before, That however we are not so wavering
and unsettled in matters of faith, as to resolve our belief into the
determination of Synods or Councils, believing no more, nor no otherwise, then
as they determine: Yet that it is not out of the compass of the authority of a
Synod to examine, try and authoritatively to censure Doctrines as well as
matters of Discipline. And we think (how confident soever you may be of the
soundness and orthodoxness of what in your Paper you propound in way of
exception against any thing in ours) you have not such clear and inquestionable
grounds from Scripture for the same, that you were to be accused of wavering or
unsettledness, if you had submitted the same to have been examined and tried by
a Provincial Assembly: and much less, if you could have had the opportunity of
submitting it to the Censure of a General Council.

But whereas mentioning our Provincial Assembly at Preston, you call it a new
termed Provincial Assembly. If your meaning be, that the terming it a
Provincial Assembly in stead of a Provincial Synod is a new term, then this is
but only a Logomachia, and not much to be insisted on. Although we frequently
call it a Provincial Synod as well as a Provincial Assembly. But if your
meaning be; That it is a new termed Provincial Assembly at Preston. Because
Provincial Synods or Assemblies have been held but lately at Preston, we see
not (if Provincial Assemblies be warrantable, and have been of ancient use in
the Church) that having been long in dis-use, they begin of late to be held at
Preston, that can justly incur your censure. But if the Antiquity of such
Assemblies be that you question: Then we refer you to what Dr Bernard in the
Book of his above quoted, shows was the Judgment of Dr Usher (who is
acknowledged by all that knew him, or are acquainted with his works, to have
been a great Antiquary; however we allege him not, that you should build your
faith upon his Testimony) and which we think may be sufficient to vindicate
Provincial Assemblies in your thoughts from all suspicion of novelty. In that
Book you have in the close of it proposals touching the Reduction of Episcopacy
unto the form of Synodical Government received in the ancient Church. And it
thus begins. By the Order of the Church of England, all Presbyters are charged
to administer the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the
Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has received. And that they might the
better understand, what the Lord has commanded herein, The exhortation of Paul
to the Elders of Ephesus Acts 20.28. is appointed to be read unto them at the
time of their Ordination. A little after it is acknowledged, That Ignatius by
Presbytery mentioned by Paul 1 Timothy 4.14. did understand the Community of the
rest of the Presbyters or Elders, who then had a hand, not only in the
delivery of the Doctrine and Sacraments, but also in the administration of the
Discipline of Christ. And for further proof. Tertullian is alleged in his
General Apology for Christians. Where he says, that in the Church are used
exhortations, chastisements and divine censure; For Judgment is given with
great advice, as among those, who are certain, they are in the sight of God.
And it is the chiefest foreshewing of the Judgment to come, if any man have so
offended, that he be banished from the Communion of Prayer, and of the
Assembly, and of all holy Fellowship. The Presidents, that bear rule therein,
are certain approved Elders, who have obtained this honor, not by reward, but
by good report. There also is further showed, That in matters of Ecclesiastical
judicature, Cornelius Bishop of Rome used the received form of gathering
together the Presbytery. And that Cyprian sufficiently declares of what Persons
that consisted; When he wishes him to read his Letter to the flourishing
Clergy, which there did preside or rule with him. And further, That in the 4th
Council of Carthage it was concluded. That the Bishop might hear no man's cause
without the presence of the Clergy. And that otherwise the Bishops sentence
should be void, unless it were confirmed by the Clergy. And yet further. That
this is found inserted into the Canons of Egbert (who was Archbishop of York in
the Saxon times) and afterward into the body of the Canon law it self. It is
here also acknowledged, That in our Church, this kind of Presbyterian
Government has been much disused. Yet that it did profess, that every Pastor
has a right to rule the Church (from whence also the name of Rector was at
first given unto him) and administer the Discipline of Christ, as well as to
dispense the Doctrine and Sacraments, etc. By all which it is acknowledged, and
also proved; That the form of Government by the united suffrages of the Clergy,
is ancient: and which is there in express terms asserted; as it might be
demonstrated by many more Testimonies, but that we conceive these already
mentioned are sufficient, and being alleged by the aforementioned Author, As
also evidencing what his own Judgment was in this point, may be more likely to
sway with you (if in that there should be a dissent betwixt you and us) then
any thing, that we could our selves produce. But in this reduction of
Episcopacy to the form of Synodical Government received in the ancient Church,
there are proposals of Assemblies of Pastors within certain limited bounds.
Which (saving that they are some of them somewhat larger then ours, which is
but a circumstantial difference) do hold proportion with the Classical,
Provincial, and National Assemblies, mentioned in the form of our Church
Government. As also the times propounded there for their meeting, the power of
these Assemblies, and what they were to have Cognizance of, and the
subordination of the lesser to the greater, with liberty of Appeal, if need
should require, and are the same in substance as with us. And all these were
propounded, as the way of Government in the ancient Church, and in the year
1641. (after the troubles, that had risen in Scotland about Episcopacy and the
Ceremonies, and before the setting up of the Presbyterian Government in this
Land, had so much as fallen under debate in the Parliament, so far as ever we
heard of) as an expedient to prevent the troubles, that did after arise in this
Land about the matter of Church Government, being for the moderating of
Episcopacy; That at that time was grown to that height, that it had quite taken
away from the Pastors that rule, that of right did belong unto them; And for
the Reduction of it to the ancient form of Synodicall Government. And therefore
in the Judgment of this learned and reverend Antiquary, our Provincial
Assembly at Preston (where the Pastors of the Churches are members, as he
acknowledges of right they ought to be in such Assemblies) would not have been
accounted a new termed Provincial Assembly.

But you go on and tell us. That other parts of our Paper are full of darkness,
to which you say, you cannot so fully assent, till further explicated and
unfolded by us.

We cannot apprehend any such darkness in our Paper, as you speak of. But yet
because in yours, you question what authority we have from the civil
Magistrate, for what we do, and likewise the extent of it: and your mistakes of
our meaning may perhaps some of them arise from your unacquaintedness with the
rule we walk by. Although we were not to be blamed for any mistakes, that might
arise ab ignorantia juris (whether simple or affected, that we determine not,
but leave you to examine;) Before we come to make Answer more particularly to
what follows, we are willing to be at some pains to give you some further
account of the power we are awarranted by the civil Authority, for to exercise.
To what persons within our bounds it extends it self: and what some of those
rules are, that are prescribed unto us by civil Authority, to walk by in the
exercise of that power we are betrusted with.

It is a general and common mistake amongst many, that the Presbyterian
Government was established by the Parliament but for three years, and that
therefore it is now expired and out of date. But if you peruse all that passed
in Parliament touching it, no such matter will appear. The directions of the
Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, after advice had with the Assembly
of Divines, for the Electing and choosing Ruling Elders in all the
Congregations, and in the Classical Assemblies, for the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the several Counties of the Kingdom, For the speedy settling of
the Presbyterian Government, bearing date August. 19. 1645. Their Ordinance
together with Rules and Directions, concerning suspension from the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, in cases of Ignorance and scandal, dated October. 20. 1645.
The Votes also of the said Houses for the Choice of Elders throughout the
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales in the respective Parish Churches and
Chapels, according to the directions before mentioned. And touching the power
granted to the Tryers of Elections of Elders, Of the date of Feb. 20. 1645. and
Feb. 26. 1645. Their Ordinance for keeping scandalous Persons from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the inabling of Congregations for the choice of
Elders, and supplying of defects in former Ordinances and Directions of
Parliament concerning Church Government, bearing date March 14. 1645. The
Remedies prescribed by them for removing some obstructions in Church
Government, dated April. 22d 1647. And their Ordinance for the speedy dividing
and settling the several Counties of this Kingdom into distinct Classical
Presbyteries and Congregationall Elderships, dated Jan. 29. 1647. We say, all
these were passed absolutely without any proviso's at all, limiting the time of
their continuance, that is expressed in any of them. Indeed in the Ordinance of
Parliament giving power to all the Classical Presbyteries within their
respective bounds, to examine, approve and ordain Ministers for several
Congregations, dated Nov. 10. 1645. It is provided in the Close of it, That it
shall stand in force for twelve months, and no longer. As it is provided in
another Ordinance for the Ordination of Ministers by the Classical Presbyters
within their respective bounds for the several Congregations in the Kingdom
of, England bearing date August. 28. 1646. That it shall stand in force for
three years and no longer. Which latter might give to some (that took but the
matter upon report) an occasion to conceive, that the Presbyterian Government
was settled but for three years. Although that was but ill applied to all the
several Ordinances that had passed before, which belonged only to one. But
the Ordinance especially, from which chiefly (as we conceive) the mistake
arose about settling the Presbyterian Government for three years only, was the
Ordinance that passed June 5. 1646. The title whereof is, An Ordinance of the
Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the present settling (without
further delay) of the Presbyteriall Government in the Church of England. In the
Close whereof it is ordained. That this Ordinance shall continue for the space
of three years, and no longer, unless both Houses think fit to continue it. But
if the matter of this Ordinance be consulted, it is manifest it was but
touching a Committee of Lords and Commons to adjudge and determine scandalous
offenses not formerly enumerated, appointed by the Ordinance in stead and place
of Commissioners mentioned in the Ordinance of March 14. 1645. And also showing
how the Elderships were to proceed in the examination of such scandalous
offenses. And touching what power was granted to the said Committee, and in
what sort they were to proceed, as is clear to any, that shall but take the
pains to peruse that Ordinance. The ground whereof in the preface to it, is
made to be this. The Lords and Commons in Parliament holding their former
resolution, that all notorious and scandalous offenders shall be kept from the
Sacrament, have thought fit to make a further addition to the scandalous
offenses formerly enumerated, for which men shall be kept back from the
Sacrament. And least the stay of the enumeration, and the not naming of
Commissioners to judge of Cases not enumerated, should hinder the putting in
execution the Presbyterian Government already established, They have thought
fit, etc. And do therefore ordain a Committee (therein particularly nominated)
in stead and place of Commissioners.

The groundlesness of the mistake about settling the Presbyterial Government
for three years only, that might arise from the proviso in this Ordinance, is
so clear to any common understanding, that the bare recital of the sum of the
matter of this Ordinance, and the ground of making it, does make it so fully to
appear, that it were but lost labor to use any more words about it. But we
have particularly mentioned all that ever passed the Parliament (so far as we
have either seen or heard of) that hitherto concerned Church Government, until
the year 1648. When the form of Church Government to be used in the Church of
England and Ireland was agreed upon by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, after Advice had with the Assembly of Divines, and was ordered by
them to be printed August. 19. of the said year 1648. And this Ordinance
(wherein all that had passed the Parliament before in parts, and at several
times, and what ever was but temporary, by virtue of other Ordinances (so far
as was intended for continuance) are molded up into a complete body, with a
supply of sundry things that had been never mentioned nor published before in
other Ordinances) is without any limitation of time for its continuance, and
remains unrepealed to this day, for any thing we have seen or heard to the
contrary. Nay we think (as we shall touch upon anon) That by the humble Advice,
assented to by his Highness, this Ordinance (as well as others) receives
strength.

But by this full account given, we think we have made it sufficiently to
appear, that we have had the Authority of the civil Magistrate to bear us out,
in what we have acted since the first setting up of the Presbyterian Government
until this present. Except there be any, that can come forth, and charge us to
have transgressed the rules appointed by the Parliament for us to observe in
our actings, against which our own innocence only shall be our defense.

It now remains for your further satisfaction and our own vindication, that we
recite some things particularly out of the form of Church Government, which we
conceive are thereunto subservient.

In the very first Words of the Ordinance (according to what we have before
recited in the directions for the electing and choosing of ruling Elders, and
is there also to be found) you may find it thus. Be it ordered and ordained by
the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled and by Authority of the same,
That all Parishes and Places whatsoever within the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, (as well Privileged Places and exempted jurisdictions, as
others) be brought under the Government of Congregationall, Classical,
Provincial and National Assemblies, etc. Where it is to us unquestionable,
That by virtue of this appointment, such as live within the bounds of our
several congregations and Parishes are under the power of some one or other of
the Congregational Elderships, constituted by Authority of Parliament within
our several Parishes; And that all those, that live within the bounds of our
Classis (mentioned before) are under the power of our Classical Assembly,
constituted in like manner by the said Authority.

What power is given particularly to the congregationall Elderships, you may
find in the aforesaid form of Church Government, and unto which we refer you;
only we shall mind you, That by virtue thereof, they have power, as they
shall see just occasion, to enquire into the knowledge and spiritual estate of
any member of the Congregation to admonish, and rebuke, to suspend from the
Lords Table, those who are found by them, to be ignorant and scandalous, and to
excommunicate according to the rules and directions after following. And it is
thereby ordained, That the Examination and Judgment of such Persons, as shall
for their ignorance in the points of Religion, mentioned in that Ordinance, not
be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be in the power of the
Eldership of every Congregation. All which will appear by the express Letter of
the said Ordinance, to any, that will consult it, and which not only justifies
all that is practiced in that case by the several Elderships, but also shows
what grounds this Classis had for that which was mentioned in our Paper,
touching both what is therein appointed to the Minister about Catechizing
Families, and also concerning the Ministers exhorting such, as in the several
Families he should find to be of competent knowledge, and know to be of
blameless life, That they should present themselves to the Eldership; The
Trial and Judgment in this case not belonging to any one Minister alone, but
to the Eldership.

There are also rules and directions given in this Ordinance to be observed by
the several Elderships, concerning suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in cases of scandal, which may be seen there particularly. But there is
no rule given, that will allow either the Eldership or Classis, according to
the several powers to them therein granted, either to warn before all, or to
excommunicate knowing and blameless men for their mere not presenting
themselves before the Eldership.

The rules of this Government prescribe otherwise; as we our selves must also
needs profess, that we are not conscious to our selves, that we have given any
just occasion by our management thereof, That contrary to the express rules
appointed therein to be observed by us, and to the plain sense of our
expressions used in our Paper (of which afterward,) any such a thing should
have been so much as supposed to have been intended from any thing there
expressed.

Give us leave to proceed a little further, to lay open the order that is
prescribed in the above mentioned form of Church Government, touching the order
of proceeding to excommunication; which as it will awarrant the publishing of
men's names openly in the Congregation, and warning them before all to reform,
being such as are justly censurable by the rules thereof, and particularly
where it prescribes, that several public admonitions shall be given to the
offenders, etc. So it will awarrant us in any thing, that is made censurable by
that Paper of ours, that was published.

To make this to appear, as also to show what reason, we had to make known to
the several congregations within our bounds, what our Paper held forth. We
shall here declare, what offenses are censurable with this greatest and last
censure of Excommunication, according to the order, that is there prescribed,
and which, as it requires, that it be inflicted with great and mature
deliberation, and after all other good means have been essayed; so it appoints
in these express Words.

That such Errors in practice as subvert the Faith, or any other Errors,
which overthrow the power of Godliness; if the party who holds them, spread
them, seeking to draw others after him; and such sins in practice, as cause the
Name and Truth of God to be blasphemed, cannot stand with the power of
godliness; and such practices, as in their own nature manifestly subvert that
order, unity and Peace, which Christ has established in his Church; and
particularly all those scandalous sins, for which any Person is to be suspended
from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, obstinately persisted in; these being
publicly known, to the just scandal of the Church; The sentence of
Excommunication may and ought to proceed, according to the directions after
following.

But the Persons, that hold other Errors in Judgment, about which learned and
Godly men possibly may and do differ, and which subvert not the faith, nor are
destructive to godliness, or that be guilty of such sins of infirmities, as are
commonly found in the Children of God: or being otherwise found in the faith,
and holy in life (and so not falling under censure by the former rules)
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of Peace; and do yet out
of conscience, not come up to the observation of all those rules, which are or
shall be established by Authority, for regulating the outward worship of God,
and Government of his Church. The sentence of excommunication for these causes
shall not be denounced against them.

These things this Classis taking into Consideration, together with the power
they were betrusted with by God and Man, for the dispencing the censures of the
Church, in the cases censurable by the rules here laid down and elsewhere, in
the form of Church Government: And there having been in the Provincial
Assembly several debates touching such Persons as in the several Congregations
were ignorant and scandalous, who offered not themselves to the Sacrament, not
to the Eldership in order to their admission to it: and they commending it to
the several Classical Presbyteries to be considered of, whether some further
course was not to be held, for the information of the one, and the reformation
of the other, then yet had been taken, notwithstanding their neglect; and what
they judged fittest to be done for the attaining those ends; and to represent
their thoughts therein to the next Assembly. This Classis upon the whole
concluded to represent their apprehensions in the Case, as is expressed in the
Paper that was published, which was approved of before by the Provincial
Assembly, and which they judge is sufficiently awarranted, in regard of any
thing therein contained, by the rules expressed in the above mentioned form of
Church Government.

We having thus far showed what we have been, and are awarranted to practice by
the several Ordinances above mentioned, we shall now proceed further to
declare. That however we are no Lawyers, and therefore leave the determination
of the Case to the learned in the Law to judge of, to whom it belongs: yet if
it may be lawful for us to judge of a matter of this nature from the
principles of reason; It seems to us, that the above mentioned Ordinances about
Church Government, as well as other Ordinances of Parliament, are confirmed in
the humble Advice assented unto by his Highness in the 16. section thereof.
Where we find these Words. And that nothing contained in this Petition and
Advice, nor your Highness consent thereunto, shall be construed to extend to
the repealing or making void of any Act or Ordinance, which is not contrary
hereunto, or to the matters herein contained. But that the said Acts and
Ordinances, not contrary hereunto, shall continue and remain in force, in such
manner, as if this present Petition and Advice had not at all been had or made,
or your Highness consent thereunto given. Whence we gather, that if in the
several Ordinances for Church Government, there be nothing contrary to the
humble Advice, or to the matters therein contained, they are not thereby (any
more then any other Acts or Ordinances of Parliament) repealed, but left to
remain in force. At least, there seems to us to be a plain intimation, that
they have a force in them, which is not by this humble Advice repealed and made
void. For it does not appear to us, That there is any thing in the Form of
Church Government, or any other Ordinances of Parliament about that matter;
that is contrary to the humble Advice or matters therein contained. And whereas
in the 11th section there is mention made of some that differ in worship and
discipline from the public profession of these Nations held forth, to whom
some indulgence is granted; It seems to us, there is an acknowledgement and
owning of what the late Parliament held forth, in regard of these the Directory
for worship and form of Church Government, which they passed, as the public
profession of these Nations in regard of worship and discipline. And in which
apprehensions we are the more confirmed, because here in this section, mention
is made of a confession of faith to be agreed on by his Highness and the
Parliament, there having nothing in that kind passed the late Parliament, that
established the Directory for worship and form of Church Government. However
there had been a Confession of faith drawn up by the late Assembly of Divines;
Whence it seems to us clear, that they own the Directory for worship, and the
form of Church Government, to be that which they hold forth, as the public
profession of the Nation for worship and Government. To the same purpose we
find in the Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland,
etc. As it was publicly declared at Westminster December. 16. 1653. page 43.
Sect. 37. Where also they express a worship and Discipline publicly held
forth, which must needs refer to the Directory and form of Church Government
by us recited; There being no other worship or discipline, that then had, or
now has, the civil Sanction, in this Nation.

We have been large, in what we have here represented in the general, before
we come to speak more particularly to the rest, that now follows in your Paper.
But our pains being greater to make this full representation unto you, then it
will be for you to read it, we must entreat you to excuse us, considering it
tends as well to rectify your mistakes, as to vindicate our selves, being also
desirous not to be mistaken any more, as also because it lays a foundation for
our briefer and more particular Answer unto what follows, and to which (these
things being thus premised) we now come.

In the things, wherein you profess your selves to dissent, till further
explicated and unfolded by us.

(1) The first thing we meet with here is; That by the many Persons of all
sorts, that are members of Congregations, and mentioned in our Paper, in your
sense thereof we seem to hint, that thereby we mean only such, who have
admitted themselves members of some Congregation within our association, and
yet live inordinately; etc. And that therefore you, who never were any members
or associates of ours, are not within the verge and compass of our Presbyterian
discipline, etc. Unto which we say; That we have constantly professed against
those of the separation. That the several Assemblies of Congregations within
this Land, that make a profession of the true Christian and Apostolic Faith,
are true Churches of Jesus Christ. That the several members of these
Congregations are by their birth, members, as those that were born in the
Jewish Church, are said to be, by the Apostle, Jews by nature: Gal. 2. That
this their membership was sealed to them in their Baptism, that did solemnly
admit them, as into the universal Church, so into the particular, wherein they
were born. We have also constantly maintained against the before mentioned
Persons; That the Ministers of these Churches are true Ministers,
notwithstanding that exception of theirs against them, that they were ordained
by Bishops, who also themselves were true Ministers in our Judgment (though we
cannot acknowledge, that by divine right they were superior to their fellow
brethren, either in regard of order or jurisdiction) And that therefore the
Word and Sacraments (the most essential marks of a true visible Church,
according to the professed Judgment of our Divines against the Papists on the
one hand, and those of the separation on the other) dispensed by these
Ministers, were, and are the true Ordinances of Jesus Christ. And that hereupon
our work was not (when the Presbyterian Government was appointed) to constitute
Churches, but to reform them only. And that therefore none within our bounds,
except they shall renounce Christianity and their Baptism, can be deemed by us
to be without, in the Apostles sense; and so therefore not within the compass
and verge of our Presbyterian Government. Neither is it their not associating
with us in regard of Government, that does exempt them from censure by it, if
they should be such offenders, as by the rules thereof were justly censurable.
It not being a matter arbitrary, for private Persons at their own will and
pleasure to exempt themselves from under that Ecclesiastical Government, that
is settled by Authority. And as you know it would not have been allowed of under
the former Government.

(2) And therefore whether you, and all others within our bounds, be not
comprehended within our Government, according to the rules laid down in the
Ordinance of Parliament above mentioned, appointing the form of Church
Government to be used in the Church of England and Ireland, and therein
ordaining, as has been recited before in the first page thereof, and to which
we refer you. (Especially considering, that all within the bounds of our
several Parishes (that are no other now them formerly) even Papists and
Anabaptists and other Sectaries, were under the late Prelatical Government) we
leave it to you to judge. Only if so, we wish you to consider, that then you
are brought under the Government of Presbytery, not so much by us, as by the
Parliament appointing this Government. And then we think you, who warn us not
to contemn civil power, might well (out of respect to the Authority ordaining
it, but especially considering the word Presbytery is a known Scripture
expression 1 Timothy 4. and interpreted by sundry of the Fathers, as we do, as
has been declared before) have used a more civil expression, then to have
called it a common fold, into which (it should seem) your complaint is, that
you should be driven. Although Presbytery lays restraint on none, but such as
being scandalous in their lives, and so contemning the Laws of God, are
therefore truly and indeed the lawless Persons, that we speak of. But whereas
(as you suppose) This is our chief design in this, as in other transactions of
ours, to subject all to our Government.

We do refer our selves to our course of life past, and hope it will witness
with us, to all that will judge impartially, what our designs have been in our
other transactions. And as touching our design in the Paper published, whether
it has been ought but the information of the ignorant, and reformation of the
scandalous, to the Glory of God and their salvation, we leave it to be judged
by those, that will judge of men's intentions by what is expressed in their
words and actions.

We know very well, we are charged by some, that we affect Dominion, to Lord it
over the People, and to have all sorts of Persons, of what rank soever, to
stoop to us. But we do openly profess, that the Government of the Church, that
is committed unto men, is not Despotical, but Ministerial. That it is no
Dominion, but a Ministry only. And that the Officers, that are entrusted with
it, are themselves to be subject, both in regard of their bodies and estates,
to the Civil power: That by the Ordinance of God, they are appointed to be
under, and that in their Government they have nothing to do with the bodies and
estates of any Persons, but with their Souls only. Although here we desire to
enquire of you, whether, if you be indeed for the settling of any Government at
all in the Church (as you profess to be) you do not think, that all should be
subject to it? We cannot judge you to be so irrational, as to be for a
Government, and that yet subjection to it must be denied. And if the late
Government of the Prelacy was not blamed by you, because it required subjection
to it; we wish you to consider, whether upon this account you have reason to
censure us. But further, whereas you tell us; That we garnish our Government
with the specious title of Christ's Government, Throne and Scepter. We wish you
to consider, what in your Answer to an objection (that you frame out of our
Paper) your selves do say. You there tell us. You pray for the establishment of
such Church Government, as is consonant to the will of God, and universal
practice of primitive Churches. That Ecclesiastical Discipline may be exercised
in the hands of them, to whom it was committed by Christ, and left by him to be
transferred from hand to hand to the end of the World. The expressions, you
here use, are as high touching that Government you would have established, as
any have been, that ever we have used of ours. For your prayer is, That
Ecclesiastical Discipline may be exercised in the hands of them, to whom it was
committed by Christ, and left by him to be transferred from hand to hand to the
end of the world. The Government then, that you are for, must be with you,
Christ's Government Throne and Scepter. And why do you then condemn us, if we
have used such expressions concerning our Government, till you have convinced
us, that it is not such? When yet you take to your selves the Liberty to use
the like language, concerning the Government you pray may be established.

But whereas you say, Presbytery is the main thing driven at here, and that
however she comes ushered in with Godly pretense of sorrow for the sins and the
ignorance of the times, and the duty incumbent upon us, to exercise the power
that Christ has committed to us, for edification and not for destruction, and
that these are but so many waste Papers, wherein Presbytery is wrapped up to
make it look more handsomely and pass more currantly. We do earnestly desire,
That in the examination of your consciences, you would seriously consider,
whether you have not both transgressed the rules of Charity in passing such
hard censures upon us, and also usurped that, which belongs not to you, in
making your selves judges of what falls not under your cognizance. The things
you mention belonging only to be tried by your and our Master, to whom we must
all stand or fall. But we are heartily sorry, that Presbytery (which stands in
no need of any painting or cover to make it look more handsomely and pass more
currantly) should be accounted by you the anguis in herba, whereof you had need
to beware, it having never given that offense to any, as to merit such language.

But now you frame an objection out of our Paper, and return your Answer,
professing, That you pray for the establishment of such Church Government
throughout his Highness Dominions, as is consonant to the will of God and
universal practice of primitive Churches, etc. In that you do here join the
will of God and the universal practice of primitive Churches together, as you
joined the Word of God and the constant practice of the Catholic Church
before, you seem to us, to make up the rule (whereby we must judge what
Government it is, that you pray might be established) of these two, viz. the
will of God and the universal practice of primitive Churches. Or that it is the
universal practice of primitive Churches. That must be our sure guide and
comment upon the Word of God, to tell us, what is his will revealed these
touching Church Government and discipline. If this be your sense (as we
apprehend it is) we must needs profess, that herein we greatly differ from you,
as not conceiving it to be sound and orthodoxe. It being the Word of God alone,
and the approved practice of the Church recorded there (whether it was the
universal and constant practice of the Church or no) that is to be the only
rule to judge by in this, or any other controversies in matters of Religion.
But yet admitting for the present the rule you seem to make, we should desire
to know from you, what that Church Government is, which is so consonant to the
will of God and universal practice of primitive Churches. For our own parts,
we think it will be very hard for you, or any others, to demonstrate out of any
Records of Antiquity, what was the universal practice of primitive Churches
for the whole space of the first 300. years after Christ, or the greatest part
thereof (excepting so much as is left upon record in the Scriptures of the new
Testament) the Monuments of Antiquity, that concern those times (for the
greatest part of them) being both imperfect, and far from showing us, what was
the universal practice of the Church then (though the practices of some
Churches may be mentioned,) and likewise very questionable. At least it will
not be easy to assure us, that some of those, that go under the names of the
most approved Authors of those times, are neither spurious nor corrupted. And
hereupon it will unavoidably follow, that we shall be left very doubtful, what
Government it is, that is most consonant to the universal and constant
practice of primitive Churches for that time. But as touching the rule it self,
which you seem here to lay down, we cannot close with it. We do much honor and
reverence the primitive Churches; But yet we believe we owe more reverence to
the Scriptures, then to judge them either imperfect or not to have light enough
in themselves, for the resolving all doubts touching matters of faith or
practice, except it be first resolved what was either the concurrent
interpretation of the Fathers, or the universal and constant practice of the
Churches of those times. Besides that admitting this for a rule, that the
universal and constant practice of the primitive Churches must be that, which
must assure us what is the will of God revealed in Scripture concerning the
Government which he has appointed in the Church, our faith is hereupon
resolved into a most uncertain ground, and so made fallible and turned into
opinion. For what monuments of Antiquity, besides the Scripture, can assure us
touching the matters of fact therein contained, that they were such indeed, as
they are there reported to be? the Authors of them themselves being men that
were not infallibly guided by the Spirit. But yet supposing we could be
infallibly assured (which yet never can be) what was the universal and
constant practice of the primitive Churches, how shall that be a rule to assure
us, what is most consonant to the will of God? When as we see not, especially
in such matters, as are not absolutely necessary to salvation, Even as a
General Council it self is subject to errrour.
but that the universal practice of the Churches might in some things be
dissonant to the will of God revealed in Scriptures. And so the universal
practice of primitive Churches can be no certain rule to judge by, what Church
Government is most consonant to the will of God revealed in his Word. We know
there are corruptions in the best of men: There was such hot contention betwixt
Paul and Barnabas, Gal. 2.
as caused them to part asunder. Peter so failed in his practice, as that
though before some came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles, yet when they
were come he withdrew himself, fearing them of the Circumcision. And hereupon
not only other Jews dissembled with him, but Barnabas also was carried away
with their dissimulation. Whence it is clear, that the examples of the best men
even in those things, wherein they went contrary to the rule of Gods Word, are
of a spreading nature, and the better the Persons, that give the bad example,
are, the greater the danger of the more universal leavening. Nay we find,
that not only some few Apostolical men had their failings, but even
Apostolical primitive Churches did, in the very face of the Apostles, they
being yet alive, make great defection, both in regard of opinions and
practices. As from the examples of the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and the
Churches of Asia is manifest. The Apostle also tells us, that even in his time,
the mystery of iniquity began to work: And in after times we know, how the
Doctrine was corrupted: what gross superstition crept into the Church: what
domination was striven for amongst the Pastors and Bishops of the Churches.
Till at length Antichrist was got up into his seat, unto which height yet he
came not all at once, but by steps and degrees. Besides it is of fresh
remembrance, that notwithstanding the reformation happily brought about in our
own Church in regard of Doctrine and worship, after those dismal Marian times,
yet the corruption, in regard of Government continued such, during the time of
the late Prelacy (which yet was taken away in other reformed Churches) that the
Pastors were deprived of that power of rule, that our Church acknowledges did
belong to them of right; and which did anciently belong to them; however the
exercise thereof did after grow into a long disuse, as has been showed before.
And therefore when we consider on the one hand, that the superiority, which the
Bishop obtained at the first above the Presbyter in the ancient Church (and
which was rather obtained consuetudine Ecclesiae then by Divine right) did at
the length grow to that height, that the Pastors were spoiled of all power of
rule: so we cannot much wonder on the other hand, that the ruling Elder was
quite turned out of doors; For the proof of the being and exercise of whose
office in the purer times, there are notwithstanding produced testimonies of
the ancients, by Divines both at home and abroad, that have written about that
subject, and to which we do therein refer you: As there do remain some
footsteps and shadow of their office in the Churchwardens and Sides-men even
to this day. And so upon the whole, the premises considered, and that we are
commanded not to follow a multitude to do evil (though it were of the best of
men) and that therefore the examples and practices, though it were of whole
Churches, are to be no farther a rule for us, then they follow Christ, and as
their examples be approved of in the Word of Christ, notwithstanding the
universality and long continuedness of such practices. Whereas you say, that
you pray for the establishment of such Church Government, as is consonant to
the will of God and universal practice of primitive Churches; we believe you
might cut the matter a great deal shorter, and say, That you are for the
establishing of that Government, that is most consonant to the will of God
revealed in the Scriptures, and that the Word of God alone (and on which only
Faith must be built, and into which at last be resolved, when other records of
Antiquity, that yet are not so ancient, as it is, have been searched into never
so much) shall determine what that is, and so those wearisome and endless
disputes, about what is the universal and constant practice of primitive
Churches (and which if it could be found out in any good measure of probability
for the first 300. years after Christ, could never yet be so far issued, as to
be a sure bottom, whereon our faith may safely rest) may be cut off. It being a
most certain rule, and especially in matters of faith, that the Factum is not
to prescribe against the Jus; The Practice against the Right or what ought to
be done. And it being out of all question the safest course for all, to bring
all doctrine and practices to the sure and infallible Standard and Touchstone,
the Word of God alone. And after you have more seriously weighed the matter,
and remember how you profess, that in the matters you propose in your Paper,
You rest not in the Judgment or determination of any general Council of the
Eastern or Western Churches, determining contrary, to what you are persuaded is
so fully warranted in the Word of God, as well as by the constant practice of
the Catholic Church; (although what that was, were more likely to be resolved
by a general Council then by your selves) the proposal of having the Word of
God alone to be the Judge of the Controversy about Church Government, cannot
(we think) in reason be denied by you.

And we with you shall heartily pray, That the Church Government, which is
most consonant to the will of God revealed in Scriptures, might be established
in these Lands. Although we must also profess, that we believe, that that
Government, which is established by Authority, and which we exercise, is, for
the substantials of it, this Government, and which we judge also to be most
consonant to the practice of the primitive Churches in the purest times. And
therefore as there was some entrance made by the late Parliament, in regard of
establishing this Government by Ordinances, as the Church Government of these
Nations: And as to the putting those Ordinances in execution, there has been
some beginning in the Province of London, the Province of this County, and in
some other places throughout the Land: So when there shall be the opportunity
offered, we shall not be wanting by petitioning or otherwise to use our best
endeavors, that it may be fully settled throughout these Lands. That so we may
not, as to Government in the Church, any longer continue as a City without
walls, and a Vineyard without an hedge, and so (to the undoing of our posterity)
endanger Religion to be quite lost. And upon which consideration we do
earnestly desire, that all conscientious and moderate spirited men throughout
the Land, though of different principles, whether of the Episcopal or
Congregational way, would bend themselves so far as possibly they can to
accommodate with us in point of practice: In which there was so good a
progress made by the late Assembly, as to those that were for the
Congregational way: And, as we think, also all those that were for the
lawfulness of submission to the Government of the late Prelacy, as it was then
exercised: And that are of the Judgment of the lare Primate of Ireland in his
reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical Government, (mentioned
before) might do, if they would come up toward us so far, as we judge their
principles would allow them: As we do also profess, that however we cannot
consent to part with the Ruling Elder, unless we should betray the truth of
Christ Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy 5. (as we judge,) and dare not give any like
consent to admit of a moderate Episcopacy, for fear of encroachments upon the
Pastors right, and whereof late sad experience lessons us to beware, as we
judge also, that the superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter in degree (which
some maintain) is no Apostolical institution, and so have the greater reason in
that respect to caution against it: Yet we do here profess, we should so
far, as will consist with our principles and the peace of our own consciences,
be ready to abate or tolerate much for peace sake. That so at the length all
parties throughout the Land, that have any soundness in them in matters of
faith, and that are sober and godly, though of different judgments in lesser
matters, being weary of their divisions, might fall in the necks one of another
with mutual embraces and kisses, and so at last (through the tender mercy of
our God, there might be an happy closure of breaches, and restoring of peace
and union in this poor, unsettled, rent, and distracted Church, to the glory of
God throughout all the Churches.

But now as to you, and what follows in your Paper, (and in the mean season,
till this can be accomplished, and for which we shall heartily pray) we
cannot but judge, that such as are within our bounds, and live as lawless
persons contemning the commands of God, and so out of their rank and order,
(and of which sort you deny not, but that there may be some among us, however
they be subject to Law, and the punishment of the Civil Sword, as needs they
must be) yet being such as are justly censurable, according to the rules of our
Government, we do not think they are thereby exempted from being reached by
that Ecclesiastical Sword, as you phrase it, which both God and the Civil
Authority has entrusted us with.

And as we are far from contemning the Authority of the Civil Magistrate, and
shall therefore (out of due respect unto it, and that the lawless might be
curbed) be ready, not only our selves, as we have a call; but also warn
others, as there may be occasion, to make complaint to the Civil Power, that so
such offenders, being punished by corporal and pecuniary mulcts, to the
suppression of wickedness and licentiousness, and the Reformation of men's
lives and manners; Yet we do not apprehend why this should hinder us from
warning the Members of our several Congregations to make complaint to the
Eldership of those, that walk disorderly and will not be reclaimed, to the end
they may be further dealt with, as the nature of their offense may deserve. We
being fully assured from the word of truth, That Excommunication is Gods
ordinance, appointed for the reformation of the scandalous, and as you your
selves acknowledged in the beginning of your Paper: and being a spiritual
punishment for the nature and kind of it, through the blessing of God, may be
more available for the destruction of the flesh, and the thorough humiliation
of the offender, then any corporal or pecuniary mulct (that reaches but the
outward man) can be; And as it was blessed with great success for this end for
many years together, whilst the Church was destitute of Christian Magistrates:
Although in a Christian State we see not, why we should divide what God has
joined together. We having not yet learned either from the Scriptures or sound
reason, that the conjunction of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Sword is not more
likely, through the same blessing of God, to work a greater reformation in men's
lives, then either of them alone, remembering that old Maxim, Vis unita
fortior. And as touching our selves, and the power we are entrusted to
exercise, we shall commit our endeavors unto his blessing, in the use of his
own appointed means who is able, and we doubt not but he will, make the same
effectual for the ends for which he has appointed them.

But you say, There are other parts of our Paper, that do likewise remain dark,
which you desire to be made plain. Although we conceive not so of them, yet
we shall as willingly go along with you, to give you further answer, as you to
desire the same of us.

And therefore whereas we having said in our Paper, That there are many
persons of all sorts, that will not submit themselves to the present Government
of the Church. Your first Quaere thereupon is, Why Government in singulari? We
answer, because it is the only Government, that at present is established in
this Church by Civil Authority; The Prelatical being put down, and cautioned
against in the humble Advice, in regard of any liberty to be extended to it for
the exercise thereof: And there being no other Government but the Presbyterian
(which is our Government) that is owned (as the Church Government for the whole
Nation) by the Civil Authority. And as it is that, which we judge to be most
agreeable to the will of God, so also we conceive, that whatever is of Christ's
prescribing in any other different Government (whether Episcopal or
Congregational) is to be found here: As we do apprehend the redundancies of
them both to be taken away in this, and the defects of them both to be here
supplied. And however there may be differences amongst godly men concerning
Church Government, which it is that Christ in particulari has prescribed in
his Word, yet we judge that the Government which Christ has prescribed in his
Word is but one; As all those must say so too, that not being Erastians do
hold, That one Church Government or other is of divine Right.

But whereas you bring in Calvin saying, Scimus enim unicuique Ecclesiae, etc.

To this we say; The circumstantials of Government, that are but matters of
order only, and which must be suited to the time, or place, or persons, for
whom they are made, and concerning which (if you had quoted the place where
Calvin uses these words) we believe it would appear he speaks; these being
variable, and so but the accidentals of Government, may not be one and the same
in all Churches. But if Christ have prescribed a Government in his word; for
the substantials of it, it must needs be de jure one and the same in every
Church. And that the Presbyterian Government is that in particular, which is
there prescribed, in Calvin's judgment, is so manifest by his works to the whole
Christian world, that it needs no proof. But if the Government, which Christ
has prescribed, for the substantials of it be only one, then that alone is
good, and all other Governments differing substantially from it must needs be
bad; and this only jure divino, and Christ's own Government, and the rest not.

And therefore, whereas in the next place you suppose, We may assert, that our
Government, is the Government by way of Eminency, as Christ's own Government,
more immediately, and jure divino. To this and to what you further hereupon do
inquire, we say, we have declared already; That we called it the present
Government, because it is the only Government settled in the Church by the
Civil Power. But whether it be the Government by way of Eminency and jure
divino, that was not the thing referred unto in the phrase we used. And as to
the resolving of your doubts and scruples, we conceive it is here for us not
material to go about the proving of the Jus divinum of it; we having proved,
That it is the Government that is established by the Civil Magistrate, and
which does lay as good a foundation to evidence the lawfulness of your
submission to it, as for the lawfulness of your submission to the former
Government, (and touching which we suppose you were satisfied) your exceptions
lying as much against the High-Commissioners, Chancellors, and Commissaries
then, as they can do now against the office of Ruling Elders, and which is the
chief thing we apprehend is stumbled at in our Government.

But yet if you desire to have satisfaction given you touching that which we
are not ashamed to profess, viz. the Jus divinum of the Presbyterian
Government, we referr you to what is so fully spoken touching this point, by
sundry learned Divines both of our own Church, and the Reformed Churches
abroad, that we know not, what can be added more The Assemblies Propositions
about Church Government.

The Jus Divinum by London Ministers.

The Provincial Synod of London their vindication of the Presbyterian
Government. Rutherfords due right of Presbyteries. Aarons Rod, by Gillaspie.


.

And yet we do not say, That there is no present Government in any Church or
Assembly of Saints, but where our Discipline and Government is erected entirely
in all the parts of it, no more then we should deny him to be a man, in whom
there were a defect of some integral parts, or in whom there were some
superfluous members. But as when Antichristianism so overspread the face of the
Church in those dark times before the Reformation, God preserved a Church,
Ministry and Ordinances, though not without the mixture of many corruptions in
doctrine and worship, even amongst the Papists themselves; So there was some of
Christ's Government and Discipline in the worst times, though not entirely, nor
without the mixture of much corruption in that Discipline and Government. And
yet if you consult Antiquity, you will not find, that the Presbyterian
Government has lain hid so long, as that for the space of 1500 years it could
never be found till this present. You have heard what rule did anciently belong
to Presbyters, notwithstanding that through the corruptions, that crept into
the Church in after times, the exercise of that power was long disused. And the
like may be said of Ruling Elders, and as has been showed by others. But it is
what de jure ought to be, and not what de facto is or has been, which is that,
which you and we are chiefly to attend, and concerning which the Scripture
must be the only Judge, as we have said before.

But you say, now subjection to our present Government is required by us; and
then demand, Whether all that observe not our rank and order, and subject not
themselves to our present Government, must be taken for lawless persons? for
so, say you, does this close connection of ours seem to import; viz. Many who do
not subject, but live, etc.

But here you do reason fallaciously a been conjunctis ad male divisa: For in
our Paper we speak of such, as did live in a sinful and total neglect of the
Lords Supper: That were scandalous and offensive in their lives, drunkards,
unclean persons, and that will not subject themselves to the present
Government, but live as lawless persons. And therefore the lawless persons
we meant (and as might plainly have been gathered from our words) were such,
who as they subjected not themselves to the present Government of the Church,
so they were also scandalous and offensive in their lives, we joining these
altogether, whom you divide. And whether such as will neither submit themselves
to the Laws of God, nor the Government, that is settled in the Church by the
Civil Power, be not lawless persons, we leave it to you to judge.

But yet we do here also mind you, That however we do not judge all those to be
lawless persons, that do out of conscience not come up to the observation of
all those Rules, which are or shall be established by Authority for regulating
the outward worship of God, and Government of this Church (being otherwise
blameless) yet both you and we may well remember, that such as should have
refused to have subjected themselves to the late Prelatical Government, would
have been accounted in those times to have been lawless persons.

But you say, When we make it an Order, that notice shall be taken of all
persons, that forsake the public Assemblies of the Saints, you would gladly
know, how far we extend this Saintship, this Church, and Assembly of Saints?

To which we answer, as far as the Apostle did, when writing to the Church of
Corinth and the Churches of Galatia he calls them Saints and Churches;
notwithstanding there were some in those Churches that were leavened with
unsound doctrine and grossly erroneous: In Corinth, some that denied the
Resurrection, made rents and schisms, and sundry grossly scandalous: In the
Churches of Galatia, such as mixed works with Faith in the point of
Justification, and of which the Apostle Paul would have those Churches to take
notice, even to the censuring of them, they being spots to those Assemblies;
and however Saints by profession, and in regard of outward calling, being in
Covenant with God, and having been baptized, yet answered not their profession
by suitable conversation. And therefore, however there be sundry of the like
stamp in our Assemblies, we do not therefore unchurch them, or make our
Assemblies not the Assemblies of Saints, because of the corruption of such
members.

And seeing our principles and practices are manifestly known to be utterly
against the opinions and practices of the Donatists of old, and those that have
of late rent themselves from our Churches, because of the scandalousnesse of
the corrupt members, that are found in them, (though the sin of these in our
Churches is aggravated by giving that occasion) you might well have spared your
pains in transcribing out of Augustine, what he justly said unto those
schismatics, that he had to deal with. Nay, you might rather have gathered
from our Paper; That seeing we said, that notice should be taken of all those
that should forsake the public Assemblies of the Saints, our purpose was to
have censured such as the Donatists were; That we purposed to observe and
censure those that did maintain and hold up private meetings in opposition to
the public; That cry down our Churches and public Assemblies, Ministry and
Ordinances, (as you know several sorts do; and who, as they hold sundry gross
errors, that subvert the faith, so in regard of those and other their
practices, that in their own nature do manifestly subvert the order, unity, and
peace, that Christ has established in his Church) do justly fall under Church
censure, according to the rules of our Government above mentioned. And that
therefore we were not altogether silent concerning either the sin or
punishment of such, as did err grossly in doctrinals or in discipline, so as to
make such dangerous rents from the Church, as the forenamed Sectaries do:
Contrary to what you say of us in your Paper. And further, by such as forsake
the public Assemblies of the Saints, of whom we said notice should be taken,
you might have gathered our meaning was, that such (of which sort there are but
too many amongst us) who out of a principle of carelessness, sloth,
worldliness or manifest profaneness, do on the Lords day either idle out the
time, or else are worse employed, when they should resort to the public
Assemblies: and who, as they are no friends to any private meetings for the
good of their souls, in the use of any private means of conference or prayer
for that end: So they do also Atheistically turn their backs on all the public
Ordinances, forsaking them and the Assemblies, where these are dispensed,
should be taken notice of in order to censure, if there was not reformation;
and to neither of which sort of persons any indulgence is granted by any Laws
of the Land, that we know of. And if you had gathered thus much from our
Paper, as your mistake had been far the less, so your Charity had been the
more, then to have reckoned us in the number of such Persons, as the Donatists
were. And yet we did not mean, That we intended to take notice in order unto
censure of such, who being sound in the faith, and godly in life (though
differing from us in point of Discipline and Government) had their distinct
Assemblies from ours, they endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace: They not being censurable by the rules of our Government, as is
manifest, by what we have declared before. Although we remember, how all that
submitted not to the former Government, were counted schismatical. Neither did
we reckon these in the number of the lawless Persons, we speak of, who
subjected not themselves to our Government, and whom we account to be parts of
the universal visible Church militant here on earth, however they have also
their public Assemblies distinct from ours, though sundry of them, as there
is occasion, resort to ours also. But how we should hereupon make either these
or the lawless Persons, that we speak of, members of the invisible Triumphant
Church (all which we have reckoned to belong to the visible) they must have
eyes quicker then Eagles, that can discern how this follows, and therefore
there is no fear our Charity should so far overreach, as you supposed it might.

But still you are unsatisfied; For you know not, it seems, what we mean by the
word (Public) the public Assemblies of the Saints. By our professions and
practices in our owning the public Assemblies, and where the public
Ordinances of the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer are dispensed, which we our
selves do constantly frequent and stir up others to frequent also, it was plain
enough, what we meant by public Assemblies. And we are heartily sorry, that
you understanding our meaning, as is clear by what you say anon, should by this
but make your way to give a lash at our Private meetings, which are none of
them such, as we need to be ashamed of. And which, when we meet, either for
conference about matters of Religion, or to pray together, and humble our
selves for our own sins and the sins of these times; When there is not the
opportunity of a public Assemby; or when personal or Family occasions call
for a private, is surely as commendable, at the least, as a private meeting
upon domestical, civil, or political occasions: and therefore not to be
secretly girded at. And on the other hand, we do not meddle with the censuring
of those, who being godly and sound in the faith, in the main points of
Religion, do yet differ from us in judgment, in matters of Discipline and
Government: And have their Assemblies for Gods public worship distinct from
ours, as we are barred from it by the rules of our Government, as we have often
said before. And therefore we leave room enough for Consciences that are truly
tender. Though we cannot say so much for the Prelatical Government.

Neither do we transgress any Laws of the Land which have made no provision to
except any Persons, that we meddle with, and are made censurable by the rules
laid down in the form of Church Government, nor have we under Color of
Authority made any Laws and Edicts, but according to that power, that the civil
Authority has committed to us, have only openly given notice in our several
Congregations, of what offenses are censurable by the rules of our Government,
that the offenders might take heed, they incur not that censure of
Excommunication, which Authority has awarranted us to inflict upon the
obstinate and otherwise incorrigible. And therefore (except to execute what we
are appointed to do by the civil power be to contemn it) we cannot be thought
to have done any thing in contempt of the civil power, as it is not our
ignorance of the Laws in force (that, we are confident, being grounded in
reason fight not one against another, and which is your more charitable and
favorable construction) that has led us into any practices, that are
transgressions of them. And therefore though you much question (upon what
account soever it be, that we have been led into what we have acted) and think
it concerns us to look to it, whether we have not run our selves into a
praemunire. Yet we are assured, we are as sufficiently secured against that
danger, as all the Justices in the Land are, that have acted upon other
Ordinances of Parliament, which they have judged to be in force, as we do also
those to be, that have been the ground of our proceedings.

But you have yet further to except, for whereas we said, That like notice
should be taken of all scandalous Persons. Your next Quaere is, Whether those,
that forsake the public Assemblies of the Saints in the second order, may not
be taken for scandalous Persons comprehended in the third order?

Here we perceive you understood, who were meant by those, that did forsake the
public Assemblies of the Saints, viz. Those who forsaking the Assemblies,
where the public Ordinances were dispensed, were upon that account really and
indeed scandalous, and so being comprehended under the latitude of that
expression, might justly merit to be censured as scandalous Persons. And thus
conceiving you were not mistaken, yet we, who were to express our selves
popularly, and so as we might be understood, considering some of that stamp,
though they forsook the public Assemblies of the Saints, and constantly
turned their backs as on the Lords Supper, so on all other Ordinances, yet if
not drunkards and swearers, whoremasters, etc. did not take themselves to be
scandalous Persons. Do not think, that in this we are any more to be blamed by
you (we using variety of expressions only for this end, that we might be
better understood) then we blame Lawyers and Attorneys, and wherein we judge
them not to be blame worthy) for using variety of expressions and Multiplicity
of Synonnymous Words to make the matter more clearand out of doubt, where yet
one and the same thing is understood by all.

But now hereupon your complaint is; That we burden you with Traditions in
multiplying of orders fine necessitate ad Arthritim usque; and cry out, Quare
oneramini ritibus? And tell us of lengthning out our Paper, which yet is not by
these few words hereused made very much longer.

But if you had remembered the multitude of Canons and burthensom Ceremonies,
that were rigorously pressed, even to the highest censure in Case of refusal,
and under the burden whereof sundry truly conscientious Persons under the
late Prelacy did sigh and groan: When those, that were scandalous enough in
their lives, escaped censure (and which some have cause not so soon to forget)
we think you would have seen little (...)


