The Quaker Quasht AND HIS QUARREL QUELLED: IN An ANSWER to a Railing Pamphlet
written by MARTIN MASON of Lincoln.

ENTITLED THE Boasting Baptist DISMOUNTED AND The BEAST DISARMED and Sorely
WOUNDED Without any CARNAL WEAPON.

Whereunto is added Eighteen several MEDITATIONS usually Received by the
QVAKERS at their first Entrance into that Delusion.

By JONATHAN JOHNSON, a Servant of Jesus Christ.

To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word it
is because there is no light in them,

Isa. 8.20. But there were false Prophets also among the people even as there
shall be false Teachers among you, which privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift damnation,

2. Pet. 2.1. There be some that trouble you and intend to pervert the Gospel
of Christ, but though that we, or an angel from heaven, preach unto you
otherwise then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed,

Gal. 1.7, 8. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith in Flying-Horse-Court in Fleet
Street, near Chancery Lane End, 1659.

TO THE READER.
AS Books are censured according to the judgment of the Reader so I expect no
other from thee, whomsoever thou art; it is my satisfaction within my self,
that I have no other end in sending this forth into the world, but to maintain
that which I know to be truth against those who grossly and absurdly do oppose
it, as I hope will be plainly seen, and manifested to right Judgment.

As for Martin Mason, the man whose railings slanders and unparaleld evil
speakings against me, are sounded abroad in the Nation, and for no other cause
that I know of, for my love to the truth of Christ Jesus his Gospel: and for
desiring to draw him from that thick cloud of darkness under which I see him
lie, by the deceiveableness of unrighteousness, suggested into him by that
power, that darkens the Son and the Air, and which a long time have striven to
hide that light and Spirit of truth, which is received by the hearing of faith
preached, and believing according to the Scriptures; and now as much as ever
(so far as their power serves) in this generation called Quakers: who bouldy
and audatiously deny Christ and his Apostles teaching, to be the Word of God,
or Rule of righteousness, or power of God to Salvation, contrary to the plain
testimony of the Scripture, and calling the Scriptures teachings, dead letter,
and lifeless book, with innumerable suchlike, wicked reproachful terms, as in
the Pamphlet that I am now to deal with is manifested, and in many others, and
as they are in their writings, so they are in their words, as I can witness and
have others to witness with me, the one of their generation to my face told me
I was a filthy creature, a liar and a beast, with more such foul words, for
saying Christ had a body and was like unto us in althings save only sin, for
said he, Christ had not a body of substance but the form only of a body.

And when I alleged the Apostle Paul's complaint of his infirmity in the flesh,
against their pretended perfection: he using the same language of Beast and
Liar and like told me, Paul was no Christian when he wrote that.

But I say, as for Martin Mason: I did expect to hear of his acknoledgment in
his evil in what he had written against me for declaring the truth, which would
have stayed me from sending this into the world, which I have had almost two
years by me, but failing of my expectation I sent to him now, at least to know
if he were come to a sight of his folly and evil therein, and if he were; that
he would acknowledge it, if not, I must send into the world to vindicate the
truth against him, for said I, many blind ones boast of thy folly and my
silence, and many who clearly see thy ignorance and evil therein, wonder why I
will let such stuff pass unrebuked; but no retnrn had I from him but persisting
in the same mind using his old language, without any acknowledgment at all. I
therefore thought my self further engaged, to send this forth which I had
written.

The Scriptures do abundantly foretell of the coming of these who in the name of
Christ shall deceive many.

As there is no Name given under heaven whereby men shall be saved but by the
Name of Jesus Christ, Acts 4.12.

So the Enemy of the Salvation knows, there is no Name but that only to take up
to deceive by, and under pretense of that to bring in his low devices which are
destructive to the Soul: there is no other way then to be sure of safety in
these dangers, when truth and falsehood has taken both one name, but to look
only to the Sriptures, where the Name of Christ is fully made known with power,
and by which whomsoever comes to right knowledge shall deserve all false cryars
of lot here and lo there, and truly know the Name and voice of Christ from
strangers, who take up that name to deceive by, and will not stand to the true
trial of the Scripture, but by false glosses and evil interpretations pervert
the plain and manifest truth, and when all that will not serve, bouldly deny
the life and authority of Scripture, and labor to pull them from men's hearts
and minds, that their own falsehood may be set above them, as is plainly seen in
this generation called Quakers; like to their predicessors the Papists, all
which are alike denyers of Christ as he has revealed himself in the
Scriptures: Therefore whomsoever thou art that truly desire to bear the Name
of Christian weigh what thou read in the right balance, and whatsoever thou
find to hold weight with the Truth, approve and receive it; and if any thing
fall short of that, impute it to my weakness, for my desires are unfainedly to
own the Truth although it be found against me. To the true trial I commit my
writing, who am a lover of all those who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity.

Jonathan Johnson.

Truth Triumphing.
NOT yet dismounted Martin from that Station,
That dwelling place of Gods beloved Nation:
Nor sorely wounded, with the windy push
Of Martin Mason, with his quaking Rush.
It is no Satyrs, Apish, Babel-frown,
Can pull the least of Gods beloved down.
How can thou think thy Scrith-Owl nightly skriking,
Can from Gods Truth take any Saints good-liking?
Can those who in old Babels ruin dwell,
Reach up to Sion, or her Towers tell?
Can Owls and Bats, that flutter here below,
Mount up like Eagles Sions strength to know?
Or there dismount from of the Fort so strong,
The Lambs Beloved, singing Sions Song?
The more thou strivest those sacred walls to scale,
Greater thy loss, the more thy strength will fail.
Martin keep thou below, reach not too high,
Till thou be cleans'd from thy impurity.
Thy false conceited Wisdom, void of Light,
Lays op'e thy folly, unto wise men's Sight.
Thy boasting brags to Wound and to Dismount
Does show thy shallowness; all men account
(But night eyed bats) thy railing Pamphlet foolish
And thy hot zeal, to true Religion coolish:
Vain are thy thoughts thinking to strike Truth down
With railing words, it never yet was known,
That Truth was overcome by railing foes,
Though many times she in her Covers goes
With bloody face, and Martered sore by such
As ather beauteous hold appears, think much:
Leave thou these bold assaults' against Truths rich Palis
Think not that Truth can be ore' come by Malis.
The more thou strivest, the more thou wilt have the foil,
And sorrow'l be thy wages for thy toil.
Shut not thy windows at the glorious light
Which in the Gospels day does shine so bright.
Were it not madness in the brightest day
To light a candle, to show men their way?
What use for candles, where the Sun does shine?
As little use for that dull light of thine.
Thy light within more sit for secret place
Then where the sacred Sonlight shows his face.
It must in Dungeons be, and caves below,
Where Heavens bright Lamp, his face does never show,
There where the nightly dancing Satyrs dwell
Who likes no light but what is within their Cell:
Pleased with the light themselves there kindled have,
And will no Son light let into their grave.
Happy for thee if thou could thrust away
That darkning skreen which hides thee from the ray
Of Gospel Son light, which would let thee see
Those glorious things which from thee hidden be.
Leave thou those foolish fancies of self-teaching,
And ope' thy ear to Scriptures sacred preaching.
Obey those truths that therein written be,
'Twill make thee of Gods holy City free,
And bring thee to a right regenerate mind
And let thee know that now thou art deaf and blind,
J. J.

THE QUAKER QUASH AND HIS QUARREL QUELLED, IN An Answer to a Railing Pamphlet,
written by MARTIN MASON of Lincoln, etc.
Martin,
THOU can not leave thy old way of boasting, as in thy former Paper, so in
this thou criest up thy self a man of valor and strength, it seems thou
fear thy own Works or Neighbors will not praise thee, therefore thou
contrary to Wisdoms advice, Pro. 27.2. wilt praise thy self, I told thee in my
former Paper, That wise men will not boast till the putting off their Armor,
but thou, notwithstanding, wilt cry Victory before Conquest, or touching thy
Adversaries with any blow, to give the cause of encouragement: thou (Bragadotio
like) say thou will not give one intch of ground or turn thy back on the
uncircumcised Philistine, by which thou would have the world to think thy
David's heart and engagement will conclude in Victory. But if David had taken
thy way of railing and boisterous braging the room of combat, or without blow
he had never overcome: May not I fitly compare thee to a whore taken in her
whordome, yet rails on those who take her, and cries whore first: I took thee
in thy Boasting, as is witnessed in our former papers, thou runest out into the
world and cries me for the boaster. But I am so far from Boasting that knowing
my own infirmities and weakness, I would rather keep silence and let thee spend
thy breath in vain, the wage words to maintain any such right, but I knowing
that thy railing is against the Truth, which thou serest thy self to oppose; I
am moved through mindfulness of the Lord not to keep silence. But to declare
against thy deeds of darkness and presumptious words against the most High and
his Saints, let this my engagement be compared with David, and thypresumptions
words with Goliath, and it will make known who is the uncircumcised Philistine.

The more thou strivest the more thy weakness within is manifested, and thy
strokes throws thee backward.

Thou say, the weapons of your warfare, are not carnal, yet all thy defense,
or offense, is by carnal foul and filthy words, of which, but disposesse thee,
and thou will be left without either words or shields. And though thou talk of
the conquering Sword of the Spirit, saying, it is thy weapon, it is little
manifested in thy denial of the word of God, for the conquering Sword of the
Spirit is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6.17.

Therefore, although thou steal these words of weapons, not being carnal and
Sword of the Spirit, that which thou call, the dead Letter, yet art thou far
from the exercise of spiritual weapons, or knowledge of them, for if thou were
not, thou woulest testify more purity and peace. If thou say, thou hadest
these words, the Sword of the Spirit, or, Spiritual weapons, from the light
within thee, without the Scriptures, (which thou call dead Letters) all that
hears thee Impartialy, will say, thou speak not Truly. And so will thy own
conscience if thou open that Book. And will also let thee see how asuredly evil
it is for thee to call the Scriptures dead Letter, and yet fetch those words
which thou deliverest for spiritual Declarations from thence. Thou say
(among other things) thou ask me, has every one that comes into the world
heard and read the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, as they are
transcribed in the Bible, and thou say. I answer, they have all heard, thou
replyest must the Liar in thee be received for the Oracle of God.

Answ. Thou hear dealest falsely with my answer, not delivering as I did, I
said, have they not all heard, thy error in this is because thou know not
the Scriptures which will tell thee, Mat. 28.20. Mark. 16. 15. Act. 2, 5, 6.
Romans 10.18. Whether this be my Lie or the Scriptures speaking, let the hearers
Judge, as also who is the Liar, whether I for alleging plain, Testimonies of
Scriptures, or thou for delivering my Answer, otherwise then thou receivest it,
may not Millions of Men and Women, say thou, who dwell in those parts of the
world, not counted Christendom wittness against thee: if an Egyptian mist had
not blinded thee, thou could not have been so besotted as to back thy Lie
with those places of the Letter, Mat. 28.19, 20. Mark. 16.15. Which in effect
prove Christ's Command to his Disciples, when they were upon earth, to go preach
the glad tidings of the Gospel to the generations they lived in.

Answ. Could thou fetch those Millions thou speak of for thy defense, yet
could they not witness against me, the Word of the Lord is a sure witness
against thee, and all opposers of the universal precahing of faith, or sound of
the Gospel of Christ in all the world, and to every creature, therefore as
formerly, so I say now, as the Apostle does demand, Romans 10.18. Have they not
all heard, but they have not all obeyed, as verse the 16. Therefore those
Milions which thou say are not counted Christians, if they be not
Christians, it is not because they have not heard, but because they have not
obeyed; read Act. 1.8. and Luke. 24.27. Which tells thee, the Apostles shall be
witnesses of Christ Jesus to the uttermost part of the earth, and that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached to all Nations. Now let all
who have ears to hear, judge whether an Egyptian mist and besottedness be not
rather in thy self, to aledge these whom thou never saw, or heard, (but by
the report of others, to be thy witness against me, and the Scriptures. There
is two many nearor hand, who if their non obedience must witness against the
Scriptures, that they have not heard the preaching of Christ, and his Apostles
do witness fully, of which namely Martin Mason is one, who is too full of fury,
and wrath against the preaching of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles, to
yield obedience thereunto.

Thy saying that Mat. 28.19, 20. Mark. 16.15. In effect proves Christ command
to his Disciples, when they were on earth, to go preach the glad tidings of the
Gospel to the generation they lived in: Dothplainly show, how desirous thou art
to out short the Commission of Christ, and stop the mouths of his Apostles, in
their preaching by that Commission in these times; whose power and promise with
that Commission, as it was to all the world, and every creature, so it is to
the worlds end, as is manifested in the Scriptures, verse the 20.

By which is discovered what relation thou have to Christ, or love, or
aquaintance with his truth; If thou did know Christ, as the truth is in
Jesus, thou would know, that though the Apostles be not personaly upon earth,
yet their word by which belief in Christ is wrought, John. 47.20. and by which
the world shall be judged, John. 12, 48. Romans 2.16. and by which the word of
God is manifest, Tit. 1.3. and which is a witness to all Nations through the
whole world, Mat. 24.14. yet remains, notwithstanding thine and Millions of
opposers, and denyers thereof. And thus that Egypian mist and sottishness which
thou say is in me, is manifested in thy self, who as thou go about by
London way to speak with me, who lives by thee in Lincoln, so thou runest to
the unchristianed world (as thou call them) who live many thousands of Miles
from thee, to be thy witness against me, that the Gospel is not preached by
Christ and his Apostles, and against the Scriptures also: And our own
knowledge, who have their preaching sounding in our ears continually. Would any
but a misted blind man, bring a candle to witness against the Light of the Sun.
Thy confusion is further manifested: In thy acknowledging the Scriptures, in
effect proves Christ command to his Disciples, to go preach the glad tidings of
the Gospel: For thou denyst, and opposest, that Christ which they preached, and
also in his Ordinances, and therefore most miserable is thy condition in that,
to acknowledge it the Command of Christ, and the glad tidings of the Gospel,
and yet fight against it.

Thou say thou never questionedst Christ's Commission, or their execution
thereof, yet thou thy self denyst obedience thereunto, and would bring
Millions of non Christians, to witness against it, what greater question can be
against that Commistion to all the world, and every Creature in the world, or
the execution thereof, then to say Millions of people in the world, have never
heard of that Christ. Thou bidest me see my foolishness, and be ashamed, but if
that blend, which befottes all senses that oppose the Truth, were not it thee,
thou would see thy self amongst these Owls, and Batts, whose nightly noise
is heard in the ruins of Babylon. But that wine being in thee, it is hid from
thy Eyes.

Thou repeatest thy question, How is the Gospel preached to every Creature
under Heaven, if not by the Principal of light in the Conscience.

Answ. And I answer thee again, In the preaching of Christ and his Apostles,
which works the principle of light in the Conscience, which is the light of
Christ, that lights every man that comes into the World. And whatsoever
pretended light in the Conscience, that is not enlightened from thence, and
leads not to the obedience of that preaching, it is darkness and not light, it
is two secret and desert, for the Saints and Diseiples of Christ to go out to
it, Mat. 24.26. and lead but where the foolish Woman brings her dead guests,
Prove. 9.18.

Take away thy Letter (say thou) and by this man's Doctrine, there would be
no principal of light, arising in thy Conscience.

Answ. Take away the preaching of Christ in the Scriptures, which thou call
dead Letter, and there would be the same in the Conscience in relation to
light, that would be in thy tongue, for hadest thou not their speakings to
still thy mouth with what Name of Christ, or Spirit, or Spiritual weapon; or
Gospel; or Conscience, or Light it self would thou have: all that hear thee
knows that thou have none of these expressions but from thence. Those who spoke
by thy Spirit, when Christ was personally upon earth, might likewise say, take
away this Carpinter, Marys Son, and there is no Mesias or Son of God, or Light
and Savior of the world; for as they contemned and despised Christ Jesus,
because of his seeming meanness or outward manly estate, so thou do contemn
and despise his Word, therefore his Word shall judge the in the lay day, John.
12.48. Shall men despise the way and means that God has given, for teaching
and correcting in righteousness, and which is able to make men wise unto
Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Because it is brought home to them in words and
writing, such dispisers shall wonder, and vanish away at the beholding the work
of God by that which they so despise. Martin take this further with thee, to
consider of in way of answer, that whosoever takes away, or denis that which
thou call dead Letter, shall find no light of Conscience but what leads to
destruction, the Scriptures are either the voice or speaking of God, or
nothing, or worse, if they be nothing or worse, why do thou sometimes say
thou ownst them, or why do thou speak by them, and steal their word to fill
thy mouth with and aledge them? And if they be the voice and speaking of God
(as even they are) thou that would take them away and call them Dead and
Life-less, would take away the voice and speaking of God and call it Dead and
Life-less, and so art a plain opposer and set enemy against God, which
manifests thy dead and dark mind. Thy swelling words against me of gross
darkness, and calling me Babylonian, and Liar, and shame cover thy face, and
the like, I slight them as Big words of wrath, for want of matter.

Thou ask me, If there was not a Principal of Light in people before Moses
writ the Letter.

Answ. There was the preaching of the Gospel, the word of Faith which is the
sure Principle of Light, before Moses writ the Letter, witness Abels offering,
and Abraham's believing, compared with Gal. 3.8. and Heb. 11.4. As also the
preaching of the Gospel, or righteousness by Noah, to the world of the ungodly,
2. Pet. 2.5. Yet Christ sends the People to Moses and the Prophets to hear
them, who did not only declare the Sacrifice, Circumcision and Ceremonies of
the Law, but also the Faith and acceptance with God of these who before the
Law, and in the Law did hear and obey the Gospel of Faith; and says Christ, if
they will not hear them, they will not be persuaded, though one arise from the
dead; Luke. 16.29, 31. even so now, the people have Christ and the Apostles, if
they will not hear them, no other dead arising light can persuade them to hear
the Gospel of Faith: therefore what is the principle of light before Moses writ
the Letter, to thy denial of the preaching of Christ and his Apostles in the
Scriptures. Cornelius had as much light as thou can aledge, yet he must hear
the Apostle Peter for Salvation.

Thou tellest me, I say in my Prayer, that the sound of accusing, or excusing,
is in all consciences: then it must needs be (say thou) in the conscience of
Millions of people, that never heard of the preaching of repentance, and faith
by the Apostles.

Answ. That which I said in my Paper, was that their Sound (speaking of the
Apostles) of accusing or excusing is in all consciences, then say thou, it
must needs be in the conscience of Millions, that never heard their sound, but
how this is agreeable with right reason, that the sound of the Apostle
preaching, must needs be in the consciences of Millions, that never heard of
their sound, let the hearers Judge; yet let this be observed how thou strainest
thy self to shuffel out the Apostle and say in thy own pretended Light,
leaving out my word, their sound, applied to the Apostles, and putest in thy
word, the sound, applied to thy darkness, and then say, I said it; which is
false in a double manner, both in leaving out what I said, and saying what I
said not, if thou see not this to be a deceitful sottishness, the standers by
will, this is like thy Logic in thy former Paper, which thou touldst me came
from the Rock of Ages: I asked thee in my former Paper, where thou, or any of
those who run abroad, now in these days, have come where Christ and his
Apostles have not been before you. And to that I joined my saying that the
sound of accusing or excusing is in all consciences, all which thou have left
out in 'its order and place, and without answer, that thou may with more
ease, persuade others against the truth delivered by me; but they are weak
discerners that sees not what thou art in such false dealing.

This thou call my scornful question, and for want of answer, openest thy
mouth in cursing, throwing out some of thy waters of bitterness which flow
within; And after a terrible fit, thou art forced to say thou ownest no other
Gospel but what the Apostles preached.

Answ. To which I answer, that then thou must discern that which thou call
the light of the conscience, for the Apostles never preached so, and then thou
must own the man Christ Jesus, who suffered at Jerusalem to be the Savior of
the world, and the Baptism with water upon repentance, and Faith to be a
Gospel Ordinance, for this is that which the Apostles preached, Act. 4.10, and
3, 16, and 5, 30, 31, and 9, 34, and 13, 32, 38, 39, and 16, 30, 31, and 2, 38.
Thus out of thy own mouth, thou art condemned for thy disobedience.

Thou say, you do not direct the people to any other thing then the Apostle
Peter did, that sure word of Prophecy, the light in the conscience to which
they do well if theyake heed 2 Pet. 1.19.

Answ. Then you must send them to the Scriptures or Prophesies of old, for so
did the Apostle Peter in the text, as the following versos do witness, if thou
have ears to hear, and to the Baptism of Repentance, for so did Peter, Acts
2.38. which thou denyest and therefore speak falsely, in saying you direct
the people as Peter did. Peter did not send or direct the people to the light
in their own consciences (as thou say he did) in that also thou speak
falsely, and addest them words to the text, by which thou manifests how blind
and bold opposer thou art, though God threatens his plagues against thee; for
it, Rev. 22.18. thou and thy generation do in this as all Antichristians have
done, to make their own Idols stand up, thrust in their own inventions amongst
the speaking of the Spirit of God in the Scripture, but it will fall as Dagon
did before the Ark.

Also thou say, you send them to the seed of the woman, the word of God, the
unction, or, Christ within.

Answ. You send them several ways, it seems as pleases the fancy of the
sender; but thou speak falsely, and intendest deceitfully, for all your
sending is to keep people from the knowledge of the woman's seed, the word of
God, the unction, or, Christ within. For the seed of the woman or of promise,
is the man Christ, who was begotten and born of the Virgin Mary, and so was he
the woman's seed, and he who brake the Serpents head, and loossed the works of
the Devil, by his death, and blood-shedin that flesh, in which he came and
dwelt amongst men; and the unction, or, Christ within, is the Spirit of promiss
sent from Christ, into those who believe in him, John 16.7. Mat. 29.20. But thy
woman's seed, and thy Christ within, and unction, or word, is thy feigned light
which thou tellest people, is in all consciences, though in the state of
unbelief, or unregenerate, and thither would thou send people, to seek
Christ in their own dark hearts, and false speakings in the desert secret
place, that so they may leave looking for the light of Israel, to follow your
matters contrary to Scriptures teaching, or the Apostles direction. But he
cannot find Christ within, who denies Christ without, he cannot have Christ
spiritually by faith, who denis Christ bodily raised from the grave, and
ascended, and remaining in the Heavens. Thou and thy generation, are in that
denial manifested to be busy sticklers both against that Christ and the
preaching of his Apostles; who preached Christ to those in whom he was not,
that they by faith might receive him, and that is the promise of unction, which
only Saints deny as the earnest of their everlasting inheritance. And so he
dwells in Saints, not in unbelievers, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and 2.12, 2. Cor.
13.5. Therefore thine and thy fellows telling men that are not in the faith,
they must look to the light anointing, and Christ within them. As it is a smoke
arising from below, to cover men's eyes from the light of the Son; so there is
in its two pernicious evils, the one is, it stays men from following Christ,
the Savior whose power, excellency, and glorious manifestation of love is
sounded forth, and made known by the spirit of God in the Scriptures, to bring
all men to everlasting life through faith in him. The other evil is, it makes
men listen to the false imaginations, and deceitful persuasions of their own
hearts, which has been the cause of all Idolatry, superstition, and
disobedience to the Law of faith, that has been; for men leaving the spiritual
teaching, and commands of Christ in the Scripture, and following their own
Invensions, and heart Imaginations run themselves into several false practices,
and bold disobedience, of which this of yours is not the least, for the
greater pretense of light (in disobedience) the greater evil.

And this bouldness of thy heart, by following its Imaginations is further
manifested, in thy saying, how should the seed of the woman break the Serpents
head, if the seed of the woman, the unction, or; Christ within, and the seed of
the Serpent, the man of sin, be not within.

By which all may plainly see who are in the light, thy denial of the death of
Christ, who by his death and bloodshed in that once suffering at Jerusalem,
did break the Serpents head according to Gods decree, and appointment: but thou
in denial of that, and to give him a plaster, for his his broken head, tellest
the world or unbelievers, that their light within (which is their heart
imaginations and vain fancies) without that which is preached by Christ, and
his Apostles to give light, is the seed of the woman that breaks the Serpents
head, no other breaking of his head would thou have them to believe, and
thus would thou if thou could save the breaking of the sepents head, and
give him a hellmet rather.

Thou runest on with a many words, some stolen from Scripture, and some thy
own Imagination, and to conclude, what say, but this is a mystery.

Answ. To which I answer, it is a mystery indeed, but it is the mystery of
Iniquity, for it denies Christ Jesus, and sets up false devices in his
room, but the righteous desires not to know the deepness of Satan as thou
speaks in thy former paper, thou say to me, poor man how has thy father
befooled thee, has not the God of this world blinded thy mind it is so or else
thou would see thy nakedness, and be ashamed of thy ignorance, with more such
big words,

And this was because, I had said, the light of Christ is manifested, by the
preaching of Christ and his Apostles, hearing, and receiving, of which said I,
is the inlet to the Spirit of promise, and for proof I alleged, Gal. 3.2.
Acts. 2.38, the truth of which thou not being able to gainsay, smitest me thus
with thy tongue for reveng in thy offense at truth, but when thy passion was
somewhat over, and thou had forgot why thou wast angry, thou said the very
same thy self which thou condemnest in me, thy words were these, Did not the
Galatians receive the Spirit, by the hearing of faith, that is (say thou) by
believin that Christ, which Paul preached? also thou said, that is the word
of faith which we preach, says Paul, and hearing of the word of faith, (the
light in the conscience) is the inlet to the Spirit of promise.

In answer to all which I said, what cause have thou thus to complain against
me, when thou art forced to say the same thing with me, thou have in this
disarmed thy self, and yielded the victory, it is in vain for thee to take up
for another charg.

Let the wise Reader now judge, if there were not just cause for thee to lay
thy hand upon thy mouth in silence, or confess thy folly, for exclaming against
me, for saying what the Scripture says, when thou say the very same with
me, and with the text of Scripture alleged; save only thy addition, the light
in the conscience, which is to be thrown to thee, being thy own Idol, and not
belonging to the text. But thou for want of a gracious humbled Spirit, to
acknowledge the truth, when it is so plainly laid before thee: continuest thy
old corrupt language, like Balaam to curse where thou knows the Lord has
blessed, but thy mouth is ordered contrary to the desires of thy heart.

Be it remembered (say thou) that thou have owned the light of the conscience,
to be the inlet to the Spirit of promise.

There is no cause (Martin) to forget that, being remembered that thou say
with me, that light is by the hearing of faith preached by the Apostles.

Then in thy former paper, touldst me of Juggling, the which I called upon thee
to prove, but thou not being able, returnest to ask me, if I have not saved
thee some labor, and done it my self.

Answ. Martin, this is just like thee, to show so little cause for so large
accusation, thy labor has been great enough, were it known to prove that thou
cannot; but I will show how with male labor, I have opened Martin Masons
Juggling Box, who cried condemnation against me for that which I found he
himself had, and I also found that when he had called the people together,
pretending to show them Christ the Savior, and light and truth, there I
discovered all to be nothing but a crucifix, and false fained lights, and
tryfels of self-dinying.

Thou may have spared the labor of telling me, I one while own the Letter,
to be the inlet to the Spirit of promise, and another time own the light of the
Conscience to be the inlet, sometime calling the Letter, sometime the Spirit,
the Rule.

Answ. For I never owned to thee, any light of Conscience but that which is the
preaching of Faith in the Scriptures: which Light or enlightening, thy self has
before owned (though fore against thy will) and for thy pretended light, that
has not 'its original from that faithpreaching power of the Apostles, I deny
it as a deadly darkness: where have thou that word Letter from me, calling it
the inlet, or rule, is it not a word of thy own divising against the Apostles
preaching, or to use thy own terms, a Brat of thy own begetting, why will thou
father it upon me, charge it not upon me, but challenge thy own.

Is not thy foundation (say thou) built upon the Letter, do not thou
account, that for the word of God Which Paul and Petter preacheed.

Answ. I do account that for the Word of God which Paul, and Peter preached,
and I am built upon that foundation which they have laid, which is Christ
Jesus, as 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. And this is denied by none but the raiging Heathen,
and disobedient denyers of Christ, to be come in the flesh, the Apostles Paul
says to the Thesselonians 1 These. 2.13. For this cause also thank we God
without ceasing, that when ye received of us the word of the preaching of God,
ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is indeed, the word of God,
which also works in you that believe: let this be compared with thy denial of
that to be the word of God which Paul preached; and those who hear thee, will
account thee as Paul wileth, Gal. 1.8. Art thou not by this proved one of
those, who would move men away from, and pevert the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1.6,
7. May not I justly say of thee, as Paul said of thy Brother Alexander the
Copper-Smith, 2 Timothy 4.14, 15. The Load reward thee according to thy works, and
let all men bewar of thee, and all such, for you withstand the Apostles
preaching sore, it is well thou art no wiser in thy evils, but to destroy thy
work with thy own hands, and let thy blindness in wickedness to appear to all
men, not only in this thy gross denial of the plain truth, but in thy sometimes
acknowledging that which thou hear denyest to cover thy deceit with; but layest
it the more open to the view of all men. As for example, thou ownest (to
deceive by) Christ to be the word of God, and thou say in thy paper to me,
that Paul Preached Christ; and now forgetting that, thou would deny that to
be the word of God which Paul Preached; if he that bids me in thy last paper
see my sottishness, and be ashamed, would make right application of this to
himself, he would see something, but howsoever the standers by will: does not
the Scripture abundantly declare that the Apostle preached the word of God, as
Acts 17.13. and 8.25. and 13.5. And they preached Christ, (whom thou say
thou ownest to be the word of God) wast thou clapped up in some clouded darkness,
and oblivion, when thou writ this, surely this madness will appear to all men.

Thou take occasion at my speaking of the Apostles preaching the word of God,
and Jesus; to ask me if the word of God, and Jesus be two distinct things.

Answ. If to fill paper, thou did not love to make frivilous questions, thou
would not thus spend thy self and time, look in thy former paper, and thou may
find this saying first from thy self, quoting Acts 17.13, 18. where it is said
Paul preached the word of God, and that he preached Jesus these Scriptures,
would satisfy thee (if thou were not as I have told thee) that preaching the
word of God, and preaching Jesus, is all one, and that my accounaing, that for
the word of God which Paul and Peter preached, is an account agreeable to the
Scriptures, and not against any but those who are against the truth.

Thou say in thy former paper, that my fancy is found to be built upon the
sandy foundation of litteral printed leaves, not the rock, yet (says thou)
that which gave forth the leaves I own.

To which I answer, that then thou must own the Printer, for he gave forth the
leaves, and so thy own foundation by thy own confestion must needs be Sandy; of
which without proof or my confession thou have accused me, I own not, or am
built upon any such foundation, (said I) or upon Paul or Peter, but that which
I am built upon, is that spiritual, and powerful word sounded and preached
forth by the Apostles, either in word or writing: at which answer thou art so
nettled, and stickles, and stislles up and down, and yet for all the stir thou
makes, thou cannot free thy self, thou call to thy friends to see me put to
my shifts; but they that are friends indeed, will tell thee thou art put to thy
shifts with a witness, for thou have no defense for thy self therein, but as
scoulds have one against another, which is to exercise a foul tongue, calling
me liar again and again, and high flown Pharisee, and the like, but in the
midst of all thy collar busling to free thy self, thou have sunck thy self
further in, for now thou art forced to confess that the pure spirit of the
living God gave forth the letter, and yet thou calls it dead letter, and in thy
title page thou say thou art a minister, not of the letter; and in thy
foregoing page thou tellest me I cry up the letter; now call thy friends and
let them see who will be put to their shifts, to free thy self of being a
blasphemer, in saying that which thou confesses to be given forth by the pure
spirit of the living God, is a dead thing; and of being a Minister of
Antichrist, in saying thou art no Minister, but a crier down of that which is
given forth by the pure Spirit of the living God, by thy own confession: see
what evil contradictions and obfurdities thou have run thy self into, as all do
who take up arms against the truth.

Thou tellest me in the next place I am puzzled, and tormented, because in thy
paper thou cryest not up the letter.

Answ. Thy friends will tell thee thou art more puzzled and tormented in crying
it down, who in thy struggling to cry it down, and against that which thou
acknowledges, to be given forth by the pure Spirit of the living God, art thy
self thrown down headlond, so far from the state of a faithful Minister, of the
everlasting Gospel, (as thou call'st thy self) that thou neither shows grace,
or good intelligence, and art neither Prophet, or the Son of a Prophet, but as
men have taught thee from thy youth, so do thou remain in low place amongst
the heards-men, where thy friend looking upon thee, will see who is dismounted,
and sorely wounded; boasting brave does seldom conquer, but the truth will
overcome.

Answ. Thou ask why the Heathen rage, and the men imagine a vain thing; it is
men's offense at Christ Jesus, against whom they band themselves, and assemble
together, Warring against, the Lord, and his anointed, witness, Martin Mason,
and his fellows, whose raging words, and not without blasphemy, and vain
Imaginations, is manifested to all who have eyes to see, or ears to hear.

I said in my former paper, that the baptism of repentance, hearing of faith
preached, and believing, is the inlet to the Spirit of promise, as these
Scriptures testify, Acts 2.36. Ephesians. 1.13. Gal. 3.2.

Thou tellest this to the world, as matter against me, but leaves out the
Scripture that I brought to witness it by; by which thy falsehood and deceit is
laid open; for thou leaves them out, knowing what thou accuses me of reaches
them, but they will speak to thy shame, and confound thee before all men. Thou
being empty of any answer thereto, say, by this man's Doctrine none have the
spirit of promise that bow not to his Sprinkling.

Answ. Martin, I have not at any time called upon thee, or any to how to any
Sprinkling, neither have I used the word Sprinkling to thee upon any such
account, it is a word brought only by thy self for reproach, when thou want
an answer: in which thou do but show how thou runnest into holes, and Caves
of thy own digging and scratching, to hide thee from the presence of truth.

If I should say to thee for want of other answer, when thou tellest of the
light within, to be the inlet to the Spirit, without the Scriptures teaching;
that by this man's doctrine none have the Spirit that how not to his quaking,
would thou not call me Liar, and deal me a many foul words for it; let that
charity now begin at home, and deal such words rightly where they do belong,
would any but one who is blind in heart, publish himself in print in such poor
pettish spirited things as thou do, I am ashamed to have to do with such
silly stuff, neither would I, but that I knew my silence would make thee boast
and be wise in thy own concent, therefore I choose rather to answer thee as I am
advised, Prove. 26.5. Thou bids Jonathan tell thee, if he did not a little
before own the light of the conscience to be the inlet of the Spirit.

Answ. Jonathan by writing has told Martin before, and tells him now that he
dis-owns his false fained light; but he owns the light of the conscience,
enlightened by the preaching of faith according to the Scriptures. Thou ask
me if I will be a Liar, whether thou will or no: as though thou had the making,
and disposing of Lies, as a Child belonging to the Father of Lies: but though
thy will like thy Fathers, be to have all Liars like thy self, yet thou must
want of thy will in me, for I neither love or make Lies, neither can thou
prove any Lie against me, though thou call me Liar, but it is a small matter to
find a Lie in a foul mouth.

I am willing to refer what is said to the wise in heart to judge, who is the
Babbler and bond-slave in Babylon, and says, and unsayes: which is the esteem
thou would have me in with those to whom thou publishes so against me, and
whom thou ask if I do not place water, and believing in the Letter in the
room of Christ, by making them the way, and the door or inlet to the Spirit of
promise.

Answ. It would agree better with right reason, if thou showed where I said so,
least they that find not any such saying of mine, must needs say thou art a
Liar whether they will or no; I deny, thou have them words from me; water
administered upon repentance and faith in Christ Jesus. I would have where it
should be according to Gospel teaching, that is the Baptism of repentance,
which I have so much spoken to thee, and against which thou and thy generation
devises so many cross opposings, to wind out and shroud your selves from the
appearance of truth, but your coverings are too scant, which makes your
nakedness be seen of every passer by.

Who ever (say thou) are not Spiritually blind, will see the blasphemy of the
beast, for Christ the light of the world is the door and the way, John 10.9,
and 14.16. and so the inlet to the Spirit of promise.

Answ. Does Christ being the door and the way to Salvation, deny faith to be
the inlet of his spirit of promise, is not entrance into Christ the door by
faith, and is not receiving the Spirit of promise by faith: then faith in
Christ is the inlet to Salvation, and the inlet of the spirit of promise into
the heart therefore, though Christ be the door and the way.

Yet those who have not but denies faith in Christ Jesus, have no inlet or
entrance therein; then surely thou must needs be without Christ, and has no
entrance into him, calling it the blasphemy of a beast, to allege the plain
Testimony of Christ to prove faith to be the inlet of the Spirit of promise,
surely all that hear thee, will see thy spiritual blindness, in such
faith-less, grace-less deliveries. Thou ask me where the Creature must look
for Christ if not within.

Answ. The Creature must look for Christ, as he does openly manifest himself to
every Creature according to the Scriptures, thou nor any other are not like to
find him within in your faithless condition, till you hear the Scriptures
direction, and obey the teaching of Christ therein, and so become new Creatures
according to the Gospel, for none but new Creatures have Christ within them,
and no new Creatures in the denial of the Baptism of repentance; the denial of
which is manifested in thee, in thy hot words of contempt against it: being thy
self so fouled in foul water without repentance, even since thou received thy
Romish washing, and not purisyed from that by the lavour of regeneration,
remains in thy old unclean condition, not obeying the truth thy self, but
railng upon those that do.

And though Christ stand at thy door and knock, and call upon thee to open thy
door, and amend thy life and be Baptized in the Name of Christ Jesus for
remission of thy sins, yet thou will not hear him and open thy door to receive
him; but have received a stranger called false Imagination; who because he
acknowledges whoredom, and drunkenness, and murder is sin, yet because he
tells thee not that disobedience to the command and teachings of Christ in
reference to his Law of faith is sin, is Spiritual Whoredom, and Drunkenness,
and Murder, and Theft, and the like, therefore thou cryest out against the
Ordinances of Christ to outface thy disobedience thereunto: but if an evil
Spirit should not come with something to deceive with, the possessed therewith
must be a professed Devil, in maintaining its Motion. But the man of sin comes
in all deceivableness of unrighteousness, to persuade those who are deceived
that they are Saints, when they are the quite contrary; and now to give our
Audience a right knowledge of what we contend for, and the difference thereof,
that so they may make right application of truth or falsehood, to which of us it
belongs, let them know, That what I have declared and do contend for, is for
the maintenance of the faith once given to the Saints according to the
Scriptures, and preaching of Christ and his Apostles, which is the light and
way of God, to direct all men to everlasting life, as the Scriptures do plainly
witness, John 14.6. Mark 16.16. Romans 10.9, 10. John 3.16. Thy declaration and
contending is without, and denying the Scriptures, and preaching of the man
Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, for the sins of the whole world, or the Apostles
sent of him: so thine is a thing in secret, not according to the open declared
will and command of Christ or teaching of his, and therefore must needs be a
deceit, and not to be received but accounted accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. John 9.10,
11. Romans 16.17.

If I must receive thee as in the truth for saying, thou have a light within
thee which thou call Christ, when thou walk contrary to, and denyest the
declared will of Christ Jesus in the Scriptures; then from the same ground I
must receive another that says so, and then the Pope and his Prelates, and
theirs, or any such who are as able to declare what they say they have of
Christ within, as Martin Mason, or any by whose hand held forth, he has been
led into this Condition, and they are for no other cause to be excepted
against, but for their walking contrary to and denying the declared will of
Christ Jesus in the Scriptures, and following their own Inventions, which they
call light: And of this Martin Mason and his fellows, do manifest themselves to
be as guilty as the former, and so with them denyers of Christ, to be come in
the flesh, for whosoever are denyers of that Christ Jesus who died at
Jerusalem, for man's redemption, and his teachings, and commands given forth by
him and his Apostles while they were personally upon Earth amongst men; must
needs be found guilty of the Apostle John's brand upon them, 1 John ^3. 2 John
7. Your Evasion of Christ coming in your flesh will not cover your deceit, but
more discovers your opposition to Christ Jesus, for your telling men of Christ
coming in their flesh, or your flesh, is to make them deny Christ come in his
own flesh, or the flesh, which was the only flesh or body, that God came in to
give his Law or Testament of faith to men, and was appointed to suffer and seal
his Testament with his blood.

Thou often talkest of the light within, telling men and women in secret, of
every sin they commit, yet thy light does not tell thee or them of your sins of
unbelief against that Savior, who tells thee in his Gospel that the world
shall be condemned for sin, because they believe not in him; Thou will not open
thy window to let this light of righteousness shine into thy dark heart, but
only light thy self and others with the nightly Torches of your own kindling,
which at the best let you but fee that evil, and that righteousness, which is
only in relation to the Law of works, by which Law none shall be justified or
condemned, thy light is a Popish light, and had its kindling from that fire,
and not from the Alter Christ Jesus; and therefore is a strange fire, and so an
abomination, from which fire has been the kindling of men's minds, in way of
merit by their own works, against the Justification that is by faith only,
according to the Scriptures, in the maintaining of which faith in Christ Jesus,
many thousand who have washed their long robes, and made them white in the blood
of the Lamb, and have not loved their lives unto the death, but have laid down
their lives in witness of that truth, in which they have been such overcomers,
that one would think there should have been no more rising up of that beaten
down falsehood in the accuser of the Saints; yet here appears the same Spirit
moving from below, which though it has not the horns, and teeth, and claws of
the beast, to kill and rend the Saints as the former did, yet it has the mouth
or voice of the Dragon, to accuse and curse and smite with the tongue, those
who deny to receive their false devices, by which voice thou call it
blalphemy in me, to say the Spirit is received by the hearing and receiving of
faith preached, and so accuses the Apostles also of blasphemy, of whom I
received it, Gal. 3.2. Ephesians. 1.13. Act. 2.38. because it denies the Spirit is
received by thy dark works.

Thou biddest Jonathan tell thee, was the bearing of faith, Gal. 3.2. hearing
the Prophets and Apostles, or hearing that Christ which Paul preached, to be in
all, Jew and Greek, Barbarian, Scithian, bond and free.

Answ. If Martins eyes had a Christian opening, he would see that either he
must deny Paul to be an Apostle, and the Apostles to preach all one Christ, or
say these are both one; and if Martin should tell me that the Christ which Paul
preached, and the Christ which Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and others of the
Apostles preached, was not all one Christ, all that hears him tell me so, will
say he speaks not truth, and for Barbarians, Scithians, etc. the Apostle in
that place names them not, and where he does namethem, as in Col. 11. He does
not name them as having Christ without or before faith in him, but that as to
the Jews, so to all others Christ is the same, both in the offer of himself to
all by his preaching, as also his indwelling with them in receiving him by
faith, but neither in Col. 11. or any where else does the Apostles preach
Christ to be or dwell in any, either Jew or Greek, but by faith only, (quite
contrary to your teaching) without which faith wrought by the Apostles
preaching, thy pretended Christ unction and light within, is all vanity and
deceit.

Thou ask what shall be the condemnation of all mankind, who never heard of
the name of Christ at Jerusalem, if not the light of Christ placed in the
conscience, and wherefore is the light of Jesus left there in the heart of
every man and woman, if not to lead men and women out of sin into holiness, and
whether any thing without can redeem a Soul from sin, but that Jesus who is the
light of the world, and shines in the conscience of every man and woman in the
world. Answer these queriers without any Serpentine evasion, conjuring
consequence, or Antichristian falicies, say thou.

Answ. The condemnation of the condemned, shall be for not believing in the
name of that Christ, who dyed at Jerusalem, as the Scriptures lively and
abundantly stand up to witness, though the dark generation calls them dead,
John 16.8, 9. and 12.48. Mat. 16.16. Mark 25.41, 42, 48. And thy saying they
have not heard of the Name of that Christ, that dyed at Jerusalem, is of no
value, for it is but thy false witness in the maintenance of thy own evil
cause, and therefore to be rejected, being a neggative, against the Scriptures
affirmative, besides thy own words (the light of Christ placed in the
conscience) is against thee, for how shall the conscience be enlightened by
Christ that never heard of him, Romans 10.14, 15. Here thou have Ensnared thy
self, now thou must either acknowledge with me, that the enlightening of all
consciences, is by the preaching of the faith in that Christ, who suffered for
sin at Jerusalem, or plainly deny him to be the Christ, whom thou denying art
in sin, as the same Christ tells thee, John 8.48. and till thou hear the
voyceof that Christ who calls thee out of the State of sin or unbelief, to
believe in his Name, and wash away thy sins in his blood, thou art not in the
State of Holiness, but in uncleanness, what ever thy heart Imaginations and
false fancy may sooth thee up withal, for there is no State of cleanness, or
holiness spiritual, but by faith only in that Christ Jesus, who suffered at
Jerusalem. Which Christ Jesus the light of the world in his sufferings at
Jerusalem, did without them redeem Souls from sins; thy Queries denying this
does manifest thy denial of that Christ, who died for sinners; whose redemption
does work faith and light in men, but not any thing in man does work his
redemption, for as formerly I have told thee and others of thy generation (at
which you have been so wrathful, but never gave any answer) that redemption is
the cause of man's belief, not belief the cause of man's redemption, for so
should men deny Christ, and be his own redeemer, but Christ is a redeemer
before man be a believer, for what should man believe if not redemption, and
who should he believe if not the redeemer. As a man cannot own Christ the
Savior, and deny his redemption, so a man cannot own redemption and deny the
Savior. But thy Queries plainly testify thee to be a denyer of both.

In the next place, thou have broken (in thy blindness) thy forehead against a
rock, that lay full in thy way, for thou art forced to confess, that I say
something to the proof of Baptism of Repentance, in alleging, Acts 7.59. If
I, and my friends, can witness such a condition as those convicts did in the
four last verses.

Answ. My friends and I, witnessing the condition required, verse the 38. do
manifest conversion which is more then conviction, which conversion does not
only witness by the gift promised thereunto, that condition in the four last
verses upon the like, or any Gospel occasion requiring; but the condition, Acts
7.59, 60. Romans 12.11. Heb. 10.34. For my friends, and I, do witness against
thee, and all who deny to follow Christ in the Regeneration, or Baptism of
Repentance, that if we follow not that conversion to do as Gospel need
requires, to the loss of what we here enjoy, and life and all, if we be
thereunto called, for Christ and his Gospel sake, we violate our Baptism and
destroy our faith: but to leave any of these, and not for the Gospel sake, or
it requiring and calling thereunto, but presently from an idle notion to seem
to have what is not within, it is a denial of faith, and is hypocrisy; turn thy
eyes to those of thy own generation, and see if thou can spy none who are so
far from parting from their own estates, that although convinced, yet are not
converted to restore that which others complain against them for; as taken from
them, by Exaction and Violence, while garments will not cover Extortion, the
righteousness of the Saints is the clothing of the regeneration. If my friends
and I could not witness the condition of the four last verses; or, the 38.
verse (of which thou can not accuse us in a Gospel language) is it right
therefore for thee to deny Baptism, call the wise in heart to Judge, if this
be from a conscience rightly enlightened: and they will tell thee, that rather
thou ought to stand up in the right use and practice thereof, according to its
faithful institution, and not deny Baptism because others who profess it, are
not rightly qualified for it: and when the Hypocrite has cast out the beam in
his own eye, he will see more clearly any mote that is in ours: till when if
thou make use of thy own words (let the babbler be silent) it will be more
wisdom, and that lying pride and passion, which here and so often thou would
persuade the world of against me, would not so plainly appear in thy self, and
then blindly boldly, callit perfection.

Thou tellest me, water sprinkling is not once named there, Acts 2.32. To which
I answer, that neither would it be named here, but that thy low light looks
thee out that bubble to prevent thy obedience to that baptism which is named
there; after thy forced confession of the truth thereof as before is manifested:
and for a further occasion against that truth, thou ask me if Christ's
Baptism consist of outward water. I answer, if it did, Martin Mason were a
Baptized man, for he has had outward water; but wanting in ward repentance,
and faith in that Christ, whose ordinance Baptism is, therefore he is not
Baptized but denies that council of God against himself, as his predecessors
in denial thereof did, Luke 7. I also will ask thee a question, whose Baptism
was it that Philip Baptized the Eunuch with, Acts 8.38. And that Peter
commanded Cornelius to be Baptized with, Acts 10.47, 48. If thou acknowledge it
Christ's Baptism, thy fable is answered; If thou say it was not Christ's
Baptism, whose seavants were they in the doing, and commanding it to be done;
lay by thy lewd language, and let me have an answer to this, who never
receivest answer from thee yet to any thing that I desired an answer to, in
meekness, and moderation, but in unreasonable railings; and when thou know
what the Baptism of repentance is, by a right conversion wrought in thy self,
thou will know what it is to suffer with Christ, and what the Baptism of the
holy Ghost is, till when the Serpent that is so quick in thy mouth, stops it
from confession to Salvation.

Thou should answer, Ephesians. 1.13. Which thou call my last proof, and was
brought to prove that the Spirit of promise is received by believing, as also
Gal. 3.2. was alleged to prove the same; but thou having no mind to acknowledge
the truth, though so plainly appearing before thee, and wanting answer against
it; asks me what was this word of truth, if not Jesus the word of God, the sure
word of Prophecy which shined in the Ephesians dark hearts, which they knew
not.

Answ. Is there any thing in this (worthy to be called an answer) to defend
thee in thy denial of the Spirit, to be received by the hearing of the faith
preached, and believing the word of truth, and Jesus the word of God being
alone, the Apostles preached that word of truth, and Jesus the word of God, to
work faith in men, by which faith the Spirit of promise was received, what help
for thee in this, but to throw thee backward: that word of truth, and Jesus the
word of God, did not shine in the Ephesians dark hearts, before the Apostles
preached to them, as thou falsely and ignorantly would persuade, but after the
Apostles preaching they believed, and after they believed, they were sealed
with the holy Spirit of promise, as that text says, Ephesians. 1.13. but thou
thrusts away the word after, which the text delivers, that thy darkness might
be placed before the Apostles preaching of Christ Jesus, but Christ tells
thee, John the 10.8. that all such forecomers, are thieves and robbers: compare
this thy saying, with the sure word of Prophecy which shined in their dark
hearts, which they knew not; with what thou say before, that the unction,
the woman's seed, the Christ within, is that light which is in all consciences
before faith, and without; and before the Apostles preaching; so that by thy
Doctrine, the Apostle preaching the word of truth; or, Jesus the word of God,
brought nothing to the Ephesians but what they had before, for if they had the
unction, the Christ within, which is the Spirit of promise, before, then were
they Sealed before; but the Apostle tells them, Ephesians. 2.12. that before they
believed they were without Christ, so that I must either deny the Ephesians
conversion by the Apostles preaching of faith, and the Apostles saying, that
after they believed they were Sealed, and that before they were without Christ,
and so make the Apostle a liar, (which God forbid) or tell Martin Mason he
cannot escape being the liar, and therefore by the sentence of his own mouth,
must have his mouth stopped: a many foul and wicked words proceed from thee, in
the next place, which I will leave to all who have learned to let their words
be few, and gracious, to see by what Spirit thou art led? and to Judge whether
such expressions, (to avoid answer) be the new tongue speaking of a Saint, or
speaking like the Dragons.

Thou asks me if I shame not to tell thee with my false tongue, that thou
contemns the faith in the sufferings of Christ,

Answ. I would thou were repentantly ashamed at thy contempt of the sufferings
of the Lord Christ, that dyed at Jerusalem: which contempt of thine is
manifested in these words, in thy paper. But thou (speaking to me) and the
drunkard, and scum of the earth, who fed your selves with the mere froathy
verbal faith in the sufferings, of that single man Christ Jesus at Jerusalem;
and yet wallow in your wickedness, are not saved or redeemed from your sins.
And in the same Raper alleged, 1 John 4.2. Say thou, did the Apostle here
signify, that every one that confesses Christ come in the flesh, of the
single person at Jerusalem; that every one confessing this is of God, why then
the Pope will say he believes this?

Now let the honest hearted in the Nation, whom thou calls upon to Judge, let
them I say Judge, whether this language be not a contemptuous speaking: Thou
(as the manner of thy generation is) when thou calls others to Judge, leaves
out that which thou know will most evidence thy contempt, as here, thou
leaves out the word single man, and single person, which were thy words to me,
but here thou leaves them out, and then call to the wise in heart to Judge:
will not thy light within, let thee see this to be falsehood and dissimulation:
Christ Jesus was the Son of Mary according to the flesh; but thy brethren who
called him the Carpinter, Mary's Son, Mar. 6.3. speak that in despising
contempt against him. So he was the Man Christ, and a person like unto us in
all things save only sin: but thy calling him single man, and single person, at
Jerusalem, is from the same spirit of despising contempt, as the honest hearted
will tell thee. Martin thy light leading thee in ways contrary to the way of
faith, only in that Christ, that suffered at Jerusalem, leadest thee from the
true and everlasting light and life, to the place of death and darkness: for
there is no life or light leading to Salvation, but by faith in that Christ
only who suffered at Jerusalem, which thou plainly do deny, and ragest so
against me for discovering thy flying to any, whose faith thou call merely
froathy and verbal, will not help thee in thy denial of faith to Salvation: for
such is no faith, the Scripture tells thee, there is one faith, Ephesians. 4.5.
which faith Justifies and saves, Gal. 2.16. Ephesians. 2.8. but whence have thou
thy frothy verbal faith, that is the device of thy Spirit of delusion, which as
it would have many Christ's to deny that one Christ who suffered at Jerusalem,
so it would have many faiths, to deny that faith which is to Salvation,
according to the Gospel: thy telling me of wallowing in my wickedness with the
drunkards, and scum of the earth, is but thy raging at rebuke, for thy bold
Blasphemy against the Lord that bought thee. Now Judge say thou, O ye wise
in heart; is the Scripture, 1 Timothy 2.5. call not him who suffered at Jerusalem,
the man Christ Jesus; and may not I use the language of the Apostle.

Answ. The wise in heart, (are no formal Quakers) will tell thee thy language
is quite contrary to that of the Apostles, for the Apostle in that Scripture,
calls the man Christ Jesus, the Mediator betwixt God and man. But thou calls
him the single man, and single person; in contempt of faith in him, and to make
men deny his Mediatour-ship, the Apostles language is a confirmation of their
belief in that Christ Jesus, who believe in God, thy language is to destroy
their belief in that Christ Jesus, who believe in God, and so thou art
manifested to deny both the Father and the Son, 2 John 9.

Thou bids me peruse thy paper again, and see if thou said not, no other
Jesus do I own but the Lamb of God, which was slain from the beginning of the
world.

Answ. Thy expressions in that, is but the liberty thou takes for occasion, and
to deceive thereby those who hear thee; for the name of Christ or Lamb slain,
or Redeemer, or Anointed, thou do but use them words, to exalt thy pretended
light within, that so thou may bring down and deny that Christ whom thy
fellows slew at Jerusalem, and this all may see, who have but half an eye of
discerning, to be the whole drift of thee, and the rest with thee; had thou
said no other Jesus do I own but the man Christ, who dyed at Jerusalem, and
faith in him only to be Salvation, thou had some cause to bid me peruse thy
paper, but whoever peruseth thy paper or thee, shall not find that, and that not
being in thee, all thy expressions of Christ, and light, or unction, or woman's
seed, and the like, are falsely applied to thy secret invention.

Thou say, I tell thee in two several places, that thou crucifies Christ
again; and that I break forth into rage, because thou tells me he is slain in
me.

Answ. I told thee thou would crucify the Son of God again, and good cause had
I, when thou told me, not only that he is slain in me as thou here say, but
also that he is still slain for me which here thou say not; which is the
continuance of thy deceit, to leave out that which thou knows will most
discover thy falsehood: is not this plain lying, and dissembling in thee? to
tell the world I said that, which I said not, and to cry out against me, and
dissemble the cause; But thou art ashamed truly to declare to the world what I
said to thee, and the occasion, because thou knew it would confound thee: that
which thou calls my raging, was my alleging the Scriptures against thy false
affirming Christ to be still slain for me: which Scriptures prove that Christ
the Lamb that was slain is alive for evermore, Rev. 18. and that he once
sufferered for sins, the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. and that he was once
offered to take away the sin of man, Heb. 9.25, 26, 28.

But thou (said I) dares say is still slain for me; was his first death
insufficient, and shall Christ from his immortal and glorified being be brought
down to die, and suffer again; let the Reader now judge what breaking forth
into rage is in this? he who affirms Christ Jesus to be still slain for
sinners, must deny him to be risen from the grave, and ascended, make right
application of this, or let the wise of the nation that hears thee, do it: if
Christ be still slain for me (as thou say he is) it must be bodily, for so
was his dying for sinners, then is he in the grave, and not risen or ascended,
but thou say, the heaven which contains Christ, is a mystery to my dark mind:
But I answer, it is rather thy dark mind which to set up thy mystery of
iniquity, would cloud the Heaven that contains Christ according to the
Scriptures, Acts 3.21. and 1, 11.

Thou returns a slender account of my counsel given unto thee, to leave thy
false luminaries, and turn thy feet into the testimonies of the true light, in
calling me liar, and false Prophet, blasphemer, and such like: but those who
were but in doubt before, will now be fully satisfied, what light is in thee,
compared with the pure peaceable Spirit, and mind of wisdom, John 9.8. the
Leopard say thou cannot change his spots, and it is hard for thee to leave thy
lying; thou say, I kill the Scriptures, can that which is dead be killed.

Answ. I did not say thou killed the Scriptures, do not thou tell a lie then
to say I said so; I said thou would kill the Scriptures (if thou could) when
thou should obey them, and have them alive again to defend thee against others,
and this was because sometimes thou said, the Scriptures thou owned, and that
they were yours, and that thou owned that which gave forth the leaves, and
would bring them forth to condemn others: and at other times when thou art
called upon to obey them, thou calls them dead letter, and life-less books, and
say, it is a damnable doctrine to say the Spirit is received by the hearing
of faith preached, and believing according to the Apostles preaching in the
Scriptures; let the reader now judge whether this loud outcry against me of
lying, be not justly returned upon the head of the crier.

Martin, I have told thee, and many of thy generation, that you cannot kill the
Scriptures, but that they are and will be a continual living against you, and
all opposers of truth, and though thou say, can that which is dead be killed,
yet do thou and thy fellows make all the vile war you can against them, in
which you find them so living that it is a torment unto you, and makes you rage
against the remnant of woman-seed who keep the commandments of God, and faith
of Jesus according to the Scriptures.

Thou asks, if in two several places, I do not call the Scripture, dead letter.

Answ. If I do, it is where I call thee a Saint; see if thou can find that in
my paper: thou tells me I run on in lying, because I said thou runs for shelter
amonst those thou accounts thy enemies, who knows no other burial with Christ,
but burial in water, calling them the chief Princes of Meshech and Tubal.

Answ. Had not I good cause to tell thee of running for shelter to thy enemies,
when thou runs to defend thy self against Baptism with the word sprinkling, a
word begun and used in way of contempt, by those whom thou and thy generation
are against, as much as against me; yet art forced to make use of their weak
weapons having none of thy own in this case: and now to make them more of thy
side, and to rise with thee against me, thou say I call them the chief
Princes of Meshech and Tubal, but let my paper be looked on with impartial
eyes, and it will be told thee, it is applied to thee, and thy generation, and
all who are found to band themselves against the Baptism of repentance, I not
nominating any particular but him I writ to, though thou say, I mean those
called dippers, yet thou have not the word dipper from me.

Thou say I have invented an abominable lie, besides nonsense in two lines,
and this abominable lie and nonsense, is because I say, thou bids me prove
whether Christ commanded Baptism to his Disciples yea or nay, and did the Lord
require it of his people to this day, yea or nay.

Answ. Was not the matter we had in question Baptism, see my answer to James
Naylors sixth position set down in thy former paper, my words there are these;
it is not faith but a fancy, to run to other helps, then the Spirit received by
the hearing of faith preached by Christ, and his Apostles, all other teaching
or Spirits are but lying vanities, leading to the denial of obedience in that
faith required, as in the Baptism of repentance, and the like; thou
undertaking to reply to this, said, it is indeed thy darling, thy Diana which
must down: is thy sprinkling with water the Baptism of Christ, did the Lord
command or require it of his people to this day? Now the reader (thy cloak
being taken off) may see the abominable lie and nonsense: whether in me, who
answers thee according to the matter in question, or whether it be not rather
in thy self, who to fly the answer, talkest of sprinkling, which is from the
matter, and is neither darling, or Diana of mine, but that thou must dandle
such babbles to delude the spectators: surely thou art not so blind in thy self
as thou seems to be, to think that any who can hear right from wrong, will not
hear thy guiltiness of Lying and nonsense: to call upon me to prove Sprinkling
which belongs not to our question, to avoid thy answer in denial of Baptism.
But though thou can not say any thing in answer, thou can tell how to give
the lie; its an observable thing in thee, that when thou have the least to
answer, thou make the greatest noise in railing accusations, thinking thereby
to take off the Reader from seeing thy folly: but the wise will soon descern
thy poverty, and miserable nakedness.

Thou thinks it not enough to tell me, I vent an abominable lie and nonsense,
(for speaking truth) but fearing that insufficient to effect thy will, thou
tellest me, thou never knew of one pretending to more piety then I, that
excelled, or equalled me in the devilish art of lying.

Answ. Surely the violence of thy evil disease, through delusion will appear to
all men; I cannot but think thou speak contrary to what thy thoughts are of
me; what a miserable condition is thine, in this to accuse me, not only to them
who knows me not, but also to them who knows me, of that which in thy thoughts
thou do not think is so; but thy denial of truth in me, is to cover thy
denial of truth in the Scriptures, as in the matter in question, the Baptism
of repentance, which yet remains a Conquering truth, over all thy Sprinklings,
and Lies, and nonsense, which paper-walls thou patches together, to defend
thee from answering what was charged upon thee in the point of Baptism.

Thou say, in the art of Lying, I am a noble servant to my Master.

Answ. That does but show the pride of thy fathers child, who would have a
servant under him.

In which pride, thou say for the simples sake, thou will peruse those
Scriptures my father sends me with, to fight for his kindgome, which Scripture
is, Mat. 28.19, 20. Act. 2.32, 41, 42.

Answ. Let the Reader take notice, that these being the Scriptures of God and
weapons given by him to those he sends, for their defense and safety against
the enemy, thou must either acknowledge God to be my Father, (agianst thy will)
in bringing these Scriptures; or say they are not his, but the Scriptures, and
weapons of his enemy: which Blasphemy being lodged in thy calling it dead
Letter, will be laid open, that all may see whose Child thou art. But howsoever
this is certain that it is not God, whose the Scriptures is, that sends thee
with these low weapons of self devices to fight against the sender of those
Scriptures, and those sent of him; but all thy labor will be in vain, and
destruction will be the wages of such Employment; thy promise to the simple is
spoken in thy mother tongue, Prove. 9.16. They must be simple ones indeed that
gives ear to thy Doctrine, and perusal of Scripture. Thy first perusal is, thou
tellest the simple thou cannot find Sprinkling there.

Answ. This is a simple instruction, he must needs be a blind guide, that can
but tell those he undertakes to teach, that he cannot see, or cannot find, and
so produce nothing; thou can not find Sprinkling, and thou will not find
Baptism there, though the Scriptures plainly declare it; the simple will soon
have enough of thy perusal of Scripture; from whence thou runnest stumbling to
me in thy blindness, and asks, if Act. the 22.16. make for my purpose, and if
Sprinkling with water is once mentioned there, or did Annanias bid him be
Baptized with outward water.

Answ. That Scripture is for me in the matter in question, which is Baptism,
Annanias bid him arise and be Baptized, and he arose and was Baptized, Act.
9.18. as for thy words Sprinkling with water, and outward water, being no
Scripture Language but thy own, having thy tongue dipped in the Egyptian Sea, and
but trifles, and babbles of thine to shift off the answer; I shall leave them,
see if thou can produce any thing from thence, that will answer thy rejecting
that counsel of God, against thy self in not being Baptized, as thy brother
Expounders and perusers of Scriptures did, Luke the 7.30.

Thou say, as for Act. the 10.47, 48. is it not clear, the Holy Ghost was
received without outward water, then where is the necessity of Sprinkling?

Answ. No necessity of Sprinkling, but where Martin Mason wants an answer, In
his denial of Saptisme with water upon confession of faith; and for the
necessity of that Baptism, the Apostle Peter in that Text gives full
satisfaction, both in asking who could forbid water, and also in commanding
them to be Baptized; it appears none of thy Spirit was there, for then there
would have been a denial of it: but there was no denial or forbidding, but
submistion, and command for it, both in Peter and the rest, and for the Holy
Ghost being received before that Baptism, that is nothing to thy denial
thereof, for none in denial of Baptism, either then or since, did receive or
have the promise of the spirit; Gods love to these in the State of submission,
and obedience to that Ordinance, as Cornclius and the rest were, is no
president for thee or any in opposing, and denying it: but to condemn your
disobedience, Cornclius did manifest as much, and more light then thee and thy
generation do now, before Peter was sent unto him, yet had he not the spirit of
promise, till he had heard the Apostles preaching the Lord Jesus, in whom he
believed, and after that there was no slighting water, but it was administered
in the name of the Lord Jesus; In which Name, any thing commanded and practiced
by the Apostles, and believers was accounted necessary, and still is, but where
the Spirit of error does Blaspheme, and deny the Lord in his Ordinances. Did
Christ himself, give an example of righteousuess in being Baptized with water,
upon which the Holy Ghost did witness the good pleasure and love of God, and
shall men now be heard or accounted as righteous, in opposition, and denial
thereof, surely none will give ear to such strangers, and enemies to truth,
but such as know not the Lord, and have no acquaintance with his voice.

Thou say Act. 8.36, 37. intimates, that it is but a thing indifferent, if
thou beleevest, says Philip, thou may; as much as if he had said, if thou
beleevest outward water to be necessary to Salvation, thou may be Baptized.

Answ. Take away (as much as) thy prologue to proceed falsely) and the
remainder is, if Philip had said, if thou believe outward water to be
necessary to Salvation, thou may be Baptized: but Philip said not so, it is
Martin Mason that says so, in which he has manifested himself in a Lie, as
much as if he had sa^d, Philip taught the Eunuch not to believe in Christ; for
if Philip had taught the Eunuch, that to believe outward water, was necessary
to Salvation, to fit him for Baptism, he must deny belief in Christ, which
only is necessary to Salvation, and to fit for Baptism, for there is nothing
can fit for Baptism, but only faith in Christ: water administered upon that
faith is necessary to obedience, which the Eunuch observed from Philips
preaching, desiring water, but Philips preaching, and the Eunuch believing, was
in that Christ only as verse. 35. does manifest, according to Christ's command,
Mark 16.15, 16. Mat. 28.19, 20. Of whom should the Eunuch know, and why should
he desire Baptism, if Philip had not preached it to him; and for thee to say
that Philip who preached, and was sent by the power of the Holy Ghost, preached
things in relation to the Gospel, so indifferently as thou say, as to be
done, or. not done, thou do in this disable, (what thou can) the Spirit of
the most high God, to say he commands, and sends his servants to practice
things of no value, or that are unnecessary, and things indifferent to be done
or undone, which is blasphemy; or say that Philip and the Apostles did contrary
to commandment, or the Spirit teaching, and so make them Antichristians like to
thy self.

This indifferent Spirit of thine, which would take men off from the commands
of Christ, and practice of his Disciples, is a Spirit of error and Doctrine of
Darkness, and none but those who are led by such en evil Spirit, would or durst
so grossly oppose the plain teaching of the Scripture, and bring their own lie
against it. The next proof thou faist I clap in, is no better then the rest,
which is, Acts the 8.12. They were all baptized both men and women, but water
was wanting.

Answ. There is no want of water where the baptism of repentance is truly
ministered, as there it was, and the Baptism of the Holy Ghost they had not
till afterward, as verse 15, 16, 17. But thou want a Christian eye, and
heart, which if thou had thou would hate to deliver such detestable Stuff,
where the Scripture names water in Baptism, thou with wicked violence would
pluck the words away, and place thy own divised baubles in the room thereof,
and where the Scripture speaks of the same baptism, because it names not
water, thou audatiously denyest water, and say it is wanting there, by which
thy Spirit of lying is plainly laid open: thou calls me vain Jangler, and tells
me these places are not for my purpose without adding to the letter; but
whether thou in thy perusal or rather abusal of Scripture, have not manifested
thy self a vain Jangler, and adds to and diminishes of the Scriptures,
teaching to hide and deny the truth, let the reader Judge; thou say John was
a Propher, therefore his Ministration must end in Christ Jesus, who is the
fullfiling of the Law and the Prophets.

Answ. What Is all that to thy denial of the Baptism of repentance, or
baptizing with water upon confession of faith, and sins. If John were a Prophet
he was so in relation to the Gospel of Christ, whose servant and Minister he
was; and not in relation to the ceremonies, and rudimeuts of the Law of Moses,
therefore his ministration ending in Christ, ending but where it began as all
other Prophets ministration of the Gospel did, as Peter and Paul, and John,
whose ministration begun and ended in Christ, but all in relation to their own
persons, for that ministration still remained, and does remain: to say the
ministration of Baptism ceased when John ceased, is not only a tying the
teachings and commandments of God to man's mutability, but is also a plain
denial of the Apostles teaching, and practice to be of God, not only after John
was taken away, but also after Christ himself ascended, as Acts 2.38. and
10.47, 48. and 6.38.

Thou ask me why I do not plead for the practice of circumcision in the
flesh, as for Baptism, is not their authority of an equal purity, both by
permission, not by precept.

Answ. If I should plead for the practice of circumcision in the flesh now, as
for baptism, I should be a denyer of Christ like unto thee, circumcision being
a carnal seal of a worldly covenant was abolished by the bringing in of a
better testament, Heb. 7.22. and the 10.9. But I plead for Baptism because
it is an ordinance of the Gospel, and a Testimonial of their faith, and
obedience, who enter into the new covenant: thy saying they are of equal
purity, is from an impure weakness, for the one was only an impression in the
flesh, not reaching the heart by faith; the other has no Seal or impression,
but in the heart, by faith; and whereas thou say, they were both by
permission, not by precept: thou speak falsely; for they were both by
precept, the one a precept of the law; the other a precept of Christ in the
Gospel, which all that obey the light that lights every man, that comes into
the World, knows and will acknowledge, but those on whom the sun is gone down,
night is to them for a vision, and darkness for a divination. Thou say in my
reply to the seventh Position, thou find me so puzzled teaching perfection;
that I give thee no answer, but would shuffle thee off, bringing in, James the
3.2.

Answ. Thou do this but to shuffle off James 3.2. To which thou should give
answer, whosoever reads thy former paper, shall hear thee throw me out a many
foul and filthy words, about perfection, which is all that is contained in that
paper to puzle me with, which paper if thou were not ashamed to show to the
world with my answer, it would manifest who is puzzled, and what perfection
there is in Martin Mason, compared with what thou repeats from, James 3.2. If
any offend not in word, the same is a perfect man; if thy own mouth do not here
condem thee, let thy offensive words (which testify thy deceived and vain
Religion, James 1.26.) witness, which is because thou wants a bridle which will
bring thee a sad conclusion as James tells thee, James 3.3. to the 7. But now
let the reader hear what answer there is in thee, to that of James 3.2. which
thou say I shuffle thee off with, the Apostle, there says to his brethren,
in many things we sin all: In the room of an answer, say thou, does he plead
against perfection as thou do? to which I answer, Thou must acknowledge he
does, or say he calls sin perfection, see if thou can shuffle this off.

Thou say, the Scriptures were never writ that the Devil by them should plead
for sin.

Answ. Nor were they ever writ that sinners by them should plead perfection?
Thou tellest me of bringing, Romans 7.18. Where Paul says, I know that in me,
that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing; from whence (say thou) thou would
infer, that in Paul dwelt nothing that was good; but will thou say the Holy
Ghost is not good?

Answ. I brought Romans 7.18. to let thee hear the Apostles own words, which
denies perfection in the flesh, thou can not tell how to answer this, and
therefore leaves it, to speak fasly of me, saying, I would infer; had I brought
the Second commandment to a Papist against his worshipping of Images, and he
answer, hence thou would infer, that God should not be worshipped, it had been
an answer equal with thine.

Thou ought rather to answer that Scripture, or acknowledge thy error, Paul had
the holy Ghost, yet Paul says, in him, that is, in his flesh dwells no good
thing; but thou say perfection, dwells in the flesh of Paul, so that the
perfection thou pleads for is no good thing, or we must deny Paul, and hear
thee against him; but if Paul who had the Spirit of God within him, had no good
thing dwelling in his flesh, as himself says, then sure it is a bad perfection
that is in Martin Masons flosh, in whom dwells the Spirit of error, as is
manifest in his abuse of Scripture, and fighting against the truth.

And then say thou, away with Paul's Epistles, and by consequence with the
rest of the Scripture.

Answ. That is it thou strives for, to get shut of the Scriptures, for their
witness torments thee, but thou labors in vain, for they will outlive all the
generations of falsehood, and be a continual witness against men's devices, as is
plainly manifested in this.

Thou say that I alleged, Phil. 3.24. is to me a mystery.

Answ. I have so much of the mystery as to alledg it for that which thou art
not able to answer, therefore in that I need not say to them, babbler be silent;
thou say my piece of Logic shows what a Pagan I am.

Answ. And thy silence argues thy consent, to the right reason in that piece of
Logic, for thou give no answer to it, whether it be more Pagan-like to frame
right reason, or deny it without reason, let thy friends judge.

Thou biddest me consider in the cool of the day, that which is born of the
flesh is flesh; but that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.

Answ. In the cool of the day I do consider, and in that coolness tell thee,
that this is sufficient to discover, that notwithstanding all thy hot words
against me about perfection, in the mind through faith, but not perfection in
the flesh; till Mortal have put on Immortality, that outward man is born of the
flesh, and is flesh; therefore not perfect; the inward man or mind (in the
state of faith) is born of the Spirit, and therefore perfect; in which
perfection of the mind, Paul says he serves the Law of God, but in his
imperfect flesh the Law of sin, Romans 7.25. All thy following words about
perfection, at the end of which thou writes the word Queries, is a repetition,
not proving any thing for thee, for the Tabernacle of God with men, and
dwelling in them, and walking in them, and the like, is all included in that
before alleged of the Apostle Paul, his having the holy Ghost in him, yet the
same Apostle says, that in his flesh dwells no good thing; this thou should
answer too, and prove perfection in that which Panl denies, or acknowledge thy
error, or speak plainly that all may hear thee, as one of thy generation did to
me; alleging that Scripture to him, who adorning his speech with thy manner of
language, of beast and liar, and filthy creature, and such like; Said, Paul
was no Christian when he wrote that; thou ask me, why I deny that to be the
true Spirit, or true unction which is not received by the letter.

Answ. That Spirit, which denies the Apostles teaching in the Scriptures, and
is not received by the hearing, and believing their preaching of faith, I deny,
because it is a lying Spirit, and comes but to deceive.

Had not, (say thou) Abraham, Isaac, and the rest of the holy men of God, who
lived before Moses writ the Letter, had not they the Spirit of truth within
them? were there not many deceitful Serpents and filthy Spirits like thine, in
their days, and had they any outward writing given them, etc.

Answ. What though Abrabam, and the rest thou speak of, in their time had
the Spirit of truth within them before the Law written by Moses? does that give
cause to any in time of the Law, to deny the writing by Moses, or thee, or any
now to deny the writings of Christ, and his Apostles, if there were such
Serpents, and filthy Spirits, as thou speak of, who opposed the cammand of
God, yet that does not excuse the deceitful Serpents, and filthy Spirits, that
now deny the written verities, as thou and thy generation do: that Spirit which
led men to obey the commandments of God or Law of faith, before Moses writ the
Law, which if it were not by writing, yet it was by voice, which is all one,
for that which was given to Abraham by voice was written for our learning, and
what was given to the Apostles by voice, was also written for our learning,
Romans 15.4. That we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have
hope, that Spirit I say that led men before the Law written, to obey, did also
lead men to obey the Law written by Moses, and whosoever denied, and despised
that Law was led by an evil Spirit, and it was death without mercy, Heb. 10.28.
Even so now that Spirit that led men before the Law, and in the Law, to obey
the commandments of God by faith, the same Spirit now does lead men to obey
all the commandments, and teachings of Christ Jesus in the Law of the Gospel
preached, and written by the Apostles, as 1 Cor. 14.37. But whosoever denies
obedience, and would trample that down, as thou and thy fellows, they are led
by an evil Spirit, and their sorer punishment is told them, Heb. 10.29. did
Paul and the rest of the Apostles, (say thou) receive the Spirit of truth by
virtue of reading, or hearing any writing or book without them.

Answ. All the Apostles did first hear the voice of Christ, who was their Book
or Writing without them, before they received the Spirit of Truth within them:
Produce if thou can any of the Apostles who had the Spirit of Promise within
them, before Christ had first called them with his voice without them.

Thou say, That which thou broughtest out of 1 John 2. as to the anointing
stands unshaken, and cannot be removed by all the Brats of Babylon.

Answ. That which thou broughtest, is not like to be shaken by the brats of
Babylon, (except against their wills) as the foolish woman destroys her own
house) for it is their own bringing, but if that, 1 John 2. and all other
declarations of the holy Ghost, in the Scriptures, could be shaken, they had
been ere now, for thou and thy generation lay all your bones and sinews to
shake it, but it is grounded on a Rock, and has its being and protection from
the Lord of Power, and therefore is it that (like your predecessors) you are so
marvelously beaten back in your assaults against it: what have thou to do with
the anointing spoken of, 1 John 2. it does not belong, nor is it in the
denyers of Christ, it is only the Saints Seal and Assurance of the love and
favor of God to them, which those know not who are in the state of
disobedience against the Law of Faith, for without Faith no promise or sealing
in the New Covenant: And no Faith where no Obedience to that Teaching is
denied: Thou publishest this to the World, to make them think thou had said
something, but it is a plain testimony (to all that hear thy former Paper with
my Answer) of thy conviction, here not being a word in answer to any thing said
to thee, but Repetitions weakly, as well as in thy amazement thou could. Thou
talkest of the Pope, but thou can not free thy self, with all the skill and
strength thou have, of the comparison I made betwixt you; You both boast of
Christ to be come in the flesh, and both deny that Christ who came in his own
flesh, for you both deny his teachings and commands given while he was here in
the flesh, and set up your own inventions against him, and therefore are alike
Antichristian, and so as is Prophesied of you in Daniel, though you seem to war
and contend one against another, yet you talk of deceit at one Table, talking
of Christ come in the flesh, by which he calls himself Christ's Vicar, (or Christ
on Earth) and thou and thy generation, so many as there are of you, would be so
many Christ's, like another of your Predecessors, Henry Nicolas, the Father of
the Familists, whose breath some years agon has blown these swarms, that thus
darken the Sun, and infect the Air; He denied Salvation by Christ who died at
Jerusalem, as you do, and said, That the state of Perfection is the Man Christ,
or any power in man whereby he can keep the Law, without Faith in the Man
Christ. Is not this the Doctrine taught by thee and thy generation, all which
is to set up your selves to be the coming of Christ in the flesh, denying that
Christ that came in the flesh, which the Apostle John teaches confession of, 1
John 4.1, 2. thy exposition of which, to pervert the Truth, does manifest no
less; which is, that the Apostle means, Christ come in the flesh of others;
though all the Apostles in their preaching does preach belief in that one
Christ that came in his own flesh, or person, in which he suffered at Jerusalem
for the sins of all men, and not in the flesh of others, as thou expoundest;
for that is the coming of those who say, lo here and lo there, which are
false Christ's, forewarned of, Matthew. 24. Who to set up themselves and throw
down Christ Jesus, by false Expositions pervert the Scriptures; by which is
manifest who rules in the fleshly tabernacles of such Children of disobedience.

It is but the Liar (say thou) that tells me, my Master has not commanded me
to judge.

Answ. Martin, thou will not seem to take notice, because the world should not
know, that I told thee, there is difference betwixt a Judge and a Malefactor; I
told thee, thou should answer thy own Maker at the Bar, and stay taking upon
thee the Judges place till thou be a Saint, and then thou will know that thy
Master (whom thou now call the Singlo Person) that died at Jerusalem, and is
alive for evermore, bids thee judge not, Luke 6.37. 1 Cor. 4.5. to bear off
this blow, thou bring Christ's words, John 12.48. He that rejects me, and
receives not my word, has one that judges him; but this is no defense for
thee, but wounds thee deeper, for Christ tells thee there what one that is that
shall judge, which is, the Word that he has spoken; which thou call, the
dead Letter: But thou, to deceive by, thoughtst to keep this out, that thou
might take the Judges place thy self, and so to exalt thy self above Christ,
and then say, he is thy witness. O bold presumption, was ever a greater
exaltation in a cative so low!

Christ came not (say thou) to send peace but the sword, to the Man of sin
whom thou servest.

Answ. And yet I am far from serving thee or any such exalters of themselves
against Christ; if thou understoodest those words of Christ, Mat. 10.34, 35,
36. part of which thou have stolen to speak proudly with, thou would not have
placed them thus, but would have known that they are nothing for thy purpose.

Thou talkest of the Saints Judging the World, and the Spiritual man judging
all things.

Answ. As I have told thee, Stay till thou be a Saint, and then thou will not
be so hasty to be a Judge, but wilt better know how and when such Judgment
shall be; and that the Spiritual man's judging, is discerning all things, not
judging or censuring persons, and then thy manifestation of Faith and obedience
to Christ and his Gospel, will be a judging and reproof to unfaithfulness, and
thy tongue will be taught more tamenesse, then to smite others therewith, for
then the Spirit of God will tell thee, that thou have nothing to do to judge
another man's Servant, he stands or falls to his own Master, Romans 14.4. then thou will learn to speak with a new tongue, and that old blasphemous cursing
presumptuous tongue, that runs without guide, will be plucke^ out, and be no
more the loud belman to a corrupt heart.

Thou ask me, By what authority. I judge thee for an enemy of
righteousness, and why I judge the People called Dippers, calling them the
chief Princes of Meshech and Tubal, and by what authority I judge the Priests
of the Nation for Antichristians?

I judge thee not, I leave that to him to whom thy judgment and condemnation
does belong, the Word of God tells thee, of thy enmity against righteousness,
in warring against that Word. Where have I judged the people thou call
Dippers, or called them the chief Princes of Meshech and Tubal, show it if thou
can? Or where I have named the Dippers in my Paper upon any such account: It
is with thee, as I told thee formerly, thou would shelter thy self amongst
others, thou see thy want, and would have help in the defense of thy cause;
which makes thee cry also to the Priests of the Nation (as thou call them)
telling them I judge them Antichristians; Thou art driven to a great straight
surely, thou take me for some foreign enemy, that wilt thus claw thy
domestic enemies, to engage with thee against me, but thou do trouble thy
neighbors with such a false alarm; when I have occasion with, either those
thou call Priests or Dippers, I shall stand up in the manifestation of truth
according to what I have received from the Lord, and shall leave the judging or
censuring them and all men to him to whom all judgment does belong, and my
self, shall not judge or pass sentence on any man.

Thou tellest me, I shame not in one of my Arguments to affirm, that the
Letter, under the Name of the words of Christ, is Spirit and Life in it self.

Answ. What cause have I to be ashamed of affirming the very word of Christ
himself, John 6.36. but thou have cause to be ashamed of thy ly, saying, I
affirm the Letter, which is a word of thy own and not of mine.

In another place (say thou) thou concludest the Spirit of God in the
Apostles, who were Saints, is the Rule to try and discern false Spirits.

Answer. If I do, it is no contradiction of the former, seeing the word of Christ
and Spirit of God in the Apostles were one, and spoke one and the same thing.
The truth is Martin, thou would gladly say something to my Argument, but
thou can not, thou know that way of arguing was begun by thee, in which if
thou had dealt faithfully with those to whom thou have so generally divulged
our difference, they would plainly see where the right of reasoning is, and who
has most cause to be ashamed of their Argument.

Thou say, the Spirit of God in the Apostles, at their death returned to God
that gave it them, but (say thou) would thou have me as sottish as thy
self, to say and unsay, and own their Writings to be the Spirit of God: This
thou writest to deny the Apostles preachings and teachings to be the infallible
Rule to try the Spirits whether they be of God.

Answ. That Spirit which the Scriptures speaks of from whence thou had that
saying (the Spirit returns to God that gave it) though thou quote it not,
Eccles. 12.7. is not that Spirit by which the Apostles did preach Christ and
work miracles, but of the Spirit which is the mooving and acting in the bodily
being of all men, which the Apostles had before they received the gift of the
Spirit of promise, therefore how sottish soever I am, this must needs be an
ignorant blindness in thee, thus to use Scripture words against Scripture
teaching, to pervert them to extinguish if thou could, the speaking of the
Spirit of God therein, that thou may bring them into a dead and dry
estimation, that so thy false Spirit might act at Libetty, but the Spirit
speaking in the Scriptures, is of such lively power and authority, that it will
quash and consume those risings and out-burnings of the man of sin; and by that
which is written, which thou callestdead, and would have denied, as now
shall be made manifest to thy confusion. The Spirit of God says to John Revel.
1.11. That which thou see writ in a book, and send to the Seven Churches
that are in Asia: Compare this with that which follows in that Book written,
Revel. 2.7. Let him that has an car hear, what the Sprirt says to the
Churches; By which it is plain, (to the dashing down of thy denyals thereof) that
Book written by John, is the Spirits speaking to the Churches: Compare this
with what our Savior says, John 6.63. The words that I speak to you are
Spirit and life, So that the Scriptures must either be denied to be the words
of Christ, or owned to be the speaking of the Spirit, but to acknowledge them
to be the words of Christ Jesus and deny them to be the speaking of the Spirit,
or to be Spirit and life (as Christ says they are) and call them dead as thou
and thy generation does, is the most rediculous, absurd opposition to Christ
and his Gospel, that has been yet: The Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. 14.37. If
any man think himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him acknowledge the
things that I writ unto you are the Commandments of God; Are they the
Commandments of God and not the Spirits speaking: But thou say, thou are not
so sottish as I, to own this: It seems thou had rather (truly) be a fool to
be esteemed wise in this world, then be a fool that thou may be truly wise.
See whether this be sottishness in thee or no, 1 Cor. 3.18.

But howsoever, thy wisdom in disowning the Scriptures to be the speaking of
the Spirit, does show thee to be neither Prophet or spiritual: therefore the
Spirit of God will disown thee, the wolf would persuade the weak, that he will
keep them for worrying when the danger is only in himself.

Thou say, I charge that for a Liar, for saying I own the Letter to be the
rule, but one thing is, say thou, I need not go far to fetch my proof thou
have given it under thy hands, in these words, therefore the Scriptures are the
sure and infallible rule to try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no.

Answ. My charging thee for a Liar, was for saying I own the dead Letter, to be
the rule, thou shuffies out the word dead, but it shuts thee not of the ly but
makes it a greater ly, what plainer ly can be told then this, to say I owned
that which I never named to thee, but to deny therein, the word dead Letter is
thy own, not mine. If thou call the Gospels declaration, the Turkish Alcaron,
and I say that Declaration of the Gospel is the power of God to Salvation to
all that hear and obey it, can thou reply and say, I own the Turkish Alcaron
to be the Decleration of the Gospel without being alyer? and is it not the same
to say, I own the dead letter to be the rule, because I say the decleration of
the Gospel is the rule, thou may see if thou be not moresotish then I, it is
thou that calls it the dead letter or Alkaron and not I, and therefore the lie
must needs lodge with thee. Thou say I also call the words of Christ, or
Scripture dead Letter; twice in a following argument of mine.

Answ. For the truths sake, and that the Liar may be looked upon, and seen of
all, I will not only lay down that argument of mine but the occasion thereof
given by thee, in thy argument thus framed.

He that denies to be tried by the true touchstone, the infallible rule, it is
an infallible sign his Spirit is not of God, he is guided by the Spirit of
error.

But thou Jonathan Johnson denyest to be tried by the living principle of God,
the light of Christ in the conscience, the Spirit of truth: and would be
tried by the dead Letter, therefore thy Spirit is not of God, thou art guided
by the Spirit of error.

This argument I told thee, comes bare without any proof, against Jonathan
Johnson: therefore Martin Mason remains a liar till he prove the ascertion,
in the mean time to discover what waslapt up in that argument: I from thy own
Major poposition, framed thee this.

He that denies to be tried by the true touchstone, the Infallible rule, it is
an infallible sign his Spirit is not of God, he is guided by the Spirit of error.

But thou Jonathan Johnson, denyest to be tried by the principle in Martin
Mason, and would be tried by the living principle of God, the light of
Christ, in the Scriptures, Therefore thy Spirit is not of God, thou art guided
by the Spirit of error.

When I had thus laid open the falsehood of thy argument, and slander against me
without ground or proof, I who can better tell my own desires and denyals, then
thou can, to declare truly the same, framed thee this argument.

He that desires to be tried by the true touchstone, the infallible rule, the
living principle of God, the light of Christ in the Saints consciences, the
spirit of truth, and not by the dead Letter, it is a sign his Spirit is of God,
he is guided by the Spirit of promise.

But Jonathan Johnson, desires to be tried as above said. Therefore it is a sign
his Spirit is of God, he is guided by the spirit of promise.

Martin do I here call the words of Christ, or Scripture, dead Letter, (or any
where else) wash thy eyes, and look better over my paper, then speak rightly,
and thou will say my charge is not taken off, neither has the liar remooved
his lodging, which every passer by will now behold, thy bosom being
unbuttened. I have not yet told thee what I call the dead Letter, though thou
say I call the Scripture so, by which is manifested, who is the liar. But now it
puts them out of doubt, and to satisfy the hearers I will tell thee; It is the
writings of Martin Mason, and his fellows, and all such as oppose the
Scriptures teaching, denying the ordinances, and commands of Christ there
taught.

Because I esteem their books or bulks of writings, no better then an Idol, set
up like the mass or service book to draw men from the true worship and service
of God, which is according to the Scripture; therefore, If I say, the same that
thou do, (as thou say I do) then we say both one thing, by thy own
acknowledgment; But I say the dead Letter is the Quakers Books: therefore thou
say the same with me, repent thou of thy error in calling the Scriptures dead
Letter.

Thou say thou never read, grosser contradictions to thy knowledge then
has dropped from the pen of this Painted Pagan: (as thou call me)

Answ. I believe, Martin, the Painter is mistaken, and spoils his work for
want of color; this surrilous way of thine, with all the falseness of thy
alegations will discover thee to all that read the Papers: Loud accusation, and
little proof lays open folly, it is a small matter for a man of thy language
to be larg upon charging evil upon others; but very scant in making good what
you charg. Thou say in the next place, that for all my folly and confusion, I
must give thee another rotten reed of Egypt as it were for a farewell, in an
argument, which for substance (thou say) is thus, etc.

Answ. I will leave thy substance, and bring the whole substance it self, the
argument as it was given to thee, by me.

They, who by an infallible Spirit, were Master Builders, and layers of the
foundation of the Saints Religion; and who are heard of all who are of God, and
who have the Spirit of truth, and who accounts all accursed, who preach any
other Doctrine then they have already preached, must needs be the true
touchstone, and infallible trial of Spirits, whether they be of God or no; and
denial to be tried by them, is a plain testimony of an evil cause, and that the
Spirit is the Spirit of error, and liar.

But the Apostles were they, who by an infallible Spirit were Master Builders,
etc. As these Scriptures testify, 1 Cor. 3.9, 10, 11. 1 John 4.6. John 8.47.
Acts 2.4. 2 These. 2.13, 14, 15. 1 These. 2.13. Gal. 1.8, 9, 10. 2 John 7.8, 9,
10. And Martin Mason, denies their trial, and calls it dead Letter.

Therefore his Spirit is not of God, he is guided by the Spirit of error.

Thou, for want of an answer to this, call me forgetful, willful, lying
Beast. Did not he even now (say thou) a little before, in his other argument
say, that he desired to be tried by the light in the Saints conscience, and not
by the dead Letter, and yet taxes me; O blush and be a shamed.

Answ. I am neither Beast or Liar, nor forgetful, of what I have said before, I
have laid down the plain truth to thee, which is, that the Apostles teachings,
or Scriptures, is the true touchstone and trial of Spirits; I have not in any
place called them dead Letter, but have always told thee, that the light in
the Saints consciences is received from thence, therefore I have no cause to
blush or be ashamed at the truth; the manifestation of which makes thee be
wrathful, out of which thou brings the Beast, and Liar, and blush, and be
ashamed; there not being a word in thy tongue to answer, of which if thou cold
be ashamed, there would be hopes of thy repentance, and good cause have thou to
blush and be a shamed of this proclaming thy folly for it is a low disgrace to
one pretending such high things, to be so discovered as thou art in such want
of answer, and in evil words corrupting thy good manners.

According to the grace of God given to me, (say thou) as a wise Master
builder, I have laid the foundation, says Paul, 1. Cor. 1.10. he builded upon
the rock; other foundation then that is laid, can no man lay, which is Jesus
Christ in all, Jew and Greek, Barbarian, Scithian, bond and free, Luke 3.11. to
this unction within, did Paul direct the People.

Answ. Whosoever rules, and observes thee, will see thy desire to set up thy
self for a wise Master builder, for which read thy motto, Pro. 26.12, 16. Thou
joins several declerations of the Apostle together, to pervet them if thou
cold, from his Gospel order of teaching to thy own corrupt sense, and foysts in
thy own words amongst, to make fit a lie, the Apostle in neither of these
places, or any where else does direct the people to the unction within them,
till first they have heard the preaching of the Apostles, in the doctrine of
faith and believing, thou tellest me of a brat of my own begeting, but if this
be not of thy begeting it is the begeting of some of thy generation, from whom
thou have received it to nurse: do not think to Father such prodigious birth
upon the Apostles, their begeting men to the faith was by preaching Christ
Jesus, who was not in those before to whom they preached, that is your false
invension to oppose the truth, the Apostle says he laid the foundation, thou
say it was laid in them before, a flat contradiction to the Apostles
teaching, and the Scripture thou quotes, Col. 3.11. Does not say, Christ is in
all Jew and Greek before they received him by faith, through the Apostles
preaching; but plainly tells thee (if thy ears cold hear) verse 10. where
Christ is in all, which is in all them who have put on the new man, which is
renewed in knowledge; after the Image of him who has created him, by which is
manifest (according to the whole teaching of the Apostles) that Christ is in
all who are in the faith, but in those in whom faith is not, the Apostles have
not any where said that Christ is there. Therefore thy opposition to the
Apostles, and that Christ which they preached is made plain; and that thou, and
thy fellows would set up your own heart-Imaginations, and false deceiveings in
the place of Christ. And would persuade men of a Christ, in all before or
without the preaching of faith by the Apostles; that they may deny the Apostles
preaching: and that Christ which they preached, to those who before were
without him; Ephesians. 2.12. And where Christ was not named, Romans 15.30.

That which lay dead, (say thou) did at the hearing of the voice of the Son
of God live.

Answ. That which hear thou say lay dead, is that which before thou call
the Christ in all, the royal seed; the unction, the Lord of glory crucified in
them: so that by thy doctrine, the royal seed, the unction, the Lord of glory,
and Christ in all, lay dead till it did at the hearing of the voice of the Son
of God live, what greater confused nonsense can be delivered, then to say
Christ, the Son of God lies dead, till he hear the voice of Christ the Son of
God and live; can such babbling be without blaspemy? those who knew, and in whom
Christ the hope of glory is, will see this thy dead Image, that thou would set
up to deny the Lord that bought thee.

After thy complaint, of almost weariness, thou follows with something to the
poor hears (as thou call them) whom thou say are wedded to their water,
and counts no Saints who submit not to their ceremonies, thou bidest them
answer thee in good earnest, can their Diana satisfy a hungry Soul.

Answ. To which the poor hearts reply, that it were better for thee to sit down
and rest thy self after thy great labor and hot chase, except thou find thy
self so tired, that thou desire the refreshment of those waters, to which
they are wedded, to cool thy heat of blood, and in good earnest they answer
thee, they have not Ephesian Diana, which they worshipped walking by thy light,
of self-invention, or any other Idol, that may have written upon it, light of
Conscience, quaking, or baptism, but they have that Christ the Bread of Life,
which the Ephesians believed in after the preaching of the Apostles unto them,
they feed not upon hid Bread, nor are they wedded to stolen waters, they abhor
the secret devices, and self-inventions, that oppose the open Declarations of
Gods mind and will in the Scriptures of Truth: They drink of Shiloh, the
Fountain open to the house of David: They feed on Manna, the Bread that came
down from Heaven, their souls love, and are continually refreshed therewith.
Which Manna, thou and thy genaration loathes, and calls it light bread, and
prize your Garlic and Onions above it, the art of sowing and growing of which
you learnt in Egypt.

Thou talkest of washing the body with outward water, and the answer of a good
Conscience toward God, and who (say thou) can witness the answer of a good
conscience toward God, that is not guided by the light of God in his
Conscience.

Answ. And what answer of a good Conscience can thou have that is not
enlightened by the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, fighting against their
Doctrine of Faith, and denying all obedience thereto. Does not thy own
Conscience, when thou considerest of thy answer before Christ at the day of
Account, condemn thee for opposing and denying the Command of Christ and
Practice for discipling all Nations, is not thy iniquity there.

Thou tellest them they are not come to yea and nay, in their dealing.

Answ. Thou talkest like a tired man in Spirits: Produce if thou can that, in
any of them, and they will acknowledge it is against the Baptism of Repentance,
which they plead for, and thou deniest; But thou not proving that against them,
where is thy yea and nay in thy dealing, thou must needs want the uprightness
of yea and nay in thy dealing, thus falsely with us accusing us without ground
or proof: They deny with formal words of yea and nay, to cover the deceit of
wrong dealing within, neither do they put on white breeches without, to cover
the black breeches of bribery and extortion. Look nearer home let not thy eyes
be scattered in the corners of the World, yea and nay in the tongue, when wrong
and falsehood is in the heart, is not the language of Saints. Thou thy felf art
far from that yea and ney in thy dealing or communication with Christ's
commands Mat. 5.37 dealing such foul and filthy words to those against whom
thou speak or writest.

Thou tellest them of respect of persons and vain customs and fashons of the
Heathen, and art not yet brought to the bridling of the tongue.

Answ. These words are thy own, and better applied to thee, then from thee, the
Customs, and Fashions of the Heathen, are self-divices against the God of
Israel, and Savior of all men; they own no such soul fashions, or evil
Customs, but deny them and therein deny thee, and thy generation, and your
Groves, and Alters, and Calves at Dan, and Bethel. And for an unbridled Tongue
running at random, cannot be more manifested, then in what is breathed from
thee; in which all that hear thee with right understanding, will say it is not
the Language of Sion, or new tongue speaking of a Saint, but the Language of
Babel, and speaking like the Draggon.

Thou say, Paul told the people he had not shuned to declare unto them all
the Counsel God: but where did he mention water Baptism as a branch thereof,
if it had been of the Counsel of God, certainly Paul durst not have concealed
it.

Answ. Whose Counsel was that which Peter gave, Act. 2.38. will thou denyest
that to be the Counsel of God, it being the Counsel of God. Paul did declare it
according to thy own Confession: And whose Counsel was it for Paul to Baptize
Crispus, and Gaius, and others; and into whose name did he Baptize them, into
his own name, or into the name of Christ; if into the name of Christ, as openly
thou dare not deny, and not into his own name as himself testisyeth, 1 Cor.
1.13, 14. 15. Then must it needs be the Counsel of God, which does condemn,
and confound thy abominable denial thereof: may not the question be rightly put
to thee, that our Savior put to the Scribes, and Priests, Mark. 11.20.
Concerning that Baptism, whether it were from Heaven, or of man, will it not
dazzle thee as it did them; thou not only denying that Counsel of God against
thy self, as they did, Luke. 7.30. But also denying it to be the Counsel of
God, which is a degree of evil exceeding theirs, in that report of them: But if
thou say thou do confess it from Heaven; (which thy predecessors opposers of
truth durst not deny) do thou not then condemn thy self in denying it to be
the Counsel of God: and thy saying, it is of men makes John Baptist a
transgressor, in doing man's divices in Divine service, and Christ a consenter
with him in it; and so the Apostles teaching, and practice in that Baptism, to
be all transgression and vanity; had thou not better never bring these
Scriptures, that are so plainly against thee, were it not a great folly, to
allege the second Commandment, to prove the worshipping of Images; and is it
not as great folly in thee, to allege Scriptures, to deny Baptism, that is so
plainly for it; thou must as the Papists do, and as thou and thy fellows,
follow them, either maintain your divices by unwriten very lies, which you call
verities, and so make men believe as the Church believes, or the Father of
yourfamilies, or the more you allege Scripture to hold up your Idol, the more
it falls, and is broken apeices.

Did not Paul (say thou) foresee, that thing to be Idolized in his days.

Answ. No Martin, that is the false device of thy generation, from whom thou
have received it, witness James Naylors Book, tituled a Hand held forth to the
help-less, to lead them out of darkness, etc. where he delivers it plainly, and
grossly, in the point of Baptism, in which he deliver a palpable lie, as thou
do here after him: both against the Corinthians, and against Paul, for
neither did the Corinthians Idolize Baptism, neither did Paul complain against
them, or deny it upon any such account: the Apostles rather complains of them,
for neglect of that esteem which they should have of that Baptism, in relation
to Christ, and given it to men, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. And for further
Satisfaction I shall give thee something to Cew the Cude upon (if thou were a
Clean Beast in thy feeding) which is, that the Baptism of repentance cannot be
Idolized by any, water may be Idolized, or something else in the Inventions of
men, instead of that Baptism: any ordinance of Christ, (whose ordinances are
all ordinances of faith) cannot be Idolized, for where Idolizing is, there is
something also in the room of faith: but where faith is, there is no Idol or
self inventions, and therefore your pretended light within is an Idol, because
it denis (and draws men from) the faith and obedience in that Christ Jesus, who
dyed at Jorusalem, and from that reverence, and esteem which ought to be to his
teaching in Scripture; to follow, and fall down to your faithless Idol.

Thou say, Paul knowing Baptism to be a permissive practice not a precept,
laid it aside.

Answ. Let those who have read Paul, and read thee judge, whether thou have not
told a manifest lie of Paul in this, for Paul has not any where so declared
his knowledge of Baptism, or that he laid it aside; If Baptism were not a
precept, the Apostles were transgressors to preach, and command; and practice
in their Masters name, that which he had not commanded, and Baptism being a
command, thou would report them transgressors like to thy self, saying, they
laid aside the practice and teaching of their Masters precept: what plainer
precept, to those who desires to obey the Lords command can be given, then
that, Mat. 28. Go teach all Nations, and Baptize them in the Name of the
Father, etc. And Acts. 2.38. Repent and be Baptized, and Acts. 10.48. He
commanded them to be Baptized. Surely these things are plain enough to all, but
such as bend their tongues for deceit, and to oppose the truth: whatsoever is
manifested to such, to be the plain Testimonies of truth, yet a denial must be
in those Children of falsehood. For as these who are begotten by the Imortal
seed; to a lively hope through faith, do own and submit to every command of
Christ, though never so seeming weak, and contrary to corrupt nature: So those
who are begotten by the power of darkness, they hate the light, and natural in
them it is to oppse it, for there is no concord betwixt light and darkness; in
which darkness if thou were not, these Scriptures are plain enough, and so
plain, that thou do not deny them, as not thinking them to be precepts. But
to maintain thy darkness and disobedience aggainst them. Thou and thy
generations have had sufficient Testimony in the mantenance of this truth
against your falsehood, in perverting and denying of these Scriptures, to which
you give no answer, but instead thereof, have blown forth big and boisterous
words of slander, and accusation, from the bellows of that forge, where all
your falsehood is framed: and this will appear to all who have understanding,
and did but read that which thou and others with thee have received, both
concerning the former Scriptures, and that which thou followest with; Where
Paul says he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.

Answ. Paul was sent to preach the same Gospel which Peter was sent to preach, in
which was concluded the Baptism of Repentance, or water upon Repentance and
faith, as Acts 2.38. and 10.47, But neither paul or Peter were sent to Baptize,
without or before preaching; for that is the work of opposers, not of the
messengers of Christ, and therefore was it, that Paul said he was sent to
preach the Gospel, for till preaching was received, there was none to baptize.

Paul did neither deny to be baptized himself, (as thou and thy generation
does) as appears, Acts 9.18. with 22.16, neither did he deny to baptize others
after they had heard his teaching, and believing, for then he had both denied
the command of Christ, Mar. 28.19. and his own practice upon those he baptized,
as 1 Cor. 1.14, 16. for to baptize in the name of Christ, and deny it to be a
precept, or ordinance of Christ; does condemn the doer: and so would thou
condemn Paul in his righteous proceeding, according to the Gospel: but it is a
condemnation of thy self, and manifest thee to be an enemy to truth, in
aledging Paul to deny his own preaching, and practice, and the rest of the
Apostles.

Does not Peter (say thou) speak plain enough to the prudent, does he account
water baptism any better then a figure pointing out the fubstance, the answer
of a good conscience,

Answ. If thou were not of those prudent ones, to whom the things of God are
hid, Mat. 11.25. Luke 10.21. Peter's speaking would be plain to thee, to be the
baptism of repentance; not water without repentance, nor repentance denying
water: though thou would devide them as all Antichristians have done: though
Peter calls baptism the figure, yet he calls the figure that saves, which
cannot be without the answer of a good conscience, therefore thy calling it a
figure or water baptism, without the answer of a good conscience, and that
saves not, shows how thou strives to violate that Scripture and manifest thy
ignorance of what baptism is.

Which of you (say thou) would you be truly honest to the light of God in
you, durst possitively affirm ontward water to be the Baptism of Christ, Is
not his a baptism of suffering?

Answ. Martin, if outward water; (as thou have been told before) were the
baptism of Christ, then thou, and all thy generation who have had outward
water, by the order of the Sea of Rome, were baptized; but wanting faith
according to the order of the Gospel, you have not the baptism of Christ, they
(whom thou call the poor hearts) are so honest to the light of Gods truth
revealed to them by the Gospels preaching, that they, do affirm water,
administered upon repentance, and faith, is the baptism of Christ, that is a
cording to Peter's teaching in the Scripture before all edged. That outward water
is not the figure that saves but baptism is; and also they further affirm,
that thy division of water from repentance in baptism, that thou may deny the
Gospel Baptism, do manifest thee a child of those Antichristain predlcessors
from whom thou receivest thy outward water. does not thy fingling out the
Baptism of suffering only, to deny the baptism of repentance, by reach also,
to the denial of the bap isme of Christ: but talk not thou of the baptism of
sufferings, till thou suffer Christ's baptism of repentance, to talk place in
thee, none ever suffered for Christ's name sake; who denied him in his
ordinance? thou bids the poor hearts not be afraid to take up the daly Cross,
but like vallent Soldiers enter the field etc.

Answ. The entering into Christ by the Baptism of repentance, Is the taking up
of his Cross, and deny ill of that Baptism in all Ages since Christ, has been
to avoid and deny the Cross of Christ, and therefore whatever cross thou or thy
fellows meets withal, Is not the Cross of Christ, or worthy, of thename of
suffering for Christ, or Gospel Humilation; for you deny both Gospel and
Christ, and all your Humiliation, and pretended valiantness in suffering is
from self desire to maintain your own divices: and therefore as Scripture
tells, you will not be known worthy of reward.

The poor hearts obedience to the teaching of Christ in his ordinances, as in
the Baptism of repentance does manifest their love, excluding fear, in taking
up the Crose of Christ by which they stand Armed with strength from God, to
undergo what ever they shall be called to in witness of his truth, and if they
fall in that day of trial, their streng this small. And then they violate and
make void (as to themselves) he Baptism of rapentance, they so much plead for,
denial of which Baptism (as has been said) is device to keep men from the
Cross of Christ, for that baptism brings a man to the lowest estare of self
denial and Humility, and to be raised up in the acknowledging their State of
life, to be only in the love and power of God, in which warrfare the Saints
have always got the victory, and so shall those whom thou call the poor
hearts continuing faithful in the Lords truth, an promise, not giving ear to
those pretended lights of men's consciences, that deny the commandments of God,
and obedience to the Law of faith: And though such come forth like Giants with
big and furious words, railing against the host of living God, yet the Lord
will subdue them with Sling stones, and cut them off with their own Weapons
Zeek 9 15. 1 Samuel 17.49, 50, 51. For what is not of God shall fall, and none
can stay the consumation determined to be powered upon the desolate, Dan 9.27.

Jonathan Ionson.

MARTINS MEDITATIONS.
MARTIN one day, sat musing in his mind,
Of things which are, and things which after follow,
And studied sore, to see if he could find
Who Truth enjoys, and who in falsehood wallow:
And as he thus sat musing all alone,
Attendance strait came to him many a one.
There first came in a messenger of light,
And told him all things lodged in his heart
And of the Truth gave him a glorious sight
And from false fained things wil'd him depart.
He let him see the ill of their estate,
Who make Religion nothing but a prate.
They in obedience to the royal Law
No Faith produce, but self-inventions frame
From love of heavenly truth men's minds to draw,
And keep them from the ever saving Name.
And what they practice has no Gospel warrant,
And thus this Messenger began his Errant.
And further told him if he would be sure
To walk aright, and work the work of God,
And for himself Salvation would procure.
Then must he follow in the holy trod
Which the Apostles of our Lord did walk in,
And not believe the vainness of men's talking.
He must the Scriptures hear in what they teach him,
And yield himself unto the gracious will,
Which those Apostles of our Master preach him
And they will surely teach him Christian skill,
And bring him to a right regenerate frame,
To know the Lord and call upon his Name.
Repent and be baptized says this Message
And God will seal his Covenant in thy heart
Deny not Martin to receive th'Embassage,
Which God by his, does to thee thus impart
And it will bring assurance to thy soul
Of heavenly favor and of sins control
But if thou will not hear this voice of life
And show thy self obedient to this call,
Then several cries amongst which there is such strife
Will thee assail and round about thee fall.
And with their evil Charms and strong delusions
Inthral thy mind in several sad confusions.
That thou may hear and do thou know not what,
And follow men, and leave the Lord thy Savior,
Therefore says he, in time be ware of that,
If thou will gain an everlasting favor,
So shall thy soul continually be at rest,
and not with fear and vain device oppressed.
Martin at this being troubled in his mind
This sacred counsel to deny, or do,
A love to what was told him could not find,
But from this admonition soon did go:
For this good seed was stolen by those that fly
About the world betwixt the earth and sky.
And now a many quickly enter in,
Some on this manner saying, some on that,
At last a whited black one did begin
To talk and to delude him by his chat.
Humble he seemed with coat and visage trim
To hide his foul deformity most grim.
Believe not thou (quoth he) that voice that spoke
And told thee Stories of the Scriptures preaching,
Hear me, who am sent hit her for thy sake,
To let thee know, the Conscience secret teaching's
The Light within, to which thou must take heed,
Not that which thou do in the Scripture read.
The Scripture's a dead Letter, void of Life,
That Christ, no Savior, who at 'Salem died,
Thy Savior is within thee: form and strife
's amongst men who in Scripture rules abide.
Let Scripture rules alone, what light's within thee,
Let that sure light in all thy works begin thee.
What Is Baptism with water but a toy,
What Is Bread and wine received with faith in Jesus?
A fruitless form, the hid light will destroy
These outward things, which too too much displease us,
Who do deny the precepts of that Preacher
Whom men call Jesus Christ the Gospel Teacher.
That outward Christ, who at Jerusalem died,
And all those outward things from him profes't,
Are of no worth, but to be laid aside,
The Inward light will make thee these detest;
And though men think through Faith to have Salvation
In Mary's Son, it is a vain Imagination.
None are redeemed, or are saved by him,
Redemption's not by any thing without,
The light within, the woman's seed, espy him,
That Is thy Redeemer, of which have no doubt.
Mind that within thee, and obey its teaching,
Believe not Christ, or Scriptures preaching.
It is a Doctrine damnable and vild,
To say the Spirit is received by preaching
Of the Apostles faith in Mary's child,
And hearing and obeying to their teaching.
They Are filthy creatures, serpents, dogs, and swine,
That so to Scriptures teachings do incline.
Without the Apostles preaching in the Letter
The Spirit is received, and Christ within,
Look but within thee, there thou wilt find him better
Then by the Apostles, it is the man of sin.
That bids thee hear the Apostles for salvation,
All that lock there for Christ find desolation.
Thus have I told thee where thou Christ shall find,
Even in thy self, thy teacher there does dwell,
Those who seck Christ within the Scripture's blind,
With such false teachers see thou do not me'll.
Obey the light within, so shall thou be
A perfect man, and from deceivers free.
This voice so well did Martins pallet please,
That he himself, himself might only teach,
That he could be a Christian now with ease
And never submit to what the Scriptures Preach.
The Doctrines of regeneration taught,
Are now by him esteemd a thing of naught.
He Would always Christ within, be never was lost
So Christ, the Savior, needs not come to save him,
His Christ within saves him without that cost,
But that false Christ will even of life bereave him.
This light that thus in Martin does arise,
Is even the light of the old Pharisees.
They would have life denying Marys Son,
And of the Heavenly kingdom would be free,
Without Christ Jesus, and would headlong run,
In self-ish lights against Christ's verity.
Hating the Doctrine, taught them by the Savior,
'thout whom there is no everlasting favor.
So Martin by his meritorious works,
'thout faith in Jesus, thinks to gain Salvation,
But that is the enemy which in him lurks,
And fills him with a vain Imagination.
To look for life where life he cannot find,
Thus strange Delusions make deceivers blind.
J. J.

FINIS.

