A LETTER From a Minister in His Excellence His Army, To a Brother of his in
LONDON, By way of prevention to MERCURIUS AULICUS and his Accomplices.

Dated from my Lord Generals Quarter before READING. April 18. 1643.

London, Printed for J. Rothwell, and S. Gellibrand. April 20. 1643.

A Letter from a Minister in the Army, to his Brother in LONDON.
Brother,
I Know my friends are full of expectation, and I am not unwilling to take a
little pains to fatisfie them: But if they will not be satisfied without the
storming or taking the Town, they cannot yet be satisfied: if the truth will
give any satisfaction, it is this: We marched from Windsor to Maydenhead, on
Thursday after noon; from thence to Ockingham on Friday, and so to a place on
the West of Reading, a mile from the Town, where my Lord Generals Quarters, at
the house of one Sir John Blachgrave, with the Soldiers in the fields about.
On Saturday afternoon, toward night, we faced the Town: in the night Major Gen:
went up with his Regiment, and a Work was made to plant Ordnance on, which
began to play on Sunday morning early, and battered the Fort and Works next
them, which yet they diligently make up. On Sunday night Sir John Meldrum
commanded with his own Regiment, Sir William Cunstables, and Col: Barelayes,
who went on with the Works. Last night Col: Langham commanded, having with him
his own Regiment, my Lord Generals, and Colonel Hampdens; and the Works are
now brought within less then half a Musket shot of the Town. It may be our
friends at London expect we should have stormed the Town, and entered it before
this; but they may be mistaken at that distance: they have in the Town about
3000 men, which they have a liberty of drawing down to that part of the Town
next us, in regard we have no Forces on the other side, my Lord Gray being not
yet come to us, though we doubt not of him this night, or to morrow morning. We
have had intelligence out of the Town, that say we have killed and hurt many of
their men, notwithstanding the advantage of their Works, Colonel Bolles, as is
reported, for one; and that their Provision is scarce, but as yet it is not
stopped, as were to be wished; yet we have taken up Cavesham bridge, and left
no way to them, but by Boat, or by Henley. We hear of some of the Kings Forces
marching down on the other side the water to their relief, if it may be, I hope
they will be prevented. At our first approach, our Provision was very scant,
but I hope we shall now have it more plentifully; hungry days, and cold nights
would have abated the courage of our Soldiers, were they not very hearty in
the business: Let our friends rather strive to have their prayers for us warm
as the day, then their censures sharp as the night: If we be to blame, it was
for coming hither, which yet must not be too soon; I know no miscarriage since
we came. Our loss has been very little, considering our danger, working and
lying so near them; I think we have not lost above 8 or 10 men in Service, two
or three have been killed through curiosity, and some hurt by accident, as some
of Sir John Meldrums Regiment yesterday, by blowing up Powder, and this morning
three or four slain, and some were hurt by the breaking of a Carriage by some
Powder fired about through improvidence. Sir Anthony Saint-John, a Captain of
my Lord Generals Regiment hurt by it; it was reported Major Ingolsly was
slain, and Lieutenant Colonel Barriff hurt, but no such matter: We have lost
no Officer since our sitting down, but one Lieutenant Price, of the Major
Generals Regiment. Though our work be hard, yet our Soldiers are hearty; but
it must not be expected they should overcome impossibilities, so as by a bare
assault to get over Pallisadoes, Ditches very deep, and Brest-Works. They have
in Town ten small Brass Pieces, two bigger of Iron, three Troops of Horse. As
we have not assaulted, so neither they sallyed forth to do any thing worth the
naming. Take heed your desires of storming be not too soon fulfilled; if it be
not done with all circumspection, it will not only lose many lives, but
endanger the whole Army and Kingdom, for ought I know: Add therefore to your
faith patience; we could be as willing to change our Quarters, as you to have
us; Me thinks you should be preparing a supply, to further the best, and to
prevent the worst. I thought fit to write this, not only for your own
satisfaction, but to prevent Mercurius Aulicus, who I doubt not will tell you
strange stories shortly. This may serve as a battery upon the refuge of lies,
which is our enemies strong retreat; as some out of the Town tell us, they
encourage their Soldiers by telling them our Ordnance are broke, their
supplies at hand, they see our men fall in great numbers. This night Major Gen:
commands in the approaches, his own Regiment; my Lord Roberts, and Col:
Hobornes, with three Regiments more, as a reserve to them, which is the
constant course: It may be the difference of my profession may make me miss in
terms and circumstances; but you may take this for the substance and truth of
our condition. Only I may further add, for I shall not conceal any thing,
though to our disadvantage, That there is a Supply of strength come into
Reading this morning, some Musketeers under the Conduct of Sir Lewis Dyve, as
I hear, who have so much confidence, as to bring their Ladies to this Music; I
hope to no other purpose then to make our Victory the more considerable. I
forbear to add further for the present, but that which I need not beg, your
prayers.

So I rest, E. B.

FINIS.

