Railing Rebuked: OR, A Defense of the MINISTERS OF THIS NATION: By way of
Answer to the Vnparrallel'd Calumnies cast upon them in an Epistle lately
published by Thomas Speed Merchant of Bristol, unhappily become the QUAKERS
Advocate.

WHEREIN, Some Scriptures are opened, and diverse things Objected by the
QUAKERS, EXAMINED and ANSWERED.

With an Hortatory Epistle prefixed to fasten Christians to Jesus Christ in
these un-glewing times, wherein so many play fast and loose with him.

By William Thomas Minister of the Gospel at Ubley.

Mat. 6. 23. If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness? 1 Cor. 4. 13. We are made as the filth of the world, the offscouring
of all things.

Luke 10. 16. He that despises you, despises me.

Gal. 4. 17. They would exclude you, (that is, shut you out from loving me and
all true Pastors, says Paul) that you might affect them.

Tertull. praescript. advers. Haeret. Avolent quantum volunt paleae levis fidei
quocunque ad slatu tentationum, co purior massa frumenti in horrea Domini
reponetur.

London, Printed by T. M. for Edward Thomas, and are to be sold in
Green-Arbour, 1656.

To my respected and well beloved Friends and Neighbors, in and about the
City of Bristol; those in particular of my own Charge; and in special, those
that by the tentation of these times, have sadly, and dangerously declined from
the Scripture-path.
THat I do in the first place make mine address to you (my honored Friends)
in that great City, shall not be (I trust) otherwise apprehended then as a
testimony of my Christian respect, and desires of your spiritual good. Besides
that the business in hand stands in so near a relation unto you, as to call
upon me (as I conceive) to call upon you, and exhort you all, in these loose
and leaving times, that with purpose of heart you would cleave unto the Lord
Acts. 11. 23.
. It is the Fate (shall I say) or rather the great fault of eminent places, to
entertain and profess religion by way of faction, rather then out of election
upon solid grounds, or with that reverence and awful affection that is
required in religious Undertakings: Hence a new Faction causes a new
Defection, I do not mention this as willing to fix an imputation upon you,
whereof there is no reason, but yet I offer it to your most serious
consideration and care, that there may not be just cause of such a censure.
And, however that be, I hope I shall be excused in making my application
thither where he that will needs be mine adversary has his abode, and where
many of the same erroneous and apostatising way with himself, are so
entertained 2 John 10 11.
and countinanced, (I do not say by all,) that I cannot but present it as a
matter of deep humiliation to that (otherwise honorable) City; especially
considering how the infection has spread it self thence into all adjacent
parts. Lastly, out of that City the Pamphlet that I am called to answer has
posted about the Nation: As concerning which, I leave it to all that have any
sense of religion, to consider whether they ever knew so strange and ugly a
thing, I may say, such a Monster brought to Bristol-Fair to be showed there
first, and carried about the Country to be seen afterward. But be it what it
will be, since it is come abroad, and that upon my occasion (though altogether
beyond my intention) I cannot but account my self so far concerned in it, as
to do mine endeavor that they that fear God may not take hurt from it, (I mean
some weak ones, for established Christians detest it) and that they that fear
not God may not take heart from it, and animate themselves against Gods
Ordinances; yea further, that it may not ly as a guilt upon this Nation, that
such things are published to the great dishonor of God and Religion, without
any refutation, contradiction, or pleading for truth. Isa. 59. 4.
If herein my declining abilities may be any way useful, I am willing to set
them all a work (with much desire of divine assistance) to serve that City and
Country, where (beside my employment in my own place) I have diverse times
bestowed my pains, now for the space of near forty years, to preach and
mantaine that Scripture-doctrine, and those Scripture-Ordinances, which this
upstart generation thrusts sore at to make them fall, but all in vain, for
heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one tittle of Gods heavenly truth
Luke 16. 17.
.

What I have hitherto spoken is but preparatory to that which follows, which
will reflect (according to the Title of the Epistle) upon two sorts of persons,
I mean those that have stood firm, and those that have lost their first footing
and first faith.

Unto the first of these, who have held fast those things which they have
received and heard from their Teachers out of the word of God (among whom, I
thank God, I may and do speak to those of my own Charge) I say, to such I have
three things to communicate.

First, that they are much bound to bless God for his unspeakable gift, it
being He, and He alone that 1. ^
is able Jude. 24.
and faithful 2 These. 3. 3
to keep us from falling. Nor can it but much affect them, upon serious
thoughts that when (in these infected and infecting times) so many have fallen
on the one hand, and so many on the other, vet that spiritual Ps. 92. 11.
pestilence has not come nigh them; especially considering how many false
Prophets have arisen, and with how many fair shows and seeming wonders, they
have set forth their wares, in so much that they would have deceived (if it had
been possible) the very elect Mat. 24. 24.
. In that so many of you (therefore) are preserved, O how great cause is there
to conclude as the Apostle in the same argument does, To the only wise God our
Savior be glory and Majesty, dominion and power, now and ever Amen. Jude ver.
25. Secondly, I shall say further to such as the Apostle does. Dearly beloved
and longed for, our joy and our Crown 2.
(when Apostates crown us with thorns) so stand fast in the Lord Phil. 4. 1.
, and for that purpose put on the whole Armor of God that ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the Devil Ephesians. 6. 11.
, and those profundities Rev. 2. 24.
, which the old Serpent produces in these last days, finding his usual
devices 2 Cor. 2. 11.
to be so well known, that he had need betake himself to his new depths: You
have put your hand to the plough, look not back. Luke 9. 62.
Be old Disciples Act. 21. 16.
Nothing is more sinful; nothing more shameful then to give off at last, and
to be befooled and bewitched out of a good way. Gal 3. 13. and 5. 7.
Let it never be said, you have, but you do, your will, you ever will, run
well; make it your highest design to die in Jesus 1 These. 4 14.
. When you see any, when you see so many fall away, think that your Savior is
now speaking to you in particular, and saying (even as affectionately as of old
he did.) Will ye also go away Joh. 6. 67.
? If ye will go, whither will ye go? to Arians? enemies to Christ's Person, to
Ranters? enemies to his Precepts and Purity, to Quakers? enemies to his
Ordinances and Officers. If it seem evil to you to follow the Lord Josh. 24.
15.
, you may go after such companions; But does that seem evil? Is it evil to
follow the chiefest good? or can you follow and enjoy him, and not hear his
voice Joh. 10. 27.
, and attend his Ordinances Psalm. 65. 4
? Know that nothing but the words of eternal life will make an eternal
Disciple Joh. 6. 68
. If others be gone, let them return to you, but do not you turn to them Jer.
5. 19.
. Finally, look to your selves (and desire the Lord to look to you) that we
loose not the things we have wrought, but that we may receive a full reward,
Joh. 2. 8.

Thirdly, I have one word more; It is easy and obvious to observe that many
poor, profane Creatures, who have nothing of the power of godliness in them,
yet bless themselves in this, that they be not Separatists, Anabaptists,
Quakers, (which they that are such have cause to look upon as a sad fruit of
their falling a way) I shall therefore earnestly move those Christians that
have not been removed, as others, in these tottering times, to express the
power of that truth in their whole souls and lives, to which God in so great
mercy, and with so great power has held their hearts; which I do the rather
mention, 1. Because that is the way to keep for ever the truth hitherto kept,
for faith that is the doctrine of religion is held in conjunction with a good
conscience; If you put away the conscience, you will make shipwreck of the
faith 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.
; It is the life of religion that preserves the light. 2. This will put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men 1 Pet. 2. 15.
, whose most plausible argument against a right religion, is an unrighteous
conversation. 3. This is a course to confirm those that yet stand firm, who
shall receive the most familiar and operative conviction of the soundnes of
your religion and theirs in matter of opinion, by the efficacy thereof in the
holiness of your carriage; for that which is the truth of God indeed, is
described to be a truth which is after godliness Tit. 1. 1.
. That is, it teaches to live Soberly, Righteously and godly Tit. 2. 12.
. They who have been taught as the truth is in Jesus, put of the former
conversation and put on a better Ehes. 4. 21 22, 23, 24.
, Yea, 4. By this you may possibly regain those that are, inpart departed, for
why should not that good conversation that is one means to bring an Heathen to
be a Christian 1 Pet. 2. 12. and 3, 1.
, be a means also, to bring a revolted Christian to be a right Christian.

And to those who are so revolted I am next to speak; which I confess is a
very heavy task, not only because their going back is so godless, (for to be
without God, and without a teaching Priest and without Law, go together 2 Chronicles. ^ 15 3.
, and how far they put away the two latter, wherein God is enjoyed, their
writings show; I say therefore not only because their going back is so
godless, and thereupon, so grievous to think and speak of) but also because
their return (I mean of the chiefest of them) is so hopeless and the more
hopeless because their hearts are so high; In these days they that have got a
new opinion, are like prodigals that have newly got their portion, they go into
a far country from their fathers house, and when they have done that, think
none in a more noble condition then themselves; But because all are not gone
alike, and that God who has persuaded Japheth to dwell in the tents of Shem,
Genesis 9. 27
, can persuade those that be gone furthest, yet to go their way forth by the
footsteps of the flock and again to feed beside the shepherds tents. Cant. 1:
8.
. That is, to walk as they were wont, with the true sheep after the true
shepherds; I shall therefore offer such assistance as I can give (and which
the Lord can make to take) by opening the causes of declining, and adjoining
the remedies.

The causes are either within or without.

1. Within I And the great cause and sum of causes within is the corruption of
nature. If the prince of this World adventured on our Savior himself in whom
he fonnd nothing Joh. 14. 30
, no marvel if he presume he shall be successful with us in whom he finds
so much, I mean so much of that pravity which makes so much for his purpose.

In particular, there is within us.

1. An unbelieving heart Heb. 3. 12. 1.
, the very character whereof is, that it departs from the living God Heb. 3. 12.
; these are the days wherein Christians do not only profess that they can
live without, but pretend to be above ordinances; which is an height so
strange, that we may be astonished at it; so shameful, that we may blush and be
confounded at it; so dangerous, that we may fear and tremble at it. What?
Above that, which Christ himself has ordained them to be under, and that to
the end of the world Mat. 28. 19, 20.
, as his way to their happiness! would they ever do this, if they did believe,
either the promise of life made to hearing Isa. 55. 3.
, or the threatening of unavoidable destruction denounced against despising Heb.
2. 3.
? But when men be of this mind, that no good or comfort is to be had in
ordinancecommunion, (perhaps because themselves have wanted it, for that they
did not rightly, humbly and patiently seek it) no marvel if there be
ordinance-desertion; when men change faith into fancy, no mervail if they
change Religion into frensy 2 Timothy 3. 9.

2. An unstable heart, led away with diverse lusts 2 Timothy 2. 3. 6. 2 Pet. 3. 16.
, that is, light desires; inconstant and alternant motions; longing after every
thing and pleased with nothing long. How many be there, whose light is weak,
but lusts, affections, cupidites, strong? No marvail if with such a new man and
a new matter, like new wine, work mightily; and if such Athenian ears be
quickly turned from the Truth to Fables 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.

3. A carnal heart 1 Cor. 3. 3.
, wherein there is a great desire to hear Ministers of parts, for their Parts;
not but that parts are to be regarded for their good use, and because by
greater and quicker abilities, Gods Word is opened more clearly to the
understanding, or pressed more powerfully upon the conscience; thus to love
parts, that is, for the Word and the good service they do in the things of God,
is very good; but on the other side, to love the Word for the good Parts; that,
in regard of the Christian that is so taken and mistaken, is a dangerous thing,
and in-regard of the Word of God, a dishonorable thing. To have the faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of Parts, is much alike as to have it with
respect of persons Jam. 2. 1.
, such are easily wafted thither where there is more of the parts, though less
of the Word and truth of God, for it is for the great Parts of men that they
go, rather than the good Word of God. This is it that undoes great Cities, that
people fl^ck to public Ordinances, as it were in way of recreation, as if
Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas, that is, various Ministers of different gifts,
were sent by Jesus Christ to please men's several humors, and that they may run
from one to another for their better content; and not (as the truth is) to
deliver unto them from God, a ^aw of faith and life, which they ought to hear
with a trembling spirit Isa. 66. 2.
, as that whereby they are to be guided here, and accordingly to be judged at
that last and great day 1 These. 4. 1, 2. Mark 16. 16. John 12. 49.

4. A careless heart; taking the Doctrines of good Ministers on their words,
without observing their grounds, and examining (as the noble Bereans did) those
Scriptures whereupon they did build the doctrines delivered to their hearers.
Hence it comes to pass, that though the Word be delivered to them, yet that
and their hearts are not delivered to it Romans 6. 17
, but to the Minister that is the deliverer of it; upon this follows that
which is worse; to wit, that when other Teachers step in (especially if they
make show of much holiness) and deliver contrary things to those they heard
before, they take those also upon their words that deliver them, and let go the
former truths, sell these, and buy those; no wonder, for we may say one man's
word is as good as another; to wit, if the Word delivered, be taken on the
bear warrant of the one and the other.

5. A proud heart and a foolish 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4. Gal. 3. 1.
: Hence the Jews formerly sought life in a way of legal righteousness; to
wit, for want of knowledge Romans 10. 2.
, and because they were fools as to suffer themselves to be bewitched; and
withal for want of humility, and because they would not submit themselves unto
the righteousness of God Romans 10. 3
. Papists since have troad in their steps (no mervail, for proud man would fain
be his own Savior) and the Quakers go far this way; for howsoever they seem
enemies to that pride (which we all condemn) by some outward and bodily
neglects (wherein the Papists go beyond them) yet they and the Papists both,
discover and display a far more dangerous pride, in lifting up as they do, an
inward light, and their inherent pretended perfections; yea in all Sects and
deviding parties, height of Spirit has a great part Gal. 4. 17.
Gal. 6. 12. 13. John 3. 9.

These are the causes within, unto which may be added, Secondly, causes and
occasions without; namely these,

1. Christians forsaking their fellow Christians: Apostasy in Religion begins
or at least begins to be settled and to show itself in separation and breach of
communion 2 Timothy 4. 10.
, when the Apostle says, Let us hold fast the profession of our says; he
says soon after, Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, but
exhorting one another Heb. 10. 23. 24, 25.
, for good Christians by mutual exhortations and communications, are not only a
comfort, but a guard one to another Mat. 3. 16
. It is observed that they that Quakers prevail with, are either ignorant
persons and raw professors, or mere Notionalists, full of brave words, but that
have little of the power of godliness; or else men of separating spirits.

Hear what he says, that was for a time, and in a great part, one of them: I
do not hear, (says he) nor know any that have been well grown and experienced
Christians, maintaining a close communion together, according to the exemplary
ways of Christ and his Apostles, that are thus overcome and betrayed by the
subtle Wiles of the Devil The worlds wonder or the Quakers blazing Star p 33.
54.
.

2. Their forsaking the Ministry: Sheep without a shepherd are easily made a
prey to the Woolf, as Joash was, when Jehojada was dead Chron. 24. 7
, and the Galatians in Paul's absence Gal. 1. 6.
. Let Christians that have departed from their first principles, common with
their own hearts, and enquire whether they staid so long with their first
Pastors, as seriously to seek from them a resolution of their doubts, and to
see whether all reasons of running away, might not have been answered: But no
marvail if they go out of the way by those that are unfaithful, that never
enquire the way of those that are faithful; yea, that forsake their proper
guides Heb. 13. 17.
. What would the Deputy have done when Elimas the Sorcerer sought to bewitch
him, if Paul had not stood by and come in with his charms Acts 13. ^, 9, 10.
? Observe therefore that the first work of Seducers (that they may prevent all
preventions of prevailing) is, to make their new Disciples abhor their old
Teachers; just as good-fellowes handle the Prodigal; that is, so as to make him
detest his Fathers house, that they may make a prey of him; yea, they do so new
mould their spirits, as that they make them open their mouths in outcries and
curses against those now for whom (to speak in Paul's language Gal. 4. 15
.) they would once have plucked out their eyes; thus as sometimes Achitophel
counseled Absolam, to go into his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all
Israel, to make the difference between him and his Father irreconcilable, by
that odious act 2 Samuel 16. ^1.
, and thereby to secure himself: So do Seducers teach their followers a
minister-reproaching-language and usage, that so they and their former (yea,
and all sound) Teachers, may be at an everlasting difference, and by that means
their hold may be the more firm Gal. 4. 7. Joh. 9. 24.

3. Their forsaking (at length) the ordinance of God, and the outward exercise
of religion both in the public congregation and in their own Families. Now
when Christians leave the Word, which is the builder up of Saints Acts 20. 32,
and the Sacraments that are their Confirming Seals. Romans 4. 11. And Sabbaths
that are the cement of Religion Psa. 122. 1, 2, 3* 4. Isa. 56. 6. They that
join themselves to the Lord and to his servants keep the Sabboath.
. And that Prayer that is the Christians keeper Jude v. 20, 21. (sweeping the
house for the Devil by sweeping out holy exercises, Luke 11. 25.) no marvel if
they be ruinous, unstable, shattered, and even lost creatures.

To add a little more, now I am engaged in this argument: The precedent
distempers partly arise from, and partly are fomented by such furtherances
thereof as I shall now subjoyne;

To wit,

1. Satan himself; who is as a Murderer, so a Liar from the beginning John 8.
44. 2 Cor. 11. 3.
, that is, not only a teller of Lies and a maker and moulder of untruthes, but
also a maker of liars, and an instiller and promoter of all those falsehoods
that are in deceived and deceiving men, 1 Kings* 22. 21, 22.
, If there be a man appointed of God to be deceived to his destruction, I Will
persuade him, (Says that Murderer) If he be asked where withal? I Will be a
lying Spirit (says that liar) Many talk much of Spirit but Christians must not
be soon shaken in mind 2 These. 2. 2, 3.
, by such Suggestions nor suffer men to impose upon them by the name of Spirit,
for perhaps, it may be the spirit of Ahabs prophets.

There is a saying cited out of Luther, that will give every man reason to
raise a suspicion upon the pretensions of extraordinary revelation, it is this;
Verily God must be incessantly implored with fear and humility, otherwise
truly it may soon come to pass that the Devil See the Book called A Faithful
discovery of a treacherous design p. 18, 19. 12 Cor. 11. q3.
will present before our eyes such a fantasm that we should swear it were the
true holy Ghost it self, as not only those ancient Heretics, but in our time
also examples which have been, and are still great and dreadful, do forwarne.

2. Seducing Teachers, Satan's Angels, b who transform themselves into the
apostles of Christ, and talk (as Apostles might of immediate inspiration; and
an infallible spirit, who come with new and seemingly heavenly lights, and no
marvel, for Satan himself that is the deformed prince of darkness, is
transformed into an Angel of light who use good words and fair speeches to
deceive the hearts of the simple Romans 16. 18.
, yea they would deceive (if it were possible) the very elect Mat. 24. 24.
.

3. Evil Neighbors, Satan's Agents, as Solomon's wives Nehem. 13. 26. And the
Arians-wives of Emperiours; for very often in the wife (as of old) begins the
fall; this is true also in regard of other infectious company, as in Osiander
Hist. Eccles. Epit. Cent. 4. chapter 43. lib. 2. and lib. 3 chapter 51.
the colloguing Princes of Judah that infected Joash after the death of
Jehosada. 2 Chronicles. 24. 17.

4. The Distemper and Apostasy of the times, Satan's great advantage, Mat. 24.
12.
corrupted times are like the infected air causing a catholic contagion. This
is the time wherein old truth (by the knowledge whereof many are now in heaven
1 Timothy 2. 4.) are grown to be out of date, Nor is it such an honor (as of old)
to reverence ordinances, but if you walk above them and look upon them as low
forms, then you are (with too many) in the highest form. The devil forms a
great tentation out of such estimation.

The Liberty of the times, Satan's engine. I mean (as men make use of it) it is
made great use of by Satan for the carrying on of his designs, I deny not but
it is a mercy which we are greatly to thank God for to have a free liberty to
do his will, but liberty of such a latitude as to walk right or wrong in
matters of religion without the least fear in any case, either of Church or
state-censure falls into Satan's hands as a fit engine, both for the opposing
conculcating of saving truths, and the spreading and cherishing of damnable 2
Pet. 2. 2
errors, for that old serpent knows, that if he can but obtain that men may
do what they themselves will (natural men and hypocrites, which are far the
greatest company, being of his mind and led after his will 2 Timothy 2. 26.
.) he can easily bring them to do what he himself will: There John 8. 44.
are two restraints from evil; government and grace: The former is like hedges
and walls to creatures that are wild: The other is like the gentleness and
orderliness of creatures when they are tamed Isa. 11. 6.
; because so few partake in the latter, there is a great deal the more need of
the former Psalm. 32. 9.
.

6. Corrupt and corrupting Books, Satan's Library; which yet are not chained and
fixed, but flying Books, purposely made little, that they may be made nimble,
and pass with more speed, and at an easy rate, to infect the Nation; may we
not fear a flying roll will go forth over the face of this God-neglecting
Nation, because the wings of such Books are not clipped Zech. 5. 2, 3.

Having been large in the causes of declining, I shall contract the remedies,
the rather because the discovery of the causes, is it self a remedy; yet for
the greater confirmation of those that stand, establishment of those that
stagger, and the better raising up of those that are fallen down, I shall add
these ensuing helps.

1. Study the Word of God: There be two Rules and Centers to combine and knit
up men in a right way. The first, is the Rule and Law of reason, that conjoynes
men in Civil things and ways of humane wisdom. Gamaliel was more rational
than the rest of his Society; and to him the whole company agreed, in him the
whole Council was concentred Act. 5. 40.
. The second is the Rule of Scripture, that unites men in the things of God,
walking by the same Rule and minding the same things go together Phil. 3. 16.
. By the recited Word and will of God, we find in Scripture a concurrent and
unanimous determination of a great Controversy Act. 15. 14, 15, 16, 17, etc.
28. 31. and 16. 4, 5.
, wherein also the Churches of God did with great consent and content, stand
resolved and rejoice, whatever others think, yet we may say as Luther does In
his Preface before his Lectures on the Psalms of Degrees.
, If our Doctrine be in any danger, it comes of this evil; to wit, the loathing
and neglecting of the Word.

For further help from the Word, have recourse to the Ministers of the Word,
for unity in Gods way, is the work of the Ministry. The Prophet Elijah was the
great Reducer of the revolted people of God in the old Testament 1 Kings 18.
38. 38.
. And John Baptist (that other Elijah) was the great turning instrument in the
new Testament, to bring in and fasten the Fathers to the Children, the Children
to the Fathers, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just Luke 1. 17.
Seducing Teachers are Removers Gal. 1. 6, 7. but faithful Ministers are the
returners of those that wander 1 Pet. 2. 25.
, and confirmers of those that are weak, Acts 14. 22. yet not excluding
Magistrates, who (being pious) are in their way, eminent Reducers into Gods
way; as we see in Jehosaphat that dwelt at Jerusalem, but went out through the
people from Bersheba to mount Ephraim and brought them back to the Lord God of
their Fathers. 2 Chronicles. 19. 4.

2. Reverence the Lords Day and all those holy Ordinances, which God has
appointed to be then (especially) exercised. It is observed that the meeting of
the Jews together in the solomn Feasts, was a great means of uniting them in
the knowledge of the Calvin
God of Israel, which was then more abundantly taught Chron. 30. Nehem. 8. 2.
4.
, and in the true worship of God, wherein (then) they were more abundantly
employed.

3. Keep close to good Christians, whose character it is to meet together to
speak to one another, Mal. 3. 16. and so to confirm one another 1 These. 5. 14.
If any be unruly, they warn him; if feeble-minded, Psalm. 122. 1, 2, 3, 4.
they comfort him; if weak, they support him; and if any of the company do
err from the truth, one or other, if he does not forsake the Society, will set
upon him and seek to turn him from the error of his way, Jam. 5. 19, 20. It is
very observable that when Peter was among right Christians at Antioch, he was
right himself; but when other company came in that were feirce enemies to
Christian Liberty, both he (though an Apostle) and by his example, diverse
others, yea, and Barnabas, left their upright walking, Gal. 2. 12, 13, 14.

Now its true that all Sects have their Societies, and they may say they keep
to those of their own but its one thing to love and keep company with
Christians upon the account of Regeneration and union to the Head (which should
be the great reason of our love 1 John 5. 1. Psalm. 119. 63.
, and associating our selves with them i) and another to walk with a deviding
party in a way of Faction, and because they and we are of one opinion, leaving
the company of those in whom there is the same gracious work, because there is
not the same particular way. From this irregularity, it arises that people
wander in un-approved ways without any return, to wit, because they keep
company and correspondence with those only that are of their own mind, and by
whom therefore they are confirmed, but have no intimate and communicative
society with others that are of other principles, by whom they might be
resolved, informed, and (through grace) rectified and reduced.

4. Fear and forbear the Society of Seduced and Seducing Persons; in regard of
whom the rule is to turn away Tim. 3. 5, 6.
, to avoid them Romans 16. 17.
, not to go forth at their call and instance Mat. 24. 26.
: Two great evils accompany the accompanying of such; for either 1. They will
be corrupters of thee, Romans 16. 18. 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. Or 2. Thou shall be a
countenancer of them, whereunto that of the Apostle relates 2. Epistle of John
10. 11. If there come any to you and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed, for him that bids him God speed is
partaker of his evil deeds.

5. Consider into what extremities they that once loose their footing, do at
last fall: Unthrifts that sell all their Wood from off their Land to maintain
vicious courses, will sell their Land shortly; so they that easily part with
some part of that Religion which the Scripture has established, are like enough
(if they be followed close) to fall off from the rest. O what a long journey
have diverse Christians taken from their Fathers house! who (I believe) never
thought of their going so far at their first setting out. Some color there is
for Separation; but then the Separatist turns Anabaptist; some color also
there may be for that (and but a color) but then the Anabaptist turns Quaker;
and is there any color for that? for leaving Christ's colors 2 Pet. 3. 17.
? O remember the Rule, Buy the truth and sell it not Prove. 23. 23.
: Part not with any truth, least you part with all; like Christians that pick
and choose some godly Ministers at first, but contemn others, and shortly
after shake off all.

I shall here mind you of a double extremity into which they that are called
Quakers are fallen, and so hasten to a conclusion.

1. Consider how near they come to Popery, though hoodwincked (its like) and
toled into it by a Jesuiticall spirit, which also (as this Pamphlet may prove)
has much invaded their writings. Their symbolizing Mr. P^yn Mr. Baxter Quak.
Catech. p 27.
and agreeing with Papists, is sufficiently discovered by others, in the
particulars; as the contempt of Scripture; pleading for the sufficiency of the
common light, or the light of Nature, that is in all men generally; leaving
their callings as Monks and Hermites do, and shaking off those to whom they
have relation, to shift for themselves; in their pretending to perfection, as
if they were without sin, and to a fulfilling of all Gods commandments,
especially in resting as they do upon an inherent righteousness, and insisting
still upon things legal rather than Evangelicall.

It is observable (as they say that have conversed much Faithful discovery of a
treacherous design, p 12.
with them) That there is no mention made in any of their Papers we have yet
seen, of eternal salvation from the wrath to come, or condemnation of hell by
any atonement, The Oath of George Cowlishaw of the City of Bristol Ironmonger
taken Jan. 22. 1654.
price, purchase, blood-sacrifice of our mediator without us, but of eternal
salvation from the dominion of sin by Jesus Christ, who is eternal life in us.

Of this I need to say the less, to those to whom I write, who are by Oath
informed of the actings and acceptings of diverse persons in Popish Orders, into
this design, and among this miserable, misled company.

Its true (as one says) that Satan transformes himself, and these men cry out
against Antichrist, but what Worlds wonder. p. 40.
matter is it if a man call himself Knave? its no slander: So for Satan to cry
out against himself, is but a small game for him to play incomparison of some
other.

2. Consider further how near they come to Atheism; for what is it less than
an approach to Atheism, not only to forsake, but also to be bitterly
disaffected to They who desire to be acquainted with the mysteries of this way,
may be satisfied in reading that Book.
the Servants and Ordinances of Jesus Christ? For the manifestation whereof, I
shall yet again make use of his testimony, who being himself far gone in the
Quakers woeful ways, in the Northern parts, has more fully than any other that
I have read (and that in thankfulness to God for his deliverance from them)
made a discovery of them.

First then, he demonstrates these men to be led by a spirit of Antichrist,
from that spirit of enmity, bitterness and prejudice, which is conceived and
brought forth in their hearts toward such of the servants of God, as walk
most strictly and orderly in communion together; and especially such as are the
Pillars of the truth in the Churches of Christ. This I know to be true (says
he) by what I observed in my own experience, when I was under those
Satanish-angelical-metamorphosings; beside that, I have heard them say several
times, their hearts were not drawn out toward the creatures of the world, that
they were more tenderly affected Worlds wond q 27.
toward such who were merely Atheistical and profane creatures, then toward
such and such Societies, Professions, Professors; to wit, precious,
honest-hearted men, against whom they rail in their Letters to them and yet
pretend love.

Secondly, for the Ordinances of God. It must needs be (says he) the power of
Antichrist working through See the same Book, p 16. 17.
deceit, that robs the soul of all those former ways and means wherein the
Lord did work faith, knowledge and enjoyments in the hearts of his children,
etc.

I have heard them complain exceedingly that they were not wholly taken off
such things, but they did find their hearts hanging upon old despensations,
ways, discoveries; all these things they say must be burnt up in them and
destroyed, and because there is so much of them remaining, therefore they be
under such agonies. They esteem also that the more the heart is brought off
from the meditation and consideration of Gods former dealing, and the more
negligent it is become in reading, hearing, praying, or any such heavenly (and
their own once) exercise, the more pure and perfect it is become, and if they
could altogether cease from them, it would be well with them. They think all
acted formerly was the power of the first Adam; and therefore being not of
Christ it ought to be denied, and thrown away as an abominable thing.

These things and much more you may find in that Book called, The Worlds
wonder, or the Quakers blazing Star, by Edmund Skip, Preacher of the Gospel to
the People at Bodenham in Herefordshire.

Now can you whom God has kept from these horrible heights hear these things,
and not exceedingly bless God, by whose alone power you have been preserved?
Or, can you that are fallen off throrow your own inconstancy, facility and
security, read these things and not tremble to think what the end will be of so
doleful and dangerous a backsliding? O think with your selves (each of you) if
I that have been guilty of so sad a departing were now a dying. Could I say
with a good and grounded Conscience and confidence, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly? Into thy hands, I commend my soul, a soul that loves thy Word, thy
Sacraments, thy Sabboths, thy Ministers, thy Saints, far less then it was wont
to do? Will not such things bring thy hoare head with sorrow to the grave? If
ever the Lord be so merciful as to return such (as if they belong to him he
will:) O with what weeping and heart-smart will they come to seek the Lord
their God Jer. 50. 4.
? And if God do not this, what will become of their poor seduced souls? Leave
this God once, leave this God still, (whom if you do enjoy, you must enjoy in
Ordinances, Job. 22. 21, 22. Psalm. 65. 4.) and assure your selves you shall
never meet with such a God again. The Lord make you to know it, and thereupon
make all to know that he has turned your heart back again. 1 Kings 18. 37.

And this prayer is (after I have been so long in this fifth cansideration)

6. The last means I shall propound and way of revocation of revolted
Christians. O that they would come again to prayer and fasting! that would cast
out all evils and Devils, Mark 9. 29.

In conclusion, I shall advertise the Reader, that whereas I write more roundly
in this Rejoinder, than I use to do, and than I have ever done, (and wherein,
if in any thing, I have exceeded in the judgment of wise and godly men, I am
ready to be reproved) that manner of writting I have been drawn into, not only
because the things are so gross which this Opponent holds, and the spirit so
insulting with which he holds them forth (a temptation which I have endeavored
to resist) but more particularly for these reasons,

1. Because the Apostle directs in some cases Neque enim sic cum protervis at
indomitis agendum ut cum mansuetis docilibus Calv. in loc.
to cutting rebukes, Tit. 1. 13. which I write with fear, least I should take
my self, or encourage any other to take a liberty to walk in such a way,
unless with a desire to cure those that are corrupt; or to deter others that
are such; or to confirm those the better that are not such, etc. Yet (sure) all
men are not to be dealt with alike, Jude v. 22. 23. and with these men both
ways are tried. I wish one or other may do them good.

2. Because I doubt not but zeal and resolution is required in pleading for
the cause of God and against the irreligious and injurious usage of his word
and servants, especial when it is covered with shows of reason and religion.

3. Because it is not reasonable that by a cold discourse there should be any
suspicion that our consciences accuse us as this adversary does; or that we
doubt of the regularity and righteousness of our calling and carriage, which
are here so much inveighed against: which is the more considerable, because
such men as he who has set himself a work in this Book, are apt to interpret a
mild way of Refutation, a secret conviction and vertuall concession, that the
cause is such, that we dare not boldly and strenuously give witness to it.

4. That Christians that fear God may not be abused and deluded into doubts by
the lofty and Thrasonicall Language of this, or any vaunting opposite: nor be
induced to think by a remiss reply that there is something of truth and
honesty in that cause of his which is carried all along with so transcendent a
confidence.

5. Nor is this done without some respect to Solomon's counsel Prove. 26. 5.
that one, that is of so great a spirit as this writer is (and yet in no wiser a
way) may not be altogether so high as otherwise he might be in his own
conceit, or (if he will needs be so, yet) that it may be in his own conceit
only.

I should not have been thus long, but that I account the answering of one that
declaimes (or exclaimes rather their disputes far less considerable than the
communicating of something upon this occasion, (which) (as God has enabled) I
have endeavored to do) for the information and conformation of humble,
sincere, and ordinance observing Christians.

The Lord give a blessing to what I have written, that it may be to those that
are firm in their resolutions for God (as Josua's stone sometimes was chap.
24. 26, 27.) a sealing-stone: to those that are doubtful a Touchstone,
yielding some assistance for a right discovery; to those that are fallen away a
Lodestone, to draw their hearts (if God say so too) back again: (1 Kings. 18.
37.) and to none a Millstone, by rejecting that in scorn which is offered unto
them in love, and with a sincere aim at their spiritual and everlasting good.

This shall still be the prayer of him whose real desires are to be.

Your servant in his utmost WILLIAM THOMAS.
May. 21. 1656.
Jer. 3. 22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backsliding.


Can any heart be so hard as not to Answer.

Behold we come unto thee for thou art the Lord our God?

I will go and return to my first husband, for it was better with me than then
now,

Hos. 2. 7.
To the Reader.
Reader,
BE pleased to understand that since the writing of this Epistle, I find that
there is a sober answer made to the angry Epistle of T.S. by my Reverend
Brethren the Ministers of Redding, which I doubt not will give very good
satisfaction to the understanding and indifferent Reader; yet I shall not
desist from publishing my self what I intended before, but shall go on in my
purpose, both because the Book (the Epistle wherefore they have answered) is
directed to my self by name, and because God has in mercy so directed mine
and my Bretherens meditations, that we shall walk in something a different way
in one and the same work, and yet not only without difference and
disagreement, but I hope with a more full and cumulative assistance, to such
selfe-knowing and sincere Christians, as see they need, and desire to profit by
our labors, which we pray God to bless unto them for their greatest good.

I shall further advertise the Reader of two things.

1. That my purpose at first was to answer at once the whole Book of T. S. And
in order thereunto I framed the precedent Epistle which reflects more properly
upon all of it then upon a part. But in regard of my many occasions and
inability of body for study, it will require some longer time to go through
the whole; and yet I am so importunately called upon by diverse godly Persons,
to whose spirits that book is extremely displeasing, that I cannot defer the
doing of something for some present satisfaction. I have resolved therefore for
this time (especially considering that the pleading of my own personal cause
is of no concernment in regard of the general interest of the Ministry) to
apply my self to his Epistle only, but with a purpose (God assisting) to
adjoyne my answer to the residue. of the Book, which I hope will be in a very
short time.

2. I desire the Reader to observe that experience has so much informed me of
the little likelihood of prevailing with him that is become mine Adversary (to
whom my desires have been to do good) that I have resolved, and formerly
declared, that I would not have further to do with him: and the truth is, that
a special end in this my answer, after my endeavor to clear the truth and
servants of God, is the informing and confirming of teachable Christians.
Thence it is that I am more large in the opening of several places of
Scripture; and thereupon also I speak (not in the second, but) in the third
Person to the Writter, and direct my discourse to the reader, desiring God that
those Providence that add to the work of his Ministers, may add also to the
spiritual welfare of his people.

W. T.

The Title of Thomas Speeds Book.
T. S. Christ's Innocence pleaded.
W. T. I shall only paraphrase and so pass his Title Page.
Christ's Innocence pleaded;] that is, the Quakers Innocence; for them (toward
the close of his Epistle) he calls [the innocent] and pleads all he can (not
for Christ but) for them. If he say he pleads for Christ in pleading for them,
I shall return only this answer, that we very well know Christ's innocence, but
are far from knowing theirs. We see they do prove (by their in^ustrious
Seducements) and have cause to fear that they will further prove (unless God
restrain them, or (which we desire most) convert them) a most nocent and
spoiling Cant 2. 15* Col. 2. 8.
company but men speaking perverse things, have ever presumed to shelter
themselves under the name of Christ, and (that they might draw Disciples after
them the better) to entitle him to their deceiving doctrines, Matthew. 24. 23,
24. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14.

T. S. Against the cry of the Chief Priests.

W. T. That is, against the preaching of the chief Ministers of the Nation,
whose duty it is to cry aloud against sin, Isa. 51. 1. and whose scope and
work it is, to plead the cause of Christ against erroneous and Antichristian
men, Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11.

T. S. By Thomas Speed, a Servant of that Jesus Christ, who was at the request
of the bloody crew of Chief Priests and Teachers crucified at Jerusalem.

W. T. A Servant (as he says himself) of Jesus Christ and yet the servants of
Jesus Christ cannot be quiet for him; and it is of that Jesus Christ who was
crucified at Jerusalem, and yet as if that crucifying were not enough, this
cruel man makes him suffer still in his faithful Ministers, Luke 10. 16
by whom he neither was nor is crucified, but is evidently set forth and even
pictured in the preaching of (and for) Christ crucified according to the
doctrine of Scripture, Gal. 3. 1.

Now whether this professing servant look to be saved by Jesus Christ crucified
[as on the Crosse] dying for our sin and then rising again for our
justification; or [as in the heart] were worth the knowing. If he look to be
saved by Christ [as] sanctifying within, and not as suffering without, he will
not be found a good servant, because not of his Masters mind.

T. S. Matthew. 23. 27. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites:

John 8. 39, 40. If ye were Abraham's Children, ye would do the works of
Abraham, but ye seek to kill me, etc.

W. T. Whether these Scriptures, by which he intimates the Ministers of England
to be Hypocrites and Murderers, yea Murderer of Jesus Christ, be rightly
applied, or wretchedly abused, let all indifferent readers judge.

T. S. Seneca de vit. beat. Quaeramus quid optime factum sit non quid
usitatissimum et quid nos in possessione felicitatis aeternae constituat, non
quid vulgo, veritatis pessimo interpreti probatum sit.

W. T. I shall return him the saying of another Philosopher, that was full as
wise as Seneca.

Probabilia sunt quae probantur aut omnibus aut pluribus, aut certe
sapientibus, atque iis vel omnibus vel plurimes, vel iis quorum spectata est
and perspecta sapientia, Aristot Top. Lib. 10. cap. 10.

On the contrary, he declares himself a Sophister and fallacious man, that
regards not that Rule, but ex propriis scientiae sumptionibus non veris quod
vult effecit. ibid.

I proceed now to his Epistle.

A Defense of the Ministers of the Nation, in Answer to an Epistle lately
published by THOMAS SPEED.
The Inscription of the Epistle.

[To all the Public Teachers in this Nation, who are by themselves and the
world, called Ministers of the Gospel.]

BEfore I go further, I shall observe in answer to this Inscription, these four
things.

1. That this Author thinks it not enough (I know not whether he scorn or no)
to lay hands on Mordecai alone, and to oppose himself against my poor self,
whom he might with more ease, and less sin, have trodden under foot; but his
design is to disgrace the public Teachers throughout the whole Nation, unto
whom therefore he gives the odious name of Chief-Priests, (which they never
owned, and by which never any Saint, that we read, or know of, called them) the
better thereby to fasten upon them his monstrous and fictitious accusation.

2. That he that prefixed this Title cannot but know, that himself has heard,
not only the world, but many Saints also, call the Teachers of this Land by the
name of Ministers, unless he be come to that pass to think that none are
Saints but Quakers, and that he was none himself, till he was one of them.

3. That the people of this Nation, and he among the rest, whether they and he
hear, or whether they will forbear, shall know one day that there have been
Prophets and Ministers among them Ezeck. 2. 5.

4 A fourth thing which I observe, and offer to the Reader to take notice of is
this, that he that casts all that dirt, that is in this foul Epistle upon
public Teachers, was lately a public Teacher himself, though not by the world
no^ the Saints, called Ministers, as having not (for that his carriage makes to
appear) so much love to the Ministry, as to engage in it, nor so much fe^r of
it as to forbear without a due Call, or a true heart to it* to be tampering
about it; he gave a Say to that calling, and it might have been thought that he
would have been a star to have lead others to Jesus Christ, but he he is proved
a Comet, and is now not only fallen to the earth, but (which I am sorry to
speak, but this Book will speak it) falls foul upon heaven, which I cannot but
present as a very considerable warning to all others that take the boldness to
be public Teachers without any mind and meaning to be Ministers of Christ in
the way of Christ, least God not only give them over to teach erroneous things
(which they often do) but leave them at last to fall off from preaching
themselves without a calling, to be bitter enemies to those that preach with a
calling, as this miserable man declares himself to be; who notwithstanding has
nothing to defend himself from the dint of his own sword-like words, but only
this, that he is no Minister, and making us none neither, the case is alike,
and so all falls on himself in reference to the time wherein he was a public
Teacher, and no better (sure) than other public Teachers, whom in this Satyr
he so much enveighs against.

The Epistle.

T.S. Sirs, the night is far spent, the day is at hand, and blessed, yea,
blessed from the Lord are all they who are found walking not as children of the
night, but of the day. The hour is coming, and now is, that all coverings shall
be removed and the vails plucked from off all faces, and lamentation and woe
will be to all them who are found covered, but not with the covering of my
Spirit, says the Lord God. Awake therefore O ye shepherds, awake, awake, stand
up, seriously consider of and prove your coverings; make diligent inquisition
and search whether ye are covered with power or profession, with the substance
or with the Form etc.

You do all pretend your selves servants to the Son of God, and to be Ministers
by him called forth to preach the everlasting Gospel, from the bottom of my
heart do I wish, that I were able truly to say of every individual of you, But
why does he not say what he way truly say of so many of us?
that you are found walking worthy of such a Master, and bringing forth fruit
worthy of that high and holy calling, with which you pretend your selves
called, I shall not undertake rashly to judge you, or accuse you unto the
world; let your fruits demonstrate what Trees you are, and let your works judge
you.]

W. T. The Ministers of this Nation are not unwilling to be awakened to the
serious consideration of any thing wherein they are truly concerned, nor are we
deaf at, but yet we wonder at those false witnesses that in these days rise up
against us, and lay to our charge things that so many of us know not of, Psalm.
35 11. Among whom the Author of this Epistle will needs appear to all the
world, and that as an eminent undertaker; one would hardly think that one that
is so much a Novice, should so far lift up himself (but that Novices will do
so) as to sit in judgment upon, call to the Bar, indite and prepare for the
highest condemnation, not only the public Teachers of this Nation, (to ^ll
whom he writes) but (which he may do upon the same false account) of all the
Reformed Churches, yea, of the Churches of Christ generally since the Apostles
times, as if Christ had forsaken his Church for so many Ages, with which he
has promised to be present in the Ministry to the end of the world Math. 28.
19, 20.
; Strange it is that a man pretending to piety should put himself into such an
office, if the adversaries of a right Religion, that say as the King of Syria
fight neither with small nor great, save only with those whom they call
Ministers, seek for a Proctor to plead their cause thoroughly, may not they
find one here? unto whom it belongs seriously to consider (and I heartily wish
he would think upon it before it ^e too late) how near he comes to that
Tertulius that loved to call Paul a pestilent fellow, and how that will speed
when he comes to be tried by that word, he that despises you, despises me; if
such Scriptures be nothing to him, but he will needs think he does God service,
when he will cast all reproach upon his servants, therein lies his danger,
which I speak the rather for their sakes, that are of the sa^e way and spirit
with him, who, if the Teachers of the Nation be found at the last day the Lords
Ministers and Ambassadors (as the conscienc^s of some of them cannot choose but
acknowledge they will, if the work of the Word be not clean blotted out of
their hearts) then may they collect what 1 Timothy 3. 6.
a fearful reckoning there does (without repentance) remain for them from those
direful things that befell the Ammonites state upon their base usage of David's
messengers 2 Samuel 10. 6. and 12. 31
.

Yet had the Ammonites a pretense for it, and made as if David's servants had
come to search the City, to spy it out and to overthrow it 2 Samuel 10. 3
, nor did Tertullus want a color for that which he pretended as Paul's black
character; for he does not say of Paul, he is reported to be, but we have found
him to be a pestilent fellow; just as this man says, let your fruits
demonstrate what Trees you are; let your works judge you, and so Tertullus;
this Paul is a pestilent fellow, let his works judge him, for he is a mover of
sedition among all the Jews throughout the world: Here is a great proof, if
Tertullus had not been a great liar.

Howbeit I do not deny but that if he speak of particular men, there may be
diverse or many among the public Teachers of this Nation justly blamed, (though
few in that height in which he sets them forth) whom neither my self nor any
godly Minister will plead for, but mourn for; but what is this to [all] the
public Teachers of this Nation? Yea, how is this to any purpose at all? Since
there was never any National Society of Ministers wherein there was not an
observable corrupt company? If that be a sufficient reason to condemn the
Ministry, because there is not a walking worthy of that calling in every
individual Minister, then no society of men will be uncondemned, because
unworthy persons are still mixed, and (ordinarily) the most.

T. S. [You pretend the Scripture to be your rule; come therefore, let us
plainly reason together, and see if your own rule will condemn you or absolve
you.]

W. T. We own the Scripture for a Rule though this Writer does not; and are
willing (as in duty we are bound) to be tried by it; but while we acknowledge
the Rule and the Law, we deny the Fact, and the things that are here alleged
against us in that generallity wherein he alleges them: We say (as Jeremy
Jer. 37. 14.
) its false: And as Paul, Neither he nor his Partners can prove the things
whereof they accuse us Acts 24. 33.
.

T. S. [The Spirit of the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet Micah chapter 3. 11.
accounted it among the abominations of the Priests and Prophets of those days,
that they taught for hire and did divine for money; and as an aggravation of
this their wickedness, he further testifies, that they even prepared war
against him that refused to put into their mouths v. 5 Let these Scriptures be
your indictment before the Judge of all the Earth; And to the light of Jesus
Christ in every one of your Consciences do I appeal, whither you are able to
pleadto it not guilty, and if guilty, how then can you escape the same sentence
and condemnation that fell on those Priests and Prophets, who were found in the
same transgressions.]

W. T. To this I answer.

1. If the taking a maintenance for our Labor in Preaching be Preaching for
hire, then we acknowledge we Preach for Hire: But that such a construction is a
vain surmise, is evident by Scripture that says, The Labourer is worthy of his
hire, Luke 10. 7. We profess we take that which Christ says we are worthy to
have; but if he understand by preaching for hire, that we exercise and order
our preaching for the getting of money and maintenance, there are enough of us
that (through Gods mercy) know that to be a mere slander, as the other also is,
of preparing war for those that put not into our mouths. If this man made
conscience of applying Scripture, he would otherwise apply it, and use more
caution, that there might be less calumny.

2. Nor are we afraid to hear of an appeal to our consciences: For though we do
not know so little of our Rule, or of our selves as to pretend to perfection,
(as Quakers do) but find many things amiss, for which we humble our selves
before the Lord, yet, in reference to those gross things whereof he speaks,
our hearts shall not reproach us so long as we live, Job 27. 6.

3. We will not secure our selves only within this brazen wall of an accusing
conscience, but freely offer our selves (in this and in the things following)
to the trial and testimony of the people of God among whom we have lived: Let
them say whither they have found such evils in us as are objected against us,
while we have walked in and out before them Act. 24. 20
.

4. We shall willingly and cheerfully join issue in refering our cause to the
great God that knows perfectly our hearts and ways, and before whom we doubt
not to stand in the judgment through Jesus Christ at the la^ and great day If
our sentence should come forth from Quakers we might very well and very much
fear; but Lord, let our sentence come forth from thy presence Psa. 17. 2.
.

5. I wonder it should never come into the heart of this man that has so many
[It's] If guilty, If so etc to think what if it be not so? What if they be not
guilty? Shall not they that be wronged have reparations? Will God take it well
to have his servants slandered, or shall they go scot-sree, that make it their
trade to traduce them?

T. S. [Jesus Christ, the true and great Prophet of his people, denounces the
woe against the Teachers in his days, for that they did their works to be seen
of men, standing praying in the Synagogues and the corners of the streets, as
also because they loved the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and the chief seats in
the Synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be called of men Rabbi,
Rabbi; view your selves in this glass also, and let the light of Christ in all
your consciences judge whether these spots are not manifestly to be seen in
your garments; and if so, who can absolve you from being sharers in their woe,
who are found partakers with them in their evil works.]

W. T. Let the Reader observe that Christ condemns not 1. Standing in prayer
(whereof there be diverse examples in Scripture Nehem. 9. 4, 5, 6. Luke 18. 13.
And whereof Christ himself says, when you [stand] praying Mark 11. 25) 2. Nor
Praying in the corners of the streets, (though this man of this company know we
do not so) (for wisdom cries (and may to cry God) in such chief places of
concourse Pro 1. 20, 21.) 3. Nor taking the uppermost rooms and seats, as if
it were a sin to take them, for some body must needs have them. Nor 4.
greetings in the markets and meetings (which humanity requires, and Scripiure
favors Acts. 15. 23. We find greeting in letters to be dispersed in every City
and Acts 21. 19. 1 Pet. 5. 14.
.) 5 Nor being called Rabbi Read more of this in M. Bakers Qua kers Catichisme.
p. 17. (...).
else it is like Christ would not have taken that name John 1. 38. Mark 14. 45.
On the contrary, it is evident by the text, that the thing which our Savior
blames, is, praying in places where we may be seen [to be seen] as Mat. 6. 1.
To be seen of men, that is, in a vainglorious way; and the [loving] (for so he
speaks) and [willing] and [affecting] of higher places and Titles. To what
purpose then is this place brought, but only that this uncharitable cre^ture
(who has no knowledge of our hearts Mark 12. 38. compared with 1 Samuel 2. 16.
Genesis 34. 19 vide Beram in locum significatur voluntas cum summa cupiditate
conjuncta.
and ends) takes it for granted, that when we stand in a Pulpit for the peoples
edification, we do it for our own praise; and that because we [take] therefore
we [love] those a little higher places and titles which civility casts upon us.

This is so senseless an allegation and imputation, that one would not take
notice of it, but that the Quakers generally bring it, and Christians may
understand the text better by giving some explanation of it.

T. S. [The Scripture witnesses that the sheep and the sheepheards of Jesus
Christ were not of the world, because by him chosen out of the world, and
therefore by the world were they hated, persecuted, imprisoned, stoned, beaten
in their Synagogues, dragged before Rulers and Magistrates for his name sake,
cast out as the sweepings and offscouring of all things. Stand to the Bar, O
you Shepherds before the righteous Judge that cannot be bribed, and in the
presence of him that searches the heart and tries the reins of all men: Give
true answer to what I shall demand of you. Are you by the world hated, or are
you haters of others? Are you persecuted or Persecutors? Are you imprisoned for
Truths sake, or are you imprisoners of others? etc.]

W. T. To this I answer, 1. That we are hated and persecuted in the height
(with Ismael's persecution Gal. 4. 29. with Genesis 21. 9.
yea) and made the off scouring of all things in the Quakers Books, and in
this of his more especially, and more studiously, more virulently and more
generally than in many (or for ought I know in any) other. 2. He shall answer
himself in the next Page but one of his Epistle; where he says, that the
Bishops did in their days imprison, and evil entreat many of us. Why does he
say, are you imprisoned, when he himself tells us we have been imprisoned? If
he mean that we are not now imprisoned, neither were the Shepherds of Christ
still imprisoned Acts 9. 31. Besides this, how many were tossed and troubled in
the High-commission-court, by wicked men in and about their own places?

T. S. [We never read that Paul or any of the Ministers of Christ, in
Scripture, did so much as claim a maintenance from those without, much less
did they Commence suites at Law against the world or the Saints for the tenth
of all their Labors. Are you the Messengers of Christ? And is the Scripture
your rule? How is it then that you dare not engage to preach, having not first
made firm Indentures See this about Indentures answered in the 7. Article of
his scoffing Charge. 1 Cor. 9. Gal. 6. 6.
for your livelihood? Or why is it that you fill the Courts of Justice with
your actions against those that refuse to pay you the tenth of all their
increase? Nay, by what rule do you exact it of those that never hear you, nor
own you for their Pastors?]

W. T. We read that Paul says and proves that he might claim of maintenance
of right; if he forbore it in fact (for reasons referring to those times) does
that hinder the righteousness of the claim in these days, which was righteous
in those?

As for commencing Suits at Law, 1. I enquire what are Courts of Justice made
for, if laboring men may not come 1.
thither to seek for their hire which is unjustly detained from them? 2.
Charity has two eyes and ears, malignity but one; else could he not see or
hear of so many Ministers that 2.
never went to Law in all their lives, whereof (because this man puts a force
upon modesty) I must affirm my self to be one, who have continued in a place
(but mean for maintenance) now these 39. years and never called any to any
Court for Tithes or any thing else; yet other may take another course (or my
self if there be further occasion) and patiently seek their right by Law, when
they cannot have it otherwise, without any just blame. 3. Whereas he demands by
what rule do you exact the tenth of those that never hear you, 3.
nor own you for their Pastors? I answer, 1. If Pastors be faithful, by what
rule do they disown them and withdraw themselves from them? Must a Minister
that desires and endeavors to do good, loose and be deprived of the members of
his Church and the maintenance of his place both at once? 2. I shall not deny
but things may so stand, that a man living in one place may have reason to be
an hearer in another, but I am sure that he can have no ^eason to be unjust,
that is, to withhold that maintenance which by law and right is due to, as
being affixt unto the place where he lives, though he be in some account o^ his
own, an hearer else where; especially considering that no humane law binds him
to pay where he is an hearer, but only in that place where he is an Inhabitant,
so that what he lays out in one place he saves in another.

T. S. [Moreover the Scripture manifestly declares against all the works of
the flesh, such as are drunkenness, swearing, hypocrisy, coveteousnesse etc.
and are your hands all clean from this filth? Are not a great part of you found
wallowing in this common mire?]

W. T. Our Savior says of his own company, you are not all clean John 13. 11.
And if there were one bad among so few, no marvail if there ^e many bad among
so many, whom yet there is no purpose to defend, but a course taken to cast out.

T. S. [And among those of you that have escaped that open pollution of
drunkenes with wine, are you not yet intoxicated with wrath and rage against
the innocent? Let me ask you further, (and let your anger be turned into a
serious consideration of what I shall say) is there scarce a Prison this day in
the Nation in which some servant of the living God or other is not prisoner to
your insatiable fury? Does not Jesus Christ as truly lie bound in many nasty
holes and dungeous in England by your instigation and procurement, as he did by
the procurement of Saul in Damascus? If any poor Jeremiah come from the Lord to
bear testimony against all your abominations, is there wanting a lordly Pashur
among you who (in case the Magistrate be so honest as to refuse) will not with
his own hands put his feet in the stocks? Now then to your Rule etc.]

W. T. 1. Here he makes many Questions wherein he must answer himself. I
neither know nor believe any such thing as his interrogations import: In
particular I doubt not but Ministers are as far from being Pashurs and putting
men's feet in the stocks, as Quakers are from being Jeremiahs and that is far
enough.

2. If unruly persons be imprisoned, do Ministers put them in prison or
Magistrates? If Magistrates, have they not authority and order to do it from
the civil Power? Why then does he not blame and cry out upon the supreme Power,
because it will not suffer the public service of God to be every where
disturbed by the sottish messages of deluded souls, tending to the hinderance
of the delivery of Gods message and the abusing of his messengers? Must the
blame be laid on Ministers because men and poor misled women suffer as
malefactors, that is, for breach of civil Laws, disturbers of the public
peace and tumultuating in solemn religious meetings?

What follows after, is by others already answered In a sober Answer to this
angry Epistle, p. 10. 11.
.

T. S. [As it was of old so it is now, there being no new thing under the Sun;
the seed of the bondwoman persecuteth the seed of freewoman; the form
fights against the power; and the letter against the life. The professing
religious Jews cried out against the Apostles and Saints in those days, Help
O Caesar, help men of Israel, for there are a Sect of men called Christians
risen up, who turn the world up side down; The late Bishops, they cried out,
Help O King against this factious generation of Puritans, who will not have us
to reign over them; own us, and guard us with thy sword, for if thou suffer us
to fall, this will be the consequence, no Bishop, no King. Those called
Persbiters, they also invokated the Powers late in being, crying out, help O
Parliament, help against these schimatical Independents and Anabaptists, who
begin to refuse subjection to those yoaks we would lay upon them, as we did to
those laid by the Bishops upon our necks. But now so it is at this day, that
all the Teachers of all sects and factions (like as the Pharisees and Sadduces
against Christ) do with one lip cry out and say, help O Protector, help O
Magistrates, help, for there is now a strange Generation of men risen up, that
the Earth is not able to bear; such as strike at our very root, and if we fall,
this will be the consequence (if you dare to believe us) no Minister, no
Magistrate]

W. T. To all this I answer,

1. That it is very ill (where it may be justly charged as 1.
here it is unjustly) that the form of Religion should fight against the
power, and the letter be abused against the life of the word. But it is an evil
as bad as that, or much worse, when a pretended power of piety fights against
the form of sound Doctrines, or any of those forms which Christ has
appointed in these times of reformation Heb 9. 10
; or when an inward light and life is lift up, to disparage that Word of God
which is not a dead letter, but quick and powerful, and sharper than a two
edged sword Heb. 4. 12.
.

2. For his [Help O Caesar etc.] if you take out the fancy that is in it (which
its like much pleased the Framer) it 2.
comes (in regard of the two former passages in it) to this sense, (if it be
sense) you must not call upon the Magistrate to punish those that deserve it,
because sometimes the Magistrate is called upon to punish those that deserve it
not: A man must not call upon Moses to put a blasphemer to death, n Levit. 24.
13, 14, 15.
because the Elders and Nobles of Naboths City, were sometimes called upon to
put Naboth to death upon an unjust accusation of blasphemy 1 Kings 21, 8, 9, 10.
. Is not this a good Argument, you ought not to call upon the Magistrate to to
trouble a true man, therefore you may not prosecute the Law to hang a Thief and
a Murderer?

3. Its true, that the Parliament was called upon by Presbiters, for the
settling of a Government according to the 3.
Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches, wherein they held
(and held forth) a brotherly compliance with Independants, even unto the utmost
of that which their principles, built (as far as they could apprehend) on
Scripture, would give way unto, with sufficient declaration also of due respect
unto and willingness to close with, others that were godly though of
dissenting principles and persuasions. They intended no yoke but the yoke of
Christ, and were not (as some have been formerly) friends to soule-annoying
restraints, but only enemies to soule-destroying Liberties.

4. It may be something wondered at that he should acknowledge, 4.
that Teachers of all Sects and Factions cry out for help against his Sect:
Does not this show them to be like Ishmael? Not only because of their
persecution of others with bitter words Gal. 4. 29.
, but also of others dis affection to them, their hand being against every man,
and every man's hand against them Genesis 16. 12.
. I do not say, bad men's only, but good men's also, unless there be no Teachers
good in the Nation besides Quakers; now, how sad is the condition of these men,
whom so many wise and godly men can see no cause to approve and favor?

5. What he says in jest, No Minister, no Magistrate, will be found a truth in
good earnest; for they that contemn Gods 5.
express ordinance in the former Ephesians. 4. 11.
, will (for the same reason) undermine it in the latter, to wit, that an open
way may be made for what they like, and what they like, yea, Magistrates are in
so much more danger than Ministers, because such men are more hindered in their
purposes by their greater ter power, and may gain more (if they can accomplish
their purposes) by their subversion. Herein late experience will give some
light, by which it has been observed, that they that had an evil eye upon the
Ministry (and being not content with Reformation thereof meditated ruin) were
also possessed with principles leading to the overthrow of the Fundamental I
awes, and of Magistracy The affecting of a fist Monarchy has an evil aspect
upon whatsoever is reckoned a branch of the fourth.

T. S. [Horrible blasphemers they are: grand Heriticks; and notorious
blasphemers, and that you may know w^ do charge them to be such on as just
grounds as our brethren the Scribes and Pharisees charged Christ If we should
admit that we are as like the Scribes and Pharisees as the Quakers are like
Christ, we should not suffer much, for that is to be most unlike.
, we desire you to scan over this ensuing list of their monstrous blasphemies]

W. T The generals being passed over, we must now come to the particular
charge, which this accuser has drawn up, in ^est, against himself and his
assosiates, in earnest, against the public Teachers o^ the Nation: I cannot
but exreamly loath the spirit with which it is written and exceedingly blame
the writer; and yet it grieves me whenever I think of it (and that is very
often) that one formerly reputed to be religious, should so far forget
Religion, and show so little fear of God as to strain his wit (which God has
given him for a better purpose) to frame such a play Book as this is, made up
of Fifteen fancies thereby to mock and blaspheme Gods Messengers 1 Pet. 4. 4.
(...).
: As concerning which he must be told in the first place, that persons
criminous would think themselves in very good case, if they might but draw up
their own charges, and make such a list against themselves, as themselves list.
Yet shall the several Articles of this his charge, be considered as they
proceed from himself, that sits down (let all men judge whether it be not) in
the seat of the scornful, and thus gives them forth,

T. S. [First, they blaspheme and say, that Christ is the light of the world,
and has enlightened every man that comes into the Joh. 1. 9. 8. 12.
world, and that he that follows that light shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life, which light is sufficient to teach them and guide
them unto the Father, etc.]

W. T. Here are two Scriptures joined together with more subtilty than
soundness, and upon a design rather than reason; for though there be a
similitude in words, yet the words import different things and are spoken upon
a different (...) indicat eam praesentiam quae cum ipso mundo coepit* (...)
Nempe etiam antequam mitteretur Johannes, aut ipsemet in mundum veniret Beza.
account; for which purpose I shall take it for granted, that the first
Scripture, to wit, John 1. 9. speaks of Christ's enlightening the world as God
before his coming in the flesh, or at least as well before his coming as after,
which will I suppose appear clearly two ways. 1. Because the purpose of the
Evangelist in the former part of that chapter, is to set forth Christ's
Divinity, which he does both by reason and the testimony of John Baptist. 2.
Because it is not said that [is] the true light, but that [was] If any say,
that enlightening Calvin in Mat. 23. 37. Neque hic disserit quid sacere
inceperit ex quo fuit in carne manesastatus, etc.
work is still carried on, I shall not deny it, but that will amount to no more
but this, that the thing intended there, is to advance Christ in the eminent
work of enlightening the world in the generallity, and to show that Christ is
the fountain of light to all generations and successions of men. Now I conceive
that it may with good reason be made out, that the lighting intended there is
most properly with the light of nature, and that 1. Because o^ the latitude of
the subjects enlightened, to wit, every man that comes into the world, that is,
that is born into the world Viri per nativitatem ex utero matris, as Joh. 18.
37. and 12. 46. piscat.
. 2. Because it does not appear, that the light of Gods Word and the knowledge
of Christ, has been, or is, communicated to all the world Universally, much
less to every one born into the world Individually, but rather the contrary,
Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Acts 14. 16. with Deuteronomy. 18. 14. Acts 16. 6. Diverse there
fore understand this of the light of nature Calvin Cartwright Piscator. Polanus
Syntagm. L. 6 c. 18. Cameronis Opera. p. 233. est loquutio in scripturis
usitata illud Deo tribuere quod sieri non potest nisi a Deo, licet in
omnibusnon fiat, ut Psalm. 145 14. Omnes cadentes licet in lapsibus suis multi
manent,
, and they that understand it otherwise, yet no way favor that which the
Quakers would deduce from it; for they limit the words thus, Christ lights
every man that comes into the world, that is, every man that is enlightened, he
enlightneth him: And again thus, every man that comes into the world, that is,
both Jews and Gentiles, in which sense the world is taken, 1 John 2. 2. And
yet again, every man that comes into the world, that is, that comes into the
Church, or into the world collected into a Church (as world is taken Mat. 13.
38.) though not by saving illumination, yet by saving revelation, that is, by
that Gospel-revelation that is fit to save them And therefore is called
salvation Acts 28. 28 Heb. 2. 3,
, though diverse receiving the revelation, do (through their own fault) loose
the salvation. So that which way soever the words be taken, the sense that the
Quakers fasten upon them will fall. For, understand the text of natural light,
and then [no man] has enough to save him; understand it of spiritual and
saving light and then [every man] has not enough to save him Mat. 13. 11. John
17. 25. I shall leave this text (worthy of the view of the worthiest men) to
their better consideration, observing only what suffices to the present
purpose, which is, Mr. Baxter has answered them well and warily, when he
says, All that come into the world of nature he enlightneth with the light of
nature, and all that come into into the world of grace, he enlightneth with the
light of supernatural revelation The Quakers Catechism p 7.
that the lightning there spoken of, does at least include (and that signally)
the light of Nature; the other light (I mean the light of the Word) being not
communicated to any (in any observable generallity) before the coming of
Christ, but only to the Jews, who were the only people of God, and whose
privilege it was to have the Oracles of God communicated and committed to
them. Romans 3. 2. Which I note for this purpose, to show, that this Scripture
cannot be rightly urged to conclude, that there is a light in every man
reaching unto Christ and unto salvation.

But the other scripture, to wit, John 8. 12. is of another consideration, as
being delivered by Christ as God manifested in the flesh, and appearing in the
world in person and in Gospel-preaching; and so it directly intends his
enlightening of the world, that is both Jews and Gentiles (for he does not say,
as in the other place, I am the light of every one that comes into the world)
with the saving knowledge of the Gospel, and concerning this its true, that
whosoever follows Christ enlightening them by his voice (which some do through
grace, many do not, and none can without it) shall not walk in darkness, but
have the light of eternal life, John 10. 27, 28.

Now here lies the deceit, that both scriptures are confusedly clapped together,
when the first speaks (if not of the light of Nature only; yet) of that in a
great part, and the latter speaks only of Gospel Light; particularly it lies
in applying that effect to this light spoken off in both places (as if every
one that comes into this world had a light to lead him to heaven) with belongs
properly to the light spoken of in the latter place And yet the light spoken of
in the latter place is not saving by the use of our own Free Will, but by the
grace of God.

I shall now apply my self to my Opponent, with whom my Sober Answer p. 12, 13.
Brethren have dealt providently in Querying him out of his starting hols, that
so there may be a fair fight in the open field. Were his meaning fair and
honest, and he intended no more when he says, he that follows that light;
but that he that follows Christ the great light of the world, as he directs
by his Word and Spirit should have the light of life; or that Christ Jesus the
light were sufficient to teach and guide to the Father. I say, if he meant
thus, we should not gainsay him, and the Charge in such a sense is his own, not
ours: But if his meaning be that Christ puts a sufficient light within every
man that comes into the world to guide him unto the Father and unto life. I
deny that to be true, and charge him and his company with falsehood in affirming
it, for that natural light (which is the alone light that Christ the word
communicates to all men universally) shines in so much darkness since the fall
that the darkness comprehends it not so, as to make out that from it which is
sufficient for salvation Joh. 1. 5.
. Its true, that Christ or the light [lightning] is sufficient to guide to the
Father every one that comes into the world, but not every light of Christ
[lighted] Let him show any Scripture that says, that Christ so enlightens
every man as that that light is sufficient to guide him to the Father, that
explication is his addition; nay the light that all men have, though it seem to
make them know God as God, yet it suffices not to make them know that there is
a Father, that is, to inform them that there is Father, Son and Holy Ghost, or
that there is any Gospel: Since natural light insists only on the moral Law and
covenant of works; for there cannot be more written in the heart of fallen man
without further revelation than there was in the heart of innocent man which
was only the Law of works, not the law of faith. There is nothing known of the
Gospel but by report and tidings from God Romans 10 14, 15.

But let all Christians mark the poison that lies under these lips; every man
has a light, that is, a light within him; (for so they still express it) to
help him to life and guide him to the Father. Therefore 1. No need of teaching,
or the ministry of man, that is his own inference here; therefore come no more
at Sermons. 2. Nor need of Scripture: For what necessity of a light without, if
there be a light within sufficient for the enjoyment of life, an^ for direction
to the Father, the fountain of life! Therefore throw away Scripture as a dead
letter. 3. Nor need of grace; for every man that comes into the world, whether
he have grace or no grace, has that light with him: which if he will make use
of it, it is enough for him, therefore set up free will, which Quakers (as they
conceive that are nearly acquainted with them) call a power accompanying the
light to destroy every evil as appears A faithful discovery of a treacherous
design p. 11.
in them that yields themselves to it, and watch that their vain minds draw
them not from abiding in the the pure light of Christ: Thus corruptly do they
speak, but do you Christians who have been taught better things, look with a
jealous eye upon the light within. If the light of the Word, and the light in
the heart agree together, then you may take the light in the heart as Gods
light, but if that light within, agree not with the light of Scripture without,
then look upon it as darkness, and fear it as a traveller does a dark night,
or a mendipmist, or that which they call a [foolish fire] by which so many
wander out of their way.

T. S. [And then what need of our teachings?]

W. T. By our teachings, he means Ministers teachings.

To this therefore I answer,

1. That his inference is little worth, because it is brought from a false
ground of his own, to wit, that every man has a light in him sufficient to
bring him to God, when none can come to God but by Christ, Heb. 7. 25. Nor by
Christ unless by faith, nor have any such faith ordinarily, unless by
hearing, Romans 10. 14. Nor hear without the Word of God, which every man has
not, yea, the Gentiles in general are said not to have the Law. Romans 2. 14.

2. For the thing it self, when he says, what need of teaching? I do thereupon
demand of him (not to what purpose the Quakers teach, for sure there is no need
of their teaching, yet they that make nothing of other men's teaching, make
something, yea, much of their own; but I demand) what need had Christ to send
forth his apostles, and bid them go and teach all Nations? Math. 28. 19. Or
what need had Christ to give some to be Teachers to the end of the world? Is it
not for the perfecting of the Saints till we all come to a perfect man? Ephesians. 4.
11, 12, 13. Or what need had the author to the Hebrews to say both these things
you ought to be Teachers and have need to be taught? Heb 5. 12. And yet sure
those Hebrews had as much light in them as is in every man that comes into the
world.

3. Considering there be some places of Scripture seeming to make the teaching
of men not so needful* I shall for satisfaction of weaker Christians speak a
little to those Scriptures.

The Scriptures are Jer. 31. 34. 1 John 2. 27. In regard of both which I shall
speak generally and particularly.

1. In general, and with respect to both Scriptures, I shall repeat the common
and true answer, to wit, that the Holy 1. The Scripture speaks not in those
places logically and definitively, but Rhetorically and by way of amplification.
Ghost saying, you shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and you need
not that any man teach you, does not speak strictly and absolutely, but
comparatively, to wit, so as to signify that there should not be so much need
of teaching in the time of the Gospel as formerly, and that because the Spirit
should be poured forth in a greater measure than ever was before, whereupon
knowledge should abound Isa. 11. 6. Act. 2. 17.
. If any ask why I give this interpretation? I answer, 1. Because other
Scriptures declare the teaching of men to be necessary Paul says necessity is
laid upon me 1 Cor. ^. 16. Yea, in Isa. 2. 2. Jer. 3. 15.
The Gospel Prophecy (such as that of Jeremy is) runs thus, we will go to the
Mountain of the Lord and he will teach us, to wit, by the Law coming out of
Sion, and the word from Jerusalem, by the mouths of Gods messengers, Isa. 52.
7, 8. Add to this, that Christians also are to teach and admonish one another,
Col. 3. 16. Now, that is a certain rule that no Scripture must be so
interpreted as to cross another Scripture, therefore that in Jeremy must not
be taken in its full latitude, but with due limitation. 2. Reason, and our
ordinary manner of speaking justifies the foregoing interpretation, for we say
usually of a witty child, that he will learn of himself without a Teacher, not
absolutely but in comparison with other children, that have no such prompt and
precious Spirit. 3. The Scripture it self speaks thus, Jer. 16. 14, 15. It
shall be no more said, the Lord lives that brought the children of Israel out
of Egypt, but that brought them from the Land of the North; where the Prophecy
must not be taken absolutely, as if deliverance out of Egypt should never be
mentioned more* (for we remember it and magnify the Name of God for it to this
day) but in comparison with, and to set forth the excellency of their more
glorious Redemption from Babylon; and this is the use of Scripture, to deny and
make nothing of one thing, when it would advance another, making that which is
exceeded as if it were not existent, as Psalm. 51, 16. Hos. 6. 6. so, 2 Cor. 3.
10. a thing is said to have no glory in comparison with another thing which far
excels it in glory

2. To speak more particularly, to the several Texts.

1. As to that in Jeremy, I conceive that a special thing considerable 2.
there is that the Prophet holds forth the difference 1.
between the Old Testament and New Testament dispensation. In the former they
were taught by men (other inward teaching was not so conspicuous) in the latter
by God, John 6. 45. The reason why I mention this is, because those words, You
shall teach no more every m^n his neighbor, Jer. 31 34. follow upon the
promise of the Spirits effectual inward teaching v. 33. as if he should have
said, in the New Testament the teaching of the Spirit shall be eminent, as
teaching by men was in the Old not but that God taught by his Spirit in the
Old Testament also, but yet Spirit is in special manner ascribed to the
New Testament, 2 Cor 3. 6. which may be for two reasons, 1. Because, the Spirit
of God was given in all ages, from that which Christ was to do and did in the
time of the New Testament, John 7. 39. and therefore it is ascribed to the
New Testament only, when the two Testaments that is the two dispensations are
opposed, as they are, 2 Cor 3. 6 They taught at a great disadvantage in the
Old Testament, for no teaching was effectual without the New (there was never
any merit or Spirit, but from things acted in the New Testament) nor so
effectual as in the New. The knowledge [then] was but like a drop, this [now]
is like the Sea, Heb. 2. 14. Acts 2. 17.
. 2. Because the spiritual teaching in the Old Testament was nothing, that is,
very inconsiderable in regard of the abundant teaching of the Spirit in the
New. So that the proper answer to that place in Jerremy may be this, that under
the New-Testament-dispensation they shall not teach every man his neighbor,
that is only So Tremel. and Jun. in Jer. 31. 34. Non autem [solum] decebunt
eclipsis frequens ut, Genesis 32. 28. 1 Samuel 8. 7.
, with such restraint of the accompanying Spirit of God as was in the
Old Testament, but all the people of God (however taught either by Pastors or
Neighbors) shall be truly said to know God as persons taught not so much by
men outwardly as by the Spirit inwardly, and, in regard of former times,
eminently.

2. For that other Scripture 1 John 2. 27. two answers may be given 2.


1. That being instructed so far and so long already, they needed not any man
should teach them, to wit, the Fundamentals and main things of Christianity;
for those they had learned and come to a full knowledge of.

2. They needed not any man should teach them, that is, otherwise then they had
bin taught by the Spirit that is, by the Spirit in the Word, and in the heart
Take these three together, The Spirit in the Word, the Spirit in the Ministry
of the Word, and the Spirit in the heart of a sanctified Christian, and then
it is true, that no Christian (taught by these) needs any man should teach him
(or Angel either, Gal. 1. 8.) otherwise or any other thing than the Spirit in
these three teaches.
* for it is not spoken to exclude the teaching of men, because the Apostle was
now teaching them himself, and he wishes them to abide in that which they had
heard, v. 24. to show, that teaching and hearing was then in use; but what he
speak is to arm them against seducers, v 26. by putting them in mind that
they had been so soundly and so fully taught that they needed not to seek other
Teachers to receive from them a righter or an higher Doctrine: The thing they
were to do, was, not to heaken after a new Gospel to be thereby taught, but to
abide in the old Doctrine wherein they were already instructed by the spirit in
the Word, and which was sealed up unto them by the Spirit in their hearts.

T. S 2. They say that that which may be known of God, is manifest in the
consciences of the very Heathen (God having revealed it unto them) even his
eternal power and Godhead: And that Romans 1. 19, 20. chapter 2. 15.
though they have no Law without them, yet they show the work of the Law written
in their hearts, and are a Law unto themselves.

W. T. I know not what there is in this second Article, unless it be a double
untruth 1. If he say (as he does) that the Teachers of this Nation ^ay to the
charge of Quakers the bare affirming of that which is here put down, that is
one 1.
untruth* let him produce those Ministers that blame any man for saying what
the Scripture says in both these places. But 2. If he mean (as his fellows do
and as himself seems 2
to do by his former words) that such heathen-knowledge is a sufficient guide
to the Father, or to blessedness, that is another untruth; for the Scripture
speaks truth when it says, The invisible things of God are clearly seen of
men, even of Heathens (not so as they may be saved in that way, for how could
they without the knowledge of a Christ which neither Nature, nor creature
reveals? but) So that they are without excuse Romans 1 20. To shut up this
therefore in brief; If he say that men that never heard the Word of God, have
light enough to help them to heaven, let that be his charge; for he that
believes not shall be damned, and how can they believe in him of whom they have
not heard, Mark 16. 16. Romans 10. 14.

T. S. [3. They say that Christ did not mosk nor impose an impossibility upon
his poor Lambs when he exhorted them to be perfect even as his heavenly Father
is perfect, etc] Mat. 5. 48.


W. T. I answer, 1. The Scripture exhorts us to many things, that we have made
our selves unable to do, because 1.
however we are not able, yet it is our duty to do them. And God has reason to
claim his right though fallen man has lost his power.

2. Yet we may be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, to wit, by way of
imitation, and as aspiring to perfection. We may be perfect as God, though not
as perfect as God, as 2.
the Air is light as the Sun, though not as light as the Sun: There may be,
and should be an inchoate, and a progresive, but there cannot be here an
absolute perfection; and it is blasphemy to think that we shall ever be perfect
as God is perfect, that is, an inequallity.

3. Neither does Christ intend any such thing there, as either perfection
infinite or equal with God, or perfection absolute 3.
and equal with the Word of God; it is evident by the context, and that
[therefore] which is in the verse he cites, that he speaks of a comparative
perfection in opposition to Publicanes, who love those that love them and
salute their brethren only; and thence he infers (without any such mocking as
this Fabler feigns, if there were not a plenary perfection) this serious
exhortation, Let it not suffice you to be perfect as Publicanes are perfect,
but labor to be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, that is, make him
your pattern, and aspire to that perfection that appears to be so eminently*
in him, while he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good; yea, gives his
only Son not for the comfort of his Friends, for he had none among fallen men,
but for the salvation o^ his enemies Romans 5. 10.

T. S. [And that the same Christ spoke truth, whenas he bear witness of
Nathaniel, that he was an Israelite in whom there was on guile, John 1. 47]

W. T. Christ does not say there was no sin in him, but only that there was no
guile in him, which imports not absolute perfection, but sincerity Genesis 20. 5,
6. Psalm. 66. 18.
. To have no guile in the spirit, does not prove that a man is perfect, or no
sinner, but only that he is a pardoned sinner. Psalm. 32. 2.

T. S. [As also that Paul did not design that which was impossible, when he
labored to present men perfect in Christ Jesus. Colos. 1. 28.]

W. T. The Question is not, whether men may be perfect in Christ Jesus in a way
of justification, but whether they may be perfect in themselves in a way of
sanctification; Romans 10. 4. Col. 2. 10. vide Davenant in locum.
this latter (though Ministers labor still that people may be carried on to
perfection) cannot be attained here, but is reserved to the last day 1 Cor. 1.
7, 8. 1 These. 3 13. Jude v. 24.

If the Scriptures which he quotes be rightly understood, it is his own charge
still not ours; (we shall never charge him for saying any thing the Scripture
says, in the Scripture sense) but if his, and the Quakers meaning be under
such expressions of Scripture to affirm a perfection without sin, then let
them take their charge from the Apostle, which is, that they are therein liars
1 John 1. 10. Yea, while men plead perfection and sinlesnesse, God himself
professes he will plead with them and every such person as they are, because
he says, I have not sinned. Jer. 2. 35.

Let Christians therefore go on and bear up to perfection, but never boast of
perfection: no man can do that reasonably, that either knows himself or that
knows Scripture: that is, that knows how high and perfect the rule is, and how
imperfect and defective himself is, being compared with that rule. Our duty
here is to be always perfecting 2 Cor. 1. 7,
, but it belongs to our wisdom to know that we can never be fully perfected
till the last day wherein our souls shall be among the souls of just men made
perfect. 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10, 11. Heb. 12. 23.

Mean while they may fear and tremble to think of the perfection of Quakers, as
is related by one thatbest knew them, (being once far entered into their way)
who relates this of them, that They are people bereaved of former ways and
means, wherein the Lord does work faith, knowledge and enjoyments in the hearts
of his children, and of all those former excellent things The Worlds wonder or
the Quahers blazing Star. ^. 16. 17
which were brought forth in them by the power of truth, and of the use of
those ways of walking, wherein they have manifested any love or obedience to
God: They are people b reaved of all things of this nature, and they reckon it
their happiness and their perfection so to be.

T. S. [4. Theydo not blush to say that Christ and the Apostles spoke as they
meant in the Scriptures, and therefore they deny our meanings and
interpretation as needless, etc.]

W. T. Quakers have reason to blush (if they know how) at such a consequent as
here they bring in: For it is as if one should say, God spoke as he meant by
Moses in the Law, therefore there was no need that Ezra and the Levites should
give the sense, and cause them to understand the reading, Nehem. 8.8. O^ that
God by the Prophet Isaiah spoke as he meant, and therefore the Eunuch had no
need of a guide, for the understanding See John 2. 19, 20, 21. and 16. 18. 19.
Luke 24. 27.
of his Prophecy, Acts 8 30, 31. Or that Christ spoke as he meant, and
therefore his expounding afterward was needless, Mark 4. 34. May not a man
speak as he means, and yet the expressions be so dark or doubtful to many a man
that he is not able to discern what he means? Every Author ordinarily speaks
as he means, Is there no need therefore of Commentators and Expositors to make
it plain, that the words which may be taken diversely, yet in such a place carry
such a meaning with them and not another?

T. S. [Especially because we differ among our selves in our own meanings, and
are fallible in our Interpretations we give of them, by which means a great
part of our craft and employment is like to fall to the ground.]

W T. I answer, 1. That in the interpreting of Scriptures 1. concerning the
Fundamentals of Religion, we do sufficiently agree. 1 Cor. 15. 11. Whether it
were I or they so we preach and so ye believed. 2. What ever difference there
is 2.
that proves only that the examination of Scripture is needful Acts 17. 11.
, not that the Interpretation of Scripture is needless: Is there no use of
Physicians? Had people as good be without them, because there is a difference
of judgment among them? Or is it safe therefore for diseased persons to go from
them to Mountebanks, because Physicians will acknowledge they may be deceived
or disappointed, but Mountebanks will tell them they will cure certainly and
infallibly? Yet a great difference there is between Physicians that have not,
and Ministers that have an infallible Rule; after which while they walk they
can neither be deceived nor deceive Jer. 20. 7.
. 3. His scoffing close wherein he compares Gal. 3. 1. Act. 19. 24, 25.
Ministers by whom Christ is evidently set forth, and, as it were, pictured, to
those that made silver shrines for Diana, e shows with how good a will he sits
in the seat of the scornful, and there laughs at a Ministers employment,
committed to him of God, which is to be a Messenger and an Interpretor, Job 33.
23 For the people should seek the Law at his mouth. Mal. 2. 7. Whereby is not
meant that they should seek from him the Law it self (for that they had from
God) but the Interpretation, and true meaning of the Law, which it belonged to
their office to make known.

While these men therefore deny Gods Ordinance of opening and Interpreting
difficult places of scripturely his Messengers Mal 2. 7 We charge that upon
them as a wicked error, and warn all Christians to take heed of those men that
will take away the Exposition of Scripture from them, and the knowledge of the
mind of God, by the men of God; and who (as the Papists with whom they do
much agree) may well be afraid the scriptures should be opened, and the light
of God let in, because by that way of God their own false Wares and
sophistic^ted stuff will be soon discovered.

In the close of this, I cannot omit to mention these two things,

1. That Quakers are enemies not only to the Preaching of Ministers, but to
the teaching of men: For no man can teach the things of God, but by opening the
mind of God, astis revealed in Scripture.

2. That there is one thing in these times, which (when there is much deformity
in them otherwise, yet) may be counted their proper ornament, that the devil
very much envies, and that is Scripture-Exposition. wherein good men before
this time had never so great assistance, and of which never men that went under
the name of Chistians declared such dislike.

T. S. [5. They assert, That Christ did not speak one thing and intend another,
when as he commanded men not to swear at all; but Mat. 5. 34. (...) A
Prohibition so universal, that it admits of no exception.
let their yea, be yea, and their nay, nay; whereas, we that are Orthodox, do
both swear our selves, and teach men so to do; otherwise we may happily go
without our maintenance, for want of sw^arers in our Courts of Justice, against
those Heretics that refuse to pay us Tithes.

WITH. This man and Anabaptists (for the Quakers Religion is a medley) would be
excused for accusing allO ths as sinful, because Christ says, swear not at
all: a prohibition says this Commentator, so universal, that it admits no
exception: But that you must take on his word, who though he be against
Interpret tions, and so declared himself immediately before; yet gives such an
Interpretation of that place. Now its very true, as Christ says we must not
swear at all, but that expressions Fallacia a dicto secundo quid etc.
wherein there is such an universality admit no exception, that is not true; as
will appear in other instances; All things are lawful for me, says Paul,
again and gain: 1 Cor. 10. 23. What? Without exception? Was it lawful for him
to lie, steal, commit adultery etc. No: but such large expressions are to be
limited to, and by the subject matter and the argument in hand: namely, in the
forecited places, it is to be restrained to things indifferent. In like manner
the same Apostle faith, 1 Cor. 9. 22. I am made all things to all men, not by
an unlimited and lawless compliance, as if he would be a blasphemer among
blasphemers; or among persecuting Jews a persecutor, but by an humble,
justifiable, and advantageous condescension.

We Assert also that Christ did not speak one thing, and intend another when he
said, swear not at all: but all the question is, what he intended, and that may
appear by the words subjoyned: For he did not only say, swear not at all, and
there make an end; but proceeds and shows what he means by that general
saying, while he adds; neither by Heaven nor by earth; nor by Jerusalem, nor
by the Head So James cap. 5. 12. (without any comma) (...), etc.
, that is, whereas the Scribes and Pharisees made as if the third commandment
forbad perjury only, Math. 5. 33. Our Savior shows that there is such a kind
of swearing as is not to be at all used, to wit, 1. when men swear by the
creatures, either impiously and Idolatrously, putting them in the place of God,
as if they knew whether we swear true or false, or could recompense us
accordingly; or else irreligiously and irreverently, abusing, in the profane
use of such creatures as are here enumerated, the name of God imprinted on
them, or God himself related unto in them; this is one [swear not at all] that
is impiously or profanely by the creature. 2. The other is, that none should
swear at all (by God, or creatures Therefore James says? neither by the heaven
non by the earth, nor by any other oath, to wit, by the like creatures; again,
by no oath at all in ordinary talk, so as to make our communication a swearing
communication, opposite to Yea and Nay (i. e.) to an affirming or denying
communication: without any oath.
) rashly, unadvisedly, uncertainly, that is, without a just cause, or calling,
or ordinarily, that is, in familiar communication, thus also our Savior
explains his injunction of swear not at all. Math. 5. 34. by that which he
says v. 37. but let your communication, that is, your ordinary communication
Your (...)
be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; to this purpose also the Apostle James speaks; above
all things swear not, to wit, by heaven, earth and such creatures, according to
the profane usage of those times, for it seems men then were like ungodly
people now, who think it no fault to swear, so they swear the truth, when not
only to swear falsely is a great fault, but to swear frivilously, causelessly,
and in familiar conference. The Apostle therefore adds, but let your yea, be
yea, and your nay, nay; that is, in common discourse let there be no oath at
all: But a constant and candid expressing your selves, in simple and stable
affirmations and negations. In brief, that which Christ speaks is not against
all swearing (wherein the Name of God is so much advanced in his Omniscience
and Justice) but against creature-swearing and common swearing: we may
therefore put our Savior and his Apostle together and conclude that both
Christ and James (whose words we may call a comment upon our Saviors words) do
not take away the use, but establish the reverence of an Oath, by prohibiting
the profane and trivial taking of it up in men's common talk.

Let this then be the charge (since these men will needs be charged) that they
absolutely deny the use of an Oath, when yet God commands it in the Old
Testament as a part of his Moral worship, Exodus 22. 11. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Psalm. 63.
11. Isa. 65. 16. Jer. 4. 2. And thou shall Swear etc.
laying down also special rules for the holy use of it. Jer. 4. 2. And with
that the New Testament tells us, that an Oath for confirmation is the end of
all strife. Heb. 6. 16. Let them consider therefore upon what good account they
put an absolute end to that which God himself says, puts an end to all strife.

But this man sits and laughs at this necessary and effectual assistance for
the administration of Justice, and speaks as if he would let the world know,
that he will neither swear himself, nor get any body else to swear for him to
obtain that which is duel to him; for if it be not thus, but he will seek his
own as Ministers seek their own, then he himself will be accounted one of those
Orthodox men among whom he is so loath to be numbered.

T.S. [6. They are bold to assert, that in taking Tithes for preaching, we are
true neither to the Old Covenant, nor the New: Not to the Old, because Tithes
were the maintenance peculiarly appointed to the Tribe of Levi, of which Tribe
we cannot say we are; and Deuteronomy. 14. 29.
also the Tithes of old were by command to be put into a store house, whether
the stranger, the Fatherless and widow, were to come and eat of them and be
satisfied, which we practice not; not to the New Covenant, for that Jesus
Christ has put an end to the Levitical Numb. 18. 21.
Priesthood, and consequently to all the maintenance and appurtenances there to
belonging.]

W. T. A. 1. Though we are not of the Tribe of Levi, yet we are Ministers of
the Gospel, taken from among men, 1.
and ordained for men, in things pertaining to God: So there is an agreement in
the generality of the office, and such a succession Heb. 5. 1.
and correspondency in regard of the spiritual substance of it, that
New Testament officers taken from among Gentiles are prophesied of under the
name of Priests and Levites. Isa. 66. 21. with Romans 15. 16.

2. As we are not properly of the Tribe of Levi, so we have not those Tithes
that were appropriated to that Tribe: Its 2.
true, we receive a portion of the fruits of the earth called Tithes, yet it
comes very short of that ample proportion which the Tribe of Levi had i, who
yet besides the Tenths and Fift-fruits, and the share they had in the
sacrifices, had also 48. Cities with their suburbs.

3. Tithes were not so appropriated to them, but that there was one Tithe for
the people themselves, Deuteronomy. 14. 22. 23. and another Tithe was to be laid out
for the poor, Deuteronomy. 14. 28. 29. which was called the Poor man's Tithe Godwins
Moses and Aaron lib. 6 cap. 3.
. If people were to lay out a Tithe for the use of the poor now, as they did
then, we should be as far from hindering them of it, as this writer from a just
imputation, when he speaks of not practicing that by our selves in these times,
which was to be done by the people in those times; and yet out of that we have,
the Godwin ub^ supra.
poor have an allowance, both by way of yearly pay, and of voluntary Alms.

4. For the objection of being true neither to the old nor new Covenant, I
answer, that we are true to the new Covenant 4.
(under which we stand) because though Christ has put an end to the Levitical
Priesthood, yet he has not put an end to the Church Ministry, nor to that
maintenance which is necessary for it; for there is a new Gospel-Ordinance to
establish it, to wit, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. 1 Cor. 9. 14.

5. Whereas it is objected here, that the Levitical Priesthood is gone with all
the appurtenances whereof Tithes were 5.
one; thereunto I answer, that Tithes may be considered two ways,

1. In the general nature of a maintenance of the servants of God in the
service of God] As to speak more plainly and by way of instance, in regard of
the matter now in hand; the Levites having no part nor inheritance with their
brethren Deuteronomy. 14 1.
27. and yet being Gods special Officers about the service of the Tabernacle,
wherein there time was taken up, they had need of a sufficient support for them
and theirs. In this respect Tithes belonged not to the Ceremonial but rather to
the Judicial Law; as the Levites were a part of that body of people, all of
which was to be provided for in the land of Canaan; yea, we may say to the
Moral Law of the 2 and 4. command of the first Table, as they were Gods
servants: And to the 8. command of the 2. Table as they were the servants of
the Church laboriously employed for them, according to the rule of service
prescribed in those times:

Now to apply this: In this nature we take Tithes, that is, as they serve to
make up a fit maintenance, for the support of the servants of Christ, in the
service of Christ for the people of Christ who partaking of spiritual things
from us, ought in equity to minister carnal things to us, Romans 15 27.

2. Tithes are considered under the notion of the support of, and 2.
their special application to the ceremonial service. Now as they were given,
received and made use of, to maintain and uphold that old Testament worship,
and the Priests and Levites in order to that, so they are abolished: we lay no
claim to them in that relation; but yet the Tenth being the only maintenance
designed unto us, we do with a good Conscience take it, because there is no
ceremony in the proportion* that is, in maintaining the ministry by laying out
a Tenth, but only in the old Testament application Tithes were an appurtenance
to the old ceremonial worship, but they were not [in themselves] a Ceremonial
appurtenance: for we find a tenth part given to God long before the Ceremonial
worship was instituted by the hand of Moses, Genesis 28. 22. Yea, whereas he
says, they were appropriated to the Levitical Priest hood, or to the Tribe of
Levi, we find them paid by Abraham to Melchisedeck, who was none of that
Tribe, Heb 7. 6. 9. 13. Yea, to him even Levi himself paid tithes in Abraham,
Heb. 7. 9. How then were they proper to Levi?

Let the Quakers then take their right charge which is this: that while we
challenge not Tithes by Moses law; but only a maintenance formed out by the
just and pious laws of the land in that proportion, they deny Ministers that
maintenance, and would have us labor (if we will labor) without any
livelihood, without any hire: When Paul says, I took wages, 2 Cor 11. 8

T. S [7. They call us hirelings, because we preach by Indenture first made
with the people for our maintenance, and do not go forth Luke 10. 3, 4.
(trusting our Master Christ) as his Ministers of old did, carrying neither
purse nor scrip with us: which should we practice, we are doubtful we should
be reduced to one of these two straits, to wit, either to work or beg; the
first of which we cannot do, and to do the second we are ashamed.]

W. T. I Answer, 1. There Is a great difference (but that this 1.
man will not open his eyes to see it,) between taking hire, and being an
hireling; for Christ approves the former, Luke 10. 7.
and condemns the latter, Joh. 10. 13.

2. In those places which are called Benefices, and are in the 2.
disposal of Patrons, and wherein there is a competency, there is no need of
Indentures, a maintenance being by law already settled upon every such place.

3. As for other places, wherein no maintenance is settled, 3.
the people that seek out a Minister, and know he cannot subsist to do service
to their souls without a worldly support, do freely offer such a maintenance as
they conceive may be competent, which if it appear so to be, the Minister
(after he has first found the place fit for the execution of his Ministerial
Function, and that he is thereunto lawfully called) does accept of it, and so
closes with them, to do his office among them. He lays no necessity upon them
to give him such an allowance; but they seeing the necessity of enjoying the
Ministry, are willing to give it. Hereupon happily some writings are drawn up,
that while the Preacher does his duty he may not (through the injustice or
inconstancy of the people) be defrauded of his necessary maintenance, which on
both sides is agreed upon; In this transaction, the charge which is here laid
upon Ministers (for the meaning of the man in all these charges, is to
discharge the Quakers, and to charge and deride the Ministers,) is as vain and
foolish, as the ground thereof is weak and frivolous.

Now whereas he speaks of our going forth, not trusting our master Christ, as
his Ministers of old did, etc. I Answer,

1. our master Christ does neither require us, nor allow us, to depend on, or
rather to tempt him Mat. 4. 7.
in resting on, extraordinary courses, when there be ordinary ways beforeus
wherein we may lawfully walk.

2. All may see what enemies they be to truth that are enemies to distinctions,
and will not put a difference between our Saviors 2.
extraordinary and temporary commission, upon grounds peculiar to that time and
state of Gospel affairs, and successive ordinary missions, wherein no such
charge was given, no not to the Apostles themselves. Is it a perpetual Law that
a Minister when he goes forth to preach, must carry no silver, no shoes,
Nominasse est refutasse.
Acts 21. 7.
nor yet a staff? Mat. 10. 10. Nor salute any man by the way? Luke 10. 4. Or
was it not rather such a Law as was given the Isralites at the eating of the
first Pass^ver, Exodus 12. 11. (but unobserved after) and that for the same
reason, to wit, because they were in have, and two Coats might clog them,
Salutes stay them, ordinary worldly Provisions cumber them; Neither do I deny,
that it was to teach them Faith also, but then I add that though dependence
upon God be a perpetual duty, yet we are not bound to exercise it always, in
the same way; for we find Ezra taking one course that is, an extraordinary,
and resolving against a band of Soldiers, Ezra 8. 22. and yet Nehemiah taking
another, that is, an ordinary, and accepting from the King Captains of the
Army and Horsemen to go along with him, Nehem. 2. 9. What does this show, but
that we are to rest upon God in an extraordinary way, when the Word, or honor
of God requires it, and in an ordinary way, when Providence, without any
prohibition, or just prejudice opens it; God would have the walls of Jericho
thrown down with Rams horns, to confirm their Faith in God; but in the next
onset upon Ai, his will was that they should go to work in an ordinary way,
both of power and policy, Josh. 8. 3, 4. Yet observe, that in the forecited
places, where Christ sent them forth without providing for themselves, he tells
them also that the workman is worthy of his meat, Mat. 10. 10. and the Labourer
of his hire, Luke 10. 7.

Let this man therefore, and his company take their charg, which is this; that
they call us hirelings, because we take that hire which Christ says we are
worthy of, and that (whiles we are not doubtful of provision from our master
Christ himself extraordinarily, if there were no ordinary lawful way therein
to have it,) these men show themselves desirous we should be reduced to one of
these two straits, either to work, (when another work is required 2. Tim. 2.
) or else to beg, (whereof the world might be ashamed, but especially the
Saints.)

Collect from hence what honest men these be, and how unlike that godly
Jehosaphat, who commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the
portion of the Priests and the Levites that they might be encouraged in the Law
of the Lord, 2. Chron. 31. 4.

T. S. [8. They call us greedy Dogs, because we do not walk after the example
of those whom Christ sent out to preach the Gospel, to Luke 10. 7.
wit, eat and drink such things as the people give us; but instead thereof do
force that by Law, even from the poor and needy (to wit, the Tenth of all they
get by the sweat of their brows) which by fair means we should never obtain. A
thing they say which the true Prophets and Ministers of Christ mentioned in
Scripture never practiced.

W. T. A. 1. We profess we do not (because we believe 1.
we ought not) walk after extraordinary examples, no more then they after the
example of Elijah, Luke 9. 55. Christ bad his Disciples when he sent them
forth, heal the sick, and cleanse the Lepers, and raise the dead, Math. 10. 8.
Must we undertake that work too? If extraordinaries now are to be followed,
let Saints go and sell all (as in the first times they did) and lay down the
money for the Churches use: Will this young Merchant do so? With whom we must
needs be Dogs and greedy Dogs too, because we take a maintenance, which
devout persons, and in particular, such as ought to be Nursing Fathers and
Nursing Mothers to the Church have provided for our nourishment, and which
people (that love those that labor for their souls) are willing to give us
and set before us, what have we but what Christian people have given us, or do
give us? In which respect we eat and drink what is set before us.

2. If he mean we must have nothing but from hand to mouth and from meal to
meal, how comes it to pass that he 2.
that is received into the office of a Minister must be an housekeeper? 1. Tim.
3. 4. and a lover of hospitality? Titus 1. 8. What? And have nothing to keep
house or hospitality with of his own, but only other folks meat and drink?

Object. But they say we force it.

Answ. If some better minded, set meat and drink before us, and others that are
worse affected, will come and catch it away, must we be so unthankful to those
that have set it before us, or so injurious to our selves, as to let them carry
it from us?

Object. But we force from the poor and needy the Tenth of that which they get
by the sweat of their brows.

Answ. Either the poor and needy be spared and nothing is received from them;
or else it is (as their state is) very little. That little is given to God by
being given to faithful Ministers for the support of that work of his wherein
they labor. (For I plead not for idle, or Idol-Shepheards) Its laid out also
that their souls may be provided for; and that not without good ground of hope
of prospering the beter in their outward estate, Mal. 3. 10. If this little may
not be had without Law, it is many times lost; but suppose the Minister do by
law seek his maintenance from them who get their living by the sweat of their
brows (which is the lot of all men, and of conscientious Ministers especially,
that spend and are spent for their people) I say, suppose he use force to get
those dues which (as he confesses here) by fair means he should never obtain,
is he an Oppressor that seeks his right forcibly? Or is not he unjust and
wicked that detains it, and forces him so to seek it, if ever he will come by
it? I speak of such poor as be in some measure able to pay this, as well as
their other debts. If their poverty be such as that they have nothing at all to
pay, then his outcry is as just against the Merchant o^ any Tradse-man, that
shall demand his due of them, as against the Minister.

3. Though some people cry out of oppression in the maintenance of Tyths
(because it is now the fashion so to do) yet to 3.
men that understand themselves there is no such thing: For it has been
sufficiently and openly prooved Before the honorable Committee of Parliament
when the business of Tyths was in agitation An. 1653. See the Paper entitled,
Some modest and sober Considerations about Tyths
, that the Minister has full as much right to the Tenth part as any man has
to his Nine. The Tenth is the Incumbents own, not given to him by the present
generation that lay it out, but paid as a Rentcharge on the Land, charged with
it before either Lord or Tenant had any propriety in it. None but a Minister
possessed of the place, can claim a right to it, as being freely given to the
Church.

This may suffice for answer to him and them whom Tithes trouble so much, but
the Ministry much more, by which latter trouble Christians may judge of the
former; unto which I add that many of those men that are enemies to the
Ministers Tenth, are no friends to Gods Seventh, that is, are ill observers,
yea, bold slighters of the Sabbath day; which I speak to warn Christians from
closing with them that have so lost the reverence of Religion.

But since I am drawn so far into this subject, I hope I shall not be
injurious, if I do a little detain the Reader by adjoining and offering (only)
some Arguments for this kind of maintenance by laying out the Tenth, that
being the thing that in these times is in so much question.

I say therefore,

1. That this kind and proportion of maintenance is to be 1.
reverenced, as having upon it a divine stamp, by being ordained of God in the
old Testament, without any repeal in the New. Nor is it reasonable to reckon
Tithes among Jewish and Ceremonial things, belonging to the Pedagogy of Moses,
considering that the Apostle gives this construction of that
Old-Testament-maintenance, that they who ministered holy things, who waited and
served at the Altar, were in that respect, partakers with it, and lived upon
it, 1 Cor. 9. 13. 14. whence therefore he collects, that they who preach the
Gospel, should live on the Gospel. Now it is a Ceremonial thing or is a Moral
thing, that a man that labors should live of his labor? And into that the
Apostle resolves the Altar-maintenance in the Old Church.

2. Its a way of maintenance that has been reverenced 2.
and approved in all Ages of the Church, for whence is it that Tithes have so
long stood in the Churches of Christ, and under the Government of Christian
States? But because wise and godly men, saw there was no other way so like to
fulfill the mind of God, for a competent and a convenient maintenance, as by
ordering it to be laid out in that particular way of Tithes? I offer this as an
Argument drawn from the judgment of discretion in the Christian world Its true
that in some Protestant Churches there has been an alteration, but followed
(as I have heard credibly reported) with lamentation for the straitness,
falling upon Ministers by such change of maintenance A sad complaint of this
was made by Pareus Professor in Hiedleberg to Dostor Twisse, when he was there
with him, as was reported by D. Twisse himself to a friend of his
.

3. I propound this way of maintenance as most rational, and that in diverse
respects,

1. Because equal, and though reproacht as oppressive, yet cannot be proved so,
nor possible be so, For

1. People have nine parts and do but lay forth the Tenth, 1.
and is it hard when God gives men ten parts of the Fruits of the earth that
they should give him one again? But 1.


2. Now man can be oppressed by laying that out to another 2.
which he never farmed himself, nor paid any thing for, and which no man but
the Incumbent had any right to sell him.

2. Because Suitabl?: A Ministers duty is, to be given to Hospitallity (1 Timothy
3. 2.) for which he will be best enabled 2.
by receiving something of every kind, for thereby he is furnished with those
various things, where of Hospitallity is made up This is the more confirmedly
that Scripture-Role, Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word; communicate
to him that teaches him in all good things, one and another.

3. Because this is (as a Suitable, so) a simpathizing maintenance, that is, a
Minister being to have his subsistence from 3.
the ruits of the earth, is thereby moved the more feelingly to pray for a
blessing from God upon them. If people be loosers therein, he is a looser with
them; and if they have more, he has more: Nor will it follow from hence that
Covetousness makes him pray, but ^nterest does, and Interest (if it be a just
Interest, though it be in some sense a self-Interest) ought to do it; for, is
not that it which God himself propounds as a motive to the performance of that
duty, while he says by his Prophet, Pray unto the Lord for the peace of
Babylon, for in the peace thereof shall you have peace? Jer. 29. 7. so may
Ministers pray (and that according to Gods mind) for a blessing on the fruits
of the earth, because in the increase thereof is their increase. Yea, and in
this very case, Math 3. 10. Bring your Tithes to God, is urged by an Argument
from their own Interest, to wit, that God will pour a blessing upon them.

4. Because it is a maintenance of all other freest from templation. 4.
If subsistence come from the people, then there is a great temptation to
please them; if from the State, then, if the State and higher Powers happen to
be corrupted (and who in so much danger as they) There is another and greater
temptation lies on that hand, to comply with it, I mean, with the corruptions
of it, for in all justifiable things, there ought to be a compliance. This
Argument receives strength from our daily prayer, which is, Lord lead us not
into temptation.

5. This maintenance is most easily obtained: Whilst the occasions of people
require continual layings out, but espeially 5.
at such a time as this is, when the necessities of the State force upon men
many and great payments: hence money is very hardly had; but at that time when
God (in the fruits of the earth) gives in much, its easy to part with a little
of the same kind.

6. That Promise which is proper to this kind of maintenance, 6.
and which is before mentioned, may, I doubt not be justly applied for assuring
those of gaining by it, who are conscientious in it Mal. 3. 10.

I do not in what has been said press the Jus divinum of Tyths in the new
Testament in a strict sense: yet for that much may be spoken And here (since
that I am thus Involved in this Argument) I shall not forbear to publish what
has been spoken where my self was (I thank God) an hearer; and is left in
Notes in my own custody, by one of singular worth and sincerity, now with God
Mr. Sam. Crok Pastor of Wrington in Sontersetshire. preach Ann. 1627.
. I shall transcribe it as he left it in his Notes upon Mal 3. 8. where the
Lord is giving in his Answer to that Question, Wh rein have we robbed thee?
Says, in Tyth's and Offerings, which in those days were expressly required
in the Law: But the people returning from Babylon, among other duties neglected
that. Nehem. 13. 10, 11, 12. Herein therefore says the Lord am I robbed.

Observe, The interverting of thins hallowed is a robbing of the Lord.

1. In free will offerings: Hence David says, Psalm. 56. 12. [Thy] Vows (as if
he had said, no longer M^n^,) are upon 1.
me O God. So Levit. 27. 10. 28 See the example of Ananias and Sophira Acts 5.
before sale all was the rs; after sale, the money was theirs; but being once
consecrated, no part was theirs. It was a lie against the Holy Ghost to deny
it, a robbery of God to detain it: And this was in the Church of the
New Testament, and in the case of a Free will Offering.

2. How much more in case of Legal dues established by the 2.
Law either of God, or of man for God? Un er both which this due of Tithes
falls, and under one at least, is perpetual.

Quest By what Law are Tyths now due? It seems not by Gods Law Quest. here
urged, no more than other Offerings (here joined with Tithes) unless by the
Ceremonial or Judicial Law now out of date?

Answ. Nay, even now, under Christ and the Gospel, Tithes Answ.
are due, For

1. Not only Levitical Priests received Tithes, but Melchisedech, 1.
Genesis 14. 20. In whom there was a Type of Christ's Kingdom and Priesthood, unto
whom even Abraham and, in him, Levi paid Tithes, and his Priesthood is
everlasting* Heb. 5. 6. and so Christ's, and the dues belonging to it.

2. If maintenance of Ministers by Tithes be abolisht, what other find we
established in the place thereof, and where do 2.
we find it? If no other, that remains; if it be a Ceremony, what and where
is the substance and body?

Obj. We read of free-gifts Acts 4.

Answ. That was an [Intrim] while the Church [under Persecution] could not
receive Tithes. But what provision is there for the Church in peace under
Christian Government? Surely none if not this, therefore this is in force still.

The Apostle requires a communion of all goods or in all 3.
good things Gal. 6. 6. some part therefore of all increase, Ministers are to
partake in Something for bread, for cloth, for drink for all men are nourished
and maintained by the same elements: Other settled ways of maintenance will not
afford a proportion suitable to that Rule.
, what part can be more equal than that which the Lord prescribed?

4. Wherefore the whole Christian Church (Prince and people) together with the
faith, received and established this Order of maintenance by Tithes, whereby
(call it Civil, Municiple, or Ecclesiastical Law, yet) now at least it becomes
Moral by consequence as obedience and Tribute to princes, Romans 13. The 4. thing
may be further explained by what he delivered in the preaching of the Sermon,
to wit, thus; I take the Law of Tithes (said he) to be more than Judiciary,
even Ecclesiastical which comes nearer the second Commandment than a matter of
robbery between man and man.

Its a Law therefore though not immediately promulgated from God, yet enacted
by men for God. The things are consecrated to God and the Law of those things
is consecrated to God too, therefore cannot be taken away: Do Christian
Magistrates require subjection, as to God, because it is said, give to Caesar
that which is Caesar's? And is it not a subjection to God to obey this Law for
God?




And it was the wisdom of Christians to depart no further from Jews, then in
things necessarily to be left, as Figures yielding to the body, etc. As
likewise of Protestant Churches, no further to depart from the Church of Rome,
than in those things wherein they had departed from Christ.

This may serve for ground of resolution, without disputing every objection.

Mean while it reproves those who wink at this sin, willing to persuade
themselves, that is not against conscience, which is for their profit, as

1. The Pope, the great Woolfe or thief in the Church, who 1.
purloined. Tithes by wholesale, appropriating (indeed impropriating) them to
Monks and his creatures when they were appointed for Gods service.

2. Those Reformers in the time of Henry the 8. who taking 2.
the Popes robberies from Church and Lay, that is, taking Temporal revenues
and spiritual together, had not so much care and conscience as to distinguish
and restore Tithes, but turned both to the Commonwealth. Hence many by a
miserable necessity do inherit this Robbery, and live on the Churches Revenue.

3. Every day people desire to win (as the Sea gains upon 3.
the Land) upon the ministerial due by customs and otherwise; finding sweet
the bread of deceit, insomuch that it is become a Proverb, Pinch on that side.

Thus far this wise and godly man of God, and in no wise worldly, but exceeding
liberal, as in Gods house, by instruction, so in his own, by Hospitallity.

I shall leave what I have written (which had it been published by the Author
himself would have been much more like himself) to the judgment of such who
have purposely studied this subject, and to whom God has given a larger light,
recollecting my self and resuming that which I have already spoken, that is,
that I reach not so high as to press the divine Right of Tithes in a strict
sense, but (keeping my self to my own measure) that which I insist upon is
this: That whereas there is clearly a divine Right for maintenance in the
generality, that general Law has a special influence into this particular way
of maintenance (I mean, by laying out the Tenth) inasmuch as no other way is
like to be found, in all respects so expedient, for the fulfilling of the will
of God in the maintaining of those that do the work of God as this is. I leave
it to consideration therefore, whether it be not consequentially divine; for a
maintenance is due by divine right; if so, then it is Gods mind also that it
should be made out one way or other, and if in some way then in the fittest
way. I shall add only that there are two great ordinances of God, the one of
the Ministry, the other of their maintenance; for so has the Lord ordained,
that they which Preach of the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 14.
and there is much in the latter of these for the supporting of the former, I
mean, in the supporting of the maintenance, for the supporting of the Ministry,
which is easily confirmed, while it cannot but be observed, that they that
plead against Tithes, do through the sides and upon the account of Tithes,
strike at the Ministry of England, and transfer the plea thither. The great
eye-soare is not Tithes, but the Persons concerned in the Tithes, that is, the
Ministry. The Lord keep it in the thoughts of the hearts of our Governers to
establish the Ministry, and that maintenance by which the Ministry may be best
established I shall conclude this with two Scriptures, 1. The old Prayer, Deuteronomy.
33. 11. Bless Lord his substance, and accept the work of his hands. I am loath
to write (but would have Quakers and Anti-ministerial men to read) the rest. 2.
The other Scripture is 2 Chronicles 24. 16. They buried Jehojada in the City of
David among the Kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God and
toward his House.

I doubt not but I may say truly that neither my Brethren In their Sober
Answer to this angry Epistle newly put forth. p. 18 etc.
nor my self have thus extended this Argument out of a mind to make good to
our selves or others, a personal maintenance; but we thus far plead for
maintenance, that the Ministry may be continued; and for a maintained Ministry,
that Religion may be maintained; and for the maintaining of Religion, that our
God may be detained, and may not for the forsaking of a right Religeon, forsake
us and utterly depart from us.

Its high time to return to my Epist^er, who says in the close of this
Article that the true Prophets and Ministers of of Christ mentioned in
Scripture, never practiced the procuring of any thing from people by force of
Law.

To which I answer,

1. That in the Old Testament, express Laws were made 1.
by God himself, for the maintaining of the ordinary Ministry; and such courses
were taken by godly Magistrates in good times as whereby they were ^ill
relieved Nehemiah 10. 32. to the end, and 13. 10.
, which in probability, was by complaint made for unjust detainments To wit,
either by themselves or some other godly persons that saved them that labor,
which if others would do for us, we should sit still with thanks.
.

2. As for the times of the New Testament mentioned in and Scripture, it is not
reasonable to think of requiring any thing by Law. 1. Because there was no Law
establishing a ministerial maintenance; yea, 2. it was scandalous also to go
to Law about other things wherein the present Laws might relieve them, because
it was before infidels. 1 Cor 6. etc.

Having spoken thus long of this Article, I shall return it upon this Author
and his adherents, with this charge that whilst they call the Ministers of the
Nation greedy Dogs, (such is their Religion, such is their reason, such is
their charity) because some of them have sometimes forced their right from some
poor men by law, who yet were not so poor but they might have paid it (for
if any have exacted from persons altogether disabled, I defend them not) but
they were so unjust, and froward, that they would not pay it otherwise, let
them consider how they will answer this at that great day, when Christ shall
come to determine who be greedy dogs, and who be faithful shepherds, and how
he will take it to have all branded because some may be blamed.

T. S. [9. They call us hypocrites, pretending these as the reasons. 1. Because
we Preach the things we practice not: accusing us for preaching against Pride
and yet living in it: against covetousnes, and yet being greedy of filthy
Lucre. etc.]

W. T. A. But how does it appear that they live in pride or are greedy of
filthy lucre? why this man says so, and are not strong affirmations great
proofs? especial when they be in the mouth of an adversary? yet in regard of
this or the like things before or after, I do not undertake to plead for every
public teacher in the Nation. Let this accuser come forth, and speak his
mind plainly; if what he produces against the public teachers be by him
meant of all the public teachers in the Nation its an absolute falsehood: if
only of a corrupt company among them, its an absolute folly; as if a man should
write an epistle to all the merchants and Tradesmen in the Nation, and say, you
couseners and cheaters, and Extortioners etc. because some or many of them be
such: were not this a madness?

Besides that he may know that a man's points are sooner taken from his knees,
(yet exercise in that or in any such kind, as preach against) then pride from
its heart, as this his Epistle shows.

But we be hypocrites again.

T. S. 2. Because often times in the close of our Sermons we tell the people we
should have proceeded further if time had not prevented us when as indeed we
had no more to say.

W. T. A. Here malice is witty, and the man thinks he has hitt us home: but
how does he know that such Ministers as now and then say so, had no more to
say? who made him a window into preacher hearts? and does he judge so of other
men because his conscience tells him it was so with him when be was a public
preacher? or does he think it so hard for one that uses to preach, when the
time is past (as he supposes it to be.) To add yet something more if it were
convenient to add it? or has not he heard that they who say so, preach much
longer at some other times? and therefore (for any thing he knows might be
provided to say more at that time? But whether that he says be true or no, yet
it seems it was one of the choicest aspersions that he could think of, to a
base the ministry withal, and therefore (at all adventures,) down it must.

But if this be not strong enough, he will have a threefold cord, to see
whether that will hold us and represent us to the world under the notion of
Hypocrites.

T. S. 3. Because in our prayers before sermon we frequently beg of God, that
he would put words into our mouths, and teach us what to say; where as even
then, we have our sermon notes, either in our pockets, or our bibles, or the
platform of our discourse prepared in our heads.

W. T. A. I Answer,

1. We are not ashamed to confess (but should be ashamed if it were otherwise)
that we have Notes, or at least the platform 1.
of our discourse prepared in our heads and hearts, before we preach; we dare
not presume as some extemporary teachers and Enthusiasts do, who come before
people with such crudities and confused discourses, that awise man cannot hear
them without indignation, nor a godly man without grief, nor ungodly men and
common hearers without laughter.

2. Notwithstanding this we beg of God what to say, and how to say it, not only
because we do not tie our selves to 2.
words, or precisely to our premediated matter, but also because we know that
whatsoever we provide, God has an hand in the delivery of it. Pro. 16. 1.
Though we be weakly prepared, he can and often does, supply us; though we be
never so well prepared, be can confound us. If a man be never so Intelligent,
or never so Eloquent a Preacher, yet God can remove away the speech from the
trusty, and take away the understanding of the aged. Job. 12. 20. We do not
therefore pray to God only for what we want, but for what we have, which we
hold, or loose, according as God stands by us in our work, or leaves us.

Now let us judge how just this charge of Hypocrisy is, and withal whether it
may not be justly retorted upon him by whom it is published, who (if you look
to the bottom of this Epistle) subscribes himself a cordial lover of our
souls, when he shows himself by his bitter invectives, a cordial hater of our
Ministry, in the exercise whereof we save our own souls, and the souls of
those that hear us. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Withal he names himself a Servant of Jesus
Christ, who witnessed a good confession, and yet makes it his work (and his
play too) to reproach his laborious servants and faithful witnesses in the
Ministry.

That an accute Athiest upon the Ale-bench should babble out such things as
these be, or a learned good fellow please himself with such foolish talking and
jesting (when the Pot and the Pipe have whetted his wits) were not to be
wondered at, but that a man that prosesseth the fear of God himself, and that
has been so often in the Pulpit as if he meant to teach it others, should speak
after this rate, this is too too bad; the Lord make him and his miserable
companions better.

T. S. [10. They call us Thieves and Robbers, because we spend six days in
the week, to gather together the words of the Prophets and Apostles, the words
of Jerome, Augustine, Calvin, Luther, etc. and then come forth on the first day
and speak to the people, saying, Hearken to the word of the Lord, when as
indeed we received it not from the Lord, but from the writings of other men
with whom we converse.]

W. T. A. We acknowledge that we do spend our time to 1.
gather together the words of the Prophets and Apostles (with their right
meaning) that accordingly we may speak to the people, and then we say, hearken
to the word of the Lord, for, are not the words of the Prophets and Apostles
the word of the Lord? Luke 1. 70. 1 Pet. 1. 11. 1 These. 2. 13
And if they be so, are we Thieves because we receive from the Lord that which
we deliver to his people? 1 Cor 11. 23. These be strange things: But it seems
by their writings See the faithful discovery of a treacherous design Page 33.
that they make all Thieves and stealers of the word that quote Scripture, if
that which they deliver to others be not delivered to them by immediate
inspiration.

2. For the words of Jerome, Augustine, Calvin, Luther, I answer, that we are
not such contemners of the gifts and 2.
graces which God bestowed on them, for the edification of his Church as to
make no use of them. He that scorns to make use of the labors of man for his
improvement in the things of God, shows himself a proud and unthankful man;
yet we do not ground any point of Religion upon the words of the most eminent
men, but we make use of their light, and that judgment of discretion that was
in their time, for our better assistance in a right understanding of the mind
and way of God.

3. When we produce the words of Jerome and Austin, we do not say, Hearken to
the word of the Lord. Its true, we say 3.
so before the Sermon, because we take a Text out of the Word of God, and to
that, we bid them hearken,, as also to all those things which our purpose is to
deliver to them out of the Word of God afterward: But if there be occasion to
make use of humane Authors, (as there is seldom in Country Congregations) we
offer to the hearers what we receive from them only as the considerabl^ things
of men, not as the infallible things of God; nor do we impose them upon the
consciences of any, as we do the Word and worship of God.

But whereas it is not enough with this man, that he makes us Hirelings, and
greedy dogs, and Hypocrites, but he must make us Thieves and Robbers too; I
shall return him his charge, and desire him to reflect upon himself and his
company, that cry after us as men do after a Thief, and to enquire whether they
may not more justly be accounted such themselves, that strive to steal away the
good names of others, and put the name of Thieves upon them, by a foolish and
false fame. For as for the first part of his accusation, it is foolish, to wit,
that we gather from Prophets and Apostles, and then say hearken to the Word of
the Lord, for so we ought to do; and as for the latter, it is false; to wit, that
we say, Hearken to the Word of the Lord, when we bring the writings of men, for
that (unless he mean it in some sophistical sense) we do not.

T. S. [11. They have the confidence to advise us (see the boldness of these
deceivers) to preach no more to the people, than the Lord has spoken to us,
and then we our selves witness the life and power of within our selves, which
if practiced, would be of sad consequence to us; for that whereas most of us
are engaged by contract to preach weekly, some once, some twice, some three
times; if we should preach no more, then we witness the life and power of,
either constant silence, or rare speaking would be found in our Congregations;
and then what our sheep would do for shepherds, or what we shepherds should
do for hire, let all that are in Authority judge.]

W. T. A. This I let pass, as seeming to have nothing in it; but a calumny
coucht under a counsel and pretended advice, though perhaps there be a device
in it also, and some deeper deceit; for when they say, speak no more than you
have experience see a faithful discovery of a treacherous design. p. 28.
of, then you live in; they who have had personal discourses with them, find
from thence ground to declare, 1. That this is to silence you from ever
mentioning the Histories and Prophecies of the Scripture, as Creation, coming
of Christ into the world, Day of Judgment, Resurrection of the body, which
being past, or to come, we can have no present experience of. Or 2. that by
this means all the Scripture must be construed as metaphorical, in an
Allegory; the Creation, Adam, Eve, Wilderness, Canaan, Kings, Prophets, yea,
Christ himself, his Flesh, Blood, Cross, Jerusalem, Herod, Pilate, Churches,
Elders, Autichrist (and what not?) to be fulfilled in the Allegorical
construction of particular experiences.

If there be no such mystery of Iniquity as this in his mind; and again, if he
do not intend in these words, a living up to our Doctrine in full perfection,
(which we dare not pretend unto) then let him know, that the desire an I
endeavor of the public Teachers in England is, to express both within and
without themselves, the life and power of that they preach to others, wherein
what their seize are, let those witness among whom they are best known,
and say whether they be not such, as to prove this part of his charge, a false
accusation,

T. S. 12. [They say that the mind of God is not to be known by study in an
University, but by revelation of the Spirit, who alone knows his mind. 1
Cor. 2. 11, 12, etc.]

W. T. A. If he mean the mind of God cannot be known, savingly by nature or by
humane learning, that we say too, and hold against the Quakers, that God does
not so enlighten every one that comes into the world, as to know the mind of
God in that sense: But if he mean, it cannot be known notionally, that is, so
as to understand in many points the truth of Scripture-Doctrine, that we deny
Scribes and Pharisees may fit in Moses chair and teach those truths that other
men ought to hear Mat. 23 2 and therefore they may know them themselves. Unto
this I add, that humane Learning (considered in it self) will not acquaint us
with the mind of God, but yet being sanctified, its a great Assistant for that
end.

T S. [And that Pa^l and Peter, and other the Ministers of Jesus Christ in
Scripture, did not serve an apprentiship in any University to ^arn the Trade of
Preaching; but did preach that Gospel which Christ by his Spirit revealed in
them, and therefore they 1 Cor. 2. 10. Galar. 1. 16
charge us to be Ministers of the Letter only, because we preach the Saints
words, but do no^ witness their condition.]

W. T. A Paul and Peter were instructed by immediate revelation, which we are
not so presumptuous as to expect, A. vid. Amesium in 2 Pet 11. de differentia
Apostolo^u^ and ministrorum ordinar.
, or to m^^e the condition of the Apostles our condition; if we must do all
that Paul and Peter did, then we must go up and down and not tie our selves to
a particular place; and then, what need is there of that reading, study,
meditation, which Paul presses upon Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15. 2 Timothy 2.
15.

Yet did not the Apostles preach only by revelation of the Spirit within them,
but according to that which the Spirit in Scripture revealed to them, Acts 26.
22. by which they were willing to have their doctrine examined Acts 11. 17.

As for the rude illiterate scoff of an Apprentiship, what conscience this
Merchant makes to instruct his Family in a right Religion, and to confirm them
in piety by Family Prayer, may well be suspected. But you may be sure he is an
Apprentice-taker, and so is skild in this language, and accordingly must thus
speak, but it is because he has a mind to be abusive, for otherwise he has
looked so much upon the University (I think) as to know that scholars do not
live there in the nature of Apprentices, but study the liberal Arts in a free
and ingenious way. But his wantonness (I must say his profaneness also) rises
higher when he speaks with all contempt of preaching, as if it were some common
Trade, when it is that glorious calling wherein the Son of God spent his time
when he was here upon earth, and which is the way of God in which he is well
pleased to save those that believe 1 Cor. 1. 21. That we are Ministers of the
letter only, is his saying only, but he has a great reason for it, to wit,
because we preach the Saints words, but do not witness the Saints condition
And what is this witnessing the Saints condition? that is a part of their
gibberrish who devising a new Religion, had need devise a new uncouth language.
Let him speak plainly, and as men use to speak, that are not afraid to be
understood. If he means by witnessing their condition, to give witness to the
truth of God, that they still do, and desire more and more to do by their
Doctrine, and (whatsoever he says to the contrary) by their conversation; yea,
many of them have formerly sealed it with their blood, and many more are ready
by Gods assistance to do it, when God shall call them to it, which may be
quickly; for we are not so secure (whatsoever heights his petulant Pen puts
upon us) as not to think of suffering in a way of cruelty by those by whom we
suffer, so much in a way of calumny.

T. S. 13. Their blasphemies do not end here, but they proceeded on, and
declare both to us and our people, that all our tai^in^ and profession of
Christ, his death, rresurection, and righteousness in the notion (though never
so orthodox) shall nothing avail us, or them, unless we witness the life of
Jesus in us, and his eternal power raising us up to newness of life.

W. T. A. That the profession of Christ in the notion will nothing avail
Ministers (as to their salvation) without the power and life of religion, we
easily grant, and therefore (in that regard) his charge is ground less, and
has nothing in it, but only an oblique and untrue taxing of the Ministry of
this Nation, as if there were nothing of the life of Jesus in the public
Teachers thereof.

But that Orthodox teaching will nothing avail others. When the Teachers
themselves are bad, let him prove, and disprove therein our Savior himself.
Math. 23. 2, 3.

T. S. 14 They do not spare to publish it as truth (and practice accordingly)
that he that respects persons does commit sin, and therefore Jam. 2 9.
it is (Heretics as they are) that they will no sooner bow down to the rich
man wearing the gold-ring and the goodly apparel, then to the poor man
that is clad with vile raiment: of which, if permitted (O you Rulers and
Magistrates) this will be the sad consequence that you will neither be styled
honorable nor worshipful; nor we be called by the well-pleasing Titles, of
Doctors, and Divines.

W. T. A. Let such uncivil men prove that Christ was a respecter of persons in
his concession to Nicodemus, that he was a Master in Israel; or the spirit of
God in Luke, when he calls Gamaliel a Doctor of the law. Act. 5. 34. And some
women honorable women. chap. 17. 12. or Paul when he says, most noble Festus,
chap. 26. 25. This (quandam) Teacher of others might have learned himself by
this time, that though it be a great fault to respect men impiously, so as
toderogate from God, 1 Samuel 2. 29.
or to respect men partially, with the contempt of poor christians, (wherefore
James speaks, chap. 2, 1, 2.) yet it is no fault to give men Titles of
distinction (as to call some noblemen, others Knights, others Gentlemen, so
some Divines, other lawyers) or to give them those titles of respect and
dignity that belong to them in their places; but a duty rather; for we must
give honor unto them to whom honor belongs, Romans 12. 7.

T. S. Lastly, they do avouch it to be proper (as in Hebrew, Greek and Latin,
so in English) to say Thou and Thee to any single person: Heb. (...) Thou. Gr.
(...) thou La. Tu thou
concluding (see what is to be illiterate) that because Adam, Abraham Moses and
we our selves do say thou, and thee, to the great God that made the world,
therefore the same expressions may be used to mortal men; and though we do
esteem the impropriety proper for great men and rich men, to say thou and
thee, to a poor man, and a mean man; yet we cannot but condemn the same
(though proper) for a poor man or a mean man, to say thou and thee to a great
man, and a rich man.

W. T. A. 1. It is not proper, nor possible, to say thee or thou to any man, in
Hebrew, Greek or Latin; for neither Hebrew, Greek, nor Latin, have any such
words.

2. It Is true that the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin pronounes are translated
[thou] in our English tongue when a single person is spoken too. Nor is there
any irreverence in speaking so in our prayers to the great God, because in our
English translation of Scripture, Scripture-prayers are so expressed, and the
use of all the people of God in England has so far obtained, that there is no
abatement of the honor of God in it. But on the other side, such is and has
been the constant manner of speaking in this Nation, that it is thereby become
offensive to say thou and thee to our superiors, and when such offense, may be
avoided by another way of speaking which (according to Loquendum ut vulgus.
the usage of our English Tongue) is as proper as that, the offense ought to be
avoided; for Scripture says, Give no offense, 1 Cor. 10. 32. To wit, if it may
lawful, fairly, and especially easily, be prevented, the old rules is to
speak as people commonly and ordinarily speak. Now custom has made it to be
the civility of our language to testify our respect by saying you, and
disrespect by saying thou, to any superior or equal (unless it be in a way of
familiarity)

3. It Is true also that when a child learn his Accidence he must say Ego, I,
Ille, He, Tu, Thou. But must he therefore go to his Father and say O Thou
Father, give me this or that?

What a strange thing is this to make rudeness a matter of religion? as if a
man could not be holy, unless he be humorous, nor a perfect Christian, (as
perfection is attainable) unless he be a perfect Clown.

T. S. [These are the horrid Blasphemies, and damnable Doctrines, against the
Abettors of which, you do at this day discharge so much passion, and rage,
both from Press and pulpit; calling to the civil Powers for Bonds and
Prisons; nay fire and faggot against all those, who (fearing the Lord) do
fear to call darkness light, and light darkness. But stop a little and consider,
what you are doing whilst you are upon the full carrere posting to Damascus
upon Saul's bloody errand. Will you not out of your own mouths be condemned
before him that cannot err in judgment? Do you fulfill or violate that Royal
Law of Christ written in your hearts, to do unto other, as you would they
should do unto you? are not you as notable heretics in the esteem of those
whose blood you thirst after as they are in yours? and would you esteem it
just that (were the power in their hands) they should mete the same measure
unto you?

W. T. A. This studious Accuser of those Elders against whom no accusation is
to be received, but before 2. or 3 witnesses. 1 Timothy 5. 19. Thinks (its like)
he has acquainted himself and cleared his company very well in the forenamed
list of 15. (as he scoffingly calls them) Blasphemies, (which are for the most
part, truly and in good earnest such in the Apostles sense 1 Pet. 4. 4.) And
yet he is not quiet* but proceeds to blaspheme further, and to condemn the
public Teachers of this Nation, not of any petty crime, but as posting on
Readiness bloody errand and thirsting after blood.

What he says is very high; but how vain is his Religion, who bridles his
tongue no better then to fasten upon us those horrid things, which being
applied to all the public teachers in this Nation (to all whom he writes) are
just as true as the like accusation of Shimei was when it was applied to David.
2 Samuel 16. 7, 8.

But let him and his accomplices consider, whether their own mouths, which are
so full of the cursings of ministers, and their bawling Books (that are so
full of swords) do not sufficiently signify that it is far more probable
that they will shedd our blood (if God should once give them power) then true
that we desire theirs. Our desire and prayer is, that God would open their eyes
to see the error of their way, and turn them from their by paths that they
may not perish in them, wherein we believe we shall prevail for those among
them that belong to God.

T. S. [If you shall despise it as mine, yet accept of it as the counsel of
Gamaliel, that sober Pharisees, take heed to your selves, what you intend to do
as touching the innocent whom you now so fiercely pursue, lest happily you be
found even to fight against God. etc. And now what is in all the world that I
(who am become your enemy because I tell you the truth) do wish unto you
Teachers? Even this, that the gracious God would grant you to witness the same
change that Saul did, that the same hand of love that struck him to the earth,
would likewise bring you down from all your high thoughts, and lofty
imaginations, to stoop to the teachings of that Jesus whom you now persecute,
that you may come to witness all the wisdom of this world to be foolishness
with God, and may be content to become fools, that you may be wise. That you
may cry out (from the same root of life) with the same Saul, Lord what would
thou have us to do? That you may not in words only, but in truth, come to
witness all your excellency but loss, and your glory but as dung, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ: And finally, that you may be made
able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height, and to know the love of Christ that passes knowledge: All which
are the hearts desires of him for you, who is

A cordial Lover of all your Souls Pilate.


W. T. A. In these last lines of his Epistle he returns to his exhortations
and supplications; wherein (having expressed his detestation of us by saying the
worst he can, and that with all the wit he has, against us) he would be
thought to wish us well; if he do so, its the better for himself, and we would
not be behind with him that way. However good and well-grounded admonitions we
shall not refuse to observe, though coming out of the mouth of an enemy; not an
enemy as he says, because he tells us the truth, but because he tells (let him
search whether it be not out of an invenomed spirit against us) so many
untruths of us, though he speak some truth to us.

I desire to think the best, Charity is kind 1 Cor. 13. 4. but yet it is not
blind: Nor can less be said (I think) concerning the best he says (by any
man that will not shut his eyes) but that his dealing therein is like the old
management of the business of Jobs Friends with their unjustly condemned Job.
They were grave and wise men, gave him very good counsel, told him how much
comfort he might expect from God, but all this was, If he would be an honest
man, when as he was one already, yea, better than themselves (as appears by
Gods commendation of him in the beginning of the Book chap. 1. 8. he was a None
such) and righter than they in the cause he maintained, as appears by Gods
approbation of him and condemnation of his Friends in the latter end of the
Book chap. 42. 7, 8. Just so it is here, for though this man come as short of
these men's wisdom as he does of their years, and indeed be no way worthy to be
compared with them, yet he comes full up to their mistakes. If we Ministers
would take his counsel and become honest men, (who are a company of greedy
Dogs, and Hypocrites, and Thieves, and Robbers,) then it would be well with us;
but (though we detest the carriage of any of our calling, that shall be found
guilty of those evils and abominations, yet) the public Teachers of this
Nation can speak with a good conscience (yea, and ought to speak) in that
language of abused Job, God forbid that we should justify him: Till we dye we
will not remove our integrity from us; our righteousness we hold fast and will
not let it go; our hearts shall not reproach us so long as we live: We desire
to be much humbled Job 27. 5. 6.
for our miscarriages, and know what need we have of a Savior; but yet can
confidently refer our selves for the trial of our cause and carriage as it
stands here, to that righteous God and supreme Judge, who will thoroughly plead
the cause of Zion (ever shot at through the sides of Ministers) and will one
day disquiet the Inhabitants of Babylon, and all those Instruments of theirs
that fight against them and him Jer. 50 33. 34.

As for his cordial love which he does not show, but say, he has toward our
souls, my return thereunto (for my own part) shall be only this, that
whatsoever I have spoken in dislike of, and opposition to this scandalous
Epistle yet I may truly say it has deeply affected my heart, to think of the
sad condition of these poor and miserable men (whom we call Quakers, because we
know not how otherwise to distinguish them, or to converse with them) whereunto
I am moved by these two reasons.

1. Because they are (I do not say, nor do I mean, such bitter enemies to us)
but such adversaries to the eternal salvation of their own souls; as many
other ways, so especially whilst they bring not the light within them to Gods
light, which is contained in Scripture, but Gods Scripture Light to that light
which they pretend to be in their hearts; which is the ready way to their
un^oing; for he that trusts in his own heart is a fool, and so runs upon his
own ruin and perdition, Prove. 28. 26. and they are the Scriptures, and the
Scriptures only that make us wise unto salvation 2 Timothy 3. 15.
; unto which I may add their other pernicious error of pl^cing Justification
and salvation in a Righteousness within, and not in Christ and his
satisfaction without

2. Another reason is, because these poor creatures are left (I mean the
princip^l of them) by those generally that have written most tenderly to them,
and that not without great and sad reason, as men whom it is to no purpose to
speak to; they are left (whose heart would not grieve to think of it?) as men
irrevocably lost, like those men of whom the Scripture says, who has
forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come? they are possessed with such
opposite principles as render them Luke 3. 7.
incapable of all those warnings that should work upon them and be effectual in
them, to free them from the wrath to come; but Turn thou them o Lord, and they
shall be turned. It is impossible for all men and means to save such hardened
souls from death, but none have so erred from the truth, but that a God can
convert them. Lord, what thou would have us to do, and what it is impossible
for us to do, be pleased to do thy self to whom all things are possible: We
cannot but thou can, save even such souls from death, and so cover a
multitude of sins Jam. 5. 19, 20. what is it that Omnipotency cannot do? What
is it that Free Grace will not do? So work in them, so work for them, that in
the Ages to come, the exceeding 'riches of grace may be manifested and
magnified; and a probatum may be put upon that glorious truth, that even in
regard of such grace raigns Ephesians. 2. 7.
through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord Romans 5. 21.

If my style seem to any so severe as to call in question the reality of such
compassions and supplications, to that I have spoken in my Epistle Tit. 1. 13.
Rebuke sharply, praecisely, severe.
, and shall add this further, that my spirit has been much humbled within me
(let it not be accounted fondness to say so much) and not a little contained
and immoderated by what providence pointed me to, while I was about this work
in Mr. Beza's Argument on Psalm. 143. wherein he tells us that that Psalm
declares what moderation we should use, when we are oppressed with slanders;
for though he that is un^ustly accused (says he) be not guilty of that crime
in his own conscience* as it appears that David was banished without all
deserving as a seditious person, and g^^lty of high treason (which causes him
both in o^he^ places and in this psalm, b^l^ly to appeal unto God, tru^^ing in
his innocence) notwithstanding whereas the conscience before ^he judgment s^a^
of God does abundantly reprove them also, which are most innocent before men,
it must needs be that the conscience here sustain a double prison, both
confessing i^ self (...), and also s^^ting it self as innocent before the same
Judgment seat, and David does his thing most manifestly in this Psalm* addin^
a en^ence as notable as any is any where in the holy Scriptures* whereby all
and every man without exception (besides him (...) w^o was ^o^ne pure without
all spo^) being considered in themselves, are condemned of injury done to
others, and therefore wo^hy of ^undry punishments. Thus ^ar that holy and
humble man.

And shall ^t not be our testimony that we the Ministers of Christ, are not
such ^s we are made to be, because we freely acknowledge our selves worthy to
be made such? I say worthy, in regard of our guilt before our God, though I
doubt not but such charges as these (as they come from those that charge us)
shall be cast out of the ^ourt of heaven. Yea, and that we shall receive
through Jesus Christ for all those things wherein our consciences do accuse us,
and wherewith that God that is greater th^n our consciences, is able to charge
us (while we accuse our selves and fly to free grace) an absolving sentence.

Yet sure this sends us (for I shall not fear to conjoyn my dear Brethren in
this concession) and that very feelingly to a more special scruting, and severe
search, into our own hearts and ways, to find out if it may be, whence it
may arise in true consideration, that God should permit so much scorn to be
cast upon us. He spoke like a Philosopher that says, What evil have I done,
that bad men speak well of me. but he speaks like a Christian an I like a
Divine, that says, what evil have I done, that bad men speak evil of me? I
k^^w no^ why Honest Phocion applauded once by the people, who never used to
like him, wondered a^ it, and said to one n^er him, Ecquid imprudenti hod^e
mihi excidit mali Have I let fall any ill passage that the people are so
pleased.
they should be so offended, but there is reason enough, whether I know it or
no, why God should be displeased, and by their most unjust, manage his most
just displeasure. Surely it is meet to be laid unto God (from the rod of men,
and that scourge of their tongues, which is ever in the h^nd of God) I will not
offend any more, that which I s^e not, teach thou me, if I have done iniquiry.
I will do no more Job* 34. 31, 32.

Having thus far made bold with my Reverend Brethren (yet speaking all to my
self most) I may not leave without adding a few words concerning those of the
Ministry, who may be justly charged with some or many of these enormous things,
that are heaped up in this Epistle: Yea, from whom such a persions have risen
upon the whole company and calling of public Teachers I hope they will give me
leave without (...) contempt, in a fair and loving, but yet serious and (...)
way, to impart my self unto them.

1. Then for the (...) of Teaching, though this Epistle be not such a friend to
public teaching, as to tax us for neglect that way* yet that no doubt, is a
Ministers principal task, and to be loo^^ ^^on as a matter of a solute
necessity 1 Cor 9 17. The ^all to Preaching reaches as high as heaven and the
woe for not Preaching goes as low as hell, and will be found so to do, when
Christ shall come to require an account of that charge of Preaching the Word,
and being instant in season and out of season 2 Timothy 4 1* 2. but that which it
concerns me more especially to intimate, is this, that whereas much is here
spoken, concerning maintenance, they have no cause to lay hol^ on the wages,
that have no care to do the work of the Ministry for it is the Labourer, no the
^oyterer that is worthy of his hire. I shall pas^e this with Gregory's censure
Fructus ^bsque pecun^a comedit qui Ecclesiastica commoda prin^ pit sed
ministerium popul ^non im^en ^it. Quid ad haec nos Pasto Moral. in Job. l 22.
cap. 23.
res dicimus qui officiu^ quidem praeconis susipimus, ^ed alimenta Eccesiastica
muti manducamus; exigimus quod nostro debitur corpori. sed non impedimus quod
subjectorum debetur cordi.

2. That which there is more cause to speak to here, is this, that if any that
are of this great Calling shall (in these days wherein men are more pressed to
take pains) preach frequently and live desolutely, they have to consider, that
they are under our Saviors black character of those Scribes and Pharisees (with
whom this indiscreet and un-distinguishing Epistle shuffles us all up) and
that is this, they say and do not, Mat. 23. 3. like Kine (its an homly
similitude but which comes home) that give a good meal (and that perhaps of
sincere milk) and then throw it all down with their foot; or like children that
write a fair copy, and then blot it out with their slieve. How dishonorable a
thing is this, and how uncomfortable? For here I remember what is storied of
Origin, who being drawn in by a device (as Epiphanius reports) to offer
Frankinsense Haeres. 64.
to the Heathen gods, he left the place where he did it, which was Alexandria,
being not able to endure the infamy that succeeded such a fact, and came to
Jerusalem, where when they constrained him to teach, he rose up at length, and
read this sentence of the 50. Psalm, But unto the wicked says God, what have
thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my covenant into
thy mouth? And when he had done, laid asi^e the Book and fell a weeping and
wailing, and the whole company with him. And sure, if ever God awaken a
mis-living Ministers conscience, an evil carriage will be a weeping business,
and the 50. Psalm to him will be like the 51 to David.

3. That which I have most cause to mention, and which has moved me to speak
of all the rest, is, that this Book of reproaches takes its rise and the little
strength it has, from the loose and unjustifiable carriage of diverse persons
in the ministerial Calling. Now what a lamentable thing is this, that Ministers
of the Word should so live, as to dishonor both the Word and the Ministry It
is but reason that they suffer me to speak, by whom we all suffer Thou that
teach another teach thou not thy self? Thou whose business it is to
preach the Law and Word of God, by breaking the Law, dishonourest thou God?
Romans 2.
For the Name of God (even that Name of his which is stamped on his ordinances
and Ministers) is blasphemed among the Quakers and Anti ministerial men through
you. Is it nothing to you, that you make the offerings, the ordinances of God,
the ordinances of the Ministry to be abhorred? Will not the account be sad at
the last day, that you have not only 1 Samuel 2. 17.
lived scandalously your selves, but also brought a scandal and all approby on
all those of the same calling, that have lived better? O think seriously and
seasonably of that heart-smiting aggravation and the sheath-lesse sword that
followed it. By thy sin thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme. A good Minister is the Ornament of the Ministry, 2 Samuel 12.
14. 2 Cor. 8. 23
yea, the glory of Christ; but a bad one, the blot and the blemish, who has
therefore three heavy things to be acountable for, a bad carriage, the bad
carriage of a Minister and making the Ministry it self despicable by so bad a
carriage. Let this (if any thing hasten an amendment for the preventing of an
accumulated Judgment: And for that reason I have written thus much, and not as
assuming any thing to my self over others of the same calling, or as loving the
faults of any; were it not that there is such a cause, and by occasion of this
Book, such a call.

Its high time for me to draw to a conclusion, wherein I shall return to him
with whom I have to do, and to those of the same way, concerning whom myself,
and I doubt not to say, the public and pious Teachers of this Nation, are
willing and ready to pray that they do no evil, not that we should appear
approved, but that they should do that which is honest, though we be as
Reprobates, and yet I trust they shall know that we are not Reprobates 2 Cor.
23. 6, 7.

But I had cause notwithstanding thus to apply my self to this first and
foulest part of our Adversaries Book, out of a sense of what David sometime
said 1 Samuel 22. 22.
, I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy Fathers House; to wit,
fourscore and five Persons of the Lords Priests, My love to my Brethren will
not suffer me to do less than to reflect upon my self (when I read these most
abusive things) as the Person, through whose occasion the ^e^r servants of God
have been thus vilified; and though the railings of injudicious and uncivil men
be of little value upon right consideration, (save only to lay upon themselves
a fearful guilt) yet because diverse weak Christians, who are not so well able
to see into the subtilties of Deceivers, and to find out the depths of Satan
in this design, may be induced to a less estimation of public Preachers and
Preaching, which are Gods principal ordinary way to the salvation of their
souls. I have taken the more pains to afford them the help of this Discovery,
that so the ordinance of the Ministry may not have less efficacy upon their
souls, by having less respect in their hearts.

Now if God shall be pleased to bless any thing that has been spoken, so as
to make it prevalent for the confirming of those who have yet kept the Faith,
and the reducing of those who are not far gone, or not long gone from the right
way, I shall humbly bless God for it, and doubt not but they will do so also;
however I shall leave all to that all-working God, who when Paul plants, and
Apollo waters, does himself alone give the increase, and add (through his good
Spirit, which I humbly beg for that end) an effectual operation.

FINIS.

