THE Whole Duty OF MAN Epitomized FOR THE Benefit of the POOR. With Select
Prayers suited to every Partition.

^y Edm. Stacy. a Minister of the Church of England.

^ear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the Whole Duty of Man,

Eccles. 12. 13. LONDON: ^^inted for John Lawrence at the Angel in the
Poultrey, 1700.

To the Right Honorable Sir Richard Levit, Lord Mayor Elect; And the
Honorable Charles Duncomb, and Jeffery Jefferies Esquires, Sheriffs of the
City of London, etc.
IF there be any thing that can excuse my Presumption in putting Three such
great Names to this little Book, it must be the Sincerity of my Intention for
the Interest of Religion.

For the Doctrines it contains, I need say no more, than that they are
faithfully Collected from that incomparable Author the Whole Duty of Man, a
Book (to speak in Dr. Hammond's Words) that has all the Advantages, which (with
Gods Blessing) can render it fit for the Salvation of Mankind.

My Design in drawing it into this little Volume, I have already mentioned in
the Title, viz. For the Benefit of the Poor, and who so fit to recommend it to
them, as those very Persons to whom the Government of this great City is
entrusted; your Names, your Characters, and your Authority together, must needs
stamp a Repute upon it; and render it acceptable even to this sin full Age.

I am sensible, there is neither of you can be any Friend to the common Vanity
of Complement; and therefore to bespeak your Acceptance of these few Sheets; I
shall Address my Self to your gracious God, that under the shadow of your
Protection, he would bless this Epitomy to the Conversion of many Souls.

Alas! we live in a World wherein Virtue has almost lost her Prerogative,
Religion has few true Friends and will have fewer still, ^ill Men can be
persuaded to consi^er the Necessity and Advantage of ^t; and how far this
little Book ^ay contribute toward that End is ^tterly out of my Power to
deter^ine.

I know I have put it into good ^ands, and so I humbly leave it ^ith you, with
this Assurance, that ^hatever you do in the behalf of ^iety and Charity, will
be doubly ^ac'd to your Account in the Re^ords of Eternity, and entitle you
(...) Rewards as large as your Merits, ^d as lasting as your Souls.

And now there remains no more, ^t to beseech you to accept this ^^tle Book,
and Pardon the unwor^y Author, who amongst many o^ers that Congratulate your
Ac^ssion to your respective Stations, (...) one of the first that has thus
ven^r'd to do it in Public.

Your high Qualifications have ^awn after you many Hearts, and ^any ardent
Wishes, and Mine in a more Particular manner than the rest, who am with the
utmost D(...)stance and Regard, may it plea(...) your Honors,

Your most obedient Servant, E. Stac^

THE PREFACE.
OUR Inimitable Author has proposed the Care of our Souls as the grand
Proparatory to the Whole Duty of Man, and indeed I cannot better recommend the
Epitomy of his Book, then by telling you in his Words, that the carelessness of
our Souls is the Root of all the Sin we commit; so that unless we would be
persuaded to consider the Condition of our Souls, all Lectures of Religion must
be utterly lost upon us.

The Design of this little Book will admit of but a very short Preface, and
therefore I shall only tell the Reader, that his Soul being infinitely the most
^valuable of any thing that he has beside, has the greatest Title to his Care
both in Point of Reason and Justice.

This is what we find confirmed in the Accounts of all Wise Men, who still
value every thing more or less, as it imports to their Interest or Happiness*
Our Souls therefore being our chiefes^ Good, it concerns us very nearly t^
consult their Preservation, and how that is to be done, is the Design of the
following Sheets.

I hope it will not be expected, (...) should say any thing in Apology for this
undertaking. If the thing be done a^ it ought to be, it must needs be of
general good; the Reader indeed would do well to observe, that though my
Brevity, etc. has generally compelled m^ to use my own Words, yet the Meaning
and Method of the Author are all along carefully preserved.

For the Whole Duty of Man it self it is indeed a most complete System o^
Religion, and therefore highly fit to b^ often read over at large by all, whos^
Time and Circumstances will allow it; This Epitomy is only designed t^ supply
those Deficiencies, and for the Assistance of bad Memories; in brief it is
intended chiefly for the Benefit of the Poor, and to them I refer it etc.

THE Whole Duty OF MAN Epitomized, etc.
PARTITION I.
the Duty of Man by the Light of Nature, and Scripture: His Duty to God,
Himself, and his Neighbor. His Duty to God; of Faith, the Promises, of Hope,
of Love, of Fear, of Trust.

THE Incarnation of our Blessed Lord, is without doubt a sufficient warrant for
the Salva(...)n of our Souls, if we perform the Conditions annexed to it; which
(...) in general to use our honest endea(...)vours to obey the whole Will (...)
God, according as we have it co(...)vey'd to us, by the Light of Nature, and
the Light of the Hol^ Scriptures.

The Light of Nature in the first pla(...) Of the Light of Nature.
is a Light which Go^ has stamped upon o(...) very Souls, by the guidance (...)
which, without the help of Scri(...)ture mere Natural Conscience wou(...)
direct us in the performance (...) several Duties. Such as are (...) Worship a
God, to be Just one (...) another, and to Honor our P(...)rents, and the like.

The Light of Scri(...)tures is a far mo(...) Of the Light of Scripture.
Divine Light, when in God has laid b(...)fore us both his Commands, a^
Precepts, to be the general Rul^ and Grounds of our Duty.

The general Rules of the Du(...) of every Christian are brie(...) comprehended
under these three Heads; The three great Branches of Man's Duty.
our Duty to God, our Selves, and our Neighbors, and those three I intend for
the Subject of the following Discourse.

The Foundation of our Duty to God, is Duty to God
grounded chiefly upon our acknowledging him to be God, and then admitting of
no other.

And first by acknowledging Acknowledging him to be God.
him to be a God, we are to believe him to be an Infinite Glorious Being,
without either beginning or end, both Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, God blessed
for ever.

We are likewise to To believe him in his Attributes.
believe him in his Attributes; to be a God of Mercy, Justice, and Power, that
he sees and knows all things, and disposes every Event, according to his Will,
and that he can never cease to be other than perfectly Good, Merciful and Just.

The believing him to be our God signifies yet more, it means by Faith we
should believe the Holy Scriptures to be his Word, and that all that he speaks
to us by them, are most true; that all that he affirms is Indubitable, that his
Commands Of Faith, of God's Affirmations, Commands, Threatenings, and Promises
are Just, and Equal, his Threatenings and Punishments certain and unavoidable,
and that all his Promises are Yea and Amen, and will most certainly be made
good to all those that faithfully depend upon him.

This is the sum of our Faith, or Belief of those things God has been pleased
to reveal to us in the Holy Scriptures.

The next Duty to God is Hope, which is a comfortable Expectation of his
Promises, and should be always preserved from the dangerous extreme Of Hope,
Presumption, and Despair.
of Presumption or Despair; We should neither depend to much, nor too little
upon his. Mercies, but rely upon his Justice, and Integrity for our Rewards and
Punishments.

A Third Duty we owe to God is Love, Of Love and the Motives, i. e. Gods
Goodness, Excellence, and his kindness to Men.
a Duty which without doubt he has the the greatest right to, both upon the
account of his Goodness and Compassion to us, his Innate Excellence, and his
particular Kindness to all Mankind.

God is most Good, Just and Excellent, he is perfectly Holy, Kind, and
Compassionate, and cannot be charged with any Impurity, or the least mixture of
any thing that is evil; his Goodness and Kindness are Immence and Infinite, and
have been so abundantly demonstrated both to our Bodies and Souls, that we
cannot refuse him our Love without the greatest Injustice.

The Scripture abound with Holy Invitations, endearing Promises and
affectionate Offers, by which he endeavors, as it were, to woo us into good
Lives, and to entreat us to accept of Happiness here and Eternal Happiness
hereafter.

The two great Tokens of our true The Fruits of Love, a desire to please^ and
enjoy him.
Love to God are First, An earnest desire to please him (...) and Secondly, To
enjoy him. This is the common Indication of true Love in all ordinary Cases;
and above all other things does best approve us to thos^ we have a real value
for.

The reality of ou^ Affections to Go^ Of pleasing God.
are best declared, b^ a steady Conformit^ to the Divine Will, a readiness t^
obey his Commandments, and a^ awful regard to his Precepts; the^ are indeed
Arguments of our real Love, and Affection, and the only way we can make use of,
either to please him, or to show the sincerity of our Hearts.

Next to pleasing Of enjoying him.
God, a desire to enjoy him is consistent with our Love; if we love God in
earnest we shall covet to be always in his Company, conversing with him in
Prayers and Meditations, hearing his Word and receiving his Sacraments, which
is the only means of enjoying God in this World.

Our enjoyment of God in the next is far more permanent and complete; there we
shall be continually with him in eternal fruition of Joy and Happiness, in
comparison of which all our advantages in ^his Life are but empty Baubles and
Trifles.

A Fourth Duty to Fear.
God is Fear, which ^rises from the consideration of his Power and Justice; and
those in Conjunction, do both enable, and oblige him to punish the Wicked an
awful regard and belief of which is the only means that can restr(...) us from
offending him.

God is the chiefes^ Object of Fear, and We ought not to fear Man more than God.
therefore we ough^ not to fear Man more than God. I will no^ fear, says the
Psal^mist, what Man can do unto me. Me^ have no Power to do us hurt unles^ by
God's Permission, and then the^ Malice can reach no further neithe^ than our
Goods, Names, Liberties or our Lives; the Destruction o^ Soul and Body together
is Gods Pre^rogative only.

It Is God alone that knows a^ our secret Thoughts and Transact^ons, all our
Sins though committe^ with never so much Privacy, lie al^ways open before him,
and he will b^ sure to find us out, and punish (...) unless we repent, which
indeed i^ the greatest Argument that can b^ to awaken our Fears and engage ou^
Apprehensions.

A Fifth Duty to God is Trust, that is, Trust.
a depending and resting upon him in all our Dangers. Wants and Extremities,
whether Spiritual or Temporal.

In our Spiritual Dangers, we are to Spiritual Dangers.
throw our selves upon God's Assistance, and to implore him to strengthen us
with the Grace of his Holy Spirit, that we may be able to withstand, or at
least to remove the Temptation.

In our Temporal Temporal Dangers.
Dangers we are to rest and depend upon him, to commit our selves to the shadow
of his Wings, under the Royal Prophets Assurance, Psalm ^4. 22. That the Lord
delivers the Souls of the Saints, and all that put their trust in him shall
not be destitute.

In all our Dangers and Distresses, with Prayers and Tears we are to implore
his aid, and not attempt to deliver our selves by any wicked Act; we must never
use sinful means, not We must not seek to deliver our selves by Sin.
even the Preservation of our Lives and Liberties can make any the least
pretense for the doing an unjust thing; Christ himself has told us, that if we
gain the whole World and loose our own Souls, we are great loosers by the
Bargain; if therefore things should ever come to that unhappy Issue, that we
must part with our Estates, perhaps our Lives, or else commit Sin, we should
then remember that that is the proper season to fight under the Banner of the
great Captain of our Salvation, the Crucified JESUS.

In our spiritual Necessities we are to Spiritual wants.
fly to God with Tears in our Eyes and invoke his Assistance, we are to pour
out our Souls before him, and then we may depend upon it, that as he has
commanded us nothing that he has not given us Power to perform, so he will
suffer us to want nothing that we ask of him with a holy and devout Integrity
of mind.

We are likewise to rely upon him in all Temporal wants.
our Temporal and Bodily Wants; he has obliged himself to take care of all his
faithful Servants, his Eye is upon them that fear him, and them that hope in
his Mercy, to deliver their Souls from Death, and to feed them in the time of
Famine.

If we do our Duty honestly and religiously The Benefits of trusting in God.
in our several Places and Callings, then as the Apostle advises we may cast
all our Care upon God who cares for us, and he who is subject to no sort of
Deceit or Impoverishment, that best knows our wants, and is best able to supply
'em, will be sure in the proper season, to relieve us against all Dangers and
Necessities whether Spiritual or Temporal.

I conclude this with the words of the Apostle, Phil. 4. 6. Be careful in
nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication, with thanksgiving, let
your Request be made known to God.

PARTITION II.
Of Humility, of Submission to God's Will, in respect of Obedience, of Patience
in all sorts of Sufferings and of Honor due to God in several ways, in his
House, Possessions his Day, Word, Sacraments.

A Sixth Duty to Humility.
God is Humility, which from an humble sense of our own Meanness and his
Excellency should work in us a twofold Submission, the first to his Will, the
second to his Wisdom.

A Submission to the Will of God consists Submission to God's Will, with
respect to Obedience.
chiefly in our Obedience or Patience, in the first by urging us to a ready
Complaisance to his Commands, by melting down our stubborn haughty Minds,
without which we can never come to know, worship, or obey him, with that
profound Distance and Submission which the greatness of his Majesty, and the
importance of his Commands require.

To promote our Obedience, The great distance between God and Man.
we should often reflect upon that vast distance that is between God and our
Selves, that we are but polluted Dust and Ashes, wretched Creatures but of a
few Hours, and that he is without Beginning or End, Immortal and Eternal.

That our best Works and Performances The unworthiness of our best Works.
are utterly unworthy of him, or at least unworthy of our own Commendation, the
best we can do when we come to compare it with the Perfection and Purity of
Almighty God, as the Prophet expresses it, Is but as filthy Rags, and therefore
we ought by no means to boast of our own Works or to attribute any of them to
our selves, but to give God the Glory and pre-eminence in all our Actions.

The Second kind of Submission to Gods Submission with respect of Patience.
Will is Patience, which consists in an humble acquiescence to all the
Afflictions which HE is pleased to lay upon us. This will make us easy under
all his Dispensations, and entitle us to a kind of Repose even in the midst of
our Troubles, and is indeed the pure effect of that Humility that does so
highly recommend us to Almighty God.

A patient Submission to the Will o^ Thankfulness for Gods correction.
God will give us (...) right notion of our Afflictions rather than incline us
to murmurs and complaints, will convince us, that God chastizes us out of
Friendship, and so consequently that we are obliged to thank him for his
Correction, as indeed we are upon many extraordinary Accounts, but especially
as they are Marks of his Care and Love.

Our quiet, and Fruitfulness under Afflictions.
thankfulness under Afflictions is not all neither, the Fruit of 'em should be
Repentance, that is God's chief Design in laying them upon us; that they should
force us to call our selves to an account, and enquire diligently what it is
that has engaged him to deal with us in so rough a method.

In all our Sufferings In all sorts of Sufferings.
and Afflictions we ought to look upon God's permissive Power as the Principle
Agent, and with Holy Job's Patience, let them be derived to us either from God
or Man; and in his Words, bless the Name of the Lord for giving us warning.

Secondly, I told you that Humility contained likewise a Submission to God's
Submission to Gods Wisdom
Wisdom, as well as his Will; God being infinitely Wise and Just, we are to
submit to him in all his Commands and Dispensations.

We are to submit to him in his Commands, In his Commands.
by making our Understanding ^end to his Will and Word, how opposite soever it
may be to our own carnal Reason or Humors, for when we consider that his
Wisdom is Infinite and cannot Err, we own an Obligation to believe and obey
every thing he speaks or commands.

We are likewise to submit to the Wisdom In his Disposals.
of God in all his Dealings and Dispensations, and tho many Events happen
contrary to the ordinary Course of things, and are utterly above the reach of
our narrow Capacities to comprehend, yet being all chosen and determined by the
unerring Wisdom of God, we ought to submit to them, with the greatest
Satisfaction and Humility.

The next Duty to God is Honor, which Honor.
consists in the paying him such a respect and Reverence as belongs to the
greatness of his Majesty, and this may be either inwardly in our Hearts, or
outwardly in our public Actions, and Behavior toward him.

Besides, the general, there are particular Several ways of honoring God, in
his House and Possessions.
Ways of honoring God, as First, By approaching his House, the Church with
Reverence, and behaving our selves there with Devotion and Attention; Secondly,
In his Possessions by paying our Tithes and Just, Dues which God has appointed
for the maintenance of his Ministers.

The Sin of Sacrilege and defrauding the Ministry, is a very great and crying
Sin; it is the downright robbing of God, an^ indeed his Vengean^^ The great sin
of Sacrilege and the Punishment of it.
is in nothing mo^^ discernable then in h^^ Punishment of it; u^*on which
account w(...) should have a ve(...) strict Care never to meddle with (...)ny
thing set a part for God.

The Third Thin^ whereby we are t(...) The Lords Day and Feasts of the Church
to be kept Holy.
express our reverenc^ to God, is by keepin^ Holy the particula^ Times set a
part for his Service, such a(...) are the Sunday's, or Lords-days and other
solemn Festivals appoint*ed by the Church; this he ha^ strictly required of us,
and herei^ we must not disappoint him upon any pretense.

Days of Fasting an^ Humiliation are like wise The Fasts.
to be solemnl^ observed, that according to the Design of the Church, we may
mee^ together, and humble our selve^ ^eeply before God, and with Prayers and
Tears bewail our own and ^he Sins of the Nation.

Fourthly, We are ^o express our Honor God's word the Holy Scriptures.
to God, by pay^ng an awful Reve^ence and respect to ^is Word, by frequent
reading the Holy Scriptures, and by collecting ^he measures of a good Life from
those lively Oracles; by attending upon the Duties of Religion, and ^y being
present as often as we may at the public Catechizings and Sermons.

Catechizing in the Of Catechizing.
first Place is the Foundation upon which the whole Christian Practice must be
built, it is therefore the Duty of every Parent to have his Children early
instructed in the Church Catechism, and for this end they are to call in the
help of their respective Ministers; and for those that have been so unhappy to
want these Instructions in their Youth, it concerns 'em as nearly as their Sou^
to have their minds Principl'd wi^^ the Conditions of their Salvati^^ as soon
as they can, which neith^^ the Consideration of their Age, (...) any other
pretense should perswa^^ them to defer for one Moment.

After they are i^*structed in the Pr^^ciples Of Preaching.
of their Relig^*on, they ought th(...) to apply themselves to the heari^^ of
Sermons, which they ought (...) attend too, not out of Custom Formality, but
for the true ends f(...) which they were first intende^ The Doctrines are to be
locked up our Hearts, that we may have 'e(...) in a readiness to combat all
o(...) Lust and Follies, and to beat off a(...) our Temptations; this is the
gre^^ end of Preaching, and unless (...) make this use of it, it signifies
litt^^ toward the Salvation of our Souls.

Fifthly, We are (...) Honor God in (...) strict Of the Sacraments.
Reverence (...) the two Sacraments (...). Baptism, and the Lords Sup(...)r;
the first we are to respect a particular Covenant between (...)d and our
selves, the first and (...)lie^t Sign of our Salvation; and (...)e second as a
remembrance of (...)rist's Death, and the Privileges (...)riv'd to us upon
that account.

The Sacrament of (...)ptism being admi^^^tred Of Baptism.
to us in our ^ancy. It is not expected from to perform the Covenants which
(...) engage our selves to by our (...)reties, but then this lays the
(...)eater Obligation upon us when (...)e come to Years of Discretion, to
double our Duty, that we may (...)ache the best amends we can, for (...)e
defects of our Minority.

To come to a true Knowledge of (...)e Duties we Promise at our Bap(...)m; the
right way will be to con(...)er what our God fathers and God(...) others Vow in
our (...)ames, and that we The Vow of Baptism.
all find to be, to re(...)unce the Devil and all his Works, by which is meant
t(...) Worshipping all false Gods, whi^^ is indeed the worshipping the D^*vil;
Secondly, The Pomps and Va(...)ties of the World, that is, all inor(...)nate
desires of Riches and Gre(...)ness, all unlawful Sports and Ex(...)ses in Meat
or Apparel, and all (...)there sinful things wherein t(...) World is apt to
deceive us; a(...) Thirdly, The sinful Lust of t(...) Flesh, by which is
understood (...) inordinate Appetites, and all u(...) clean and carnal Desires,
and t(...) is the first part of our Covenant.

The second general Thing o(...) Godfathers and Godmothers p(...)mis'd for us
in our Baptism; (...) that we should believe all the A(...)cles of the
Christian Faith, as th(...) are summed up to us in the Ap(...)stles Creed, and
not barely belie^ them neither, but to have all (...) Principles so deeply
impressed a^ engraven in our Minds, that fr^^ thence we may be able to draw
s(...)ficient Motives to the Practice Virtue and Piety.

The last part of our Vow is, that we should keep Gods Holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the ^ame all the Days of our Lives; that is, that
according to the Di^ections of Gods word, we should ^alk all our Days in the
Paths of ^rue Religion, Honesty and Sobri^ty.

This being in short The strict obligations of this Vow of Baptism.
^he Substance of our ^ow, the next thing (...) the Obligations we all under to
perform ^t, and herein I need only tell you, ^tis a Vow of the most solemn and
^inding Nature, and that you cannot ^reak it without being not only un^ust, but
forsworn; besides, it is ^ur Interest to keep it upon many Accounts, but
especially upon the Account of the great Privileges it ^^titles us to, from
the Promises of God conveyed to us in that Sacra^ent.

PARTITION III.
Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supp^^ of Preparation before, as Examination, of
Repentance, Faith, an^ Obedience, of Duties to be done (...) the Receiving, and
afterward^ etc.

THE Reverenc^ The Lords Supper.
due to the S(...)crament of the Lord(...) Supper is the next thing, which
according to my first Division, I sha^^ consider by laying down what is t^ be
done before, at, and after the Receiving.

The first thing t^ be done before the Things to be done before Receiving. The
first is Examination.
Sacrament is Examination, which is (...) strict enquiry into the state of our
Souls and the Condition o^ our Lives, and thi^^ in the Judgment of St. Paul is
so essentially necessary, that we ought not to presume to make any approaches
toward the Holy Table without it.

For the perfecting your Examination, you are to consider the Nature of your
Covenant, which is a renewal of your Baptismal Vow, and since that is the chief
end, three things follow in Course; First, That we be well Instructed in the
Covenant it self. Secondly, What have been our Breaches? And Thirdly, Then that
we resolve upon a better Performance for the Future, and these Three are to be
the ge^eral Grounds of our Examination.

And First, You Will find that, this ^s a Covenant made by God with ^is Son
Christ Jesus for the Re^emption of all Mankind, and that ^e Conditions on our
side, are an ^^ire Obedience to all his Com^ands, and the state of our
Know^^dge in this, is the first part of our ^xamination.

The next is con^erning Sins.
our Breaches of this Covenant, which we can never know with that exactness as
w^ ought, without comparing them with the Law of God, which as i^ is the truest
rule and measure (...) our Duty; so it is the best means t^ lead us to the
Knowledge and Fountain of our Sins.

Our Sins alas! a^ of many sorts and d^ grees, Several sorts and degrees.
and require great deal both of o^^ Judgment and Deliberation to enquire aright
into their Causes, an^ Consequences. It requires a great deal of Skill to
heighten and aggravate the Circumstances of our Guil^ to that degree, till we
come at la^ to a true Sense of the hainousne^ of them.

The end of Examination is to bring (...) to Humiliation and Contrition.
this, and to a rig(...) Knowledge of o^^ Sins, to humble us (...) the sight of
God, and to melt o^^ Hearts into a deep Sorrow and Co^trition upon the
Consideration (...) our Demerits and Injustice toward him; we are likewise to
Pray for the Assistance of God's Spirit in the discovery of all our Sins, and
for his Grace that we may thoroughly be^ail and lament them.

After we have wrought our selves, Confession and Faith.
by the assistance of our Examination to a ^ixt hatred and aversion against all
our Sins, then we are humbly to confess 'em to Almighty God, who by the
precious Blood of his Son Jesus Christ, we are faithfully to believe, will be
reconciled to us, and upon the account of our entire Obedience will vouchsafe
us the Salvation of our Souls.

And then, when Resolutions of Obedience.
we have thus examined and prepared our selves with respect to our Humiliation
and Contrition, our Confession and Faith, the next thing is our Resolution of
Obedience, which must not be only in general, but with a particular regard to
every individual Commandment of Go(...) derived from a fixed and solid hatr(...)
against all manner of Sins.

The means of t(...) new and entire Ob(...)dience Of the means and of present
renouncing of Sin.
must be o(...) next Care, which w(...) be best perfected (...) an impartial
retr(...) into our own Minds; there (...) may discover the Springs and
Fou(...)tains of our Sins, and what Tem(...)tations we are exposed to, and
(...) be in a capacity to shun and avo(...) them; and this must be done i(...)
mediately too, without any ma(...)ner of Delay or Pretense; for t(...) it be
done, and a Bill of Divorce g(...)ven to every Lust, we are in no r(...)spect
fit to meet our Redeemer (...) the Holy Table.

Beside this, we a(...) to put our Souls in(...) Of embracing Virtue and
quickening Graces.
the best posture th(...) we can, by imbracin^ all the Virtues of (...) good
Life, and (...) possessing them with all those Gr^^es that may render them
acceptable in the Eyes of God, and this we may do effectually, by contemplating
the Promises and goodness of God, and by meditating upon the exemplary Life and
Doctrine of our blessed Lord.

His Life will put us Charity and Devotion and the necessity of those Graces.
^n mind of that Charity and forgiving temper, which is so often, and solemnly
required of us, and so essentially necessary in our Sacramental Preparations;
it is Death for us to approach God's Feast of Love, with any manner of Ranchor
or Malice; we are to bring no other Dispositions thither, but what are dictated
to us from a devout Mind. A fixed and settled Devotion, earnest and frequent
Prayers, and a Soul disentangled from the World, are our properest Companions
for this Sacrament, and for these we are earnestly to implore God's Assistance,
without whose help in assisting us with the Graces aforementioned, we can never
expect (...) complete our Preparations.

And for the better perfecting a^ this, we are to apply our selves (...) our
spiritual Guide, to the Minister of our own Parish, who is th(...) properest
Person in this Case; (...) him without any manner of reserv^ we are to declare
our Doubts an^ Jealousies, and to take his Assistance and Directions; and
herein (...) sort The usefulness of a spiritual Guide. We should not be ashamed
to discover our selves.
of shame to discover ourselves ough^ to deter or disincourage us; we ough^ to
open our Case fairly and Impartially that he may know perfectly how matter
stand between God and our Soul^ and then he will be able to give u^ Advice how
to cure both ou^ Doubts and our Sins the doubtful an^ As necessary to the
Confident as the Doubtful.
the confident are equally obliged to this our own Judgment are not entirely to
be relied upon, in a Concern where there is so much weight and difficulty, nor
is the Advantage of a spiritual Guide to be rejected, when it can be of use in
the Improvement of our Preparation.

These are the Duties before the Sacrament. The next thing is, what is to be
done at the Time of Receiving; At the time of Receiving to meditate upon our
unworthiness and Christ's Sufferings.
and here, First, Consider thy own unworthiness, and how unfit thy Sins and
Frailties, and the repeated breach of thy Vows, have rendered thee for such a
Holy Table; from hence, let thy Meditations lead thee to the Sufferings of
Christ. When we see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured out, we should
reflect that his blessed Body was torn, and his Blood split, and that it was
our Sins that was the Cause of both.

Consider likewise that the Sufferings of Chrst were the only means to atone
the wrath of God, and then The Atonement wrought by them; thankfulness for
them, the Love of Christ in them.
consider what unexpressible thanks are due to him for preserving thy Sou^ that
must have perished eternally without his help; this great Love of Christ for
us, should stir up in us a love for him, and engage us immediately to take up
solemn Resolutions to Sin no more, and that we may indeed perform these
Resolutions, we ought earnestly to beg of this crucified Savior, that he will
by the Power of his Death, mortify and kill all our Corruptions.

Just as we are about to receive the The Benefits of the new Covenant sealed in
the Sacrament.
Consecrated Bread and Wine, we should remember that then God is entering into a
New Covenant with us, that he is now giving us fresh Assurances of the Pardon of
our Sins, if we perform our part of the Condition; as soon as we have received,
we ought to Upon receiving, give thanks, and Pray.
offer him our devoutest Praises for that great Mercy, and should be sure never
to forget to send up our Prayers to him, not more for our selves than for the
good Estate of the Church, and for the Conversion of all Mankind.

After the Sacrament After the Sacrament, private prayers and Thanksgivings.
is over, then we ought as soon as Possible, to retire our selves, and to
repeat again our Prayers and Praises, and to renew our Promises, and to beg the
Assistance of God's Grace to enable us to make 'em good, and to pursue our
present Purposes to the end of our Lives.

The Day we receive Not presently to fall to worldly Affairs.
the Sacrament should be kept void of all worldly Cares and Business; we should
spend that Day especially in Prayers and Meditations; and indeed no Day should
pass, but we should call to mind the Promises To keep our Resolutions, and the
danger of breaking them.
we make to God at the Sacrament, and consider seriously the danger we expose
ou^ selves to in breaking them.

In breaking ou^ Vows at the Sacrament, Making God and our Conscience our Enemy.
we make God our Enemy, and engage him to withdraw from us all manner of
Kindness and Compassion; nay, we raise an Enemy within ou^ own Bosom; our
Conscience must needs fly in our Face, and upbraid us with the breach of such
solemn Vows and Covenants.

Gods Mercies in pardoning us heretofore should not give us the least
encouragement to provoke him again; to presume upon this is a very high abuse
of his goodness; The obligation of our Sacramental Vows are God's former
pardons n^ encouragement, the vow perpetual, yet often to be renewed.
perpetual, and can never be violated without the breach of our Oaths; it is
perpetual, it is true, and yet it is to be renewed often, We are to do it as
often as we have opportunity in remembrance that Christ died for us. And thus I
have showed you the Reverence we are to pay to God in his Sacrament.

PARTITION IV.
Honor due to God's Name; Sin's against it, Blasphemy, Swearing, of Assertory,
Promissory, unlawful Oaths, of Perjury, vain Oaths, and the Sin of them.

THE last thing Honor due to God's Name.
wherein we are to express a Reverence to God is in honoring his Name, and
what this is, will be best understood by considering what are the Things by
which it is chiefly dishonored.

The first Sin against the Honor of God's Sins against it Blasphemy and
Swearing.
Name is Blasphemy, the highest Degree of which is Cursing him either by our
Words or in our Thoughts, and next to that, Swearing either by false Oaths or
else by rash and light ones.

A false Oath may be of two kinds; as Assertory Oaths and Promissory.
First, That by which I affirm some thing; or, Secondly, That by which I
Promise; the one we call an^ Assertory, and the other a Promissory Oath, and
are both a very great dishonor to God's Name, when they are not taken with
Sincerity and Truth, and performed with reality.

An Oath is the strongest Tie that can Unlawful Oaths.
be between Man and Man, but yet if it be unlawful in it self and
contradictory, and impracticable in the Nature of it, in such a Case, though
the breach even of such an Oath be a very great Sin, yet it is better to repent
heartily of our Folly and Wickedness in making such a sinful and inconsiderate
Oath, then to attempt with greater Sin and Danger in the performance of it.

There is nothing God greatly dishonored by Perjury, and the Punishments of it.
by which the Name of God is more dishonored then by Perjury, it is the highest
affront can be offered to him, and indeed we find him resenting nothing with
more just severity, then this kind of Violation of his Honor, He will not hold
him guiltless, he has declared that takes his Name in vain, which is so
dreadful a menace, that methinks it should engage every one that has any value
for his Salvation, to keep them most strictly from this Sin.

All vain and light Oaths, such as are s^ Vain Oaths and the Sin of them.
common in our Discourses, are likewise ^ very high offense against the Majesty
of the Name (...) God. Our Savior has forbidden us to swear, even by mere
Creatures, to show us, I presume the Reverence we ought to have for the Name of
their Creator; and sure whatever this profane Ag^ may think of it, there is
nothing does more argue a Contempt o^ God, then to hear his Name intermixed in
every Period of loose Discourse. and violated every Momen^ with horrid and
impertinent Oaths.

This sort of vain and rash Swearin^ They lead to Perjury, and are liable to no
Temptation.
leads directly to Perjury, we grow at la^^ so Familiar with the Name of God,
tha^ at length we can us^ it upon any occasion, without considering whether we
swear true (...) false to things doubtful or certain beside this too there is
no manner of Temptation for this sort of lewd Swearing, there is no kind of
Pleasure or Profit in it, nor any thing else to recommend it, and so
consequenely it is a base Sin, which we wilfully commit without any manner of
excuse or Pretense.

It Is a dangerous Vice, and therefore The Necessity of abstaining from them;
the means; the Sense of the Guilt and Danger.
every Man that values the Salvation of his Soul, ought to renounce it with the
greatest Caution and Concern; the means are always ready before him, viz. the
Sense of the Guilt and Danger of it, when he considers the great dishonor that
his rash Oaths offer to the Name of God, and that Eternal Misery must be his
Punishment; unless he repents, he must needs sure be touched with a Sense of his
Guilt and Danger, and these must certainly argue very strongly with him to
renounce 'em.

Speaking Truth is likewise a very great Truth in speaking, forsaking occasions.
means to restrain us from rash Oaths when Men once come to be observable for
their Truth and Integrity, there (...) no need of an Oath to confirm the
Veracity of what they say; we ought also to avoid all occasions that are most
liable to betray us to this Vice, to preserve constantly a deep and profound
Veneration for the Reverence to God.
Name of God, which we should never mention without Respect, and that will be
an excellent means to prevent us against the profaning it with ou^ Oaths.

Another great means to restrain us from rash Oaths, is to keep (...) strict
and consta^^ Watch over o^^ Watchfulness and Prayer.
Words, and then t^ use the great remedy of all Prayer, tha^ God would enable
thee to avoid (...) overcome this wicked Custom. And thus by these several ways
of dishonouring God's Name, we may easily perceive what it is to Honor it,
What it is to Honor God's Name.
which is all founded upon an awful Respect and Reverence, which is due to that
sacred Name, that is Great, Wonderful and Ho^y.

PARTITION V.
Of Worship due to God's Name, of Prayer, and its several Parts, of Public
Prayers in the Church, of Private Prayers, of Repentance, etc. of Fasting.

THE next great Worship.
Duty to God is ^orship, a Duty only peculiar to ^^mself, and therefore of a
very ^reat Importance; and is to be per^^rm'd, First, By our Souls; and
^econdly, By our Bodies, the Souls part is Praying, an^ of that there are
diverse Prayer its Parts.
Parts, according to the different thing for which we ask.

Confession is the first, and may be either Confession.
general or pa^ticular, the former is a necessar^ part of our solemn Prayers,
whither Private or Public; and the latter more proper for the Private and the
intent of it is, that (...) should humble our selves before God, and with a
deep and hear^ Sorrow bewail the Sins we confess.

The second part (...) Prayer is Petition, (...) Petitions for our souls and
bodies.
which we beg of Go^ whatsoever we wa^^ either for our Soul or Bodies. For our
Souls, we b^ the Pardon of our Sins, and the A^sistance of his Grace to enable
(...) to obey his Will. For our Bodie^ we beg the necessaries of Life, su^
outward things I mean, that he his Wisdom sees most fit and nee^ full for us.

A third part of Prayer is Deprecation, Deprecation of Sin and Punishment.
by which we entreat God that he would turn away from us the evil of our Sins,
and the Punishments due to them; that he would prevent us from all Sin, and
enable us against all Temptations, and that he would forbear to chastize us
with Spiritual or Temporal Punishments.

The next part of Prayer is Intercession, Intercession.
which consist in Praying for others, both for Strangers and Acquaintance, but
in a particular Manner for the Governors of the Church and State, and for our
Relations and Friends.

Another Part of Prayer is Thanksgiving, Thanksgiving for spiritual Mercies and
temporal.
which is the praising and magnifying God for all his Mercies both Spiritual
and Temporal; for the blessings of our Souls and Bodies, but above all for the
sending his Son to redeem us, and the Holy Ghost to comfort us, and for all
other his Favors vouchsafed to us in his Word and Sacraments.

These are the several sorts of Prayer to be used both Public and Private,
Public Prayer in the Church, and in the Family.
The Public use of them is first in the Church, from whence we must not absent
our selves without some necessary Cause; and Secondly, In our own Families,
where every Master is strictly bound to call his Children and Servants to the
daily exercise of them.

Private Prayer, is called so, because we Private Prayer.
use it in Secret, where we have an oppotunity to be more particular than (...)
convenient in Public, and upon n^^ account or pretense whatsoever (...) to be
omitted.

Prayer is a Duty, that require^ a frequent performance by none seldomer then
Evening and Morning; we Frequent Prayer very advantageous.
should always begin and end the Day with our Addresses to Almighty God, oftener
if we have any convenience, and indeed did we consider the advantages of
Prayer, we should think it great Wisdom to use it as frequently as possible.

For First, It Is a Its Honor, Benefit and Pleasantness
great Honor, that such mean and contemptible Wretches as we are, should be
admitted but to speak to the great God of Heaven and Earth; and then it is a
Benefit, the highest that can be Imagined Prayer being that immediate ^ource of
all the Advantages we either want or wish, besides it is a ^leasant Duty in it
self, and to a ^ruly Pious and Devout Mind, it ^ffords abundance of substantial
De^ight and Satisfaction.

The Carnal Minds indeed can ^iscover none of these Advantages, the Pleasures
of the the Flesh, and the Carnality and want of use the Causes that makes it
seem otherways.
dross of the World li^ in the way, and those have so vitiated their Pallates,
that they ca^ taste none of the pleasantness in it; other think it unpleasant
for want of a frequent usage, and beside these two, there is nothing ca^
dissuade us from the real Pleasure and Advantage of it.

The next thing is, how well w^ perform this Duty, and herein w^ are chiefly
concerned for the Matters of our Prayer we are to ask nothing To ask nothing
unlawful, but with Faith, Humility and Attention.
unjust or unlawfu^ but all with Faith, an^ Humility, and wit^ the most profou^
and deliberate Atte^tion.

Opposite to Attention in Praye^ is all wandering thoughts; the Consequence of
which are very dang^rous. To suppress these, we should consider the greatness
of that Majesty to Help against Wandering the Consideration of Gods Majesty and
our own needs.
whom we are speaking, the worth of those things we ask for, and our own
extraordinary Wants together.

We must likewise ^nvoke God's Assi^tance, To pray for God's aid with
Watchfulness, Zeal Purity; and for proper ends.
and set a care^ul Watch over our Hearts to keep all ^andring thoughts ^ut of
our Minds, ^hilst we are convering with Him; all ^ur Petitions should be put up
to ^im with the highest Zeal and Ar^ency of Soul; Our Prayers should ^e
abstracted from all manner of in and Impurity, and be constant^^ directed to
right and proper ends.

This is the first part of Worship, ^he next is Bodily Worship, and this
con^st, Bodily Worship.
in humble and re^erend Gestures in making our approaches to God, i^ such a
decent lowliness of Body, tha^ may best declare with what a Pro^stration of
Soul, we make our Addre^ses before the Throne of Grace.

Repentance is the next Duty we owe (...) Repentance a turning from Sin to God,
this Duty to be done daily.
God, and is in sho^^ nothing else but a general Resolution t^^ forsake our
Sins, an^ to implore his Grace the times for th^^ great Duty are as often as we
thin^ upon our Sins; every Day at lea^^ we ought to call our selves to a^^
account.

At some particula^ times indeed, we a^^ At set times, at the time of
Affliction, at Death.
obliged to redoub^ our Repentance, a^^ those Times we oug^^ to fix for our
selve^ at least once a Week. We ought (...) have a set time of Evening our
Accounts with God and our Cons^ences, the time of Affliction an^ Calamity is a
very proper season ^or it, and at our Death we are the ^ost solemnly obliged to
renew it.

But it is dangerous (...) defer it till Death, The danger and disadvantage of
Deathbed Repentance.
(...) should not hazard (...) Souls upon such ^^certainties; beside, (...)
Deathbed Repentance must conse^uently want several Qualifications which the
Nature of true Repen^^nce requires; the ^ustom of Sin is not The Custom of Sin
hard to be vanquished. Pain the Cause of Insincerity.
(...) be destroyed in a (...) days, or hours, ^^^haps moments, ^^sides too,
our Pains ^^d Agonies most ^^obably disturb our ^houghts, and then our
Repen^^nce can never be dressed up with ^^at strict Sincerity, which God
re^^ires of us for the Salvation of (...) Souls.

To Repentance, the Duty of Fast^^g may with great Reason be an^ex'd which is a
Duty we find so^^mnly recommended by God himself, the Church and the Practice
of goo^ Fasting, a revenge upon our selves, acceptable to God, yet no
satisfaction for Sin.
Men; by Fasting, w^ in some measure r^venge the Injuri^ done to God upon our
selves, and su^^ Holy Revenge upon our selves for o^^ Sins, is doubtless very
acceptable t^ God, and yet we ought not (...) think them sufficient without the
Merits of Christ's Blood to atton^ for our Offenses.

The Scripture h^ indeed given no pa^ticular Times of Fasting.
Direction, ho^ often this great Du^^ of Fasting is to be performed, b^^ the
oftener the better; for being great Instrument of our Humilia^^on, we ought to
take all opportu^^ties to perform it, which our Heal^^ and Circumstances will
admit.

And thus I have passed throu^^ the the first Branch of our Duty (...) God to
wit, the acknowledge i^ him to be our God; the second the having no other, and
of this I need say no more, then that by it we are forbid all kind of Idolatry
and Superstitious Worshipping of ^mages of Creatures, and all in^ard Idolatry
of the Mind.

PARTITION VI.
Of Sobriety, of Humility, the great Sin of Pride, of vain Glory, the Danger,
Folly, the means to prevent it, of Meekness, etc.

Duty to our Selves.
THis Duty to our Duty to our Selves.
Selves, is by St. ^aul summed up in (...) word SOBERLY, by which (...) meaning
must be our keeping ^ithin those bounds which God has (...) us, both with
respect to our ^ouls and Bodies; and this sober ^overnment of the Soul requires
a great many Virtues, of which I place Humility Humility.
in the first Rank.

Humility gives us low and humble thoughts of our selves, direct us to behave
our selves easily und^^ the mean Opinion of others, an^ withal is directly
opposite to (...) kind of Pride, and vain Glory; tw^ of the most dangerous
Enemies (...) Mankind.

Pride in the fir^^ Place, is a very gre^^ Pride a great Sin, betraies us to
other Sins, frustrates all Remedies. Exposes us to Punishment.
and provoking Sin, (...) has been often she^ by God's severe P^nishments of
it, it (...) in some respects, (...) there a Parent or Nurse to most oth^^
Vices, by betrayi^^ us first, and then (...) drawing us in to reject all Remed^
and by frustrating all the desi^^ and overtures of Gods Mercies; a^ beside this
too, it betrays us to ^^nishments, God having all al^^ declared himself the
proud Man particular Enemy.

It Is likewise a very foolish Vice, a Vice The Folly of Pride in respect of the
Goods of Nature, Fortune or Grace.
that argues the greatest Folly that can be, because there can be nothing
either in the Goods of Nature, Fortune or Grace, that with any reasonable
pretense we can be proud of.

That this dangerous and foolish Sin is to be avoided, I suppose we may take
for granted, and the chief Means to do it, are by applying our selves to God
for the Grace of Humility; Means of Humility.
which may be best acquired by a Reflection upon our own Sins, Follies,
Meanness and Imperfections; to which we ought to join our hearty Prayers, that
God would make us some of those poor in Spirit to whom the Blessings of Heaven
are promised.

Secondly, Vain Glory; that is, an empty thirst after the Praise of Men, is
likewise opposite to Humility, and a very great Sin; for it betraies Vain
Glory; the Sin, Danger, and Folly of it.
Men into several dangers, but more especially erraces Christ out of their
Heart^. It Is an Indication of Folly too, which every one must be satisfied in,
that would but consider what it is he hunts for, only a little empty Applause, a
little popular Air* which can never bring him any solid advantage; the Means to
help this Helps against Vainglory.
are to consider o^^ selves in the first place and then the true state of
things in the second, and (...) weigh both in the Balance of Wisdom and
Sobriety.

Meekness; that is a Calm and peacef^^ Meekness and the advantages of it.
Temper is another great Virtue, and may be exercised both with respect to God
and our selves, that toward God falls under the Head of Humility and is
already spoken to; as it respects our selves, it is an Advantage in a great many
Particulars; more especially as it promotes our Honor and Reputation, enables
us to bear the Sufferings of Humane Life with Ease and Moderation, and with
Prudence and a good posture of Mind; and the proper Means to obtain Means of
obtaining it
this most admirable Virtue, are by comparing the Loveliness and Benefits of
it, with the ugliness and mischiefs of Rage and Anger, but above all, by
contemplating the Life and Example of that great Pattern of all Meekness Jesus
Christ.

Consideration is a third Virtue, that relates Consideration of our state, it is
the rule to try our State.
to the Soul, and directs us to preponderate both our State and our Actions; to
weigh our State first, and to consider both the Grounds of our Faith, and the
Case of our Souls; and accordingly to prepare our selves against the Day of
Death and Judgment; an^ the neglect of thi^ The Danger of Inconsideration.
most excellent Virtue has been the ruin of thousands, and is the general
Cause of all our Sin^ and Misfortunes.

It directs us too i^ our Actions; teache^ Of our Actions before, and after we
do them.
us to advise with ou^ Consciences, and t^ debate the probabl^ good or ill of
every thing we do before we do it, and t^ examine likewise those things tha^ we
have already done, whether they may be warranted by the Law^ of God, and the
Rules of Religion and Sobriety; upon many Account^ therefore we are to employ
it often both with respect to our State an^ Actions, and to mak^ up our
Accounts frequently; Frequency of Consideration and Danger of omitting it.
and the plain Reason for it i^ this, because ou^ Lives are so wavering and
uncertain, that we hazard our Salvation, when ever we lie down to sleep in an
unrepented Sin.

PARTITION VII
Of Contentedness, and the contraries to it; Murmurings, Ambition,
Covetousness, Envy; Helps to Contentedness; of Duties which concern our Bodies;
of Chastity, etc. Helps to it; of Temperance.

THE next Duty Contentment
to our selves is contentedness, which consists in an evenness and an humble
acquiescense under any State it shall please God to allot for us; and without
this, it is impossible we should be in any tolerable Condition of Happiness. The
The contraries, murmuring, Ambition and Covetousness.
Contraries to it, are Murmurings and Impatience under God's Dispensations, all
Ambitious Thoughts and Desires, an^ all sorts of Covetousness, Griping^ and
Extortions.

Covetousness is a very great and high Covetousness contrary to our Duty to
God, our Selves, and our Neighbors.
Offense, and directly opposite to the great Duties we owe to God, our Selves
and our Neighbors* it is opposite to our Duty to God, by taking our Minds off
from him, and embarasing them with the Cares and Troubles of the World; it is
opposite to our Duties to our Selves, both with regard to our Souls and Bodies
by urging us to sacrifice the first to a little Pelf and Dross, and the latter
to Pains and Disappointments, and so it is opposite to our Duties to our
Neighbors, both in our Justice and Charity, by forcing us upon unlawful Means,
and by setting us upon false and indirect measures; contentedness Contentedness
contrary to Envy.
is also contrary to all kind of Envy and Malice, and can never inhabit in any
Breast, that is the least tinctured with Prejudice or Revenge.

Helps for Contentment Helps to contentment.
are the Consideration of God's Goodness, Power, and Justice, and his universal
Care of the World, that all our Affairs are in his hand who knows our Wants
better than our selves; Secondly, We should consider the Vanity of all earthly
things, by comparing them with the essential Joys of Heaven; that we are here
but as Strangers and Pilgrims, and that whatever our outward Condition may be,
there is a time coming when we shall be delivered from the burden of all our
Sins and Sorrows. and be enstated in a Happiness large as our Wish and lasting
as our Souls.

A Fifth Duty is Diligence, which is a Diligence. It consists in Watchfulness
and Industry to improve the Gifts of Nature and Grace.
Duty which we likewise owe to our Souls by watching carefully over them, and
diligently guarding the^ against all Dangers, and then improving them
industriously in every Virtue, and in all the Gift^ of Nature, and the
accomplishments of Grace.

We must likewise improve and cherish Good Motions to be improved, the danger
of defe^^ing them
all good Motions, and make the most of every Holy Suggestion, lest upon our
dispising the overtures of Grace, God withdraws from us all manner of kindness,
and turns us up to a reprobate Sense; and thus far of the Virtues which belong
to our Souls, I come next to those that belong to our Bodies.

In the front of these I place Chastity, a Chastity, forbids all manner of
uncleanness.
Virtue which strictly forbids all manner of wantonness and uncleanness, not
only the grosser Acts of Adultery and Fornication, but likewise all impure
Thoughts, and all unchaste Looks and Gestures.

The Beauty of Chastity The mischief of it, both to Body and Soul, and God's
Judgments against it.
can be no how better described, then by comparing it with the loathsomeness of
Lust, and the many Evils and mischiefs that spring from it. Lust defaces the
Dignity of our very Souls, and sinks the rational Creature into a Bruit; it
makes our Minds foul and filty, and loads our Bodies with Diseases and
Deformity, and what is worst of all, does generally call down Gods great and
heavy It shuts us out from Heaven.
Judgments upon us, and shuts the Gare of Heaven against us Eternally.

These and many other are the sad effects of Uncleanness, against which we
Helps to Chastity.
ought to fortify our selves, by avoiding Idleness, and improving our Mind in
all kind of active Virtue; by avoiding all manner of Temptation and all lewd
Company, but above all, by praying earnestly, that God would give us a Spirit
of Purity.

The second Virtue relating to our Bodie^ Temperance in Eating.
is Temperance, and the Exercises of tha^ are diverse, i. e. in Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping, Recreation, and Apparel; I shall speak of them separately,
and begin with Eating.

Temperance in Eating, is then observed The ends of it to preserve Life and
Health.
when we make it agreeable to the end for which God and Nature designed i^ to
wit, the Preservation of Life and Health; those are the sole end of it, and he
that proposes it either to gratify his Taste, or Pamper h^^ Body, Crosses Gods
original Purpose in it, and breaks all the Rule of Temperance by which it
should be regulated; nay, he Sacrifice ^ll his other Senses to his Taste,
exposes Rules for Temperance, and the means of it.
himself to the Character of a Glutton, and what is worst of all, to the Fate of
that rich Glutton, that after all his Dainties wanted at last a drop of Water
to cool his Tongue.

PARTITION VIII.
Of Temperance in Drinking; false ends of Drinking, viz. Good Fellowship,
putting away Cares,

THE next thing Drinking directed to false Ends.
is Temperance in Drinking; the right Ends whereof are the very same with
Eating, viz. the preserving our Lives and supporting our Healths, but this like
the former has been sadly subverted and directed to Purposes strangely distant
from the Original intent of it.

Men now drink themselves into Beast False end of Drinking, Good-Fellowship.
under the common but false Notion of Good-Fellowship; others drink to exces^^
under the pretense that it is a gre^^ means to maintain a mutual Friendship
Preserving Kindness. Chearing the Spirits, and putting away Cares.
and Corresponden^ amongst Men; some will have it, that it is highly useful to
che^^ the Spirits, and (...) correct and disp^^ Melancholy; that (...) drives
away the Cares and Perplexities of Humane Life; that it is very fit for the
passing away time and filling up empty Intervals, na^ some will tell us it is
Reproach not to d^ Preventing Reproach.
it, and argues a great deal of sowreness and disingenuity, man there are that
drink Pleasure of Drinking.
for drinking sake that love the Liquor and so are Sots without any of the
former Pretenses; but these are all great mistakes, and truly upon a fair State
of the Matter, it is a subject fit both for our Wonder and Sorrow, how this
unaccountable Practice of excessive Drinking should have so unluckily
encroach'd upon all Societies; that no Bargain can be made Bargaining.
(which is another pretense for it) nor nothing of any Moment transacted, but
the Tavern, or the Alehouse must be the Place fixed upon for the doing of it.

The unreasonableness Degrees of this Sin.
of these Motives is too plain to admit of a Dispute, they are all so
ridiculous, absurd and inconsistent, that upon a short Appeai to common
Experience we find 'em exploded and condemned; every Degree of this Sin is a
high breach of Temperance; every drop we drink beyond what is convenient for
moderate Refreshment, is an Offense both against God and Man, and the strong
Drinke^ The great Guilt of strong drinkers:
above all the rest both from the evi^ of his Example, and Practice the most
unaccountable.

A Man would think that the many Mischiefs The great Mischiefs of the Sin, an
Exhortation to forsake it.
that attend this Sin should be a warning to us to avoid it when we consider
it is a dishonor to God a reproach to Christianity, and a Destruction both to
our Souls and Bodies; sure a few Exhortations may serve to prevail with us to
forsake it.

And why should any seeming difficulties Difficulties of forsaking it
considered, viz. Necessity of drink, want of employ and Reproaches and
Persuasions of Men.
dissuade us against parting with so dangerous a Vice; why should we plead
Custom^ or the Necessity of Drink, or why should we betray so much Folly, nay
so much Wickedness to make drinking the business of our Lives. Alas! it is a
mistake, and let the vain deluded Drunkard say what he will, it can be no
Reproach to us to reject all Intemperances of this kind, and all the
Persuasions of Men upon that Account.

The Means to resist these, and all other Means to resist this Sin, by weighing
the advantage with the hurt, and rejecting the Temptations.
Temptations for intemperate Drinking, are to weigh the Good with the Ill, and
the pretended Advantages with the real Losses and Dangers, and to reject them
at their very Security to do so. Love of the Sin hinders the means, makes Men
loath to believe the danger.
beginnings, and to avoid all manner of Occasions and Opportunities, this we
may do, if it be not our own fault, and these and such like means will
effectually do the Business, if our mistaken Love t^ Vice does not hinder it,
and make us unwilling to believe it, either dangerous or destructive.

PARTITION IX:
Temperance in Sleep; the Rule of i^ Mischiefs of Sloth, of Recreations
Cautions to be observed in them (...) Apparel.

SLeep is a Thin Sleep.
part of Temperance, which is likewise, The Rule of Temperance therein; many
Sins follow the Transgression of it, with other inconveniences.
if measured b^ the end for which God ordained it, only for (...) Refreshment;
and (...) support for our frai^ Bodies; and in this we are likewise to take
Care not to indulge our selves to far least at length it incline us to Sloth
which is ordinarily attended with a whole train of dangerous Sins, and with
abundance of other great Inconveniences.

We should likewise Temperance in Recreations.
have a very high regard to Temperance in our Recreations, and be perpetually
Cautions to be observed.
Cautious, that they are lawful in their kind, and no ways dishonorable to
God, or Injurious to our Neighbor; we should be very careful too, that they
never ^end to undue Ends, Undue Ends of Sports.
but are all exactly Innocent, harmless and inoffensive.

The last part of Temperance in Apparel.
Temperance is that of Apparel, and this as well as the rest is to be measured
according to the Ends for which Clothing was ordained; which were first to
provide a modest and decent covering to hide our Nakedness, this was the first
and great End of it; the second was to fence our Bodies from the Severities of
the Cold, and secure to us such a convenient Apparel designed for a covering of
shame.
Warmth that is necessary for the Preservation of our Health; and the third for
the distinguishing Fencing from Cold.
Persons both with respect to their Sex, and Qualities. Now these are the three
grand Ends of our Apparel, which we should always be careful to preserve i^
Distinction of Persons.
the middle, between the extremes of gaudiness and contempt.

And thus I have passed through the several Branches of Temperance and herein I
would in no respect seem to advance a contrary extreme; i. e. too much
sparingness, which is Too much sparing, a fault as well as Excess.
indeed a fault as well as Excess. A Covetous griping Temper is no more to be
accounted for, then any of the former; and is in many Particulars a high breach
of our Duty both to God, our Selves, and our Neighbors.

PARTITION X.
Of Duty's to our Neighbors. Of Justice, Negative, Positive, of the Sin of
Murder, of the Hainousness of it, the Punishment of it, and the strange
Discoveries thereof. Of Maiming, etc.

Duties to our Neighbors.
IN the Word Righteousness Duties to our Neighbor -- Justice.
are contained in gross the Duties to our Neighbor; and in the larger Sense it
contains all kind, both of Justice and Charity. I begin with Justice, ^f which
there is two sorts, Negative and Positive.

By Negative Justice, Negative Justice.
we are forbid to do any wrong to any Man; either in respect to hi^ Soul, Body,
his Possessions, or his Credit; and first we must not do any manner of Injury
to the Soul, either in To the Soul in the Natural and Spiritual Sense.
a Natural and Spiritual Sense; we mu^^ take great Care that we give no
occasion (...) Grief or Sadness to the Mind of an^ Man, in which Sense the Soul
(...) said to be naturally injured; and (...) alike diligent not to administer
(...) him the Cause, either of Sin or Punishment, in which Case the So^ may be
spiritually wronged.

Sin is the Disea^ and Wound of t^^ Drawing into Sin, a great Injury.
Soul, and the sed^ cing us to it is t^^ greatest Injury the can be done us.
There are sever^ Means for this, both direct and (...) direct; the direct Means
are (...) commanding us, counselling, enticing Direct and indirect means of it.
assisting us; the (...) direct Means by she^ing us ill Examples, or by
encouraging us in any Wickedness; by justifying Vice, and by throwing Reproach
upon the Duties, and strictness of Religion, and by these, and ^^ch like Means,
both direct and ^^direct, Men bring upon themselves the great guilt of injuring
^^d wounding their Brethrens ^ouls.

It would be too This sort of Injury Men ought sadly to consider, to bewail and
repair.
^^ng to instance, the ^^veral Sins by which ^^en ensnare others: will
therefore leave with this Caution, ^^at it concerns them (...) near as their
Souls, to consider that Injuries they have done of ^^is kind, and to bewail
them with ^^e deepest Concern and Sorrow; ^id not only that neither, but as a
^ore particular Testimony of their ^^pentance, to do their best by all ^^e
means they can to make Repa^tion.

Negative Justice in the second ^^ce binds us against all kind of Injury to the
Bodies more especially against Negative Justice in respect of the Life.
the Life of our Brethren. Murth^^ is a Sin of the de^^est Dye, and may (...)
committed either openly and (...) rectly, or else secretly and treach^^ rously.
It may (...) done, either by op^^ Several ways of being guilty of Murder.
and Public Violen^^ or else effected und^^ the Coverture of con^^ ceal'd
Malice and ^^venge, but which way soever it (...) the Sin is of that (...)
alted hainousness, th^^ The hainousness of the Sin, and the Punishments of it.
it provokes God to higher degree of A^ger in the Execut^^^ of his Vengeance
(...) Punishments upon than any other Vice in all the b^^^ and dreadful
Catalogue.

It is worth our ^^tice by what mira^^lous The strange discoveries of it.
Means God been pleased to di^ ver it; and indeed would we but take (...) to
our serious Thoughts, it must needs possess us with the greatest Horror and
Abomination of it, and engage us to watch and guard We must Watch against all
approaches.
our selves against the most distant approaches of this Vice.

Next to the Murdering, the maiming and Maiming, an Injury which every Man
dreads.
disabling our Neighbor is a very great Sin, this we must grant, by reflecting
^ow precious our Limbs are, and ^ow miserable a thing the want of any of 'em
is; especially, if it be (...) poor Man; in such (...) Case, though we Worst in
a poor Man.
can never make him a full Satisfaction, we are ^he most solemnly A necessity
of Satisfaction.
^ound to provide for his own, and his Fami^ies wants.

Unlawful Wounds and Stripes are likewise highly inconsistent with that golden
Rule of Loving our Neighbor Wounds and Stripes injurious also.
as our Selves and indeed our Cruelty to others, argu^^ not only a great de^^
Cruelty to others the effect of Pride
of Pride and In^^lence, but withal (...) savageness and bruitishness of mind,
much below the common tenderness and compassion that becomes the humane Nature.

PARTITION XI.
Of Justice about the Possessions of o^^ Neighbors; against injuring hi^ in
his Wife, his Goods; of Oppre^sion; Theft; of paying of Debt^ etc.

THE next part His Possession.
Negative Justice, relates to the Possessions of our Neighbors, (...) the
front of which we may wit^ great Reason place the Wife. O^ Wives, are the
Principle part of our Possessions, The Wife; the enticing her, great injustice
to the Woman and the Man.
and the corrupting Her to defile Her Husbands bed, is the worst and highest
part of Injustice both to the Man and the Woman; this is an irreparable The
most Irreparable.
sort of Injury. A Vice that God has declared that he himself will Judge, and
we may depend upon it, without Repentance that Judgment of his will be the most
severe and dreadful.

Next to this, we owe a Negative Justice to our Neighbor with ^^spect to his
Goods; such as are his House, His Goods.
Land, Cattle, Money, ^c. and the two ordinary Causes that engages Men to break
it, are ^^ther Malice or Covetousness.

That Part of Injustice that is ^^unded upon pure Malice, is commonly Malicious
Injustice.
^^cted upon the Devils Principle, like him they seek to destroy others; not so
much, as it is any good to themselves, but out of a natural desire to do
mischief, the other part that is founded upon Covetousness, though indeed it
may Covetous Injustice.
have something of a base and sordid Design in it; yet when it is considered,
it is always attended by Oppression Theft and Deceit, it wants very little to
come up to the wickedness of the former.

Oppression is an insolent barefaced Robbery, Oppression and Gods Vengeance
against it.
and so much the worse still, because the Poor are generally the Persons
injured we have many. Lectures against every kind of it, in Holy Scripture^ but
especially against that which affects the Fatherless and Widdow^ it is indeed a
most crying guilt, and God's heavy Vengeance is no one instance more exemplary,
he that has oppresst the Poor; says the Prophet, shall surely die, and his
Blood shall be upon him.

Theft is another kind of this Injustice, Theft; not paying what we borrow, are
bound for, or Promise.
which in general is twofold, the first is the withholding what we should pay,
and the last the taking from our Neighbor what we have no Right too; the first
as well as the last, is a plain Act of Robbery, and let the present Practice of
the World argue never so much for it, it can never prove, but that by common
Justice and Honesty we are strictly engaged, to the utmost of our Abilities, to
discharge all the debts we are obliged to, either by Bond, Promise, or any
other lawful Obligation.

PARTITION XII.
Of Theft; Stealing; of Deceit (...) Trust; in Traffic; of Restitution, etc.

THE next Part Stealing the Goods of our Neighbor.
of Theft is; either by open Violen^^ or private Fraud, the Robbing our
Neighbor of tha^ which he is in Possession of. This a Vice that wants no
Aggravation it need not be disputed, but the both the Highway Man and House
breaker, as well as the sly, injurio^^ Pilferer are two Ranks of degen^rate
Creatures so odious to God that they are unfit for humane S^ciety. There are a
great man Branches of this sort of Robber^ as the Concealing of stolen Good^
the buying them at cheap Rate with many others, which I need n^ mention any
further, they being best but a kind of Robbery. God will be sure to deal
severely with us upon that account, although perhaps we may escape the
Cogui^ance of the Law.

A third Part of Injustice is Deceit, of Deceit.
which the Acts are so numerous, that it is morally impossible to Name 'em all:
I shall Rank them therefore under these two general Heads, viz. The Deceits of
Trust, and Traffic.

He that deceives a Man in a Matter of In Trust.
Trust that is committed to him, is guilty of the most treacherous and base
Injustice; in such a Case we are to behave our selves with the utmost Fidelity;
especially, when any thing for the ^ses of Piety or Charity are committed to
our Charge; he that vi^lates his Faith in these particulars, ^dds Sacrilege to
Fraud and Trea^hery, and entails upon him all the Curses that are due to those
Sins.

As to Matters of Traffic, there may be deceit both in the Buyer and Seller;
In Traffic. By the Sellers concealing the faults, and over-rating their Wares.
the Seller Sins greatly, when by a Connection of Lies, perhaps Oaths and
Execrations, he conceals or excuses the faults in his Commodities, or what is as
bad, sells by false weights and measures, or impose^ an extravagant
unreasonable Price upon the Buyer; these are indeed grown very common and
practic^ faults, but yet never the more excusable, the great Judge of Truth and
Equity has often declared his solemn displeasure against 'em, and will be sure,
sooner or later, to punish them to the utmost.

The Buyer may be guilty of Fraud too Fraud in the Buyer.
and though indeed h^ does not fall under s^ many Temptations as the Seller yet
when ever he makes an advantage of his Neighbors Wants, and Purchases his
Commodities at under Rates, without doubt he offends the Justice of God, by
thus insulting upon, and making his Advantage of his Brothers Necessities.

The Temptations to Deceit in Traffic, Many Temptations to deceit in Traffic.
are so interwoven with all Trades, that it behooves every dealing Man to have a
great Care to guard himself against them, this way of Cheating is become a
perfect Trade it self, and Men boast of it, and value themselves upon it, but
for all that the Eyes of God are too pure to behold such Iniquity; nay, The
commonness, a Reproach to Christianity.
it is even a scandal to our Christian Profession, a very high and solemn breach
of those common Rules of Justice and Equity laid down in the Precepts of the
Gospel to be the Standard and Guide of our Actions.

Besides all this, it is but a mistaken Principle neither, Fraud and
Undermining, deceitful measures and false balances are not the right way to It
is no way to make a Man Rich, but ruins the Soul.
make us Rich, there goes a secret Curse along with such kind of Practice which
is generally executed in this Life; which though it may by chance fail here, it
never fails in the next; there the Deceiver will be fatally deceived in the
loss of his Soul, the Consideration of which should methinks put him upon the
grand Restitution.
Remedy, Restitution, without which he can never make any tolerable Atonement
for the Injury he has done either to God or his Neighbor.

PARTITION XIII.
Of false Reports; false Witness; Public Slanders, Wisperings; of Scoffing,
Calamities, Sins, etc. Of Positive Justice, Truth, ^ying, of Envy and
Detraction, of Gratitude, etc.

THE Credit of His Credit. our Neighbor is another Part of Negative Justice,
which should be as dear to us as his Possessions, and should in no respect be
impaired either by false Reports or malicious Surmizes and Conjectures, from
both which our Reputation, the dearest thing we have, next our Souls, is liable
to great Injury.

False Reports may False Witness.
be spread diverse ways, both Public and Private, the Public way is
ordinarily, by bearing false Witness either with regard to our Lives or
Estates; this is a most grievous Wound indeed to our Credit, a sort of
outrageous Injustice to our Neighbor, that we are hardly ever able to make him
amends for.

The second open way of spreading these Reports is by Public Slander, Public
Slander.
and herein our Reputation is also liable to a great deal of Injury.
Reproaches, Lying, Scandal and Railing make up the base Composition, which as
the Apostle long ago observed were amongst other Works of the Flesh, fit only
to shut Men out of the Church here, and the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter.

The Private way of spreading such Reports is Whispering, this is a way as
Whispering.
dangerous if not worst then the former, and is by St. Paul mentioned in the
Catalogue of great Crimes, which are the effect of a Reprobate Mind; this is a
kind of Slander that like secret Poyso^ destroys us insensibly; it is Solomon^
Observation; that the Wisperer separates chief Friends, than which nothing can
argue louder for the suppressing of it.

The several Steps Several Steps toward this Sin.
of this Vice are to be carefully avoided, as First, We should be so far from
encouraging it, that we should rather reject the very first approaches of the
Talebearer: Secondly, We should be very Cautious how we believe false Reports,
or rather we should never give any Credit at all to them: And Thirdly, We
should be sure never to report any thing we here from such kind of People, but
look upon 'em no less Enemies to us, then to those of whom they are speaking.

Besides, this open way of impairing our Neighbors Credit, there is* yet
another, which though it may seem to be a little more plausible, is yet in all
respects as bad as the former; I mean Scoffing and Reviling, Scoffing and
Reviling.
which indeed is not only an Injury to our Neighbor, but even to God himself.

The three Things for which Men are For Infirmities, Calamities, and Sins.
commonly reviled, are either for their Infirmities, their Calamities or their
Sins; and why should Men be despised for that which they cannot help, this is
calling God's Providence to an Account, especially with respect to the two
former; indeed for our Sins they have more of our Wills, it is true, but then
considering they make us the most miserable of any thing else, without doubt
they require a great deal of our Pity and Compassion.

We owe likewise a Negative Justice to Destroying the Credit, a great Injury,
and irreparable.
the Credit and Reputation of our Neighbor; his Credit is the most valuable
thing he has, and therefore to Rob him of that, is the highest Injury we can do
him it is the highest, because his Damage is irreparable; the utmost we can do,
can never make him amends, and yet Every guilty Person to do all he can in
Order to it.
we must do our best, because without it we can never expect God's Pardon for
the Sin.

Thus I have past through the four Branches of Negative Justice to our
Neighbor, and yet must further observe, that this Justice binds our Justice in
the Thoughts.
Thoughts as well as our Words and Actions; nay, it confines even our Wishes
and Affections. Our whole Hearts should be intent upon his Good, and our Minds
constantly taken up, which way we may best promote the Happiness both of his
Soul and Body.

I come now to speak Positive Justice.
of Positive Justice, by which is intended the giving to every Man his proper
dues, whether General, or Particular; as First, The speaking Truth in general
Speaking Truth, a due to all Men.
of all Mankind; this is a common debt we owe to every one, and indeed we are
bound to the strict performance of it, by many strong and weighty Obligations,
but the greatest of all is, because Lying is a Vice so scandalous and odious in
it self, and so solemnly condemned in many parts of Holy Scripture; Lying
forbid in Scripture.
but then what is very strange, notwithstanding it is the most Lying a common and
foolish Sin.
foolish and ridiculous, it is become so common, that it is a great Rariety (to
use the Words of the Royal Prophet) to find a Man that speaks the Truth from
his Heart.

Next to this we owe to all, Humanity^ Courtesy due to all, yet unpaid by the
Proud.
and a courteous and affable Behavior, a Virtue which a Proud Man can never
arrive to; he is so busy in admiring himself, that he overlooks all the
Perfections of others.

Meekness is likewise Meekness, a due to all Men.
a Debt we owe to every Body, and indeed a very great accomplishment, and
highly necessary for the Preservation of the Peace of the World; whilst on the
contrary, all sorts of Brawlings and Contentions, Brawlingvery unsufferable,
and leads to the Sin of Cursing.
tend to Disorder and Confusion, nay, what is worse, they tend to a great many
Sins too, but especially to that most provoking Sin, Cursing and Execration.

Having thus far Particular Dues.
spoken of Dues in General, I come now to the Particular, which Men are
ordinarily entitled to upon some special Qualification, the three chief are,
that of Excellency, that of Want, and that of Relation.

And first a Man is entitled to our Respect A respect due to Men of
extraordinary Gifts.
upon the Account of his Excellency. I mean for his extraordinary Gifts and
Endowments, such as are Wisdom, Learning, Grace, and the like; and such a
Person we are in no respect either to Envy or Revile, or to grudge at God's We
are not to Envy them, nor detract from them.
Blessings and Kindness to him; we should not attempt to detract from his
Worth, or to cloud or darken his Merits, but rather do our best to make 'em as
conspicuous as we can, and this we should do not only as it is a Debt which we
owe to him, but because the contrary is an Act The Folly of both these.
of extreme folly, as well as ill Nature and Injustice.

Beside the Excellencies of the Mind, we owe a regard to the Quality and
outward Advantages. God for the due governing of the World, A respect due to
Men in regard of their Ranks and Qualities.
^^as decreed several Orders and Classes of Men, to each of which in Proportion
to their respective Dignity we are to pay a due Respect.

We are also Debtors Dues to those that are in any sort of Want, to the Poor.
to Persons under any kind of Want, whether Spiritual or Temporal, but more
especially to the Poor, who by Gods particular Appointment, have a solemn Right
to our superfluities; and then it can be nothing else but an arrant Robbery to
bestow that upon our Lust or Vanity, which is assigned for their Portion. In
the Case of the Poor we are Gods Stewards, and it is the same unjustice and
fraud for us to embezle that which he has entrusted with us, as it is for any
Steward to misemploy that which was intended for the use of his Masters Family,
and commonly too meets with the God withdraws those Abilities, that are not
thus employed.
Doom of the unjust Steward in the Gospel, to cause us to he put out of our
Stewardship, and have those Abilities taken away, that have been so
unfaithfully employed.

The third Qualification is that of Relation, Duties in respect to Relation.
and of this there are diverse sorts, as First, that of a Debtor to a Creditor,
and of an obliged Person to his Benefactor, and in both these Particulars we
are bound by the strictest ties of Justice and Gratitude Not to pay our just
Gratitude to Benefactors, the contrary too common.
Debts when we are able, is a Vice almost unpardonable, and (...) be ungrateful
to a Benefactor, however common it may be in this unthankful Age, is an Act the
most sordidly base and disingenieus.

PARTITION XIV.
Of Duty to Magistrates, Pastors. Of the Duty of Parents to Children, etc. Of
Childrens Duty to Parents.

I Come now to the Duty to Parents.
nearest kind of Relations, and in the first Rank of those I place our Duty to
Parents, whether Civil, Spiritual or Natural.

The Civil Parent is To the Supreme Magistrate, Honor.
he who by a just right possesses the Throne, and to him we owe Honor and
Reverence; we are to look upon him, as a Person upon whom God has stamped a
great deal of his own Power and Authority, and upon no Account to speak evil of
him or revile him.

Next we owe him our Tribute, which we are to pay him with the utmost, both of
Justice and Freedom; Thirdly, Tribute, Prayers and Obedience.
We are to Pray for him, that God would direct and assist him in all his
Undertakings. And Fourthly, We owe him a solemn and strict Obedience; which
both the Laws of God and Nature have commanded us to observe wi^^ the most
awful and religious Submission.

The second sorts of Parents a^^ the Spiritual, viz. the Ministers of God^
Duties to our Pastors.
Word, and such a^ are entrusted with the Salvation of Souls; to them we owe
the highest Love and Kindness we are obliged to esteem and value them as our
best and truest Friends we are likewise to contribute to their Maintenance,
Love, Esteem Maintenance, Obedience, and Prayer.
and witha^ to look upon them a^ Gods Messengers, and upon that Account t^
behave our selves (...) them with a great deal of distance and respect, and to
put up our earnest Prayers to God for them, that he would grant them the
assistance of his Spirit, to enable them rightly to discharge their Holy
Calling.

The third sort of Parent is the Natural, Duties to our Natural Parent.
by which is meant the Fathers of our ^lesh. Toward these ^e are to demean our
Reverence, Love, etc.
^^lves with Reverence and Humility, and upon no Account to contemn or ^^spise
them, either in our outward ^ehaviour or in our Hearts; we we them our most
ardent Love and ^nderest Affection, and ought to ^^hor every thing that can
give them the least Cause of Grief or ^isquiet.

We owe likewise Obedience.
^r Obedience to all ^e Commands of our Parents, that ^^e not opposite to the
Laws of ^od, and cannot violate them, ^^thout exposing our selves to the
Punishments he has so often denounced in Scripture against disobedient Children.

Children are not to Marry without the Children not to Marry without the
Consent of their Parents
Consent of their Parents, every Child is so much the Right and Possession of
his Parent, that he mu^^ be guilty of Theft to dispose (...) himself without
his Consent. We are likewise bound according to (...) Abilities, to supp^^
their Wants, and (...) To provide for their Wants. Duties to the worst of
Parents.
administer to them (...) any kind of Extremity: and all this is (...) be done,
even to the worst of Parents.

But as there a^^ many things due from Duties of Parents to Children.
the Child to the ^^rent, so there are so^^ from the Parent (...) the Child.
The Parent is oblig^ to nourish and sustain the Chi^^ till he comes of Age to
do it himself, he is likewise to take Care for his Soul, by bringing him early
to the To bring them to Baptism; to educate them.
Sacrament of Baptism; and by having him timely instructed in the Principles of
Religion, and educated in the true Faith, and Fear of God; and as a Means to
improve his Education too; he is Means toward their Education.
to encourage and correct him, and to use all wise and gentle Means in order to
impress upon him a timely Sense of Virtue, and good Morals.

Thirdly, The Parent The Parent to watch over the Child's Soul.
is to watch over the Soul of his Child after he comes to years of Maturity,
and as often as he finds occasion, to exhort, encourage and reprove him; he is
likewise to take Care of his outward To provide for their Sustenance.
State, by providing him with a suitable Condition of Life; but above all, he
is to lay before him a good Example, To give them good Example.
and to make his own Life a fit Pattern for him, from whence he may transcribe
the true Rules of Virtue, Honor, Honesty and Godliness; and then he is to
Bless him, and Pray To Bless them, and to give them no unreasonable Commands.
for him, and to recommend him often to God's Care and Protection: And besides,
all this too, he must be extremely careful, that all the Commands he lays upon
him are just and reasonable, and in all respects utterly distant from all sorts
of harshness or severity.

PARTITION XV.
Of Duties to our Brethren, and Relations; Husband, Wife, Friends, Masters,
Servants.

THE second sort Duties to Brethren: Natural Love.
of Relation is that of a Brother, which we may take in a double Sense, either
Natural or Spiritual. I begin with the First, the Duties between Natural
Brethren, I mean such that are of the same immediate Parents. And the Duty of
these is to have united Hearts and Affections, to love one another with great
Tenderness and Sincerity, and to do their utmost to promote their mutual Good
and Happiness; This is a Duty so necessary in all The necessity of Love among
Brethren.
Points, that without ^t no Family, where there is any number of Brothers, and
Sisters, can propose any tolerable Ease or Satisfaction.

The second sort are Spiritual Brethren, Spiritual Brethren.
under which Notion are comprehended all those that are baptized in the same
Faith, and Church with our selves, and to all these our Compassion is to be the
most melting and affectionate; with these we are to profess and defend the
Faith of Christ Crucified, and to communicate with 'em in Our Duty to hold
Communion with them. To bear their Infirmities, to restore them after falls,
and to sympathize with them.
all Holy Offices, we are to bear with their Infirmities, and in a friendly
manner to admonish and reprove 'em, and by fair and gentle Methods to endeavor
to bring them to Repentance after they are fallen. We are to sympathize with
them in all their Agonies and Distresses, whether of Soul, Mind, or Body.

The third Relation is that between Husband The Wife owes to the Husband
Obedience, Fidelity and Love.
and Wife, this is the nearest Relation of all, and yet there are several
respective Duties which they owe to each other, for the Wife in the first
Place, she owes her Husband Obedience, which God has strictly commanded her to
pay him in all things that are Just and Lawful; she owes him Fidelity both to
his Bed and his worldly Affairs, she owes him likewise her Love, and is bound
to behave her self to him with the greatest friendliness and sweetness. And
this she is The faults of the Husband acquit her not from these Duties.
to do notwithstanding his faults, which will by no means acquit her of any of
these Duties.

There are likewise Duties from the Husband to the Wife: Love,
several Duties owing from the Husband to the Wife; the First, Is Love, by
which he is enjoined to treat her with the utmost Tenderness and Compassion,
not to behave himself to her with any manner of harshness or severity, but to
use her in all respects as a part of himself.

Secondly, He owes Fidelity to her Bed, this Faithfulness to her Bed,
is as much the Husbands Duty as the Wife's, and the breach of it in either, is
an Act of Uncleanness, and Perjury. Thirdly, He is bound to do his endeavor To
maintain and instruct her.
to provide for her, and to suffer her freely to partake of all his outward
Blessings; and amongst the rest of his Duties, he is chiefly to take Care of
the Salvation of her Soul, and to instruct her as far as her need requires in
the Principles of Honesty and Religion.

In brief, Husbands and Wives are mutually Husbands and Wives bound to pray
for, and assist each other.
bound to Pray for each other, and to their utmost to propagate their
Reciprocal Good and Happiness.

The true Ends of The true Ends of Marriage to be consulted, and unlawful
Marriages to be avoided.
Marriage are likewise to be consulted; in which Case the Ornaments of the Mind
are sooner to be chosen, then either Wealth, or Beauty, or any other outward
Appendage; above all the rest, unlawful Marriages are to be avoided, it is a
Holy State and should never be entered into, but according to the Direction of
the Church, Reverently, Advisedly, Soberly, and in the Fear of God.

The next thing is Friendship, which is Friendship with its Duties.
of that common good and concern, that humane Life would be but a wretched
thing Faithfulness, Assistance, Admonition, Prayer, Constancy.
without it; the Duties of it are many, but the most material are Faithfulness
in our Trusts; Assistance, either with respect to our Souls, or Bodies; to our
Souls, especially in admonishing us of our faults; which is the highest and
most exalted Act of Friendship that can pass between Man and Man. Prayer is the
next Duty, and after that Constancy, and all these together render a Friend an
inestimable Jewel.

The Last Relation is that between Masters, and Servants, and these too are
mutually engaged to each other. The Servant is bound to obey Servants owe to
their Masters, Obedience, Fidelity, Submission, Diligence.
his Master's just Commands, and to execute them with Freedom and Satisfaction;
he owes him likewise an universal Fidelity in all his Concerns; and is obliged
by all the Rules of Modesty, and good Manners, to bear his Rebukes, and
Reprehensions, with Submission, and to discharge his Trust, in every
Particular, with Diligence, and Application.

The Masters on the other side, owe to Masters owe to their Servants: Justice,
Admonition, Means of Instruction, Moderation in Command, Encouragement.
their Servants Justice, in providing them with convenient Food, and paying
them their Wages; as also Admonitions and Reproofs, with regard as well to
their Sins and Offenses against God, as Faults against themselves. They owe 'em
likewise good Example, that is, they are to make their own Lives and Actions a
fit President for them to walk by; they are to allow them opportunities for
Instruction, and convenient time for the Public Worship of God; moreover they
are to command them with Prudence and Moderation; to encourage their well
doing, and to treat their Faithfulness, Diligence, and Piety with a great deal
of Kindness and Bounty.

PARTITION XVI.
Other Branches of our Duty to our Neighbor. Of Charity to Men's Souls,
Bodies, Goods and Credit.

THE next Duty Charity in the Affection.
to our Neighbor is Charity, this is a Duty which the Blessed JESUS himself
has solemnly enjoined in his Holy Gospel, and may be considered two Ways,
either in our Affections, or Actions; and First, The Charity of Affections, is
such an universal Kindness, that inclines us to wish well to the Soul, Body,
Goods, and Credit, of all Mankind.

To their Souls in the first Place, and to To Men's Souls, Bodies, Goods, and
Credit.
them we cannot sure but wish well, when we consider, that Christ thought their
Ransom worth the Price of his own Blood; we owe next all the good we can to
the Bodies of Men; this is an high Article of our Charity, and without it, we
can never come up to that golden Rule, of loving our Neighbor as our selves.
His Goods, and his Credit, are likewise to be very dear, and precious to us,
and we are bound to propagate his Interest, and Reputation, and to esteem them
upon all Accounts equal to our own.

This kind of Charity naturally begets The Effects of this Charity.
in us a quiet and peaceable Mind, and a Compassion and Tenderness toward
others; it creates in us a Joy for their Prosperity, and excites us to Pray for
'em, and to importune Almighty God in their It casts out Envy, Pride,
Censoriousness, Dissembling, Selflove and Revenge.
behalf; besides all these too, it guards our Minds against all sort of Envy or
Revenge, keeps down our Pride, and impresses deep upon us the Grace of
Humility; it destroys Censoriousness, and curbs the rashness of our Judgment,
suppresses Dissimulation, and banishes, and subverts, all feigned, and
pretended Kindness; it casts away all Self-love, and mercenary Designs, and
entirely roots out of our Minds all manner of Ranchor and Malice.

Nay, this Charity goes further, according The Motives to it, Christ's
Commands, and the example of God
to the Doctrine and Example of our Blessed Lord, it extends it self even to
our Enemies; and what can be a greater Motive to it, then to find it so
solemnly commanded and enforced by God's own President.

This is a Subject well becoming our This Charity to extend even to Enemies.
serious Consideration, and should put us in mind methinks, to balance our
Sins against God, with the Offenses of our Brethren against our selves, and
would we do that, we should find the first so much outweigh the last, that from
a fair Comparison, we must needs judge our selves very unworthy to expect God
should Pardon us The Disproportion of our Offenses against God compared with
Men's against us.
for so many great offenses, and yet at the same time we refuse to forgive our
Brethren for some, perhaps, trivial faults; besides this too, there is a great
deal of Pleasure Pleasantness of this Duty.
and Satisfaction in the forgiving our Enemies; it is true, this may seem a
Paradox at first sight, but then, if we examine the Truth of it by Experience,
we shall find it really so, and this sort of forgiving Temper, the most
delightful as well as the most Christian.

Beyond this likewise, there is another Consideration strong enough to engage
us to forgive our Enemies, I mean the danger of it; God has made our Compassion
to others, the If we forgive not, God will not forgive us.
Standard by which he intends to measure his to us. If ye forgive not Men their
Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your Trespasses, nay, he has made
it a part of our daily Prayers, so that when a revengeful Person says this
Prayer, he lays upon himself a Curse, and does in effect beg God not to forgive
him.

This is a Duty we are obliged to in Point of Gratitude too; God has showed
Gratitude to God.
us wonderful Mercies, and can we be so base to think, we are not obliged to
some returns. Peace and Unity was one of the last things our Savior
recommended to the World, and indeed he has pressed no single Precept The first
rising of Ranchor to be suppressed.
with greater concern than this of universal Charity and forgiving Enemies, a
Consideration methinks, that should engage us to suppress all Degrees of
Ranchor and Revenge, and to check and curb them in their very first Motions.

I come now to the Charity in the Actions, to the Mind, Soul, Body, etc.
Charity in the Actions, which is the truest way to prove the former, I mean by
a sincere and cordial Love, distributed without Hypocrisy, or Reserve, to the
Soul, Body, Goods, and Credit of our Neighbor; to his Soul and Mind, we should
acquit our selves with the utmost tenderness and concern, and omit no means
that might any ways promote the Happiness or Advantage of either; to his Body
we should exercise all the Offices of true Christian Friendship and Kindness
and upon all occasions be constantly ready to promote his Interest, and defend
his Reputation.

PARTITION XVII.
Of Charity; Almsgiving, etc. Of Charity in respect of our Neighbors Credit,
etc. Of Peace making, of going to Law, of Charity to our Enemies.

THE next thing Charity in respect of the Goods, both to the Rich and Poor.
is our Charity, toward the Goods and Estate of our Neighbor, and herein we
are to assist and further him in all honest and friendly Offices, and this we
are to do to the Rich as well as the Poor only with this difference, that the
Poor are the more immediate Objects of our Alms.

This great Duty of Almsgiving is enforced Motives of Almsgiving
by many strong and powerful Motives, but the three greatest of all are with
respect to God, our Neighbor, and our Selves, God has commanded it, and
expects it both as an Argument of our Obedience and Thankfulness. Secondly,
True Love and Compassion, and a Fellow-feeling of our Neighbors Wants and
Sufferings engage us to it. Thirdly, In respect of our Selves, the Motive is,
that there is an Eternal Reward annexed; the manner is likewise Manner of
Almsgiving
to be carefully consulted, which will add much to the Grace it self, and to
the Advantage of those we relieve.

And First, We are Cheerfully without the Apprehension of Want, seasonably,
prudently, and liberally.
to do it always with the greatest cheerfulness and satisfaction to exercise a
kind of Holy Joy in dealing our Bread to the hungry; we must not entertain any
vain Fears, or impious Apprehensions, that our administering to the Wants of the
Distressed will be any means to Impoverish us or consume our Estates. We are
likewise to observe a due season and order of Time, and a Prudent and Religious
Care in the regular Distribution of our Charity, and withal to do it pursuant
to the Principles of Liberality and true Christian Generosity.

Our Charity likewise obliges us to preserve Charity in respect of our
Neighbors Credit.
and propagate the Credit of our Neighbor, to be our selves very tender and
careful of his Reputation, and to defend and promote it among others, with all
the Caution that we are able; to be unwilling to believe his Faults, and to
conceal them as far as it is lawful from the Public, and to use all friendly
means to advise and reclaim him.

This is the sum of that Active Charity Acts of Charity in some respects, Acts
of Justice.
we owe to the several Capacities of our Brethren, and this indeed according to
the true meaning of it, is a kind of Justice we owe to him. Likewise Justice
and Charity are so near allied, that they are not to be separated, the one
constantly depends upon the other, and they can never be divided without Injury
to both.

To improve this excellent Virtue, we can do nothing better, then by laying The
great Rule of Charity.
always before us that great Rule of Loving our Neighbor as our Selves, this
the Apostle makes the sum of our Duty; and indeed we can hardly err if we
make that the Standard whereby to measure our Actions.

Peacemaking is another Peacemaking.
Act of Charity, and may be of great use both to his Soul, Body, Goods, and
Credit. God himself has pronounced the Peacemaker blessed, an encouragements
sufficient to engage us to lay hold on all opportunities of setting upon this
extraordinary Work of Charity; but first every Man ought to have a special
regard to his own Temper; he that will undertake in such an excellent Office,
He that undertakes it, must be peaceable himself.
has need to be qualified with all the Graces of Peace, Meekness, and Charity.

Contentions, and Quarrels, and Litigious Suits and Controversies ought to be
appeased and taken up with all the Caution that can be.

The going to Law i^ the Cause be Just has Of going to Law.
commonly so many unhappy Appendages, that according to the Judgment of St.
Paul, the tender regard we ought to have for Peace, should rather incline us to
take Wrong and suffer our selves to be defrauded then make use of it.

All that remains now, is the extent of this Charity; which is to reach to all
Order^ and Degrees of Men even Charity to Enemies.
to our very Enemies; this was our Blessed Lord's own Example, then which,
there can be nothing greater to recommend it to us.

And thus I have run through the several Parts of our Duty to our Neighbor,
toward the right Performance of which there is nothing certainly can more
conduce then the rooting Self-love an hinderance to this Charity.
out of our Hearts all kind of inordinate Love of our selves; this is an
unhappy Principle indeed, and where it once takes root it soon choaks both our
Charity and our Justice; if therefore, we ever intend our Charity should grow
in our Minds, we must first weed out of 'em this Sin of Self-love, for it is
impossible they can prosper together, and then, when this and all other
hindrances are removed, we are to fly to our grand Remedy, Prayer, that God
would Prayer a means to procure it.
frame our Hearts into such a galless Temper, that we may be enabled rightly to
perform this great Duty.

And now I have done with those several Christian Duties, both possible and
pleasant.
things I at first proposed, in showing what is our Duty to God, our Selves,
and our Neighbor; and surely, through the whole, there seems nothing of
Impossibility; the things themselves are all reasonable Just and Practicable,
and what is more delightful and pleasant too; even those that may seem to expose
us to Persecutions and Even when they expose us to Suffering.
Suffering from their Ends and Consequences are the Objects of more Joy then
Grief. There is such a Power in Virtue, such a Satisfaction in a good
Conscience, and such a Secret and constant Pleasure in the Performance of the
Christian Duties, that there is no Apology to be made for our Neglect; beside,
it is a dangerous thing to defer our return to God, the Particulars I have set
down in The danger of delaying our turning to God.
the Discourse of Repentance, and thither I refer you; with the Wise Kings most
rational Advice, Eccles. 5. 7. Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put
not off from Day to Day.

An Introductory Prayer for Faith.
BLessed Lord, God, strengthen and confirm my Faith I besee thee, that I may
truly believe and depend upon thy Holy Name, and Word; improve my
Understanding, and direct my Will, that whatsoever I read in this, or any Book
tending to the Promotion of Religion, and the Salvation of my Soul, may sink so
deep into my Mind, that I may bring forth by it, the Fruit of good Living, to
thy Praise and Honor: O Jesus, my only Mediator and Advocate.

A Prayer suited for the First Partition.
INstruct me O my God, in the Whole Duty of Man; enrich me with thy blessed
Spirit, that the Lights of Nature and Scripture may shine bright in me, and
guide me, through the distinct Branches of my Duty, to Thee, my Self, and my
Neighbor. Give me O Jesus, merciful Jesus, such an awful Sense of thy Eternal
Essence, that by a steady and unalterable Faith I may lay hold on thy gracious
Promises; improve and enliven my hope by a fixed and solid Dependence upon thy
Goodness, and yet restrain me too, that I may in no respect be possessed with the
Vanity of Presumption. O God of Love, inspire my Soul with such a Holy Ardency,
that I may make it the whole business of my Life to Adore and Love Thee. O God
of Love! Let the Fear of Thee (O glorious Majesty!) posses me with such a Holy
Reverence, and Regard for Thee, that I may be afraid to do any thing against
the Honor due to thy Name, or to provoke Thee with any kind of Sin, or Folly;
and in all my Wants and Extremities, give me Grace to put my whole Trust and
Confidence in Thee: O Almighty Lord!

For the Second.
ENdow me, O Lamb of God, with a Spirit of Meekness and Humility, that I may be
enabled to submit to thy Will, and to undergo all the Sufferings of my Life
with Calmness and Moderation. O thou Eternal Fountain of all Honor, Glory, and
Power, for thy own sake I beseech Thee impress deeply upon my Soul, a high
Reverence and Regard for thy House the Church, and the Possessions thou have
set a part for thy own Use, and let thy Day, thy Word, and thy Sacraments be
always precious in my sight; O Lord! my Strength, and my Redeemer.

For the Third.
O Merciful Jesus, who have prepared a blessed Feast for the Entertainmment of
my Soul, give me Grace before I presume to approach thy Table to prove my Self
by a strict Examination, how fit I am to be a Guest at such an Holy Banquet;
and seeing I can never prepare my self as I ought without Repentance, Faith,
and Obedience: Direct me I beseech Thee, in the right performance of those
great Duties, and in every other Grace and Virtue that is any ways requisite to
qualify me aright for that awful Mystery.

For the Fourth.
O Omnipotent and Eternal God, I acknowledged thy Name is Great, Wonderful, and
Holy, and most worthy of Honor and Adoration; keep me therefore (dread Lord)
from all kind of Blasphemy, and Perjury, and from all vain and unlawful Oaths,
and from every other Sin that may any ways tend to debase the Majesty of thy
most glorious Name.

For the Fifth.
THY Name O Lord is thy own glorious Self! Hear me therefore O great Jehova!
That when I Pray, Repent, or Fast, or do any of the other Duties of Religion, I
may do them all with an habitual Reverence, and Purity of Intention, to the
Praise and Honor of thy Name.

For the Sixth.
DIrect me O my God in the Duties to my Self! Impress upon me O Eternal
Goodness, a sober Mind, and an Humble Spirit, that I may acquit my self to Thee
and my Fellow Creature, as becomes a Wise Man and a good Christian; keep I
beseech Thee all Pride and Vainglory out of my Heart, and from a due
Reflection upon the Folly and Danger that attends them, give me Grace to use
the means to prevent 'em effectually; endow me O thou Author of all good Gifts,
with a meek and quiet Spirit, that I may form my Life after thy Example; O
blessed Jesus!

For the Seventh.
BLess me O Father of Mercy with a contented Mind through every State and Turn
of my Life, and let neither Murmuring, Ambition, Covetousness, or Envy at any
time get the Dominion over my Reason, and disturb the Composure of my Soul.
Assist me mercifully O Lord in the performance of those Duties that concern my
Body, that by the help of Chastity and Temperance, I may utterly mortify all
my Corrupt Lusts and Appetites, and make it a fit Receptacle for a pure Mind,
and a quiet Conscience.

For the Eighth.
GIve me, O thou Eternal Fountain of all Order and Sobriety, a fixed and settled
Hatred against all Intemperance, but more especially against that of excessive
Drinking; discover to me I beseech Thee, the false Ends of Drinking, and
imprint upon me such a deep sense of the Danger, and Folly, and withal of the
Loathsomeness of it, that I may reject it, as a Vice much below the Dignity of
a Man, much more of a Christian.

For the Ninth.
O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord, God, direct me I beseech Thee in a right Application
of all thy Blessings. Thou have given me leave to Sleep for the Support and
Repose of my Frail Body, teach me likewise, O God of Temperance, to measure it
by the Ends for which thou was at first pleased to ordain it. Let all my
Recreations be moderate and inoffensive, and used with the strictest Caution
with regard to Thee, my Neighbor, and my Self; give me Grace and Prudence to
avoid all Gaiety in my Apparel, and to prefer the inward Ornaments of my Soul
to all useless Trappins, and all gaudy and insignificant Shows and Formalities.

For the Tenth.
INstruct me, O Eternal Father of all Truth and Equity, in the Duties I owe to
my Neighbor; grant I beseech Thee, that I may direct my Life, by the constant
Rules of Justice, both Negative and Positive. Prevent me, O Crucified Savior
from that crying Sin of Murder; let the hainousness, the Punishments, and the
strange Discoveries thou have been pleased to make of it be always in my View,
to deter me from it even in the most minute Particulars.

For the Eleventh.
GIve me Grace, O Blessed Redeemer that after thy Example I may observe a
strict and Positive Justice to my Neighbor in all his Possessions. Stamp deep
upon my Mind I entreat Thee (O my God) a tender regard for him in his Wife, and
in all his worldly Goods. Lord I beseech Thee, defend me from the Sins of
Oppression and Theft, and give me Grace to acquit my Self justly in all my
Dealings, and to behave my self as becomes an honest Man in all manner of
Bargains and Commerce.

For the Twelfth.
LET thy merciful Ears O Lord be open to my Prayers; for the sake of thy own
Eternal Equity, errace utterly out of my Mind all unjust Notions; and let no
Temptations to any sort of Robbery at any time get the Dominion over me;
improve my Mind I beseech Thee with such a determinate hatred against all kind
of Deceit, that I may immediately resolve upon that great Duty of a Christian
Restitution. And this I beg of Thee with the highest Ardency, for thy own sake
O merciful Jesus!

For the Thirteenth.
O Eternal God of Truth! guide me I beseech Thee by thy blessed Spirit, that I
may be exactly careful how I Believe, or Report any thing to the Prejudice of
my Neighbor; keep me from the dangerous Sins of Perjury. and Slandering, from
all base and malicious Whisperings, and from all fly and injurious
Insinuations; O God of Righteousness, let the tenderness and regard I owe to my
Fellow Christian sink so deep into my Soul, that I may neither Scoff at his
Calamities, or Infirmities, nor deride his very Sins. Give me, O King of
Justice, such a Positive Vprightness and Integrity, that I may abhor all sorts
of Lying, Envy, and Detraction, and that I may preserve an humble and entire
Gratitude and Thankfulness toward my Friends and Benefactors, but especially
toward Thee O bountiful Jesus!

For the Fourteenth.
O God of all Order and Power, who in thy Wisdom have appointed several Ranks
and Degrees of Men among us, give me an awful Sense of that profound Obedience
and Respect I owe to all the Magistrates, Pastors, and Governors in their
respective Stations; teach me O my God! as a Child, that Love and Reverence I
owe to my Parents, and as a Parent that Care and Duty I owe to my Children,
that in both Capacities I may discharge my Trust after the Direction of thy
most Holy Precepts, O King of Righteousness!

For the Fifteenth.
TEach me O merciful God and Savior, that I may acquit my self to all my
Brethren whether Spiritual or Temporal, and to all my Relations, as becomes a
Member of the Christian Profession; in the several Capacities of a Husband,
Friend, Master and Servant, teach me O merciful God, to behave my self, as
becomes a Member of thy most Holy Religion, O blessed Jesus.

For the Sixteenth.
INstruct me I beseech Thee, O Almighty Lord, in all the Branches of my Duty to
my Neighbor. After thy own Example, O unchangeable Goodness! Direct my Charity
toward him, with respect to his Soul, his Body, his Goods, and his Credit;
give me such a Spirit of Positive Justice, that I may value him upon all
Accounts equal to my self, and be always ready to do the very best I can to
propagate his Interest in both Worlds. I beg this of Thee with the utmost
Ardency of my Soul, O Jesus, merciful Jesus!

For the Seventeenth.
O Merciful God, who have marked out my Compassion to my Fellow Creature, as
the Standard by which thou intendest to measure Thine to me! Give me, I beseech
Thee an entire and universal Charity. Open my Bowels, that I may be ready to
help and further him in all his Extremities. Grant O my God, for the sake of
thy own Love, that I may be always prepared to vindicate my Neighbors good
Name upon all occasions, that I may judge the best and speak well of him, and
conceal or excuse his Infirmities, that I may be impatient to hear, slow to
believe and unwilling to propagate evil Reports; lodge him in my Heart in the
very next Place to my Self, that I may constantly Study his Peace, and value it
equal to my own; keep me from all Litigious Suits and Controversies, let an
even and regular Charity run through my whole Life and Actions, and extend it
self even to my very Enemies; I beg this and every thing else, thou in thy
Wisdom knows useful for me, for Jesus Christ his Sake,

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
Books Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey.
CAtholicism without Popery. An Essay to render the Church of England a Means
and a Pattern of Union to the Christian World. ^ctavo.

The Mourners Companion: Or, Funeral Discourses on several Texts, ^n Two Parts.
By Mr. John Shower. Octavo.

The Dying Man's Assistant: Or, Short Instructions for those who are concerned
in the preparing of Sick Persons for Death. Being no ^ess worthy the
Consideration of all good Christians in time of Health; ^hewing the importance
of an Early Preparation for their latter End; with regard as well to their
Temporal, as Eternal State. By a Divine of the Church of England Twelves.

The London Dispensatory, reduced to the Practice of the London Physicians,
wherein are contained the Medicines that are now in use, and such as are not in
the Latin Copy added; with their Virtues and Use. By John Pechy of the
College of Physicians in London, Twelves. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Mr. Clark's Concordance to the Bible. Twelves.


