THE NEW BLOODY ALMANAC For this ensuing year, beginning March the 25. 164^
and ending, March 25 1645. In which England i^ directed, ^o foreknow what shall
come to pass, according to many predictions: Being a perfect abstract of the
Prophesies of the best approved. Out of Scripture, Astrology, and Prophesy.
And some observations from that admired Astrologer of our days. Mr. JOHN
BOOKER.

Also other Prophesies by Walgr^ve, Merlin, and Cardan.

A cold Summer. Woods. old Men dye. much Wind. Grass.
woodcut depicting astrological predictions. Wars. commons rising. Popery
pull down Pear Church and Kingdom Je^^^.
woodcut depicting astrological predictions. A cold Winter. Towns f^^^d,
Fea^e^s plenty a glorious State.
woodcut depicting astrological predictions.

LONDON, Printed by John Hammond, 1643.

The new bloody Almanac.
READER, thou art hear presented with an old Almanacks relation, to this
ensuing year 1644. written one hundred thirty, and six years since; by John
Walgrave, whose maniscript has been kept in a library in Bedford-shire and
now remains in the coustody of Mr. John Gwin Minister of ^ ople in the same
County, and it is truly gathered according to the rule of the original copy,
written by the Authors own hand in Vellome; with Gold, Blood, and J^ck,
wherein is found these observations upon the year in general, viz.

From the 25. of March to the last of December 1644. there are these Pictures
drawn in the said Vellome, viz. Bee-hives turned up side down, and the Bees
flying away, Arrows flying in the air dead Bodies ^apt in shrines with
Crosses, Crucifixes on there breasts, upon the shrines, Mountains and Hills and
one with a Crown on his head and Stars about him, over which, is likewise
written thus; viz. A cold Summer, foul weather Bees go away, Hunger in the
Land, death of Children, a full and glorious state, much wind.

From the last of December to March the 25. following, there are likewise a
Woman in Winter habit; ripe corn a great tree with an Axe lying on the ground
at the root thereof, a Lord and a Lady, with a gold ring between them, a round
Globe without a Cross, a Bullock, two Pigeons billing each other etc. a
forlorn Cross thrown at upon the mountains, winds. Winter so so, new Laws,
much fair Cattle: and a fair Sea.

These be his Emblems, and these be his own interpretations, under which
himself subscribed thus; which still remains in letters of Gold, viz.

John Walgrave me vir sect
in bille ka eser Anno Dom. 1508.
John Walgraves predictions, upon each Month in the year.
IN April, Sol is in Taurus, cold and moist (many alom) the Emblems are first
two Women lying dead upon the ground with papers in their hands, corn growing
thick, and measures thereof upheaped, and to Bee-hives subscriped thus, If it
thunder in April, it tokeneth death of Women, good corn and many Bees.

In May, Sol is in Gemini, hot and moist, (ma tbum) the Emblems are two trees,
a Sith and two young Cavaliers with Arrows at their throats, over which is
written thus, May tokeneth hunger in the Land.

In June, Sol is in Cancer, cold and moist (^ndifferent) the Emblems are a dry
and barren mountain with dead trees, having neither fruit; nor leaves
thereon, having a Lion on the one side of it and a Wolf on the other, and this
inscription upon the same, written over it in old (English) June tokeneth wood
(that is mad and furious Beasts,) as Wolves, Lions and others that are wild,
and great Floods.

In July, Sol is in Leo, hot and dry, (evil to bleed) the pictures painted in
this Vellome are for this month, are a Sith, a Bullock: and an heart, and this
observation thereupon, July, tokeneth good Birds and strong Beasts.

In August: Sol is in Virgo: cold and dry, (indefferent) the Emblems are a
great Gun: two open hands and a woman lying solitary upon the ground over which
is written thus August tokeneth sore sickness and much pilgrimage.

In September, Sol is in Libra, hot and moist: (good to bleed) there is
pictured for this Month men all in armor, lying dead upon the ground and
gunner and fireworkes and the inscription over the same is this. September:
betokens men of the Land slain in their armor.

In October, Sol is in Scorpio: (cold and moist:) (indifferent) the Emblems are
first; wind issuing out from an head and tops of hills and Mountains in the
midst of water: and lastly great spreading trees from which Emblems is
observed viz. October betokens great winds; and Floods, and much fruit.

In November, Solis in Sagitarius hot and dry: (good to bleed) the Emblems are
full measures of corn, and great store of corn growing: and this inscription
above the same, November betokens much corn, and joy in the Land.

In December Sol is in Capricornus hot and dry: (good to bleed) the Emblems are
a vessel of Wine, and men and women embrasing and kissing each other: over
which is written thus, viz. December tokeneth many Love days. And an increase
of wealth to Merchants, with Peace, with Love, joy and wealth, together with
the word of truth, which the Lord hasten to poor England.

In January Sol is in Aquaries, cold and moist, (good) and there is the picture
of a great head blowing forth wind, great Mountains. And swords, and bills,
over which is written thus, viz. January betokens great winds, and Floods much
war.

In Febu^ry Sol ^s in Pisses cold and moist (indiffrent) and there is the
picture of a spade two o^d men in gowns, dead upon the ground, and two
Gentlewomen in black baggs mourning and a it were he Lands end, by the Sea ^^e,
over which is like wise written in old Inglish; as much as thus, viz. Febuary
tokeneth death of Merchants and Mariners.

In March Sol is in Aries, hot and dry; (good to bleed) the pictures are, a
great head blowing forth furious winds; and three Gentlemen led by one bearing
a poleax before them; and one bearing a cross upon his neck following them,
and n the last place a great b ock: the observation upon these Emblems is this;
March betokens great winds an 5 Floods, and the commons arising.

M. John Bookers emphatical observations on this present year, 1644.
IN the new Moon preventionall, Marce wholly possesses the Heavens which
happineth on, the 27. of February, Marce being Lord of the year, he was in the
first house, does threaten losses, abortment and greivious labor to those that
are with Child

Jupiter ha^h the next pre-eminence to Marce, and his position at the sun
ingresse into Aries in the sixth house, it makes the condition of servants, and
four footed beasts, happy and prosperous. And so much the more because his
happily joined with Venus, temperateth the a^re, and brings in the Northren
winds. In the new Moon preventiall he was in the eight house, decreasing the
signs of death, and in the full Moon postuentionall in the eleventh house,
and increasing the fortune, and renown or life; gives gifts unlooked for.

Saturn challenges the third place, who at the sunns entrance into Aries, in
combust of the sunn in the first house, and in his fall fortelleth loss to
many: and grief of those that are at liberty: and strife with a certain
Ambassador: or a certain General of an Army. In the new Moon preveronall;
he is in the seventh house very near Venus; who is almost in the eight: and
both very unfortunate signifying death of women, and of sour sooted beasts,
and at the full Moon polinentionall, he is in the eleventh house, the Moon
separat^ng from the oppos^tion of the sunn to oppositions, cunsing an opening
of the gates of Heaven cold raines fleere or snow, and ha se^ and a troubled
un^o some air, and deceives the ^ope, and expectation of many and brings
mischefe and doubts.

Mercury has the fowerth place, he at the sunns ^ngresse into Aries: being
unhappily placed in the end of the fourth house, in his det^^ment and very nigh
the Dragons tail, and Ret^ograde, signifies a prison for the Clerks of an
Office and for those that have the keeping of the common treasure: and will
hurt women with child: that they will neither suffer abortment, or will never
come to birth. In the new Moon poonentio^all he is in the seventh house where
is signifies the unlawful accompanying in the act of gener^tion ^i^h ch^ldren
and the avoid ng of women. At the first Moon post ventiouall; he is in the end
if the middle of Heaven unfortun^te casting down the Scribes, and the learned
men from their honors to a Captaineshippe and to the public reward of Cities.

Thus far of the principal signifycations of the year in this spring
quarter which end on Monday the tenth of June.

Jehovah Zaboath fig^teth for us, let him arise, and let his enemies be
dispersed.

Thus far Mr. Booker.

Cardan fortells us concerning this spring quarter in which Mars rule^h that it
signifies burning of honies: thunder hail; and war but the reason is because
reigns little in Saturnes house but in the turning of the year, at the
entrance of the sunn into Aries in the third house in the end thereof it
signefies emnity, and increases hat^red: and disturbeth alience every where
and because he is nere the fourth house: and the Moon in a g^n^le sign: is
lately fallen of from her opposition; does pull down her poisoned nature
again and infects the planets; and does foreshew great eff^^^on of blood:
especial^y about the end of the year.

Thus far Mr. Bookers cotation of C^^^^n.

Thus it remains written by learned Merlin in his observations upon Easter. we
shall deal at this present concerning those 500. men -- in Susa with the 10.
sons of the great Favour^te.
THE end of the enemies of the Church, is at the last shameful, and full of
sorrow: and their wicked counsels turn at the last to their destruction: and
are made a ruin and confusion unto them: first therefore the day of this
exceution is noted the 13. day of the 12. month Ader: which answers to part
of our Febuary, and the beginning of March. In that day the counsels of the
enemies are reported to fall out contrary to their opinions, for when they
hoped to exercise dominion over the people of God; themselves receive the
overthrow: so the lo^s which the great Favorite cast, that he might find a fit
day to root out the people of God: were found to be deceitful and lying: and
those who put their trust in them, receive a just reward of their impiety.

Although therefore, it sometimes fall, out that Satan the author of all
sorceries: enchantments, and devination, do speak truth (God by his just
judgment and vengance giving force unto his errors) yet this is his only end,
to delude, and draw into perdition, all those curious folk which employ
themselves to such arts, full of sacrilidge; and impiety, that those who were
not Lovers of the truth may perish as they have deserved: for as much as they
have left God, in whom is the fountain of life and truth, to turn themselves
unto the author of death and father of lies. By this means were our Idolatrous
Leagen deceived, who by force of the Bulls and Pardons they had from the Pope
of their Jubilees, Pilgrimages, pr^cessions: of their madness in the
worshipping of Images, and foolish devotions; and by the fortelling of certain
Almanackes, and deceits of other like leger-du-maines, did promise unto
themselve, the wished and happy end of their purposes, which is the abolishing
of the Reformed Churches and Doctrine of the Gospel. But the time and day
which seemed unto them fit for their definements turns unto them, in a day of
sorrow, shame, and eternal confusion -- The people of God then wisely provide
for the affairs: not giving themselves so to joy, and gladness, but
dilligently stand upon their guard, ^rovide them of Armor: gather themselves
together at certain times and places, and principally did fly unto God by
prayers, desiring that he who hither had showed them so great favor, would
make perfect the work of their deliverance, and surely then had they most
need of Gods help, when the fight with their enemies, for unless God had
danted their courage and weakened their force and prowess, there was now hope
they should be vanquished.

Furthermore, they contain themselves within the bonds of the proclamation,
that they only use force, against those that seek their hurt; that is those
that were in arms to hurt their wives and children: for this was the form of
the first edict.

But by what Law do they take up arms against them. Even bearing themselves
bold upon the Kings Decree, which was not called back, although one contrary be
published.

Thus far Merlin.

AN Old Prophesy concerning the great Turk. Patissa homomos ghelur, caiferun
menleker alur kenzal almai alur kapze iler ie di etc.
In English thus.

OUR Emperor shall come, he shall posesse the Realm of an Jnfidell Prince, he
shall take the read apple: and make it subject to his power If at the seventh
year of his comm nd, the Christan sword does not advance; he shall rule unto
the twelfth year, he shall build houses plant vines compass in gardens with
hedges, and beget children: but after the twelfe year that he has held the
red apple, the Christian sword shall appear, and put the Turks to flight.

A Prophese of Merlins.
The crimson Dragon with his one fearce paws,
Shall tear his porpper bowels against the Laws,
Of whosome nature plague and famine then,
Shall fill the barren earth, with shrowdes of men,
After the Dragon, whose smooth scales are wh^t:
Hither the A^mon Daughter shall in vite,
And crown themselves: against whom shall rise,
An Eagle from the Rock, and both surprise.
FINIS.

