AN ABSTRACT Of some of the Printed LAWS OF New England.
Which are either contrary, or not agreeable to the Laws of England, which Laws
will immediately come in Force, in Case the Bill in Parliament for the
Restoring the CHARTERS of the Plantations does pass, and are not Controllable
by any Authority in England, as they pretend by their CHARTERS.
Page 1.
NO Law to be submitted to, but what is made in their General Court (the
Parliament of England not Excepted.)

p. 15.. 9.
Adultery made Capital.

. 12.
If any Man Conspire and Attempt any Invasion, Insurrection, or Public
Rebellion against our Commonwealth, or shall endeavor to surprise any Town,
Fort, or Forts therein, or shall Treacherously and Perfidiously Attempt the
Alteration and Subversion of our Frame of Polity, or Government fundamentally,
he shall be put to death.

. 14.
If any Man have a Stubborn, or Rebellious Son of sufficient Years of
Understanding (viz.) Sixteen Years of Age which will not obey the Voice of his
Father, or the Voice of his other, and that when they had Chastened him, will
not hearken unto them, then shall his Father and Mother, being his Natural
Parents, lay hold on him, and bring him to the Magistrates Assembled in Court,
and Testify unto them, that their Son is Stubborn, and Rebellious, and will
not obey their Voice and Chastisement, but lives in sundry and notorious
Crimes: Such a Son shall be put to Death.

. 15.
Ravishment left to be punished by Discretion of Judges.

p. 34.
It is hereby Declared, That the General Court consisting of Magistrates and
Deputies is the Chief Civil Power of this Commonwealth, which only has Power
to raise Money and Taxes upon the whole Country, and dispose of Lands, (viz.) to
give and confirm Proprieties, appertaining to, and immediately derived from the
Country, and may Act in all Affairs of this Commonwealth according to such
Power, both in matters of Counsel, making of Laws, and matters of Judicature,
by Impeaching and Sentencing any Person or Persons according to Law, and by
Receiving and Hearing any Complaints, orderly presented against any Person or
Court.

p. 43, 55, 56. By which it appears, that that part of the Bill for Restoring
Charters set forth in the preamble, (viz.) the Encouragement of the Established
Religion, will not be Answered, but on the contrary, by Restoring the Charters
of New England these Penal and Prohibitary Laws in Ecclesiastical matters will
be revived, and the Established Religion thereby discouraged, or wholly
suppressed, whereas by the vacating and Dissolution of those Charters and Laws
the Established Religion was promoted.
None to be admitted to the Freedom of their Commonwealth, unless of their
Church and in full Communion, and Members of their Church.

p. 45.. 15.
Penalty of not coming to their Meetings Five Shillings.

p. 48.. 4.
None suffered to Vote in an Assembly, unless they come to their Worship.

Whosoever, p. 58.
shall be found observing any such day as Christmas, or the like; either by
forbearing Labor, Feasting, or any other way upon any such Account as
aforesaid, every such Person so Offending shall pay for every such Offense,
Five Shillings as a Fine to the County.

p. 60.
Does hereby Order, and by the Authority of this Court be it Ordered and
Enacted, That no Master or Commander of any Ship, Barque, Pinnace, Ketch, or
other Vessel shall henceforth bring into any Harbor, Creek or Cove within this
Jurisdiction any known Quaker or Quakers, or any Blasphemous Heretics as
aforesaid, upon the penalty of the Forfeiture of one hundred Pounds.

P. 61.
Quakers Banished on pain of Death.

P. 63. P. 88. P. 89.
Several Laws to encourage the MANUFACTURE of LEATHER in that Country.

P. 73.
Nor shall any Man be compelled to go out of this Jurisdiction upon any
offensive Wars, which this Commonwealth, or any of our Frinds or Consederates
as shall voluntary undertake, but only upon such Vindictive and Defensive Wars
in our own behalf, or the behalf of our Friends and Confederates, as shall be
enterprized by the Council and Consent of a General Court, or by Authority
derived from the same.

P. 102. Memorandum. By this Law many Thousands not agreeing to the
reasonableness of it, live together unmarried, and great numbers of Children
unbaptized by reason of the like Restraints.
It is therefore Ordered by this Court and Authority thereof, That no Person
whatsoever in this Jurisdiction shall join any Persons together in Marriage,
but the Magistrate, or such other as the General Court, or Court of Assistants
shall Authorize in such place where no Magistrate is near.

P. 106.
This Court taking into serious Consideration the great necessity of upholding
the Staple Commodities of this Country for the supply and support of the
Inhabitants thereof, and finding by experience, the bringing in of Malt, Wheat,
Barley, Biscuit, Beef, Meal and Flower, (which are the Principal Commodities of
this Country) from Foreign parts, to be exceeding prejudicial to the
Subsistence of this Place and People here; Have therefore Ordered, That no
Person whatsoever either Inhabitant or Stranger, shall directly or indirectly
after the first of March next, import into this Jurisdiction from any part of
Europe, any of the aforesaid Provisions, under the Penalty of Confiscation of
the same (except it be for the Ships Provisions) that shall be so Imported,
Landed, set to Sale, or otherwise disposed contrary to the intent of this Order.

P. 117.
A Mint for Coins of all values, set up with all its appertenances. No notice
being taken of the KING in the Stamp or allay.

P. 119:
It is Ordered, And by this Court Declared, That no man shall be urged to take
any Oath, or Subscribe to any Articles, Covenants, or Remonstrances of Public
and Civil Nature, but such as the General Court has considered, allowed and
required. And no others to be taken, but such as are allowed by the General
Court. The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy not excepted.

P 137 Vide the Laws at large. ^
Whereas, The keeping of Sheep tends much to the benefit of the Country, and
may in short time make good supply toward the Clothing of the Inhabitants if
carefully preserved. And forasmuch as all places are not sit and convenient for
that end etc.

P. 141.
All Ships Prohibited to unload till they have acknowledged their Government,
and greater Impositions upon Shipping of England than others of New England.

Vide the Laws made to regulate the Navigation and Trade.
The Execution of the Acts for Trade and Navigation made impracticable --

By which Laws, and their Power, and Practice of making others of like Nature.
It appears, how necessary it is, that by Authority residing in England these
Nothern Colonies, which are endeavoring to improve, and have already set up
the Principal Manufactures, and Staple Commodities of Old-England, ought to be
restrained in the Point of Government, and remain Subject to, and immediately
depending on the Crown.


