AN ELEGY UPON The Death of that Renowned HERO Coll. RAINSBORROW.
WHO Was most Traitorously Murdered on Monday October. 29.1648
Something it was, that made the envious Stars
To mutiny, and discord into Wars,
In that great Constellation -- 48.
Whose brows with curled flashings yet affright
The reeling Universe: It was thy Fame,
Thy peerlesse Valor and thy precious Name,
O Rainsborrow, something it was the Sun,
Did walk in mourning since thy day was done,
In Sable Clouds, masking his glorious face,
As loathing to behold that fatal place,
Wherein thy righteous blood (yet reeking) cries
Against those bloody Caines butcheries.
But did thou dye as fools, or were thy hands
(The Twins of prowess) braceletted with bands?
(Whereof each singer was a charm to still
The balls of Death, and whole Campania's fill
With palmed Trophies) No, as Virtue fares
Loathed by vicious Hell-born Councellers,
Such was thy fall, such thy bewailed fate,
Though blood-gorg'd Envy could but Antedate
Thy mortal piece, Shryne to that purer part,
Not to be pensill'd by Seraphick Art.
Therefore the Heavens, grown covetous to see
The Earth enriched with such a Gemme as thee,
Down glydes a winged Cherub in all have,
To snatch thee hence, in triumph to be graced,
A fixed Star; where though the Quires do sing
For joy, we (steeped in tears) our hands do wring
Like melting Niobes, though from our eyes,
Thy worth may claim as debt such sacrifice,
Mirror of men, Arts abstract, Soldiers glory.
True Graces splendour, and sweet peace's story,
Engine of War, a valor double edged.
Not to be blunted, though with Armies hedged,
(Nor durst grim Atropos, presumed thee harm,
Had not the subtle Hagge, used Treasons Arm)
Whom all succeeding Ages may admire
Not imitate, yet there is living fire
Within thy name, enough to blaze on high,
Coward Succession, into Chivalry,
Nor does the languish'd Land lament alone,
But Neptunes Court, where thy great name is known,
Are all in mourning, there the Sea-Nimphs weep
Vailing their beauties in the curled deep:
The showers unto the Billows mourn, and they
Unto the shoares return, a Welladay.
The burden of whose Eccoes passing knell
Is this: A great Man's fallen, in Israel.
Farewell dear Patriot, since thou art gone, we have
But two things to be proud of, first a Grave,
And then thy name, in that we will happy be,
In this more Active through thy memory.
And thus our Tears of Joy and Grief, we shed,
Glad thou art in Heaven, yet sorry thou art Dead.
Virtus post Funera. THO. ALLEYN.

Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson. 1648.


