THE ABSTRACT Of the CLAIMS Of all Persons Claiming as INNOCENTS In the City,
County of the City, And County of DUBLIN.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE

C2 R



Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castlestreet, 1663.

By His MAJESTY'S Commissioners Appointed to execute the Act for Settlement of
IRELAND.
WHereas by our late published Rules, Orders and Directions, etc. dated the two
and twentieth of OCTOBER last past, To prevent the surprizal of any person for
want of due notice when We intend to begin with any particular County, and that
all persons concerned in any of the Lands claimed by Innocents in such County,
may have certain notice of the persons claiming the same: We have thought fit
and ordered to begin with the several Claimants in the City and County of the
City of DUBLIN, and to send forth our public notice thereof to the several
Counties throughout this Kingdom, with Lists containing the Claimants Names and
Denominations as well of the Lands claimed in those particular Counties, as of
Lands claimed in other Counties:

These are therefore to signify unto all persons concerned, That upon TUESDAY
the tenth day of FEBRUARY next ensuing, We intend to sit publicly in Court at
the KINGS INNS DUBLIN, then and there to proceed to the hearing of such of the
undernamed Claimaints Causes, (a List whereof is herewith sent) as shall then,
and so from time to time, be fitted and prepared for our Adjudication,
according to our said published Rules, Orders and Directions, etc.

And We do further hereby signify, That the said under-named Claimants are
hereby required to appoint their Atturneys respectively to prosecute their
Claims before Us.

And all Soldiers, Adventurers, and other persons whatsoever, concerned in any
of the under-mentioned Lands, their Atturneys, Agents or Sollicitors, (who have
been so remiss and negligent in prosecuting their Claims, and bringing in their
answers, that We could not hitherto proceed to the public hearing of Causes,
as We intended) are hereby likewise required to be more diligent in making
their appearances, in filing their answers, and producing their Witnesses,
Evidences and other Writings, according to the respective days and times, and
at the peril by Us prescribed in Our published Rules, Orders and Directions
aforesaid.

Given at the Kings Inns Dublin, the 16th day of December, 1662. Signed by
Order, THOMAS KENNEDY, Chief Clerk to the said Commissioners.

Claimants Names. Denominations of the City, County of the City, and County of
DUBLIN. Other Counties. Denominations. Anglesey Arthur Earl, and Walter
Plunket. 7 Houses. Anglesey Arthur Earl, and Patr. Tallant. 5 Houses in S.
Brides street. Arthur John. Several houses, waste land. Carbery house in
Skinner-row. 8 houses and 24 acres of land. Hacketstown. Pierstown Lumlottery.
A bond of the Staple of 400 l. A Bond of the Staple of 100 l. Neals-town,
Westpelstown. Mead

Louth

Roscomon Mayo Louth: Roscomon: Mayo and Sligo.

The Rectory of Knockmark: Heathstown: Harristown: Drumine: Newrath: Mullagh:
Curry: Drumcassil: Richards-town: Abbey in Atherdee and Parks: Galy: Leo:
Garran: Ballikilline: Drombofin, Dromomadery: Fullenlanker: Cluombuock: A bond
of the Staple of 1000 l. Allen Edward. Several Houses: Athgoe Kildare

Louth Wicklow

Bishopscourt: Oughterard with the Rectory thereof: Painstown: Hartwelmill:
Keelocks: Rathmore: Palmerstown Little Rath: Atherdee Kilbride. Archibald
Pierce. Two Houses Clogheran, Swords Cappag, Killenardan Wicklow

Cavan

Kildare

Glasinmullin, the Tiths of Brea, Ten poles of land and a Castle, Crikriagh,
Latelow: Toniveagh, Maghery in Caltry, Knockitean, Aghatenevulty, Kiltily
Benevulty, Lesderig Bogh, Aghigaslan, Blackhall, Several Statutes. Arthur
Patrick. Two houses, Colmans-town. Two Statutes for 400 l. Allen Ralph. Two
houses, one waste plot of ground. Arthur Bennet. 5 Houses, One park in S.
Keavans street, Irishtown, the wood of Castleknock. Kildare

Tipperary

Creistown, Kellystown, Newtown.

Annagh, Derry: Ballyurgane.

Ash Rich. jun. 1 House in Highstreet. Kildare The great Fernaght. Archibald
Christofer. One Stonehouse in St. Patrickstreet. Oldgrange, Brea. The Rectory
of New-town in the Strand. Kildare

Wicklow

Catherlagh

Grangfort alias Grange foer, Collinstown al. Collins, Thorimstown, al.
Coninstown, Coolerick, Huetstown, Kilcae, Tymolinbey, S. Johnsland:
Inchmaquidder, Naas, The Rectory of Kilcrony, Killelade, Portress, Moylabby,
Spretstown Crookstown Gurteen, Ivaughan, Davidstown, Kilrush, Tirdoyn, Solland,
Johnstown, Kill.

Ratool, Corristown, al Ballishroe, Spinnans, Toberogan, Gracesland
Gibbletstown, the Rectory of Fontsland, Glancar, Glancormack. Castledermot.

Archbald Edward. Two houses in Thomasstreet, 2 in S. Kevanstreet, 2 Tenements
at the Green. Wicklow Templecarrig Aylmer Gerald. One house in Shipstreet Mead

Louth

Sisly, Obrestown, Malafine, Balrath, Deens, Higginstown, Carrick, Cruistown,
Begnetshills, Baristown, Rectory of Ballimagarvey, Billardstown, Senescalstown,
Thirstenstown, Dunmo. Drogheda 2 houses Hainstown, Reynoldstown, Gibstown,
Carnonbreg, Preistland, Chanonrock Coolcredan, Dromcawel Monasterbois. Allen
Lawrence. Three houses in Winetavern street, several houses in S.
Patrickstreet, 2 houses on Merchants key, A Feefarm in S. Nicolas parish
without the walls, A Statute Staple of 200 l. A Statute Staple of 800 l. County
Clantarf, Dalky. Louth

Sligo Queens Mead

Richardstown, Poohaustown, Verdestown, Branganstown, Bergan, Mashfieldstown,
Ratheskin.

Dromcouragh etc.

Inch al. Ballycoolin etc.

Davistown, Corballies, Much-Roberstown.

Brown Thomas. Three houses and a garden, an Orchard and a park in S.
Thomastreet, Clondalkin, Knockmuckine, Venables farm, Lukan. Bath Peter. 8
Houses, Barbies land, Coolock, the troul-mill of Swords, S. Dowlagh, 40 acres
betwixt Santry and Clunturk, Clunturk, A Statute Staple of 1000 l. on Athcarn,
Richinhead, Hackestown, A rent charge on Walter Cruce. Mead

Roscomon

Grange end, Thomas town, the Grange of Trevet, the red moor al Dunsoghlin, A
Statute Staple of 830 l. on the estate of G. Crofton. Blake Patrick, and
others. 4 Houses, Rathcool, Tassagart. Galway Gortigany, Killogenemalow,
Killogecostraw, Gortincorra. Barnwall Will. Mary his wife and Dominick Hughs.
One house on Cockhill. Westmeath Mullingare. Ball Thomas. 2 Houses in
Pipestreet 1 house in Highstreet. Mead Kildare Bolton, Robinston. Millston.
Bermingham Patrick. One garden-plot in Oxmontown. Brown Mabell. One house in
Rosemary lane. Beal Josias and Barbara. One house in S. John's lane. Bellew
Edward 10 l. per annum out of William Higgins houses and lands. Bath Patrick. 2
Houses and several other Tenements in Pipestreet and Mary lane, Glasnevine.
Mead Balgeath. Barnwal James Several houses, Deumnagh, Tirenure, Camish,
Gallan-town, Cromisin, Ballimad, Ballibrigen, Balliformot. Wicklow Louth
Tiniepark, Ardee. Banks Andrew. One message in Highstreet, 1 house in
Skinner-row, 1 house in Highstreet. Barnwel Robert. 2 houses in Cookstreet.
Mearh Wicklow Clonmeath, Masetown, Kilmakennock. Bret John and others. 2 Houses
in Highstreet. 1 house in Christchurch lane. Mead Deece Barony Goltromer,
Knockmark Ratooth Bar.

Mixmal.

Brenan Richard. 1 House in S. John's lane. Brice Richard. 1 House in the
Corn-market, 2 houses in S. James street, 1 house in S. Thomas street,
Kilmainam, 2 houses in Newstreet, Giffords grove, Floods freehold, Fitzsimons
or Bealings land, the Backey, the new park.

Newcastle Bar.

Hospital of S. John of Jerusalem, Sloesland, Clinshers park, Crumlin.

Mead Dunboyn Barnwel Mary. 1 House in S. Thomas-street. Bor John. 2 Houses in
S. Michaels lane. Galway

Mead

Canmer, Ballimrergh, Garnaan, Balaghbane, Derrin, Laghlin, Toberkegh,
Ballinderry, Ballagh, Cagail. Great Bewbeck. Burnel Henry Esquire; Houses in
Oxmontown, Irishtown, Lutterilstown, Barbiston, Castleknock, Blancherston,
Hartstown, al. Staheny, Coulock, Backistown, Castle-Curragh, A mill and weir in
the Liffie, Rickenhead, Diswelstown, Kellistown, Clansillagh, Finaghsland,
Jannings land, Stagob, Porterstown, Dillons land, The pace, Ashtown,
Carpenterstown, Mead

Kildare

Moyfinragh Bar.

Castle-Rickard, Ballinihan.

Salt Bar.

Killistown, Creestown, Newtown, Gragesallagh, Powerstown, Kilmartin, Craserath.

Barnwal Patrick. 5 Houses. Mead

Louth

Duleek Bar.

Kilmone, Primerston, Rath, Iriston, Ballihake Kilrew, Smithston, Franckston,
Keaser, Balliston, Tough, Bodin Ratouth, Flemington, Mananstown, Kinard, Hilton.

Ratowth Bar.

Mosenrath, Rathmolan, Treman, Stranne, Cloncovan.

7 Houses in Drogheda.

Birmingham Mary and Maximilian Dempsey and Anne ux. The Fleece in
Fish-shamblestreet. Kildare

Kings

Carhery.

Donferth, Disert, Muclan, Mulgigh, Killien, Ballinamallagh, Kilmurry,
Kilshanchoe, Irr, Ballrennet, Ballinderry, half Mucklan,

Inkehy half Bar.

Ballicolgan, Laraghs.

Ball John. 11 Houses and the shut clap-mill, Portrane and the Rectory thereof.
Mead

Kildare

Duleek Bar.

Londerstown, Newtown of Duleek, Bolton, Robinstown.

Milletstown.

Birne Daniel. Several houses and tenements.

Castlknock Bar.

Stagobby, Abbistown.

Wexford

Wicklow

Queens

Shilmalier Barony.

Ardsmead, Collinstown.

Arcklow.

Ballinecorbeg, Ballicaple, Ballinclare, Carrigmore.

Portnelton.

Quintinally, Moret.

Stradbally.

Allebeg.

Bamber Roger and Teresa ux. One house in Highstreet, 1 house in S.
Patrickstreet.

Nettercross.

Murtheree.

Lowth Keappock, Brodlogh, Baltrasney, Miltown, Rath, Drommore, Capogs mill, S.
Sundays land, Atherdee, Recognizance of 1000 l. acknowledged by Tho. Keppocks
Recognizance of 200 l. from Gerald Cowley of Atherdee and William Moor of
Barmeath, Another Recognizance of 300 l. acknowledged by John Dowdal of
Atherdee. Barnwell James of Brimore. 1 house on merchants Key, Brimore,
Flemingstown, Newhaven, Moylaragh, Plunkets land.

Balrodery Bar.

Balrothery, Balbrigan, Balscaddan, Garrestown, Tobergrag, Ballimad, Drimnagh.

Vppercross.

Crusrath, Little Staheny, Blancherstown, Ringwellstown, Tyrrynure, Camadge.

Mead Dunboyn Bar.

Peirstown, Marshal, Dunboyn, Newtown de Dunboyn, Brabstown, Collierstown,
Blackwood, Hawkenstown, Warenstown.

Duleek.

Battranstown, Cockranstown, Boynanstown Denamstown, Pruinstown, Racastown, The
Grange of the Logh, S. Ganstons, Duleek, Carblagh.

Newcastle Bar.

Ballyformant, Gallanstown, Crumlin, Fox and Goose.

Kells

Kilmainam beg.

Margallen

Oristown, Knock, Lyshanstown.

Atherdee

The chiefLord demeasn and the meadow adjoining, the great hill of Atherdee,
Mullaghdrylan, Mullaghmulin, Stakillin.

Brown Dame Mary. 2 houses on the blind Key. Longford Moydo Bar.

Bellamore, Caldraghgebbedegh, Clontehe, Clonelan.

Barnwel Simon and ux. Five houses in the Suburbs. Mead Duleek Bar.

Kilmone, Brimerston, Irishton, Rath, Ballihack.

Ratouth.

Kilbrew and the Advouson of Kilbrew parish, Smithston, Franckston, Reasle,
Paliston, Toagh Bodin, Ratouth, Flemmington, Grange end, Dunsaghlin, Mananston,
Kinand, Ulton.

Moyfenrath

Rashmolian, Troman, Little Stran.

7 houses in Drogheda.

Crawley Edw. 3 houses, Bellingstown, Kilcoskan, Great and little Bellingstown,
Loghmartin. Louth

Monaghan

Ferrald

Cookstown, Athclare. Ballymeaghan.

Cheevers John. 2 Houses on the Wood-Key,

Balrodery

Garistown.

Mead

Kildare

Skreen.

Mastown, Corballis, Painstown, Rogerstown Bodingham, Kilmoon.

Naas.

Rathmoor, Pounchestown, Woolfstown, Haynstown, Athgarret, Firhill, Skeogs,

Wicklow

Catherlagh

Wexford

Philipstown, Edistown, Cradogstown, Balcase, Ballicane al. Plowland,
Godamendy, Ramoremill.

Talbotstown bar.

3 Castles, Butlers court, Knockanem, Cnockerin, Cnocanore, Oldcourt, Monfin,
Raturele, Cullenshil, Balligore, Comenstown, Bollensmuttane, Ballydangelly,
both the lowest: Cnockanybroky, Inchbane, Ballinetony, Bollyneskehanie,
Ballynoltagh, the Kell of 3 Castles, Temanerly, Coshanavally, Slewnelaraghduff,
Slewsaw, Carrigletrim: Killincnappagh, Ballinfoyl, Ballysillore, Clonovally,
Sknygane, mac-Nebantry, Carrigdown: Glanbride, Downfoord, 18 tenements and land
in the town of Wicklow.

Catherlagh

Grangefort: Littletown, Ballygory: Glenoge: Rathvern: Rathveren al.
Rathverehan: Clinclogh al. Kingclogh: Motelessagh, Ballensyneare, Banogboy: the
tithes of Frierstown.

Bargie bar.

Ballyhaly, Ballylosky: the hill in the barony of Bargy, Horestown, Halslone,
Scurlogs bush, Lecane, Deans castle, Grange, Graige, Ballimader, Ballyfrorie,
Banno, Duncormuck.

Shilmalier

Coolrahin, Churchtown, Ballycollany, Ballear, Birdstown, Sommerstown.

Fort

Cossenstown, Ballicnocane, Killalane, Ballimenan, Ballyvouch, Ballyrely,
Hayesland, Clongaddy, Roches, Keatings, Ballygrungan, Cloomeen, Carrigechurch,
Barristown, Kereaght; Island.

Cadowgan Eliz. vid. One house on the Woodkey. Chamberlain Roger. One house in
Parsonslane. Clerk John. Swan-tavern in Highstreet, Five houses and a waste
piece of ground in Oxmantown, Two houses in Castlestreet, Six houses in S.
Thomas and S. James street, One house in S. Stephens street,

One judgment.

Mead

Tipperary

Dunhoyn

Notston, Rowan, Cradockstown, Loughsallagh, Bradston, Main, Barrets place,
Stephens place, Barons park, Philipston al. Boolis, Kenaghston, Purcherston,
Curcoyn, Ballmucolly called Tues land, Nallswood, Gonocks, Warrenstown,
Mileston, Muchfeild, Stockins, Walsheogrow, Lawkins, Pinkstown, Ballipadine,
Dunboyn, Dun aghlin, Clonee, Ronskeagh. One parcel of land.

Carrick Simon. One house in Highstreet Carbery Richard. One message by
Newgate. Mead Ballymagarvy. Culm Debora vid. Two houses in Golden lane. Mead
Tarraghee al. Castleboy Cunnigar Farm Blakesbush, Thornton, Barons meadow,
Knockgowran, Bodinsleys, Baronsleys, Skryne. Cosgrave Matthew. One house on the
Merchants key. Cosgrave Laurence. One house on the Merchants key. Crolly alias
Chamberlin Thomasin vid. 16 houses,

Colock.

Glasnievin al. Dracots farm, Kilmainham.

Mead

Westmeath

Kells

Chamberlinstown.

Lune

Moyacher.

Mollengar

Two houses in Mollengar.

Cook Amy. 6 Houses. Clear Patrick. 2 houses in S. Thomas street. Coleman
Thomas. A house, Orchard and garden in Newstreet. Christ-Church Dean and
Chapter. The Chantry lands of S. Annes Guild, S. Seths Guild, 3 houses in
Oxmontown, several houses on the Woodkey, One house,

Vppercross.

Smothscourt al. Simonscourt. Colcot and the Conyburry al. Scald hills,
Ballimore-Eustace.

Caddle Robert 2 houses in S. Patricks street. Carbery John. Baggatrath al.
Baggotsroth. Conran Walter. 1 house in S. Thomas street.

Balrodery Bar.

Courragh.

Crump Christophar and others. The horse-pool and one house in S. Michans,
Shallon, Dancestown, Kilmainham, Rahine, The mill of Collotrath, etc. Delahide
John. 2 Houses, Irishtown, Phepostown, Rahinny and Corballis. Wicklow Rathmuck,
Ballyogan, Rathsalcan, the Tithes of Ashtown and Pellstown. Dunsany Lord. One
house, the Pace, Castlknock Bar.

Fullam.

Mead

Cavan

Skreen.

Dunsany, Corballis, Cloony, Hilltown, Ulickstown, Oristown.

Dunboyn

Garrestown, Kennistown, Voldenstown,

Duleek.

Curraghstown, Erick, Tutrath, Oldcastle,

half Four

Fenner, Bolies, Drumlerry, Castletor, Cresdrame.

Kells

Ballyhist, Corristown, one Tenement and a chiefry in Kells.

Great and little Glane, Tullaghmedan,

Deece Barony

The Rectory of Kiltale, Scurlockstown, Phernock.

Castleruan

Knocknevoy, Aghbrack and Lorganboy.

Clomayho

Kilfacy, Crocovertuine, Corkloghan, Corfurnoy.

Claminghan Bellychan, Tulliboy, Aghnehsdern.

Dowde Thomas. One house in Highstreet, 2 houses in Schoolhouse lane, One house
in S. Patrickstreet Nettercross.

Murdery, Dowds-Cabragh, Strawbelly.

Castleknock.

Porterstown, Bursers-town.

Mead

Louth

Mead

Navan, Rathmory, Knock-Rickard, Molloghdryllen, Ballitrasny Broadlogh, S.
Sundays land, Atherdee, Millockstown, Kildermot,

Atherdee

Huntstown, Haghlam, Simonstown, Finway.

Ferrard

Melton, Rathdronimure.

Dunboyn

Clonee, Morrals land.

Dutton John. 1 house in Bridgstreet. Desmineere Lewis and John. One house in
the Merchants Key. Dongan Thomas. Two Houses in Wine-Taverne street, three
houses in the New-Roe. Duffe Richard and Ux. Eleven Houses.

Cooleck.

Kilmainham, Clontarfe. Collinstown, Davans-stown, Balleforman.

Devenish James. Five Tenements called Horsemarket. Deey Michael. Eight Houses.
Dongan William, Lord Viscount. The Park without Saint James, Stayne near the
College four Houses. Dalky, Abbotstown, the Rectory and Tithes of
Palmers-town. Kildare. Salt.

Castletown, Kildrought, Moretown, Kilmarredock, Godfrey-Harriston,
Coolmac-Thomas, Collinbacks-town, Possicks-town, Ardresse, Bebus.

Naas.

Shearlocks-town, with the moiety of the tithes Clare.

Clare, Cooledriny.

Salt.

The impropriate tithes

Longford

Mead

Queens

Kilkenny.

Catherlagh

of Kildrought.

Killeullin.

Tobberrogan, Johnstown.

Salt half Bar.

Killmean, Gibbins-town, Moretown.

Clare.

Corrihils, Kilbegges, Long-town, Ballymany.

Kannell.

Grange-Clare.

Clare.

Corrickeragh, the impropriate tithes of Kilbegg.

Connell.

The Tithes of Grange-Clare.

Clare.

The tithes of Corckeragh, Stabbers-town, and Hodgestown.

Ballinesheegard, Coolyvore.

Kells.

Ballybreagheny, Gibs-town, Donagh-Patrick, Korbins-town.

Deece.

The impropriate tithes of Moyglare.

Rathnemanagh, Knokanegrough, Coolcorin, Balliteighin, Knockanderry, Mariborogh.

The tithes of Temple Michael, Cool-Sarskan and Monegan.

The half of the tithes of Cloedagh, the half of the Rectory of Athade.

Sleward

The tithes of the Barony of Sleward.

Upper Ormond.

The impropriation of Middlethird, the impropriation

Catherlagh

Tipperary.

of S. John's town, alias Scadans and the tithes.

The tithes of Kilkennybegg, Lysmayneny, Lisnecloanta, Garrinemona,
Lisnemorragh, Gortnemoddah.

The impropriation of Luchoe, Rathnegannanagh, Cleofadda, Carrigigown,
Barnedirge, Cloughurdan, Loughanatteney, Ball ristenna, Tiwel, Balliduffe,
Sheraghquillagh, Rodine, Lisbally, Rathnerenra, Lisservan, Camsheceragh,
Gortmore, Ross-Reilcerrin, Lisludican, Ballidaggan, Lissduffe, Ballyriskard and
Knockna.

Doyn George One house in Damasstreet. Down. Donag-Clony, Moyganan,
Ballykeele, Ballyaghreskiugh, Moyree.

Upper Bar. of Tuugh. Bawn and Dullany.

Castlereagh.

Ballynehatty and Bally vnlvally.

Dowde Christopher. One house in Cook-street. Dowdal Walter. One house and
Garden in Oxmantown, one house in S. Jame-street. Mead Lune.

Athboy.

Halfoor.

Outfolk, alias Outhale.

Kells

Crievagh.

Lime.

Culconun, upper Barvecon.

Kells.

Deamers-town, Grish-town.

Dowdal Stephen. One house near Newgate, one house in Corn-market, one on the
Merchants key. Mead

Louth

Duleek Bar.

Gallanstown, the little Boolies, the small farm, Kenock, both the Carnes,
Gaskranstown, the Deems.

Skreen Bar.

The forty Acres, two houses in Duleek.

Farrard Bar.

Terfeighan, Dunnany and Corstown, Dales and Kilcloghes, Callan, several
houses, Coolpark and other lands in Drogheda.

Dungan Dame Mary. Four houses in Fishamble street, Parils, Stain, Dalkey, The
Rectory and Tithes of Palmerstown, Abbotstown. Queens

Kildare

Mead

Longford

Kilkenny

Catherlagh

Rathnemanagh, Knocknegrough, Coultoryne, Ballyteigerine, Knockenderry,
Mariborough. Castletown, Kildraught, Moortown, Collen-blackstown,
Godfryharristown, Bebus, Sherlockstown, Carryshills, Kilbegs, the tithes of
Longtown, Ballimany, Grange, Clare, Corckeragh and the tithes, Kilmelridock,
Coul mac Thomas, Possickstown, Ardress, the tithes of Stablerstown, Hodgestown
and Kildrogh.

Kells

Norbinstown, the tithes of Moyglare, Gibstown, Donaghpatrick, Ballybreaghwene.

The tithes of Ballynesegard and Culivore.

The tithes of Temple-micheal, Coolforckan and Mongany.

The tithes of Cloydagh S. Johnstown, Kilkennisbeg and Limoyneary,

Tipperary the Rectory and tithes of Athad.

Upper Ormond.

Lisnecloonta, Gorynemona, Lynemoragh, Gortnemudagh and Middlethreed.

Lower Ormond.

Lorchoe, Rathue, Gannanagh, Cleofadan, Corrigigowen, Barnedirge, Cloghurdan,
Loghaneattyunvy, Ballistinny, Tywell, Ballyduffe, Shenagh, Quillogh, Rodine,
Lisbally, Rath-mac-Kenan, Lisseynan, Camseragh, Gortmore, Rosse, Bealcarrin,
Lisludican, Reilydaggin, Lisduffe, Balyrickard, Knockenae,

Sleward.

Slevord.

Dillon Luke. Three houses and lands,

Castlknock,

Cappock, Blansherstown, Cardiffs and the new Mills and Killmarmartin.

Nettercross.

Finglas, Johns-town and the Boding.

Newcastle Bar.

Blundels-town, Kilmatalway, Cromlyn, Coulecoat.

Coolock.

Killigh.

Lowth

Mead

Two houses and a Meadow in Drogheda.

Ferard.

Dillons-land.

Betagh-town, and other lands.

Enos Mary. A house in High Street. Eastwood John One house in S.
Nicholas-street. Eustace James. Eighteen Acres in the Parish of S. James, 26
Houses.

Castleknock.

Damastown, Maistown,

Louth

Kildare

Five houses in Drogheda.

Salt.

Confye, Newtown, Balscot, Howes-land Ballygaree.

Corstown, Ballycaeke.

Ballruddry.

Balredry.

Newcastle Bar.

Rathcool, Taffagard, Clondalkan, Blackhomehill.

Radown uppercross.

Dawkey, Dowdingstown.

Newcastle.

Luckan.

Ballruddry.

Calcott.

Mead Dunboyn

Milestown, Rathlick.

Flemming John Three houses and a waste piece of ground in Oxmantown, three
houses in Sautry. Fyan Francis Sixteen houses in S. Francis-street, one house
in Corn-Market. Louth One house in Drogheda. Fitz Symons Henry Three houses in
Cookstreet, one house near Newgate, one house in Backlane. Finleys Mary The
third part of six houses.

Neithercross Bar.

Murtherie.

Louth Keappocke, Brodlogh, Baltraswry, Miltown, Rathdrummore, S. Sundays land,
Capotkes-Mill and 14 houses, the third part of a Mortgage of a 1000 pounds upon
Thomas Keppocks estate of Atherdie, the third part of a Mortgage of 300 l. upon
John Dowdal of Atherdie, a third part of 200 pounds upon Gerrard Cowly of Ardy,
and William More of Barmeth. Frayne Redmond Two houses in S. Francis-street.
Rathcourath.

Mullenmichan, Ichenyaday.

Moyahill.

Molingard.

Fartullagh.

Carrick, Carrickfrayne, Oulanstown, Mahanstown.

Farbils.

Porters-town, Dardisland, Killucken, Rathwyre.

Flemming Garret. Two houses in Thomas-street. Cavan.

Moneghan.

Louth

Mead

Fermanagh

Clank.

Taghart, Dromhalp, Dingan, Dromaller, Tollibrick, Corlea, Lisenamneagh, Moher,
Cornesaw, Capnaugh, Corwillis, Edendogullan, Dowae, Laragh, Drombarr, Moagh,
Mollaghnercrea, Balleaghly, Corhalman, Cormay, Lisnesasenagh, Coremery,
Cortoberr, Corvaddy, Lisnarlare, Killbegge, Cabragh, Corrigirry, Eneskea,
Moybolg, the impropriate tithes of Killane, Cnockbridge, Moybologg, Templeport.

Castleraighdown.

Magherendown.

Dartry.

Toughreah, Tatecacke, Corslea, Cortreen.

Atherdee

Laganwater, Tullie, Newtown, Cormortine, Greatwood.

Kells

Emlagh, Mary-Abbey.

Demifore.

Corbally, Derreherridan, Grangestown, Cnockanvilry, Kilragh, Emlagh,
Castleraigne, Lergan, Muntes.

The impropriate tithes

Letrim. of Kinally and Killert. The impropriate tithes of Clanclare, Killaster
and Moynally. Fitz Gerald Patrick. Two hoses in Mary Lane. Kildare.

Mead

Clane.

Clane.

Clane.

Ikeathy.

Oughter.

Inny.

Kilmurry.

Salt.

Ardresse.

Dunboyn

Clony.

Fitz Simons James Three houses in the Wood Key.

Newcastle.

Callaghtown.

Swords.

Swords, Rogans-town, Battlepark.

Foster James Six houses in Francis-street. Fullam Thomas. One house in
Castle-street. Fingall Earl Luke A house in Oxmantown.

Balrothery.

Reynolds-town.

Cavan. Castleraghan.

Cloghwelly, Getragh, Cloghwellyetrach, Cloghurgool, Lissnalany, Drumgore,
Cornuslee, Cargach, Drunane, Bare, Virginia, Clanmore, Richardrom, Balleene,
Carnehuesky, Killikeene, Lislea, Cargach, Enagh, Thartach, Lislurty, Edenburt,
Logh-Ramer, Portan, Gallon-mac-Geroge, Eterand, Cargach, Carrick,
Athyhencruagh, Muninchocan, Knockatampal, Tineden, Anchonquilly,

Eastmeath. Corronagh, Knocknegartan, Agentegall, Ballahdorragh, Island,
Knocknefea, Barnagh, Lurganboy, part of Knocknofea, Gallonfieragh,
Gallonstramore, Galloniteragh and Gallonstramore, Aghecullen, Keallreagh, Moet,
Crosseighan, Aghedowan, Outeragh, Carrigeagh, Pollgariffe, Lacarowihill,
Edenconishian, Shandrom, Aghemore, Cloonmago, Fry, Neid, Knockowny, Cooletwoe,
Pollyteden, Aghonehae, Galloaroe, Galloncourtampull, Knocklahan, Aghebrack,
Lorganboy, Pollnashye, Lissinaghan, Downamolloge, Knockanroe, Lissedonnelan,
Aghoncheadgotah, Lorgeragh, Skarenhien, Tomquill, Omery, Killoge,
Mulianeshanaclone, Agheneden.

Castleraghan.

Ardskea, Clontrasfane, Deherny, Lemnenesse, Carrigneveagh, Culemoney, Ne
Carribruse, Fertaghow, Fertagheghtra, Aghendronge, Napertune, Loghrawie,
Agheler, Killegnemore.

Ratooth.

Growtoran al. Grovesland, Rayes-town, Foyls-town part. Rathregan, Lismachon,
Ribes-town, Parsons-town, Porre-town, Woodland, Tillikilliconner, Beleams-town,
Little

Fingall Earl Luke. and mickle Derricks, Clonrosse, Swyocks-town, Drumnineere,
Dunsaghlin, Creemore, Dunshaghlin, Ardca, Ladyhill.

Halfore.

Killalan, Gechans-town, Galboys-town, Seraghs-town, Tonlegaith, Corestown, Old
castle, Castle Corr, Crosdrum alias Fassagh, Glanca, Baltrasny, Hamlings-town,
Newtown, Giverveamon, Rath, Corriston.

Dunboyn.

Part Bellandy, Foyles-town, New Bracetown, Balliantry, Nottstown, Little Bally
mac Colly, Kennanstown, Dunboyn.

Kells.

Killsby, Nillinaghs-town, Mills-town, Cullinstown, Boltown, Robertstown,
Drumbarrugh, Destinrath, Calliaghtown, Maprath, Curragh, Clunfenan, Cornesase,
Mote, Rathenrick, Loghan, Cabragh, Scurlocks land.

Deece.

Tulloghmeaden, Kiltayle, part Boyesttown, Knockmack, Morestown Bedfadstown,
Bollogbane.

Skreene.

Walterstown, part Culvestown, Killeene, Clowanstown, Smithstown, Berelstown,
Dwogston.

Navan.

Tullaghanoge, Courts-town, Monistown,

Westmeath.

Louth

Meadstown, Tulchanstown, adjacent towns, Little Bellardan.

Fore.

Raherkin, Hartstown, the Rectory of Kilskyer.

Slaven.

Fegenstown part, Swylefield.

Delvyn.

Legshiny.

Fore.

Glanydon, Carrack, Carrack, Martins-town, Ballimiowen, Arkistown. A house in
Drogheda.

Foster John Six houses and a Brewhouse in St. Francis street, Two in St.
Michaels Lane.

Newcastle Bar.

Ballidowde, Esker, Irish town, Lucan.

Mead

Westmeath.

Deece.

Kilgrage, Peirstown, Porterstown, Baystown,

Ratoth Bar.

Dunsaghlin.

Ktlkenny Bar.

The Rectory of Drumram.

Fitz Simons Marcus A house in New-street, Two other houses.

Balrodery.

Ballmadrought, Corduffe.

Vppercross.

Rathcool, Dalky, Newland.

Newcastle.

Colmanstown, Ballymore, Tassagard.

Kildare Castle Dermot. Fyan Edmund Several houses in College Green, and a
house in Corn-market, a house in Winetavern street, and a house in Bridestreet.
Fitz Williams William, and Alice his wife Two parts of the Precinct of S. John
Baptist without New gate, three Mills and and a Garden, a house etc. in
Backlane, Wicklow Rahinclag, Ballogh, Shallon, Benettstown, Trablie, Ratouth,
Finnor, Millhill, Duleeke, Walterstown, Salimoor, a house in Ramlane, a house
in Cookstreet, a house in Cornmarket.

County.

Clonshillagh, with the Rectory and Grange, Skirmullin alias Tirmullin,
Fiblestown, Barnegeeth, Janings land alias James land, Fenaghs land,
Mistelston, Godamendy, Huntstown, Brune alias Rohernebrune, Colemanstown,
Loghton, Tobberbin, Baldovan, Colecot, Fedanston, Esker, Ballowne, Flockmeadow,
Rohnicallagh, Brandonsgrow, Killeagh, Owenstown, Lawrenstown, Vallanstown,
Great Stokeing.

Orsborns land, Mabston, Curtlagston, Gonogkeston, Rathleeke, Mognelswood,
Ballamacolly, Mastockstown, Haughingston, Roetston, Priston. Fagan Cristopher
Esquire; A house and a Castle-in Corn-market, two-Tofts in Cook-street, and a waste
piece of ground, two houses on Wood-key, one house in Fishamble street, one
house in S. Michaels lane, six houses, etc. in Oxmantown, two houses in S.
Patrickstreet, six houses in Sheepstreet, two houses in Wine-tavern street, a
house in Skinner row, two houses in Bridgestreet, Casyes tower on Wood-key,
Ash-park or Combe-park, etc.

County.

Feltrim, Mabestown, Effernock, Clongel, Drynam and Hamonstowne, Stacoule,
Kinsaly,

Mead

Wexford

Sligo.

Morgallen.

Drakestown, Williamstown, Mountainstown, the Grange.

Kells.

Cullcomman Kells, Mullaghegh Kells.

Ratouth.

Cullcomman.

Ballagheene.

Killgowne, Ballybane, Ballyhought, Ballintegert, Tinekilly, Ballydovenell,
Tobbernenan.

Tirrerill.

Ballynashee, Rathduffe, Tillinure, Cashell alias Cashelnebuny, Carrow Geoltie,
Carrow Iclean, Umerirow, Carrowvickissook.

Carran.

Carrowardcoran, Ballyonachan, Carrowknockchoirke,

S. Doughlags, Bohuner and Ballmacartie with the tithes, etc. the Rath of
Killofferie with the Rectory and tithes, Effernock, the great tithes of
Balgriffin.

Newcastle.

The upper Mill, Rath-cool.

Rathdowne.

Bloyke, with the great and small tithes and customs, Dalkey and the tithes of
Dalkey, and Brenanstown.

Balrodery.

The Curragh, Darcistown, Loughshenny, Thomastown, Tankardstown, Donabate,
Palmerstown.

Castleknock.

Newtown, Rathcool, Cromline.

Vppercross.

Upper mill, Cromlin.

Nethercross.

Luske.

Carrowdanclonagh, Carrowknockchoilme, Carrowknockrawer, Leaghskeagh. Farrel
Edmond and others Two houses. Louth Atherdee.

Painstown.

Fitz Rery Robert One house in S. Thomas street.

Newcastle Bar.

Colletrath, Spricklestown, Gallanston, Correstown, Chapel Midway.

Ratouth.

Greeneg.

Fox Gearrot and Elinor his wife The Castle of the Cran,

Newcastle.

two houses in Castlestreet.

County.

Cromblin.

Westmeath. Rathcourath.

Moyvoore, Temple Patrick, Loggenegall, Ballinecurrie, the five Acres.

Killkenny.

The impropriate Rectories of both the Baskins.

Kerbery.

The Grange, Ballniallacke.

Fitz Gerald George One house. Mead

Kildare

Westmeath.

Moyfenragh.

Tycrahan, Kilarde, Ballyboggan, Clonards, Harristown, Ballinekill alias
Woodtown, Knockanegolly Park, Killosbillin, Cappaghvoggan, Baltogeny,
Kilneclanagh, Kilnegatlagh, Kilmurry, Kilmir, Donoer, Insimore, Rathinally,
Woodtown, Rathclony, Ardnemullan, Toulaght, Aghnegullagh, Kilvarding,
Ballinebarne, Annagh, Moydrum, Enan.

Lune.

Baltonoran, Ballinnebracky, Ballinegulsy, Portlester, Parkestown,
Crossanstown, Moyfechar, Ballyver, Muchwood, Coleronan, Woodtowne west,
Corballis, Rathkenan, Rathcormack, Moyrath, Santoe, Cluny.

Carbry.

Kilrumurry, Ballyowne, Ballinekill, Dirrinligg.

Forbill.

Canagad, Clontrave, Munganstown, Griffinstown, Aneskenan, Derrymore,
Bruttenstown, Chananstown, Jovistown, Pristown, Pagetts Park, Milestown,
Creggstown, Rathfarne. Cloghanstown, Forestown,

Kings. Clonycullin, Ballroyne, Griffinstown, Rahintull, Kerinstown,
Kilpatrick, 7 l. per an. out of the Earl of Kildares land in Farbill,
Corballis, Poslickstown Ballintlevy, Ballintornan, Croughoule, Kilcroughoule,
Glanmore, Coin, Mr. Gawlyes lands, Carnes, Knockmant, Banachir, Sarswelstown,
John Duffs town, Corbetstown, Ballindeny, Gnewbane, Killinure, Ballyneclagh.

Moyashill.

Newtown, Spittlehouse, Ardmornes, Corrinaghir, Rahincorrick al. Suircan and
Corboge.

Clonlonan.

Upper Clonlonan wood, Clonaltron wood and other parcels, Knockinea.

Moyashill and Magharederon.

Pettits wood, and a house in Molingare, Clonykivant, Rathwyre, Killucan.

Coronellor, Philipstown, Lihince.

Gilbert Sir George One house in Bridgestreet. Gough Anthony Two houses, a
mortgage of 70 l. on two houses in S. Michaels lane, the Pill in Oxmantown.
Wicklow

Tipperary.

Kildare.

Down.

The Rectory of Arkloe with the tithes.

The Rectory of Newtown, Lenan, with the tithes.

Eight or nine Tenements in Kill.

Ardagh, Donowan, Dromcroe, Ballyawn,

Mahirmorghie, Ballyattine, the two Dirricks, the two Mondoraghes, Molederthan,
Glastrym. Gernon Nicholas One house. Gough Ignatius Eight houses and Tenements,
Sarkes, Parkes, Glasnivin, Whylestown, Hayestown, Balldongan, Ballinston,
Hutton. Glover John One house in Newroe.

Newcastle.

Sagard.

Graham Haure Two houses with two Backsides, two houses upon the Key.

Garrestown.

Mead

Kildare

Wicklow

Wexford

Macetown.

Paunchtown, Woolestown, Rathmore, Paynestown, Athgarret. Part Grange.

Ballihally, Balliare, Cassenstown, Bridstown, S. Margarets, Famerstown,
Balliknockane.

Gough William A house in S. Francis street, a house in Highstreet, five Houses
in S. Michaels lane, a house on Wood-key, several houses without Polegate, a
house in Skinners Row.

Balredry.

Sutton, Redmonds farm, Balldungan, Whitestown and Hayestown.

Louth

Mead

Longford

Kildare

Farrar.

Martinstown.

Dundalke.

Cnockgoe.

Ardie.

Stermanstown, Newtown, Mollastown, Lisranny, two houses in Drogheda.

Davistown, Moretown, Malagha.

Gruill.

Taghimy, Killincarra. Kill.

Gibbons Thomas Two houses, and two plots of ground in Oxmantown.

Coolock.

Kilbarrock.

Castleknock.

Ballyboggan.

Mead Deece.

Paddinstown and Thomastown.

Hamilton Sir Francis Nine houses. Hicky William Twelve houses. Westmeath.
Fininsland. Holmes Peter Three houses and a Horse-mill.

Cloghranswordes.

Mead Duleek.

Kerreston.

Higgin Francis Five houses and a plot of ground. Handcock Christopher Ten
houses.

Nethercross.

Clandalkin, Tassagard, Swords.

Kildare. Rathmore, Mergettstown. Harding Philip One house in High Street.
Holmes Simpson Two Parks and two water-mills, near Thomas court wood. Hicky
William One house in the Merchants key. Hurley John Two houses in S. James
street. Humphrey Joan, alias Ballew, Patrick mapas and others. One house. Mead
Duleeke.

Clarestown.

Hewlett George, and Mary Vx. One house in Oxmantown. Hoar Mary, Margaret and
Alson One house on the Merchants key, two houses in High Street, two houses in
Cook-street, Two houses in S. Brides street, two houses in Newrowe, several
houses in S. Francis-street, several houses in S. Mary Abbey.

Kilsalgham, Domnuck, Coolcoyes, Corstown,

Mead

Wexford.

Clatterston, Bulston, Caleston, three houses.

Baller, Mashall, Rishalls, Haristown, Skal, Rish, Kildowan, the Dirrtra,
Cristown, Grang-Sallah, Polhore, Castell-hills, Tammon.

Thomtown, the Rath, Bulkhale, Bedfords, Stradbally, great Kingston, Rathla
Castone, Leythill, Luske, Castleknock, Irishtown, Harristown, Rickinhead,
Castle Carroaght. Hamble John A house in S. Nicholas street. Mead

Louth

Duleeke.

Ballymadde, Smithstown, Gillinstown, Corballis, Duleeke.

Ferrard.

A house in Drogheda, a house in Fermonfecuin.

Harris Edward Several houses in Fishamble-street, 2 houses near S. Owens
Church, two other houses, and two parks near St. Kevins. One house and a plot
of Ground in Cooksstreet. One other in Castlestreet, The Town of Portra^e.
Mead Bar. Duleeke.

Newtowne, Landerstowne.

Bar. Moyfenra.

Clunguffin.

Irving David and Ann Ux. 2 Houses. Jans Edward. Two houses and Gardens in
Glasmaquinock near Oxmontown, 2 small meadow Parks, one great house in St.
Michaels lane, one house in Winetavern street, one house in St. Patrick street,
two houses in St. Nicholas-street, Three houses in Rochell-lane, 3 houses in
St. Georges lane.

Newcastle.

The great and little Farm of Kilmaynham.

Mead

Westmeath.

Duleeke.

Shallon, Kilkarvan, Prinestown, Batramstowne. The mill of Kilbeard, houses in
Duleek, the Abbey of Skryne, Cusacks-hall with parks, houses in Skryne,
Thorneton, Loghtown, Baldoghnan.

Rathconraght.

Ballimore.

Corkery.

The Abbey of Monti Feonan with a mill.

Jans Michael and Frances Ux. One house near Newgate, one house in
Corne-market, one house on the Merchants Key. Mead.

Louth

Duleeke.

Galstown, the little Boolies, Small Farm, Kenock, the moiety of both the
Carnes in Duleeke, Gaskianstown, Deemes, two houses in Duleek.

Terfeaghan with many houses, dales, and part of Kilclogher, Callan.

Farrard.

Dunnany.

One house and garden in Deerstreet, one house in Batchelors lane, eight acres
of land in the Franches, one park in Green-Bater, two crofts without the gates,
one Orchard without S. Lawrence gate, and a message in Batchelors Lane with
seven walls and a Garden, and a Tenement in Heirs lane, one house in S. John's
street and a garden, one shop with a chamber, one house in S. Peter's street,
one park, two houses, one half of a meadow, one house in Batchelors lane.

Kenneday Walter, George Usher and John Walsh One house. Tassagard. Mead.
Nottstown, Rowan, Bradistown, Loughsallagh, Cradockstown, Maynebarretts place,
Stephens place, Barrons park, Philips town al. Boolies, Kennaghtstown,
Pincherston, Carcoyne, Balleneolly, Nalliwood, Warrinston, Gonock, Millestown,
The Much-fields, Stockens, Walshesgrow, Kildare Lamkins, Pincklestown, Dunboyn,
Dunsaghlyn, Clony.

Lexlip.

Kearny Edmund One house in S. Patrickstreet. Cork.

Cosmee.

Conrey.

Garrihinagh al. Killmore, Tonneregigh, Monnimore, Rahingh, Killbegg, Bealtra,
Gortnacrussy, Templetryen, Garrestown, Gortnicrussy.

Carake.

Ballany.

Limricke.

Gortgare, Schoule.

Kildare, Wentworth Earl Kildare house, 1 house in S. Michaels lane, one garden
and an Orchard near the Castle, S. Stephens Hospital, and the lands to the same
belonging, the tithes of the lands of the house of the hogs, Mintions mantle,
etc. Clondalkin, the Rectory of Gracedew, Tippkenin.

In Com. Dublin or Wicklow.

Kilconut, Templecargie, Shebela, Killinure, Moylisty, Moyskeagh, Mynore,
Ballyellis, Killalig and half the Goule, Cremesellin.

Catherlagh

Cavan.

Lymerick.

Kinnagh, Tonnegrohe, Barkill, Ballycaslune, and Dowganstown.

Aghtryde, Gary-Robert, Crosrath, Pollkill, Pollrath, Clonetedaffe, Rahinmore,
Rathclaghagh, Garysallagh, Conline, Dromard, Callaghnegh, Aghtilmore, Lowagh
al. Lodagh, Ballenecross, the manor of Clonmahone.

Glaschony, Killaneweary, Ballinfryory, Drommeyne.

Cosmore.

Acleckagh, Brittal, Corkincolrone, Lishmoreen, Peacke, Adare and several
Burgesses, etc. Cragane, Sallene and Farranna, Pallicy, Garrytullane,
Garrypooky, Garrineportriffe, Castle Robert, Bantageara, Garranabrickene,
Ballaghnegerah, Laghughne sporteenagh, Gurteenebalanaha,

Kildare, Wentworth Earl of Keapacraheene, a parcel of pasture land,
Garryannony, Rathnawitagh, Ballyacarraney, Ballyvodane, Ballywilly, Heighragh,
Ardefione, Lisavill, Bohuranusky, Ballynabnoly, Garryanpookey,
Ballysheoondehey, Killegnosy, Mollane, Gortganiffe, Gortaknochane, Garkemore,
Balleaguossy, Ballynaswagh, Ballykealing.

Cosmore.

Lower, Gleananore, Beabas, Rathmore, Donenamanie and Ballytrastane,
Ballynahow, Pollagh, Kearhowe, Ballymacrorie, Doonekippe, Ballymickane,
Cloncallane, Castlekippnie, Rahen, Uregare, Ballystonymore, Ballystonybegg,
Ballyncurreyo, Ballywillenbegg, Kearhowreagh, Ballyany, Coskenydedy, Criggane,
Clounshane.

Kerry.

Claghrane, Ballylongfort.

Poblebryen.

The Island of Corkamore.

Connollagh.

Lishduffe, Finterstown, and Garraneard.

Cosmay.

Tullorvey, White Abbey, Black Abbey, Poor Abbey, Gortnadoghny, Gortnegea,
Bollybally, Bonefion, Park more, Feranboy, Garryone, Girtenan, Varmsculla,
Felesteene, Ballyculleene,

Kildare, Wentworth Earl Cloghrane, Tullovine, Ballenta, John Leas Dolloe,
Maurice Fitz Geralds Dolloe, Russels Curagh Ineanoge. Thorntons Curraghineoge,
Tuoreene, Shanclonin, Skeaghmerrygeoge, Rathbrenagh, Ballenfryora, Creaffbegg,
Croomegleabland, Rosstemple, Garaneroe, Ballylosky, Fanningstown, Rathcannon,
Clogher, Clonbryen, Ballynenanty, Greallagh, Garebally, Broffe, Ballygrenane,
Ballyvolhane, Fearan-Henry roe, Ballysallaugh, Ballyvettoge, Ballyncolly,
Cnocksawney, Clonygerra, Ballylenanemore, Ballyherrone, Clonmore, Rathmarckey,
Thomas town, Cahirassy.

Kenry.

Ballynishane, Pallice, Ballydowell, Ballyvanane, Killesaragh, Dromore,
Ballyonollane, Keillmoreene, Caher Inereagh, Corry, Tuogh, Ballymickleharnane,
Keilvarigie, Corry, Corry, Kiellknockane, Ballyvadane, Crigginacree,
Ballyassea, Court mac Rynoll, Ballyogahassy, Ballymacshaneboy, Graigeanister,
Anlands town, Ballingady, Ballygadybeg, Ballinwillen, Ballinahowe, Garryduffe,
Gartannonteene, Gortenure, Monegrany, Gortavilly, Kearhew, Garuffe, Lisancarry,

Kildare, Wentworth Earl Clare and Lymerick. Galway and Limerick. Kilkenny.

Kildare

Westmeath.

Ferancuddelly, Ballenfollardy, Ballwoodane, Parkmore, Ballygossy, etc.

Kilcashin.

Kilcarnell alias Kilcarwell.

Kerdons house in the City.

Sherlockston, several houses and lands in the town of Naas, Walterston,
Moynooth, Newtown, Kellistown, Creffstown, Curretown, Collinsland, Newtonwest
al. Macabe, the Manor of Kilka, great and little Bealand, Narroghbeg,
Rathculvin, Hubberstown, Ballynase, little Birtown, Mullaghinaste, Kilmead,
Ballycollane, Ballyhyde, Ballynibarny, Youngstown, Ardnegresse, Ballynybarney,
the Manor of Kildare, Brownstown, Irishtown, Ballynure, Kilnabooly, Ardscoll,
Donede, Philipstown, Castleridy.

Keyle, Ballymullen Alias Milton, Pallagh Alias the Pace, Garrygevil and the
Spittle house, the Manor of Ballinderry alias the Slaughtne Arts, Ballynegeale
alias Irishtowne, Ballynemacher, Leskevin, Machercoirk, Roskeay, Impire,
Colrownig, Kilnevan, Ballynobbane, Noghowal Portloman, Desert alias
Rathnobagdagh, Ballynegallogath, Varvelstowne

Kildare, Wentworth Earl of Kerry and Desmond.

Roscommon.

Garron. A ware on the River of Enish, alias Cartomugarrowe, Ballintogher,
Coolamber, Lockelstown, Farrinmurry Ballynhiskanagh, Ballydronan, Ardmaghcar,
Killeagh, Ferruffennagh, Barbrackan, the little Ruske, Carneregan, Twoerane,
Aghtybore, Brackaghnehuly, Belane lower Ballyneran, Coolymne, Cleglass,
Ballynebrye, Carneclonemacke, Cloneregroy, Scarpe. The fishings on the
Logh-Royal and the River of the same, a Castle near the same, Brennybegg,
Ballysallagh, Ballintlew, Ballintornan, Bancor, Knockunuit, Sarsfieldstown,
Sydan, Mottown, Robbinston, Castletown, Kennaleagh, Milton, Newcastle,
Castlecorre, Rathbeg, Rathmore, Moggilty, Cloncolman, several Lands held by the
Scept of Menter Brenan, the Country of Calry, Tooballynelly, the Country of
Breawniury, the Country of Towennany, Ballymicknema, Bishopstown, Glaskrine,
Rathaspike, Kiltobber, Clonguillan, Keylnere and Cloncullan.

The fishings on the River of Goolin and Ballycarbry.

Conymore, Clonesalliaghe, Beahaghe al. Beaghe and Ballinegarragh.

Kildare, Wentworth Earl Cork.

Galway.

Ballygorgan, Ballynemelagh, Castlemore. Bissegnie, Ballaghe,
Ballyclanwilliamboy, Gortnetarnoge, Ballagh, Lisnigrisie, The Rectory of
Lickmatash, Garryduffe, Kilboggie, Carrowemore, Ballyvarowghter, Kilmyoode,
Templenan, Trymotume, Lowghnaton, Gurtenelaghen, Lisnegrough, Lissertary,
Kiltragh, Leneghton, Clonefia, Carrynarke, Kilcrine, Leggen, Loneghton,
Kilkrine, Carrownakitoe, Cograne.

Longford.

Cartonacetapana, Mullagh, Lissidaganie, Killogs, Sesseveg, Lisnakashie,
Dunleo, Clonelehane, Cartrona, Harduarna, Killeronie, Carrownikin, Rokan,
Lisdanille, Bitervase, Clonnanayneneva, Stenagith, Irkare al. Toberntawry,
Tobernikerhin, Lowghanamroge, Gortkaerne, Dowler, Carrownmeanagh, Truscan,
Carrowgar, Lena, Renagh, Gurtin, Creran, Carrowneanagh, Caremare, Clogh,
Clonkinbegg, Coolenearnock, lands in the town of Clare, Lissenefranke,
Clonnanynen, Trustran al. Derrymane, Carrowkeile, Carrownfeire, Longford,
Greyganebony, Gregangarrowe, Tryanreanghe, Carrownkilly, Aghrane, Dowlagh and
Naghrough,

Kildare, Wentworth Earl Tipperary.

Wexford.

Wicklow

Mayo

Mead

the Rectories of Assufraigh al. Asaskreagh and Kilsalen al. Killosalen, and
Lissecharra, Rathmore, Rathnegleny.

Garryhucke al. Jack-garden, Ballybeg, Thomaston, Ballykellcaghan al.
Ballyclecaghan. Toomenyfanshoge, Ballyduffny, Killmare, Ballyhamuck al.
Kilmanock, Garyvarowne, Caryhenigon, Garyhowe, Lackandarragh and Moan Edmond.
Ballykeene al. Ballykeine, Knockanemohill, Ballenepark and Ballenefunshoge.

Glancoagh, Ballyvonell and Carrowkiltrone.

The penny place, and several houses and lands in Dunboyne, Clony, Bennetston,
Rathtig, Hilton, Mounckton.

Several houses and Lands in the Town of Duleeke, other parcels, viz.
Maryridge, Maryland and Roodland, one Dove house and lands in Kinawde,
Bretunston, Broynanston, Arrath and Grenock, Newton of Moyaghy, Kildalkey,
Knockodder, Toppsland, several houses and Lands in the Town of Kells, Coocorr,
Jenkinstown, Quoynstown, Donoghstown, Woodcockstown, Warrenstone, Barretstowne,
Wernockstown, Gughterhillagh, Cullentragh, The manor of Rathskeagh,

Kildare, Wentworth Earl of Kings. Drumgoyle, etc. Ballyshane, Clonbrona,
Ballynerve, Ballinekelly, Clonecreane, Bolynarge, the Manor of Eglish,
Derrynlogh, Ballyquillan, Cullaninore, Cullanvolly, the Island of Kiltobber,
Ballinglasse al. Clondeglasse, Kilvoyler, Leagh, Ballintrohan, Cullanbeg,
Cullanmore, Ballyconnocke, Kilvem, Curraghroddery, Roscurra al. Kneebeg,
Killmoylar, Gniew, Cossan, Ilandwile, Knockbane, Tulchanmore, the Freagh,
Clondelue, Streamstown, Lands in Delny a mac Coghlan, Cameshbegg, Ballykill mac
Rossny, Moystine, Ballinkillin, Doubrancher, Moylmich, Iskercastle,
Killtauragh, Noybagh, Aghny, Droyne, Kilmunynog, Carramore al. the great Quart
and Aghlena, Bancorr al. Bannagher with the fishing Ware, Castle and town
there, Moyslin, the Castle of Kilnegorrhenagh, Cower, Castle Feddan, Russnis,
Nabagh, Carrowshinagh, Ballydona, Williamston, Balleverivan, Ballintulchan,
Killinanagh, Ballinkillin, Tullagh, Morahin, Ballymore, Ballycony,
Ballykillmurey, Agbarny, Ballydroid, Castlebrack and the Country of Toosmeare
alias' Ballycashany, Urike, Monycoyle, Kildare, Wentworth Earl Cappaghilowcan,
the great and little park, Coolenepish, Carrymore, Clonveclahan, Culboran,
Lawagh, Ruscaghbeg, Arteblany, Moyhanagh, Bally mac Gilly, Sylan, Killmurrey,
Ballynebracke, Cartron mac Killy, Rathlight, Killmore, Gaddanstown and other
lands in Ely, Carrol, the Manor of Lea, etc. Rathdonvoy, Bolybracke,
Cogshnohovan, Curra, and other lands, etc. Garrinelegan, Maghernehagh,
Gartenegowen, with diverse Wares on the River of Shannon, Maynes. Derrinioghe,
Derrynagh, Garvally, Aghtene, Killenegarvaghe, Glencromine, Ardehorme,
Moyshlin, Killawragh, Moylagh, Aghie, alias Athie, Killmanyvoke, The Rahin, a
yearly rent out of Sir John Mac Coghlans lands, Lanvaghe, Moynaghie and the
parish thereof, Towmoyane, killniller, Ballni vohane, Kilmoylecke, Killiene,
Inchlacour, Derrnilaghe, Ballynafalla, Ballykeale, Ballykillkallama, Litter,
Loughan, Maghernore, Gortmelougha, Gurtemelee, Gurteneffees, Killenemore, Bally
macdermot, Cowldrie, Ballyknochan, Bally mac murghe, Cappabirne, Rossemore and
Killmacaddawe. Kildare, Wentworth Earl Longford

Queens Sligo.

Down.

Ballycowen.

Lynally, alias Sanvach, and Moyraghie.

Camagh, Correynagh, Smeare, Rathmore, Gukinroe, Taugaght, Breaghwoy, Sunnagh,
Camroayne, Cullough, Barry, Desertdolagh, Leslight, Ballynaght and Ralight.

The Strate Dishoke. Carrowdrom, Cormicke, Carrowomigan, Carrowcarrymilton,
Carrowgranymore, Carrownecrene, Carrowelisdowgan, Clanegashel, Lands in the
Territory of Slaight.

Ofliny.

Shaneboy Mac Owen Hara; Cowlecashell, Cornmick, Leighcarrowdullogh, and
Leighcarrowknappard, the Castle Lordship and Land of Slygo, Tireconnel,
Kilnisky, Carbery, Fermanacke with several other parcels in Connaught,
Clonmurrey, Cornetrig, Roscrib, Wranck, Carrowougin, Carrowe, Carrimiltin,
Carrowgrunem, several parcells of Land in or near Cowle and Cashell, Cormicke,
Leighcarrowe, Tallagh, Leighcarrowknappe, The Rectories of Assaghfragh, alias
Aghaskragh, Kilsalen, alias Killoslen, etc.

The customs, etc. of Ardglass, Strangford, Killogh, Shipland, Portaferry and
all other the

Kildare, Wentworth Earl of Louth

Wexford and Wicklow

Forts and Creeks on the River of Strangford and Loghquanie, Corballyes,
Ballyregan. Pryorstowne, Knock and Callaghcurry.

Both the Annaghs and Ballinward, Pallis Achulline, Mawghor, the Manor of old
Rosse, viz. Ballyboly, Killskanlan, Rochestown, Ballimelagh and Breymlimore,
Newbane Carnaght, the Manor of Killonghy, alias Killegin, viz. Knockstown,
Freshalstou, Kingstown, Ballystraghboe. The Tomenerlies and the Quenlaght, etc.
Clonroch, Ballyvonin, Tonyferny, Downany, the Roddenagh, Garrintansey,
Raturtin, the two Clondeliffs, the Great Forest, Birnestown, Rackardstown,
Ballyshane, the manor and Town of Dipps, viz. Ballyneslany, Rossard, Ballybo
and Castleton, etc, Kilcherelagh, Ballyhobin, St. Michans Chapel and Roches
Conycrew, Kilcorly, Adromminaccore, Powers mill and the Earls meadow, the Ferry
of Rosse, Cafisstown, Prestallstown, Dowdwarfe, the Parsonage and Viccarage of
Old Ross, Nash, Cullinstown, Ballyshinan. The Stone house, Piercestown,
Ardmore, Ballyronum, Kenlestown, Ballyarnum,

Killegin, both Clondalies, Robstown, Brynestown, Woolferstown, Castlenech,
Ballygormogan, Rochestown, Rodiston, alias Brymilemore, alias Kilstalan, and
Ballyneboly, Ballyshenan, the Government, etc. of Ross, all the land in Fassagh
of Bentry, the mills of old Ross and Rosseponter, the Island of Dromduffe,
Ballybrittas, Minemore, Garrynarren, Killacovat, Ballyot, Ballymergin,
Ballyhenecke and Ballynekerd. Lutterell Thomas Six houses in the Precinct of S.
John without Newgate.

Castleknock.

Lutterels town, Brandoingrove, Killistornane, Ballestrowen alias Stravanstown,
Skirmullin, Clansillagh, Jamesland, Finnighsland, Barbistown, Kissianstown,
Coninstown, Frebleckton, Barnegeath, great Stahenny.

Newcastle.

Godamendy, Misselstown, Huntstown, the Pace, Whites-town, Diswellstown,
Carpenters-town, Blancherstown, Scaltweod alias Greatwood.

Ballyowen, Esker, Fiddanstown, Bishopsfield, Loughtown, Rathcoole,
Colemanstown.

Newcastle.

Lucan, Ballydowde, Baldonan, Flockmeadowe,

Kildare Naas.

The Naas, Phinceston, Rathsker.

Salt.

Lexly, Tobershoghlin, Danamore, Flessesstown, Muchrath, Lanckton.

Clare.

Abbey of Clare, Newtown.

Dunboyne.

Ballymacolly, Mastockston, Hawkinston, Roestown, Walterstown, Rathleeke,
Dunboyne, Loghsallagh, Milestown, Curtlaghston, Bennettston, Kilbrenan, Main,
Gunnogs, Handcocksland, Osburnsland.

Ratooth.

Fearnehouse, and other houses and lands.

Deece.

Toubly part.

Duleeke.

Finnor, Mooretown, Rowlestown, Millhill, Clownestown.

Coldcott, Fryertown, Killakee, Stayony.

Vppercross.

Rahincullagh, Killimatalway, Bruine al. Boherbrane.

Nethercross.

Killeagh, Tibberbir, Cotterelstown, the Rectory of Durabate.

Castleknock.

Voltanstown, Lawrencetown, Owens town, Clunsillagh.

Balrothery.

Knockroder.

Leynes Bartholomew, and Elinor Vx. Three houses.

Nethercross.

Swords.

Balrodery.

Grallagh.

Nethercross.

Littlebealingstown.

Newcastle.

Coolecolt, Crumlyn and New Mill.

Nethercross.

Ballhary.

Kildare

Mead Lowth

Salt.

Lexlip. Ministown.

Several Tenements.

Luttrell Alice, al. S. Lawrence Widow. A house in High Street, another house.

Castleknock.

Duswelstown, Blandcherdston, Schallwood, Blackethmil, Lucan, Rathcole.
Newcastle. Killmatalvey, Frierton, Cosserelston, Cloghroder, Cotterelstown,
Killakee, Slagony.

Castle Carbery.

Ballyonan, Ballinekilly.

Kildare Naas.

Rahesker, Naas.

Clane.

Clane.

Salt.

Donamore, Lexlip.

Dunboyne.

Dunboyne, Main, Kilbrenan, Handcockland.

Duleeke.

Rowleston, Morton.

Screene.

Clowneston.

Moor Patrick One house. Martin William One house, cellar and garden in the
Woodkey. Martin William One tenement in Castle-street. Minshal Sir Richard and
Dame Mary Vx Eight houses, 19 Messuages.

Balrudery.

Kilcrogh, Jordans town, Cotterelstown.

Nethercross.

Reglish of Luske with the tithes thereof.

Longford Ardagh.

Cullenny, Serieaghmorefada, Kriaghadoe, Kriewiny, Homane, Corribane,
Culmahensy, Lisnamucky, Garnukesagh, Cnockachahud, Glacke, Clenragh,
Doonenamalagh, Fieaghfada.

Mallone William Forty three houses.

Castleknock.

Kilmaineham, Polemill, Phepestown.

Newcastle.

Westpanstown, Ballydoude.

Nethereross.

The third part of the great tithes of Grynocke, Kilsalchan and Chappel-midway,
Brownstown, Culdrie.

Coll ck.

Dunbro.

Newcastle.

Turimore.

Mead. Skreene.

Lismull in with the great and small tithes, Jurdanstown, Blandestown,
Loughtown, Castletown.

Mey Matthew Seven houses.

Newcastle.

Athgoe, Newcastle, Kilmatalway, Kilmainham.

Mead. Ratouth.

Ratouth.

Milles Ralph Orphan Eight houses etc.

Newcastle.

Moyles Castle, Blackborns land, Wards land alias Korkagh Farm.

Murtagh William One house. Mason Matthew and Elinor Vx. One plot of ground and
one house. Mead Henry, Lord Bishop Six Parks or Closes, Ballyboughte, S. James
Parish.

Coolock.

Ballybought, Drishoge, Drumconragh, Clynmell, Glasnevyne, Stacoole,
Ballygriffin.

Balrotherie.

Baltra, etc. Balcarrid.

Eastmeath. Duleek.

Athcarne, Deens, Clony, Dollerstown, Hayestown, Great Boolies, little Boolies,
Knock Island, Micknanstown.

Skreene.

Ballrath, Ardmullcan, Johnstown, Rathfeagh, Slanestown, Ediketown, Great
Waterside, Little Waterside, Irishtown, Timole.

Morgallen.

Shilliogge, Wilkinstown.

Nottingham Ignatius One house. Nottingham Peter Five houses.

Newcastle.

Ballyowen, Ealker, Lucan, Nanger, Ballydoud, Clandolkan, Killmartin,
Fininstown, Poorestown.

Kildare.

Mead

Athgarred, Little Newtown, Kildrathad. Partmany, Pinkins. Plunket Christopher
Two houses.

Rathdown.

James land, Pluncketts parks.

Balruddery.

Chief rent of Tankards town, Rent of Wax out of little Ballagheragh.

Mead Navan.

Priestrath, Five tenements.

Ratouth.

One tenement, little Dorix, Racrossane, two tenements in Crenock, with ten
acres of land.

Plunckett Thomas Two houses, two gardens, one Orchard, and one park, in S.
Katharines parish, one house and a Backside in S. Nicholas Parish without the
Walls, two tenements, one Garden, and one Orchard, idem.

In Brownstown 160 acres, Barrony of Nethercross and Balrotherie.

Louth Bewly, Blakestown and Ballinreske, New town, Barsplunckett, sixty acres
in Jermin Fearn, twenty acres in Balray, Laraghmenshy, Balmaglan, sixty acres
in Priors town, twenty acres in Miltown, sixty acres in Galcowes town. Pipers
town, Cottrelstown, ninety acres in Browns town, five acres Mead Droghedah and
a Milne in Kercock, Three acres and an house in Rathdrumner, forty acres in
Nichols town, sixty acres in Dunleere, fifteen acres in Burrin, thirty acres in
Rahascar, thirty acres in Swinestown, ninety acres in Peoganstown, thirty acres
in Finway. Sixty acres in Gronfty. In the town of Droghedah, two houses in
West-street on old walls and garden in the North side of the said street, one
park of two acres, one house in Batchelors lane, 2 parks in Greenbater, two
parks and a Milne without S. Sundays gate, two parks in Yellow-bater, a park
near the Green hills, one tenement in S. Laurence street, Fyans Roe. Pilkinton
Thomas, Alice Vx. and Wakefield John Three houses. Wexford. Gory.

Killibeggs.

Pain Joseph Two Tenements. Penteny Richard One house in Oxmantown.

Balrodery.

Knock-Tirkinton, Boehill.

Coolock and Nethercross. Surgostown, Laresstown, Crosshouth.

Percivall Sir (...) One message in S. Nicholas street. Pluncket Sir Nicolas
and Dame Katherine and others The corner house in Winetavern street in M.
Palfreys possession, houses, one cellar, one Horse-mill. Wexford.

Wicklow

63 Messuages, gardens and tofts, the Castlehill, Fagh and S. John's, Buldlort,
Tynnicarry, Tynniknock, Rathnemony, Ballirahine. Anarelly, Ballenetunny,
Balleneskeagh with the tithes, Balleneparky, Ballesallagh. Purcel William and
Edmond. 3 Houses. Pierce Dame Elinor One Close. Plunkett William One house.

Coolock.

Bagatrath, Portmarnock, Carrickhill.

Mayo Ballanidoe, Dowmore, Carrownelegan, Knockneaghan, Rathbane, Knockgrany,
Iverland, Cowbegg, Cowla. Plunkett Angel and Francis Plunkett Twenty six
houses. Mead Lune.

Rathmore, Ballintogher, Ballivanan, Garranban, Rathconny, Derriconer, both the
Clownies, both the Gills towns, Lincherland, Moyagher part.

Kells.

Fords town, Ballaghboy, Dowrath, Newtown, Corraghtown, Ruoristown,
Scurlockstown.

S. Patricks the Dean and Chapter. The Chantry lands of S. Annes, The tithes of
great and little Cabragh. Wicklow Rathmuck, Ballyogan, and Rathsalcan, the
tithes of Ashtown, and Pelstown. Palsrey Richard Four houses and a Tennis Court.

Balrothery.

Newinnings in Reynolds town.

Pain John Esquire; Several houses. S. Patricks Vicars Chorals Corporation Several
houses. Plunkett Christopher One Message in Cookstreet.

Dunsoughly, Harristown, Brachan, Newtown of Dunsoughly, S. Margery Dubbore,
Uttermoye, Jonestown, Merifall, Balleskin, Killdonan, Cillmacmonan, Hallowood,
Rath, Donnabate, Cromlin, Mill-Dawispark, Luske, Knock, Balrodry, Tanchardstown.

Mead Loghgoure, little Loghgoure, Morton, Mollinan, Ballimore, Ponderlagh,
Collestown, Wilkinstown, Rathbegan, Warringstown, Partans, Dunsalin,
Gallmore-Island in Rathtouth, Preistrath, several houses in Rathtouth,
Flemmington, Runtonstown, Moyaghery, Curraghtown, Kells, Mollagheh, Gonnox,
Magginsyard, Greens park, Finglas Bridge. Plunkett Richard One tenement in S.
James street, one house in S. Thomas street. Mead Kells.

Cross Kille.

Plunkett Walter Several houses in the City and Suburbs, late belonging to
Thomas Plunkett Alderman. Mead Deece.

Dirpatrike, Littletown, Mullaughine, Tullaghmedan, Augher Turin and the Barons
Farm, Knockmark, Allens land, Bedfastown, Dromry, Plunketts land, the College
houses and lands, Moortown, Talbote, the Glane, Killtale and Branganstown.

Palles James and Mary Two houses in Cornmarket, two houses in High Street, one
house in Back lane, one house in S. Frances street, 3 l. per an. out of three
parks and one Orchard in New-street, 20 l. per an. on Dunsoghly, Newton and
Bragon, 15 l. out of and 150 l. mortgage Lowth

Mead.

Alexander.

20 l. per an. out of Ardvally, 200 l. Mortgage on Castletown, 50 l. mortgage
on Cookstown, 160 l. mortgage on Alexander Reads land.

8 l. per ann. out of Harlocks town, a statute staple of 600 l.

on Kildonane and Balliskin, Talbots Farm in Crumlin, 26 l. mortgage out of
Rochords Farm in Crumlin, a statute staple of 200 l. 80 l. per an. out of
Crivitenall. Quinn Peter 3 Houses, 3 shops, etc. Cluntarfe. Mead.

Kildare

Deece.

Agherske, Tury, Bedfastown, Mooretown, Fenesland, Knockmark, Kilcoolie.

Soneboyne.

Salestown.

Duleeke.

Dardestown.

Clane.

Longetown.

Quatrod Nicholas One house in Oxmontown. Quinne John 4 Houses, etc. and a
Garden, Clonslagh and certain houses, etc. Wexford. Forth.

Garrisynott, Kildeiske, Talbottstown, Hearesmead, Collenstown.

Quinne Marcus Nine houses. Roscommon, Wentworth Earl Roscommon house in
Oxmantown.

Several houses lands and tenements.

Trim, Navan, Kells. Athlone, Athboy.

In Blagh street.

The tenements in possession of Robert Rategam, Widow Lloyd, Robert Ferral,
James Nutter, John Hopkins, Patrick Helane, John Griffin, George Dobson, Garrat
Barry, Patrick Helane and George Dobson.

In Market-street.

Isaac Reynolds, Walter Walsh, Widow Williams, Alexander Jepthson, Tho. Grant,
Tho. West, John Hopkins.

In High Street.

William May, William

Roscommon Wentworth Earl Harrison, Mrs. Newman, Tho. Kelly, Richard Helane,
Moragh, Loghlen, Richard Cloud, Derby Fine, Teige Foranane, John Hely, David
Bourke, Thade Dillon, Mrs. Brinnin, Robert Quely, Paul Nelane, William Mallore,
Tho. Tailor, and Christopher Kernons.

In Blynd-street.

Paul Nelane, Thady Dillon, Christopher Kernan, James Kernan, and Owen Brinnans.

In Haggard-street. Joseph Pressick and Mallone, John Rely, Nicholas Sheely,
Donogh Foronan, Charles Connor, three gardens nigh the Church, Morogh, Loghlin,
2 parks without Nauan-gate, 1 near the great Mill, 1 other without Blaghgate
called Hoppyard, Patrick Chain, John Martin, a fishing Weire over against the
Maudlins and Dirby, Lideocks.

In the Navan.

In Horsend-street two tenements in the hands of one Jacob, one near the wall
in the Bakers occupation, one other possessed by a Cooper near Trym gate one
other by Graham, Wafers castle, also a Cabin, and a garden there.

In Kells.

In S. John's street one tenement, in Maudlins street one tenement

Roscommon Wentworth Earl Eastmeath.

Westmeath.

with two gardens, in Carrigstreet one waste tenement.

In Athlone in Irishtown Nine tenements.

In Athboy

Ten tenements.

Navan.

Newtown, Ardgreagh, Rathnally and the mill, Harbertstown, Dungenny, Mogomet,
Clunfane, Vallenaughton, Fellestown, Cloundavan, Robinrath.

Deece.

Grange, Creroge, little Finglogh town.

Moyfenragh.

Fosters town, Earberstown, Turnie, Mawdlins, the Mill of Newtown.

Lune.

Woodtown-abbot, Filpots town al. Moneshallabod, Dervor, Rathcarran.

Halfowre.

Dyamore, Martinstown, Thomas town, Williams town, Phillips town, Patricks town
al. Partridg town, Ballnivally, Knocklogh, Kennaghan.

Rathconrath.

Shonlish, Beologh and Agloghbane.

Kilkenny west.

Cluonkeene, Cloghir, Creggah; Ballynenoan, Gnivenemanagh, Kilkenny,
Ferraneskehie, Lisnesrkiny and Tullaghanglass, Knocknegonin, the Plow land of
the castle of Walterstown, Rathbreack, Ballintrohane, the Island of Innishbofin,

Longford the tithes of Kilkenny, Bryanmor, the Abbey of Athlone, Spittlehouse
and tenements called Garragh, Cluoninore and Middowe.

Cluonlonun.

Boyledonnogh, Hories, Boyanagh, Tyrodonolon, Black Hories, Knockshane al.
Graunts land 20 acres.

Rathconrath.

Garragh, Cluonagh, Shyeg, Lisnegrio, Ferranegawne, Belanimo, Athboy,
Buolegarockan, Feranekirk, the Castle Cartron, Craggan, Aghaconner, Aghatemple,
Boleredmond, Mount Cornely, Ardnegacone, Garrowe, Scahardand, Cappudna,
Farribregge, Atteniuroona, Carrowreagh, Cluonibreene.

Shrule.

Keele, Carrigge, Rathbegg, Rathmore, Tange, Newcastle, Garrincorr al. Corr,
Abbey of Shrule, Cloghanbedy, Aghanderry, Tullonon, Cluonsuse, Townsted, The
Fairs, fishings, Wares and mills, Cluonebreen, Drumlisnegereagh, Dromanure,
Rathorne, Killree, Rathsallowe, Killinboy, Cnockagh, Ballynemanagh,
Lisnecreave, and Cronagh, Forgney, Acrecam, Tomerick, Clarinullagh, Tonagknock,
Ballycor, Aghnidramen.

Longford

Tipperary

Kings.

Cavan.

Shrule.

Agnehend, Aghnagan, Corbane, Leter, Ballymacknemae.

Rathline.

Moegh, Castlecor, Deroge, Knockboy.

Cluoneen, Grange, Gortnevulny, Monasterg, Litterluna and Rectory, Cluoncreken.
54 Acres in Ballyvinassedy, Roscullinagh, and Droninicam, the mountain of
Shevobloome, Mucklone, the Vicarages of Kilcoman, and Aghencon, the Rectory of
Syrakeran, Linnet, Littere, Roscowragh, Inchinebeo, Corbally, Cluonirekeen,
Cowlyshell, Killcoleman, Ballenokennet, Ballecaslane, Ardare, Garryhand,
Ballybrit, Monyfadda, Lenybanan. Moonery one pole of land with appurtenances,
also several Fairs and markets in the Counties of Westmeath, Kings, Mayo,
Galway, Sleygo, and Roscommon.

Russel Christopher 16. Houses.

Nethereross.

Seatowne, Newtowne, alias Knockmowles, Kelleys farm, 20 houses and a great
stonewall, Gammwell, Smythesland, the Firr park, Tampanfield.

Rellick George. 2 Houses. Relly Stephen. 2 Tenements, etc. Mary acre. Rogerson
Thomas. One house. Read Bigget. Two houses. Roe Henry and Ellinor Vx. Several
statutes upon several persons in the City of Dublin. Rery Fitz Robert A house
in Thomas Street.

Castleknock.

Colletrath, Spricklestown, Gallantston, Correstown, Chappell-Midway.

Ratooth.

Grenog.

Strong James, Richard and Christopher Five houses.

The Rectory and tithes of Sherlockstown, a Statute staple against Christopher
and Henry Burnell late of Castleknock, and Edmond Geashell of Paslockstown.

Sedgrave Lawrence. The third part of the Precinct Ambite of St. John the
Baptist. Sheet James Dr. One house. Saltonstal Samuel. A house in Cornemarket.
John Sergeant. A house in High Street. Sarsfield Patrick. 2 Houses, a mill and
a park.

Newcastle.

Lucan, Waspanstown, Padingstown, great and little Bolinetagh, Allenswood and
Sagard.

Kildare. Offaly.

Tully, Braiistown, Fryerstown, Merny, Martinstown, Kilbrid, Loughbroan,
several Tenements in Kildare, Rathbryde, the tithes

Vppercross.

Rathcoole.

Wicklow

Kings.

and Rectories of Friars town, Rathbryde, Kilcorkry, David's town, Duneny,
Ballygreny, Rathmuke, Fenner, Ballihinoge and Ballynecailagh.

Old Connel.

Roseberry, and Clungorie, Corvells, Corvells Court, Scarletstown, Ricards
town, Clungaunagh. The Tithes and Rectories of Mooretown, Roseberry, and
Killelan.

Kilcullen.

The tithes and Rectories of Thomas town, and Mooretown.

Maraghandreban.

The tithes and Rectories of Lipstown, Blakehall and Calverstown.

Naase.

Turnings, Clunings, Killinemore, White-Church, Ladycastle, Stone mill and
Barronrath.

Clane.

Ballynecapoke, Beataughtowne, Maudleeves and Clane.

Shillelly.

The Rectories of Carnow, Hackets town and Gilberstown.

The tithes of Raghan, Lynoll, Killaghy, Ballyhin, Ballyhoy, Drumcullen,
Eglish, Kilbrid and Kilmurry, alias Kilmanchan and the Parsonage of Killurim.

Seagrave John 3. Houses in Highstreet, one in Bridgstreet, 3 in St.
Nicholas-street, 3 in Duleeke.

Bartons town, Bellewston and Ballinegarvy.

St. Francis-street, 1 Mault-house in Oxmonmantown.

Nethercross, part of Newcastle, and Vppercross.

Collects Inn al. the old Exchequer and Higgingreen, little Cabragh, Finglas
wood, Newgrange, Kilmacredocke, and Ballykellmore, Muchmore and little Wayre.

Balrothery, and Vppercross.

Tubergraigan, Garestown, Kilmakargin.

Nethercross.

Colcot and Tussagart, Ballyboggan.

Mead Ratouth.

A Statute staple of 1200 l. on Rathbeggan.

Springham Thomas A house in Bridg-street.

Castleknock.

Killmenaham.

Tailor Mary, and Bridget

Talbot William

One house. Six houses.

Newcastle.

Two waste pieces of ground, Five tenements with 26 acres of land.

Louth Dondalk.

Haggards town, Newtown, Killalyn, Ballybalrick.

Tyreconnel Earl A house, Merriyonny, Rings end, Baggots Rath.

Newcastle.

A house and plot of ground, Finstown, Kiltale.

Rathdown.

Caleragh.

Castleknock.

Cappuck.

Rathdowne.

Bullerstown, Kilternanin, Mallalride.

Wicklow

Mead

Down.

Rathdown.

Great Bray.

Navan.

Hallanstown and Athronan.

Templeton, Mooretown and Mucklough.

Coolock.

Symons Court, Owenstown.

Rathdown.

Dundrum, Glancullea, Little Bray, Killinacud.

Talbot William Eight houses.

Coolock.

Puckstown.

Balrothery.

Balwinstown, Edestown, Garristown.

The Cross.

Swords, Kahinny, Corballis.

Castleknock.

Stradwally, Clandalkin, Kilmainum.

Mead Ratooth.

Roberts town, Johnstown, Donreagh, Little Bulstown, Greenock.

Talbott Margery Certain houses.

Balreddery.

Garristown.

Nethercross.

Swords, Puckstown.

Balruddery.

Ballwynstown, Dolphins Barn.

Taaffe, alias Cook Julian Tyrenure. Talbot Sir Henry One waste piece of ground
without S. James gate, Madder garden, 8 Tenements in S. James, 1 Tenement in S.
Thomas street, 18 Tenements in S. Francis street, 1 Tenement on the Corn
market, 1 Tenement in S. Patrick-street, 6 Tenements in Sheep-street, the
Brickwalls in Castle-street, 2 Tenements in Fishamble-street, 6 Tenements in
Skinner Roe, 1 Tenement in S. Nicholas parish, the winetavern gate with 6
Tenements, 1 Tenement in Wine-tavern street, 3 Tenements opposite the old
Crane. Usher Arlenter Four houses and a Tennis Court.

Newcastle Vppercross.

Cromlin, Clandalkin.

Valden Silvester One house. Usher George and Alice Vx. Twenty five houses.

Coolock.

Sutton, Whitstown, Hayes town, the Rath, Baldangan.

Kildare

Rosscommon Westmeath

Moyfanragh.

Freefans al. little Freefans, Richardstown, Hoartown.

Duleeke.

Rath Cane, Trim.

Salt.

Calrow town and the tithes, Kill.

Rosscommon.

A Mortgage of 200 l. Multerfarnan.

Usher Arlenter of Cromlin. One house in Fishamble street, one Orchard and
Garden, one piece of waste ground in Cookstreet. Usher Henry One Stone house.

The Manor of Baldongan, Lytown, Ballenstown, Whites town, Hayes town, the
Rath.

Coolock.

Sutton and other lands.

Catherlagh

Wicklow

Westmeath

Mead.

Rosscommon.

The Rectory of Artlo, etc.

The parsonage of Killmagorge.

The lands of the Abbey of Mullifarnan.

Beartanstown and Baldongan.

Cloynreny, Sanvally Mac Corvill, Agdrumnagh, Caldragh, Lisgilroe, Lyshumuske,
Gorseloghan and Clonne.

Wiseman Edward and Mary Vx. One house in Castlestreet. White Dominick and Luke
White. Fourteen houses, three shops, and certain parcels of ground. Warren
Peter and John Warren. A house in S. Kavans parish.

County.

Danabrook, Cornescourt, Glaunemucke, Ballowley.

White Stephen One house on the Wood-key, one waste house in S. Francisstreet.

Balruddery.

10 l. per annum out of Little Hollywood.

Lowth

Mead

Dundalk.

One Castle, 24 acres and a half, and 10 houses in Carlingford.

Seven houses, one Orchard, and one Croft in Drogheda.

Arder.

Two houses in Arder.

Duleeke.

Fifty two acres in Harkinston.

Additional Banks Elinor One house in Highstreet. Brown Thomas Several houses
in Dublin, one Castle in Clondalkin, Seskin. Ball al. Gough Ann One house in
Ram-Lane, the thirds of Bartholomew Balls estate. Baggot Elinor and al. Several
houses in Dublin and Oxmantown, Clandalkin, Clownburrus. Downestown, Slane, the
tithes of Ballyferman. Bamber Richard Several houses in Dublin. Brown Sir
Richard Several houses in Dublin. Longford Killmoore, Ballykenny, Tully Row,
Bailyrichan, Killeclogh, Cerrillman, Drumderrick, Cullaghneddagh, Bachilboy,
Carridmere, Tuma, Feaghmoore, Tarrybog, Corryglass, Lissahanedan, the fishing
Were of Ballybeg, Keebe, Clunart, Bohine, Clogher, Tully, Monteryelgan,
Cnockangoly, Sin, Friaghnane, Carrylackluanagh, Carryballentampan, Donegall,
Knodoragh, Ballegarne, Agheratna, Ballenamoore, Caldragh, Gobedagh, Clonelegh,
Clunellan, Risbage. Barnwall Richard One house in Cookstreet Dublin, Lispople,
Drumnifield, Knockbryne, Roganstown. Mead.

Louth.

Moneghan.

With a Water-mill, S. John's Rath, Stabanan, Lychistown, other lands,
Carlingford, Ballug, Corballies, Cowly, Balliregan, Brockaroagh. Brook William
and his wife Several tenements on the Wood-key. Bath Richard and others Several
houses in Dublin and Oxmantown, Glasnevin. Monaghan

Mead.

Annaghagh, Dennistown.

Balgeeth.

Brown John of Neals town Several houses in Dublin, Rowlagh, Steeplefarm,
Cappaghs, Barneswood, Clandalkin, Nealstown, Ballgaddy, Bally mac negine, Bally
mac Kenny, Hoyles half farm, Clanborries, Pars-Moores, Haumless half farm,
Rathline, Skellinsford, a Watermill in Kings mills town. Blackny William One
house in Dublin. Reykentore, Sankers town, Balcunry, Heaths town, Nodds town,
Wise town, Adams town, Freeland, Parkinstown. Carberry Nicholas Several
Messuages, etc. Clanbrasel Henry Earl S. Maryes dissolved Abbey, etc. Clarke
George One house in Stephen street, two houses, gardens and Backsides in James
street, three houses, gardens and backsides in S. Thomas street, one house in
the Backlane with a backside, one house in S. Patrick street with a garden and
backside. Kildare Two hundred and fifty pounds due on John Clerks estate,
three hundred pounds due on James Eustace his lands in Moon, in the right of
his wife. Crump Christopher and Vx. Robert Barnwell and Vx. Lawrence Purfield
and Ignatius Hursell One Lease for 61 years by the Master and Wardens of S.
Anns Guild, an annuity of 10 l. per an. to issue out of a house in Cornmarket,
one Bond of the staple of Kildare Four Messuages, 67 acres of land in Ardresse
Barrony of Salt, one Annutty of 5 l. sterling. out of Corners Court, one Annuity
of 10 l. per an. out of Corners of 320 l. acknowledged by Patrick Halgan.
court, a lease of 99 years out of Monally. Dowdal Ignatius One house in
Winetavern street. Lowth One house on the Key of Droghedah, one other house in
Harpies lane, one garden plot in S. John's lane, an house or tenement in
Richards town with several acres of land, several houses and lands in
Mollincrosse, certain houses and lands in the town and fields of Collem. Dowdal
Patrick One house in Cookstreet, one void piece of ground joining on the west
upon the Corner house of Bridgestreet, and extending on the East to the sign
of the Bull on the Merchant-key. Mead

Louth.

Slane.

Regskon and the mill thereof.

Atherdee.

Coologs land. One house and backside at the middle gate of Atherdee, one house
and backside in the Highstreet of Atherdee, one house and backside in the said
street, 60 acres of land in the fields of Atherdee.

Dundalke.

Ballymacklyot.

Dowdall Matthew One house and garden in Thomas-street, one house and garden in
Francis street, one house and garden in Patrick street: in Kilmainham ten acres
of land. Westmeath

Mead

Louth

Delvine.

Cloran, Corcullintragh.

Slan.

One house and backside in Slane.

Deece.

A mortgage of 200 l. on Lumbardstown and Fidorffe. Ratooth. A mortgage of 200
l. upon Smiths town, Himlingstone and Aglastan.

In Louth 2 acres, in Dundalk two houses and eight acres.

Draycott Henry One house in S. Michaels lane. Mead

Louth.

Westmeath

Wexford.

Duleeke.

Momantown, Colpe, the little Bebeg, great Bebeg, Duleek, Lough, Graycots,
Corballid, Routhgrainge, Calangh town, Miltown, Rodder, Fullerstown,
Kilnacdasland, Davistown, both the Graggs, Balgeeth, Scalernagh, Febeg, Colpe,
Kells, Drogheda. Febeg, the Rectory of S. Leonard of Dundalk. The Rectory of
Killan and Garr.

Norristown and Clarestown, Dipford and Crooked more.

Ellcock Elizabeth One house in Pipestreet. Eiffe John The Monastery of S.
Thomas near Dublin. Fanning Rose Houses several, etc. Fullam Nicholas Houses
several, etc. Fleming Rose al. Quine One house in Oxmantown, three tenements
and 12 acres of ground in Santhy, 2 tenements near Youngs castle, one other
house in Oxmantown, and one near S. Michaels Church style. Gernon Thomas Houses
several. Hoar Philip of Kilsalchon One house in Highstreet, two in Cookstreet,
one in S. Brides street called Henry the eighth, two in Newstreet, houses in S.
Francis street, several houses and gardens in S. Mary's Mead. Clatterstown,
Bulls town, and some land in in Calestown, the Manor of Ballemalshalrish, al.
Shalrish and Kildowan, Ballishelan, Tracristown, Harnistown, the Dirr. Abbeys,
1 house on Merchants key formerly called Fitz Simons house. The manor house
and lands of Killshalcon, Dunmake, Thorntown, Coolcoye, Carrestown, the Ruth,
Balkhale, Bedford, Sradbally, great Kings town, Rathlucas town, Longhyhill,
several houses and gardens in Luske, the town of Castleknock, Irishtown Hares
town, Rikenhead, and Castle Curragh. Wexford Graigshallagh, Polehore, Mortgages
of 140 l. on Lawrence Bealies land in Stradbally, 140 l. on Paslastown and
Matestown with several other Mortgages, three houses, the Castle hills, some
lands in Tumen. Jordan John One house in Kesars lane, and another on College
green.

Balmuguire, one message and 15 acres in in Luske, Clomedan al. Ashtown, one
house and 2 acres in Swords, 5 tenements and 26 acres in Cromlin.

Kings Four tenements and gardens in Philipstown. Lambert Philip One house near
Newgate. Wexford Fort.

Ballyheire, Beng, Ballywich, Ballicollan, little Killian, Muckrath, Collkeran,
the village o 9 acres and Chapel, Ballycrinegan.

Shilmaleere.

Marshals town.

Barge.

Richards town.

City Wexford.

Three houses.

Lynch Bartholomew Roscommon. Scaldpark, and the four quarters of Ballinehoe.


