A BRIEF APOLOGY FOR THE Sequestered Clergy. Wherein (among other things)
this Case of Conscience is judiciously handled: Whether any Minister of the
Church of England may (to avoid Sequestration) omit the public use of the
Liturgy, and submit to the Directory.

In a Letter from a sequestered Divine, to Mr. Stephen Marshall.

Printed in the Year 1649.

In Nomine Crucifixi, secundum illud primae ad Corinth. cap. secundo, verse.
secundo.
Reverend Sir,
THis address may seem very strange; and yet if you shall consider the
occasion, it will appear that I could not prudently do other; for you being
accounted a light in that very House in which I stand eclipsed, I could not
imagine by any other mean then your splendour, how to obtain the dissipation of
this Cloud.

Sir, so it is, that that Worshipful and worthy Knight Sir John Trevor is one
to whom I owe very much, for it was his Letter and his influence that first
guided and planted me to, and in the School of the Prophets; It was respect to
him that gained me a tutor, and it is now my respect to him, which gains you
this trouble.

For, when about the beginning of Michaelmas Term I was at London, meeting him
in the Palace yard, I thanked him for a late courtesy; his reply was, I had
disabled my self from the capacity of a Courtesy; I took leave to answer, it
was my conscience and the tenderness thereof that has thus straightened me; He
told me again in words (as I conceive) to these aequivalent, that I was more
biased by conceit, then conscience; and guided rather by will then Judgment.

I have so little left, that I can demonstrate to the world I have not made
gain my godliness; and I shall now desire to make it as evident unto you,
that it is not fancy, but scruple, and scruple only, for which my self, and in
me a wife and five children very deeply suffer; so that I here, with all
respect implore your assistance, either to satisfy my weakness and set me
right, or (which perchance may be the shorter work) be pleased to satisfy him
whom I do so highly honor, that you conceive my grounds and reasons are such as
may conclude me a Rational and conscientious, though weak Brother.

The Misdemeanors (for so they are called) for which my conviction (bearing
date May 5. 1646.) testifies, I am sequestered, they are these; 1. Adoration or
worshipping God by Bowing of my body Eastward, or toward the Holy Table. 2. For
the exterior acknowledgement of the Diety of my Savior, when summoned to it by
his blessed name Jesus. 3. For deserting my cure two whole years. 4. For
officiating by the Common Prayer Book, with refusal of the Directory: To which
is added a general surmise of Malignancy against the Parliament.

First as of least concernment, I shall give you this brief account of the
third charge, to which I negatively answer: I never at all did desert my Cure.
For, being, as Justinian, derelictum dicitur quod Dominus ea mente abjecit, ut
id in numero rerum suarum esse nolit, that only is deserted which is thrown
off with a mind to be no more possessed: I cannot possibly be said to have
deserted my Cure, when by Petition upon Petition, by Letter upon Letter, and
all the ways I could imagine, I implored my quiet at home, or to have leave to
know why; and our Committee never would, or did give way to either; so that
what is here called desertion, is no more then what those words of Scripture
will well warrant, when you are persecuted in one City, fly unto another.

Secondly, Every absenting more then two years, in these days of trial, has
not been accounted sequestrable, and therefore under favor I suppose, though
this by way of cumulation is put in, this is not the gravamen; for there is not
in the conviction any charge for flying to, or being in any forbidden Quarters.

Lastly, I was so far from deserting my Cure, that I kept at my proper cost
(though sequestered) a Curate, all my absence; one who kept my people freer from
distractions and aversions from the ways of the Church of England, then since
they have been. But haec obiter. That which my conviction declares me to suffer
for, it is a pretense of superstition, expressed by bowing to the East, to the
Altar, and at the Name of Jesus. 2. For not laying aside and relinquishing the
Liturgy.

Now I beseech you with patience peruse this my defense, in which I shall
endeavor to clear first my acts of commission from being superstitious, and
then 2. give my reasons why I take it to be a sin of omission to renounce the
Liturgy.

First bowing to the East, and to the Altar, are not only false accusations,
but false in such a degree, that (without my confession) are impossible to be
proved; for being the intention only can specificate the term, it is not in
the power of any man living, to say to what I bow, or to what I kneel; for I
am confident your self bends your knees toward many a thing, to which you
abhor to do it.

Bow at his Footstool; that is, at the Ark and Mercy-seat, for Reformed
Catholic 707.
there he has made a promise of his presence, the words say not Bow to the Ark
but to God at the Ark. Thus Mr. Perkins. And thus and no otherwise did your
Christian Brother bow either toward the East or toward the Holy Table. Now as
the Jews (in Mr. Perkins charitable Divinity) did not bow to the Ark, but to
God at the Ark: Even so, when occasionally your Christian Brother bowed at the
Holy Table, it was not to the Table, or to the Altar, but to his God he made
his Adoration, and that for the same reason which M. Perkins uses; For there
he has made a promise of his presence. There has he enabled us (vi promissi)
to say, This is my Body, this is my Blood.

Now that it is an act of superstition to worship God by bowing of the Body, is
a scruple in which I cannot be satisfied: for page 855. ibid.
as Mr. Perkins, so think I -- The worship of the Body is called Aderation,
which stands in bowing of the knee, bending or prostrating of the body, the
lifting up of the hands or eyes -- A duty which the same reverend author proves
to be, as himself speaks, altogether necessary, and that for three
irrefragable reasons. 1. Because Love must not be conceived in the mind only,
but also testified in the actions of the body. 2. Christ redeemed both, and
therefore must be glorified with both. And lastly Christ being an Head to the
whose man, for this cause not only soul but body also must stand in
subjection to Christ. Many others might be added, but it seems to me vain to
add a beam unto the sun. Now if to worship by bowing of the knee, prostrating
the body, and lifting up of hands or eyes by a duty lawful, yea altogether
necessary, no matter which way soever it be done, still it is as Mr. Perkins
fully, an act not of Superstition, but Adoration. For as it was no superstition
in the Jew to worship God by bowing before the Ark or Westward, so superstition
it is not, to worship God by bowing before his Holy Table, that is in the
phrase of antiquity, Eastward. As for bowing to the East or to the Altar, I am
able to produce a Letter writ by me 5. or 6. years ago, ex Diametro against
it, and am still ready to ratify that Doctrine.

The second act of superstition, it is bowing at the Name of Jesus: and to
clear that I shall thus argue. No act directly tending, and intended, for the
Advance of the glory of Jesus, can be superstitious, but to bow at the Name of
Jesus in the sense of the Church of England, is an act both tending and
intended for the advance of his glory, and therefore cannot be superstitious.
For the proof of the minor Proposition, I appeal to the 18. Canon of the
Church of England where the end and intention of that gesture is clearly thus.

When in time of Divine Service the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due and
lowly reverence shall be done by all persons present, as it has been
accnstomed, testifying by these outward Ceremonies and gestures [observe what]
their inward humility, Christian resolution and due acknowledgement, that the
Lord Jesus Christ, the true and Eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of
the world.

Now upon this ground I thus argue; for as much as both words and gestures have
their individuation and specification merely by use Law or custom, what this
gesture of bowing at the Name of Jesus is to signify and import in the Church
of England; this the Representative part thereof having clearly manifested, we
are to take it in that sense and in that signification, in which and for which
it comes from them proposed and commended to us.

For as in Languages we receive and use words, in and according to that power
and meaning which the first authors and contrivers delivered them unto
posterity; even so that I might ever avoid the being contentious, look what
spiritual and internal duties my Mother the Church of England professed to
express and signify by such and such exterior gestures, such I conceived they
did import, and in such sense and signification I did use and communicate them
unto others.

Whereas then (as the Canon clearly) the due and lowly Reverence exacted at the
Name of Jesus is only to testify our inward humility, Christian resolution,
and due acknowledgement that the Lord Jesus Christ is the true and Eternal Son
of God. This being the known and declared end and meaning of this gesture;
Bowing at the Name of Jesus can no more in my weak apprehension be accounted
Superstition, then is inward humility, Christian resolution, or the due
acknowledgement of the Lord Jesus Christ to be the true and Eternal Son of
God; for being Actus exterior and interior candem constituunt virtutem; being
the outward expression and the inward meaning do make but one complete act; if
the inward be virtuous the outward cannot be vicious; if the inward be
religious the outward cannot be superstitious; so that since bowing at the Name
of Jesus is by the Church and use of England determined to signify an
expression of inward humility, Christian resolution, and a due acknowledgement
of the Deity of the Son of God; I cannot yet imagine how, to him who so
understands and so uses it, bowing at the Name of Jesus can be counted
superstitious.

Nor does only the Canon of the Church of England, but even the Canon of holy
Scripture warrant me sufficiently that superstitious it cannot be; for Dato
sed non concesso, suppose it no duty of that known Text, yet there is
congruity enough to avoid the Superstition of it; for if by those knees the
Apostle means the spiritual and inward knees of the heart, then, as he,
without thought of Superstition expressed that inward duty by bodily
incurvation; why may not I or any other (by his example) express my inward
profession of the Deity, as he, by a corporall'expression, by bowing at his
Name? But my intention is not to write a volume, or indeed to say ought more
then may conclude my design mentioned, to prove that I have not been, nor yet
am scrupulous without cause, nor a sufferer without reason.

Now my first scruple is, whether a Minister may with a good conscience
renounce or leave off any act, Rite, or gesture, under the brand and notion of
superstitious, which he believes is not so?

I dare not do it for these reasons:

1. I should belly mine own soul, in calling good evil, and evil good.

2. I should confirm a scandal laid upon many godly Orthodox Divines, that
they in thus doing have been superstitious.

3. I should do an irreparable violation to those holy gestures which I do
verily believe are advancers of Gods glory.

4. I dare not omit that as superstitious which I believe not to be so, for
fear in so doing, to this undetermined notion, I might add such latitude, that
under the color of Superstition, even Religion it self may be violated. In a
word for my particular, whether I look upon adoration in abstracto, as the mere
expression of that subjection and distance which dust and ashes owes to his
maker, or whether I look upon it in concreto, as joined with some other duty,
as saying our prayers, receiving the Sacrament or profession of our Saviors
Deity; in neither respect (it seems to me) more guilty of Superstition or
troubling the waters, then was the Lamb in the fable when the Wolf charged him:
so that if by some greater light, or latitude of understanding, your clearer
judgment shall discern otherwise, I shall with all respect and thanks yield up
my soul to further illumination, which till it shall please God to give me, I
dare not in cool blood call an honest woman whore; or what I conceive
religious superstitious, for more then yet I am, or hope for to be worth. And
this may suffice for the first scruple, viz. That my judgment concluding
otherwise, I dare not acknowledge or relinquish Adoration under the notion of
superstitious innovation.

The second thing I have to do, is to give my reasons, wherefore I conceived it
a sin of omission to lay aside, much more to renounce the Liturgy, and that I
may do it methodically,

First, I shall give my reasons why I dare not countenance the worshipping of
God without a form; secondly, why I dare not in specie omit this form.

First, I dare not countenance the worshipping of God without a form; for being
the Scripture charge not only to hold the faith, but to hold fast the very
form of sound words, I conceive set form of prayer a necessary expedient to
this end; for being experience both ancient and modern has taught us this sad
truth, that Errors, Heresies, and Innovations in Doctrine are instilled and
infused by the conceived prayers of such who are either Authors or abettors of
such opinions, therefore (and especially in these times) I dare not but
endeavor a set form. A set form seeming now as necessary as an antidote in
time of pestilence.

Secondly, to worship without a prepared and set form (it seems to me) to
serve the living God with less care then Pagans did their Idols. For witness
Plato, a Law there was whatever lib. 7. de leg.
Prayers or Hymns the Poets composed to the gods, they should first show them
their Priests. And Alexander ab Alexandro testifies lib. 4. c. 17.
the Gentiles read their prayers out of a book before their sacrifice, and that
for this reason, Ne quid prepostere dicatur, etc. Or for fear some thing
rashly or preposterously might pass the lips, as if stolen from that of
Solomon, be not rash with thy mouth, and 5. Eccles.
let not thine heart be hasty, an argument to me, that even an heart may be
over hasty, and therefore my weakness desires a set form.

Thirdly, the serving and worshipping God by a set form seems to be approved
by God in all ages, before the Law, under the Law, under the Gospel. Before
the Law we read thus, Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord, Eo
tempore ritus certos 4. Genesis 26. Joan. Dr^sius in difficilioribus Geneseos.
colendi Deum institutos fuisse quos observarent filii Dei. From that time
forward say Expositors, certain rites or set forms were taken up for the
public worship of God, yea forsitan propter idblatriam insurgentem, perchance
for the prevention of incroaching of Idolatry, says a learned Neoterick:
therefore was Enoch Barradius, Tom. 4. l. 10. c. 12.
sedulous to prescribe and deliver a set form. But whether Enoch were or no,
sure we are, God Almighty under under the Law, to prevent Idolatry had his set
Rites; and in particular to the point in hand, a prescribed and set form of
prayer, -- on this 6. Numb. 23.
wise shall ye bless the children of Israel, saying, (as it follows) The
Lord bless thee and keep thee, etc.

Under the Gospel both S. John the forerunner, and our blessed Lord and
Master, for substance, both we know taught to pray; and it is strange teaching
without a form; as the corner and first stone in the building the Lord left us
a prayer, and this prayer proved the basis and fundamental of all future
Liturgies: This through the devotion and piety of the Church increased and grew
into a form, and in this I suppose M. Beza may be my advocate, who tells me,
and all the world, Quae ad ordinem spectant ut precum formulae disposuit
Apostolus, those things which appertain to In 1 Cor. 11 ver. ultim.
order as do forms of prayer, the Apostle himself appointed and disposed, so
that set forms in the judgment of M. Beza are Apostolical, the English
Translation reads it thus, such things as appertain to order, and form of
prayers, and other such like the Apostle took order for, in the congregation
according to the consideration of times, places, persons, 1 Cor 11. 39.

Fourthly, the want of set form prevents that which I am bound for to
endeavor, the conversion and communion of the adverse party; for either I must
persuade them to worship God according to my discretion, and relie-upon the
implicit faith of my prudence, or else I must produce a form in which I desire
their communion, and to which I must endeavor their conversion. Now I believe
all those who renounoe an implicit faith in the whole Church, or in the
Representative of it, all such (I say) at least will abhor so far to resign
themselves unto a private Minister, as to worship God all days of their lives,
according to his mutable dictate. I am sure the Papists will say this is worse
then what we call Popish servitude, for they are bound only to believe and
serve God as the Church orders: but where all is left to the will of the
Minister, people are bound to worship and serve God as his private spirit leads
them, and I wish I could not feelingly say (even from follies vented in my own
Pulpit) what an Ignis fatuus that is.

Lastly, to avoid prolixity, for my own particular, should I renounce a set
form, I must needs profess my self guilty either of Superstitious Innovation,
or (which in materia Religionis is bad enough) popular insinuation.

First, that to worship God without a form is Innovation, this the whole
Christian world will attest unto me, the Eastern and Western Churches,
Wittinberg where Luther, Geneva where Calvin, Scotland where Knox flourished;
and to innovate and act against a Catholic Custom of Christendom, of the
whole Christian world, may breed a scruple in a wise, much more in a weak
Christian.

Secondly, as Innovation, so it would seem to me unavoidable superstition, and
that whether superstition be positively or negatively considered? for
superstition being positively considered, being the issue of misgrounded zeal,
this superstition is active in the production of superstitious performances,
whereof this is one, to conceive that God will be pleased with no prayer from
me, unless of my own conception, nor no devotion unless it be of our own
invention; this I say is the superstitious issue of a misguided zeal. Again,
as misguided zeal is the mother of superstitious performances, even so
ignorant fear is the motive and cause of superstitious forbearances, as when
one vainly fears, and in that fear refrains such an act, as displeasing,
which indeed is rather pleasing to Almighty God, touch not, taste not, handle
not, these are negative superstitions, issues of ignorant fear: And so far as I
can conceive, scrupulously to reject or lay aside set forms, as superstitious,
is out of ignorant fear really and actually to commit (pardon the phrase) a
negative superstition.

3. Again, should I not superstitiously (which as drawing nigher Religion is
more honest of the two) say aside a set form, I cannot imagine any other
principle but popular insinuation to move me to it, and to make that a motive
in Religion scarce appears to me religious. Omnia ponenda post Religionem
nostra Civitas duxit. If the Pagan had so much Divinity, as to say, it was a
Law in their City, that Val. Max. lib. 1. cap. de Religio.
all things whatsoever must give way unto Religion, certainly it behooves me,
who am a Christian in matter and point of Religion, to look upon nothing
through a carnal or secular perspective. Now to me (and with me runs the whole
current of Antiquity) set forms of Prayer and Worship, they are the most
religious and assured means either to preserve or advance Religion. The
scruple then is, whether any of my judgment and persuasion may for any popular
or secular end in the world (and for that end merely) lay aside a better, and
assume in Gods Worship a worse way? whether this be not having a male in my
flock, to offer unto God a female, judge you.

That blessed speech of Sir Benj. Ruddierd to M. Pym, he that thinks Printed
1628.
to save any thing by his Religion but his soul, will be a terrible loser in
the end; it is worthy to be written in letters of gold, yea worthy to be
engraven in the heart of every Parliament Man that sits; it is indeed a saying
that has so far prevailed on me, that I begin extremely to question the
truth of that vulgar opinion, that the Worship and Government of the Church of
Christ are so left as to be accommodated to the proportionable exigences of
States and Kingdoms: For my particular I conceive the glory of God attended,
municipall Laws ought rather to stoop then they to strain; for Religion is so
tender a Virgin, that she may not admit the least prostitution, and I am sure a
conscientious breast fears to pumple her very ornaments.

Whereas then to worship God without a set form seems to me destructive of
the form of sound words, which charily must be preserved, a Worship more
careless then what Pagans used, an Innovation which takes away the very ground
and basis of conversion and communion with an adverse party; whereas it would
be in me either superstition or popularity to desert a set form; I must crave
leave to follow these Dictates, till I have better premises given me, from
which I may conclude otherwise. And so I shall desire your patience to
accompany me to my last endeavor, which is to show, that I cannot with a good
conscience renounce, or as yet lay aside this our individual Liturgy, and
that for these reasons:

1. It makes our Religion to be ill spoken of by the greatest part of
Christendom, and so preventeth the conversion of Papists, who accuse us of
unsetlednesse and changes; yea, it furnishes them, with an unanswerable
exception, viz. That we have these many years convicted, punished, and
imprisoned them for what our selves now so far distaste, that at Sessions we
give a charge against it, traduce it under the brand of the old Mumpsimus, and
indite it, and punish one another for it; this I profess my weakness cannot
satisfy.

2. If better it were a Millstone were hanged about my neck, then that I should
be a scandal to my weak brother, the omission of the Liturgy, being at this
time a scandal not only to the weak, but to the strong, being the cries and
tears of both require it, how should I dare to look my God in the face when I
shall wilfully become scandalous both to the learned and unlearned, both to the
strong and to the weak Christian? yea, of this sad experience has made me very
confident, such a (...), such a stumbling block as is this, the suppression of
the Liturgy was never since Queen Mary's days amongst us; for the want of
this has hindered thousands from their accustomed piety and devotion, the weak,
because they have no other; the strong, because they have no better way, and
whatever prevents piety cannot but be rather scandalum datum, then acceptum, a
real and true scandal, so that till a better form be actually established in
lieu of this, my conscience tells me I may not leave it.

3. What by oath and subscription I am bound unto, that without relaxation from
the same authority to whom I swear, and before whom I subscribed, I may not
relinquish. But I have sworn to my Dioecesan, and subscribed to maintain the
service of God, not only in genere, but in specie, according to the particular
form and way of the Church of England. And therefore to say no more, as an
honest man I am bound to make that good which I have sworn, subscribed, and
negatively promised to maintain.

4. It is against my Oath of Supremacy to acknowledge a power Ecclesiastical
Independent upon the only Supreme, and this cannot (in my apprehension) be
avoided, if the King forbidding I receive the Directory, and the King
commanding to use it, I reject the Liturgy.

5. Beneficium supponit Officium. The duty which every parochial Minister is
bound unto, is a daily recital of his Office; for being Parishes are of humane
institution, founded and endowed by the piety and liberality of devout Patrons,
look what they conditioned for, (so far as just and pious) that I conceive I am
bound unto. Forasmuch then as in the Church of England, prayer, daily prayer,
yea (and ever since the Reformation) this very form of prayer is the condition
of our admittance, though preaching be multiplied, I cannot conscionably omit
that, without which, yea, and for which I had institution and induction to my
living; so that in my weak judgment it is a very considerable scruple, --
whether what is given for a public and daily duty, may conscionably be taken
by him who does it but once a week, much less by him who does it not at all?

Lastly, it is very considerable to me, whether those words in my Protestation
(The true reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations) do not bind me, so far
as lawfully I may with life, power, and estate, to maintain either this, or
some other setforme, and that for these reasons:

First, This word or Notion, Religion, necessarily includes all the actual
muniments thereof, be it what religion it may be, for if as Austin out of
Cicero, Religio est virtus quae superioris cujusdam naturae, quam divina^ lib.
83. quaest. 31. I^stit. l 4. c. 14. p. 19.
vocant, cul^u^ ceremoniamque adfert, Religion be a virtue which obliges, as
well to Ceremony, as to worship. And if as M. Calvin, in professione religionis
homines non posse ceremoniis carere, Men cannot profess Religion without
Ceremony, be it what Religion it may be: Then (so far as my capacity reaches)
I cannot vow, promise and profess, to maintain and defend a Religion, but
under this Notion and term Religion, I bind my self to defend and maintain
what ever congruously is requisite in the defense, and support of it: for as he
that is bound to maintain a house, must preserve the thatch as well as the
grunsell: and as he who is bound to maintain a close, must have a care of the
hedge (though it be but a dead one) as well as the crop; even so, when I did
promise, vow, and protest to defend and maintain the true Religion, in which I
was baptized and bred, I know not how I could hope to make good this, unless
the necessary muniments, whereof the Liturgy is a maine one, were preserved in
it: And that in this I was not singular, I may appeal unto a Vote afterward
annexed to the Protestation, in which it is declared, that several persons had
raised the same doubt, an argument that the deduction was very obvious, and
very natural. Now forasmuch as I had vowed before I saw the limitation, after
the Vow I durst not inquire; a Vow and an Oath (as I conceive) in this
dissenting, an Oath it must be taken in the sense of the giver; a Vow because
voluntary, in the sense of the taker only: so I took it, and the obligation is
still upon me.

Secondly, whereas Religion in the Protestation has this restrictive
difference, Reformed; and not only so, but so Reformed, as in the Church of
England against all Popary, and Popish Innovations; I cannot see how I could
protest to maintain a Religion so reformed, but that I must necessarily imply
that service which the first Reformers, and all succeeding Parliaments have
made the Characteristicall note, and formal difference betwixt us and them;
and this (we all know) has been the Liturgy; for from his denying Communion
in this, the Papist was called Recusant, and by his joining with us in this, he
was said and held as reconciled to our Church.

Thirdly, in case the Protestation had run thus; I promise, vow, and protest to
maintain the true Religion established in the Church of Rome against (as they
call them) heretical innovations; would any man believe the Missall were here
excluded, which is the very formality of their professions? Or in case it had
run thus, I promise, vow, and protest to maintain that Reformed Religion,
whose character and distinctive formality is the Directory, would any doubt I
vowed to maintain the Directory? and can I hope to perform my Vow, can I hope
to maintain the Religion of the Church of England, and lay aside that which is
the practical character of my profession?

Fourthly, if this notion Reformed Religion in the Church of England includes
not Liturgy, then they are not sufferers for the true reformed Religion of
England, who suffer merely for the Liturgy, but they who so suffer, cannot
imagine else what they suffer for.

Fifthly, it is very probable to me, the compilers and chief mannagers of this
Protestation, by Religion mainly meant the form of Gods Worship, for in the
first 19. humble Propositions, the eighth runs thus: That your Majesty will be
pleased to consent that such a Reformation be made of the Church Government and
Liturgy, as both Houses of Parliament shall advise. -- To the people in the
same year the Lords and Commons declare thus, April 9. 1642. they intend a due
and necessary Reformation of the Government and Liturgy of the Church. A
plain and evident demonstration to my capacity, that both Lords and Commons
did then declare, this notion or term Religion, it includes both
Church Government, and Liturgy, otherwise what ever is of late attempted or
done concerning these, cannot be said to be a religious, but a politic
Reformation.

Lastly, how could I promise, vow, and protest to defend and maintain a
Religion which is said to be true, and actually reformed, unless there be some
form actually in being, which my judgment and my conscience must look upon;
for to swear the maintenance of a Religion, or Worship, or Discipline not
fixed, and digested into a form, seems to me like that formidable et caetera,
to swear and vow to maintain I know not what; and upon this ground thousands
there are who have stumbled at the very threshold of the Covenant, not daring
to swear to defend a Reformation where they cannot come to see the form.

Whereas then beside Statute-subscription, and those many obligations
contracted under Episcopacy, I conceive even by the Protestation, and from the
very sense of the House that made it, Liturgy is a very considerable
ingredient in the compound of Religion, and this present Liturgy in this the
reformed Religion of the Church of England: As then in Music, though there are
many rare and exquisite voluntaries, yet solemn and set Music is not
therefore to be rejected, even so though there are, and may be in the Church of
England such who can express as readily as conceive, and conceive as devoutly
as can be imagined, yet for all that, this is no Supersedeas or bar against
studied, penned, and set forms of prayer; and more then this, as I read, was
heard, and ordered to be printed by the honorable House of Commons in a Sermon
called, Babilons downfall, in these words, -- Cursed shall he be that removes
the ancient Land-marke, etc. what is the ancient Landmark of England, but our
Laws and Religion? (which contains as well facienda as credenda, and has as
well the Liturgy as the Articles and Homilies for her Boundaries) and
therefore if any man shall remove this Land-marke, cursed shall he be of the
Lord, and let all the people say, Amen. Certainly they who said Amen to this
imprecation, and those who ordered there should be an impression of it, they
were then no visible enemies to Liturgy, no not this Liturgy. All then that I
shall now trouble you withal, shall be a slight proposal of this one Scruple.

Whether a Minister is not as much bound to suffer in defense of the spiritual
Muniments of Religion, as any Subject for the temporal Muniments and
Privileges of State or Kingdom?

For Christian Religion, or the Muniments thereof, I am apt to think with
Tertullian, the Sword is no good advocate, Lex nova non se vindicat ultore
gladio, the foolishness of preaching, not the arm of flesh, As Grotius cites
him de Iure belli.
must and did establish these: And therefore I propose the scruple only in
point of suffering; for if we look unto the author and finisher of our faith,
I conceive with S. Peter, that by his example we are called upon to suffer, and
in this case to suffer only.

Now in these times of loss and suffering, I have often considered with my self
for what, either as Subject, or as Christian, especially as a Christian
Minister I stand bound to suffer.

Now whilst I look upon my self as a subject having nothing at all before me
but some secular or temporal advantage: my next consideration is, what secular
or temporal commodity is dearest to me; for I suppose no man will lose gold to
save chafe, nor expose his darling to preserve his vassal. Now forasmuch as
all temporal or secular goods are reducible to these three heads, jucundum,
utile, honestum, either pleasant, profitable or honest; that which of these
three is dearest, that which of these is absolutely the best, that (I conceive,
though I suffer the loss of the other two) I am bound to preserve.

Job 2. Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life:
though the Devil spoke it, both God and man approve it. Skin for skin,
whatever is pleasant, or whatever is profitable, a man will rather suffer in,
then in his life; for of all things, pleasant or profitable, life is the
dearest. Now albeit among things pleasant or profitable, life is the jewel; yet
bonum honestum, that good which does consist in honor or honesty, this, it is
often even dearer then life it self: so that for defense of reputation and a good
name, for the advance and benefit of posterity, for the vindication of a
friend, for the preservation of a trust; for these and such like, there is many
an one who will dare to die: but merely for what is pleasant, or what is
profitable, I think no man living: So that indeed it is only bonum bonestum, it
is only for what is honest, or what is honorable, a man as a man, a man as
rational, is bound to suffer.

Now if it be so, that honor and honesty has so strong an influence upon a
reasonable soul, that Reason will persuade even the natural man to prefer
honor and honesty before life; if property, liberty, and the Laws of the Land
are so dear to Subjects, that even* for them, thousands have laid down their
lives; my great and grand scruple is, whether bonum religiosum, whether a
religious good, whether that which I verily believe tends to the good of
Religion, ought not to me, a Christian, and a Minister, to be full as dear as
any bonum honestum, as any honest or mere secular good to me, or any subject in
the world: And (I profess to you upon the faith of a Christian) be it sound,
or be it weak, this is the principal ground and motive of all my losses, and
to support me I have these reasons.

1. Corinthians. 9. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great
thing if we shall reap your carnal things? Between spiritual and carnal
things the Apostle seems to make so despicable a difference, that the one is
not to be compared with the other: carnal things, secular and worldly
interests they are not considerable, if compared with things spiritual. A
clear argument to me, that no spiritual, or religious performance ought to
give way to any carnal end. And such I conceive are all the muniments of
Christian Religion, such in particular a blameless Liturgy.

Secondly, it is a rule amongst Casuists, that man that suffers either for
doing this, or for bearing that in relation unto Christ and his glory, that
person is a sufferer in the cause of Christ; as he that will not lie upon this
ground, because dishonorable to the Christian profession; if he should be
persecuted, because he will not lie; such an one though not in materia fidei,
yet because his restraint is for Christ and his glory, he were persecuted for
Christ his sake.

Whereas then in my poor judgment I am convinced there is no means generally
more expedient for the advance of the glory of Christ and the preservation of
the faith, then a well composed and set form of Liturgy; what ever I shall
suffer for not rejecting this, I shall confidently lay upon the score of my
Savior: for as much as I therefore only by suffering endeavor the defense of
of this, because I do verily believe, Liturgy is the advance of his glory: So
that if a temporal good (whose reward and encouragement cannot be but
temporal) can move a man to suffer; much more a spiritual, whose reward
(through the mercy of a gracious accepter) may prove eternal. For he who will
not see a cup of cold water given for his sake lost: neither will he forget the
least of sufferings which relate to his glory.

Thirdly, In suffering for spiritual muniments, and for that only which
relates to Christ only, and his glory, there is no interest but God Almighties
considered or concerned; But in suffering for temporal, though public good,
we have private ends and personal advantages of our own; so that it must be
much more acceptable to God Almighty to suffer for spiritual, that is his
interest, then for secular, that is our own.

Fourthly, If that Citizen be held an unworthy Member, who will not spend his
purse and pains for the privilege of his Corporation: and if that
Country-clowne be held no good Townesman, who will not stiffly maintain the
Modus Decimandi, The custom of h^s Town; certainly then that Minister has a
very low and poor estimate of that Liturgy which he subscribed unto, a very
unworthy esteem of the Catholic custom of the reformed Church of Christ,
that will without suffering betray his trust; making less account of what
Martyrs sealed with their blood, then will a Citizen or a Countryman of a
trifling privilege or custom.

Fifthly, Considering and inquiring after the elder times, when such was the
purity of intention, that nothing but Christ's glory was attended; I cannot find
that any thing in Religion was molded unto State ends.

Si ecclesiasticum negotium sit, nullam Communionem habento civiles Magistratus
cum ca disceptatione, sed Religiosissimi Episcopi secundum sacros Canones
negotio fine imponuntom, in Authentica Con. 123.

Not to the civil Magistrate, but to the Religious Bishops, Justinian (no
less then an Emperor) attributes and decrees the decision and determination
of Ecclesiastical affairs; and certainly if there be any Ecclesiastical
Government, as the Law speaks -- Cui jurisdictio data est, ea quoque concessa
esse intelliguntur sine quibus jurisdictio expleri non potuit. -- To whom
jurisdiction is committed all that must be granted without which he cannot
exercise jurisdiction; and that must needs be a directive and a coactive power.

Now impossible (it seems to me) that those who have, (be they Prelates, be
they Presbyters, or be they of what name or title soever, our next new light
shall call them) I say it seems to me impossible, that those who have this
spiritual power should ever discharge their trust, unless they resolve to
suffer, and to suffer precisely, for the muniments and defense of the Church of
Christ, and the power of him committed to them; for the impartial and thorough
executing of this charge, cannot but displease great ones: and flesh and blood
is a bitter adversary; so that indeed it will evidently appear, the decay of
Discipline, Liturgy and all the muniments of the Church, they have therefore
suffered because those who should have suffered for them, would not. And I
beseech God this sin be not laid to our charge; for my own particular, I
beseech God give me grace to say heartily as did some of the Martyrs, though I
cannot dispute, I can suffer for him.

Sixthly, For me to omit any act, gesture or form of worship, which I believe
or feel to be an advance to piety, merely from secular or private interest,
this in my judgment is to prefer a carnal thing before a spiritual, and to
endeavor rather to please man then my God. And indeed I could here with a
great deal of truth and sadness relate unto you, the serious and sharp
complaints of such Ministers, who profess their souls long after the Liturgy,
grieved at heart, and (as they pretend) troubled at soul, because they dare
not use what they conceive much the better way. A lamentable condition is the
Church in, when Ministers worship God with reluctancie, and only to save their
stakes, comply and do as the State would have them.

Lastly, Forasmuch as the muniments of Religion are preservers of the dearest
thing imaginable, Gods glory, and our souls welfare, I do not know what I
should suffer in defense of, if not of these.

I lately reading (as it fell proper to the day) the fifth of Esaias, when I came
to those dreadful words -- I will take away thy hedge, and it shall be eaten
up, break down the wall, and it shall be trodden down, it made my heart even
ache, to think how applicable this methodicall destruction is to our ungrateful
vineyard. I will take away the hedge, I will break down the wall. Take the
hedge and the wall away cut up the fence, and the Vinyard will soon be wast;
The Government, the Discipline, the Liturgy which as a hedge or a wall ever
since our reformation preserved the Vineyard; since I see it has pleased God
to suffer this hedge and the wall to be trodden down, I can but fear
confusion and desolation to be the sequest. For since the worldly wiseman
verily believes, where the fence is wanting, spoil and wast inevitably
follows; and therefore his maine care is to tend it: Even so where the
muniments of any prosession or Religion are slighted and taken away; where
Liturgy (this 13. hundred years without controversy, held the hedge and mound
of faith, and Gods worship in Natiohall Church) where (I say) this is pulled
down and taken away, there is iminent and evident fear; a gap is opened to
let in what ever will come. Be it the beast of the field, be it the little
foxes be it the wild bore of the forest, come what will there is no muniment,
no provision, no fence against it; so that in my poor conceptions the hedge,
the fence, the muniment of the Church they are matters of such necessary
consequence, that Ministers I conceive, had better lay themselves, and all
their fortunes in the gap, then for want of fence to suffer the destroyer to
come in.

Indeed I have been told by some who wish very well unto me, that humane
inventions and things merely circumstantiall ought not to be thus stood upon: I
thank them heartily for their affection, and bless them for their good will,
but our judgments yet must differ. For if no suffering for humane invention, if
life it self may not be exposed to hazard in defense of humane constitutions,
certainly then no fighting for the Laws of Land, nor no taking up arms for
Privilege of Parliament, for these sure are humane and political
institutions; and as these are necessary for the preservation of a State, even
some such are also necessary for the preservation of a Church, and of such
Churchmen cannot be too chary.

Again, whereas Liturgy in genere, or ours in specie is counted but a
circumstantiall business, I believe I may find out such circumstantialls in a
Christian Church, as will hazard the whole if they perish.

In the tenth persecution under the Tyranny of Dioclesian, a Decree past, ut
Templa and libri delerentur, that Christians should deliver Chron. Chario.
Diocles.
up their books and destroy (or at least permit the destruction of) their
Churches. Books and Churches I conceive are but circumstantialls to Religion;
for the world was more then 2400. years old before there was any Scripture in
it; yea, the Christian Church it was from the birth of Christ more then 90.
years before the Canon of the New Testament was completed, yea after the death
and Resurrection of our Savior there is (supposing his passion at 31.) ten
years Mat. 41. Luke 5. ^. Mark 61 Joh 98.
numbered before any Gospel at all was committed unto writing, twice ten before
the second, thrice ten before the third, and more then three twenti^s before
the last; a plain argument that books and writings are but circumstantiall to
Religion; for one may live and die a very good Christian, and know never a
letter on the book.

Suppose now the Pope and Popery should so far prevail, as to have under the
notion of books heretical (for so they will stick to call our Bibles) to call
in, and under pain of death to deliver up our Bibles even to the fire, could
any conscientious Protestant satisfy his soul with this poor evasion, alas
the Bible is but circumstantiall, the Doctrine and Religion of it I can
preserve though the Bible be gone? without all peradventure it is most true, a
learned and well grounded Christian, he may preserve the faith, he may deliver
and hold fast the form of sound words* though among Turks, where a Bible is
not to be looked upon: and yet for my particular I should scarce look upon
that man as Christian, who to save his purse, yea his body should deliver up
his Bible to the fire.

In the Roman Martyrologie there is a commemoration made of many holy Martyrs,
who despising the sacrilegious Edict of Dioclesian Ian. 2
7. quo tradi Sacros codices jubebantur, potius corpora carnificibus quam
sanctadare canibus maluerunt] chose rather to deliver their bodies to the
executioner then holy things to dogs, or holy books unto the fire. And truly I
should rather honor these as Martyrs, then those for good Christians, who
under pretense of things circumstantiall, should deliver those to save
themselves; so highly (I conceive) God would be dishonored in the betraying of
so great a preserver, and muniment of his Honor.

Again, as Books, even so (to some much more clearly) Churches, Oratories,
Temples, they are mere circumstantialls. Now suppose the Independent and
Congregationall Brotherhood should so far overpower, as to command the
demolition (as they call them) of our Steeple Houses, the destruction and
levelling of our Churches, I would very fain know whether in point of
conscience I were not rather bound to suffer, then in any measure to appear
willing to so high a sacrilege? I who am flesh and blood as well as other men,
could find pretty evasions and glosses to fool my soul withal; I could say
(as I hear) is not a Sermon as well in a Parlour as in a Church. Did not Christ
preach in a Ship, Paul pray upon the sands, and shall I suffer in defense of so
unnecessary a trisle as an heap of stones, a Popish Relic, a sorry meeting
house? For my particular, I am afraid many things are daily called
circumstantiall, not with consideration whether so or no, but because these are
the things in question, these the points which I must either dissemble, desert
or suffer for. I pray let me as a close to this present you with the example of
one, who though a Bishop, was ever reverenced as a Saint, and a good man; I
mean that great Doctor S. Ambrose, who being once tempted and provoked even in
this very point, and that by no less then the Emperor, to deliver up Epist.
33.
his Church, though it pleased the Emperor in a fair way to send Earls and
Tribunes to him, -- ut Basilicae fieret matura traditio, that there might be a
seasonable del^verance of that Royal Palace (for so his piety terms the
Church) yet you shall find this reverend Bastor so far from deeming this a
circumstantiall trisle, that he offers his goods, his body, his life in lien of
it.

Ea quae Divina Imperatoriae potestatinon subjecta. The things of God are not
subject to imperial power, was the peremptory position of this Bishop; and
then proceeds. -- Si patrimonium petitur, invadite; si corpus, occurram: vultis
in vincula rapere, vultis in mortem? voluptatiest mihi. -- If you who are sent,
demand my patrimony, invade it, take it! if my body, here it is; if to bonds or
death you desire to carry me, it shall be a pleasure to me; -- pro altaribus
gratius immolabor, -- I will gladly be a sacrifice to preserve my Altar. He
would rather dye the death then suffer an Arrian Minister to officiate in his
Church; yea as it is in the same Epistle -- cum propositum esset ut ecclesiae
vasa jam traderemus -- when the Emperors Officers demanded a present delivery
of the Church Vessels, the conscientious Bishop was so far from holding these
such circumstantialls, as not to be stood upon, that he plainly tells the
Emperor, it was neither lawful for him to deliver, or the Emperor to demand
them.

Trade basilicam; deliver the Church, is as much as to say (as the In Sermon
ad plebem intra basilicam, Ep. 33.
same Father to his Flock) speak a word against God, and dye; nay not only so,
Nec solum dic ad versus Deum etians fac ad versus Deum, It is not only to speak
but to do against God, which in his judgment deserved no less then death;
Thus zealous of a circumstantiall, and of exterior muniments, was that holy
Bishop to betray a Church, yea a Vessel of a Church, it was in his divinity a
sin against the Deity; an act against him for whose glory and service they were
preserved.

In these sad times of trial, I conceive one main end of Gods judgments
(especially upon his Clergy) is to discern who those are who have hitherto
merely related to him for their bellies; and who for his glory mainly? who have
been spiritual, and who carnal professors of the Ministry? For those who
served him chiefly? for their bellies, and carnal ends, to them the invasion
of nothing is considerable, in which their interest and their ends are not
involved; but such who with purity of intention have mainly studied and sought
the advance of Gods service, to them as to S. Ambrose, the muniments of
Religion, the abridgement or abatement of any thing that was adjuvant to this
end, is more considerable then all their secular interest, or personal
advantages of this world; insomuch as I can knowingly say it for some:
Threescore pound a year, and our old way, will be preferred before 300. in a
worse Moddell. It is to me a consideration not unworthy my pen, to see how the
judgment of God has followed such who have measured and stuck to his
interests, merely as they moved with their own. In the 21, year of Henry the
8th. in a Parliament p. 118. in Bridewell.
which began the 3. of November. the Commons sent up to the House of Lords a Bill
against the exaction of unconscionable Mortuaries; To which Bill it is observed
the spiritual Lords made a fair face and were well content a reasonable Order
should pass against them; But this was (says my author) Because it touched
them little for when within two days after a Bill concerning probates of
Testaments (in which there had been incrediale extortion) was sent up to the
Lords, then the Bishops in general (says the Historian) frowned and grunted,
for that touched their profit; then said the Bishop of Rochester, now with the
Commons is nothing but down with the Church. When the Bishops personal
profits were touched upon, then (as if the very Church were falling, Fisher
cries out, the Commons lack faith, the Commons think of nothing but down with
the Church. Yea in the progress of this reformation are not Bishops found
conniving and abetting the demolishing of religious houses; and was not this
probably with an eye to the preservation of their own; as if they said, let
Monasteries go, so long as Bishoprics be preserved: well, they are dead and
gone; But has not vengeance followed upon Episcopacy? Are there not now
amongst us who cry, down with Bishops, sell their Lands, and think this no
sacrilege, provided that Parsonages may be augmented, and Tithes supported?
well, Bishops are preached down and their honors laid in the dust; But does not
vengeance hasten after the promoters of it? Do not the Presbyters find that
there are who conceive they have less right to Tithes then Bishops to their
Lands? Are there not who are as industrious to deprive them, as they have been
(for their own ends) to deprive their God? An evident argument, that just and
righteous art thou O God in all shy ways. An argument that makes me verily
believe, those who for private interest, and merely either for praise or profit
throw off the Liturgy, forbear their duties, and betray the muniments of
Religion and the Church of Christ; God will in his due time reward such into
their own bosoms, blasting that private interest for which they have betrayed
his.

Whereas then I must profess before God, and the world, I can apprehend no
motive or inducement so prevalent as to persuade me, that the Liturgy of the
Church of England is any way a hinderer of Gods holy Worship, or an obstacle to
the solid and sufficient Ministration of the Word agreeable to Orthodox
Antiquity, and an approved promoter of Gods glory in the Church I live in:
being (I say) to consent to the abolition of Liturgy, I find in my soul no
moving motive, but either the hope of more, or the holding of what I have; I
dare not, (finding within me nothing but carnal interest) put a specious show
of Religion upon it, and tell the world that I lay aside the truly Divine
Service of the Church, because Prelates overvalued it, the ignorant doted of
it, the Papists nosed with it, and an idle and unedifying Ministry maintained
by it.

These I profess, to me are neither true nor weighty considerations; for if I
should now (as I am) forbear or lay it aside, it is not any, or all these, but
only in mine own defense, only for mine own ends I should do it: Now whether
any man may salva conscientia prefer what he conceives in Gods service a worse
way, merely for the boot of private interest, I leave it to your prudent
consideration; concluding with that of Chrystost. -- Qui hominem timet ab co
ipso quem timet deridebitur, sin vero Deum, Hom. 84. in Mat. the.
hominibus quoque venerabilis crit. He who in Gods cause prefers man, he shall
be scorned of him he fears; but he who fearing God despises man, shall be had
in reverence even of those men: The patient abiding of the meek shall not always
be forgotten.

And here I had thought to have put a period both to your trouble, and my own;
but I must needs crave-leave, that you would thus far be an advocate both for
me, and all in my condition, as to procure a belief that such who are constant
to their faith, and principles, according to the established and old way of
England, may be held if weak, yet conscientious Christians; for it is none of
the lest pressures of the Cross upon us, that we of all men are thought to
have no foundation; whereas we in our judgments believe verily, if what we
hold and suffer for be not that very Religion which the Divines of England
unanimously subscribed, and professed to ratify; there is not any in England
that is above seven years old, and to innovate in Religion has (I am sure) By
the sages of this present: Parliament been so severely looked upon, that I
should be very loath to be such a capital offender.

All that my soul longs after, is but to obtain the same liberty which all
different parties (but such as hold to their rule and conformity) daily have; a
free exercise of my conscience in that way of Worship, in which both Church and
State visibly held, and professed communion till very lately; a way of worship in
the days of Q. Mary justified against the Papist; a way of Worship in the
days of Q. Elizabeth so highly protested against by the Puritan, that Stow in
his Chronicle has recorded at Bury See the Supplication of the men of Norfolk
and Sust. in the Book of Mart. 1728 Abridg. page 413.
Sizes, 1583. Hacke^ and Coppinger were hanged for spreading certain books
seditiously penned by one Robert Brown against the Common Prayer Book.

Now reverend Sir, till some better judgment shall unfold the mystery, it must
be my wonder, tha(...) very form which this very Parliament past under the
notion of Divine Service; should on a sudden become such an abomination, that
any way of Worship, but it, is permitted; my body of professors conscientious,
but such as use this; all other ways being held if not religious, yet
tolerable: This I can assure you is no mean scandal and riddle to such as are
very intelligent, and very conscientious Christians.

Indeed a Declaration past, and by the House of Commons was ordered, not only
to be p^inted, but by special order to be published by the care of Knights and
Burgesses, against all such persons as should take upon them to preach or
expound, not 31. December 1646.
being ordained here, or in some reformed Church.

But whereas in October last a Petition against this Declaration was exhibited,
and with thanks received by both Houses; whereas notwithstanding that
Declaration, such as have no act of Ministerial Ordination past upon them, do
daily uncheck'd, preach and expound in Churches, and public places;

I humbly desire you so to qualify my conscientious constancy to the most
Christian form of the Church of England, that to persevere in it, be no more
held contumacy against Ordinance, then was that Petition against the
Declaration; so shall I be bound to give you more thanks then were the Houses
to give them.

In a word, I beseech you (good Sir) by that conscientious subscription in
which we both visibly agreed; by that canonical obedience which we both
deliberately swear; by that Doctrine which at cur Inductions in the face of our
Congregations, and the presence of Almighty God, we did profess to ratisie; by
that solemn Protestation which since this Parliament began we hoth took; by
these, and by all those duties, in which (I suppose without scruple) we did
both within seven years last past practice and communicate;

Be pleased to look with some charitable respect upon one who now only is what
generally all the Divines of England very lately professed, at least pretended
for to be; one I am who fear to change, least (as a defloured Virgin that
having lost the chaste veil of her strict modesty, then lies opan to al
proff^^s) I should find my self tractable to all changes: and how various they
may yet prov^ God knows.

Blessed be God for Religion, whether in Doctrine, Discipline, Government, or
form of Worship, I am very well; might I enjoy my peace within this pale I
should bless God, and the contrivers of it; or might there be a Reformation,
and not abolition, I should yet hope to live in a Ministerial way: but however
let me live (I beseech you) in your esteem either as a conscientious brother,
or as your convert; arguments may pierce deeper then afflictions, the one
(blessed be God) I have born with a tolerable patience, and the other I am
ready to receive with a proportionable meeknes.

Sir, the total of my desire and endeavor is, that either as Divine you would
satisfy my Scruples, or as a Christian satisfy my friend, and for either of
these I shall subscribe my self,

Your thankful Brother in the Lord, J. A.
December. 22. 1647.

