PRIVATE DEVOTIONS For several OCCASIONS, ORDINARY And EXTRAORDINARY.



LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, at the little North Door of St. Paul's
Church, 1660.

CHRISTIAN READER.
I Have, for the help of thy Devotions, set down some FORMS of PRIVATE PRAYER,
upon several occasions: If it be thought an omission that there are none for
Families, I must answer for my self, that it was not from any opinion that God
is not as well to be worshipped in the Family as the Closet; but because the
Providence of God and the Church has already furnished thee for that purpose,
infinitely beyond what my utmost care could do. I mean the PUBLIC LITURGY or
COMMON PRAYER, which for all public addresses to God (and such are Family
prayers) are so excellent and useful, that we may say of it as David did of
Goliah's sword, 1 Samuel 21. 9. There is none like it.

DIRECTIONS for the MORNING.
As soon as ever thou awakest in the morning, lift up thy heart to God in this
or the like short Prayer.

LORD, as thou have awaked my Body from sleep, so by thy grace awaken my Soul
from sin, and make me so to walk before thee this day and all the rest of my
life, that when the last trumpet shall awake me out of my grave, I may rise to
the life immortal, through Jesus Christ.

WHen thou have thus begun, suffer not (without some urgent necessity) any
worldly thoughts to fill thy mind, till thou have also paid thy more solemn
Devorions to Almighty God, and therefore during the time thou art dressing thy
self (which should be no longer then common decency requires) exercise thy mind
in some spiritual thoughts: as for example, consider to what Temptations thy
business or company that day are most like to lay thee open, and arm thy self
with Resolutions against them; or again, consider what Occasions of doing
service to God, or good to thy neighbor are that day most likely to present
themselves, and resolve to embrace them; and also contrive how thou may
improve them to the uttermost. But especially it will be fit for thee to
Examine whether there have any sin escaped thee since thy last nights
examination. If after these considerations any further leisure remain, thou
may profitably employ it in meditating on the general Resurrection (whereof
our rising from our beds is a Representation) and of that dreadful Judgment
which shall follow it, and then think with thy self in what preparation thou
art for it, and resolve to husband carefully every minute of thy time toward
the fitting thee for that great account. As soon as thou art ready, retire to
some private place, and there offer up to God thy Morning Sacrifice of Praise
and Prayer.

Prayers for the Morning. At thy first kneeling down, say,
O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon me a miserable sinner.

LORD, I know not what to pray for as I ought, O let thy Spirit help my
infirmities, and enable me to offer up a spiritual Sacrifice acceptable to thee
by Jesus Christ.

A Thanksgiving.
O Gracious Lord, whose mercies endure for ever, I thy unworthy servant who
have so deeply tasted of them, desire to render thee the tribute of my humblest
praises for them: In thee, O Lord, I live and move and have my being, thou
first made me to be, and then that I might not be miserable but happy, thou
sendest thy Son out of thy bosom to Redeem me from the power of my sins by his
Grace, and from the punishment of them by his Blood, and by both to bring me to
his glory. Thou have by thy mercy caused me to be born within thy peculiar
fold, the Christian Church, where I was early consecrated to thee in Baptism,
and have been partaker of all those spiritual helps which might aid me to
perform that Vow I there made to thee; and when by my own wilfulness or
negligence I have failed to do it, yet thou in thy manifold mercies have not
forsaken me, but have graciously invited me to repentance, afforded me all
means both outward and inward for it, and with much patience have attended and
not cut me off in the acts of those many damning sins I have committed, as I
have most justly deserved. It is, O Lord, thy Restraining grace alone by which
I have been keept back from any the greatest sins, and it is thy Inciting and
Assisting grace alone, by which I have been enabled to do any the least good,
therefore not unto me, not unto me, but unto thy name be the praises. For these
and all other thy spiritual blessings, my soul does magnify the Lord, and all
that is within me praise his holy Name. I likewise Praise thee for those many
outward Blessings I enjoy, as health, friends, food and raiment, the comforts
as well as the necessaries of this life, for those continual Protections of thy
hand, by which I and mine are kept from dangers, and those gracious
Deliverances thou have often afforded out of such as have befallen me; and for
that mercy of thine whereby thou have sweetened and allayed those Troubles thou
have not seen fit wholly to remove: for thy particular Preservation of me this
night, and all other thy goodness toward me; Lord, grant that I may render
thee not only the fruit of my lips, but the obedience of my life, that so these
blessings here may be an earnest of those richer blessings thou have prepared
for those that love thee, and that for his sake whom thou have made the Author
of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him, even Jesus Christ.

A Confession.
O Righteous Lord, who hate iniquity, I thy sinful creature cast my self at
thy feet, acknowledging that I most justly deserve to be utterly abhorred and
forsaken by thee; for I have drunk iniquity like water, gone on in a continued
course of sin and rebellion against thee, daily committing those things thou
forbiddest, and leaving undone those things thou command; mine heart, which
should be an habitation for thy spirit, is become a cage of unclean birds, of
foul and disordered affections; and out of this abundance of the heart my mouth
speaks, my hands act, so that in thought, word and deed I continually
transgress against thee. [Here mention the greatest of thy sins.] Nay, O Lord,
I have despised that goodness of thine which should lead me to Repentance,
hardening my heart against all those means thou have used for my amendment. And
now, Lord, what can I expect from thee but judgment and fiery indignation,
that is indeed the due reward of my sins? But, O Lord, there is mercy with
thee that thou may be feared, O fit me for that mercy by giving me a deep
and hearty Repentance, and then according to thy goodness let thy anger and
thy wrath be turned away from me; look upon me in thy Son, my blessed Savior,
and for the merit of his sufferings pardon all my sins: And, Lord, I beseech
thee by the power of thy grace so to renew and purify my heart, that I may
become a new creature, utterly forsaking every evil way, and living in
constant, sincere, universal obedience to thee all the rest of my days, that
behaving my self as a good and faithful servant, I may by thy mercy at the
last be received into the joy of my Lord: Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake.

A Prayer for Grace.
O Most gracious God, from whom every good and perfect gift comes, I wretched
creature that am not able of my self so much as to think a good thought,
beseech thee to work in me both to Will and Do according to thy good pleasure.
Inlighten my mind that I may know thee, and let me not be barren or unfruitful
in that knowledge; Lord, work in my heart a true Faith, a purifying Hope, and
an unfeigned Love toward thee, give me a full Trust on thee, Zeal for thee,
Reverence of all things that relate to thee; make me Fearful to offend thee,
Thankful for thy mercies, Humble under thy corrections, Devout in thy Service,
Sorrowful for my sins; and grant that in all things I may behave my self so as
befits a creature to his Creator, a servant to his Lord; enable me likewise to
perform that Duty I owe to my self, give me that Meekness, Humility, and
Contentedness whereby I may always possess my soul in Patience and
Thankfulness; make me Diligent in all my duties, Watchful against all
temptations, perfectly pure and Temperate, and so moderate in my most lawful
enjoyments, that they never become a snare to me; make me also, O Lord, to be
so affected toward my Neighbor, that I never transgress that royal Law of
thine, of loving him as my self; grant me exactly to perform all parts of
Justice, yielding to all whatsoever by any kind of Right becomes their due;
and give me such bowels of Mercy and compassion that I may never fail to do
all acts of Charity to all men, whether friends or enemies, according to thy
command and example. Finally, I beseech thee, O Lord, to sanctify me
throughout, that my whole spirit and soul and body may be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost
be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
Intercession.
O Blessed Lord, whose mercy is over all thy works, I beseech thee to have
mercy upon all men, and grant that the precious ransom which was paid by thy
Son for all, may be effectual to the saving of all. Give thy inlightning Grace
to those that are in darkness, and thy converting grace to those that are in
sin; look with thy tenderest compassions upon the Universal Church, O be
favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem, unite all
those that profess thy Name to thee, by Purity, and Holiness; and to each
other by Brotherly love. Have mercy on This desolate Church, and sinful
Nation, thou have moved the Land and divided it, heal the sores thereof for it
shakes; make us so truly to repent of those sins, which have provoked thy
Judgments, that thou also may turn, and repent, and leave a blessing
behind thee. Bless those whom thou have appointed our governors, whether in
Church or State, so rule their hearts, and strengthen their hands, that they
may neither want will nor power to punish wickedness and vice, and to maintain
Gods true Religion and Virtue. Have pity, O Lord, on all that are in
affliction; be a Father to the fatherless, and plead the cause of the Widow,
comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, heal the sick, relieve the needy,
defend the Oppressed, and administer to every one according to their several
necessities; let thy blessings rest upon all that are near and dear to me, and
grant them whatsoever thou see necessary either to their bodies or their
souls. [Here name thy nearest Relations] Reward all those that have done me
good, and pardon all those that have done, or wished me evil, and work in them
and me all that good which may make us acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus
Christ.

For Preservation.
O Merciful God, by whose bounty alone it is, that I have this day added to my
life, I beseech thee so to guide me in it by thy grace, that I may do nothing
which may dishonor thee, or wound my own soul, but that I may diligently apply
my self to do all such good works, as thou have prepared for me to walk in; and
Lord I beseech thee, give thy Angels charge over me, to keep me in all my
ways, that no evil happen unto me nor any plague come nigh my dwelling, but
that I and mine may be safe under thy gracious protection, through Jesus Christ.

O Lord, pardon the wanderings and coldness of these petitions, and deal with
me, not according either to my prayers or deserts, but according to my needs
and thine own rich mercies in Jesus Christ, in whose blessed Name and Words, I
conclude these my imperfect Prayers; saying, Our Father, etc.

Directions for Night.
AT NIGHT, when it draws toward the time of rest, bethink thy self how thou
have passed the day, examine thine own heart, what sin either of Thought, Word,
or Deed thou have committed, what opportunity of doing good thou have omitted,
and whatsoever thou find to accuse thy self of, confess humbly and
penitently to God, renew thy purposes, and resolutions of amendment, and beg
his pardon in Christ, and this not slightly, and only as of course, but with
all devout earnestness, and heartiness, as thou would do, if thou were sure
thy death were as near approaching, as thy sleep, which for ought thou know
may be so indeed, and therefore thou should no more venture to sleep
unreconciled to God, then thou would dare to die so. In the next place,
consider what special and extraordinary mercies thou have that day received, as
if thou have had any great deliverance, either in thy inward man, from some
dangerous temptations, or in thy outward, from any great and apparent danger,
and offer to God thy hearty and devout praise for the same; or if nothing
extraordinary have so happened, and thou have been kept even from the approach
of danger, thou have not the less, but the greater cause to magnify God, who
has by his protection so guarded thee, that not so much as the fear of evil
has assaulted thee. And therefore omit not to pay him the tribute of humble
thankfulness, as well for his usual and daily preservations, as his more
extraordinary deliverances. And above all endeavor still by the considerations
of his mercies to have thy heart the more closely knit to him, remembering that
every favor received from him is a new engagement upon thee, to love and obey
him.

Prayers for Night.
O Holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon me a miserable sinner.

Lord I know not what to pray for as I ought, O let thy Spirit help my
infirmities, and enable me to offer up a spiritual Sacrifice acceptable unto
thee by Jesus Christ.

A Confession.
O MOST Holy Lord God, who art of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, how shall
I abominable wretch dare to appear before thee, who am nothing but pollution? I
am defiled in my very nature, having a backwardness to all good, and a
readiness to all evil; but I have defiled my self yet much worse by my own
actual sins and wicked customs; I have transgrest my duty to Thee, my
Neighbor, and my Self, and that both in thought, in word, in deed, by doing
those things which thou have expressly forbidden, and by neglecting to do those
things thou have commanded me. And this not only through ignorance and frailty,
but knowingly, and wilfully, against the motions of thy Spirit, and the checks
of my own conscience to the contrary. And to make all these out of measure
sinful, I have gone on in a daily course of repeating these provocations
against thee, notwithstanding all thy calls to, and my own purposes and vows of
amendment; yea, this very day I have not ceased to add new sins to all my
former guilts. [Here name the particulars.] And now, O Lord, what shall I say,
or how shall I open my mouth, seeing I have done these things? I know that the
wages of these sins is death; but O thou who willest not the death of a sinner,
have mercy upon me; work in me I beseech thee a sincere contrition, and a
perfect hatred of my sins, and let me not daily confess, and yet as daily renew
them, but grant, O Lord, that from this instant I may give a bill of Divorce to
to all my most beloved lusts, and then be thou pleased to marry me to thy self
in truth, in righteousness and holiness. And for all my past sins, O Lord,
receive a reconciliation; accept of that ransom thy blessed Son has paid for
me, and for his sake whom thou have set forth as a propitiation, pardon all my
offencies, and receive me to thy favor. And when thou have thus spoken peace
to my soul, Lord keep me that I turn not any more to folly, but so establish me
with thy grace, that no temptation of the world, the Divil or my own flesh may
ever draw me to offend thee, that being made free from sin, and becoming a
servant unto God, I may have my fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Thanksgiving.
O thou Father of Mercies, who art kind even to the unthankful, I acknowledge
my self to have abundantly experimented that gracious property of thine, for
notwithstanding my daily provocations against thee, thou still heapest mercy
and loving kindness upon me. All my contempts and despisings of thy spiritual
favors have not yet made thee withdraw them, but in the riches of thy goodness
and long suffering thou still continuest to me the offers of grace and life in
thy Son. And all my abuses of thy temporal blessings thou have not punished
with an utter deprivation of them, but art still pleased to afford me a liberal
portion of them. The sins of this day thou have not repayed as justly thou
might, by sweeping me away with a swift destruction, but have spared and
preserved me according to the greatness of thy mercy. [Here mention the
particular mercies of that day.] What shall I render unto the Lord, for all
these benefits he has done unto me? Lord, let this goodness of thine lead me
to repentance, and grant that I may not only offer thee thanks and praise, but
may also order my conversation aright, that so I may at the last see the
salvation of God, through Jesus Christ.

Here use the Prayer for Grace and that of Intercession appointed for the
Morning.

For Preservation
O blessed Lord, the Keeper of Israel, that neither slumbrest nor sleep, be
pleased in thy mercy to watch over me this night, keep me by thy grace from
all works of darkness, and defend me by thy power from all dangers, grant me
moderate and refreshing sleep, such as may fit me for the duties of the day
following. And, Lord, make me ever mindful of that time when I shall lie down
in the dust; and because I know neither the day nor the hour of my Masters
coming, grant me grace that I may be always ready, that I may never live in
such a state as I shall fear to die in, but that whether I live, I may live
unto the Lord; or whether I die, I may die unto the Lord, so that living and
dying I may be thine, through Jesus Christ.

Use the same concluding prayer as in the Morning.

AS thou art putting off thy clothes, think with thy self that the time
approaches that thou must put off thy body also, and then thy Soul must appear
naked before Gods judgment Seat, and therefore thou had need be careful to
make it so clean and pure by repentance and holiness, that he who will not look
on iniquity may graciously behold and accept it.

Let thy Bed put the in mind of thy Grave, and when thou lie down, say,

O Blessed Savior, who by thy precious death and burial did take away the
sting of death and power of the grave, grant me the joyful fruits of that thy
victory, and be thou to me in life and death advantage.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only that
make me dwell in safety.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed it, O Lord, thou
God of truth.

IN the ANCIENT CHURCH there were besides morning and night, four other times
every day which were called HOURS OF PRAYER, and the zeal of those first
Christians was such as made them constantly observed. It would be thought too
great a strictness now in this lukewarm age to enjoin the like frequency, yet I
cannot but mention the example, and say, that for those who are not by very
necessary business prevented, it will be but reasonable to imitate it, and make
up in public and private those FOUR TIMES of PRAYER, besides the OFFICES
already set down for MORNING and NIGHT: and that none may be to seek how to
exercise their devotions at these times, I have added diverse COLLECTS for
several Graces, whereof every man may use at each such time of prayer so many
as his zeal and leisure shall point out to him, adding, if he please, one of
the confessions appointed for morning or night, and never omitting the LODRS
PRAYER.

But if any man's state of life be really so busy as will not allow him time
for so long and solemn devotions, yet certainly there is no man so overlayed
with business, but that he may find leisure oftentimes in a day to say the
LORDS PRAYER alone, and therefore let him use that, if he cannot more. But
because it is the Character of a Christian, Phil. 3. 20. That he has his
conversation in Heaven, it is very fit that besides these set times of Prayer,
he should diverse times in a day by short and sudden EJACULATIONS dart up his
soul thither. And for this sort of devotion no man can want leisure, for it may
be performed in the midst of business; the Artificer at his work, the Husband
man at his Plough may practice it. Now as he cannot want time, so that he may
not want matter for it, I have thought it not unuseful out of that rich
storehouse, the BOOK of PSALMS, to furnish him with some texts, which may very
fitly be used for this purpose, which being learned by heart will always be
ready at hand to employ his devotion; and the matter of them being various,
some for Pardon of sin; some for Grace; some for the light of Gods countenance;
some for the Church; some for Thanksgiving, etc. every man may fit himself
according to the present need and temper of his soul. I have given these not as
a full collection, but only as a taste, by which the Readers appetite may be
raised to search after more in that Book, and other parts of holy Scripture.

COLLECTS for several GRACES.
For Faith.
O Blessed Lord, whom without Faith it is impossible to please, let thy spirit
I beseech thee work in me such a Faith as may be acceptable in thy sight, even
such as works by love, O let me not rest in a dead ineffectual Faith, but
grant that it may be such as may show it self by my works, that it may be that
victorious Faith which may enable me to overcome the world, and conform me to
the Image of that Christ, on whom I believe, that so at the last I may receive
the end of my Faith, even the salvation of my soul, by the same Jesus Christ.

For Hope.
O Lord, who art the hope of all the ends of the earth, let me never be
destitute of a well grounded hope, nor yet possessed with a vain presumption;
suffer me not to think thou will either be reconciled to my sins, or reject my
repentance, but give me, I beseech thee, such a hope as may be answerable to
the only ground of hope, thy promises, and such as may both encourage and
enable me to purify my self from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, that
so it may indeed become to me an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast,
entering even within the vail, whither the forerunner is for me entered, even
Jesus Christ my High Priest and blessed Redeemer.

For the Love of God.
O Holy and gracious Lord, who art infinitely excellent in thy self, and
infinitely bountiful and compassionate toward me, I beseech thee suffer not my
heart to be so hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, as to resist such
charms of love, but let them make deep and lasting impressions on my soul.
Lord, thou art pleased to require my heart, and thou only have right to it. O
let me not be so sacrilegiously unjust as to alienate any part of it, but
enable me to render it up whole and entire to thee. But, O my God, thou see
it is already usurped, the world with its vanities has seized it, and like a
strong man armed keeps possession, O thou who art stronger come upon him, and
take this unworthy heart of mine as thine own spoil, refine it with that
purifying fire of thy love, that it may be a fit habitation for thy Spirit:
Lord, if thou see it fit, be pleased to let me taste of those joys, those
ravishments of thy love, wherewith thy Saints have been so transported. But if
in this I know not what I ask, if I may not choose my place in thy Kingdom, yet
O Lord, deny me not to drink of thy cup, let me have such a sincerity and
degree of love, as may make me endure any thing for thy sake, such a perfect
love as may cast out all fear and all sloth too, that nothing may seem to me
too grievous to suffer, or too difficult to do in obedience to thee, that so
expressing my love by keeping thy Commandments, I may by thy mercy at last
obtain that Crown of life, which thou have promised to those that love thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For Sincerity.
O Holy Lord, who requirest truth in the inward parts, I humbly beseech thee to
purge me from all hypocrisy and unsinceritie. The heart O Lord, is deceitful
above all things, and my heart is deceitful above all hearts; O thou who
searchest the heart and reins, try me, and seek the ground of my heart, and
suffer not any accursed thing to lurk within me, but purify me even with fire,
so thou consume my dross. O Lord, I cannot deceive thee, but I may most easily
deceive my self, I beseech thee let me not rest in any such deceit; but bring
me to a sight and hatred of my most hidden corruptions, that I may not cherish
any darling lust, but make an utter destruction of every Amalekite; O suffer
me not to speak peace to my self, when there is no peace, but grant I may judge
of my self as thou judge of me, that I may never be at peace with my self,
till I am at perfect peace with thee, and by purity of heart be qualified to
see thee in thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ.

For devotion in Prayer.
O Gracious Lord God, who not only permittest, but invitest us miserable and
needy creatures, to present our petitions to thee; grant I beseech thee, that
the frequencie of my prayer may be somewhat proportionable to those continual
needs I have of thy mercy: Lord, I confess, it is the greatest honor and
greatest advantage, thus to be allowed access to thee, yet so sottish and
stupid is my profane heart, that it shuns or frustrates the opportunities of
it. My Soul, O Lord, is possessed with a spirit of infirmity, it is bowed
together, and can in no wise lift up it self to thee. O be thou pleased to cure
this sad, this miserable disease, to inspirit and enliven this earthly drossie
heart, that it may freely mount toward thee, that I may set a true value on
this most valuable privilege, and take delight in approaching to thee, and
that my approaches may be with a reverence some way answerable to that awful
Majesty I come before, with an importunity and earnestness answerable to
those pressing wants I have to be supplied, and with such a fixedness and
attention of mind, as no wandering thoughts may interrupt; that I may no more
incur the guilt of drawing near to thee with my lips, when my heart is far from
thee, or have my prayers turned into sin, but may so ask that I may receive,
seek that I may find, knock that it may be opened unto me: that from praying to
thee here, I may be translated to the praising thee eternally in thy glory,
through the merits and intercession of Jesus Christ.

For Humility.
O Thou High and Lofty one, that inhabitest Eternity, yet art pleased to
dwell with the humble spirit, pour into my heart I beseech thee, that excellent
grace of Humility, which may utterly work out all those vain conceits I have
of my self; Lord convince me powerfully of my own wretchedness, make me to see
that I am miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and not only dust, but
sin, that so in all thy dispensations toward me, I may lay my hand upon my
mouth, and heartily acknowledge that I am less then the least of thy mercies,
and greater then the greatest of thy judgments. And O Lord, grant me not only
to walk humbly with my God, but even with men also, that I may not only submit
my self to thy rebukes, but even to those of my fellow Christians, and with
meekness receive and obey their admonitions. And make me so to behave my self
toward all, that I never do any thing through strife or vain glory; and to
that end grant, that in lowliness of mind I may esteem every other man better
then my self, and be willing that others should esteem them so also; that I
never nourish any high opinion of my self, nor covet one among others, but that
despising the vain praise of men, I may seek that praise which comes from thee
only. That so instead of those mean servile Arts I have used to recommend me to
the esteem of men, I may now employ all my industry and care to approve my
self to thee, who resistest the proud, and give grace to the humble grant
this, O Lord, for his sake, who humbled himself unto the death of the Cross,
Jesus Christ.

For the Fear of God.
O Glorious Majesty, who only art high, and to be feared, possess my soul with
a Holy awe and reverence of thee, that I may give thee the honor due unto thy
Name, and may bear such a respect to all things which relate to thee, that I
may never profane any holy thing, or sacrilegiously invade what thou have set
a part to thy self. And, O Lord, since thou art a God that wilt not clear the
guilty, let the dread of thy justice make me tremble to provoke thee in any
thing; O let me not so misplace my fear, as to be afraid of a man that shall
die, and of the son of man, who shall be made as grass, and forget the Lord my
Maker; but replenish my soul with that fear of the Lord, which is the beginning
of wisdom, which may be as a bridle to all my brutish appetites, and keep me
in a constant conformity to thy Holy will. Hear me, O Lord, I beseech thee,
and put this fear in my heart, that I may not depart from thee, but may with
fear and trembling work out my own salvation, through Jesus Christ.

For Trust on God.
O Almighty Lord, who never failest them that trust on thee, give me grace, I
beseech thee, in all my difficulties and distresses, to have recourse to thee,
to rest and depend on thee; thou shall keep him, O Lord in perfect peace, whose
mind is staid on thee, O let me always rest on this firm Pillar, and never
exchange it for the broken reeds of worldly succors, suffer not my heart to be
overcharged with the cares of this life, taking thought what I shall eat, or
drink, or wherewithal I shall be clothed, but grant, that having by honest
labor and industry done my part, I may cheerfully commit my self to thy
providence, casting all my care upon thee, and being careful for nothing, but
to be of the number of those whom thou ownest and carest for, even such as keep
thy Testimonies and think upon thy Commandments to do them. That seeking first
thy Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, all these outward things may be
added unto me, in such a measure as thy wisdom knows best for me; grant this O
Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake.

For Thankfulness.
O most Gracious and bountiful Lord, who fillest all things living with good,
and expectest no other return, but praise and thanksgiving; let me O Lord,
never defraud thee of that so easy tribute, but let my heart be ever filled
with the sense, and my mouth with the acknowledgement of thy mercies. It is a
joyful and a pleasant thing to be thankful, O suffer me not I beseech the, to
lose my part in that Divine pleasure, but grant that as I daily receive
blessings from thee, so I may daily from an affectionate and devout heart offer
up thanks to thee, and grant that not only my lips, but my life may show forth
thy praise, by consecrating my self to thy service, and walking in Holiness and
Righteousness before thee all the days of my life, through Jesus Christ my Lord
and blessed Savior.

For Contrition.
O Holy Lord, who art a merciful embracer of true penitents, but yet a
consuming fire toward obstinate sinners, how shall I approach thee, who have
so many provoking sins to inflame thy wrath, and so little sincere repentance
to incline thy mercy! O be thou pleased to soften and melt this hard obdurate
heart of mine, that I may heartily bewail the iniquities of my life; strike
this rock, O Lord, that the waters may flow out, even floods of tears, to wash
my polluted conscience; my drowzy Soul has too long slept securely in sin,
Lord awake it though it be with thunder, and let me rather feel thy terrors
then not feel my sin. Thou sentest thy blessed Son to heal the broken hearted,
but Lord, what will that avail me if my heart be whole. O break it that it may
be capable of his healing virtue; and grant, I beseech thee, that having once
tasted the bitterness of sin, I may fly from it, as from the face of a Serpent,
and bring forth fruits of repentance in amendment of life, to the praise and
glory of thy grace in Jesus Christ our blessed Redeemer.

For Meekness.
O Blessed Jesu, who wast led as a sheep to the slaughter, let, I beseech thee,
that admirable example of Meekness quench in me all sparks of anger and
revenge, and work in me such a gentleness and calmness of Spirit as no
provocations may ever be able to disturb. Lord grant I may be so far from
offering the least injury, that I may never return the greatest any otherwise
then with prayers and kindness, that I who have so many talents to be forgiven
by thee, may never exact pence of my brethren, but that putting on bowels of
mercy, meekness long-suffering, thy peace may rule in my heart, and make it an
acceptable habitation to thee, who art the Prince of peace, to whom with the
Father and holy Spirit be all honor and glory for ever.

For Chastity.
O Holy and Immaculate Jesus, whole first descent was into the Virgins womb,
and who do still love to inhabit only in pure and virgin-hearts, I beseech
thee send thy Spirit of purity to cleanse me from all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit; my body, O Lord, is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, O let me never
pollute that Temple with any uncleanness. And because out of the heart proceed
the things that defile the man, Lord grant me to keep my heart with all
diligence, that no impure or foul thoughts be harbored there, but enable me, I
beseech thee, to keep both body and soul pure and undefiled, that so I may
glorify thee here both in body and spirit, and be glorified in both with thee
hereafter.

For Temperance.
O Gracious Lord, who have in thy bounty to mankind afforded us the use of thy
good creatures for our corporal refreshment, grant that I may always use this
liberty with thankfulness and moderation; O let me never be so enslaved to that
brutish pleasure of taste, that my Table become a snare to me, but give me, I
beseech thee, a perfect abhorrence of all degrees of excess, and let me eat and
drink only for those ends, and according to those measures which thou have
assigned me for health and not for luxury. And Lord grant that my pursuits may
be not after the meat that perishes, but after that which endures to
everlasting life, that hungring and thirsting after righteousness I may be
filled with thy grace here, and thy glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ.

For Contentedness.
O Merciful God, thy wisdom is infinite to choose, and thy love forward to
dispense good things to us; O let me always fully and entirely resign my self
to thy disposals, have no desires of mine own, but a perfect satisfaction in
thy choices for me, that so in whatsoever estate I am, I may be therein
content. Lord grant I may never look with murmuring on my own condition, nor
with envy on other men's. And to that end, I beseech thee, purge my heart of
all covetous affections; O let me never yield up any corner of my soul to
Mammon, but give me such a contempt of these fading riches, that whether they
increase or decrease I may never set my heart upon them, but that all my care
may be to be rich toward God, to lay up my treasure in heaven, that I may so
set my affections on things above, that when Christ who is my life shall
appear, I may also appear with him in glory. Grant this, O Lord, for the
mercies of the same Jesus Christ.

For Diligence.
O Lord, who have in thy wisdom ordained that man should be born to labor,
suffer me not to resist that design of thine by giveing my self up to sloth and
idleness; but grant I may so employ my time and all other talents thou have
entrusted me with, that I may not fall under the sentence of the slothful and
wicked servant; Lord, if it be thy will, make me some way useful to others, that
I may not live an unprofitable part of mankind; but however, O Lord,* let me
not be useless to my self, but grant I may give all diligence to make my
calling and election sure: My soul is beset with many and vigilant adversaries,
O let me not fold my hands to sleep in the midst of so great dangers, but watch
and pray, that I enter not into temptation, enduring hardness as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ, till at the last from this state of warfare thou
translate me to the state of triumph and bliss in thy Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ.

For Justice.
O Thou King of righteousness, who have commanded us to keep judgment and do
Justice, be pleased by thy grace to cleanse my heart and hands from all fraud
and injustice, and give me a perfect integrity and uprightness in all my
dealings. O make me ever abhor to use my power to oppress, or my skill to
deceive my brother, and grant I may most strictly observe that sacred rule of
doing as I would be done to, that I may not dishonor my Christian profession
by an unjust or fraudulent life, but in simplicity and godly sincerity, have
my conversation in this life, never seeking to heap up treasures of wickedness,
but preferring a little with righteousness before great revenues without right.
Lord, make me exactly careful to render to every man what by any sort of
obligation becomes his due, that I may never break the bond of any of those
relations that thou have placed me in, but may so behave my self toward all,
that none may have an evil thing to say of me, that so, if it be possible, I
may have peace with all men, or however I may by keeping innocence and taking
heed to the thing that is right, have peace at the last, even peace with thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For Charity.
O Merciful Lord, who have made of one blood, and redeemed by one ransom all
Nations of men, let me never harden my bowels against any that partake of the
same nature and redemption with me, but grant me an universal charity toward
all men. Give me, O thou father of compassions, such a tenderness and
meltingness of heart, that I may be deeply affected with all the miseries and
calamities outward or inward of my brethren, and diligently employ all my
abilities for their succor and relief. O let not an unchristian self-love
possess my heart, but drive out that accursed spirit, and let thy Spirit or
love enter and dwell there, and make me seek not to please my self, but my
neighbor for his good to edification, even as Christ pleased not himself.
Lord, make me a faithful steward of all those talents thou have committed to me
for the benefit of others, that so when thou shall call me to give an account of
my stewardship, I may do it with joy and not with grief. Grant this merciful
Lord, I beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake.

For perseverance.
O Eternal and unchangeable Lord God, who art the same yesterdaie and to day
and for ever. Be thou pleased to communicate some small ray of that excellence,
some degree of that stability to me thy wreched creature, who am light and
unconstant, turned about with every blast; my understanding is very deceivable,
O establish it in thy truth, keep it from the snares of seducing spirits, that
I may not be led away with the error of the wicked and fall from my own
stedfastness: my will also, O Lord is irresolute and wavering, and does not
cleave steadfastly unto God, my goodness is but as the morning cloud, and as the
early due it passes away. O strengthen and confirm me, and whatever good work
thou have wrought in me, be pleased to accomplish and perform it until the day
of Christ. Lord thou see my weakness, and thou know the number and
strength of those temptations I have to struggle with, O leave me not to my
self, but cover thou my head in the day of battle, and in all spiritual
combats make me more then conqueror through him that loved me. O let no
terrors or flatteries either of the world or my own flesh ever draw me from my
obedience to thee, but grant that I may continue steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord; and by patient continuing in well doing,
seek and at last obtain glory, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Brief Paraphrase of the LORDS PRAYER To be used as a Prayer.
[Our Father which art in Heaven.]
O Lord, who dwell in the highest heavens, thou art the Author of our being,
thou have also begotten us again unto a lively hope, and carriest toward us
the tenderness and bowels of a compassionate father. O make us to render to
thee the love and obedience of children; and that we may resemble thee our
father in heaven (that place of true delight and purity) give us a holy disdain
of all the deceitful pleasures and foul pollutions of this world, and so raise
up our minds that we may always have our conversation in heaven, from whence
we look for our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.

[1. Hallowed be thy Name]
STrike such an awe into our hearts, that we may humbly reverence thee in thy
Name, which is great, wonderful and holy, and carry such a sacred respect to
all things that relate to thee and thy worship, as may express our reverence to
thy great Majesty. Let all the people praise thee, O God, let all the people
praise thee.

[2. Thy Kingdom come.]
EStablish thy Throne and rule for ever in our souls, and by the power of thy
grace subdue al those rebellious corruptions that exalt themselves against
thee, they are those enemies of thine which would not thou should reign over
them, O let them be brought forth and slain before thee, and make us such
faithful subjects of this thy Kingdom of Grace, that we may be capable of the
Kingdom of Glory, and then Lord Jesus come quickly.

[3. Thy will be done in earth, etc.]
ENABLE us by thy grace cheerfully to suffer thy will in all thy inflictions,
and readily perform it in all thy commands, give us of that heavenly zeal to
thy service, wherewith the blessed Angels of thy presence are inspired, that we
may obey thee with the like fervor and alacrity, and that following them in
their obedience, we may be joined with them to sing eternal praises in thy
Kingdom to God, and to the Lamb for ever.

[4. Give us this day our, etc.]
GIVE us that continual supply of thy grace, which may sustain and nourish our
souls unto eternal life. And be thou pleased also to provide for our bodies all
those things which thou see fit for their support, through this our earthly
pilgrimage, and make us cheerfully to rest on thee for them, first seeking thy
Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, and then not doubting but all these
things shall be added unto us.

[5. Forgive us our Trespasses, etc.]
HEal our souls, O Lord, for we have sinned against thee, let thy tender
mercies abound toward us, in the forgiveness of all our offenses; And grant O
Lord, that we may never forfeit this pardon of thine, by denying ours to our
brethren, but give us those bowels of compassion to others which we stand in so
much greater need of from thee, that we may forgive as fully and finally upon
Christ's command, as we desire to be forgiven, for his merits and intercession.

[6. Lead us not into Tempt. etc.]
O LORD, we have no strength against those multitudes of temptations that daily
assault us, only our eyes are upon thee, O be thou pleased either to restrain
them or assist us, and in thy faithfulness suffer us not to be tempted above
that we are able, but in all our temptations make us a way to escape, that we
be not overcome by them, but may when thou shall call us to it, resist even
unto blood, striving against sin, that being faithful unto death, thou may
give us the crown of life.

[For thine is the Kingdom, etc.]
HEAR us and graciously answer our petitions, for thou art the great King over
all the earth, whose Power is infinite, and art able to do for us above all
that we can ask or think, and to whom belongs the Glory of all that good thou
workest in us or for us. Therefore blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto
him that sits upon the throne, to our God for ever, and ever,

Amen.
Pious EJACULATIONS taken out of the Book of PSALMS.
For Pardon of Sin.
HAVE mercy on me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the multitude
of thy mercies do away mine offenses. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and
cleanse me from my sin.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

My misdeeds prevail against me, O be thou merciful unto my sins.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

For thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercies sake.

For Grace.
TEACH me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God.

Teach me thy way, O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth, O knit my heart to
thee, that I may fear thy name.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

O let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.

Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness.

Turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way.

I am a stranger upon earth, O hide not thy Commandments from me,

Lord teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom,

For the Light of Gods Countenance.
LORD, why abhorrest thou my soul, and hidest thy face from me? O hide not thou
thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thy loving kindness is better then life it self*

Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me.

Comfort the Soul of thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

Thanksgiving
I WILL always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

Thou art my God, and I will thank thee, thou art my God and I will praise thee.

I will sing unto the Lord, as long as I live, I will praise my God whilst I
have my being.

Praised be God which has not cast out my prayer, nor turned his mercy from me.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things.

And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever, and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty,

Amen, Amen.
For Deliverance from Trouble.
BE merciful unto me, O Lord, be merciful unto me, for my Soul trusts in
thee, and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, until these
calamities be over-past.

Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies, for I fly unto thee to hide me.

O keep my Soul, and deliver me, let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in thee.

Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of
the net.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged, O bring thou me out of my troubles.

For the Church.
OBE favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long? Why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture?

O think upon thy Congregation, whom thou have purchased and Redeemed of old.

Look upon the Tribe of thine Inheritance, and Mount Sion where thou have dwelt.

It is time for thee, Lord, to say to thy hand, for they have destroyed thy Law.

Arise, O God, and mantain thine own cause. Deliver Israel, O God, out of all
his troubles.

Brief Heads of Self-Examination, especially before the Sacrament, Collected
out of the foregoing Treatise, concerning the breaches of our Duty.
To GOD.
FAITH.
NOt BELIEVING there is a God. Not believing his Word. Not believing it
practically, so as to live according to our belief.
HOPE.
DEspairing of Gods Mercy, so as to neglect duty. Presuming groundlesly on it,
whilst we go on in wilful sin.
LOVE.
NOt Loving God for his own excellencies. Not Loving him for his Goodness to
us. Not laboring to please him. Not desiring to draw near to him in his
Ordinances. Not longing to enjoy him in Heaven.
FEAR.
NOt Fearing God so as to keep from offending him. Fearing man above him by
committing sin, to shun some outward suffering.
TRUST.
NOt Trusting on God in dangers and distresses. Using unlawful means to bring
us out of them. Not depending on God for supply of our Wants. Immoderate Care
for outward things. Neglecting to labor, and expecting God should sup(...) our
idleness. Not looking up to God for a blessing on our honest endeavors.
HUMILITY.
NOt having a high esteem of God. Not submitting obediently to act his Will.
Not patiently suffering it, but murmuring at his Corrections. Not a^ending by
them. Not being Thankful to him. Not acknowleding his Wisdom in choosing for
us, but having eager and impatient desires of our own.
HONOR.
NOt Honoring God by a reverend usage of the things that Relate to him.
Behaving our selves irreverently in his House. Robbing God, by taking things
that are consecrated to him. Profaning Holy times, the Lords Day, and the
Feasts and Fasts of the Church. Neglecting to read the Holy Scriptures, not
marking when we do read. Being careless to get knowledge of our duty, choosing
rather to continue ignorant, then put our selves to the pains or charge of
learning. Placing Religion in hearing of Sermons, without Practice Breaking our
Vow made at Baptism. By resorting to Witches, and Conjurers; i. e. to the
Devil. By loving the Pomps and Vanities of the World, and following its sinful
customs. By fulfilling the Lusts of the flesh. Profaning the Lords Supper. By
coming to it ignorantly, without Examination, contrition, and purposes of New
Life. By behaving our selves irreverently at it, without Devotion, and
spiritual Affection. By neglecting to keep the Promises made at it Profaning
Gods Name, by blasphemous thoughts, or Discourse. Giving others occasion to
Blaspheme him, by our vile wicked li^es. Taking unlawful OATHS. Perjury.
Swearing in ordinary Communication.
WORSHIP.
NOt Worshipping God. Omitting Prayers, public or private, and being glad of a
pretense to do so. Asking unlawful thigs, or to unlawful ends. Not purifying
our Hearts from sin before we pray. Not praying with Faith and Humility.
Coldness and deadness in Prayer. Wandering thoughts in it. Irreverent gestures
of body in prayer.
REPENTANCE.
NEglecting the duty of Repentance. Not calling our selves to Daily account for
our sins. Not assigning any set or Solemn times, for Humiliation; and
Confession, or too seldom. Not deeply considering our sins, to beget
Contrition. Not acting Revenges on our selves, by Fasting, and other acts of
Mortification.
IDOLATRY.
OUtward Idolatry in Worshipping of creatures. Inward Idolatry, in placing our
love, and other affections more on creatures, then the Creator.
To our SELVES.
HUMILITY.
BEing puffed up with high conceits of our selves. In respect of natural parts,
as beauty, wit, etc. Of worldly riches and honors. Of Grace. Greedily seeking
the praise of men. Directing christian Actions, as Prayer, Alms, etc. to that
end. Committing sins to avoid Reproach from wicked men.
MEEKNES.
DIsturbing our minds with Anger and peevishness.
CONSIDERATION.
NOt carefully Examining wh^t our estate toward God is. Not trying our selves
by the true Rule, i. e. our obedience to Gods Commands. Not weighing the
Lawfulness of our Actions before we venture on them. Not examining our past
actions to Repent of the ill, to give God the glory of the good.
CONTENTEDNES.
UNcontentedness in our estates. Greedy desires after Honor and Riches.
Seeking to gain them by sinful means. Envying the condition of other men.
DILIGENCE, WATCHFULNES.
BEing Negligent in observing and resisting Temptations. Not improving Gods
gifts, outward or inward, to his Honor. Abusing our Natural Parts, as Wit,
Memory, etc. to sin. Neglecting or Resisting the motions of Gods Spirit.
CHASTITY.
UNcleanness, adultery, fornication, unnatural lusts, etc. Uncleanness of the
Eye and Hand. Filthy and obscene Talking. Impure Fancies and Desires.
Heightning of Lust by pampering the body. Not laboring to subdue it by Fasting
or other Severities
TEMPERANCE.
EAting too much Making pleasure, not Health the end of Eating. Being too
curious or costly in Meats. Drunkenness. Drinking more then is useful to our
bodies though not to drunkenness. Wasting the Time or Estate in good
Fellowship. Abusing our strength of brain to the making others Drunk.
Immoderate Sleeping. Idleness and Negligence in our Callings. Using unlawful
Recreations. Being too vehement upon Lawful ones. Spending too much time at
them. Being drawn by them to Anger or Covetousness. Being proud of Apparel.
Striving to go beyond our rank. Bestowing too much time, care or cost about it.
Abstaining from such Excesses not out of conscience but covetousness. Pinching
our bodies to fill our purses.
To our NEIGHBOR.
NEGATIVE JUSTICE.
BEing Injurious to our Neighbor. Delighting causlesly to grieve his mind.
Ensnaring his soul in sin, by Command, Counsel, Enticement or Example.
Affrighting him from godliness by our Scoffing at it. Not seeking to bring
those to Repentance whom we have led into sin.
MURDER.
MVrder, open or secret. Drawing men to Intemperance or other vices, which may
bring diseases or death. Stirring men up to Quarrelling and Fighting. Maiming
or hurting the body of our Neighbor. Fierceness and Rage against him.
ADULTERY.
COveting our Neighbors wife. Actually defiling her.
MALICE.
SPoiling the goods of others upon spite and malice.
COVETOUSNES.
COveting to gain them to our selves.
OPPRESSION.
OPpression by violence and force or color of Law.
THEFT.
NOt paying what we Borrow. Not Paying what we have voluntarily promised.
Keeping back the Wages of the Servant and hireling.
DECEIT.
UNfaithfulness in Trusts, whether to the Living or Dead. Using arts of Deceit
in Buying and Selling. Exacting upon the necessities of our Neighbors.
FALSE-WITNES.
BLasting the credit of our neighbor. By false Witness. By Railing. By
Whispering. Encouraging others in their Slanders. Being forward to believe ill
reports of our neighbor. Causeless suspicions. Rash judging of him. Despising
him for his Infirmities. Inviting others to do so by scoffing and Deriding him.
Bearing any Malice in the heart. Secret wishing of death or hurt to our
neighbor. Rejoicing when any Evil befalls him. Neglecting to make what
Satisfaction we can for any sort of injury done to our neighbor.
POSITIVE JUSTICE. HUMILITY. LYING.
CHurlish and proud behavior to Others. Froward and peevish Conversation.
Bitter and Reproachful language. Cursing. Not paying the Respect due to the
qualities or gifts of others. Proudly overlooking them. Seeking to lessen
others Esteem of them. Not employing our Abilities, whether of mind or Estate,
in administering to those whose Wants require it.
GRATITUDE.
UNthankfulness to our Benefactors. Especially those that admonish us. Not
amending upon their Reproof. Being angry at them for it. Not reverencing our
Civil Parent, the lawful Magistrate. Judging and speaking evil of him. G^^dging
his just Tributes. Sowing sedition among the people. Re^^^ing to Obey his
lawful Commands. Rising up against him, or taking part with them that do.
Despising our Spiritual Fathers. Not loving them for their works sake. Not
obeying those commands of God they deliver to us. Seeking to withhold from them
their just maintenance. Forsaking our lawful Pastors to follow factious
teachers.
PARENTS.
STubborn and irreverent behavior to our natural Parents. Despising and
publishing their infirmities. Not loving them, nor endeavoring to bring them
comfort. Contemning their Counsels. Murmuring at their Government. Coveting
their Estates, though by their death. Not ministering to them in their Wants of
all sorts. Neglecting to Pray for Gods Blessing on these several sorts of
Parents. Want of natural affection to children. Mothers re^osing to Nurse them
without a just impedlment. Not bringing them timely to Baptism. Not early
instructing them in the ways of God. Suffering them for want of timely
correction to get Customs of sin. Se^^ing them Evil Examples. Discouraging
them by harsh and cruel usage. Not providing for their subsistence according to
our ability. Consuming their Portions in our own riot. Reserving all till our
death, and letting them want in the mean time. Not seeking to entail a blessing
on them by our Christian lives. Not heartily praying for them. Want of
affection to our Natural brethren. Envyings and heart-burnings toward them.
DUTY to BRETHREN.
NOt loving our spiritual brethren, i. e. our fellow Christians. Having no
fellow-feeling of their sufferings. Causelessly forsaking their Communion in
Holy Duties. Not taking deeply to heart the Desolations of the Church
MARRIAGE.
MArrying within the degrees forbidden. Marrying for undue ends, as
Covetousnes, Lust, etc. Unkind, froward, and unquiet behavior toward the
Husband or Wife. Unfaithfulness to the Bed Not bearing with the infirmities of
each other. Not endeavoring to advance one another good, spiritual, or
temporal. The Wife resisting the lawful command of her Husband. Her striving
for Rule and dominion over him. Not praying for each other.
FRIENDSHIP.
UNfaithfulness to a Friend. Betraying his secrets. Denying him assistence in
his needs. Neglecting lovingly to admonish him. Flattering him in his faults.
Forsaking his friendship upon slight or no cause. Making leagues in sin instead
of virtuous friendship.
SERVANTS.
SErvants disobeying the lawful commands of their Masters. Purloining their
goods. Carelessly wasting them. Murmuring at their rebukes. Idleness.
Eye-service.
MASTERS.
MAsters using servants tyrannically and cruelly. Being too remiss, and
suffering them to neglect their duty. Having no care of their Souls. Not
providing them means of instruction in Religion. Not admonishing them when they
commit Sins. Not allowing them time and opportunity for prayer, and the Worship
of God.
CHARITY.
WAnt of bowels and Charity to our neighbors. Not heartily desiring their good
spiritual or temporal. Not Loving and Forgiving Enemies. Taking actual Revenges
upon them. Falseness: professing kindness and acting none. Not laboring to do
all the good we can to the soul of our neighbor. Not assisting him to our
power in his Bodily distresses. Not defending his good Name when we know him
slandered. Denying him any neighbourly office to preserve or advance his
estate. Not defending him from oppression, when we have power. Not relieving
him in his poverty. Not giving liberally, or cheerfully.
GOING to LAW.
NOt loving PEACE. Going to Law upon slight occasions. Bearing inward Enmity to
those we sue. Not laboring to make peace among others.
THE use of this Catalogue of Sins is this: Upon days of Humiliation,
especially before the Sacrament, read them consideringly over, and at every
particular ask thine own heart, Am I guilty of this? And whatsoever by such
Examination thou find thy self faulty in, Confess particularly, and humbly
to God, with all the heightning circumstances, which may any way increase their
guilt, and make serious Resolutions against every such Sin for the future;
after which thou may use this Form following.

O LORD, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, for my iniquities
are increased over my head, and my trespass is grown up even unto Heaven. I
have wrought all these great provocations, and that in the most provoking
manner; they have not been only single but repeated acts of sin: for, O Lord,
of all this black Catalogue which I have now brought forth before thee, how few
are there which I have not often committed, nay, which are not become even
habitual and customarie to me? And to this frequencie, I have added both a
greediness, and obstinacy in sinning, turning into my course as the Horse
rusheth into the battle, doing evil with both hands, earnestly, yea, hating to
be reformed, and casting thy words behind me, quenching thy spirit within me,
which testified against me, to turn me from my evil ways, and frustrating all
those outward means whether of judgment or mercy, which thou have used to
draw me to thy self. Nay, O Lord, even my repentances may be numbered amongst
my greatest sins, they have sometimes been feigned and hypocritical, always so
slight and ineffectual, that they have brought forth no fruit in amendment of
life, but I have still returned with the dog to his vomit, and the sow to the
mire again, and have added the breach of resolutions and vows, to all my former
guilts. Thus, O Lord, I am become out of measure sinful, and since I have thus
chosen death, I am most worthy to take part in it, even in the second death,
the lake of fire and brimstone. This, this, O Lord, is in justice to be the
portion of my cup, to me belongs nothing but shame and confusion of face
eternally. But to thee, O Lord God, belongs mercy and forgiveness: though I
have rebelled against thee, O remember not my sins and offenses, but according
to thy mercy think thou upon me O Lord for thy goodness. Thou sentest thy Son
to seek and to save that which was lost, behold, O Lord, I have gone astraie
like a sheep that is lost, O seek thy servant, and bring me back to the
Shepherd and Bishop of my soul; let thy spirit work in me a hearty sense and
detestation of all my abominations, that true contrition of heart, which thou
have promised not to despise. And then be thou pleased to look on me, to take
away all iniquity, and receive me graciously, and for his sake who has done
nothing amiss, be reconciled to me, who have done nothing well; wash away the
guilt of my sins in his blood, and subdue the power of them by his grace, and
grant, O Lord, that I may from this hour bid a final adieu to all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, that I may never once more cast a look toward Sodom, or long
after the fleshpots of Egypt, but consecrate my self entirely to thee, to serve
thee in Righteousness and true Holiness, reckoning my self to be dead indeed
unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord and blessed Savior.

This Penitential Psalm may also fitly be used.
PSALM 51. HAVE mercy upon me O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean, thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whiter then snow.

Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness* that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of my health,
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee, but thou delightest
not in burnt offering.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit, a broken and contrite heart, O God,
shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the Sacrifice of righteousness, with the burnt
offerings and oblations, then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine altar.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end.

Amen.
PRAYERS BEFORE the Receiving of the Blessed SACRAMENT.
O Most merciful God, who have in thy great goodness prepared this spiritual
feast for sick and famished souls, make my desires and gaspings after it,
answerable to my needs of it. I have with the prodigal wasted that portion of
grace thou bestowedst upon me, and therefore do infinitely want a supply out
of this treasury: But, O Lord, how shall such a wretch as I dare to approach
this holy Table? I am a dog, how shall I presume to take the childrens bread?
Or how shall this spiritual Manna, this food of Angels be given to one who has
chosen to feed on husks with swine, nay to one who has already so often
trampled these precious things under foot, either carelessly neglecting, or
unworthily receiving these holy mysteries? O Lord, my horrible guiltiness makes
me tremble to come, and yet makes me not dare to keep away; for where, O Lord,
shall my polluted soul be washed, if not in this fountain which thou have
opened for sin and for uncleanness? Hither therefore I come, and thou have
promised that him that comes to thee thou will in no wise cast out: This is, O
Lord, the blood of the New Testament, grant me so to receive it, that it may be
to me for remission of sins. And though I have so often and so wretchedly
broken my part of that Covenant, whereof this Sacrament is a seal, yet be thou
graciously pleased to make good thine, to be merciful to my unrighteousness,
and to remember my sins and my iniquities no more; and not only so, but to put
thy laws into my heart, and to write them in my mind, and by the power of thy
grace dispose my soul to such a sincere and constant obedience, that I may
never again provoke thee; Lord, grant that in these holy mysteries I may not
only commemorate, but effectually receive my blessed Savior, and all the
benefits of his Passion: and to that end give me such a preparation of soul as
may qualify me for it, give me a deep sense of my sins and unworthiness, that
being weary and heavy laden, I may be capable of his refreshings, and by
being suppled in my own tears, I may be the fitter to be washed in his blood;
raise up my dull and earthly mind from grovelling here below, and inspire it
with a holy zeal, that I may with spiritual affection approach this spiritual
feast; and let, O Lord, that infinite love of Christ in dying for so wretched a
sinner, inflame my frozen benumbed soul, and kindle in me that sacred fire of
love to him, and that so vehement, that no waters may quench, no floods drown
it, such as may burn up all my dross, not leave one unmortified lust in my
soul, and such as may also extend it self to all whom thou have given me
command and example to love, even enemies as well as friends. Finally, O Lord,
I beseech thee to cloth me in the wedding garment, and make me though of my
self a most unworthie, yet by thy mercy an acceptable guest at this holy
Table, that I may not eat and drink my own condemnation, but may have my pardon
sealed, my weakness repaired, my corruptions subdued, and my soul so
inseparably united to thee, that no temptations may ever be able to dissolve
the union, but that being begun here in grace, it may be consummated in glory.
Grant this, O Lord, for thy dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ.

Another.
O Blessed Jesus, who once offeredst up thy self for me upon the Cross, and now
offerest thy self to me in the Sacrament, let not I beseech thee, my
impenitence and unworthiness frustrate these so inestimable mercies to me, but
qualify me by thy grace to receive the full benefit of them. O Lord, I have
abundant need of thee, but am so clogged with guilt, so holden with the cords
of my sins, that I am not able to move toward thee; O loose me from this band,
wherewith Satan and my own lusts have bound me, and draw me that I may run
after thee; Lord, thou see daily how eagerly I pursue: he paths that lead to
death, but when thou invitest me to life and glory, I turn my back and forsake
my own mercy. How often has this feast been prepared, and I have with
frivolous excuses absented my self, or if I have come, it has been rather to
defy then to adore thee? I have brought such troops of thy professed enemies,
unrepented sins along with me, as if I came not to commemorate, but renew thy
passion, crucifying thee afresh, and putting thee to open shame: And now of
what punishment shall I be thought worthy, who have thus trampled under foot
the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing! Yet O
merciful Jesu, this blood is my only refuge, O let this make my atonement or I
perish eternally: Wherefore did thou shed it, but to save sinners? Neither
can the merit of it be overwhelmed either by the greatness or number of sins. I
am a sinner, a great one, O let me find its saving efficacy. Be merciful unto
me, O God, be merciful to me for my soul trusts in thee, and in the clefts of
thy wounds shall be my refuge until thy Fathers indignation be over-past. O
thou who have as my high Priest, sacrificed for me, interceed for me also, and
plead thy meritorious sufferings on my behalf, and suffer not, O my Redeemer,
the price of thy blood to be utterly lost: And grant, O Lord, that as the sins
I have to be forgiven are many, so I may love much. Lord, thou see what
faint, what cold affections I have toward thee, O warm and enliven them: and
as in this Sacrament that transcendent love of thine in dying for me is shed
forth, so I beseech thee let it convey such grace into me as may enable me to
make some returns of love: O let this divine fire descend from Heaven into my
soul, and let my sins be the burnt offering for it to consume, that there may
not any corrupt affection, any cursed thing be sheltered in my heart, that I
may never again defile that place, which thou have chosen for thy Temple. Thou
diedst, O dear Jesu, to redeem me from all iniquity, O let me not again sell
my self to work wickedness, but grant that I may approach thee at this time
with most sincere and fixed resolutions of an entire reformation, and let me
receive such grace and strength from thee, as may enable me faithfully to
perform them: Lord, there are many old habituated diseases my soul groans
under. [Here mention thy most prevailing corruptions.] And though I lie never
so long at the Pool of Bethesda, come never so often to thy Table, yet unless
thou be pleased to put forth thy healing virtue, they will still remain
uncured. O thou blessed Physician of souls, heal me, and grant I may now so
touch thee that every one of these loathsome issues may immediately staneh,
that these sicknesses may not be unto death, but unto the glory of thy mercy
in Pardoning, to the glory of thy grace in Purifying so polluted a wretch. O
Christ hear me, and grant I may now approach thee with such humility and
contrition, love and devotion, that thou may vouchsafe to come unto me, and
abide with me; communicating to me thy self, and all the merits of thy Passion.
And then, O Lord, let no accusations of Satan or my own conscience amaze or
distract me, but having peace with thee, let me also have peace in my self,
that this Wine may make glad, this Bread of life may strengthen my heart, and
enable me cheerfully to run the way of thy Commandments. Grant this merciful
Savior for thine own bowels and compassions sake.

EJACVLATIONS to be used at the LORDS TABLE.
LORD, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.

I have sinned: What shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?

[Here recollect some of thy greatest sins.]

If thou, Lord, should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may
abide it?

But with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Redemption.

Behold, O Lord, thy beloved Son in whom thou art well pleased.

Hearken to the cry of his blood which speaks better things then that of
Abel.

By his Agony and bloody Sweat, by his Cross and Passion, good Lord deliver
me.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, grant me thy Peace.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me.

Immediately before Receiving.
THou have said that he that eats thy flesh and drinks thy blood has
eternal life.

Behold the servant of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word.

At the receiving of the Bread.
By thy Crucified body deliver me from this body of death.

At the receiving of the Cup.
O Let this blood of thine purge my conscience from dead works to serve the
living God.

Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean.

O touch me, and say, I will, be thou clean.

After Receiving.
WHat shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me?

I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

Therefore blessing, honor, glory and power be to him that sicteth upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments,

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

A Thanksgiving after the Receiving of the Sacrament.
O Thou fountain of all goodness, from whom every good and perfect gift
comes, and to whom all honor and glory should be returned, I desire with all
the most fervent and inflamed affections of a grateful heart, to bless and
praise thee for those inestimable mercies thou have vouchsafed me: Lord, what
is man that thou should so regard him as to send thy beloved Son to suffer
such bitter things for him? But, Lord, what am I the worst of men, that I
should have any part in this atonement, who have so often despised him and his
sufferings? O the height and depth of this mercy of thine, that art pleased to
admit me to the renewing of that Covenant with thee which I have so often and
so perversely broken! That I who am not worthy of that daily bread which
sustains the body, should be made partaker of this bread of life which
nourishes the soul, and that the God of all purity should vouchsafe to unite
himself to so polluted a wretch! O my God, suffer me no more, I beseech thee,
to turn thy grace into wantonness, to make thy mercy an occasion of security,
but let this unspeakable love of thine constrain me to obedience, that since my
blessed Lord has died for me, I may no longer live unto my self but to him: O
Lord, I know there is no concord between Christ and Belial, therefore since he
has now been pleased to enter my heart, O let me never permit any lust to
chance him thence, but let him that has so dearly bought me still keep
possession of me, and let nothing ever take me out of his hand. To this end be
thou graciously pleased to watch over me, and defend me from all assaults of my
spiritual enemies, but especially deliver me from my self, from the treachery
of my own heart, which is too willing to yield it self a prey. And where thou
see I am either by nature or custom most weak, there do thou, I beseech
thee, magnify thy power in my preservation. [Here mention thy most dangerous
temptations.] And Lord let my Saviors sufferings for my sins, and the Vows I
have now made against them never depart from my mind, but let the remembrance
of the one enable me to perform the other, that I may never make truce with
those lusts which nailed his hands, pierced his side, and made his soul heavy
to the death. But that having now anew listed my self under his banner, I may
fight manfully, and follow the Captain of my Salvation, even through a sea of
blood. Lord, lift up my hands that hang down, and my feeble knees, that I faint
not in this warfare; O be thou my strength who am not able of my self to
struggle with the slightest temptations. How often have I turned my back in the
day of battle? how many of these Sacramental vows have I violated? And Lord, I
have still the same unconstant deceitful heart to betray me to the breach of
this. O thou who art Yea and Amen, in whom there is no shadow of change,
communicate to me, I beseech thee, such a stabilitie of mind, that I may no
more thus start aside like a broken bow, but that having my heart whole with
thee I may continue steadfast in thy Covenant; that not one good purpose which
thy Spirit has raised in me this day may vanish, as so many have formerly
done, but that they may bring forth fruit unto life eternal. Grant this, O
merciful father, through the merits and mediation of my Crucified Savior.

A Prayer of Intercession to be used either before or after the receiving of
the Sacrament.
O MOST gracious Lord, who so tenderly lovedst mankind as to give thy dear Son
out of thy Bosom to be a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, grant
that the effect of this Redemption may be as universal as the design of it,
that it may be to the salvation of all. O let no person by impenitence and
wilful sin forfeit his part in it, but by the power of thy grace bring all,
even the most obstinate sinners to repentance. Inlighten all that sit in
darkness, all Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics, take from them all
blindness, hardness of heart and contempt of thy Word, and so fetch them home,
blessed Lord, unto thy fold, that they may be saved among the number of the
true Israelites. And for all those upon whom the Name of thy Son is called,
grant, O Lord, that their conversations may be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, that his Name be no longer blasphemed among the Heathens through us. O
Blessed Lord, how long shall Christendom continue the vilest part of the world,
a sink of all those abominable pollutions, which even Barbarians detest? O let
not our profession and our practice be always at so wide a distance. Let not
the Disciples of the holy and Immaculate Jesus be of all others the most
profane and impure. Let not the subjects of the Prince of Peace be of all
others the most contentious and bloody; but make us Christians in deed as well
as in name, that we may walk worthy of that Holy vocation wherewith we are
called, and may all with one mind and one mouth glorify thee the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Have mercy on this languishing Church, look down from
Heaven the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and
thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward us? Are
they restrained? Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for
ever; but though our backslidings are many, and we have grievously rebelled,
yet according to all thy goodness let thy anger and thy fury be turned away,
and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary which is desolate, for the
Lords sake; and so separate between us and our sins, that they may no longer
separate between us and our God. Save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes
and Governors, especially those to whom we owe subjection; plead thou their
cause, O Lord, against those that strive with them, and fight thou against
those that fight against them, and so guide and assist them in the discharge of
that office whereunto thou have appointed them, that under them we may lead
quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Bless them that wait
at thine Altar, open thou their lips that their mouth may show forth thy
praise; O let not the lights of the world be put under bushels, but place them
in their Candlesticks, that they may give light to all that are in the house.
Let not Jeroboams Priests profane thy Service, but let the seed of Aaron still
minister before thee. And O thou Father of mercies, and God of all comfort,
succor and relieve all that are in affliction, and deliver the outcast and
poor, help them to right that suffer wrong, let the sorrowful sighing of the
prisoners come before thee, and according to the greatness of thy power,
preserve thou those that are appointed to die; grant ease to those that are in
pain, supplies to those that suffer want, give to all presumptuous sinners a
sense of their sins, and to all despairing, a sight of thy mercies, and do
thou, O Lord, for every one above what they can ask or think. Forgive my
enemies, persecuters and flanderers, and turn their hearts. Pour down thy
blessings on all my friends, and benefactors, all who have commended themselves
to my Prayers. [Here thou may est name particular persons.] And grant, O
merciful Father, that through this blood of the Cross, we may all be presented
pure and unblameable and unreproveable in thy sight; that so we may be admitted
into that place of purity, where no unclean thing can enter, there to sing
eternal praises to Father, Son and Holy Ghost for ever.

A Prayer in times of common Persecution.
O BLESSED Savior, who have made the Cross the badge of thy Disciples, enable
me I beseech thee, willingly and cheerfully to embrace it; thou see, O Lord,
I am fallen into days, wherein he that departs from evil makes himself a
Prey, O make me so readily to expose all my outward concernments, when my
obedience to thee requires it, that what falls as a Prey to men, may by thee
be accepted as a Sacrifice to God: Lord preserve me so by thy grace that I
never suffer as an evil doer, and then, O Lord, if it be my lot to suffer as a
Christian, let me not be ashamed, but rejoice that I am counted worthy to
suffer for thy Name: O thou who for my sake enduredst the cross; and dispisedst
the shame, let the example of that love and patience prevail against all the
tremblings of my corrupt heart, that no terrors may ever be able to shake my
constancy, but that how long soever thou shall permit the rod of the wicked to
lie on my back, I may never put my hand unto wickedness: Lord thou know
whereof I am made, thou remembrest that I am but flesh; and flesh, O Lord,
shrinks at the approach of any thing grievous. It is thy Spirit, thy Spirit
alone, that can uphold me, O stablish me with thy free Spirit, that I be not
weary and faint in my mind. And by how much the greater thou discernest my
weakness, so much the more do thou show forth thy power in me, and make me, O
Lord, in all temptations steadfastly to look to thee, the author and finisher of
my faith, that so I may run the race which is set before me, and resist even
unto blood, striving against sin: O dear Jesus, hear me, and though Satan
desire to have me, that he may winnow me as wheat, yet do thou O blessed
Mediator, pray for me that my faith fail not, but that though it be tried with
fire, it may be found unto praise and glory and honor at thy appearing. And,
O Lord, I beseech thee grant that I may preserve not only constancy toward
God, but charity also toward men, even those whom thou shall permit to be the
instruments of my sufferings: Lord, let me not fail to imitate that admirable
meekness of thine, in loving and praying for my greatest persecutors; and do
thou, O Lord, overcome all their evil with thy infinite goodness, turn their
hearts, and draw them powerfully to thy self, and at last receive both me and
mine enemies into those mansions of peace and rest, where thou reignest with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, one God, for ever.

A Prayer in time of Affliction.
O JUST and holy Lord, who with rebukes do chasten man for sin, I desire
unfeignedly to humble my self under thy mighty hand, which now lies heavy
upon me, I heartily acknowledge, O Lord, that all I do, all I can suffer, is
but the due reward of my deeds, and therefore in thy severest inflictions I
must still say, righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments.
But, O Lord, I beseech thee in judgment remember mercy, and though my sins
have enforced thee to strike, yet consider my weakness, and let not thy stripes
be more heavy, or more lasting then thou see profitable for my soul; correct
me but with the chastisement of a father, not with the wounds of an enemy, and
though thou take not off thy rod, yet take away thine anger: Lord, do not abhor
my soul, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure, but pardon my sins, I
beseech thee; and if yet in thy Fatherly wisdom, thou see fit to prolong thy
corrections, thy blessed will be done, I cast my self O Lord, at thy feet, do
with me what thou please. Try me as silver is tried, so thou bring me out
purified. And Lord make even my flesh also to subscribe to this resignation,
that there may be nothing in me, that may rebel against thy hand, but that
having perfectly suppressed all repining thoughts, I may cheerfully drink of this
cup. And how bitter soever thou shall please to make it, Lord, let it prove
medicinal, and cure all the diseases of my soul, that it may bring forth in me
the peaceable fruit of righteousness. That so these light afflictions which are
but for a moment, may work for me a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, through Jesus Christ.

A Thanksgiving for Deliverance.
O Blessed Lord, who art gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great
kindness, and repentest thee of the evil; I thankfully acknowledge before thee
that thou have not dealt with me after my sins, nor rewarded me according to my
iniquities. My rebellions, O Lord, deserve to be scourged with Scorpions, and
thou have corrected them only with a gentle and fatherly Rod; neither have thou
suffered me to lie long under that, but have given me a timely and a gracious
issue out of my late distresses. O Lord, I will be glad and rejoice in thy
mercy, for thou have considered my trouble, and have known my soul in
adversity. Thou have smitten, and thou have healed me, O let these various
methods of thine have their proper effects upon my soul, that I who have felt
the smart of thy chastisements may stand in awe and not fin, and that I who
have likewise felt the sweet refreshings of thy mercy may have my heart
ravished with it, and knit to thee in the firmest bands of love, and that by
both I may be preserved in a constant, entire obedience to thee all my days,
through Jesus Christ.

Directions for the time of Sickness.
WHEN thou find thy self visited with Sickness thou art immediately to
remember that it is God, which with rebukes does chasten man for sin. And
therefore let thy first care be to find out what it is that provokes him to
smite thee, and to that purpose Examine thine own heart, search diligently what
guilts lie there, confess them humbly and penitently to God, and for the
greater security renew thy Repentance for all the old sins of thy former life,
beg most earnestly and importunately his mercy and pardon in Christ Jesus, and
put on sincere and zealous resolutions of forsaking every evil way for the rest
of that time which God shall spare thee. And that thy own heart deceive thee
not in this so weighty a business, it will be wisdom to send for some godly
Divine, not only to assist thee with his prayers, but with his counsel also.
And to that purpose open thy heart so freely to him that he may be able to
judge whether thy Repentance be such as may give thee confidence to appear
before Gods dreadful Tribunal, and that if it be not, he may help thee what he
can toward the making it so. And when thou have thus provided for thy better
part, thy Soul, then consider thy Body also, and as the Wise man says, Ecclus.
38. 12. Give place to the Physician, for the Lord has created him: Use such
means as may be most likely to recover thy health, but always remember that the
success of them must come from God; and beware of Asa's sin, who sought to the
Physicians, and not to the Lord, 2 Chro. 6. 12. Dispose also betimes of thy
temporal affairs, by making thy Will, and setting all things in such order as
thou meanest finally to leave them in, and defer it not till thy sickness grow
more violent, for then perhaps thou shall not have such use of thy Reason as
may fit thee for it, or if thou have, it will be then much more seasonable to
employ thy thoughts on higher things, on the world thou art going to, rather
then that thou art about to leave; we cannot carry the things of this world
with us when we go hence, and it is not fit we should carry the thoughts of
them. Therefore let those be early dispatched that they may not disturb thee at
last.

A Prayer for a sick person.
O Merciful and Righteous Lord, the God of health and of sickness, of life and
of death, I most unfeignedly acknowledge that my great abuse of those many
days of strength and welfare, which thou have afforded me, has most justly
deserved thy present visitation. I desire, O Lord, humbly to accept of this
punishment of mine iniquity, and to bear the indignation of the Lord, because
I have sinned against him. And, O thou merciful Father, who designest not the
ruin but the amendment of those whom thou scourgest, I beseech thee by thy
grace so to sanctify this correction of thine to me, that this sickness of my
body may be a means of health to my soul, make me diligent to search my heart,
and do thou O Lord, enable me to discover every accursed thing, how closely
soever concealed there, that by the removal thereof, I may make way for the
removal of this punishment. Heal my soul, O Lord, which has sinned against
thee, and then if it be thy blessed will, heal my body also, restore the voice
of joy and health unto my dwelling, that I may live to praise thee, and to
bring forth fruits of repentance. But if in thy wisdom thou have otherwise
disposed, if thou have determined that this sickness shall be unto death, I
beseech thee to fit and prepare me for it, give me that sincere and earnest
repentance, to which thou have promised mercy and pardon; wean my heart from
the world, and all its fading vanities, and make me to gasp and pant after
those more excellent and durable joys which are at thy right hand for ever.
Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, and in all the pains
of my body, in all the agonies of my spirit, let thy comforts refresh my soul,
and enable me patiently to wait till my change come. And grant, O Lord, that
when my earthly house of this Tabernacle is dissolved I may have a building of
God, an house not made with hands eternal in the heavens. And that for his sake
who by his precious blood has purchased it for me, even Jesus Christ.

A Thanks giving for Recovery.
O Gracious Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, in whose hand my time
is, I praise and magnify thee that thou have in love to my soul delivered it
from the pit of corruption, and restored me to health again; it is thou alone,
O Lord, that have preserved my life from destruction, thou have chastened and
corrected me, but thou have not given me over unto death; O let this life which
thou have thus graciously spared be wholly consecrated to thee. Behold, O Lord,
I am by thy mercy made whole, O make me strictly careful to sin no more lest a
worse thing come unto me. Lord, let not this reprieve thou have now given me,
make me secure, as thinking that my Lord delayeth his coming, but grant me I
beseech thee to make a right use of this long suffering of thine, and so to
employ every minute of that time thou shall allow me, that when thou shall
appear I may have confidence and not be ashamed before thee at thy coming. Lord
I have found by this approach toward death, how dreadful a thing it is to be
taken unprepared. O let it be a perpetual admonition to me to watch for my
Masters coming. And when the pleasures of sin shall present themselves to
entice me, O make me to remember how bitter they will be at the last. O Lord
hear me, and as thou have in much mercy afforded me time, so grant me also
grace to work out my own salvation, to provide oil in my lamp, that when the
Bridegroom comes I may go with him to the marriage. Grant this I beseech thee
for thy dear Sons sake.

A Prayer at the approach of Death.
O Eternal and everliving God, who first breathedst into man the breath of
life, and when thou take away that breath he dies and is turned again to his
dust, look with compassion on me thy poor crature who am now drawing near the
gates of death, and which is infinitely more terrible, the bar of Judgment.
Lord my own heart condemns me, and thou art infinitely greater then my heart,
and know all things. The sins I know and remember, fill me with horror; but
there are also multitudes of others, which I either observed not at the time,
or have since carelessly forgot, which are all present to thee. Thou set my
misdeeds before thee, and my secret sins in the light of thy countenance; and
to what a mountainous heap must the minutely provocations of so many years
arise? How shall one so ungodly stand in thy Judgment, or such a sinner in the
Congregation of the Righteous? And to add yet more to my terror, my very
repentance I fear will not abide the trial; my frequent relapses heretofore
have sufficiently witnessed the unsinceritie of my past resolutions. And then,
O Lord, what can secure me that my present dislikes of my sins are not rather
the effects of my amazing danger then of any real change? And, O Lord, I know
thou art not mocked, nor wilt accept of any thing that is not perfectly
sincere. O Lord, when I consider this, fearfulness and trembling comes upon me,
and an horrible dread overwhelmeth me, my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and
my heart is wounded within me. But, O Lord, one deep calls upon another, the
depth of my misery upon the depth of thy mercy; Lord, save now or I perish
eternally. O thou who willest not that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance, bring me, I beseech thee, though thus late, to a sincere
Repentance, such as thou will accept, who triest the heart. Create in me, O
God, a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me: Lord, one day is with
thee as a thousand years, O let thy mighty spirit work in me now in this my
last day, whatsoever thou see wanting to fit me for thy mercy and
acceptance. Give me a perfect and entire hatred of my sins, and enable me to
present thee with that sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, which thou
have promised not to despise; that by this I may be made capable of that
atonement which thy dear Son has by the more excellent oblation of himself
made for all repenting sinners. He is the propitiation for our sins, he was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was o him, O heal me by his stripes, and let the cry
of his blood drown the clamor of my sins. I am indeed a child of wrath, but
he is the Son of thy love, for his sake spare me, O Lord, spare thy creature
whom he has redeemed with his most precious blood, and be not angry with me
for ever. In his wounds O Lord, I take Sanctuary, O let not thy vengeance
pursue me to this City of refuge: my soul hangs upon him, O let me not
perish with a Jesus, with a Savior in my arms. But by his Agony and bloody
sweat, by his Cross and Passion, by all that he did and suffered for sinners,
good Lord deliver me; deliver me, I beseech thee, from the wages of my sins,
thy wrath and everlasting damnation, in this time of my tribulation, in the
hour of death, and in the day of Judgment. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, and do
not now repay my former neglects of thy calls, by refusing to answer me in this
time of my greatest need; Lord, there is but a step between me and death, O let
not my sun go down upon thy wrath, but seal my pardon before I go hence and be
no more seen. Thy loving kindness is better then the life it self, O let me
have that in exchange, and I shall most gladly lay down this mortal life. Lord,
thou know all my desire, and my groaning is not hid from thee; deal thou
with me, O Lord, according to thy Name, for sweet is thy mercy; take away the
sting of death, the guilt of my sins, and then though I walk through the valley
of the shadow of death I will fear no evil; I will lay me down in peace, and
Lord when I awake up, let me be satisfied with thy presence in thy glory.
Grant this merciful God for his sake who is both the Redeemer and Mediator of
sinners, even Jesus Christ.

PSALMS.
PVT me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure, neither is there
any rest in my bones by reason of my sins.

For my wickednesses have gone over my head, and are a sore burden too heavy
for me to bear.

My wounds stinck and are corrupt through my foolishness.

Therefore is my spirit vexed within me and my heart within me is desolate.

My sins have taken such hold upon me that I am not able to look up, yea, they
are more in number then the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me.

But thou, O Lord God, art full of compassion and mercy, long-suffering,
plenteous in goodness and truth.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery.

If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may
abide it?

O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but according to thy mercy
think thou upon me for thy goodness.

Look upon my adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sin.

Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble, O haste thee and hear
me.

Out of the deep do I call unto thee, Lord hear my voice.

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my Soul, O save me for thy mercies sake.

O go not from me, for trouble is hard at hand, and there is none to help.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee, my Soul gaspeth unto thee, as a thirsty
land.

Draw nigh unto my soul and save it, O deliver me, because of my enemies.

For my Soul is full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell.

Save me from the Lions mouth, hear me from among the horns of the Unicorns.

O set me up upon a rock that is higher then I, for thou art my hope, and a
strong Tower for me against the enemy.

Why art thou so heavy, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me?

Put thy trust in God for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his
countenance.

The Lord shall make good his loving kindness toward me, yea, thy mercy, O
Lord, endures for ever, despise not then the work of thine own hands.

O GOD, thou art my God, early will I seek thee.

My Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also longs after thee, in a barren and
dry land where no water is.

Like as the heart desires the water brooks, so longs my Soul after thee O
God.

My Soul is athirst for God, even for the living God, when shall I come to
appear before the presence of God?

How amiable are thy dwellings, O Lord of Hosts!

My Soul has a desire and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord, my
flesh and my heart rejoice in the living God.

O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away and be at rest.

O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me unto
thy holy Hill, and to thy dwelling.

For one day in thy Courts is better then a thousand:

I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
tents of wickedness.

I should utterly have fainted, but that I believed verily to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living.

Thou art my helper and my redeemer, O Lord, make no long tarrying.

EJACVLATIONS.
O LORD, of whom may I seek for succor but of thee, who for my sins art justly
displeased? Yet O Lord God most Holy, O Lord most Mighty, O Holy and most
Merciful Savior, deliver me not into the bitter pains of eternal death.

Thou know, Lord, the secrets of my heart, shut not up thy merciful eyes to
my prayer, but hear me, O Lord most Holy, O God most Mighty, O Holy and
Merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer me not at my last
hour for any pains of death to fall from thee.

Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am not worthy to be
called thy child, yet O Lord, do not thou cast off the bowels and compassions
of a Father, but even as a father pitieth his own children, so be thou merciful
unto me.

Lord, the prince of this world comes, O let him have nothing in me, but as he
accuses, do thou absolve; he lays many and grievous things to my charge,
which he can too well prove, I have nothing to say for my self, do thou answer
for me, O Lord my God.

O Lord I am clothed with filthy garments, and Satan stands at my right hand
to resist me, O be thou pleased to rebuke him, and pluck me as a brand out of
the fire, cause mine iniquities to pass from me, and cloth me with the
righteousness of thy Son.

Behold, O God, the Devil is coming toward me, having great wrath, because he
knows that he has but a short time, O save and deliver me lest he devour my
soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces while there is none to help.

O my God, I know that no unclean thing can enter into thy Kingdom, and I am
nothing but pollution, my very righteousness are as filthy rags, O wash me and
make me white in the blood of the Lamb, that so I may be fit to stand before
thy Throne.

Lord, the snares of death compass me round about* O let not the pains of hell
also take hold upon me, but though I find trouble and heaviness, yet O Lord I
beseech thee deliver my soul.

O dear Jesus, who have bought me with the precious price of thine own blood:
challenge now thy purchase, and let not all the malice of Hell pluck me out of
thy hand.

O blessed high Priest, who art able to save them to the utmost, who come unto
God by thee, save me I beseech thee, who have no hope, but on thy merits and
intercession,

O God I confess I have defaced that Image of thine, thou did imprint upon my
Soul, Yet O thou faithful Creator, have pity on thy creature.

O Jesu, I have by my many and grievous sins crucified thee afresh, yet thou
who prayedst for thy persecutors, interceed for me also, and suffer not, O my
Redeemer, my soul (the price of thy blood (to perish.

O Spirit of grace, I have by my horrid impieties done despite to thee, yet, O
Blessed Comforter, though I have often grieved thee, be thou pleased to succor
and relieve me, and say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

Mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord, in thee is my trust, O cast not out my soul.

O Lord in the have I trusted, let me never be confounded.

O Blessed Lord, who scourgest every Son whom thou receivest, let me not be
weary of thy correction, but give me such a perfect subjection to thee the
Father of Spirits, that this chastisement may be for my profit, that I may
thereby be partaker of thy holiness.

O thou Captain of my Salvation, who were made perfect by sufferings, sanctify
to me all the pains of body, all the terrors of mind which thou shall permit
to fall upon me.

Lord, my fins have deserved eternal torments, make me cheerfully and
thankfully to bear my present pains, chasten me as thou please here, that I
may not be condemned with the world.

Lord, the waters are come in even unto my soul, O Let thy Spirit move upon
these waters, and make them like the pool of Bethesda, that they may cure
whatsoever spiritual disease thou discernest in me.

O Christ, who first sufferedst many and grievous things, and then enteredst
into thy glory, make me so to suffer with thee, that I may also be glorified
with thee.

O dear Jesus, who humbledst thy self to the death of the Cross for me, let
that death of thine sweeten the bitterness of mine.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the Kingdom
of heaven to all believers.

I believe that thou shall come to be my Judge.

I pray thee therefore help thy servant whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood.

Make me to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting.

Thou art the resurrection and the life, he that believes in thee, though he
were dead, yet shall he live: Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

My flesh, and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ which is far better: Lord, I
groan earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with that house from heaven.

I desire to put off this my tabernacle, O be pleased to receive me into
everlasting habitations.

Bring my soul out of prison that I may give thanks unto thy name.

Lord, I am here to wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but with
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness, O take me from these tents
of Kedar, into the heavenly Jerusalem, where Satan shall be utterly trodden
under my feet.

I cannot here attend one minute to thy service, without distraction, O take me
up to stand before thy Throne, where I shall serve thee day and night.

I am here in heaviness through many tribulations, O receive me into that place
of rest, where all tears shall be wiped from my eyes, where there shall be no
more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain.

I am here in a state of banishment and absence from the Lord, O take me where
I shall for ever behold thy face, and follow the Lamb whither soever he goes.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness,

O Blessed Jesu, who have loved me, and washed me from my sins in thine own
blood, receive my soul.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord thou God
of truth, Come Lord Jesu, come quickly.

PRAYERS for their use who Mourn in secret for the PUBLIC CALAMITIES, etc.
Psalm 74. O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long: why is thy wrath
so hot against the sheep of thy pasture? etc.

Psalm. 79. O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritance: thy holy temple
have they defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones, etc.

Psalm. 80. Hear, O thon shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a
sheep: show thy self also, thou that sit upon the Cherubims, etc.


A Prayer to be used in these times of Calamity.
O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, I desire humbly to confess before
thee, both on my own behalf, and that of this Nation, that these many years of
calamity we have groaned under, are but the just, (yea mild) returns of those
many more years of our provocations against thee, and that thy present wrath is
but the due punishment of thy abused mercy. O Lord, thou have formerly abounded
to us in blessings above all people of the earth. Thy candle shined upon our
heads, and we delighted our selves in thy great goodness, Peace was within our
walls, and plenteousness within our palaces, there was no decay, no leading
into Captivity and no complaining in our streets: but we turned this Grace into
wantonness, we abused our Peace to Security, our Plenty to riot and luxury, and
made those good things which should have endeared our hearts to thee, the
occasion of enstranging them from thee. Nay, O Lord, thou gave us yet more
precious mercies, thou were pleased thy self to pitch thy Tabernacle with us,
to establish a pure and glorious Church among us, and give us thy Word to be a
lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our paths; but O Lord, we have made no
other use of that light, then to conduct us to the Chambers of death, we have
dealt proudly, and not hearkened to thy Commandments, and by rebelling against
the light, have purchased to our selves so much the heavier portion in the
outer darkness. And now, O Lord, had the overflowings of thy vengeance been
answerable to that of our sin, we had long since been swept away with a swift
destruction, and there had been none of us alive at this day to implore thy
mercy. But thou art a Gracious God, slow to anger, and have proceeded with us
with much patience and long-suffering, thou have sent thy Judgments to awake
us to repentance, and have also allowed us space for it: But alas! we have
perverted this mercy of thine beyond all the former, we return not to him that
smites us, neither do we seek the Lord, we are sliden back by a perpetual
backsliding, no man repents him of his wickedness, or says what have I done?
It Is true indeed we fear the rod, (we dread every suffering, so that we are
ready to buy it off with the foulest sin) but we fear not him that has
appointed it, but by a wretched obstinacy harden our necks against thee, and
refuse to return* now, O God, what balm is there in Gilead that can cure us;
who when thou would heal us, will not be healed, we know thou have
pronounced that there is no peace to the wicked, and how shall we then pray for
peace, that still retain our wickedness? This this, O Lord, is our sorest
disease, O give us Medicines to heal this sickness, heal our souls, and then we
know thou can soon heal our Land. Lord, thou have long spoken by thy Word to
our ears, by thy Judgments even to all our senses, but unless thou speak by
thy Spirit to our hearts, all other Calls will still be uneffectual. O send out
this voice, and that a mighty voice, such as may awake us out of this
Lechargie: Thou that did call Lazarus out of the grave, O be pleased to call
us who are Dead, yea, putrified in trespasses and sins, and make us to awake to
righteousness. And though, O Lord, our frequent resistences even of those
inward Calls, have justly provoked thee to give us up to the Lusts of our own
heart; yet, O thou boundless Ocean of mercy, who art good not only beyond what
we can deserve, but what we can wish, do not withdraw the influence of thy
grace, and take not thy holy spirit from us. Thou were found of those that
sought thee not, O let that act of mercy be repeated to us who are so
desperately, yet so insensibly Sick, that we cannot so much as look after the
Physician, and by how much our case is the more dangerous, so much the more
sovereign Remedies do thou apply; Lord help us, and consider, not so much our
unworthiness of thy aid, as our irremediable ruin if we want it; save Lord, or
we perish eternally. To this end dispense to us in our temporal Interest what
thou see may best secure our Spiritual; if a greater degree of outward
Misery will tend to the curing our inward, Lord, spare not thy Rod, but strike
yet more sharply. Cast out this Devil, though with never so much Foaming and
tearing. But if thou see that some Return of mercy may be most likely to
melt us, O be pleased so far to condescend to our wretchedness as to afford us
that, and whether by thy sharper or gentler methods, bring us home to thy self.
And then, O Lord, we know thy hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, when
thou have delivered us from our sins, thou can and wilt deliver us from our
troubles: O show us thy mercy and grant us thy salvation, that being redeemed
both in our bodies and spirits, we may glorify thee in both, in a cheerful
obedience, and praise the Name of our God, that has dealt wonderfully with us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer for This Church.
O Thou great God of recompenses, who turnest a Fruitful land into Barrenness
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein; thou have most justly executed
that Fatal Sentence on this Church, which having once been the perfection of
Beauty, the joy of the whole earth, is now become a Scorn and derision to all
that are round about her. O Lord, what could have been done to thy Vineyard
that thou have not done in it, and since it has brought forth nothing but
wild Grapes, it is perfectly just with thee to take away the hedge thereof,
and let it be eaten up. But O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us,
yet do thou it for thy Names sake, for our backslidings are many, we have
sinned against thee. O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of
trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in the land, as a wayfaring man
that turns aside to tarry for a night? Why should thou be as a man
astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? Yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst
of us, and we are called by thy name, leave us not; deprive us of what outward
enjoyment thou please, take from us the opportunities of our luxury and it
may be a mercy, but O take not from us the means of our Reformation, for that
is the most direful expression of thy wrath. And though we have hated the Light
because our deeds were evil, yet, O Lord, do not by withdrawing it condemn us
to walk on still in darkness, but let it continue to shine till it have guided
our feet into the way of peace. O Lord, arise, stir up thy strength and come
and help us, and deliver not the soul of thy Turtle Dove (this disconsolate
Church) unto the multitude of the Enemy, but help her, O God, and that right
early. But if, O Lord, our rebellions have so provoked thee, that the Ark must
wander in the Wilderness till all this murmuring Generation be consumed, yet
let not that perish with us, but bring it at last into a Canaan, and let our
more innocent Posterity see that which in thy just judgment thou deniest to
us. In the mean time let us not cease to bewail that Desolation our sins have
wrought, to think upon the stones of Sion, and pity to see her in the dust,
nor ever be ashamed or afraid to own her in her lowest and most persecuted
Condition, but esteem the Reproach of Christ greater riches then the Treasures
of Egypt, and so approve our constancy to this our afflicted Mother, that her
blessed Lord and Head may own us with mercy when he shall come in the glory of
thee his Father with the holy Angels. Grant this merciful Lord, for the same
Jesus Christ his sake.

A Prayer for the Peace of the Church.
LORD Jesus Christ, which of thine Almightiness, made all creatures both
visible and invisible, which of thy godly wisdom governest and set all
things in most goodly order, which of thine unspeakable goodness keep,
defendest and furtherest all things, which of thy deep mercy restorest the
decayed, renewest the fallen, raisest the dead; vouchsafe we pray thee at last,
to cast down thy countenance upon thy well beloved Spouse the Church, but let
it be that amiable and merciful countenance wherewith thou pacifiest all things
in Heaven, in earth, and whatsoever is above Heaven and under the earth:
vonchsafe to cast upon us those tender and pitiful eyes with which thou did
once behold Peter that great Shepherd of thy Church, and forthwith he remembered
himself and repented; with which eyes thou once did view the scattered
Multitude and were moved with compassion, that for lack of a good Shepherd they
wandered as sheep dispersed and strayed asunder. Thou see (O good Shepherd)
what sundry sorts of Wolves have broken into thy sheep-cotes: So that if it
were possible the very perfect persons should be brought into error: Thou see
with what Winds, with what Waves, with what storms thy silly ship is tossed,
thy ship wherein thy little flock is in peril to be drowned. And what is now
left but that it utterly sink and we all perish? Of this tempest and storm we
may thank our own Wickedness and sinful living, we discern it well and confess
it, we discern thy Righteousness, and we bewail our unrighteousness: But we
appeal to thy Mercy which surmounteth all thy works; we have now suffered much
punishment, being scourged with so many Wars, consumed with such Losses of
goods, shaken with so many floods, and yet appears there no where any Haven or
Port unto us, being thus tired and forlorn among so strange evils, but still
every day more grievous punishments and more seem to hang over our heads. We
complain not of thy sharpness, most tender Savior, but we discern here also
thy Mercy, forasmuch as much grievouser plagues we have deserved. But O most
merciful Jesus, we beseech thee that thou will not consider nor weigh what is
due for our deservings, but rather what becomes thy Mercy, without which
neither the Angels in Heaven can stand sure before thee, much less we silly
vessels of clay. Have mercy on us, O Redeemer, which art easy to be
entreated, not that we be worthy of thy mercy, but give thou this Glory unto
thine own Name. Suffer not those which either have not known thee or do envy
thy glory, continually to triumph over us, and say, Where is their God, where
is their Redeemer, where is their Savior, where is their Bridegroom that they
thus boast on? These opprobrious words redound unto thee. O Lord, while by our
evils men weigh and esteem thy Goodness, they think we be Forsaken whom they
see not amended. Once when thou sleptst in the Ship, and a Tempest suddenly
arising threatened death to all in the Ship, thou awokest at the outcrie of a
few Diseiples and straightway at thine Almighty word the Waters couched, the
Winds fell, the Storm was suddenly turned into a great calm; the dum waters
knew their makers voice. Now in this far greater Tempest, wherein not a few
men's bodies be in danger, but innumerable Souls: we beseech thee at the cry of
thy holy Church, which is in danger of drowning, that thou will awake. So many
thousands of men do cry, Lord save us, we perish, the Tempest is past Man's
power; it is Thy word that must do the deed, Lord Jesu, only say thou with a
word of thy mouth, Cease, O tempest, and forthwith shall the desired calm
appear. Thou would have spared so many thousands of most wicked men, if in
the City of Sodom had been found but ten good men. Now here be so many
Thousands of men which love the glory of thy Name, which sigh for the beauty
of thy House, and will thou not at these men's Prayers let go thine Anger, and
remember thine accustomed and old mercies? Shall thou not with thy heavenly
policy turn our folly into thy glory? Shall thou not turn the wicked men's
evils into thy Churches good? For thy mercy is wont then most of all to
succor, when the thing is with us past Remedy, and neither the Might nor
Wisdom of men can help it. Thou alone bring things that be never so out of
order into order again, which art the only Author and maintainer of Peace. Thou
framedst that old Confusion wherein without order, without fashion confusedly
lay the discordant seeds of things, and with a wonderful order the things that
of nature fought together, Thou did ally and knit in a perpetual band. But
how much greater Confusion is this, where is no Charity, no Fidelity, no
bonds of Love, no reverence neither of Laws nor yet of Rulers, no agreement of
Opinions, but as it were in a misordered Quire, every man sings a contrary
note! Among the Heavenly Planets is no dessention, the Elements keep their
place, every one do the office whereunto they be appointed: And will thou
suffer thy Spouse, for whose sake all things were made, thus by continual
discords to perish? Shall thou suffer the wicked Spirits, which be authors and
workers of discord, to bear such a swing in thy Kingdom unchecked? Shall thou
suffer the strong Captain of mischief, whom thou once overthrewest, again to
invade thy Tents, and to spoil thy Soldiers? When thou were here a man
conversant among men, at thy Voice fled the Divils. Send forth, we beseech
thee, O Lord, thy Spirit, which may drive away out of the breasts of all them
that profess thy Name, the wicked Spirits, masters of riot, of covetousness, of
vainglory, of carnal lust, of mischief and discord. Create in us, O our God
and King, a clean heart, and renew thy holy Spirit in our breasts, pluck not
from us thy holy Ghost. Render unto us the joy of thy saving health, and with
thy principal Spirit, strengthen thy Spouse and the Heardmen thereof. By this
Spirit thou reconciledst the earthly to the Heavenly: By this thou did frame
and reduce so many Tongues, so many Nations, so many sundry sorts of men into
one body of a Church, which body by the same Spirit is knit to thee their Head.
This Spirit if thou will vouchsafe to renew in all men's hearts, then shall all
these foreign miseries cease, or if they cease not, they shall turn to the
profit and avail of them which love thee. Stay this Confusion, set in order
this horrible Chaos (O Lord Jesus) let thy Spirit stretch out it self upon
these Waters of evil wavering Opinions. And because thy spirit, which according
to thy Prophets saying, contains all things, has also the Science of
speaking; make, that like as unto all them which be of thy House, is one Light,
one Baptism, one God, one Hope, one Spirit; so they may also have one Voice,
one Note, one Song, professing one Catholic truth. When thou did mount up to
Heaven triumphantly, thou threwst out from above thy precious things, thou
gave Gifts amongst men, thou dealtest sundry rewards of thy Spirit. Renew
again from above thy old bountifulness, give that thing to thy Church, now
fainting and growing downward, that thou gave unto her shooting up, at her
first beginning. Give unto Princes and Rulers the grace so to stand in awe of
thee, that they so may guide the Commonweal, as they should shortly render
account unto thee that art the King of Kings. Give wisdom to be always
assistant unto them, that whatsoever is best to be done, they may espy it in
their minds, and pursue the same in their doings. Give to the Bishops the gift
of Prophecy, that they may declare and interpret holy Scripture, not of their
own brain, but of thine inspiring. Give them the threefold Charity which thou
once demandest of Peter, what time thou did betake unto him the charge of thy
sheep. Give to the Priests the love of Soberness and of Chastity. Give to thy
people a good will to follow thy Commandments, and a readiness to obey such
persons as thou have appointed over them. So shall it come to pass; if through
thy Gift thy Princes shall command that thou requirest, if thy Pastors and
Herdmen shall teach the same, and thy People obey them both, that the old
Dignity and Tranquillity of the Church shall return again with a goodly order
unto the glory of thy Name. Thou sparedst the Ninivites appointed to be
destroyed as soon as they converted to repentance; and will thou despise thy
House falling down at thy feet, which instead of sackcloth has sighs, and in
stead of ashes tears? Thou promisedst Forgiveness to such as turn unto thee,
but this self thing is thy Gift, a man to turn with his whole heart unto thee,
to the intent all our goodness should re^ound unto thy glory. Thou art the
Maker, repair the work that thou have fashioned. Thou art the Redeemer, save
that thou have bought. Thou art the Savior, suffer not them to perish which do
hang on thee. Thou art the Lord and owner, challenge thy possession. Thou art
the Head, help thy members. Thou art the King, give us a reverence of thy Laws.
Thou art the Prince of Peace, breath upon us brotherly love. Thou art the God,
have pity on thy humble beseechers; be thou according to Paul's saying, all
things in all men, to the intent the whole Quire of thy Church with agreeing
minds and consonant voices for mercy obtained at thy hands, may give thanks to
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which after the most perfect example of concord
be distinguished in property of Persons, and one in nature, to whom be praise
and glory Eternally.

Amen.
FINIS.

