ACCOUNT Concerning the Fire and Burning of Edenbourgh in Scotland, In a Letter
from a Gentleman there, to his Friend in Dublin.
Scotland. February the 12th, 1700. SIR,
I Doubt not but you have had the Fatal Account of the late Fire in the City of
Edenbourgh, which has burnt the whole Parliament-Close, save the Parliament
House, and Churches; and near to the Cross on the South Side of the said
Street. A Letter from Edenbourgh the other Day carries that there is upwards of
Five Hundred Families dislodged. There is no great Loss of Men and Women, but
other Losses are considerable. It Is talked that the whole Church Registers of
Scotland are gone.

Your Cousin Broughton is preserved in Person by the Providence of God, though
in seeming Hazard: His Cabinet and-Papers sustained the common Damage of
others; but there is no Loss of Papers by burning, for all Gentlemen's Papers
being given away in confusion, not minding to whom; and a great part of them
being cast over the Walls, were carried away by the Rabble. The most part, or
all, of the Gentry of Galloway, are in one Circumstance this way: There are
Orders Issued forth for restoring of Papers to their Owners, but that cannot be
expected without considerable Money to those who have them; and where
Inventories are wanting, to be sure there will be considerable Loss.

The Duke of Hamilton seemed very Anxious to have the Fire quenched, offering
abundance of Gold to have it done. There is one Buchan clapped up on suspicion of
having an Hand in the Fire.

There is one (...) Imprioned at Glascow likewise, who is thought to have a
Hand in the Fire which happened in that City a little before: But there shall
be no more added at present

By a Well-wisher of Yours.
To prevent Doubts concerning the above Relation, the Original was Received by,
and is now in the Hands of Mr. Knowles in Back-Lane, Dublin; who Asserts it to
come from Correspondent of his, of good Repute and Credit in Scotland.



Dublin, Printed and Sold next Door to the Flecce in St. Nicholas-street, 1700.


