The Woman's Almanac, For the YEAR 1694: Calculated for the Meridian of City
and Country.

Containing many choice, useful, pleasant, and most necessary Observations,
adapted to the Capacity of the Female Sex, and not to be found in other
Almanacks: As,

portrait

The Good House-wife's Calendar. A Table of Expence^. The Critical Days of the
Year. Observations on New Year's Day. Of Dog Days, and Unfortunate to the
Female Sex. How to know the Hour by the Moon. Observations on Moles. From to
know whether a young Woman be a Maid or not, by a new Way of Astrology. To know
tell which shall die first a Man or his Wife. How to make Love powder. Choice
^a^i^^^s, dis^^^i^^^ng to both Wives, and young ^ucksom Widows, their Fortune
by the Stars, to, whether Rich or Poor, long life, Marry or no^ (...) Husbands,
whether Marry the Person they desire, and whether rich or poor in their married
State: What (...), are Fortunate. Also excellent Cosmeticks to beautify the
Complexion of old Ladies, making one of sixty six serve as well as a young Girl
of sixteen. How to procure a new Set of Teeth to grow in an old Woman's Mouth.
To Cure a Red-face. Likewise what time of the Moon it is best to get Children.

By Dorothy Patridge, Midwife, S^^tie^ in Astrology.

London: Printed for J. S. in the Great (...), 1694.

The Woman's Almanac, etc.
Monthly Observations in Goodhousewifrey, for the Year 1694.
JANUARY.

OPen Bee-hives, uncover Roots of Trees, cut Vines in one of the twelve days;
take away superfluous Branches from Fruit Trees. Fruits in prime, Winter-musk
(bakes well) Winternorwich (excellently baked) Kentish-pepin, Russet-pepin,
Holland-pepin. Set up your Traps for Vermin; especially in your Nurseries and
Flower-gardens. A lusty squab fat Bedfellow very good Physic at this Season.

FEBRUARY.

KItchen-garden-herbs may be planted. Half open your passges for the Bees. Now
also plant out your Colly-flowers to have early; and begin to make your Hot-bed
for the first Melons and Cucumbers. Continue Vemine-traps, etc. A good Season
to get Children in.

MARCH.

SLip and set Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Thyme, etc. By this time your Bees sit;
keep them close Night and Morning. If Weather prove ill, plant and graft
Fruit Trees, carry out Mannure; sow all ^eeds, whose roots are round, as
Onyons, etc.

APRIL.

PRune Fruit Trees; plant and sow strange Flowers; plant Artichock-slips, set
French-beans. This Month Venus is very rampant; get a lusty Husband, least
worse befall ye.

MAY.

SEt Gilly-flowers close in Bed, repair Hedges. Now set your Bees at full
liberty, look out often, and expect Swarms, etc. Ply the Laboratory, and distill
Plants for Waters, Spirits, etc.

JUNE.

PLant, graft, or set tender Herbs or Flowers. Also fold in Sheep, and make
them bear off the Dew with their feet in the morning before they feed. Sow
Parsneps, Pumbions, Cucumbers, Melons, and Gourds, in a hot fair Day.

JULY.

GAther Flowers and Preserve. Replant such Herbs as you would not have Seed
off. Sow Cabbage or Lettice in the old Moon.

AUGUST.

ABstane from the Feats of Venus, the Learned hold it very bad to use it this
Month. Now cut down Wood for Winter-fire. Geld Lambs, etc.

SEPTEMBER.

SLip Garden-flowers, and re-plant them; and cast up Drains to keep the Land
dry in Winter.

OCTOBER.

SEt Pears, Plums, and Apples, remove Trees that bear Kernels.

NOVEMBER.

ROugh, hew, and fashion Plough-timber, and lay it up to Season; the Ash is
good, the Elm better.

DECEMBER.

KIll-Swine; open Dreins to prevent Inundations; now use Venus.

Critical Observations on New Year's Day.
SOme observe that New Year's Day being red, portends great Tempest, and War:
If it falls upon Sunday, then a pleasant Winter follows; and a tempestious
Spring, a dry Summer, a plentiful Vintage, Cattle grow, Honey abounds, and
Women dye, Plenty and Peace. If upon Monday, a various Winter, a good Spring,
Summer dry, hard Vintage, and Men's Health changea^e, Bees dye, and Wonders
shall be seen. If upon Tuesday, a Winter cloudy, a wet and tempestuous Spring,
a dry Summer, a small Vintage, though at first hopeful, Women shall dye. If
upon Wednesday, the Winter will be sharp and cold, the Spring hard and
boisterous. If upon Thursday, a pleasant quiet Winter, a troublesome Spring. If
upon Friday, a changeable Winter, a good Spring. Summer dry, a great Plenty of
Corn, Sheep shall dye. If upon Saturday, a fearful Winter, for violent Gusts of
Wind, a turbulent Spring, and Corn naught, with a rot of Sheep, old Women shall
dye, and much burning abound.

Of Unfortunate Days, and Dog Days.
THe Dog Days are so called, because of the influance of those Stars called the
Dog, and they continue in force so long as the Sun by his nearness co-operateth
with them, beginning about the 20th day of July, and ending the 17th of August.
Diophantes would have us observe the rising of the Dog Star, in what Sign the
Moon is in that time: for if she be found in Aris, there uses to be small
store of Grain, but in Gemini great abundance, and so likewise in Taurus; in
Virgo, corruption of Grain; in Sagitary abundance, and so in Capricorn; in
Aquarius, scarcity; in Piscibus, Plenty; in Libra abundance of Fruits, with
shells of Nuts, etc. Moreover, some do reckon 33 Unfortunate Days (as they call
them) in a Year, In January, the 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 15, 17, and 19. In February,
the 8, 10, and 17. In March, the 15, 16, 19, and 28. In April, the 16, and 21.
In May, the 7, 17, and 20. In June, the 4, and 7. In July, the 15, and 20. In
September, the 6, and 7. In October, the 6. In November, the 15, and 25. In
December, the 6, 7, and 9. Others also say that there are in the Year six most
Unfortunate Days to be let Blood or to be Born: January the 3. July the 1.
October the 2. April the 3. August the 1, and 31. And amongst many the 28 Day
of Decmber, called Childermass-day, Cross-day, and Innocents-day, is taken for
a very evil Day. But it becomes Christian People not to subject themselves
unto Hours and Days, as did Pagans of old.

Observations on the Weather.
THe Judgment of the Weather is very various and uncertain, especially in an
Island, such as is England, Scotland, and Ireland, wherein one day the Season
changes so often, as that the Morning may be cold like Winter, and the middle
of the Day hot like Summer, and again the Night cold as Winter; and sometimes
contrariwise it is hot in Winter, etc. But the mixture or confusion as it were
of Sea and Land, with the often and sudden change of the Wind, are no little
causes hereof. Wherefore frequent Observations and Experience in each
particular Place, is very Necessary: Without which a learned Person may Err
more grossly than he that has no more Knowledge then Observation alone, as we
see ordinarily in Shepherds and plain Husbandmen that are much abroad by Day,
and by Night. Whereas an Artist must observe the rising, culminating, and
setting of the greatest Stars, the Ingress of the Sun into the four Cardinal
Points, Eclipses, the Aspect of the Planets, but especially the Moon, and her
Mansions and Lunations, etc. Which are here too Obscure, and too Tedious to
Treat of, as they ought. Wherefore we will speak most of such ordinary Signs as
Husbandmen and Good Housewifes do observe.

Signs of fair Weather.
IF it does Lighten the day being clear, or if it Rain presently after a great
Wind; when the Crow or Raven gapeth against the Sun in Summer; also the gaping
of Dawes in the Morning, the swarming of Bees, the flying of Humble-Bees,
^roanes, or Bettles about the Doors in the Evening, the howling of the Owl in
rainy Weather, and Ants removing of their Eggs; all these are signs of fair
Weather.

Signs of foul Weather.
RObin Red-breast sings under Hedges before Rain, but upon the tops of Trees
before fair Weather. Hens lay abroad if it rain long, but under a Roof if it
rain not long. The Herb Tidfolly looks rough against a Tempest, and the
Leaves stand staring; Hens resort to, the Perch or Roof covered with dust:
Also the alteration of the Cock's crowing, the pruning and washing of Birds in
Winter, the wallowing of Dogs, the ample working of the Spinner in the Air, the
Ant busied with her Eggs, the Bees in fair Weather not going far, Rain suddenly
dried up, the heaviness of Head and Eyes, the falling of Scot from Chimneys,
the biting of Fleas, Flies and Gnats, the pissing often of Dogs, when Cattle
eat greedily, and lick their Hoofs, if they suddenly run here and there, making
a noise, and breathing into the Air with open Nostrils, also the croking of
Frogs, Moles tairs up the Ground, the unaccustomed noise of Poultry or Swine,
the caying of Crows twice or thrice quick calling, are signs of tempestuous
Weather to follow. Little Rain in Winter, is sign of a wet Spring to follow;
and a hot dry Summer, is sign of a wet Winter: When it begins to freeze with
an East Wind, cold Wea-Weather is like to continue.

How to judge of Weather by the Clouds.
BLack Clouds flying from the East, is Rain at Night, from the West, is Rain
the next Day; if they fly low and appear to settle on the tops of Hills, it is
cold Weather; if they be full charged, and appear whole like Towers, it Hails
at hand: If white Clouds appear in Winter two or three days together at
Sunrising, it is Cold and Snow, but black Clouds are Rain. A red Sky in the
Evening and a gray Morning, is a fair Day. Mists falling in the Morning in
Spring or Harvest, also Mists over Ponds or Waters in the Morning, show Rain.
If Smoke ride swiftly in the Air, it is Wind from thence, especially from North
to South. If Mists descend from Hills, and settle in the Valleys, it is fair
hot Weather next day. If the Summer be moist, wet and cloudy, it is bad for
Corn and Fruit, etc.

Of the Critical Days in the Year.
IN feverish Diseases, and such like, the Physicians do observe Critical Days,
that is to say, Days upon which there is a great alteration of Sickness, either
toward Health or Death in the Patient: Such are reckoned to be the first day
of the Sickness, the 14 day, the 20, and the 27. Indeed the Moon alters those
times somewhat by the swiftness or slowness of her motion. They have also days
whereupon they do pass judgment of the Critical Time that comes after, such
are the 4 day of the Sickness, the 11, the 17, and the 2. So likewise in
Astrology, according to the Weather, (for the other is according to the
temperament of the Body) there are some days, or rather seasons, seeing we look
not altogether upon only one day, which are critical in regard of the Weather,
and so consequently of Dearth, and Epidemical or Raging Diseases, all which are
to be understood to fall out so often, or for the most part, but not always.
Nay, some are of opinion, that it is c^^an^ed many days back in our times, but
Experience and Observation can best satisfy in all these: Thus if the 22d day
of January be clear without Clouds, it is a sign of a good Year for Wines

If on Candlemas-day the Sun shine, it is a sign of more Winter to be remaining
than is already past. So if upon the 22d of February, it freeze or be cold, it
will continue a Fortnight.

Also the 24th day of February, alters the Weather from Frost to Thaw, or
from ^haw to Frost.

So many Mists in March, so many hoary Frosts after Easter.

If the Frogs be heard before the 24th day of April, so many days after are
they silent.

A dry March, a moist April, and a cold May is thought to be a good Spring.

If the Sun shine the 25th day of May, Wines prosper. And if it rain the 24th
of June* Nuts do not prosper. If the 24th if June be wet, it is a sign of a bad
Harvest.

If it rain the 2d of July, there will much Rain follow.

If the Wind do not change the 24th day of June, the Night following it is held
good.

If it rain the 5th day of July, it lasts so four Weeks.

The 8th day of July, if fair, the Vintage shall be good, but if dark, bad.

If the 25th day of July be fair, it is a sign of a good Harvest.

So if the Leaves do not fall betimes in Harvest, it is a sign of a sharp
Winter.

If the 24th day of August be fair, it is a sign of a good Harvest.

If it rain on the 1st day of September, it is a sign of a dry Harvest to come.

The 14th day of September.
If the Deer on Rood-day lie down, and rise up dry,
Then forty days fair follow usually.
So many days old the Moon is the 29th day, so many Floods that Winter. If the
17th day of November be cloudy, it shows a wet Winter; if dry, a sharp
Winter. And as is the 11th so is the Winter.

From the 6th day of September, to the 21st, are called Halcien-days, because
no Winds use to blow near to the shortest day of the Year. If the 25th day of
December come is the new Moon, it is a token of a good Year: And the nearer to
the new Moon the better: The contrary in the decrease. If the Sun shine the
12th day, or 6th of January, shall be much Wind: Such is Solstice or 11th day
of December, such is the Winter. How many days the first Snow is, before new
Moon, so many Snows are to come. Thunder on Shrove-Tuesday, foretells Wind,
store of Fruit, and Plenty, the Sunbeams being early abroad: Others affirm, So
much it shines that day, the like it shines every day of Lent. If it rain on
Ascension-day, it be tokeneth scarcity of Food for Cattle; but if it be fair;
plenty.

How to know what of the Clock by the Moon.
LOok upon any Sun-dial, and see what of the Clock it is by the shadow of the
Moon, as you do by the Sun, observing how much it wants, or is past 12, for
so much it wants, or is past the hour of her coming to the South; and knowing
the Age of the Moon at that time, you shall find the time of her coming to the
South, by the Table of the length of Moon shining, which is aforesaid. As for
example, Let the shadow of the Moon point at (...) of the Dial, and if it be
the 10th day of the Moon, she comes to the South, or shines by the Table 8
hours; then substract 1 from 8, and there remains 7 of the Clock, for the
Hour of the said time.

The good House-wife's Table of Expence^s.
One Week. One Month. One Year. Expenses for one Day. Shillings Pence Farthings
Shillings Pence Farthings Pounds Shillings Pence Farthings A Farthing 1 3 7 7 7
1 A halfpenny 3 2 1 2 1 2 2 A Penny 7 0 1 10 5 Two pence 1 2 2 4 3 00 10 0
Three pence is for 1 9 is for 4 8 is for 4 11 3 0 A Groat 2 4 9 4 5 14 0 Five
pence 2 11 1 0 0 7 12 1 0 Six pence 3 6 0 14 0 0 9 2 6 0 A Shillings 7 1 l. 8
18 5 0 0

Here are four several Tables, one for a Day, the second for a Week, the third
for a Month, the fourth for a Year. As to know what the expense of one Farthing
a Day is for one Week together, to wit, one Penny three Farthings a Day is for
one Week together, to wit, one Penny three Farthings; for a Month, seven Pence;
and for a Year, seven Shillings, seven Pence, and one Farthing. And this is to
be observed That so many Pence by the Day, make by the Year just so many
Pounds, half Pounds and Groats, as seven Pence a day is by the Year, seven
Pounds, seven-half Pounds, and seven Groats.

Of Riches and Poverty.
The Letter A in the Root of the Forefinger, promises much Riches and Gain;
likewise many Lines from the Root of the Thumb, between the Thumb and Line of
Life, pointing toward the Ring-finger, promises great Riches. A Mark like a
Ladder on the Mount of the Forefinger, signifies a poor Woman, subject to
great losses.

Of Husbands.
Lines reaching from the Mount of the Thumb, over the Mount, (toward the Line
of Life) show the Number of Husbands; therefore observe how many there be; and
she shall have so many Husbands, or at least a Bolus to keep her from the
Green Sickness; I mean, a Friend in the corner.

Of short Life.
The Line of Life, if it be short, it shows a short Life, and by how much the
more it inclines to brevity, so much the more it is feared

Of Buck-somness and Lust.
The Sister of the Line of Life, on the Mount of the Thumb, long and redish in
the Hand of a Woman; also the Mount or ring of the Thumb big, and elevated with
many cross disordered Lines, with Lines chequerwise near the Wrist of the Hand;
all these denotes and intimates the Woman will kiss in a Corner, or beat her
Puff-past with her Neighbor's Rowling-pin; one that cannot fix her Humors to
a constant Diet.

How to make Hair as red as a Foot, a lovely Brown.
Take of Lead calcined with Sulphur one part and another part of quick Lime,
mix them with Water, then let it dry, then wash it very clean with Soap and
Water, and it will be a very natural Brown: the longer it lies the better it
grows.

To Cure a Lady's Red Face.
Take Li^ly-roots four Ounces, boil them in two Pints of Water until half be
consumed; then take it off, strain it out, and keep it for your use.

To make an old Woman's Teeth white, recover a new Set, beautify the Face, and
take out the furrowed Rinkles as smooth as a Girl of Sixteen.
Take Loaf-sugar 1 Pound, Allom 3 Ounces, the flower of Beans, Fumitory, and
Water Lillies, a handful of each, 4. Limons sliced, the Crumb of 2 white
Loaves, Goats-milk and White Wind, of each 2 Pints; bruise what is to be
bruised; then mix them together in a Glass Alembick, distill them in Balne^
Mariae: Keep the Water as most excellent for the abovementioned uses.

Of Moles, how to know whether any Person has them.
A Mole on the Nose of a Man, or Lip of a Woman, denotes another on the Privy
Parts: A Mole on the Nape of the Neck, another on the Buttocks; and if it be on
the Check, another on the Belly; a Mole on the Forehead, another on the Breast;
a Mole under the Eye-brow, another on the Navel: And this very seldom fails.

How to know whether a Woman be a Maid or no.
Take a spoonful of the Spirit of Seagreen, House-leek, the Powder of
Crabs-teeth, one dram; half an Ounce of Jamaica Pepper beaten very small, and
mixed together, and presented in a Glass of Wine, Beer, or roasted Apple; if the
party do not sneeze in half an Hour after, you may suspect her Virginity; if
she do, be confident she is virtuous.

How to know which shall die first, the Husband or Wife
Note, That there are seven Letters in the Cross-now that stand for Numbers, as
C for 100, D for 500, L for 50. M for 1000, V for 5, X for 10. Therefore to
know which Party shall die first, write down the Man's Christian and Surname,
and then the Woman's Maiden-name also, and count which of their Names by those
Letters can make the greatest Number, and that Party shall over live the other.

How to make a Philtre, or Love-powder.
Take a Swallow's Nest, young ones and all, and digging a hole in the Earth,
put them in, and cover it up; let them ^^e there 48 hours, then, opening the
place, take the young swallows out, and dry them to Powder very small; and
this, some say, has strange effects: O hers, the breathing, the Basilick
Veins, and distilling it after, is the best Love-powder.

Licensed according to Order.


