The Woman's Almanac: OR, Prognostication, for ever: Showing the nature of the
Planets, with the Events that shall befall Women and children born under them.
With several Predictions very useful for the Female Sex.



By Sarah Ginnor Student in Physic.

London, Printed for J. J. 1659.

To the Reader.
COurtious Reader, The gift of learning being so little set by in these days
amongst those of our Sex, is the chief invitation which has caused me to
publish this small Tract, thereby to stir up others, not to let their great
worth with other learned Authors of our Sex ly in obscurity. I need not quote
them for I think few of our Sex so ignorant but they have either read or heard
of them, and though some of them have been abused by the quacksalving
Mountibanks that would engrosse all knowledge into their own hands, yet have
great and wonderful cures been done by our Sex, after these paper-sculd
Mongrels have left them. Why then should we suffer these Cater-pillers to eat
up our vine? Let me tell you, it is as lawful for us to be Judges and plead our
own Causes in our own gowns as Lawyers to plead for others. Then lets rowse up
our spirits, and show forth our Verues, for the knowledge in this Art will
animate our husbands to excel us, no doubt but we shall make them sencible
where the sign lies; and make them be in our studies many times when they would
be in an Alehouse; nay we shall find the nights will be more comfortable, and
the days more pleasant. By this means we shall be counted instead of Mobs, maps
of modesty, and for tattling Gossips, but Emblems of virtue, and parterns of
civiliy to all the world.

Yours whilst S.G.

A ROGNOSTICATION for ever.
Astrological Observations.
FIrst, I shall begin with what concerns our own Sex viz. If we find Mercury in
a feminine House with Venus, then we must allow Mercury a female, in a feminine
Sign, and drawing to a conjunction with Venus, Mercury to a Quartile of Mars
and Pisces, and Gemini, denotes some of our sex (not too much loaded with
virtue) have a rare faculty in scolding, in other some sullenness and
perverseness.

Venus in the 12 house in exaltation, applying to combustion with the Sun,
denotes that women will be more free then usual in bestowing the P -- on their
Clients. But if Luna go to Saturn in the sixth house in Libra, it shows that
old covetious fools will dote on young wenches, therefore beware of marrying,
in the Spring, for if Scorpio be in the 7th house intercepted, it denotes
unseemly wantonness, let chery and lightness in women.

If Luna be in the 7th house in Pisces, it denotes frequent marrying, and is a
fortunate position for Oyster-women, Fish-women, and others who are under the
sign Pisces.

If Luna and Jupiter be in reception, the Moon in Pisces and Jupiter in Cancer,
it is a fortunate time of marrying, many of our Sex shall obtain gallant
matches, nay some better then they deserve. If Mercury and Venus be in Cancer,
in conjunction in the eleventh house, to marry a Seaman is fortunate. If Venus
be in Scorpio, the wantons of our Sex as well as the other sex will be peppered
with the P -- and then woe to your Noses, for its a fatal plague to the roof of
your mouth besides the downfall of Narrow-bridge and the drying up your
Fish Ponds by the opperation of malignant fireworks.

For this my Judgment, do not take distaste;
But as I am, I wish you all, be chaste:
This is the only way, if you desire
To be preserved from the Frenchmans fire.
The Names of the Planets and the Days governd by each Planet.
As Saturn stands for Saturday so Luna Sunday,
Mars to Tuesday Sol stands up to Monday,
Jupiter boldly does to Thursday fly,
To Friday Venus Wedensday Mercury.
The 12 signs ruling in the body are, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces.

January.
If it be on New Years day that the Clouds in the morning be red, it shall be
an angry year with much War and great Tempests. If the Sun do shine on the 22.
day of January there shall be much wind. If the Sun does shine on Saint Paul's
day, the 25 day of January, it shall be a fruitful year, and if it do Rain or
Snow, it shall be between both: If it be very misty it betokens great death:
If thou hear it Thunder that day, it betokens great Winds, and great death
and most especially among rich men that year.

February.
On Shrove-Tuesday whosoever does Plant or Sow, it shall remain always green.

Item, how much the Sun did shine that day, so much he shall shine every day in
Lent. And always the next new Moon that falls after Candlemas day, and after
that the next Tuesday, shall be always Shrove-Tuesday.

And when the Sun rises and shines early, then prospers well all manner of
Fruit: if you hear it Thunder, that it betokens great Wine and much Fruit.

Saint Bede says there be three days, and three nights, that if a Child be
born therein, the body abides whole and shall not consume away until the day
of Judgment: that is in the last days of January, and the secrets thereof are
full wondrous. And if a Tree be hewed at, on the same day, it shall never fall.

March.
The more mists that there be in March, the more good does it, and as many
days as be in March, so many hoar frosts shall you have after Easter, and so
many Mists in August. All manner of Trees that shall be cut down unto the two
last Holy days in March, shall never fall.

Item, If on Palm Sunday be no fair weather, that betokens to goodness. If it
do Thunder that day, then it signifies a merry year, and death of great men.

April.
If it rain never so little on the Ascension day, it betokens dearth of all
manner of food for Cattle. But when it is fair weather it is prosperous, and
there shall be plenty of Tallow and much Wool.

May.
If the Sun do shine on the 25 day of May, Wine shall prosper well; but if it
does rain, it does much hurt. Item, if it rain on Whit-Sunday, it is not good.
Item in the last of May, the Oak Trees begin to bear blossoms, if they blossom
then, you shall have a good year of Tallow, and plenty of Fruit.

June.
If it rain never so little on Midsummer-day, that is the 24 day of June, then
do not the Hasel Nuts prosper: If the holy Sacraments day of our Lord be fair,
then it is good and causes Fruit plenty, and the Lambs to dye.

July,
If it Rain the second day of July, such weather shall be forty days after, day
by day, yet some imputed it to Swithin the 15.

August.
If the Sun do shine on the 15 day of August, that is a good token, and
special for Wine.

September.
If thou will see and know how it shall go that year, then take heed to the Oak
Apples about Saint Michaels day, for by them you shall know how that year shall
be: If the Apples of the Oak-Trees when they be cut; be within full of Spiders,
then follows a naughty year: If the Apples have within them Flies, that
betokens a meetly good year. If they have Maggots in them, then follows a
good year. If there be nothing in them, then follows great dearth: if the
Apples be many and early ripe, so shall it be an early Winter, and very much
Snow shall be before Christmas, and after that it shall be cold.

If the inner part or kernall be fair, and clear, then shall the Summer be
fair, and the Corn good also; but if they be very moist then shall the Summer
also be moist. If they be lean then shall there be a hot and dry Summer. If it
Thunder in this month it presageth plenty of Wine and Corn that year.

October.
When the leaves will not fall from the Trees, then follows after a cold
(...) or else a great number of Caterpillars on (...) ^^ees.

November.
Whether the Winter be cold or warm, go on Alhollows day to a Beech Tree, and
cut a chip thereof, and if it be dry then shall the Winter be warm: if thou will try on St. Andrews even, whether it shall be a moist or dry year that
follows, you shall know by a glass full of water: if the year shall be moist,
and much Rain shall fall, then shall the Water in the Glass run over. And if
there shall follow a dry year, then shall not the water arise to the brink
thereof.

When there follows a foggy Night, a good year after ensues, that is, when
it comes on the Thursday Night, or on a flesh day at Night, and not on the
Friday or Saturday, wherein some men will eat no other meat but Flesh: if there
be Thundering, that betokens plenty of Fruit.

December.
When Christmas day comes while the Moon waxes, it shall be a very good
year, and the nearer it comes to the New Moon, the better shall that year be.

If it come when the Moon decreaseth, it shall be a hard year, and the nearer
the lat^er end thereof it comes the worse and harder shall the year be. And
if any Wood be cut off on the two last days of December, and on the first day
of January, it shall not rot nor wither away, nor be full of Worms, but always
wax harder, and in his age as hard as a stone.

W^ ^^ristmas Eve at midnight the wind waxes (...) ^^etokens a fruitful year;
and when the Sun shines on Twelfth day in the morning, it betokens foul
weather, if it be fair that day it is happy and fortunate.

To find the time when the Sun shall be Eclipsed, and when not by his distance
from these two sections called the head and tail of the Dragon.
If the apparent latitude of the Moon at the time of the visible Conjunction be
less then 30. min. 40 seconds, there must be an Eclipse.

But if the apparent latitude of the Moon be more then 34 min. 51 seconds,
there can be no Eclipse.

If the apparent latitude be more then 30 min. 40 seconds, and less then 34
min. 51 seconds, there may be a small Eclipse, as in this following Figure.

North

South

East

West



Of the Eclipse of the Moon.
If the Moon at the Noon at the time of her t^^^ opposition to the Sun, shall
be distant from either of the two forementioned points, less then 10 degrees,
21 mm. and 20 seconds, then must the Moon suffer an Eclipse.

But if her distance be more then 13 degrees 5 min. and 13 seconds then the
Moon cannot be Eclipsed.

If her distance be more then 10 degrees 21 min. and 20 seconds, then she may
Happen to be Eclipsed, but not necessarily.

I shall not treat further on Eclipses, in regard the happiness of our Sex does
appeat in most splendor, when the Moon appears so clouded, as in this
following Figure, dark nights being to us as a fountain, whence flows all our
mirth, joy, pleasure, sports, and melodious recreations.



Expound you may the piece it is but a Riddle,
The pleasure of our Sex lies in the middle.
The signification of Moles in these of our sex.
If the Woman have a Mole on the left Breast, it denotes her undoubtedly
wicked. If she have a Mole on her Belly, it denotes her a Clutton or great
feeder. If a Mole right against the Spleen, it denotes she shall be often sick.
If on the bottom of the Belly, it argues much debility and weakness. If near
the privy Members it denotes unspeakable desires after Venery, and unsatiable
in coacting. If a woman have a Mole on the right Knee, it denotes her honest,
if on the left many Children. If on the Ankle of the foot, she shall take on
her the man's part. Moles on the right side betokens honesty Riches, on the
left side Calamity and Poverty. If on the Forhead, it denotes that she shall
come to high dignity. If she have a Mole about the overbrow, it argues she
shall marry a rich comely person. But if on the overbrow she shall have five
Husbands. If she have a Mole on the Nose somewhat Ruddy, and another in the
privy place, it does show such a person is over much given to Venerial acts. If
a Woman have a Mole on the neither jaw, it denotes she shall lead her life in
sorrow, which shall hinder her from bearing Children. If a Mole on any of the
Lips, it does portend that she is a great glutton. If on the Chin, it portends
wealth. If a Mole on any of her Ears, it portends she shall be Rich and much
reverenced, and has the like Mole on ber Thigh or Ham. If on the Neck, it
likewise denotes Riches. If a Woman shall have a Mole on her Loins, it denotes
poor Kindred, and always wanting. If on the shoulders, it denotes Imprisonment
and sorrow. If she have a Mole on the Throat, it signifies she shall Marry a
Wealthy and Comely man. If in the Hand a Mole shall appear, it denotes good
Luck and Prosperous Children. If a Mole on the Breast, it denotes she shall be
harmed by much poverty.

How to know whether a Woman be with Child of Boy or Girl.
Write the proper names of the Father or Mother, and of the Month that she
conceived with Child, and adding likewise all the numbers of those Letters
together, divide them by seven, and if the remainder be even, it will be a
Girl, if odd, it will be a Boy.

To know whether the Wife be Honest or no.
Write the name of the Wife, and of he^ Mother, and put all the number of those
Letters together, and put to the total sum 15, and divide it by 7, and if the
remainder be un-even, she is honest, if even she is dishonest. Always write
the proper names in Latin.

The same may be to know whether a Man or his Wife shall dye first, only add
not the number 15, but divide by seven, if even the Woman shall dye, if odd the
man.

What Thunder signifies every Month.
Thunder in January signifies the same year great Winds, plentiful of Corn
and Cattle peradventure. Thunder in February, signifies that same year many
rich men shall dye in great sickness. Thunder in March, signifies that same
year great Winds, plenty of Corn, and debate amongst people. Thunder in April
signifies that same year to be fruitful and merry, with the death of wicked
men. Thunder in May, signifies that year need, scarceness and dearth of Corn,
and great hunger. Thunder in June, signifies that same year that Woods shall
be overthrown with Winds, and great rageing shall be of Lions and Wolves, and
so like of other harmfull Beasts. Thunder in July, signifies that fame year
shall be good Corn, and loss of Beasts, that is to say, their strength shall
perish. Thunder in August, signifies the same year sorrow, wailing of many,
for many shall be sick. Thunder in September, signifies the same year great
Wind, plentiful of Corn, and much falling out between man and man. Thunder in
October signifies the same year great Wind, and scantness of Corn, Fruits and
Trees. Thunder in November fignifieth that same year to be fruitful and merry,
and cheapnes of Corn. Thunder in December, signifies that same year cheapnesse
of Corn, and Wheat, with peace and accord among the people.

Some memorable Accidents happened since 1639.
The Parliament began the 3 of November, and continued 12 years. 1639 The
Rebellion in Ireland began 23 October, 1641 Earl of Strufford beheaded 12 May,
1642 Earl of Essex made Genesis July 12 1642 Battle at Edg-hill October. 20. and at
Brainford 12 November, 1642 Newbury fight 23 Sept. 1642 Scots enter into
England Jan. 16. 1643 Bishop of Cant. beheaded Jan. 10 1644 Lord Fairfax made
General December. 31. 1644 Marst emore fight, June 14, 1644 House of Lords and
King voted down, 1648 King Charles began his reign 27 March 1625 and beheaded
30 January, 1648 Colchester taken, and Lucas and Lisle shot to death, Aug. 28,
1648 Scots routed in Lancashire Aug. 7. 1648 Ormond beaten from Dublin Aug 2,
1649 The K. of Scott routed at Worcester 3 Sep. 1649 Scots routed at Dunbar
Sept. 3. 1651 The long Parliament dissolved by the Lord Protector, April 20
1653 Victory against the Dutch, Jan. 23 1653 The Protector having Governed four
years, three months, and 5 days, departed his life the third of Sept. 1658
Some Signs of mirth for our sex.
When the Dragons head is in Scorpio, and he upon the Cusp of the 7 house, the
Moon being in Cancer, and Venus applying to a Sextile o^ the Moon, there is hopes
of abundance of satisfaction in the gallant recreation of night sport by a
stranger, which questionless will make the merry wantons of out age tittle with
laughter, at the trial of the fundamental Point of Mars, who shall venture to
beat up their quarters to his own prejudice.

When Mars sits at home to wash the dishes and skim the Pot, and Venus wal^^
the Exchange, it denotes great change in household government.

When men come sober home, and go to bed by daylight, our sex are in election
to be merry at Candlelight.

When men grow blind and cannot see to tell money at home, then our sex may be
merry abroad.

When husbands are jealous over night, it shows a fit time for out sex to go to
St. Tantlins next morning.

If a man be fortified strongly with the Scepter of Mars, it denotes a fit time
for Venus to lie down, that mirth may be produced by the Turks entrance into
Constantinople.

Yet after mirth, I wish our Sex may mend,
And Virtue guide them whilst I make An End.

