The Bloody Almanac: OR, Astrological Predictions, and Monthly Observations,
For the Year, 1659. From the Motions and Configurations Of the Celestial
Bodies, three great Eclipses, one of the SUN, and two of the MOON: Wherein is
foretold, the most eminent Actions in Europe; especially in England, Scotland,
France, Ireland, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Flanders, Germany, And Hungary.
Holland, Prussia, Norway, Catalonia, Holstein, Friesland, Bohemia, Tartary,
Muscovia, And Portugal.


Further denoting, and setting forth, 1 The Victorious proceedings of the
English against the Spaniards, and the memorable Achievements that shall
happen in their Warlike Enterprises, and Engagements. 2 The strange Revolutions
and Changes, that will attend the Affairs and Councels, both of Kings, Princes,
States and Commonwealths. 3 The high and magnanimous Transactions, of the most
illustrious and serene Prince, Charles Gustavus Adolphus, King of the Swedes,
Goths, and Vandals. 4 The great and glorious Victories, obtained by His Royal
Majesty, against the Poles and Germans; and the routing and dispiersing of His
numerous Enemies. Together with a Paraphrase upon His Majesty's Nativity. 5 The
great and wonderful things that are incident both to Men, Women, and Children;
the several Diseases and Effects, that are most predominant; and sundry Rules
and Directions, for the preservation of Health, the increase of Trade, both in
City and Country; and the general good of all Trades whatsoever.


London, Printed for John Reynor, 1659.

To the Reader,
Ingenuous Soul,
HAving been absent from this Nation for some Years, which hindered my Annual
Publication of this Sheet of Astrological Predictions; I hope (as I formerly
have) I shall receive thy candid acceptance. I am very brief in my
Observations, it being most befitting weak Capacities. The reason why I
entitled it at the first the Bloody Almanac, was, Because I writ it in Times,
when the Heavens spoke little less to Mortals, but Blood, Trouble, and
Commotions: I think the same consideration may excuse Me for the Title now. I
have no more to say, but this; That if this find thy favor, I shall be the
more encouraged further to serve Thee;

Farewell, J. LIVIE.

Januaries Observations.
This Mouth's the gate of the rest, but would you know,
How it begins, Heaven's dark with Clouds and Snow:
The Great ones jarre, the Commons pay the score;
Whilst grim sac'd Famine does afflict the Poor.
Were the consultations now on Foot, and the spirits of men as peaceable, as
the season unfit for action, we were happy. But most prudent men fear the
contrary: and the Heavens seem to incline men to mutiny and rebellion in most
parts of Europe: Hence we may expect, preparations not a few for eminent and
warlike actions, Men's expectations wound up to a great height, what may succeed
the late change here in England, viz. the death of the most serene, and valiant
Lord Protector, who, without doubt, was set a part for this work by Providence,
and the inclination of a propitious Heaven at his birth. Some (misguided in
Art) seem to be confident of the restoring of Charles Stuart, to be King of
these Nations, because he has a fortunate Genesis or nativity; and that the
conjunction in the fiery Trigon, to happen in the year 1663, may work as
eminent a change, as that in 1642. But the most eminent Astrologers are of a
contrary judgment; believing that the effects of the last so eminent a
conjunction, seconded by the change of the Aphelion of Mars, will scarcely
terminate in some Ages. For these and the like causes too tedious, and not fit
here to be related, we may conclude no change remarkable in the present
Government.

Cold Winds threatening Rain to the Iast Quarter: much Snow or Rain to the
New Mood, the air so inclinable to the 18 day, then more serene with frost till
the 25, after which expect winds driving snow or rain,

Februarys Observations.
This month begins and ends, in the formers strain,
For want of food and fire the poor complain:
Hard times God wot; pray call me not a witch,
If store of rain and snow now fill the ditch.
GOD be merciful to the poor of the City and hear their cry, and woeful
complaint for want of Trade, food and all manner of convenience. The want of
Trade indeed is the complaint of the Citizens in general. Here is great
enquiery whether some great person be not found false to his trust: pray God
defend our Grandees from broiles and divisions, nor is it only the complaint
of the poor Ttradesmen, but our Grandees want money as well as we. I wish no
plot, nor treacherous contrivement is now in agitation, and let every peaceable
man say Amen. The Spring draws on, and consequently strange and eminent
actions: hearken for news from the foreign Posts, for I hope no warlike action
shakes our habitations: The Germans, Sweads, Poles, Tartars, Muscovites,
Dutch, Dane, etc. are now highly concerned, and prepare for action, which we
shortly expect to hear of. The quadrate Aspect of the two infortunes, excites
the spirits of men to warlike actions.

From the beginning to the last quarter, the air inclinable to moisture; from
the sixth to the new Moon, rain and snow, from the new Moon to the first
quarter, the air obscure with some rain and snow; from thence to the end of the
month, the winds high and turbulent.

Marches observations.
Sometimes a friendly gale, amongst fogs appear,
Disperse the Clouds, and make the air seem clear:
Welcome thou peaceful agent; whilst we pray,
That thou art answered, ere thou go away.
THis month is the beginning of the year, and the year begins with eminent
warlike actions, remarkable Embassies and Treaties; and since I intimated in
the last month something of action suddenly to happen among the Sweads, Poles,
Danes, etc.

It may be expected I should say something of that victorious magnificent
Prince of Sweden; who for some years last past, has shined all over Europe
like a prodigious meteor or blazing star, attended with such effects as his
neighbor Nations have been sensible of, and the Danes do now feel, for the
Heavens seem to smile on this victorious Prince. Yet some Astrologers now
living do affirm (that his ascendant by direction) labors to the malevolent
rays of Saturn; if it be so, we fear an eclipsing of his honor and success,
which God prevent. Surely after many tempests and furious gusts of division,
battles and effusion of blood; we begin to hope for a calm, and a
reconciliation of some of our differences. If in this month any agent arive, or
if we have any treaty with the Spaniard, let us pray for success.

From the beginning to the last quarter the air windy, clear with some frost:
about the last quarter inclinable to moisture: soon clearing and a very
pleasant season to the first quarter of the Moon, near which expect a little
rain, some storms end the month.

Aprils Observations.
The heavens pour moisture from their plenteous stores,
The earth consumes it with her empty pores:
Both men and beasts rejoice, and every thing
Receives refreshment from the fruitful Spring.
THough the spring be seasonable, yet diseases proceeding from abundance of
blood and choler are rife. Authority somewhat molested by men pretending
holiness at home, yet courteously treated from forreiners. The six and twentieth
day there happens a great Eclipse of the moon, the beginning at thirty four
minutes past six in the evening, she rises eclipsed: the greatest obscuration
will appear at eight; the end will be somewhat after nine: the whole duration
will be almost three hours: almost nine digits or parts will be darkened. The
effects of this Eclipse will show themselves from the latter end of August, to
the end of the autumnal quarter: and will spend their influence upon youth, the
fruits of the earth, it happening in the East Angle it presageth a rot and
consumption among the vulgar sort of people, because it happens in the watery
triplicity; it signifies much trouble at sea, sea fights, overflowing of the
sea banks, etc. The sign wherein the Eclipse happens being fixed, it signifies
the decay and ruin of ancient buildings and families; and so much the greater
will the effects appear, because Mars is Lord of it. The places subject to its
influence, see in the next month.

The month begins with blustering storms: from the last quarter to the new
Moon, cold, close and windy weather: from thence to the first quarter sudden
storms, soon clearing: the next quarter cloudy, and inclinable to rain, the
month ends with clearing gales.

Mays Observations.
You lively youngsters, who do early wake,
And walke'th fields, your pleasure for to take,
Be moderate in your sport, for that's the means
To hold the longer, naught good in extremes.
I shall hear give you the names of the Kingdoms, Cities and Towns, which
shall principally feel the effects of the Eclipse the last month, viz. such as
are under Scorpio, Taurus, Leo and Aquarius. Countries under Scorpio are the
higher, Norway, Bavaria, Comagena, Capadocia, Idumaea, Mauritanaea, the Kindome
of Fesse, Gethulia, and Catalonia; Cities and towns Algiers, Valentia in Spain,
Trapezant, Urbinum, the South part of Swethland, Westphalia, Hambrough, Breme,
etc. These are the principal Cities and Towns under the four Signs. What other
places are subject to the influence of this and the two following Eclipses,
expect hereafter.

The Month begins with seasonable Weather, about the 14th day cooling Winds,
about the first quarter. Some Clouds dropping Rain by course, yet soon
clearing. Thunder and turbulent Weather ends the Month.

June's Observations.
After fair Weather, storms of Rain appear,
We know 'twere ill, if the air were always clear:
After a Calm, Wrath stirs the minds of men,
Were never so, we should be happy then.
BOth this month, and the last, we are pretty peaceable among our selves, and
many pleasing Missives arrive to our Grandees. From beyond the Seas we have
eminent Intelligence; the Swedes serve under a Rising Prince, as well as the
English; the Protestants Banners are now displaying throughout the Popish
Territories with glorious Success; and about this time a Signal Victory is
obtained by that Worthy of Worthies, the renowned Swedish King. The English
Heroes in Flanders are crowned with the like success against the proud
Spaniard, and great is the blow given to Great Britains Enemies in Catalonia.
Many Sea Fights and Pyracies committed upon the Straights, and the Coasts of
Argier, the Naval Forces of Britain prove successful, and play Rex upon the
Neptune, cutting their passage through the Curled Waves, with undanted
Resolutions, and irresistible Spirits, to the great astonishment, and exceeding
admiration of all Europe.

The Month begins fair and pleasant: About the fourth or fifth day Clouds
threaten Rain: from the new Moon, to the first Quarter, fair and clear: yet by
Coast some Thunder. From the first Quarter to the full Moon, the Air much
distempered: Cooling Winds ends the Month.

July's Observations.
As I went forth to view the azure sky,
I saw Mars draw his Sword, but ask him why
I durst not, yet his looks made forth to me,
He meant to act some direful Tragedy.
Weighty consultations on foot here in England, they are kept closer then
ordinary, the people much more desirous to hear what the result may produce.
Our great ones very jealous of one another actions. We have much intelligence
at home from the consultations of this month, and the month preceding: much
more from beyond the Seas. I wish we have no ill news from Ireland: and I pray
God deliver that Nation from intestine broils, and some epidemical disease,
which I much fear afflicts the Inhabitants of that Nation. We have eminent
intelligence from Sweden, Denmark, Holland, Poland, Bavaria, Tartary, Italy and
the adjacent parts. It appears to me from the language of the superior bodies,
that the most eminent Prince Carolus Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden is
rampant, and a terror to some of his neighbor Nations, without doubt eminent
warlike action has happened, and more suddenly to happen about those parts.
Toward the latter end of the month Mars is in opposition to the place of the
Moon at her Eclipse in April, the effects begin to show themselves to some
purpose.

The month begins with seasonable wether, soon after some thunder, ending with
cold rain, an obscure air till three or four days after the new Moon, after
that fair, about the first quarter high winds and some showers: cooling gales
to the full Moon. The month end with a turbulent air.

Augusts Observations.
What cunning games do politicians play?
They study mischief even whilst they pray;
If of their actings you would know the sense,
Gain is their stake, Religion their pretense.
LEt the Farmer use all diligence to house his corn, for I fear this month
proves unseasonable harvest-wether, by reason of many turbulent storms of
lightning, thunder, and rain. The Farmer complains of his Crops, and that his
Grain is not so good as the Spring Quarter promised, which makes the poor fear
another hard winter, having not yet recovered the poverty and diseases of the
last. I much fear sickness and poverty afflicts the poor Inhabitants of
Ireland, God grant my fears may prove groundless. Our Merchants complain, and
are in fear of their adventures by reason of their turbulency of the Heavens.
The commonalty fear their peace and tranquillity, while the great ones jarre.
For the quadrate Aspect of Jupiter and Mars, and of Mars and the Sun threatens
divisions and heartburnings among great persons, the Lawyers and discontented
Cleargy-men, endeavoring what they can to molest their Superiors. But before
the end of the month, the two superior Planners Saturn and Jupiter do aspect
each other, with a friendly Sextile Aspect; which puts us in hopes of a
reconciliation; and I verily believe that either before this time, or about
this time, there is some accommodation, or at least strong endeavors for it,
between some eminent States of Europe:

Cloudy and wet the first quarter, the next very hot and inclinable to Thunder
and Lightning, so continuing till the latter end of the month, at which time
expect cold rain.

Septembers Observations.
The Planets King divides the day and night,
Like a good Leveller, who does all right,
Our earthly Heroes sings the same song,
They Will do men right, and will not suffer wrong.
ON the sixteenth day of August last, the Planet Mars entered the Sign Gemini,
and continues till the 21. day of March, 1660. and, without controversy, is
Lord and chief Ruler, both of the last and the two succeeding Eclipses, which
according to the rules of Astrology speaks thus much, that those people who are
under the Sign Gemini must expect to be sharers not only in the effects of
the first Eclipse now operating, but also of the two other, of which expect an
account in their proper places. So that besides the towns mentioned in May,
let Flanders, Brabant, the Dukedom of Wittemberg, the West of England and many
places more, which for brevity sake I omit expect to suffer. Gemini being the
ascendant of London, without doubt participates of the direful effects of Mars,
viz. sickness, dearth, and want of trade, afflicting all sorts, especially the
poor, fire and such like, which God preserve her from.

Some great persons act honorably, for which they receive a popular applause
about this time. This month far more seasonable for the country man then the
former.

Probably some showers about the eleventh or twelfth day, or else the whole
month seasonable and good for the harvost man.

Octobers observation.
When men pretending zeal can cheat each other,
Relations not regard, each cheat his Brother;
When pride and covetousness has the command,
You may be sure, destruction is at hand.
ON the twentieth day of this month, their happens another Eclipse of the Moon:
the beginning at forty minutes after one in the morning, the greatest
obscuration about eight minutes after three, the end at thirty five minutes
after four, the whole duration two hours and fifty five minutes: The Digits or
parts eclipsed are seven. The sign wherein this Eclipse happens is Taurus an
earthly and bestial one, as the sign is earthly, it signifies a scarceity of
Corn and Grain, also much sickness and mortallity both to great and small
cattle, and so much the more because Mars is retrogade and almost stationary
upon the Angle succeeding, and Lord of the eighth house, and the Moon in the
eighth. The effects of this Eclipse are much mitigated, because Venus, Lady of
the house wherein the Eclipse happens is well posted with Stars of a
benevolent influence. Let the Hollander expect about this time losses by their
maritine enterprises as well as our Merchants; and let them look to their Dams,
lest they meet with such a deluge as happened to them in the year 1651. the
heavens seem not only to threaten them, but other parts lying near the sea
side.

About the fifth day expect showers: about the ninth day cloudy, after the
15th. day cold rain for many days, 25 day clearing again and some frost. The
month ends with cold wind rain or snow.

November's Observations.
Sol's splendid Beams are hid from us, who can
Think it is in vain, unless some Heathen man:
He who dreads not the effects, is a known Foe
To God and Scripture, the Prophets did so.
THe 4th day of this Month, there happens an eminent Eclipse of the Sun,
near 9 digits or parts darkened: the beginning at 52 min. past one; the
greatest obscuration at 4 min. past 3. the end at 13 min. past 4. the whole
duration 2 hours, and 21 min. This Eclipse happens in the house of Mars, and
the two Infortunes Saturn and Mars are Lords thereof; therefore more violently
will the Effects operate. It is the forerunner of dangerous and mortal
Diseases. It stirs up Wars, Seditions, Tumults, Imprisonments, beheading of
great persons, acute Diseases, violent and untimely deaths. From which, Good
Lord deliver us all. From the beginning of the month to the 11th day, the Wind
dispierseth some moisture: about the 12th day the Winds rise higher, and some
moisture follows, and a troubled Sky: near the last quarter clear and Frost,
which soon turns to drissing Weather.

December's Observations.
This Month the Planets pretty well agree,
With all my heart I wish that so may we:
To end the year, I wish you all good diet,
And Grace to eat it, and to live in quiet.
HAving little of Monthly Observations for this month, I shall go on here
with the Effects of the Solar Eclipse: Saturn being in Scorpio, which is the
Sign wherein the Eclipse happens and Augular: He afflicts men with cold
Diseases, Poverty and misery, scarcity of corn, and such cattle as men feed on,
and afflicts them with Diseases, making them unfit for man's food. Great
Tempests and shipwracks at Sea, Inundations and overflowing of the Sea and
Rivers, the death of ancient people, and many Controversies, and Lawsuits. The
places subject to this and the former Eclipse, I have inserted in May. The time
when they shall happen, I shall not here insist upon, because they will not
begin to operate till 1660. The Month begins serene, temperate, and frosty
mornings: about the 9. day the cold Winds drive moisture: 13. day rain or snow:
more temperate about the full Moon: cloudy snow or rain about the 23. From the
25. to the end of the month serene and wholesome frost.

FINIS.

