The bloody Almanac:

To which ENGLAND is directed, to foreknow what shall come to pass, by that
famous Astrologer, M. JOHN BOOKER.

Being a perfect Abstract of the Prophecies proved out of Scripture, By the
noble NAPIER, Lord of Marchistoun in Scotland.

The guide of Astrologers.

The Joy of England.

The destruction of the World.



LONDON, Printed for Anthony Vincent, and are to be sold in the Old Bailey. 1643.

The bloody Almanac.
I. Concerning the opening of the seven Seals mentioned Revel. 6.
JOHN mentions the opening of the seven seals, Re^. 6. the opening of every
seal must continue the space of seven years, and that because of removing and
giving seven years to every seal, you shall find the effect of every seal to
be performed within the seven years of that seal; and so the harmony to be
perfect betwixt those seals and the just history.

This was opened when Christ was baptized, and began to preach, and open the
sealed doctrine of our salvation, which was in the end of the 29. year of the
age of Christ, and about the beginning of his thirtieth year, as Luke
testifies.

1. Betwixt the year of Christ 29. and 36. then Christ by his doctrine,
miracles, death, and victory over death, so touched and moved the hearts of all
the faithful, that suddenly he with his Disciples got the victory over all the
world.

2. Betwixt the year 36. and 43. within the space of these second seven years
S. Stephen suffered martyrdom for Christ's sake, and James the brother of John
likewise was beheaded.

3. Then in the third seal, betwixt the 43. and 50. year of Christ there was
a famine whereof Agabus prophesied. Acts 11. and Luke in his book of the Acts
makes mention. In this dearth the bushel of wheat was sold for five times the
accustomed price, and the bushel of barley for three, as testifies Su^tonius
and Dion.

4 Then in the fourth seven years, betwixt the years of Christ 50. and 57.
certain heretics arose, as Corinthus, Nicolaus, and Ebion, who held deadly
heresies against the Divinity of Christ; whereupon in the time of these fourth
seven years John wrote the fourth Evangel, and published it, beginning at the
description of Christ's Divinity, expressly against those Heretics.

5 Then in the fifth seven years, even the year of Christ 57. (as the Text
says) there was seen under the Altar the souls of them that were killed for
the Word of God, and for the testimony which they maintained, even so in that
very year arose the tyrant Nero, on whose bloody seat the blood of the Saints
cry up to the heavens to God to revenge their blood.

6 Then in the sixth seven years, as the Text says, there was a great
earthquake, and the Sun was black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon was like
to blood, and even so after the year of Christ 64 a great change and defection
came on all estates of the Roman Empire, for now Nero, raised great
pe^s^^^tions against the true spiritual Professors; to have utterly darkened
and extinguished the light of the Gospel; so that the true Church of God was
forced to lurk in secret, for the revenge whereof, God moved the Kingdoms of
France, Spain, and Isle of Britain to revolt from this Tyrant.

7 Then in the seventh seven years which was betwixt the year of Christ 70. and
77. the text says, at the opening of this seal, there was silence in heaven
about half an hour; even so at that time Gods Church had peace a little while.

II. Concerning the seven Trumpets mentioned Chap. 8. and 9.
I. THe last of the seven Seals, and the first of the seven Trumpets begin both
at once in An. 71. This appears evidently, for even by the Text, Chap. 8. the
seventh sed being opened that very hour the seven Angels received their
Trumpets to blow; for having said in the first Verse, And when he had opened
the first seal, there was silence in heaven about half an hour, he subjoyneth
immediately, Ver. 2. And I saw the seven Angels, etc. receive their seven
trumpets: And farther, after he had showed verse 5. how Christ powered out the
fiery co^les of his wrath in revenge of the blood of his Saints, which
doubtless was upon Jerusalem which shed it, incontinent he subjoyneth verse 6.
and 7. that then the seven Angels prepared themselves to blow, and the first
blew his Trumpet, etc. so therefore justly at this destruction of Jerusalem in
Anno Christi 71. make we both the last Seal and the first Trumpet to begin.
Every Trumpet contains the space of 245. years which is the just space of 5.
Jubilees, and that this 71. year of Christ, and consequently the first year
of every the other Trumpet was Jubilee, you may consider by the discourse of
Iosep^^us Scal^g^rd^ emend^^t. temporum. I do conceive them to signify the
seven Ages that were then to come to the worlds end; and I am the more
confirmed to believe they do so; for that I find in Histories that great
mutations of Empires followed the end of these 245. years one after another,
as for example: In the year of Christ 71. Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus and
Vespasian: this was the year that Jesus Christ procured the revenge of his
blood and the blood of his Saint ^po^ the ^ynagogue of the Jews.

II. 245. years after, which was in the year 316. Constantine the Emperor of
Rome transported the Imperial Seat from Rome to Constantinople, and in Rome
Pope Silvester began the Papistieall Kingdom, and Italy was left as a prey to
the Goths and Vandals, who destroyed Rome and subdued all Italy.

III. 245 years after, that is, in Anno 561. or thereabouts, Totita King of
Goths b^^ned Rome and usurped the Dominion thereof.

IIII. 245. years after, that is in Anno 806, Charlemaigne received the new
^^pire of Germans and Romans.

V. 45. years after, that is An. 1051 Zedok began the Dominion of the Turks.

VI. 245. years after, that is in the year 1246. Otoman, began the first
Empire of (...) ^^oure Nations Mah^metans.

VII. Lastly, 245. years after, that is in the year 1541. arose our true
profession against the Kingdom of Antichrist, so then for conclusion you see
that every Trumpet or Vial endures 245. years; And this seventh Trumpet
which we are now under, is not to end till the year of Christ 1786. But I do
not think that the World shall continue so long, because it is said, Matthew.
24.22. that for the Elects sake the time shall be shortened. It appears to me
that the day of Judgment shall be betwixt the year of Christ 1688. and 1700.

Concerning the seven Angels mentioned Rev. 14.
IN the 14. of the Revelation there is mention made of seven Angels, Rev. 14.
and every one of the first three thundering Angels (as I may tell them)
contain a Jubilee, and then the four last all at once compleateth the day of
Judgment, by which it appears to me that the day of Judgment shall fall
about that time. Now to make it appear that every one of the first three
thundering Angels contain a Jubilee, after the custom of the Levites and
Prophets, who divide great dates by Jubiles, and small dates by weeks or years,
we judge apparently this last Age to be divided by Iubiles and every thunder or
Angel of these three that are said in the Text Chapter 14. v. 6 8 9. to pretend
Gods great Harvest to contain a Jubilee, which is 49. years, and that the 4.
last thundering Angels all at once compleateth the day of Judgment: In the 14
chapter, v. 14 16. it is said that the fourth thundering Angel which is Christ
himself, enters actually into this great harvest, to gather up his Elect at
the warning of the fifth Angel, even Gods holy spirit ver. 15. like as
contrarily the sixth thundering Angel executor of Gods fierce wrath, mentioned
v. 17.19. is admonished and warned by the seventh Angel commander thereof to
cut down, and tread out the Vines of the earth into the wine press of Gods
wrath, and so by these 4. last Angels or Thunders, to wit, by Christ himself
and by his whole ministr^ng Angels under the figure of these last Angels, all
the whole great day of Gods harvest and l^tter Judgment is accomplished.

1. The f^^st or the three first Angels Iubile begin. The last of the 7. Seals
and the first of the seven Trumpets began both at once in the year of Christ
71. so in like manner the last of the seven Trumpets, and the first of the
seven thunder begin both at once, in the year of Christ, 1541. In c. 11. v. 5.
it is said, that at the blast of the 7. Trumpet, the Kingdom of the World
becomes Christ's Kingdom, that is, then the Kingdom of Antichrist and all
other profane Kingdoms shall fall, and Christ's Kingdom shall be spread and
enlarged overall; and this can no other way come to pass, then by the
preaching of the Evangel; which was of new opened and preached at the coming of
the first Angel, whom the text says to have an everlasting Gospel to preach
unto them that dwell upon the earth, which Angel, as I said before, is manifest
to be the first of the seven thunders: therefore it follows consequently that
the new restoring of the Evangel, the seventh Trumpet and the first Thunder, or
thundering Angel come all at once in An. 1541. about which year God stirs up
openly his first Ministers and servants, Luther, Calvin, Melancthon and others,
v. 6, 7. to preach out during all this Jubilee, the perfect verity of the Gospel
publicly, which before was hid and obscured under the Antichristian reign; so
that the true Church lurketh no more, but Gods truth to all the world is made
apparent by these Ministers teaching them according to the Text, to fear God
only, and leaving all other superstitious worshipping to give glory only unto
him.

2. The first of these 3. Iubiles if you reck^n, you shall easily find that it
ended in Ann. Christi 1590. And then came the second of the seven thundering
Angels, declaring even presently the horrible fall and decay to become of that
figurative Babylon, and great Antichristian City, about which time, to wit, the
end of the first Iubile, and beginning of the second, God has showed
mavelous indices that the Empire of Rome and Papisticall Kingdom shall
sho^^ly fall* the Antichristian and Spanish Fleet is destroyed, the late King
of Fra^^e Duke of Guiz^ and his Brother, Papists and Committers of the Parisian
Massacre, all murdered ^y other, a Protestant now made King of France; this
Iubile ends in the year, 1639.

3. After that comes the third Iubile, or the third thundering and threatening
Messenger openly and loudly threatening, that if any be now that do worship o^
reverence that Antichristian Empire, or that receive the old superstitious
marks thereof on their foreheads or on their hands, the same shall drink of
Gods wrath; so that in this third Jubilee the Ministers and Messengers of God,
shall (God-willing) have only the latter dregs of that Romish feat to admonish
and threaten by open intimation, that if any be in whose hearts the reverence
of that ruined Empire, or if any now be marked with Chrisme or Cross on hand
or head, he shall be tormented eternally in the fire of Hell.

4, 5, 6, 7. Then add to 1639. 49. years and the day of Judgment appears to
fall about 1688. plainly proved by Scripture.

IIII. Concerning the Symboll of the Sabbath.
FIrst, as touching the Symboll of the Sabbath, it is thought by the most
learned, that the six days of labor weekly observed, does mean and bear the
Symboll of 6000. years, that mankind shall endure the travells and cares of
this world, and that is confirmed by Peter, who speaking of the day of
Judgment, notes that a thousand years shall be as one day in Gods sight, and
a day as a thousand years* and so consequently the six days of work to
represent six thousand years, after the which six thousand years, of worldly
cares and travells, then shall come our eternal Sabbath and rest in the glory
of Heaven, signified by the seventh days rest, for that truly there is no
institution appointed by God to Moses, which besides the civil commodity had
not also a spiritual figure, and sure it is that no figure agrees more
consonant with these six days of work, and seventh day of rest then the
present miseries of this world, and eternal Sabbath hereafter.

V. Concerning the Prophecy of Elias.
SEcondly, agreeable to the former, there is a sentence of the house of Elias,
reserved in all ages bearing these words, the world shall stand six thousand
years, and then it shall be consumed with fire, two thousand years void or
without Law, two thousand years under the Law, and two thousand ye^^s shall be
the days of the Messiah, and for our offenses which shall be many and great,
shall these years lack which shall lack, thus far says Elias: Now the term
of these 6000. years, does expire about the 2000. year of Christ, which term
both by the said saying of Elias, and by Christ's own saying in Matthew
appears to be shortened.

VI. Concerning the Prophecy of Daniel.
But by Daniel we shall approach nearer that term, for in his 12. Chapter
entreating both of the first resurrection, which is the resurrection from the
Antichristian errors; and of the second resurrection, which is the general
resurrection from the dead, such an Angel as afterward appears to John,
Rev. 10. teaching him concerning the latter day, does here appear to Daniel,
swearing solemnly a term of Prophetical days doubled by the Prophet, of which
the greatest term is expressed to be 1335. Prophetical days, which ^re so
many years, whose beginnings are determined in these words, and from the time
that the daily sacrifice shall cease, and the abomination put to deso^^tion, or
made desolate, shall be 1290. days, blessed is he that waits and abides to
the 1335. day: as if he should say, from that time that both the Jewi^h daily
sacrifice shall cease and the abominable rites of the Gentiles be abolished, to
the completing of the great resurrection from the Antichristian errors, and
utter day of his Kingdom shall be 1290. years, and then blessed shall he be that
abides and remains constant in the small time, that shall be betwixt that and
the latter day, which shall fall in the 1335. year from the taking away of the
said Jewish Ceremonies, and Gentiles superstitions, but so it is that these
were neither actually taken away by Christ's Passion, neither in the destruction
of Jerusalem, nor otherwise, till miraculously in the days of Julian the
Apostate, Anno Christi 365. This Apostate having in despite of Christ ordained
the Jews to build up and repair their Temple of Jerusalem on the one part, and
on the other part having sent his Legates to offer sacrifice in the chief
Ethnic Temple of the Gentiles in Delphos, and to consult with that oracl^ of
Apollo there, GOD sent his thunder from above and earthquake from beneath, and
thereby overwhelmed both those chief Temples about one tune so utterly, that to
this day all the Jewish d^ily sacrifice of the one, and the abominable Ethnic
superstitions of the other have ceased, and p^t to utter confusion and
desolation: but if after the opinion of some learned men, this Text does mean
in the Original Hebrew, not the abomination, to be put in desolation, but
contrarily a desolating, and wasting abomination, to be set up, together also
with the taking away the former, and foresaid daily sacrifice, in this case
appearing by the same date is not the less established; for who was a more
horrible and wasting abomination then was the aforesaid Julian that blood
thirsty Apostate, together with his detestable idolatrous magical decrees,
which pu^likely he acted and set up, to bring Christianisme to utter
desolation, so that howsoever this abomination be expounded, either passively
to be made desolate, as the Gentiles chief abominable and idolatrous Oracle of
Apollo at that time was made desolate; or actively, that the abomination should
make a wasting or desolation, and that that wasting abomination should be then
erected, as the abominable tyrant and Apostate Julian was promoted Emperor,
and his cla^^ decrees of persecution at that time set out, even always in that
very same year, 365. all the foresaid accidents occurred: for in that one year,
both first the foundations of the J^shish Temple of daily sacrifice, as
secondly (in the passive sense) the said Temple of the Ethnicks abominations in
Delphos were by thunder and earthquake both destroyed, as thirdly in the active
sense that ^b^minable Julian and his Decrees, for desolating and devouring Gods
serv^nt were then set up; Therefore from this year of Christ, 365. we are
commanded to reckon 1335. years, which falls in Anno 1700. And then says
Daniel, V. 6. shall be tree end of all wonders, even the wondrous and great day
of the Lord, but yet as this prop^esie does abridge the aforesaid prophecy of
Elias,

VII. Concerning Christ's own saying.
ANd Christ's foresaid saying in Matthew that came after this Prophecy, does
apparently abridge somewhat of this time, therefore as men said before* every
thundering Angel of three containec 49. years, and then comes that groat day of
the Lord; and we proved that the first thundering Angel began in Anno 1641. to
which add thrice 49. years, which is 147. years, and so by that account the
latter day will fall in Anno 1687. wherefore appe^ringly betwixt this 1688.
according to the Revelation, and the 1700. year according to Daniel, the said
latter day should fall, and for further confirmation thereof, there is a number
put in the end of the 14. Chapter of the Revelation, which appears to be a
date of the latter day, for that Chapter altogether speaks of the Lords great
harvest and latter judgment, there, says John, the blood came out of the
wine press unto the horse bridles, by the space of 1600 stades or cours^s, as
if app^aringly he would mean metaphorically, as wine may be thought to flow
from the Press, or the blood of slain men in a field to as^en^ to the horse
bridles; so eternally shall the torment of the wicked ascend, after 1600. years
be accomplished; for their stades agree well to mean years, seeing a stade is
that Race or course, that one is thought to run with one breath, before he
begin to renew his breath again, as one year is that race or course, that the
Sun makes in a circuit, before he begin to renew his circuit again, now
counting therefore 1600. years, from the time that this was written, which was
about the 97. year of Christ, as Eusebius in his Chronicke says, or in the
end of the reign of Domitian, as Fremeus says, which was in the year 199.
the end of the account shall fall about the year of Christ 1697. or the year
1699. which is betwizt the said term 1688. and 1700. and so the difference of
these dates are but small, and if the time of Histories were surely written,
and observed, it may be thought that the di^^erence would be either less, or
utterly nothing at all.

FINIS.

