The Bloody ALMANAC; OR, Monthly Observations and Predictions, for the Year
of our Lord, 1654.

FORETELLING

I The great and wonderful Mutation of Times, and Change of Government, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland. II The proclaiming of open Wars by the
Christian Kings and Princes, and the setting up of their Royal Standards. III
Their Proceedings touching the King of Scots, and the lamentable and
unparalled Engagement that will happen between the two mighty Fleets of
England and Europe. IV. The event and success of this great and memorable Sea
fight; and the dying of the curled Waves with the blood of Princes and Nobles,
etc. V The advance of the King of Scots, and diverse English Lords with another
gallant Fleet; and the total vanquishing and dispersing their great Armado. VI
The calling to an account the Officers of the Nation; and the beheading of
diverse great Ones, and Committee Men. VII The taking off all Oppressions and
Burdens from the people, and the restoring of them to their just Laws,
Liberties, and Freedoms. VIII The taking away and extirpating of the Power,
Rule, and Government of the Tyrannical Norman Sword. IX The sad and woeful
condition that women with child will be exposed unto, if not prevented, by the
ensuing Potions here administered.


Published for the general good of the Commonwealth of England, by a cordial
Lover of his Native-Countrey's Rights and Liberties; and freely exposed to the
view of all Cities, Towns, and Corporations,

Imprinted at London for G. HORTON, 1654.

The Bloody Almanac, etc. Or Monthly Observations and Predictions for the
Year of our Lord, 1654.
Observations on January.
DEep will the consultations be this month throughout Europe, and that about
such matters as belong not to the Vulgar to know; for he that lives to the
middle of the Month shall see all the Princes of Europe in a maze, and the
Commonalty sit by the fire, and complain to one another of their Oppression.
But woe be unto the Instruments thereof --. For, I no assistance from the
sacred Hill
Can crave; nor can I dip my feathered quill
In Helicon; the water's muddy grown,
And I must mourn 'cause Jove and Saturn frown:
Well* be content, and if thou have no will
To sing, look on the Times, and weep thy fill.


Expect great Wind and Rain the 7 day. New moon 48 min. past 3 in the afternoon
the 8 day. Full moon the 22 day at 4 in the afternoon. Term begins 23 day.

Observations on Feb.
THis month begins pitifully with misty, foggy, stinking, noisome, cloudy,
frosty weather, and turbulent actions are probably like to ensue such
troublesome Air, which may make but bad music in the ears of some great Ones,
who will justly be called to an account for their unjust stewardship, in
betraying their Trust, defrauding the Poor, rejecting the fatherless, and
despising the widow: O wicked Satyrs of the Times! that make Religion a cloak
for all Villainy! look to it, the Time is coming, that one day you must pay for
all; It Is reason the Nation should have an account given them of their moneys.
And, indeed, the Law being once more called into question, there will a people
rise, and say, They know no reason why they should be governed by the Norman
Laws, now the Norman Race is taken away by the same Instrument that brought it
in, viz.

The SWORD.

Certainly, many Overtures will be made about rectifying the Law, Governors,
and Government, toward the end of this month, when the Wind descends from the
highest Firmament, and the Rain issues forth like showers of blood. -- New moon
the 7 day, half an hour past 6 in the morn. The 12 day Term ends. Full moon 40
min. past 6 in the morning.

Observations on March.
A Mad world my masters; the month begins with a flattering countenance, and
that is no wonder, it is of late found to be the best Trade in this Nation; the
more is England's sorrow. Yet they which formerly used to command the people,
will by the people now be commanded; and reason good; 'twas never a good world
since the servant was above the Master. Many great Heads begin to totter; and
that upon crimes no less then capital; although they conceived the World would
have always stood in statu quo. If the soldier be impetuous, I cannot help it;
they will do what they lift for all me. Ill times are coming, and it is like to be
a sad year for children; beware their lives. The Law is much controverted; any
many Lawyers suffer; so must Committee men; A fair riddance. -- The 8 day new
moon half an hour past 6 at night.

Observations on April.
THis month begins very serenely with the common people, but it will scarce
end so with the great Ones. Great winds about the 9 day, and high actions
toward the 11. If you would hinder the growing of Crabs, the best way is to
pluck up the Tree by the Roots. Such as have stood stoutly for the liberty of
this Nation in oppressing Times, when Will was a Law, are now somewhat
esteemed; better once then never. Women with child must look for hard labors;
if not prevented, by abstaining from Strong Water, Wine, Ale, and such hot
Liquids. Thunder and Lightning, Rain and Hail ends the month; -- New moon the 7
day 7 min. before 4 in the morn. Full moon the 21 day at 2 in the afternoon.

Observations on May.
THis month begins with thundering actions, and lamentable times, which
causes great sadness, and little mirth. It Is never good to be too
stiff-necked; therefore look about ye Clergymen, your Cake is dough. A strange
Generation appears; and many an honest man will probably be brought to the
Touchstone: Alas! is it not great pity that cheating and cozening should be
turned the two main pillars of the Nation: 'Twas not so in the days of our
forefathers, and I hope the wisdom of the State will so decree it, that it
shall not be permitted in these our Times. An eminent Officer is like to be
called in question; Lawyers mourn, Heirs weep for their lost inheritance;
Priests mutter and whine; the wind blows; and so the month ends. -- New moon
the 6 day, half an hour past 11 at noon. Full moon the 21 day at 6 in the
morning.

Observations on June.
WHen men's actions are not justifiable by the Rule of Truth, and Law of Reason,
the last shift is to flater with the people; and when the Lions skin will not
serve the turn, to take the Foxes: But when God has decreed Justice shall be
done, all the shifts of man will not avail.

Sol smiles on Saturn, but on Jove does frown,
Virtue's a Beggar, Vice has got the Crown;
And how do you think she got it? It Is no matter
If I tell truth; at first she learnt to flatter,
Called greatness, goodness; upon that account
She took her rise, rides Lady Paramount.
Thunder and Rain ends the month. New moon the 4 day 3 quart. past 7 at night.
Full moon the 19 day half an hour past 8 at night.

Observations on July.
THe Synod of the Sun and Mars is near the little dog star, I am afraid he will
bite, and that Holland will know to their sorrow; for, by reason of their
Rebellion against the King of Spain, the Europian Princes deserts their cause,
and leaves them to the mercy of their conquering enemy. Men give gallant words
at the beginning of this month, and promise the Commonalty much good; I wish we
may find it, it has been too long lost.

The Stars are friends, (a joyful sight to see)
And love each other, pray why do not we?
This is the Reason, it cannot be denied,
They mind Gods heavenly Will, we wealth and pride.
But this cannot last long, would you know why?
All things must change, and so must low and high.
New moon the 3 day at 4 in the afternoon. Full moon at a quarter past 10 in
the morning.

Observations on August.
HOnest Actions are toward, is not that a wonder? And our long-lost Liberties
begin to appear in great splendour. Let us therefore weigh diligently the
beginning of things, and suspend judgment till we see the end. Yet the Princes
of Europe are all in amaze, and all the World in a wonder what God determines
to do. Strange and supernatural sights will be seen in the Air, and about the
middle of the month tempestuous weather. -- New moon the 2 day about 11 at
night. Full moon the 17 day at night, visibly eclipsed, according to the ensuing
figure,

Observations on September.
GReat and sad Disasters are like to befall many eminent Officers, and the
influence of the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars may in all probability do
England the greatest good, that ever was done to it since William the Bastard
conquered it, I mean, restore it to its desired Liberty, and take off all
Burdens, Oppressions, and Taxes, from the wearied shoulders of the people. To
which, let all true English men say, Amen, Amen.

Full moon the 16 day, about 11 in the morning. New moon the 28 day a quarter
past 11 at noon.

Observations on October.
THe Kings of France, Denmark, and Spain, agree unanimously in oppressing the
people; but a dismal time is coming; and great scuffling will there be to
maintain Monarchy; but the Communalty will not be content with bread and water,
so long as they know where to get rost-meat at a cheaper rate. A gallant Air
attends the Farmer this month, and pleasant weather to sow his corn. Full moon
the 15 day a quarter, past 9 at night. New moon about 4 in the morning.

Observations on November.
GReat preparations for war throughout all Christendom, and extraordinary
promises are made to Charles the second; 17 Kings, Princes, and Dukes, set up
their Banners; but upon the total dissolution of the rebellious Dutch they
appear no more visible. The Magistrates of Europe will look with ruful faces;
Repentance sometimes comes too late, O strange fate! Accomptants and Committees
must be called to account what they have done with the Treasure of the Nation.
It would melt a heart of stone to see how pitifully they look through a prison
grate, who have formerly had the world at will, and were such Sots to think
that this life would last always, when day and night teaches them all things
are subject to change. There will ^ppear this year a great Eclipse of the Sun,
but it will happen on the 7. day of Feb. according to the ensuing Type.

East

North

West

Sowth



Observations on December.
BEware your Heads, ye Royal Cedars, the Scorpions heart is venomous; sundry
eminent Gentlemen are brought to the bar of justice, and soon after made
shorter by the Head. A bloody Tragidy. -- About the beginning of this month
Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, seems to be called in question, and
that great Liberty which so many has sought after in their stout contending for
the privileges of Magna Charta, is found out to be nothing else then what this
poor pitiful Nation, when it was unluckily vanquished by a Bastard, by fair
terms obtained from the hands of a Conqueror. This will scarce suit with
English men's brains at this time: It is a real Truth indeed, we have not so
much liberty, or to speak more properly, we are not in greater bondage then
Magna Charta tied us too. The cause of this, says Nich: Culpepper, I conceive
to be in our former Parliamenti, who when They should have been enlarging the
liberty of their subject, spent their time in consultation how far the bounds
of a Forest must go, who must keep a Park, and who must not; who must keep
Hounds, Greyhounds, and Mastiff dogs, and who must not; what price must be paid
for shouting of Pigeons, Partridges, and Phesants, and thus they sweeped the
Liberty of the Nation up and down, as the maid swept the surreverence about the
house, till at last she lost it: But the year seems to end in a better posture,
pretty pleasing to the Commonalty, and not without great hopes of our desired
Liberty.

The Hollander grows as imperious as potent, and entertaineth sundry
Engagements from Us; but being beaten to his own doors, at last invites to
their assistance the Dane, Swedes, and French; with whom comes aboard the K. of
Scots, his brother James, the Lord Digby, Maj. Genesis Massey, the Lord Craven,
Sir Lewis Dives, and diverse other English Gentlemen; who, after a mighty and
unparalled Engagement, will become wholly subdued and vanquished, and thus,
says the Lord Ogleby, will this Royal Navy be brought to

An End.

