A NEW PROGNOSTICATION FOR THE YEAR OF OUR BLESSED LORD 1681. Being the first
after Leap-year.

Containing the moveable Feasts: the Eclipses: the four Quarters of the year:
the Changes of the Moon, with the disposition of the weather. The dismal days.
And the whole known Fairs of Scotland. With other observations.

Serving most fitly for the most part of the Kingdom of Scotland, but more
especially for our City of GLASGOW, where the Pole is elevated 55. degrees. 55. min.

At Aberdene, by an expert Mathematician.

GLASGOW, By Rovers Sanders, Printer: to the City and University, and are to be
sold in his shop 1681.

A Computation of time, even to this Year 1681.
Since The Creation of the World -- 5630 The general Deludge -- 3974 Fergus the
first King of Scotland -- 2010 The building of Solomon's Temple -- 2698 Rome was
built by Romulus -- 2433 The Scots entered Albion -- 2099 The building of
Edinburgh Castle -- 2011 The last destruction of Jerusalem by Vespasian 1612
The Christian Faith was received in Scotland 1471 The building of the high
Church of Glasgow 483 The first invention of Guns -- 301 The inventio^ of
Printing in Europe, before in China 241 The College of Glasgow was built --
226 The appearing of the new star in Cassiopeia 108 The Gunpowder Treason,
November 5. 76 The birth of King CHARLES the second 51 The Duke Hamiltons
engagement -- 33 The great fire in Glasgow -- 29 The last great Plague in
London -- 15 The great fire in London -- 14 The fall of an arch of the bridge
of Glasgow, 10 The last great fire in Glasgow Nov. 2. 1677. 3


Common Notes and moveable Feasts this year 1681.
PRime, or Golden Number -- 10. Dominical Letter -- B The Epact -- 20.
Fastens-even, which in England is called Shrove-tuesd. -- 15. Febr. Ash
Wednsday on the Morn. Pasch, or Easter -- 3. April Whitsunday -- 22. May.
Between Candlemas and Fastens-even, are 12. days inclusive.

Four Eclipses this year Two of the Sun, and two of the Moon.
THe first of the Moon, Feb. 22. day, in 15. degrees of Pisces about 11. hours
before noon, This Eclipse will be visible to our Antipodes. Second of the Sun,
March 10. day, at 1. in the Morning. Third of the Moon, 19. of August, about 3.
in the Morning. in 6. degrees of the Caelestial sign Pisces this will be a
visible and Total Eclipse unto us. And therefore very worthy the pains of those
Industrous Astronomers: Among us to observe. According to the Doctrine of
Alphousus, touching the Colors of Eclipses, the Moon, while she labors under
this defect, will appear of a blackish Color, mixed with palness.

The Fourth and last Eclipse of the Sun, the 12. of September, about 3. in the
morning in 20. degrees of Virgo; It will be inconspicuous as to us, and but a
small Eclipse of it self; where most Visible*

A full Description of the four Quarters of the year 1681.
THe Spring begins by the Suns entry in Aries 9. March. at 11. hours 7. min.
in the evening.

Summer begins by the Suns entry in Cancer 10. June, 11. hours 22. minutes at
night.

Harvest by his entry in Libra. 12. September, 2. hours 50 Minutes in the after
noon.

Winter by his entering Capricorn 11. December, about 3. in the morning.

The changes of the Moon, with the disposition of the Weather, for this year
1681.
Xxxj. January begins on Saturday.
Sun rises 24. min. after 8. sets 36. min. after 3.

Second quarter Saturday, the 1. day, 4. hours, 8. m. afternoon.

New moon Sunday, 9. day, 7. hours 42. minutes afternoon.

First quarter Monday, 17. day 5. hours, 15. min. in the morning.

Full moon Sunday, 23. day 9. hours 56. mints afternoon.

Second quarter on Monday, 31. day, 4. hours 17. mi. afternoon.

This Year begins with pleasant frosty weather the ^^^st 8. days, thence to
the 12. some winds, with small snow thence to the 20. good weather for the
season: from the 20. to 22.23.24. frost: thence to the 26. sleety, and to the
end of the month frost. Some what temperat.

This month set all kind of fruit trees, and quicksets. In the new of the Moon
(the wind and weather observed) you may set pease and beans, parsnips, and
oats, if the weather proof mild, and the Moon decreasing.

If thou be sick, and help would have,
The counsel of the Learned crave.
The first Fair in the year is S. Naughlans, at the Kirk of Bethelny, in Gerry,
upon the 7. day. S. Mungo in Glasgow the 13. day a fair: and at Dunkel and
Kilwinning the 2^. day.

Xxvjjj. February begins on Tuesday.
Sun rises 25. min. after 7. sets 35. min. after 4.

Tuesday New moon, 8. day, 11. hours, 58. m. before noon* Tuesday, first
quarter, 15. day, 27. minutes after noon. Tuesday Full Moon, 22. day, 10. hours,
before noon.
The 1.2.3.4, days rains, with some cold, from thence to the 10. very good
weather for all Beasts, from the 10. to the 18. small frost: the 19.20. and 21.
temperate: the 22.23. hard winds: the rest of the month more temperate.

This month set roses, with all other kind of plants, cut quicksets, sow pease
and onions; as in the month before, the weather considered, you may now garden
for sallet herbs, and such like.

Be choice of food in any wise,
To keep thee warm also precise:
The first day at Abernethy and Forres in Murrayland, called S. Brides day. On
Candlemass day in Bamff, Dunkel, Dingwal, Douglas, the 2. day. Valentins day in
Linlithgow the 14. day, and Forfar the 15. holding eight days. Ashwednesday
fair begins on Fasten-even, at Lanerk the same day, Vally-field the 24. day.

Xxxj. March begins on Tuesday.
Sun rises 18. min. after 6. sets 42. min. after. 5.

Wednesday Second quarter, 2. day, 8. hours. 35. m. morning Thursday New moon
10. day, 33. m. before 1. in the morning. Wednesday First quarter, 16. day, 6.
hours, 35. min. afternoon. Thursday Full moon, 24. day, 15. m. after 1. in the
morning.
This month begins with fair seasonable weather to the 6. thence to the 12.
somewhat cold, and to the 16. cloudy raw frost: and to the 19. some mist,
thence to the 24. windy weather, the rest of the month pleasant

This month in the new of the Moon, graft, set quicksets and vines, cut your
hedges and vines already growing: as also you may sow onions, beans and oats,
and all manner of garden seed.

Now bleed and bathe, if thou desire,
And purge also, if need require.
S. Monence in Aberdene; Dumfermling, Abercherder and S. Marnoch Kirk the first
day, at Pettenween the 3. S. Duthos in Taken of Ross the 9. in Auchertuel and
Innerness the 10. S. Causnan the 12. day: S. Patrick in Dumbartan, and at the
Kirk of Strageeth and at Kirkadie a fair of horse, neat and sheep, etc. the 16.
day; in S. Johnston the 19. Cuthbert in Langton of the Mers the 20. day:
Lady Day in Westweems, Bamff, Authtermuchti the 25. Midlentron fair at
Banchrie, on thursday before Midlentron sunday; Palmsunday at the Kirk of
Forrig, and in S. Johnston; and Skierthursday fair is upon thursday before
Good Friday at Cowper of Angus, othere wise Monks Cowper a fair in Forres,
called S. Marks fair, the first tuesday after Easter yearly.

Xxx. April begins on Friday.
Sun rises 4. min. after 5. sets 58. min. after 6.

Friday, second quarter, 1. day, 3. h. 5. min. in the morning. Friday, New moon,
8 day, 10. hours, 57. min. forenoon. Friday, First quater, 15. day, 1. hours
14. m. in the morning Friday Full Moon, 22. day, 4. hours, 19. m. afternoon.
Saturday, Second quarter, 30. day, 7. hours, 24. m. afternoon.
This month begins with threatening rain, from the 6. to 12. pleasant weather:
from thence to the 18. hard winds: thence to the 22. fair: from the 23. toward
the close of the month calm with some small rains.

In this month pole your hops, sow barley and artichoaks, bark trees for
Tanners, sow hemp and flax, set citrons, melons, and cucumbers, and furnish and
replenish your gardens with Summer herbs.

Now wholesome baths thou may frequent,
Let blood also, and not repent:
S. Oles fair at the Kirk of Cruden the first tuesday; at Leslie on tuesday
before Easter; in Corstorphine the first tuesday after Easter a fair. S. Donald
fair at the Kirk of Auchterless the 17. in Old Aberdene on Skirethursday. S.
Mark Evangelist in Dysert the 23. Beltan day the first the 26. a fair at
Rugland the 28. continuing four days: at Leven the 29. day, and in Kilrent the
30. day, at Borrowstounness the first Tuesday after Pasch,

Whiles in March, and whiles in April.

Skirethursday before Pasch in Old Aberdene, Glasgow, Dumbartan, Cowper of
Angus, Elgin of Murray. Pasch-munday in Cowper of Fife, Lanerk and Irwing,
Low-sunday after Pasch in Killimure, and all the week after at the Senzie of S.
Andrews.

Xxxj. May begins on Sunday.
Sun rises 6. min. after 4. sets 54. min. after 7.

Saturday New Moon, 7. day. 7. hours 1. minut afternoon. Saturday, First
quarter, 14. day, 9. h. 34. mi. in the morning Sunday, Full moon, 22. day. 7.
hours, 48. m. in the morning. Monday Second quarter, 30. day, 8. hours, 31. m.
in the morning.
Seasonable warm weather to the 8. day, to the 14. some Thunder, winds, and
rain, with dark weather, 15. to the 20. pleasant and warm, from thence to the
end of the month little rains with some winds.

In the beginning of this month you may sow the seed of summer herbs, which
could not endure the cold of the fore-passed months. You may sow your hemp and
flax, weed your hopgardens, and take away superfluous branches, and moss your
gardens.

Rise early now this month of May,
And walk the fields that be so gay:
The first day, called S. Philip a fair in the Grange within the Sheriffdom of
Linlithgow. Also a fair at New Church of Kilpatrick free of custom for seven
years. Holy Cross day the second Beltan in Monross, Kinrocher: Rude fair in
Ellen, and in Peebles the 3. at Ranfrew of horse, neat, sheep, custom free for
3. years a fair of horse neat and sheep and other merchand ware at the Clachen
in nether Lorn the 2. wensday in may the ninteth day: at Carlouk the tenteh at
Bamff, and at Kirkadie a fair of neat and sheep, etc. the 16. day; in Leslie on
thursday before Whitsunday: Sterling fair ten days before Whitsunday: in
Stonehive upon tuesday before Whitsunday, with a weekly market every thursday.

Whiles in May, and whiles in June

Whitsunmunday in Glasgow, Dumbartan, Lanerk and Jedburgh. Whitsuntuesday,
called Pardonday, in the Chanrie of Ross, Peterhead, and at the Kirk of Ninians
above Kirkadie, and Barrowstownness Trinity monday in Edinburgh and Brichin
eight days; in S. Andrews one day, in Burntiland one day. A fair in the Burgh
of Linlithgow the first thursday after Whitsunday. Trinity tuesday in Rugland
lasting two days Trinity thursday in Falkland.

Xxx. June begins on Wedensday.
Sun. rises 40. min. before 4. sets 20. min. after 8.

Monday, New Moon, 6. day, 3. m. before 1. in the morning. Sunday First
quarter, 12. day, 8. hours, 43. min. afternoon. Monday Full moon, 20. day, 10.
hours, 38. minutes afternoon. Tuesday Second quarter, 28. day, 6. hours 14.
minutes afternoon.
June begins pleasant and dry to the 12. day: thence the to 16. some gentle
winds, thence to the 19. hot weather: thence the 22.25. Inclining to thunder
and all the rest of the month fair and pleasant summer weather, with some
small Winds.

In this month at the full of Moon; gather herbs to keep dry for the whole
year. Weed your corn fields and gardens, set rosemary and gilly-flowers: sow
lettice, shear sheep, the Moon increasing.

Drink new or sweet, taste not at all,
For thereby grows no danger small:
A fair in Kinross the first tuesday of June. Bernard fair the second tuesday:
in Stramiglio, Aberdour and Ennerkeithing the 6. A weekly market in Forfar,
beginning the 8. of June, of neat, sheep, horse, etc. continuing till the first
of October. A fair in Forgondeny the 10. S. Barnabie in Lawder and Dysert,
Douglas, S. Laurence in Grinock the 11. day. S. Margaret in Abernethy: Ceres in
Fife the 13. Midsummer on S. John's day in S. Johnston five days, in Air four
days; in Wigton, Bamff, and Athelston the 14. Jn Scone 3. days with an weeklie
market and in Auchtertueil and Clackmanan and Bocklyvie in the Parish of Kippen
the 15. Saint Mare garet in Dumfermling, and at Moffat the 18. day; in which
place there is a weekly market every friday. Earlston the 19. Methil the 22.
day. Midsummer day in Hawick in the South, hard by the river of Teviot, for
horse, sheep, oxen, and neat, etc. on the 24. day, together with a weekly
market day always upon the thursday. Also in Forres, Townyetam on the border
the 24. day, of horse, neat and sheep, etc, the 24. with a weekly market. In
Alathy in Angus, called S. Emagola the 25. S. Peter's day at Forfar the 26.
holding four days. As also in Falkland, Burntiland, Bamff, and Kelso the 26.
Gallashiels the 27. In Peebles the 29. S. Seriff fair the last tuesday of this
month. S. John Baptist day a fair in Frazerburgh the 24. day. There is also a
fair called S. Margarets fair on the third tuesday of this month upon the
Mains of Keith-ball, sometime called Cackiben, continuing the whole week, and
to be custom free for two years.

Xxxj. July begins on Friday.
Sun rises 1. min. after 4. sets 59. min. after 7.

Tuesday New moon, 5. day, 9. hours 31. m. in the morning. Tuesday first
quarter, 12. day, 10. hours 30. mi. in the morning. Wednesday Full moon, 20.
day 1. hour, 8. min. afternoon. Thursday Second quarter, 28. day, 2. h. 15. m
in the morning
From the first to the 6. a rainy moist weather, from thence to the 22. fair
weather with some wind, to the end of the month fair summer weather.

In this month play your haying, follow your land for wheat pull up hemp that
is ripe, get rue and worm wood to drive away fleas and moths: dry flowers in
the shade, and then sun them a little for fear of corruption.

Perfume thy house with savors sweet,
But such as are for purpose meet.
Ane yearlie fair At Edzerstoun in Tiviotdale. and in Culross the first day,
of july. Abernethy and Auchtermuchty the 2. day. S. Martin of Bulzeon 4. day.
Peter fair in Peterhead. The first Tuesday in Dundie a new fair. S. Thomas in
Langnewton, midway betwixt Jedburgh and Melross the 5. day; S. Palladius in
Forden of the Merns the 6. S. An drew in Glasgow the 7. S. Lawrence at Grinock
the 11. day. Kilwinning the 12. day. S. Margaret in Frendraught, and Aiky fair
in Old Deer, both on the 2. tuesday. A fair as Borrowstonness the second
wednesday. S. Margaret in Killimure the 13. six days at the Kirk of Forrig; in
Tarves the 3. tuesday; in Moffat and Kirkadie a fair of horse, neat, and sheep
the 18. Stirling the 20. Mary Magdalen in Linlithgow, Pettenween and Pathhead
the 22. in Airth the 24. S. James in For far, Cowper of Fife, Lanerk, Roxburgh,
Kinghorn, Elgin in Murray, and in Musselburgh he 25. Pollinar fair in Inverary
and Lambmas fair in Turreff, both on the last tuesday* The last thursday of
July a fair in Lesly, and at Whitehorn two days* S, Christina in Corstorphin a
fair the 24. day.

Xxxj. August begins on Monday.
Sun rises 25. min. after 4. sets 35. min. after 7.

Wednesday New moon, 3. day, 4. hours. 47. minutes afternoon Thursday First
quarter 11. day, 1. hour 53. m. in the morning. Friday Full moon, 19. day, 2.
hours 10. min. in the morning. Friday Second quarter, 26. day, 7. hours, 57.
min. in the morning
This month begins with fair summer weather to the middle of the month, from
thence to 20. some small rain: to the 23. cloudy, thence to the end comes good
Harvest wrather.

Reap wheat and rye, cut down your oats, gather garden seeds, sow leettice and
other winter herbs in the new of the Moon: U^^ moderate diet, forbear to sleep
presently after meat, take heed of sudden cold after great heat.

Lambmas day in Atturf three days long and in Melrois, Ennerkiething, S.
Andrews, and in Dumbartan the first day, Lawrence fair in Rane the first
tuesday, the 2. tuesday at Jedburgh, thursday after in Falkland. Martimas fair
the 3. tuesday. S. Lawrence in Selkirk, Auchtermuchty, Forres and Carnwath the
10. In Rane two days before Kilmahug, and at the burn of Campsie. Lady day in
Dundie, Bamff, Merns and Vallyfield: Martimas in Innerness, and Mary day the
first at Monymusk the 15. at Rugland the 20. lasting four day. and Jn Scone on
the twenty two lasting three days S. Bartholomew Apostle in Linlithgow.
Kinkarn of Neil, Clackmanan and Peebles the 24. S. Zepherinus in Corstorphin
the 26. day, a fair. Semarevis day in Forres and Keith the 27. day. S. John's
day in S. Johnston the 29. day. Lanerk a fair the last friday of this maneth. A
fair in Stranraver in the Reinds of Galloway, named St. John's day; the last
friday of August.

Xxx. September begins on Thursday.
Sun rises 25. min. before 6. sets 35. min. before 7.

Friday new Moon, 2. day, 2. hours 33. min. in the morning. Friday First
'quarter, 9. day, 8. hours 2. min. in the morning Saturday Full Moon, 17. day,
3. hours, 55. minutes afternoon. Saturday Second quarter, 24. day, 53 minutes in
the afternoon.
The first 6. days some small rains thence to the 12.13. some small winds, from
thence to 22.23. sometimes enclining to frost; from thence to the end of the
month fair harven weather.

Set artichoaks, sow seeds for winter herbs, about the full of the Moon, the
weather being dry: sow wheat and rye, kill bees, make verjuyce, sow parsnips
and carrets, and remove trees every new Moon till February.

Raw fruit, though ripe, may sickness bring,
Unripe much eat, a dangerous thing,
S. Giles in Elgin the first day, Moffat the 2. Skirlin the 4. Latter Lady day
in Stirling, Dundie, Bamff, Monymu^k and Inverury the 8. in Auchtertueil and
Salane the 11. Rude fair in Jedburgh and Innerness the 14. in Forfar a fair the
15. holding 8. days. A fair at Kirkadie, of horse, neat, and sheep, etc. the
20. Matthew Apostle in Linlithgow the 21. Rude fair in Caril, Jedburgh,
Dumfermling, Dumfries and Athelston 24. at Leven, Langnewton midway betwixt
Jedburgh and Melross 27. S. Michel in Frendraught, Haddington, Lesly, Air, S.
Andrews, Crief, Kirkubright, Galashiels, and at the Kirk of Forrig, and at
Ranfrew, of horse, neat and sheep, cur stome free for three years, the 29. S.
Jerome in Bamff the last day.

Xxxj. October begins on Saturday.
Sun rises 44. min. after 6. sets 16. min. after 5.

Saturday New moon, First day. 3. hours in the afternoon. Sunday First quarter,
9. day, 3. hours, 10. minutes afternoon. Monday Full moon, 17. day, 3. hours,
54. min. in the morning. Sunday Second quarter, 23. day, 7. hours, 51. min. in
afternoon. Monday New moon, 31. day, 6. hours. 32. mi. in the morning.
From the first to the 7. turbulent winds and ram, and a cold cloudy air,
thence to the 10. more temperat and pleasant: from thence to the 12.13.14.
rains thence to the 24.25. hard winds, the end of this month dark cloudy
weather.

Remove young plants and trees in the new of the Moon, about the full gather
such fruit as you left ungathered the last month, cut your role-trees by once
in two years, if you intend to have store of roses.

The 1, 2, 3. a fair in Salt Preston, the first Tuesday in Dundie a new fair.
S. Francis in Abernethy and Vallyfiold the 4. Ane Yearly sayre At Edzerstoun in
Tiviotdeal upon the fyfth day Dionyse in Peebles, Earlston, Kirkintillech,
Aiton, Auchtermuchti, Ceres in Fife, Killimure and Moffat the 9. a fair of
horse neat and sheep and other merchand ware at the Clachen in nether Lorne the
second wensday in October Dalkeith and Tillibol the 10. at Innerkeithing the
12. day, Fenduc at Dunnings the 13. in Forgondeny the 15. day, at Musselburgh
and Borrowstonness the 16. with two weekly markets the monday and friday. S.
Luke in Lawder, Kinross, Rugland the 18. day. Townyetam on the border the 20.
of horse, neat, sheep, and a weekly market. S. Irenea in Corstorphin and at the
Kirk of Carlouk the 20. with a weekly market every wednesday: and at Linton in
Tweddal, of horse, neat and sheep, and other merchandise, with a weekly market
every wednesday for all time coming, of all sorts of goods and gear, the 20. A
fair at new Church of Kilpatrick, of horse, neat, lint, cloth, etc. free of
custom for 7. years, 21. Mary Salamin in Stirling and Kelso the 22. A fair at
Forfar and in Linlithgow the 24. in Kilreny and Stramiglio the 25. Fowls fair
in Pasley and Falkirk the 26. Simon and Jude in Dysert, Falkirk, Cokani,
Kirkliston and Hawick the 28. in Alloway the 29. The last thursday of this
month a fair in Whithorn holding two days.

Xxx. November begins on Tuesday.
Sun rises 6. min. before 8. sets 6. min. after 4.

Tuesday first quarter, 8. day, 10. hours, 28. min. in the morning. Tuesday
Full moon, 15. day, 5. hours, 1. minut. in the afternoon. Tuesday second
quarter; 22. day, 5. hours, 40. minutes morning. Wednesday new moon, 30 day, 16.
m. before 1. in the morning.
From the first to the 9. very cold winter weather, from the 9. to 16, 17.
rough winds, and 21.22. some frost with snow, and the rest of the month misty
weather.

In the new of the Moon remove young Trees, and in the Old of the Moon, set
Pease and Beans, sow Parships and Carrets, make Malt, and salt Martimas Beef.

If Rheumes do now molest thy head,
It is not ill to sweat in bed.
Hallowday in Edinburgh 8. days, in Falkland, Dumblane, For dice the first day:
in Alathy the 2. in Kilwinning the 3. at Jedburgh the first tuesday. S. Leonard
in Lanerk Forres the 6. Bocklyvie in the Parish of Kippen, of horse, neat, and
sheep, and other commodities, and a weekly Market every tuesday the 7. S.
Martin in Dumbar, Melrois, Martinskirk, Strabogy, Cowper of Fife, Hamilton,
Culross, Kilmahug the 11. S. Clement in Dundie the 13. S. Heleas at Grinock the
15. Margaretmas fair in Dumfermling the 16. at Bryak and Peterhead the tuesday
thereafter: at Barrowstouness the 18. S. Macharmuch in Taken and Auchtertueil
the 22. Burntiland the 23. Maiden fair the 24. Andermas fair in Stradown, and
in Frazerburgh the 29. S. Andrew in S. Johnston, Peebles and Chirnside the 30.
day.

Xxxj. December begins on Thursday.
Sun rises 21. min. before 9. sets 21. min. after 3.

Thursday first quarter, 8. day, 4. hours 26. min. in the morning. Thursday
full moon, 15. day, 1. hour 42. min. in the morning Wednesday Second quarter,
21. day, 8. hours in the afternoon. Thursday New moon, 29. day, 8. hours, 16.
minutes afternoon.
This month begins temperat to the 4. from thence frost till the 18. from the
18. to 20. snow, and all the rest of the month frost and snow.

This month and the next are best to fell great timber in the old of the Moon:
uncover the roots of your fruit trees: fallow land for barley: look well to
your cattle.

Now cold December is come in;
The poor man's back is clothed thin:
At Ransrew the 6. S. Nicolas in Aberdene the 7. Belly fair, and Lady day in
Westweems the 8. S. Dunstane in Bamff, at the Kirk of Dier and Rothemay the 14.
S. Cuthbert in the Grange, within the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow the 17. S.
Thomas in Glasgow the 15. and Innerness the 20. S. John's day in Bamff and
Forres, and Levenmouth the 27. day.

The Dismal or perilous days of the year.
MAsters of Astronomy and Physic that these Arts first found, tell the most
perilous and dangerous days in the year: in which if any man or woman be let
blood of wound or vein, they shall die within 21. days following. Or whosoever
falls into sickness on any of these days, they shall never escape it till
they be dead. And whosoever takes any great journey in any of these days to go
from home, be shall be in danger to die ere he come again. And who so weddeth a
wife in any of these days, they shall soon be parted, or else they shall live
together with much sorrow. And who so begins in any of these days any great
work, it shall never come to good end: and these are the days following. In
January are eight days, that is to say, the 1. and 2.4.5.10.11.17. and 19. In
February three days, the 8.10. and 17. In March are 3. days, the 15.16. and 21.
In April are two days, the 15. and 21. In May are three days, the 7.15. and 20.
In June are two days, the 4. and 7. In July are two days, the 15. and 20. In
August are two days, the 19. and 20. In September are two days, the 6. and 7.
In October is on, the 6. In November are two, the 5. and 19. In December are
three, the 6. and 7. and 11. and others say, the 15. and 16.

And whosoever will learn the Canicular or Dog Days, which are days of great danger
and peril, may know they begin the 19. day of July, and continue to the 28. day
of August: which season is very perilous to take sickness: and it is also
perilous to take drinks and medecines, or to let blood: But if it be great
need, then it must be before the midst of the day.

Astronomical Observations of Erra Pater, for this present Year 1681.
IN the year that January shall enter on the Saturday, the Winter shall be
temperate sufficiently, and in the Prime time shall be Frosts, the which shall
destroy the Trees, the Vines the Oils, and the Fruits: the Summer shall be
merely temperate: the Hervest time shall be good cheap, of garden herbs shall
be plenty: all flesh shall be good cheap: many old people shall die: Fever
Tertians shall grieve sore the world, and many murmurations, wars and murders
shall be done by one against another, and Neighbor against Neighbor, and many
other evil acts shall be oftentimes committed and done.

Doctor Mirry-mans Physic.
A Simple Clown in Flanders,
as traveling had been,
Having his wife in company,
came late into his Inn:
A Spanish soldier being there
a guest into this place,
No sooner saw, but liked his wife
(she had a comely face)
And watched when they were gone to bed,
then boldly in come he,
And never said, Friend, by your leave,
but made their number three.
The Clown lay still, and selt a stir,
but durst not speak for's life:
At length his patience was so wov'd,
he softly jog'd his wife,
And said to her pray thee, entreat
the Spaniard to be still.
Can I speak Spanish, man, quoth she;
you know I have no skill?
But, husband, if you please to rise,
and for the Sexton go,
He understands Spanish well,
assuredly I know.
Faith, I will fetch him straight, quoth he:
and so the rustic rose,
and softly snaking out of doors,
unto his message goes.
Mean time, imagine what you will,
to me it is unknown;
But ere her husband came again,
the Spaniard he was gone:
Which when the simple man perceived,
he fell to domineer:
O wife, said he, for twenty pound,
I would I had been here.
Tell me, sweet heart, when I was gone,
how long the knave did stay?
Quoth she, You scarce were out of doors, laugh,
before he ran away.
Wife, quoth the Clown, thou make me
that I did fear him thus:
Come, let us take a little nap,
for his disturbing us.
You see what comes of policy,
and good discretion, wife;
If I had been a hasty fool,
it might have cost my life.
Vulgar Nots and Observations, to know when the Moon rises or sets, 1681.
1. AT the Change, she rises and sets with the Sun

2. At the beginning of her Increase, she rises a little after Sunrising, and
seteth a little after Sunsetting.

3. At her first quar. ( viz. 8. or 10. days old) she rises about Mid day, and
sets about Midnight.

4. At the Full Moon, she rises when the Sun sets, and sets when the Sun
rises.

5. At the beginning of her decrease, she rises a little after Sun setting,
and sets a little after Sun rising.

6. At the last quarter of her decrease, she rises about Midnight, and
serteth about Mid day.

Now by this, you may easily know (near enough, for the common use of Land-men
but not for Seamen) the intermediat times of the Moons rising and seting every
day, slower by one hour, and about a fifth part, viz. 12. minutes.

FINIS.

