AN ACCOUNT Of a small part of Mr. John Frank's Proceeding against David Bruce.
MR. John Frank by his Covetous, Ambitious, Unjust and Malicious Inventions,
has kept a Plea which he knew to be a mere Cheat this twenty years against
David Bruce: Amongst the rest of his Inventions, he extracted an unjust
Decree, Inserting a Gentleman as compeeting for Bruce, who neither knew Bruce,
nor of the Decree: But Bruce applying himself to the Lords, they did most
justly put a stop to his Decree Declarator. Reduction and Exhibition, and all
other Diligence which he had raised upon that Decree. Finding himself
disappointed of that deep drawn deceitsful Design, he then falls upon another
Design to Kill and take Possession, he having the Provost of Peebles his near
Cousin, and one of the Baillies Married upon the said Mr. John his Sister, they
being Magistrates by Commission from the late King: He then invents a most
Damnable, Lying, Abominable Murdering Criminal Lybel: And before ever any thing
was proven, they Robbed Bruce of his Nets and Guns eight days before Franks
Lybel was produced, and presently cast him into Prison, where he was kept
close Prisoner for a Month; where he had undoubtedly perished, if the then
Secret Council had not set him at Liberty. Many Sheets of Paper would not
contain the Crafty ways, and unheard of practices that Frank has taken these
twenty years to get Possession of this five or six Acres of Land, because it is
called Franksland.

Here follows the Just double of Franks Lybel.
UNto the Honorable, the Provost and Baillies of Peebles, and besides Justices
of His Majesty's Peace within the said Burgh, means and shows Mr. John Frank
Writer to His Majesty's Signet, and one of the Commissioners of the Writers
appointed be the Earls of Murray and Melfort His Majesty's Secretaries of
State, and present Treasurer to the Writers: And complains upon David Bruce
Indweller there, an notorious Slanderer and Backbiter. That where the said
David Bruce having shaken off all fear of God and Religion, and Respect to all
Laws Divine and Humane; and conceiving an Groundless, Murderous and Malicious
Hatred, Malice and Evil Will against the said Mr. John Frank, Animo Injurandi
and Defamandi, contrait to and without all Law Civil, Ecclesiastical and
Municipal. To several Persons, in several Companies, and at several Times,
without any just Ground, Cause or Provocation given be the said Mr. John Frank.
And behind his Back, when he was in the exercise of his said public Office and
Trust at Edinburgh, Threatened, Shoated Menaced; and with great Oaths and
Imprecations, Vowed and Promised to have shed the said Mr. John Frank his
Blood, though his own should be shed for it, and to wait his Life upon him. And
likewayes Designed, Endeavored and made it his Work and Business, To Slander,
Traduce, Reproach and Defame the said Mr. John Frank, an person of entire FAME
and Public Trust: And has invented, vented and spread most Wickedly and
Imperiously to the Disgrace, Defamation and Ruin (in so far as in him lay) of
the said Mr. John many false Slanderous, Reproachful and Scandalous Speeches,
Expressions and Assertions. And particularly on the several days of this Month
of March, The said David Bruce most Ryotously, Wickedly, Barbarously and
Unchristianly Vowed and Swore with great Oaths, that he should have or shed the
said Mr. John Frank his Blood, though his own should be shed for it, and to
wait his Life upon him; and this he did to and before John Govan Provost,
Thomas Chisholme Baillie, and William Williamson Clerk, John Wood Indweller
there, and many others. And likewise most Falsely and Impudently said and
affirmed before the foresaids persons, and Bessie Lowes Spouse to John
Johnstoun Burges of Peebles and several others, That the said Mr. John Frank
had written wrong, and made false Writs, and was an Shire man: And that the
Lords of Session was to punish him exemplarly for it, and that none should
Trust nor Employ him: And that the said Mr. John had to ruin him, cheatingly
employed an Advocate to compear for him, without his knowledge, and to collude
with the said Mr. John and suffer an Decree to pass against him in favors of
the said Mr. John. And the said David most Cunningly and Maliciously, the
better to enforce the said wicked Slanderous, Calumnious and false Speeches and
Assertions; and to make the same pass for Truth with all people, be impudently
and designedly did take an Paper out of his Pocket, and red the same before the
persons aforenamed and several others, as if the Lords of Session had so sound:
And as if they had decerned the said Mr. John to be degraded of his Office,
declared incapable of public Trust, and ordained him to be exemplarily
punished. And the said David Bruce did wickedly repeat and persist in the said
Ryotous, Slanderous and Defamatory Speeches.

By all which the said David Bruce, is guilty of an complext repeated open and
manifest Riot, forethought Fellonie, and intended and declared Murder,
Defamation, Liesing-making, Backbiting and Slander, and of gross and shameless
Scandal Calumny and Detraction of an Honest Man of entire Fame, ane Person of
public Trust and Office under his Majesty and Secretaries of State, and ought
in all Law and Justice to be severely and exemplarly Punished and Stigmatized,
in his Name, Person, and Goods, to the security of his Majesty's Peace; to the
good and service of his Majesty's Secretaries of State, and the Leidges; and to
the Example and Terror of others to commit the like in time coming. And
sicklike to content and pay to the said Mr, John Franck, the Sum of Ten
Thousand Pownd Scots Money, as the Damage and Interest sustained by him, (he
being an Writer to his Majesty's Signet, and of public Trust and Office as
said is.) through the said desperate and Abominable Riot declared Murder, and
voved Slander Defamation and Scandal, and to be further punished conform to
Law and his Demerit.

The Just double of the Royal Magistrates of Peebles Sentence 4 April 1688.
THe Provest Bailies and Council of Peebles, having considered this complaint
and the Depositions of the Witnesses taken for proving thereof; they find
nothing of the Slander proven against David Bruce, but finds the expression
proven that if Mr, Frank should gain that play, he should have his Blood, and
therefore ordains David Bruce to continue in Prison while he find Caution under
the pain of 500, Merks to keep the Kings Peace and to leave peaceably toward
all Men, and especially to the said Mr, John Frank and his Family whom he has
so threatened to bereave of his life, and likewise that he shall not wear any
Offensive Arms secret or open under the same Penalty.

Sic Suscribitur. I. G. W S.


Bruces Lamentation.
MY Netts and Guns are seas'd, with Caution to compear,
I in close Prison cast, and yet the Cause not clear,
Only he says, and she says, and so says his good Brother.
That if Frank had done something, Bruce should have done some other
A most Horrid and Terrible Crime as ever yet was found,
Stigmatizing, the fine Ten Thousand Pownd.
With Caution to be found to the Peace beside,
Otherwise in close Prison still for to abide.
^^^lains, Thieves and Robbers, to all I must be Bound,
amongst our Royal Magistrates, this Law it shall be found.
^ing I must carry, my self for to Defend,
I must hold my self Content, till some Relief God send.
On the Praise of Mr. John Frank,
To the Tune of, When all Souls was at Rest.
YOur Lybel and your Elegy,
Bruce, has them in great State.
With great remarks upon your Acts,
Your Tomb with Copper Plate.
How you the Lady of our Time,
Adorned with rich Attire.
With short and long Vails Nobilly.
Even to your hearts desire.
How that she Her Journeyes made,
In Coach with handsome Train;
How that she to our City came,
And How returned again.
Your Mother of worthy Memory.
Your Tomb does here Extole,
She sure was of some Family;
Your Father was in Poll.
How you, your learning did acquire,
And did your Honor raise;
Your Speech before the Faculty,
Deserves the Leerned's Praise.
Your stately Style and writing Brave,
With Wisdom and with Skill,
Of all sorts of securities,
Of Rich Men their last Will.
Your Lodging and your Chambers Brave.
Your noble Bed of State,
With all fine things that you have,
Speaks forth your Judgment Great.
The Law and Gospel you know well.
Bruce well can prove the one,
Your Elogy the Gospel proves,
It Parallel can none.
Your Loyalty it was well known,
When to the Camp you came,
Likewayes unto the City showen,
All Men will say the same.
You mortified to our Poor,
Your Gilded Broad set forth,
Your Soul seek for to secure;
Who can declare your Worth.
Who can your great Praise set forth,
Or your rare Deeds Rehearse;
It is a thing that is too high,
For Mortals or for Verse.
Our Church and our City both,
Are troubled in these times.
Your known the Instrument to be,
That hates dividing Crimes.
By your great Wit and Oratrie,
You are now an Advocate,
When Bruce shall at the Bar you see,
Let him take head to that.
The Scriptures true which cannot lie.
Some things in them are said.
That will befit your Elogie.
When you in Tombs are Laid.
Probatum Est.
Bruce says nothing but the Truth,
Least he break Lawboroues:
For Lying, Cheating Rascals all
They will deserve the Gallows.

London, Printed in the year 1691.


