THE DUTCH Bloody Almanac, Containing The exact Astrologicall Predictions, for
the year of our Lord 1653 Divided into these particulars. 1 The Predictions of
the Bloody War between England and Holland, with the success and events of
several Fights by Sea and Land, and the Joining together of the greatest part
of Europe against England. 2 The breaking forth of open Wars with Denmark, and
the Bloody attempt of the King of Scots, and James Duke of York in prosecution
of that design. 3. Several Mutenys and Insurr^ctions in England, with some
Astrologlcal observations thereupon. 4 Some generull Calculations concerning
the Wars in France, Spain and Portugale, with every Months observations of
the Revolutions in England.


astrological figure, perhaps used for prognostication

London printed by John Clowse 1653. October. 19. 1652

January.
The great God direct us in his Truth.
THis month begines with the Sun or Sol in Capricornus, the Moon or Luna in
Jeminie, and there is a Triue of Salturn and Venus, which brings danger to
women and children, but the Conjunction of Sol and Jupiter does a little
metigate that aspect, and the effects seem to have the chiefest opperation,
upon Judges and Lawyers, and where there happens a scarcity of them, the
Influence will be found upon Jews and Brokers, in all parts except in Turkey,
where a Dutchman came to a Jew, or Broker, and desired him to help him to buy
a bargain of silk, and he would give him satisfaction for his pains, the Jew
thereupon goes with him to a Turk which had of that commodity that liked the
Dutchman, and treating about the price thereof, the Turk came to make a
price, under which he would not go: But the Dutchman thinking that the Turks
had been like himself and stood not upon bis word, or promise; swore
Persacramentum Jesum etc. that he would not give so much: The Turk not
understanding the Language enquired of the Jew what it was he said. The Jew
answered that he swore by his God? the Turk replied that he would not have
further to do with him that set his God at so low a rate, and laid by his
commodity, for which the Dutchman would afterward have given the price but
could not regaine the sight hereof.

HO^ most horied news from sea arives at the Hague; if the differences are not
now composed betwixt the English and the Hollander, a sqadron of Dewitts will
be endanger about this time, some black designs are probably discovered
against the English Commone wealth, and Holland has cause to cleave to some
^ure friends in alliance the Planets seem not to favor the French with
abillity to assist them in time of danger; It is an ill wind blows no body
good, but the constellations of the heavens bring it not to thee, great news
expected from, the Dutch Ambassadors in Denmark; The Sould^ers swell with fury.
Citizens minds rise high and most men's spirits are elevated, and the heavens
decrees are immutable and I cannot find any good aspects or French French Now
is the time for Kings to lose all or win all, and if that King has not by this
time settled a peace with the Princes. the Princes may be glad to offer another
Treaty, for fear of an other Design to be suddenly put in execution, and their
minds are in miserable perplexity, that are trubled with what is like to happen
hereafter.

The Sun in Cancer and Saturn in a Quarden is as bad or worse then the former,
yet does guess this aspect will not be of any great forces in Holland or in
England, the worst I can find unto them is the death of some of those that sit
at the helm unlamented, many pyracies committed by Sea, great blooshed in
France, if the Spaniard have a fight with the French, about this time, he is
likely ot prevail, some great remoraes of an* eminency sound* abroad beyond our
horizon; what it should be I guess not, unless it should be of some great
Fleet at Sea, it may be only a report of new Levies for the Scots King, in
Denmark or Scotland or both, yet of any place, let not the Scots think to
thrive this year, Saturn and Mars, etc. are transcendent with them and before
summer is ended, their Royal Black coats will not dare to show their teeth, and
Saturn being passing through a Quadrat presageth fear, terror, and treachery in
that Nation, but the Aspect is yet better in Holland, if they trouble not the
water, or love to fish in such, they may live at quiet, but if otherwise they
must smart as well as the rest.

February.
Sol is this month in Piscs but begins in Aquarus, which presageth good
fortune unto Soldiers if they can have there pay? Jupiter and Mercury sit in
conjunction, and let all deceivers of the People t^ke heed, for oppressors
begin to feel their own downfall; what shall the Jews at Amsterdam and else
where, have a M^ss^care nuder the Sea of Rome when they may find protection
else where? All Europ is poss^ss^d with a madness, they meet and consu^t* but
the greatest part of them know not for what, and yet in such meetings every one
cries out, great is Appolo, and great is Diana, though they see their Temples
pulled down, and that the name of St. Paul himsel^e cannot help it. Po^onia
sas^ages wax dear in Holland: many mutenyes are thereatned, and a stand in
council for want of men of trust, and no marvel when such men should be
scarce amongst those that have deceived all the world. It is well for England
in respect of the Influence that the Sea divedes them.

Yet when I consider that Jupiter is Lord of the 2d, house and thereby
dispositor of Sol, and in his revolution Lord also in the 2 house (for Pisces
is intercepted) and dispositor of Venus, Lady of the 4th both in this, and the
former figurs, she being in the ^d. in Pisces her own exaltation, I must needs
say of these positions, amonae copiam, ando they denote plenty of corn,
fruitfulness of the earth, and great abundance and plenty in this year if the
effects of that great eclipse of the sun, on the 9. of March, do not by their
violence hinder these good things that are premised by this revolution from
falling on our heads, but as commerce and trade shall increase, so shall
wickedness and deceit, for Mercury by his weak condition, being both in his
fall and detriment in the 2d. significat bnod etc. men shall give themselves to
ignominious and dishonest gain and shall observe very little faithfulness
among one another, and indeed this position of Mercuty, does also signify
anguish, sorrow, and increase of taxes for our troubls, though they are turned
into quietness and peace at home, yet we shall have war abord; for that
opposition of Sat^rn and significat bellum apparere, no less then much
fighting and bloodshed: but though Saturn our enemy being malicious and the
more by reason of his being in the 2. house, (for auget in octava masevel^s
suam malitium yet because Jupiter Lord of our ascendant* is much elevated above
him significations, etc. signifies that we shall overcome all our enemies, Haly
tells indeed that this opposition of Jupiter and Saturn signifies, quod eaunt
etc. it signify* there shall be many quarrellings between men and nations, one
shall be stired up against the other, and men of low degree shall quarrel with
one another, go to law, etc and indeed it is plain by the late separation of
Luna from conjuction of Mars, that we were engaged in brous before the
beginning of this revolution, and the position of Mars threatens their
continuacne, but his strength in the scheam promises protection qund genus, etc.

March.
THis Spring begins with Sol, and the ninth of this month there happens an
Eclips of the Sun 3 minits past f^ure of the clock in *the afternoon, this
happens on a Wensday, and if the English Merlin can but tell certainly that
the fabric of Heaven will be cloudy, he would Christen it Black Wednsday as
his Brother Booker did Monday the last year, but for that you will have a
blind excuse thus. Now I shall proceed to the effects of this Eclips, and it
makes no great matter where I begin, seeing they afford so litittle good,
either to man or b^ast

The Lords of this Eclipss are Mars and Mercury, of which Mars of the two is
strongest by odds, and being upon the ^usp of the tenth House it is so much the
worse, neither is it ever the better, because it is in a malevolent and
venomous Sign.

Mercury takes nature of that Star to which he is aspected, which very
unluckily here is Mars, both of them being in watery Signs, signify terrible
the hasty furious doings, violent, furious, tempestuous, destructive, ve^ment
winds; the Sea will be so dangerous, men can scarce pass it by heeason of
shipwreck and Piracies; and judge you what the Land is like to suffer, when a
couple of such theeving Planets are Lords of an Eclipse: Besides all this, the
Earth suffers by Thunder and Lightning, vehement and violent Storms,
Earthquake^, and great gapings of the Earth M^n take such things as are none
of their own, which formerly was called Theft, and so it is now if poor men do
it; but when rich men do it, then it is pillaging, plundering, and seizing on
Malignants goods: it inclines men to rapine, and theft, lying, depopulation;
the Laws changed, and the Priests are mad, the Priesthood it self dies, and
then farewell gentle Clergy; the bodies of men are perplexed with hot and dry
Diseases, Coughs, ann Consumption of the Lungs, Vomittings shortness of breath
and Quotidiam Agues.

April.
About the very beginning of march the king of France is marching to his own
destruction: thou art invaded by a Neighbor-Nation; thou shall, to thy Sorrow,
when it comes, know who it is: Neither is the Troubles that is in France to be
heeded, but the Microcosm bears part of it also: the King of France his Soul
and Body cannot agree, and the contention is so sharp, it is shrewdly to be
feared they will part about the letter end of March. or beginning of April: A
wild Boar in a blue J^cket is in the Vineyards* and crops up three
flower-deluces at a mouthful, and then farewell thy Monarchy of France to
Eternity. Alas^, what will the poor College of Sorban do, when the most
Christian King is eaten up with lice I when the Lord took away the Cardinal of
richilieu, the glory of France was gone. Ae^sops Frogs refused the Beam,
because he was patient but when the Stork came, he eat them up. I have little
else to say to France, but only God bless all the honest there, and send them
their liberties, and something else too. God bl^ss honest people from the
Pistilence this next Summer, which I shrewdly suspect will so rage throughout
the Dominiions there, which shall force the College of Physicians of Paris to
pay the tears they owe to the Tomb of their banishad Overcitanus.

May.
A strange diaster, about this time or perhaps in the forgoing Month is
threatened, There be some men that nothing can satisfy, who would think that
such as have already (and if acc^sion be, will again* joined in one, against
the Common Enemy should not agree amongst themselves; but either invigh,
because other men are in greater places then themselves or some other self ends
are repining yea, and it may be impeaching one another, many piracyes are daily
heard of to be committed at Sea. A great battle is likely to be fought in
France, where some King or great parson is like to fall. Something may naturally
be calculated from the in influence of the Celestial bodies of some further
misfortune to the Scots King. either by a fall or a shot from his horse: The
two Eclips^s in one Month viz* one of the Sun and another of the Moon in March
last, affoard very much matter to work upon, and invites the English to a
reconciliation in judgment, very strange intelligence comes from several
parts, This is the time that wisemen will do nothing but for themselves* and
say, that there is no reason that wisdom should put them selves in danger for
fools.

June and July.
SOL enters Scorpio, and, and an opposition with Saturn, certainly this will be
a time of great consultation in England and Holland, yet a Quadrat for many
days with Mars signifies much blood shed in France Ireland, and some other
places, some strivings amongst great persons consequently follows about the
nullifying of some thing formerly decreed, or had been long in use: by this
time much may be done in order to the equal administration of Justice in
several places where it has in prat been neglected, then happy are the people
that live under such a Government, yea thrice happy are they, if that a
dissembling flatterer, or insinuating Parasite, (the worst vermin in a Common
wealth) has not an office himself of trust. or at least some honest man in
great power to speak for him; Its an ill wind blows no body good, but the
influence of the heavens seems to be very sparing where to bestow. All men will
not be of one mind, either in Holland, Spain, Italy, France, Germany, England
or Scotland, although the Sun goes round all the world over.

England England thou art now at peace; but let him that stands take heed
lest he fall: there may be another punishment besides the Sword coming; Call
to mind what God has done for thee, and then consider what a sad thing it is
to offend so good a GOD.

August and September.
The Lord defend this people from pestelentious Ayrs, many cross* Sea fights*
Pyracies* much blood, Charles Stuart* looks for great matters by reason of
Denmark, and James Duke of York, will not care if he loses his dearest blood
to be revenged against the English, and what if the people should muteny in
many places, at last we have intelligence from the West, which rather invites
to thanks then mourning.

October and November.
The Winds blow high and a little affrightens, and we are in travel both from
Scotland, Ireland, France, Flanders, Partugale and Denma^^ we hope it will not
increase the murmurings in England, or give way to the landing of any forces in
England, the City Perquesits are still contended for, yet it matters not to me
who is Lord Major of London.

December.
O Mars! when will thou leave thy cruelty? Its a time causes many to lament
and curse War, and its attendants, Rapine, Murder and Robery: Strange divisions
and in discontents will end the year: therefore the people stand fully resolved
to proceed one step higher unto a further Election* divisions highten our
discords* Bell and the Dragon are still fighting, Righteousness prevails not.
The Governors peradventure may be taxed for unjustice, yet are they very
seriously and prudently careful for the well ordering the Commonwealth, and
thereupon they seem to incline to do Acts of Grace. The Portugale has many
good Omens of the keeping and enjoying his Kingdom, though not without labor
and travel. In the figure of his Coronotion, the almost degree of the first
appearance in the year 1618. the universal observation is, that two and twenty
years after the apperition of that Planet Portugale regained its liberty, and
upon conclusion of the Coments effects, the Eng* Common wealth became a free
State. All the Angels of the figure fixed, and Saturn, who of all the Planets
is most slow, being Patron of this R^novation and fixed in Aquarius, ^n the
Ascendant, his own house; Jupiter being Lord of Sagitarus, and so Patron of
Spain in his fall and i^ the twelf House; From whence it is concluded that the
Spaniard shall never regain Portugale, yet many dangerous years will befall
that State.

And now we shall conclude with a word of caution to France; For we find in the
Nativity of Cardinal Mazerine; that he is likely to be (...) Thorn in thy
sides; and if he outlive 1659; the Constellations promise him to enjoy greater
honor then he has at present; and in the end he is like to dye like a
Nobleman; either of a Surfeit or a Fever:

Gloria Deo.
FINIS.

