The Virgin Saint: OR, A Brief NARRATIVE of the Holy Life, and Christian Death
of Mary Wilson.

With some memorable Passages, and occasional Speeches a little before her
Death added thereunto.

To which is also adjoined A SERMON, Preached at her Funeral, By Mr. GEO.
NICHOLSON.

Together with Several Consolatory Letters, written by diverse Ministers, to her
Mournful Father, Mr. RICHARD WILSON of Crosfield in Cumberland.

London, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in Paul's
Churchyard, 1673.

Jer. 2.2. Go and cry in the Ears of Jerusalem saying, Thus says the Lord, I
remember thee, the Kindness of thy Youth, the Love of thine Espousals.

Prove. 31.30. Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain, but a Woman that fears
the Lord, She shall be praised.

Luke 2.19. But Mary kept all these Sayings, and pondered them in her Heart.

Luke 10.42. And Mary has chosen that good Part, which shall not be taken away
from Her.

To the Christian Readers: especially to the Members of two Congregated
Churches in Leathward, Cumberland: Assembling for Public Worship in their
Licensed Places, respectively, in Kirkoswold and Hesket Parishes, by his
Majesty's most gracious Permission, Authority, and Protection; Grace, Mercy,
and Peace in Jesus Christ.
Most Dear Christians,
THe woeful and tremendous misery of all Mankind by Nature, since the Fall of
Adam, is in nothing more manifest, than in their wilful Incredulity, and
affected Ignorance thereof, joined with astupendous Self-conceitedness of
possessing, or pursuing a sufficient Happiness, even in all their selfchosen
Courses, which they severally steer; accounting no counsel, command, nor
restraint Divine or Humane, more cross to their imaginary Felicity, than what
is most contrary to their own conceits and wills.

And so strongly is it rivited into all natural apprehensions, that if they
might but have their own way, and compass their own designs, they should then
be, and do as well as they desire. Not knowing that the way of man is not in
himself; Jer. 10.23.
it is not in man that walks to direct his steps. But their own way is their
folly, Psa. 49.13.
though their Posterity approve their Sayings. Yea, all are gone out of the way
(both of duty and felicity) and there is none that understands, Psalm. 14.
there is none that seeks after God, in whom only is all Happiness. And this
is the common case of all the world in their natural condition, as the Apostle
infers and proves, Romans 3.9-19.

And though all are not of equal Ignorance or Impiety; but some by Nature, Art,
and Industry, are of clearer Intellects, and more sublimated Capacities, to
know, discourse, discuss, and determine matters of weighty importance, as well
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, as Natural and Civil; as also by the
superaddition of common Influences of the Holy Spirit, in the use and
improvement of Divine Ordinances, are induced to walk commendably; not only
civilly and morally, but also religiously; far above the rank of the vulgar,
rude, and dissolute multitude, yea and many real Saints too. Yet through defect
of effectual Calling out of Spiritual Darkness into Gods mavelous Light, will
be found short of the least of Gods little ones, that believe in his Name, and
really in the rank of ignorant and ungodly ones.

Yea, and many, that are no less conceited of others Ignorance, than of their
own insuperable wisdom and knowledge, as must be supposed; So as any Cadency of
insinuation to the contrary, is resented a disparagement, Jo. 9.40. Lu. 11.45.
to be replied to with an -- Are we blind also? and, Thus saying, thou
reproachest us also: Being consident that themselves, are guides of the blind,
Romans 2.18, 19, 20.
lights of them that are in darkness, instructers of the foolish, teachers of
babes, having a form of knowledge, and of the truth, both of the Law and Gospel;
but wanting the powerful knowledge of the truth, through want of a saving change
of estate, abide, in the midst of all their knowledge, Joh. 3.19
destitute of all saving knowledge. And unless the arm of the Lord be revealed,
Isa. 53.1. and 8.11.
as well as his truth declared; and himself speak unto them with a strong hand,
as well as his Servants cry unto them with a loud voice, they will not believe
our report; they will not be instructed.

Furthermore, There are not a few (as may be justly feared) even in the
Churchell of God, who have been convinced, as was as exhorted, Act. 2.40.
to save themselves from this untoward Generation; have also professed their
Conversion before (and to good satisfaction of) many witnesses, 2 Pet. 2.18, 20.
to have clean escaped from them that live in Error, and from the pollutions of
the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And have
solemnly avouched the Lord for their God, and his holy service for the constant
duty of their lives, Deuteronomy. 26.17.
are therefore rightly received into the Communion of Saints, and duly
participate in all their Privileges: who yet are more willing to be reputed
holy, than indeed to be so, in all manner of Conversation, as they are called
and commanded, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. 1 Jo. 2.15.
whose apparent love of the world, and things of the world, bespeaks a defect
of the love of the Father; no less than their common careless neglect of secret
converse with him; which their own hearts, were they not either too blind, or
too partial, could not but accuse them of.

But shall I say, Heb. 6.9.
Brethren, That I am persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
Salvation, though I thus speak? Yea I must say with the same Author: Phil. 1.7.
It is meet for me to think thus of you all, because I have you in my heart:
Inasmuch as both in my frequent Bonds, and in the defense, and confirmation of
the Gospel (against other manifold molestations) ^e are partakers of (...);
vocat Paulus illam suam captivitatem, gratiam, etc. Piscator in loc. Gratiam
vocat quasi singular a liquod beneficium vincula sua, Beza in loc.
my Grace. Neither write I these things to shame you, but as my dearly beloved
in Christ, I warn you, that I may awaken you to a serious and diligent search
and trial of your Spiritual estates. That you rest not in any Profession,
Performances, or Privileges, whereunto ye have attained, but as forgetting
these things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before, you press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

And, Beloved, ye are my witnesses, and God also, what the design of my
Ministry among you has been. Not to seek my worldly gain, nor yours, but you,
(yea I have willingly neglected, and greatly exhausted mine own Temporals to
serve you in Spirituals) that I might beget you, 2 Cor. 12.14. and 11.2.
and engage you to God, espouse you to one husband, and present you, as chaste
Virgins, to Christ; from whom I have been earnest with you, and with whom I
have been earnest for you, that the match may be really made up between you;
which being effected, my labor is recompensed, my Errand is accomplished, my
Desire is satisfied, my Joy is fulfilled.

And now that I have this unexpected opportunity, of making public some hints
only, of some of the choice desires of my Soul to you, and to the Lord for you;
Know ye therefore that they are such as these;

First, That none of you all, who are taught, and do believe and profess the
absolute necessity of Regeneration, in order to eternal Salvation, rest
satisfied in your Spiritual conditions, Mat. 18.3. 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.15. Romans
8.9, 10.
without some hopeful evidences, that you are born again, and truly converted;
that ye are in the Faith, new creatures in Christ Jesus; And that Christ is in
you, and abides in you; And that you have the Spirit of Christ.

Oh! rest not in uncertainties about your Spiritual and Eternal Felicities: (as
you would not about your Temporal) but, give all diligence to make your Calling
and Election sure. 2 Pet. 1.10


Secondly, Look that you make good the ground you have got (through Grace)
against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, by a daily progress in both the
parts of Sanctification, viz. Mortification and Vivification. And beware that
you be not again entangled and overcome, 2 Pet. 2.20.
and so your last end be worse than your beginning. Luke 9.62.
Having put your hand to the Plough, look not back, much less be ye of them
that draw back unto perdition: But be ye of them that believe, Heb. 10.39
to the saving of the Soul.

And need I bid you beware of Popery? Rev. 13.3. Iniquitas, sed mistica
pietatis and fidelitatis nomine palliata. 1 Cor. 10.12.
which is the most Catholic Apostasy, the Mystery of Iniquity: yet palliated
with the name (only) of Piety, Antiquity, Universality, etc. yea I say, Let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall: as too many have done.

It Is operative and strong, though but a Delusion and a Lie, yea it is the
Energy, (...), 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 11.
or strong working of Satan (through the just judgment of God) with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness, in them that perish, because they received
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

Popish Seducers are subtle Artists, that have (...).
the sleight of me, (...).
cunning craf^iness, and (...). Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Pet. 2.19
the method of Error or De^usion. The Ignorant and Sensual are in greatest
jeopardie, they promise others liberty, whilst themselves are the servants of
corruption. The prime piece of their Worship is palpable Idolatry, the whole
complex of their common Devotion is Will. worship, Superstition and Formality.

One would think that no serious Professors of Christianity, were in any peril
of Popery: yet Quakers are an Artificial ^roduct of it, though they know it
not. Love God, the Gespel and your Souls, better than the World and your
Bellies, Phil. 3.18, 19.
and you are out of the danger of it.

Thirdly, Phil. 1.10.
See to it that ye be sincere Converts, sincere Saints; that your Faith, Love,
Repentance, Obedience, etc. be sincere: For if you be sincere, you shall
persevere. But Hypocrifie will end in Apostasy. What is sound, is strong and
invincible, what is sound is special, and not common Grace. Though common Grace
may make a great show, cast a great blaze, yet like the Comet, it consumes of
it self, till it be extinguished. 1 John 3.9. Mat. 13.31, 32.
True Grace is the Seed of God; and though it be little and weak, yet its
nature is to grow in stature, and strength; or though it may decay, yet it
cannot die. For its the life of God, a Well of living water, springing up unto
Eternal Life. But let its Counterfeit i. e. common grace.
, which resembles it so much in all things, make you the of^ner and exacter in
the use of the Touchstone.

Fourthly, Let your Communion with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ,
be frequent and full: Omit no opportunities, nor means thereof. Redeem time
from your worldly affairs, for converse with your God, in the Duties of his
more solemn Service: Knowing that the Holiness, Comfort and Happiness of your
lives consists in such communion.

Use and improve the means for the end. Read, hear, pray, confer, and meditate
much: And be loath to leave any duty, till you attain some sensible enjoyment of
his Grace and Love. And till your hearts be warmed, your graces excited, your
Affections engaged and your Souls, even make you like the Chariots of Aminadab,
Cant. 6.12.

And prize and treasure up your experiences of this kind. Neh. 8.10.
Retain a lively sense of Divine impressions upon your spirits. And let the joy
of the Lord be your strength, Zech. 10.12.
to walk up and down in his Name. And lament your loss, when you came off from
your Duties without success; Take heed of Formality in them.

Fifthly, And you that are heads of Families; Take heed to your Families over
which the Holy Ghost, even in your private Capacities, has also made you
Overseers: That you should watch for their Souls, as they that must give
account; that ye may do it with joy, and not with grief: Deal particularly and
closely with them about the estates of their Souls. Labor to convince them of
their exceeding sinfulness and misery by Nature. And that they are under the
Law, and so under the wrath and curse of God, while they continue therein. That
they are utterly blind, lame, deaf, Isa. 35.5, 6
dumb, and dead spiritually, and under the power of Satan immediately. That
their natural Light is spiritual Darkness; their sweet is bitter; their good is
evil. Their Moral, Civil and Religious works are all Sins in Gods sight; Prom.
8.8.
for being in the flesh, they cannot please God in any thing: but displease him
altogether, though they please themselves and others never so much. That they
are liable to all Judgments Temporal, and to Death and Damnation Eternal, every
moment.

Yet all this notwithstanding, They are to be persuaded, That the Lord Jesus
Christ, the eternal Son of God, is become an Allsufficient Savior of all men,
even the worst of Sinners. That he has purchased Salvation for them, offers
Salvation to them, and is willing to enter into a Covenant of Salvation with
them; if they will but accept him, and be ruled by him, according to the terms
of the Gospel. That he has redeemed them, and will justify them freely;
Pardon them fully, Sanctify them thoroughly, Adopt them graciously, Keep them
powerfully, and save them gloriously. That he has confirmed his Covenant of
Salvation with his Oath, and with the Seals of his Blood, Spirit and
Sacraments. That he has ever been mindful of it, taken you into it, who were
as they are: and is especially engaged to your Children, by the tenor of his
Covenant with you, That nothing but their own willful refusal, final
impenitency, obstinacy, and infidelity can deprive them of his Salvation.

Bewail the Sins of any in your Family, as if they were your own; resist them
by Instruction, Admonition, Reproof and Correction, (as the case requires) and
pray earnestly against them. Especially, teach all under your charge to eschew
evil, and do good, by your own daily Practice and Examples. And be sure you
engage them, and train them up in the constant Duties of Gods sacred Worship
and Service.

Sixthly; As Religion is your signal Profession, so let your whole Lives, in
all the natural and civil actions thereof, be influenced, animated, and (as it
were) fermented by it. Eat, drink, work, walk, ^ake, sleep, speak, and be
silent, mourn and be merry by the Rules of Religion. And let the luster of it
be conspicuous in all ^our civil Converses of Buying, Selling, Borrowing,
Lending, Giving and Re^eiving.

Let your Principles, Grounds, Motives and Ends, be really religious: not
carnal, and selfish: Be true and faithful: Just and Upright, Sober and
Temperate, Chaste and Modest, Courteous and Affable, Compassionate and
Charitable, Meek and Peaceable, Innocent and Patient, Kind and Helpful. Look
that your relative Duties to Superiors, Inferiors, and Equals, both in Church
and State, Romans 13. 1 to 7. 1 Timothy 2.12 Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, to v. 18.
be religiously discharged and performed: Honor the higher Powers; Pray for
them fervently; pay Tribute willingly; And be conscientiously subject, in all
true Loyalty; Let his Majesty's Eminent Clemency, evident so signally, in our
precious Gospel-Liberty, attract, and engage your Affections to him.

Let your Church Communion be glorious in all the holy Effects of mutual Love,
Watchfulness and Tenderness. And keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace. Ephesians. 4.3.
Let the Splendor of Religion, in your Conversations, evince the Purity, 1
Pet. 2.12
and Power of Religion in your Consciences: that God may be glorified, and men
may be edified by you. Let none you live near, or meet with, lack your possible
and seasonable Help, for the good of their Souls that need it, and will but
accept it.

And Finally, Romans 2.4.
my Brethen, whilst others despise the Riches of God's Goodness, Forbearance,
and Long-suffering; not knowing, that the Goodness of God leads them to
Repentance; But after their Hardness and impenitent Hearts treasure up unto
themselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath and Revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God; Who will render to every man according to his Deeds: See that
you, by patient Continuance in Well-doing, seek for Glory, Honor, and
Immortality: And he will render unto you eternal Life, at the End of this
temporal Life. The least glimps and foretaste whereof, how glorious and
ravishing it is, they can best tell you, that have had the Experience.

Oh! Let Christ, and all of Christ, his Natures, Person, Attributes, Offices,
Obedience (active and Passive) Conflicts, Conquests, Triumphs, and Purchases:
and all of God in Christ be precious unto you; for all are yours, if you be
his. Let him be the fat and the sweet, the hope, and the help, and the
happiness of your whole life and death; whether you live, Romans 14.8
live to him, or whether you die, die to him: (which only by holy living and
dying you shall do) and then whether you live or die, you are his. Though you
can but dye once, naturally; yet you may dye daily, spiritually; i.e. in Phil.
1.21, 23.
Affection, Job 14 14.
Expectation, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
Preparation, Matthew. 26.39.
Submission, and Ps. 31.5. Act. 20.22, 23, 24.
Resignation. I leave you to pick out the matter, which I have couched in
words, for you use, as concisely as I could; that I might not too far transcend
the bounds of an Epistle.

The ensuing Narratives present you with a worthy Example of a dear, deceased
Vi^gin-Saint, once a Member of your Fellowship; now translated into the
Celestia-Chore. Early living, and timely dying i^ the Lord, and to the Lord.
Not permitte^ by him to have other Husband than Himself; in greatest mercy
(doubtless) to herself. Whilst others sought her, He sen^ for her, and
unexpectedly (but not unpreparedly) took her from all her Relations and Lovers,
to marry her in Glory, whom H^ had espoused in Grace: Whose Piety, Prudence,
Gravity, Modesty, with other Gif^^ and Ornaments, natural and supernatural,
were illustrious in her, above most of her Age and Sex.

But I Will detain you no longer from the Natratives themselves. And the
seasonable, and useful Sermon preached at her Funeral; with some prom and
Consolatory Letters from several Godly Ministers, to her disconsolate Father,
upon the sad occasion of her Death. All which I commend to your diligent
perusal, and to Gods Blessing thereupon, for your Spiritual and Eternal Good, I
am, A servent well-wisher often your Souls prosperity; and your Servant in the
Lord for that end.

The Introduction.
THe Saints of God (most Christian Reader) are to be honored both living,
dying, and after death; though not with the honor of Invocation, which finds
no letter of Command or Direction, no letter of Promise or Acceptance, no
letter of Example or Practice in the whole Word of God; but is a reproach to
the Saints, and a dishonor to God, whose Name and incommunicable Title is, The
God hearing Prayers, and therefore to him shall the desires of all flesh come;
and if all to him, then none to Saints; yet with the honor of benediction and
imitation of their Virtues and Graces; They, they only, are the most
magnificent, illustrious, noble, excellent ones in the world, Psalm. 16.3. They
are more noble than others, Acts 17.11. They are Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6.
They are more excellent than their neighbors, Prove. 12.26.

More excellent in regard of their Descent and Stock, as having God for their
Father; In regard of their Inheritance, Heirs of Heaven and Earth, 1 Cor. 3.20,
21. In regard of their Food, they are fed with heavenly Manna, they eat Angels
food; eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of Christ; and in regard of their
Clothing, their Clothing being of imbroidered Gold, Psalm. 45.13. They have
put on the Wedding Garment, the Garments of Salvation, the white Robes of
Christ's Righteousness, the white linen, yea Christ himself.

Whereas the unjust are men of no name, vile persons, though never so great,
Dan. 11.21. To be contemned and despised, Psalm. 15.4. They deserve not the name
of men, Jerem. 5.1. They are not to be honored in some Cases so much as with a
Look, or with a Word, or with a Bow, 2 King 3, 14. Luke 23.9. Esth. 3.2. But
the Godly, are men of renown, they want nothing that can make any truly
honorable and noble; they are admitted into the King of Heavens Service,
Servants of the great King, Gods Attendants and Courtiers, employed in the most
honorable work and service; They are the Workmanship of God, created in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10. They bear the Image of Christ, are made partakers of Gods
Holiness, Heb. 12.11. And of the divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. they have holy and
gracious Practices, imitators of God as dear Children. Now can there be to the
Sons of Men a greater honor, than to hold semblance with the Majesty of God?
Glorious is that Image of God wherein they were created, whereto they are
renewed, into which they are transformed from glory to glory, 2. Cor. 3.18.
Which also Saints manifest by their actings of Grace, and ^^acious holy
Practices; Godliness is God-like^^ss, and Holiness is the Saints honor, 1 Thessalonians. ^.4. Humility and lowliness of mind decks ^^d adorns the Saints, 1 Pet.
5.5. That the ^race of God, how vilified soever amongst men, ^et it makes
Saints glorious in the sight of God; ^oliness and Grace makes persons the most
con^derable and weighty, Have thou considered my ^rvant Job? it makes them
heavy, ponderous and weighty, and to have substance in them, and therefore
worthy to be reverenced, esteemed, and honored; all others are light in the
Balance, and therefore to be contemned, vilified and slighted; but chaff,
lighter than vanity, ^sal. 1.4. and 62.4. Pro. 10.20. the word in ^^e Hebrew
for honor and glory, comes from a ^ot which signifies heavy, or ponderous;
because that which we honor and respect, we look upon ^^ as a thing that has
weight and substance in it: ^he Apostle calls that most glorious state of the
^aints in Heaven, a weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Honor is a man's weight in
the esteem of others.

Sin makes wicked men light, and then lightest of all when they make light of
Sin: But Holiness adds honor and weight to the persons of ^he Saints.
Holiness toward God makes venetable amongst Men. Hitherto then turn the ^tream
of your ambition to grow honorable by ^oly and gracious practices. Be
ambitious to live holily, as Paul was, That you may be honorable in the eyes
of God, and accepted of him, 2 Corinthians. 5.4.

The old World would build them a Tower to get them a name, and to win them
fame amongst men, Genesis 11.4. The ambition o^ Worldlings is, to call their
Houses by their own Names, to perpetuate their Memories, Psalm. 49.11. to erect
Monuments of costliest Fabric, to perpecuate their remembrance. For this end
and use men use to set up the most lasting materials Pillars of Marble, and
Pyramids, of Stone: But these, or any other things besides Grace and Holiness,
as Riches, Dignity, Power, Credit Learning Wisdom, etc. which men hope to be
remembered by, and become famous in the world, are but as Ashes, mean and of no
consistence, Job 13.12. Though men lay them by and esteem them as Monuments to
Posterity, o^ as Memorials to preserve their Names to all Gen^rations, yet they
are ordinarily scattered lik^ ashes in the air, or spilt like water upon the
ground, which cannot be gathered up; and s^ will all that, whatever it is,
which vain me frame or fancy to themselves to make them memorable and renowned
amongst posterity or succeeding Ages: But Grace is the only Glory, an^ gracious
and holy ac^ings the best Monument ^^ perpetuate our memo^y. There is more
glory in the least Grace, than in all earthly glory the least degree of Grace
is more glorious than all the glorious Advancements that the world can afford
us.

Holiness and Grace is the beauty of Men and Angels, yea of God himself; it
makes Saints beautiful and honorable in themselves, in the eyes of God, and in
the eyes of all good Men while living, when dead, and after death, yea, for
ever. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.6.

Because the Saints are precious in Gods sight, therefore they are honorable,
Isa. 43.4. honorable both in the sight of God and all good men; God's eyes and
heart are upon them: The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, says David,
they have respect to all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. and God has respect
to them in all their Concernments, Exodus 2. ult. They honor him, and he
honors them, 1 Samuel 2.30. For any service done for him, he will honor them,
John 12.26. what ever they do well, shall be sure to receive a fair testimony
from God; They need not blow a Trumpet in their own praise when they have done
well, as the Pharisees did: For what they have done well, the Lord himself (for
their honor) will report to all the world, as he did Job's holy carriage in
doing and suffering, both in the whole course of his life, and in that
particular passage of the loss of his Cattle and Children, Job ^.21, 22.

They that carry themselves well, either i^ Suffering or working for God, shall
have glory, honor, and peace from God, Romans 2.10. And when they do any new or
further service for God, God will add some further honor an^ respect to them,
as he did to Job, when he ha^ done a piece of new service, Job 2.3. He hold
fast his integrity. He was described before in the first Chap. as an holy man,
now he is described a a tried man, as an approved Soldier, Job obtains this
honor in the Combat with Satan, a glorious addition to his character. As
Job's graces increased, so did God's testimony increase concerning him; God
will not conceal any of the graces, nor the improvements of the grace of his
people: Nay, if they speak but a good word for God, they shall hear of it
again; God takes it and pens it down, Malac. 3.19.

As it is usual with Kings, for great Service done them (especially in Wars and
Battles) to make additions to their Titles of Honor, to give some new Mottoes,
or put some new Devices in the Coat Armor of those who serve them; So the Lord
does to his Saints. Thus Jacob in prevailing by Prayers and Supplications (the
Ammunition and Arms of the Saints) with the Angel, is called Israel, a
prevailer with God. God honors the Saints while living, he call them his
Friends, Abraham the Friend of God, John 15.14, 15. What a great honor was it
to Noah, that God himself, when they were all got into the Ark, would shut the
door? Genesis 7.16.

He honors them and prizes them in their Death, their Death is precious, Psalm.
116.15. He honors them when Dead; It was an honor to Moses, that the Lord
buried him, Deuteronomy. 34.6. Though its true, there was another reason, why the
place of his Burial was kept secret, lest they should superstitiously adore him
and worship him, yet 'twas a real respect and honor that he buried him.

The Lord puts white Garments of Glory upon them, that they may walk with him
in them, Revel. 3.4. Yea, He puts a weighty Crown of Glory upon their Heads, 2
Cor. 4.17. A Crown of Glory that fades not away.

And as they are honorable in the sight of God, so in the eyes of his Saints;
the Citizen of Zion is described amongst other Qualifications, by this also,
that He is a man that honors them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4. They honor
them while living; and when dead, by an honorable Interment; and after Death,
by honorable Thoughts of them, by honorable Speech in the mention of them,
and by the Imitation of their Virtues and Graces: and thus the memory of the
just is blessed, Prove. 10.7. When persons in After-ages shall remember them,
and the things memorable in them, they shall bless them and highly esteem them;
they shall not be so much as mentioned or spoken without praise or benediction;
This is Honor to their Memories.

The end therefore of the following Narrative of the holy Life of Mary Wilson
(next to the Glory of God, the Edification of the Church i^ general, the use
and benefit of that Body where of she was a Member, and the profit and comfort
of her Parents, and other near and dea^ Relations surviving) is the advancement
of he^ Memory, and an encouragement for others imitation, who often follow
Patterns more tha^ Precepts; And to present, as exemplary, th^^ the Piety and
Holiness of her that is deceased for that end.

When persons that dye are persons of known worth and usefulness, it is not fit
that their Graces should die with them, and that Virtue should be defrauded of
its public honor. And because God honors them that honor him, the Church
has been always careful to preserve and embalm their Memories: And so is that
Promise made good, and the Will of God served therein, whose mind it is, That
the Memory of the Jus^ should be blessed, Prove. 10.7. and kept from rotting;
whereas the Name of the wicked ro^^ together with their Carcases.

And if the Authors of the ensuing Narrative, with its adjuncts, had only
designed in the Publication thereof to continue the Memory and Christian
Example of that precious Saint and ^ervant of Christ, whose Death gave occasion
to them, nothing had been done unworthy a Chri^tian aim; Praise and Public
honor, being a Debt that is owed to the righteous; a debt, says Nazianzen in
one of his Funeral Orations, that of all debts is most just. And as the ancient
Church was wont to preserve the Memory of the Saints ^^ those famous Dyptichs;
So might they seek ^^ continue the Memory of her Graces in this ^ublick Record,
that though being dead, she ^ight yet speak. She really deserves both glory,
raise, and honor: Glory, that she be accounted virtuous and gracious: Praise,
an honorable ^ention of her for her virtues: and Honor, viz. a ^estification
of the former good opinion by some ^utward signs, as Commendation, erecting of
^tatues, or Pillars, etc. -- It Is said of Ab^lom, that in his lifetime he had
taken and reared ^p for himself a Pillar, and called it after his own ^ame,
because he had no son to keep his name in ^emembrance, 2 Samuel 18.18. Yet that
Remembrance of his, as Job says, proved like ashes. The ^ollowing Narrative
will be a far better Monument to preserve the Memory of her Name, and ^he name
of her Parents.

It has ever been the custom of the Church ^^ God, to write the story of the
Lives of eminent and well-deserving persons and it is pity the such Memorials
should be lost, and condemn^ to an obscure privacy, both for their own
usefulness, and for her sake that was the occasion ^^ them. Certainly God's
Worthies deserve so^^ public Monument to continue their Memo^^ and Example;
for the imitation of the Good, an^ the reproof of the Bad. The Apostle tells
u^^ That dead Saints may yet speak, Hebr. 11.4. th^^ is, Preach by their
Example: But then the^ must be some to continue the memory of th^^ example, or
else how should it speak ought o^^ instruction to future Ages.

Therefore the Apostle observes of Abel, in th^^ forenamed place, (...) He
obtained witness that he was righteous; which may be referred to the public
witness and testimony of the written Word, where his usual tit^^ and style is
righteous Abel, Matt. 23.35. And ^^ had said before of all the Patriarchs, v.
2. (...), They obtained a good report (to wit, ^^ the Church) by the
Scriptures. Now since the Canon of Faith was closed up, there is no reason that
the Memory of the Saints should be lost; an^ therefore God has in every Age
stirred up some that can handle the pen of the Writer, by some public Record,
to consign their Example to the use of the Church; though it is true, it is
confesse^ that many have been forgotten, who were other^wise famous in their
generations, for want of ^are in this kind.

Besides, the Lord has not only given us his Word for a Rule, but he has
given us Examples also as a Rule to walk by; he has given us his own Example
to imitate, Ephesians. 5.1. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. And his Sons Example, 1 John 2.6. Heb.
12.2, 3. 1 Pet. 2.21. Mat. 11.24. Learn of me

But besides these leading, unerring Examples, the Examples of the Saints are
to be commended to our Imitation, both in Doing and Suffering; Whatsoever was
written aforetime, was written for our Learning, Romans 15.4. And Examples are
written: we are bidden To go forth by the footsteps of the Flock, Cant. 1.8.
Why has the Holy Ghost set the Pens of so many on work to write the Lives of
the Saints? Why has he kept a Record of them in his own Book, but for
Instruction and Direction of his People in aftertime? The Lord has not
registered one act of the Saints, but it is useful for us; The acts of the
Saints are full of Practical Divinity, and their sufferings and troubles are
full of Pathetical Divinity, as the Exhortation of St. James does more than
intimate, Jam. 5.10. Hence those ancient Saints and Believers in Hebr. 12.1.
are called a cloud of Witnesses; because there is a directive and leading
virtue in them: As there was a Cloud that went before the Children of Israel in
the Day, to lead them; So this cloud of witness^ leads us up and down the
wilderness of our Sorrows, and in the dark night of our Sufferings.

That the gracious, pious, and holy actings ^^ the fornamed deceased Saint, may
be an addition to this Cloud for your direction and conduct, ^^ in part the
design of the following Narrative with the Additionals. Read it, and imitate
Live, as she, in the Fear of God and Faith ^^ Christ, and you shall dye, as
she, in his favor and everlastingly partake of that Felicity, which she is now
possessing in Heaven.

A brief Narrative of the holy and pious Life, and patient, peaceful, and
Christian Death of MARY WILSON.
MAry Wilson was born at Crosfield in the Parish of Kirkoswold in Cumberland,
the nineteenth Day of November, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six
Hundred Fifty and Two; Her Fathers name is Richard Wilson, a person of
exemplary Piety, and of singular Sincerity and Integrity, and a very useful
Instrument in the House of God in that Place and Office with which he is
dignified, in his careful and prudent management of that Power and Authority
with which he is clothed, and to which he is advanced.

Her Mothers name was Mary Martendale (descended from an honest, wealthy, and
wellesteemed Parentage) a great lover of Hospitality, and of good Men: For
their outward Estate, they have a competent Sufficiency, an estate sufficient
to preserve an honest report and repute amongst their Neighbors, and to be
helpful to them as occasion and opportunity serves, and necessity calls for it;
Not so rich, as by their Wealth to be exposed to envy, nor so poor as by want
to be liable to contempt; more enriched they are with the love of their
Neighbors, and with the great esteem they have amongst them for their virtuous
and Christian demeanor amongst them, and helpfulness to them; but most of all
enriched in having so rich a Daughter, who was Heir of a Crown and Kingdom,
and is now Possessor of the same.

While she lived, she was a mirror of Woman-hood for her time; and now being
dead, a Pattern of true Christianity. She was from a Child, of a sweet and
affable Disposition, and exceeding loving and engaging to all People; from her
very Infancy she was a most dutiful and obedient Child to her Parents, and to
all her Superiors, (a great Reproof to Children for the^^ Disobedience in this
present Age, and a good Pattern for their Imitation.) But her surpassing love
was mostly shown to her Father, above a^ her Relations besides, which was much
manifested, by her desirousness of being continually present with him: So that
as soon as ever she ha^ strength to go forth in his hand, she would wa^^ into
the fields with him, and begin to enquire who made such and such things, which
she b^ held and observed.

Her Father then taking notice of it, ender voured to inform her about the
Creation of the World, and the Three Persons in the Trinity and in several
other things, bordering upon an^ drawn from thence. All which Instructions she
^^dily apprehended, drank in, laid up and remembered, even as fast as he could
lay them open ^^d out to her, and never after forgot them to ^^r dying Day.
Which may be both a Pattern, ^^d also an encouragement for Parents imitation,
^^ teach their Children their trade (to educate ^^em virtuously) while young,
and they shall ^^ continue, and never depart from it, Prove. 22.6. ^^ teach
their Children the Knowledge of their ^^eator in the days of their Youth from
the ^^atures; and to learn them the invisible things ^^ the Godhead, by the
things that are made and ^^vious to their view and sight.

And that which may further encourage ^^ents to instruct and teach their
Children ^^ their Minority, is this, That God has ap^^inted their Teaching and
godly Education, as means to make their Children Disciples, and to ^^ng them to
actual Faith and Profession, both ^^ipture and Experience prove it.

Says a Reverend Divine, God commands the ^^ of this means to all Parents,
that they teach ^^m the Law of God, and Trade of their Life, ^^d to rehearse
the Words of God, and to whet ^^m continually upon them, that they may print
^^m more deeply in their minds, Deuteronomy. 6.7. And ^^ng them up in the nurture and
admonition of the ^^rd from their Childhood, Ephesians. 6.4. So that ^^s is the
first means for actual Faith which God has appointed. Now God will appoint ^^
means to be used, from which he will ordinarily withdraw his Grace, or deny his
Blessing, if ^^ be rightly used.

Certainly, if-godly Education be as well ^^ Ordinance, as Ministerial and
public Preaching and go before it; then may men expect God Blessing on their
endeavors in such education of their Children, as well as on the public
M^nistry. God sets none upon vain and fruitle^^ Works, and experience confirms
it, that Go^^ does frequently bless this means before the pu^lick Ministry
comes: Not to instance in all th^^ in Scripture that were Godly from their
Childhood; it is commonly seen in our times, that man (or at least many) of the
Children of Godly P^rents, that are truly sanctified, did receive the
^^ginnings of it in their youth; And I doubt not, said another Divine, but if
Parents did faithful discharge their Duty to their Children, that G^^ who set
them on work, would bless it, and lea^^ but few to be first converted by the
Ministry wit^^ the Church; the chief use of that being to gu^^ and govern the
Church, and to build up the Dis^^ples, and to convert those without, as it was
^^ the Primitive times.

In the time of her Youth, or rather Childhood (at which time they generally
speak, ^^^ sport and play like Children; yet she was n^^^ observed to be given
to such Childish Play, (...) other Children, though at that time she might have
had her liberty) some of the Servants in the Family, upon a certain time, going
abroad to a Morriment, so termed, desired leave of her Parents that she might
go along with them; which ^he understanding, readily refused to go: It being
asked her, why she would not? She re^lied, I think God will not love me if I go
to such Meetings.

Betwixt the Eighth and Ninth year of her Age ^he was sorely visited with the
Small Pox, insomuch that to an eye of reason, Death did look ^er in the Face;
at which time, in the hearing of many Persons, she uttered much Heavenly
Language, to the admiration of those that heard ^er. And when her Father took
his sorrowful leave of her, to go for the Doctor ( viz. Mr. ^ilpin,) she said,
My Dear Father, Take no ^hought for me, for if we never meet in this world, I
hope we shall meet in Heaven. But it then ^leased the All-gracious God to bless
the Means ^or her Recovery, and to add to her days many ^ears, that She might
be more for his Glory, and her Soul might have more assurance of his love.

Not long after her restoring to health, about ^he ninth Year of her Age; A
Gentleman coming ^o her Father's house, in Discourse with her Father, he told
him, That there was a strong report, that the Parliament was about to put forth
an Act for the Banishment of all the} Non-conformists i^ England; she having
overheard the Discourse the next day took occasion to speak to her Father about
it, and said, Father, In case that A^ come forth, that you were speaking of
yesternight must you go with the rest into Banishment? He Father then told her,
if it proved so, he knew nothing but he might. Her Father then aske^ her
whether she would go with him, or sta^ with her Mother and the rest of her
Relations She replied, She would not stay, she would go alo^^ with her Father.
But he observing the Tears i^ her eyes, said, My dear Child, I am afraid ^^
this should come to pass, it would prove a trouble to thee, but thou see I
can no way help it, unl^^ I should Conform; Therefore tell me, whether thou will go with me freely, or thou will have ^^ to Conform, and so I may abide
with you? She then replied, with Tears in her eyes, No, ^^ Father, though they
should do with you, as th^^ did with Mr. -- I would not have you to Conform.

As she grew in Years, she ripened apace ^^ Knowledge and Experience, and was
much ^^ her Duty both to God and Man: But to her de^ Parents especially, she
was a lump of Love an^ Duty, signifying duty by her affable Disposition and
humble Deportment and Carriage; denying her self in any thing, that might have
the lea^^ show of dislike to them.

How much she desired to be in her Duty to ^er God, clearly appeared in this,
in that she ^as unsatisfied to live without the enjoyment of any of God's
Ordinances or Gospel-priviledges; and earnestly sollicitous to give up her self
to God and to his Church, in obedience to God's Command, by a professed
subjection to all Gospel-appintments, in God's own way, and according ^
Scripture-Rule and Order: For upon a certain ^me she waited an opportunity, and
told her ^ather, she could not but give him an account that God had graciously
done for her Soul, and ^en began and held forth at large, according to ^e Grace
of God bestowed upon her, and given ^^ her, as will by her Experiences more
fully appear.

After much Heavenly Discourse with her about that she had held forth, her
Father propounded several Questions to her, some of which were ^undamental
Points in Divinity; and he found ^er so apt and ready in her Replies and
Answers, that he was much satisfied, That in what she bake, she was guided by
Judgment.

In the close of the Discourse, she desired her ^ather to acquaint the Officers
of the Church that according to that Scripture, 2 Cor. 8.5. They gave
themselves up first to God, and then a us by the Will of God.) For she said,
She was ^ally convinced, that a Christian ought not to live ^^ the neglect of
the enjoyment af any Gospel-Ordinance or Privilege, when they might enjoy them:
and in order thereunto, (according to the forecited Scripture) there ought to
be a more solems giving up of our selves to walk in Gospel- Order, before we
can rightfully partake of all Gospel- Privileges: And she then further said,
She should be ready ( according to that Scripture Psalm. 66.26. Hearken unto me
all you that fear the Lord, and I Will tell you what he has done for my Soul)
(...) give a reason of the Hope that was in her, and Satisfaction so far as she
was able, when called to it^ Which Practice, and orderly Scriptural proceeding
of hers, may be both a seasonable Reproof to several Professors of this present
Age, who securely remain like Sheep, scattered upon th^^ Mountains, living in
the continued neglect ^^ Gospel-Fellow-ship and Ordinances, thereby exposing
themselves to be as a Prey for ravening Wolves, and to be taken in the Snares
of subtle seducing Foxes; As also a good Pattern for the Imiation of others,
who are looking after the Lord, and asking the way to Zion, with their faces
thitherward.

As to her Carriage and engaging Disposition t^^ those with whom she was
acquainted, they be^^ know themselves; But this was well known, that if her
Father could have answered the many Invitations, that many dear Friends gave
her to their Families, he might have enjoyed her but seldom at home.

As to her Duty and reverend Respect that she gave to her Parents, both at home
and abroad, ^t was such, and so much, that gave them sometimes occasion to
fear, that some might censure them, as being ambitious of such Respect, which
made them caution her to that purpose; But when they did it, she would reply,
No, my Father, what I do is but my Duty: I cannot help ^t, if others will
misconstrue it.

As to her Usefulness in Sacred things, her ^ractice in reading the Scriptures,
and the Labors of Holy Men, was such, as it was very rare ^o name that
Scripture, that she could not have turned unto; and what else she read was much
^er own, for she would at any time have discoursed the material Points of what
she read, specially in Mr. Brooks his Apples of Gold, Mr. Love's Different
Degrees of Grace, and Mr. Shepherds Sincere Convert, and Sound Belever;
comparing these together, and then her own condition with them all.

She was also well-grounded in the Assemblies catechism, which she learned
when she was yet ^ry young.

Once a Week, when the Family had been catechized, she would come to be
examined herself, desiring still to be more and more informed ^^ the knowledge
of those great Fundamental ^ints: Nay, such was the eagerness of her de^^e to
get Knowledge and Understanding in the great matters of Godliness, that her
Father has said, Many a night, after all the Family have been gone to Bed,
would she have kept him up, propounding many Questions, and raising many
Objections and Doubts, insomuch that he has said (he may speak it to his loss
and shame) h^^ has been weary to sit so late to have answere^ her; yet for all
that, she would not willingly part with him, but would say, Father, As some
harder Questions, these are not hard enough^ All which clearly discovers and
manifests o^ what great use she was to her Father, in putting him to the daily
exercise of those measures of Gift and Graces that God had bestowed upon him.

As to her Practice in Religious Duties, She was a constant Observer of
Set-times, for her private Devotion and Retirements with God, an^ a great Lover
of praising God in Singing ^^ Psalms, not only in Family-Duty, but also by
her-self alone; Her Parents say (and some in the Family besides know,) That
after she has been laid down in Bed, she would have raised a Psalm She was
much upon the 81 Psalm, beginning a^ the 14 verse. and Psalm. 84.13. Thine arm is
strong and full of power, etc. and Psalm. 31.19, 20, 21 and 125. 2d Translation.
She was also a constant Attender upon the Word preached; it is known to many,
that Day nor Night, however the Weather blew, it seemed not hard or tedious ^^
her, when she knew of an opportunity of hear^^ the Word; and its no great
Wonder, she havnig such great encouragement thereunto, through ^he Lord's
abundant blessing her Endeavors with so great an increase both of Gifts and
Graces: In point of Memory, from the fifteenth year ^f her Age, to the last
Sermon that ever she ^eard, she would ordinarily have repeated them ^x tempore:
Her Father has taken a Sermon ^om her Mouth, a Week after it was preached, and
penned it.

So zealous was she in the Service of her God, that she was observed, after she
came Home from ^earing the Word preached, she forthwith went ^id fell down
before the Lord, and watered it with Tears, and then as soon as the Family was
^^ order, she came and repeated. A Friend ^^tely declared (since her Decease)
with Tears, ^^ what great use she had been to her and some Neighbour-women
about her, that were zealously ^fected; she would sometimes meet with them, and
repeat to them the Sermon she had last heard, and then read to them some part
of those Books which had been so useful to her, and then disbursed them over,
till she would have drawn ^ears from their eyes.

Nay further, It now seems clear to her Pa^^nts and others, that the Lord did
reveal some ^ecial Secrets to her in particular: It was very ^pparent she had
strong impressions of her death, ^^ considerable time before it came; for
instance, about a Quarter of a Year before she died, she being alone with her
Father, having no Discourse tending that way, upon the sudden she said, My
Father, if I dye, I would have you take my Aunt Mabal home, and make her your
Child^ Her Father then replied, That she knew he loved her Aunt well, But why
did she say so? He hoped that God would continue her to be his Child. But, as
her Father apprehended, she seemed as though she feared that the Saying had
some impression upon him, and so turned it off, that she only spoke it, in case
it should be so.

At another time, A young Kinswoman being come to live in the Family, at
several times she would take her into the Parlour, and show he^ how to order
and dress the Room, when she was not there, as she said; and would several
time^ have given her charge, to have a special care o^ her dear Father, and
would show her how to order his Linen, both at home, and when he^ went abroad:
To all which, and much more, the Maid would reply, Why do you speak so and so,
you will see to all these things your self ^^ Her Reply was, Well, But do you
so, when I am not here. And the Day before she died, She named the very Day
upon which she should be interred.

As to her usefulness in civil things: For her Sempstry; She was well-grounded
in all the grounds of it, so that what piece of Work soever she had seen, it
was not tedious to her to take it in; as her many pretty Works, left behind
her, do amply testify: So for her House-wifery, her Gravity in that point
bespoke her to be almost double her Age. Seldom has one of her Age been known
to have such a frugal Forecast and quick Insight into the managing of
Domestical Affairs, both with Neatness and Frugality.

She would not see any empty place in her Fathers House, but she would have
that furnished according to her Fathers ability; So that her Hospitality and
Frugality might be seen at once.

She has been often heard to say, She would not eat her Morsels alone; meaning
when she had something more than ordinary Provision: And would also have
desired her Mother, To do good to all, especially to the household of Faith. In
a word, such was her Industry in Houshold-affairs, that the burden and care of
the Family was almost quite taken of her Mother, which now makes the burden the
greater in the want of her.

As to her Father, put all her Accomplishments together and she, she was the
Joy of his Heart; he has been heard to say, That if he should have published
but the one half of the many Circumstances of her exceeding great Usefulness to
him, both in Sacred and Civil things, with her winning and engaging Disposition
to him, many Sheets of Paper would not contain them.

For when they have been under any frowning Providence, she could have
out-faith't him at any turn; And when she had observed any occasion of trouble
upon her Father, then she would mind him of what the Lord had formerly done for
him, backing it with some suitable Scripture; and as to her extraordinary Love
to him, and tenderness over him it appeared very many ways.

Her ordinary way of making mention of her Father's name in the Family, was,
Where is my joy? or, Where is my jewel? And her Father being tender, and
sometime exercised under a threatening Distemper, many would have said, That it
made her look liker Death than her Father. She would sometimes have said, She
should never endure to see her Father die: And after his Fits had been over,
and he pretty well again, yet for many Nights after, she would rise of her own
accord, and come down in the dark Night, to see how her Father was; So that she
might well say of him, and he retort it back again in the words of good old
Jacob concerning Benjamin, My life is lapt up in the Lass.

And as she was a careful and constant Performer of her Duty both to God and
Man, walking in all the Commandments of God, and serving the Lord in Holiness
and Righteousness, thereby becoming an useful Instrument, while she lived in
health in her place and station, so she manifested much Piety toward God,
quiet and cheerful submission to his Will, and much Charity toward Man, much
Patience, Christian Prudence, Courage, and Hope, whilst under her Deathbed
Distemper; as will appear more at large by her Occasional Speeches at that
time; and at last She died in Peace, with much Assurance of God's Love,
resigning up her Soul to God, and falling asleep in the Lord, the Third Day of
August, 1672, being Nineteen Years of Age, and Three Months.

The EXPERIENCES of Mrs Mary Wilson, as they were taken from her own mouth, in
the fifteenth year of her Age, which was in the year of our Lord, 1667.
AT that time when my Father was at London (which was in the Year aforesaid) it
was the good pleasure of God to draw out my Affections to the Lord, and after
the means of Grace; So that I often thought it long after one opportunity of
Grace passed, till another came to be enjoyed. And at that time, when I had any
thoughts about the present Troubles that we were under, (meaning the Troubles
about her Father's Estate, which the^ depended upon a Trial in the High Court
of Chancery) I then thought, that I could freely submit to the good pleasure of
the Lord, whatever he had a mind to do in it. And I had then very longing
Desires to read some good Books; whereupon I was happily cast upon Mr. Brooks
his Book entitled, Apples of Gold, etc. By the reading of which, especially
some Motives to stir up young one^ to fear the Lord, the Lord was pleased to
make them of Use, for the good of my Soul; As First, The Consideration that
Christ died for us betimes, and why should not we live to him betimes? O give
not Christ cause to say, that I died for you betimes, why should not you have
lived to me betimes, etc. Who but Souls much left of God, and blinded by Satan,
can hear the Lord Jesus say, I laid down a Ransom for some betimes, etc. I
satisfied Divine Justice betimes, I pacified my Fathers wrath betimes. Who can
hear Christ reckon up all what he has done for Souls, and not fall in Love and
League with Christ, and for ever to be united to Christ, and for ever be one
with Christ? And I thought the reading of these, and other Motives did more and
more engage my heart to Christ. And then I considered, That though I had made
Conscience before of committing the least Sin, that I knew to be a Sin, yet I
had not given up my self to the Lord, in that serious manner that I ought to
have done: for I was too vain (as I now see) both in my Thoughts, Words and
Actions, and went on securely, and did not at all question my Estate and
Condition; nor did I see any thing of the evil of mine own heart, till the Lord
was pleased to discover it to me. And when I did endeavor to set my self to
any Duty, or to have my Meditations upon any thing that was good; then I found
the starting up of Sin in my Heart, and a woeful Aversness and Backwardness in
my heart to any thing that was good. And though I was sensible of something
that was my Duty to do, which (as I thought) I would have willingly done, yet
when I came to it, it seemed burdensome to me. Afterward I read Mr. Shepherds
Sincere Convert, by which the Lord was pleased to let me see, from whence all
that backwardness in my heart did spring, the cause of which was that Original
Sin that I brought into the world with me; And then it was the grief of my
heart, that I could not be humbled for that Sin, as I ought to be: And it did
the more grieve me, in that I had known it before by Questions that my Father
had asked me about it, and yet it did but swim in my brain. I did not think
that it was mine own Case in particular, nor did I apply it to mine own Heart;
wherefore I did mourn, because I could not mourn enough for, and under such an
oppressing evil as this was to me. Whereupon the Lord gave me in these
supporting Scriptures, Isai. 53.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you Rest.
Then I thought these were very sweet Scriptures, but I had something to object
against my self, that they did not belong unto me; because I felt not the
weight and burden of Sin, in that degree and measure, as I ought. Though I was
sensible of Sin lying upon me, yet I thought Sin, as Sin, was not so real a
burden to me, as it ought to have been: And therefore I concluded, that I had
no Right to such Promises, but put them often away from me, till it pleased the
Lord to set home that other Scripture upon my heart, Mat. 12.20. A bruised reed
shall he not break, and smoking slax shall he not quench: till he send forth
judgment unto Victory. And providentially reciting Mr. Love's Different Degrees
of Grace, I found that same place opened sweetly, which told me to my
encouragement, That though there was much smoke of Infirmity, yet if there was
but the least breathings of Grace, the Lord would not quench it, but breath
upon it, and increase it: And that he would not despise the Day of small
things. And by these things I was much encouraged and refreshed. After that
hearing Mr. Nicholson upon Math. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; From which was observed, That it
is not a bare, naked, and ^mpty Profession of Religion, though never so
^ealously maintained, that is sufficient to save any ^an. In his Discourse upon
this point, he came ^ show how easy a thing it was to mistake about a ^od
Profession and a bad one.

First, From the nearness of their resemblance ^^ch to other. The lamps of the
five foolish Virgins, were like to the lamps of the five wise Virgins.

Secondly, By comparing our selves at present, ^^th what we had been before; a
man may be ^^other Creature, and yet not a new Creature.

Thirdly, We may mistake, by comparing our ^^ves with others that are worse (in
appearance) ^^an our selves.

Fourthly, By some superficial Touches, and ^^ward Flashes of Conscience; a man
may pro^^^ from Conviction, as well as from Conversion. By the hearing of this
I was again discouraged, ^^d brought again to fear, that all this time I ^^d
but been under some superficial Touches upon ^^ Affections; and I thought my
Profession was ^^ good, or (at least) I might be mistaken about (...) because
it was an easy thing to mistake it. But ^^erwards he came to distinguish
betwixt a good ^^fession and a bad, and showed;

First, That a true Profession of Religion, it ^aies respects Christ, as the
Fountain and ^^der of it.

Secondly, It leads to Christ, as the mark and end of it.

Thirdly, It arises from such a principle ^^ Grace within, as puts down the
Creature in it own eyes, but lifts up Christ and his Grace.

Fourthly, It is always attended with an high valuation of Christ.

Fifthly, It makes much of Christ in the wor^ of times, Christ's Cross is as
really dear, as h^^ Crown. But on the other hand, A false Profession of Christ
springs from self, directs ^^ self, exalts self, and does but make a stalking
horse of Christ at best.

These things (through the Blessing of God) ten^^ much to my Satisfaction and
Comfort; for by th^^ marks, I thought I could truly say, That (...) sired to go
to Christ, as my Fountain and Feed^^ and could do no further than I had Christ
to be (...) fountain and feeder. And I thought I could truly s^ that I desired
the end of my life might be the Gl^^ of Christ. But after this (through my
Corruption and Weaknesses) these things did slide out of my mi^^ Then Fears
began to arise again, That all ^^ not right with me, finding especially the
avers^^ of my heart to the performance of every Duty: (...) the wonted evils
that were in my heart remain^^ And many Fears possessed my Soul, that all (...)
depart from me again, and it proved so. T^^ Scripture being often upon my
Spirit, If thou (...) g^ard Iniquity in thine heart, the Lord will not ^^ear
thy Prayer; Whereupon I concluded that ^here was nothing but Iniquity in my
heart, and so (...) would give over Praying. And I did give it ^ver for many
Days, except at some single times, and then I found not the Presence of God (as
^eretofore) and so found it to be but liveless Duty, ^^at I performed. And thus
continuing for some ^^me in the neglect of Duty, and my Heart growing vain and
light, yet not considering from ^hence I was fallen all this while.

But after a while, I began to consider, that I ^^d suffered woeful decays in my
Affections; and ^^ thought I would endeavor to get my heart into ^^ better
frame against another time, but when ^^ at time came that I pitched upon, then
I was ^^ far off as ever. And then woeful Fears began ^^arise in my Heart, That
all the Profession that ^^ad made, had not been of God, but from some
^^f-design; For if it had been a work of God, ^^ would not have decayed: And
therefore I ^^red, that God had given me up to the plague ^^ an hard heart, and
would never own me more. ^^t it pleased the Lord to bring me to the hearing ^^
another Sermon that Mr. Nicholson preached ^^m Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty
God, walk ^ore me, and be thou perfect. From which ^^s observed, In that God is
an All-sufficient ^^d, it is an abundant encouragement unto his People in times
of their distressed estates and conditions. In the Improvement of which point
he came to press to the improvement of God All sufficiency in several estates
and conditions.

First, In times of Temptation, Gods People should make use of God's power, in
their tempting and tempted Seasons: The reason why Temptation takes such hold
is, because poor Souls ta^^ no better hold of God, that is able to delive from
Temptation, to succor in it, and to d^ liver out of it.

Secondly, In times of the working of Corruption, Gods All Sufficiency should
be improved against the strength and filth of Sin. Man honest hearts cannot get
vain thoughts laid by or stave off such a growing Corruption; beca^^^ they draw
not in an All-sufficient God, to man them help.

Thirdly, In times of the weakness of Gra^^ when we cannot believe, hope,
exercise Patience, etc. Gods Almighty Power should (...) leaned upon, and eyed,
and made use of (...) underprop weak Grace.

Fourthly, In times of Duty, active and (...) sive Obedience, many faint,
Because they (...) not on him that is able to help, and carry (...) and in, and
through every Duty.

By these things the Lord helped me to see, (...) I had relied upon mine own
strength, and not (...) proved Gods All Sufficiency. And it pleased (...) Lord
to turn this to my encouragement, that I had an All-sufficient God to go unto.
Whereupon I resolved to step into the presence of God, to bread my Condition
before him again. But when I did attempt this: and came with resolution to have
spoken unto the Lord, then it was cast into any Thoughts, Durst I pray unto the
Lord, that ^ad neglected to pray unto him so long? Then I ^hought, well were it
for me if I could but discover any condition unto my father, that he might pray
^or me: But through the temptation of Satan, I ^^uld not do it. But considering
again of the All Sufficiency of God, I thought it was a great thing: ^ut alas!
I knew not, nor could I find, that ^od had ever made over himself in any
Promise ^ me, seeing I had so woefully declined from Him. ^ut it pleased the
Lord to give me in that Scripture, Isai. 40.31. But they that wait upon ^^e
Lord shall renew their strength: they ^^all mount up with wings as Eagles; they
shall ^^n, and not be weary, and they shall walk ^^d not faint. Then I thought
and resolved, ^^ough the Lord should please to keep me in the ^^rk all my Days,
and never discover more of ^^imself to me, yet would I wait upon him all my
^^ys.

That Text also in Revel. 2.5. Remember ^^erefore from whence thou art fallen,
and re^^nt, and do the first works, etc. was set upon (...), whereby I did
gather, that it was a Call from the Lord to me, to repent of my Relapses and
Declinings from him; which I desired to set about, and beg Grace for the
performance and discharge thereof. And then I made bold to step again i^^ the
presence of the Lord, and found my He^^ more drawn forth to Christ, than I did
before; ^^ did enjoy more Communion with the Lord the formerly. And reading
that Scripture in H^^ sea 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed th^^ self, but in
me is thine help: Hereby I was comforted to think, that though I had gone on in
path that would have led me to mine own destruct^ on, yet my help was not in my
self, but in t^^ Lord.

Then afterward hearing Mr. Davies upon Mal. 4.2. But unto you that fear my
Nam^ shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings, and ye
shall go forth, and gro^ up as Calves in the stall. From which he shown (among
many other things delivered,) The Grace might grow in poor Souls, and they ^^
know how it grew: As for instance, Trees (...) Winter they grow, and yet not
discernable ho^^ they grow; So poor Souls, though they cannot discern how they
grow, yet after some time they are able to experience that they are grown From
which I began to be encouraged to thing that though I could not witness how I
had grown yet that there was a Change upon me.

Then he came to give some Directions, H^^ grow in Grace? One of which was
this, Such as would grow in Grace, must get into the House of God; and that it
ought to be but as the Valley ^f Bacha o us, a House of Mourning, till we be ^^
the House of God, Psalm. 92.13, 14. Those that be planted in the House of the
Lord, shall ^ourish in the Courts of our God. They shall ^ill bring forth fruit
in old Age: they shall be ^t and flourishing. The Consideration of which, ^^d
very much incline my Heart to join in Fellowship with the Lords People.

Yet again, these two Scriptures were cast into ^^y thoughts, that caused these
scruples to arise in ^^y Spirit, That I was not a new creature; nor ^^^ld I
satisfactorily find, That Christ was formed (...) me, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man
be in Christ, (...) is a new creature. and 2 Cor. 13.5. And ^^ow ye not your
selves, how that Christ Jesus ^^in you, except ye be Reprobates? Yet it ^^ased
the Lord to answer these Objections, and ^^move these Scruples in a great
measure, which ^^ded no little comfort to me, from a Sermon ^^eached by Mr.
Nicholson, out of Numb. 14.24. ^^ut my servant Caleb, because he had another
^^rit with him, etc. In that Sermon he came to (...) down some marks and signs
of this other Spirit, (...). Where this other Spirit is, there is new ^^ght,
new Taste, new Affections, new Desire, ^^ve, Joy, Delight, Sorrow, Fear, etc.
new ^^ays, Rules, End, Aims, Designs new Company, new Comforts, etc. with many
others. All which did abundantly comfort me, in that ^ could experience much of
what was said in the particular. And I then thought, that this w^^ given in
unto me, to remove those Scruples bef^^ mentioned.

Then the Lord was pleased to set that Scriptu^^ upon me, 2 Cor. 8.5. But first
gave their o^^ selves to the Lord, and unto us by the Will ^^ God.} From which
place, I did humbly concei^^ it to be my Duty to propound my self unto th^^
Church, to walk with the Members of it in t^^ Order of the Gospel, if so I may
be thought ^^ any measure fit for such a Communion.

A brief Narrative of the occasional Discourse, and memorable Passages, that
Mary Wilson expressed a little before her Death.
ON Tuesday, July 23. She began to be not Well, yet not very Sick, but was in a
weet frame of Spirit, and much in her private Retirements with God: But on the
Lords Day ^^ night, when her Father came home from the Exercise, she began to
be much worse; And upon his going to her, and asking her how she ^id: She
replied, O my dear Father! I feel ^undance of Coldness and Deadness upon my
eart to every Duty; which makes me to mourn (...) my spirit, that I have not
had so sweet Con^^erse with my God, as I was wont to have: with such more
melting language to that purpose. Whereupon he took occasion to offer her, what
^e Lord was pleased to give in unto him, for ^er satisfaction; viz. That at
such a time, she ^as an incompetent Judge of her self, because her ^stemper was
enough then for her to grapple withal. ^t then pleased the All-gracious God to
give her Comfort; and she earnestly, with much ar^ency of spirit, implored the
Lord for his Divine Assistance, to carry her through that D^stemper: so as she
might be fit, either to live o^dye.

On Monday, she passed on still in a very sweet frame, not seemingly sick.

On Tuesday, about two of the Clock, she begun to be very sick; and said,
Father, I would entreat you to be found in the use of means for me for if this
that lies in my Breast cannot be remeved, I cannot long subsist. Whereupon with
trembling heart he went for a Doctor, and before he could return, the Lord had
opened he Mouth, and given her the Tongue of the Learned, so that her Lips
uttered many divine Sentences; which (is well hoped) will never be forgotten of
them that heard her.

In the Evening, she seeing their Man-servan^ Andrew, called him to come to
her; and shaked hands with him: for she well knowing him to be zealously
affected, desired him to pray for her; saying, I have a cold Heart of mi^^ own,
and many a frozen duty I have performed I desire you to pray for me; and pray
that ^^ Passage may be easy.

And further she said unto him, What have you seen by me? have not I been proud
and haughty? and have not I taken notice of many thingh that a gracious, humble
Heart would have passe^ over? To which he replied, That if God should have
marked his Iniquities, he might have see much more in him, than ever he saw in
her.

Then she rose up, and fetched Mr. Brooke's Apples of Gold; And when she came
to read these Motives, to move Young ones to be good petimes; she kissed the
Book many a time: For those Motives had been sweetly useful to her, in the work
of her Conversion, and now much more in her Dying Condition.

Then she began to speak about her Temptations she had at her first closing
with Christ. How Satan would have persuaded her, to have rested in Civil
Education; being from a Child never addicted to any Vice. But the Lord was then
graciously pleased to let me see (said she) that there was more in the Power of
Godliness, than civil Education; when once I had experience of Christ's Love to
my Soul; Though now I have suffered some Coldness to come upon it. But if I
live, I will watch over this cold Heart of mine; and if I do return, I pray you
all to watch over me. For Mr. Nicholson lately told us, when he ^aught from
John 5. latter part of the 14 v. Behold, thou art made whole: Sin no more, lest
a worse thing come unto thee. It was observed, that Christ's Salvation was
intended, that aftersinning might be prevented. Oh that we could all take heed
of after-sinning! To that purpose she spent a considerable time, in exhorting
all about^er, to improve their time. This was spoken and pressed, with so much
Earnestness and Seriousness, as was exceeding taking upon the hearts of all
those that heard her; still ending with much Self-abasement, desiring some
about her (if she should recover) to watch over her.

The next Day, two of their Maids coming into the Room; She called them to her,
and kissed them, and said, Be good Lasses. I have been in the School of Christ,
and have learned many things; And if I live (through Christ's strength) I will
teach you.

Soon after, her Father came to her, and asked her how she did; She then told
him, She was traveling for another world. And further said, (My dear Father)
If ever I have offended you in all my life, I pray you for give me. His
sorrowful heart being almost overwhelmed with grief, he told her, She rarely
offended him in all her Life; nor could he say, he had any just cause to give
her a Reproof. For if sometimes (which yet was very seldom) occasion of both
were given, through infirmity, not wilfully, her ready and right sense thereof,
ministered such satisfaction, as easily removed the offense, and prevented the
Reproof. Judge then what deep Impression their parting must needs have. She
(then seeing him filled with anguish of heart, and not able to discourse with
her; which I am confident did lose many Divine things, he might have had, had
he been able to have kept up Discourse with her) said, My dear Father, as for
you and my dear Mother, my Life might be desirable; and if it were the Will of
the Lord, I could be willing to live, that I might pay that Debt I owe to you:
But what God will have done, is best of all; and that I freely submit to. Then
pausing a while, she said, I bless the Lord, that will presently deliver me
from two great fears, in seeing my Father and my Mother dye.

On Thursday Night, She got little or no Rest; For the Silver cord was loosed,
and the golden Bowl was almost broken. And on Friday Morning, her Father being
gone but a little from her, She sent for him with speed; At whose first coming,
she cheerfully said, My Dear Father, Let now who will be heir of Cross-field:
For I am going to be an Heir with Jesus Christ. She then taking notice of the
sad impression it had upon him, said, Father, Give me up freely.

He then told her, he had fallen down before the Lord that morning, and given
her up to him, whether to live or die.

But my Father (said she) I pray you go again, and mind the Lord of that
Covenant between you and him. But she again taking notice of his ^nability to
answer her, because of Anguish of heart, said, My Dear Father, Why can you not
give me up freely? Abraham had but one Son, and he was the Seed of the Promise,
(for it was said, in him should all Nations be blessed) and yet how freely
could he offer him up? (My Dear Father) give me up freely: and Jesus Christ
will be more to you than many Children. Father (said she) you are but a weak
man, and I am persuaded, that another Winter will set my Mother hard to it; And
as for you, (my Grand mother) it will not be long, till you will be with me.
Therefore make ready, and settle your Concerments in the world, as soon as you
can, that you may not be toyled in the world; and then table your selves with
Mr. Nicholson Then she calling to mind, that Mr. Nicholson was sent for, asked
If he was come? But he being gone upon a Visit of the like nature, three
Messengers were sent for him, before he came, which made her think the time
exceeding long for his coming; and often prayed and desired others to pray,
that she might live to see his face, his precious face, that had been so
Instrumental for the good of her Soul. Then she cried again, This Death is hard
to abide; Pray, pray that my Passage may be easy. Then she called to their man
Andrew, saying, Where is that Promise? I, even I will blot one thine
iniquities, for my Names sake: and will not remember thy Sins. Then he turned
to the place, Isa. 43.25. And many a time did she go over these words, I, even
I, am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions, for my names sake; and will not
remember thy Sins.

Then pausing a little, said, Here will I rest, for I have nothing else to rely
upon, but Christ in a Promise. As for all my best Duties, that ever I performed
in all my life, I quit them all, as Physicians of no value; and do freely cast
my self at the feet of Christ: And if I perish, I Will perish there. This was
unspeakable satisfaction to her Father, that now those Sermons, that sometimes
with difficulty she had heard, and those Duties she had performed, and which
had cost her many a Tear, should now be all disowned by her as to
Justification, when she was going to look grim Death in the Face.

And this her father affirms of his own knowledge, she was of such a broken
frame of Spirit, that seldom, or never, did she come from her private
Retirements, but with red Eyes, and watery Cheeks. And sometime, upon
particular occasion, he has joined with her in Prayer, when she would have
poured out her Soul, in such a melting frame of Spirit, Heavenly language and
powerful Arguments, as would have caused him to have groaned in his Spirit: and
blessed the Lord for those eminent Endowments of Gifts and Graces he had endued
her withal.

Presently she cries again, Oh my Father, this Death is hard to abide: Pray,
pray, that my Passage may be easy. Then suddenly, with much ardency of Spirit,
with Hands and Eyes lift up to Heaven, said, Lord Jesus put forth thine Arm,
and take me by the Hand, and say, Come up hither. Then she enquiring again for
Mr. Nicholson, she was told he was not come. She prayed again, That if the Lord
will, she might live to see him. Then beholding her Father, she said, How comes
it, that my Father is without a Cap? Then she called for one, and sat up, and
opened it with her own hands, and then put it upon his Head, who said, It was
the last that ever his dear would put him on.

Then she desired to be remembered to all her natural Relations, leaving a word
of Exhorto them all; namely, That they should come off from the world, and make
sure of Christ. Then she desired to be remembered to all Christian Friends; and
named some of them, saying, Oh the Society of the Saints, the Society of the
Saints! Were I to live again, I would more highly value the Society of the
Saints; the least of Saints.

Then she asked her Father, What day it was? He told her, Friday; Then she
said, It will not be long, till I shall be in Eternity of Felicity; and I shall
be interred upon the Lords day.

Then she asked, If she might give them out her Grave-dress? Which being
referred to her liberty, she called for her Desk, and sat up, and opened it
with her own hand, and laid aside her Shift and the rest of her Clothes, that
she would carry with her to her Grave, being all plain. She desired her Aunt to
put her Fore-headcloath low upon her Brow. Then perceiving that this enflamed
her Fatherwith Sorrow, with the rest of her Relations, she said, Father,
Whether shall the Saints know one another in Heaven? Who then gave her that
satisfaction he could on the Affirmative, and further called to mind, that Mr.
Bolton, in his Joys of Heaven, does positively affirm the same by many
Arguments; as first, That all Knowledge is desirable, but to know one another in
Heaven, is most desirable, 1 Corin. 13.12. But then shall I know, even as I am
known.

Secondly, The Disciples, in the Transfiguration, knew Moses and Elias, whom
they never saw before. Ergo we shall know one another in Heaven; with many more
Arguments to that purpose: which were so satisfactory to her, that ^he blessed
the Lord for that knowledge, especially, that she should know her dear Father
again in Heaven.

She further enquired, Whether the Sins of Saints should come into the Judgment
of Discussion, at the great Day of the Lord? She then remembering Mr. Brooks in
his Apples of Gold, did speak fully to it: and desired it might be read to her,
which accordingly was done. And when she heard it, she then blessed the Lord,
saying, whom he loves once, he loves to the end.

A Friend coming in, and asking her how she did; she said, She was taking
flight into another world: Pray, pray that my Passage may be easu, Then said,
Come Lord Jesus, take me to thy self, hold me fast in thine Arms, and let me
not go.

Then she enquired again for Mr. Nicholson, who presently came, and after
Salutation, he fell down before the Lord, to beg Mercy for her Soul. After
Prayer was done, she desired that the Room might be spared, that she might have
a little private Converse with him. He spent about half an hour with her, which
(as he after told) was mostly about some Doubts she had about the strength of
her Corruptions, and want of Assurance.

In the close of their Discourse, she was still of that mind, that she would
die: He told her, others were fitter to judge in that Case than she; And asked
her how she knew it? She then said, She felt that, that he did not feel.

So in the close of the Day, she fell into a ho^ Fever, and was violently in
it for a season. D^ring which time, the Tempter waited his opportunity, knowing
well he had but a little time t^ do his work in; so that through his
Temptations, and the violency of the Fever for a sma^^ time, she was under a
damp.

Then in the close of the Evening, the Docto^ came again; who gave her some
things, that presently did loosen her Phlegm: and not loo^ after, she fell upon
a sweet sleep (as the Docto^) and Mr. Wilkinson, and others that sat with her,
said, it was about two Hours she slept. When she first awaked, she said, Thou
wicked Satan, How durst thou tempt the Lord of Life? After that she fell into a
Slumber again, and always ^s she awaked, she cried, Sweet Christ, pity me.
Sweet Jesus pity me. Sweet Christ have mercy upon me; several times going over
those Petitions.

Then in the Twilight her Father going to ^er, asked her how she did; She fixed
her eyes steadfastly upon him, but never spoke more. Twice before Breath was
out, we fell down be^^re the Lord, and sent her to Heaven upon ^he wing of
Prayer.

Thus it was apparent, That the many Petitions she had put up to Heaven for her
easy ^^assage, were granted her; and her Entrance ^^to her Fathers House in
Glory, where she has ^^ken up her everlasting abode, to be ever with ^^e Lord,
was about the Hours of Four or Five ^n the Morning, August the Third, 1672.
Amen, Amen, Hallelujah.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. MARY WILSON.
By George Nicholson, Minister of the Gospel.
Psalm. 103.14, 15, 16, 17, 18 verses were sung.
Luke 12.40. Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of Man comes at an hour,
when ye thin^ not.


WHile the Lord Jesus was at his Setmon, there started up a certain Person out
of the Auditory, that moved an unseasonable suit (...) Him, v. 13. Master,
speak to my Brother, that he divide the Inheritance with me: (Like many) poor
Creatures, that when they come to he^^ the Word of God, they have their Hearts
so stuffed up with the World, as that the Word of God takes no place with them,
nor finds no ^oom in them, such was this poor man now men^ioned, that while
Christ was Preaching, he was proling for the world.) Well! His unsea^nable
request, though it did interrupt Christ ^n his present Discourse, yet
occasioned new, pro^table matter to flow out of his mouth; For ^ster the Lord
Christ had given him a particular ^heck for such a Proposal, together with a
denial (...) gratify him in such a request. Ver. 14. He ^^eth on, and
delivers a seasonable and ne^^ssary Caution, v. 15. Take heed, and beware of
^^ovetousness; the which he backeth with a ^^ong Argument in the same verse,
For a man's ^^e consists not in the abundance of the things ^at he possesses.

And to make the Caution to take hold of his ^^arers, He gives an instance by
way of Parable, (...) a certain rich man, that was covetously bent ^^er the
world, who whilst he was racking his ^^ains about his worldly Profits, his life
was cut ^^, his Soul required, and he a Fool for his ^^ins, from v. 16. to the
20. v. The Applica^^^n of which Parabolical instance, ye have in (...) 21. So
is he that lays up Treasure for him^^^f, and is not rich toward God. Well,
in his ^^^lowing Discourse, he applies himself unto (...) Disciples, from ver.
22. to the 30. wherein in he uses several Arguments with them, to setch them
off from the love of the world; All which lie dispersed in the aforementioned
verses, which I cannot now stand to draw forth, but must leave them for you to
cull out at your leisure. And that he may effectually take them off from the
world, he sets before them, and proposes to them, greater and better
objects than the world could present them with; As i^ he should say, If ye will
lay out your selve, and spend your strength and spirits about things Behold
here are excellent things that are worth your pursuing after, and laboring
for; Her^ is the Kingdom of God, the Righteousness o^ God, Bags that wax not
old, and Treasure i^ Heaven that fails not, v. 31, 32, 33. Math. ^^ 33. Let
your Hearts be taken up with the things, and never fear but all other things
(^^ far as they are necessary for you) shall be add^^ unto you. And that they
may receive th^^ Kingdom, and Treafure which fails not, (...) The Lord Christ
directs them to be ready (...) waiting for the coming of Christ, v. 35, 3^
And this he presses upon them by two con^^derable Arguments:

The First is drawn from that honorable a^^ happy Welcome which such shall
have at (...) coming of Christ, v. 37. Blessed are those S^^vants whom the
Lord, when he comes, (...) find watcki^g: Verily I say unto you, that (...)
shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and
serve them.

The Second Argument is drawn from the uncertainty of the time of Christ's
coming, which is laid down by a familiar Comparison, of a Thief's coming to
break up a House, when the Good Man of the House is off his watch, v. 39. And
this know, that if the good man of the house had known what hour the Thief
would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken
through. From which comparison of the Thief's sudden and unexpected coming, the
Lord Jesus presses them to be ready; For as the Thief, so he himself comes at
in hour, when men think not. Be ye therefore ready also; for the Son of Man
comes at an your, when ye think not.

The words are a serious Exhortation delivered to his Disciples, and his then
present Auditory, wherein we may take notice of these two general parts. First,
An important Duty enjoined, Be ^e therefore ready also; Secondly, A plain, yet
^owerful Argument to press this Duty upon them: For the Son of Man comes at an
hour, ^hen ye think not.

The words are so very plain, as that we need ^ot spend much time about their
Explication, ^or shall we make knots where there are ^one.

The word ((...),) that is here translated, ready, signifies generally
Preparation, or Readiness, according to the subject matter, that it has
relation to; so that be ye ready here, is be ye prepared for the coming of
Christ.

But that which will need a little unfolding, is, What we are to understand by
this coming of Christ in the Text?

Answer. There is a twofold coming of Christ. First, There is his coming to the
particular Day of Judgment, and that is at the Death of every Person; For it is
in the power of his own hand alone, to fetch away the Souls of Men: The Souls
of Men are brought before Christ immediately upon the Death of the Bodies of
Men, to receive their Doom, or Judgment, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men
once to die, and after this the Judgment.

Secondly, There is Christ's coming to the (...) Judgment, which is at the end
of the World and the Resurrection of the Bodies of Men. Th^^ I grant, is called
signally The coming of Christ his Second coming, Acts 1.11. 1 These. 4.1^^ Heb.
9. last. I know some Expositors would have this coming of Christ to the last
Judgment to be intended here; But I rather think it to ^^ meant of his Coming
to the particular Judgment and that for this reason: Because his Disciple^^ and
the then Auditory to whom he spoke, we^^ not like to live to see Christ's last
Coming Therefore we must necessarily understand it (...) his Coming to the
particular Day of Judgment, to judge every Person when he dies; At least it
cannot but be included herein.

The words offer two Points of Doctrine fairly to our Consideration.

Doct. 1. That it is the great concern of all Men that would be saved, to make
ready against the coming of Christ.

Doct. 2. That the uncertain time of Christ's certain coming, should make all
men to prepare, and get ready for his coming.

The first Doctrine is that which we shall mainly insist upon, as suiting the
present sad occasion, and the condition of all our Souls. For the prosecution
whereof, three things shall be done.

First, I shall show you, what it is to make ready against the coming of
Christ? or, wherein this readiness does consist?

Secondly, Why it is the great concern of all that would be saved, to make
ready for the coming of Christ?

Thirdly, Make Application of the Point.

First, What it is to be ready against the coming of Christ? or, Wherein this
Readiness does consist? I know that men generally think ^t no great business to
get ready for Christ's ^oming; Some think it is easily done: And others think
it is already done: And a Third think, that it matters not whether it be done
or not, for Mercy will save them, whether they be ready or not. But let all
these consider, That there is a Twofold Readiness that all must be found in,
that look for Salvation.

First, There is a Fundamental Readiness Secondly, There is an Actual Readiness.

First, There is a Fundamental Readiness, and this is also twofold.

First, Negative. Secondly, Positive.

First, There is a Negative-Fundamental Readiness, and this lies in putting
off, concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt,
according to the deceitful Lusts, Ephesians. 4.22. The Scripture phraseth it
several ways, as, To deny all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, Tit. 2.12. former
part. To put away the evil of your doings, To cease to do evil, Isa. 1.16, 17.
To lay aside every weight, and that Sin which does so easily beset us, Heb.
12.1. To pluck out the right Eye, and cast it from us; to cut off the right
hand and cast it from us, Mat. 5.29, 30. And many more such Phrases are to be
found scattered up and down the Scriptures; But these may suffice to teach us
thus much, That all that must be done, before any man can be fundamentally
prepared to meet the Lord Jesus.

I know, there are many men in the world, that make Gods Mercy the only pillow
to bolst^^ themselves up in their wickedness; that think they shall have peace,
though they add Drunkenness to Thirst; that is, Though they make provision for
the flesh, to fulfill it in the Lusts of it: But let such know, That if ever
they be saved, they must look to this Negative-fundamental Readiness, that is,
Cast away all their Iniquities, for bear to walk in the forbidden path of Sin;
for the Scripture assures us, That such as walk in crooked paths, shall be led
forth with the Workers of Iniquity, that is, They shall be ^ed to the place of
Execution with such ungodly Sinners, Psalm. 125.5.

Secondly, There is a Positive-fundamental Readiness, which lies in being born
again, Joh. 3.3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again,
be cannot see the Kingdom of God. The Scripture also phraseth this several
ways; as, To put on the new man, which of to God, is created in Righteousness
and true Hosiness Ephesians. 4.24. To be renewed in the Spirit of our mind, Ephesians.
4.23. To be born of the Water and of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. To be begotten
again, 1 Pet. 1.3. Jam. 1.18. To be ^onverted, Math. 18.3. To repent, Luke
13.3, ^. Act. 2.38. and 3.19. To believe in the Lord Jesus, Act. 16.31. To be a
new Creature, 2 Cor. ^.17. To learn to do well, Isa. 1.17. To rash and make
clean, Isa. 1.16. To make you a ^ew heart, and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 18.31. To
^^ve godly, righteously and soberly in this present ^vil world, Tit. 2.12. And
several other ways his Positive-fundamental Readiness is expressed in the
Scriptures; But I have given you these, to let you see, that all this you must
be, and do, before you can be said to be ready, to meet the Lord Jesus. What
ever the mad, doting world dreameth of, yet must men be brought to see, That if
ever they inherit Eternal Life, they must go through this Regeneration-work.
They must become new Creatures, and all old things must be done away, and all
things must become new. Look to this all you that talk of Heaven, and say you
are marching up through the wilderness of this World, to the eternal good Land
of Canaan: If you be deceived herein, you are undone eternally.

Secondly, There is an Actual Readiness that all must endeavor after that
expect Salvation, and this consists in these Seven Particulars.

First, This Actual Readiness lies in the exercise of that Grace, that is
already wrought i^ the heart of any man; and this supposes a fundamental or
habitual Readiness, of which we have but now spoken. If once the Habit (...)
Grace be infused, and seated in the Soul, there must be the acting of it, which
is the drawing o^ it forth into exercise. If a man has Faith, h^^ must live by
Faith; if he has the root of Holiness within him, it must blossom and bud.

There is no Actual fitness for meeting of the Lord Jesus, where there is no
exerting and putting forth of the acts of Grace, Luke 12.35. Let ^our loins be
girded about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves like unto men that
wait for their Lord, v. 36. where it is implied, That those Souls are not in a
fit posture for Christ's ^oming, that have not their loins girded, and their
lights burning; that is, That are not actually applying themselves to the
exercise of Grace, or trimming their lamps, as the Phrase is, Mat. 25.6, 7.
Believe it, Christian, Thou art ^ot actually ready to meet the Lord Jesus, if
thou ^rt not living by Faith, and laboring to keep live the breathings of the
Holy Ghost in thy ^oul. The Apostle Peter shows us, what Posture men should
be in, that are looking for salvation by Jesus Christ, they should be actually
bent to the acting of Grace, 1 Pet. 1.13. therefore gird up the loins of your
mind, be sober, and hope to the end, for the Grace that is to be ^rought unto
you at the Revelation of Jesus christ.

Secondly, This Actual Readiness lies in mak^ng new Additions of Grace, to that
Grace that ^ already received; To be coming forward in ^oliness, and increasing
with the increase of God. To sit down with the Grace that thou ^ast already
received, is to remain under great ^efects, and gross Neglects; which is
nothing ^se but plain and downright actual Unpreparedness to meet the Lord
Jesus. The Scriptures tell us of Additions of Grace to be made to out Grace,
not only additions of Grace to Grace, ^ mean, of one Grace unto another; but of
degrees of Grace to the same Grace that is already received. The former is
plain from 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. Add to your Faith, virtue, etc. The latter is
as plain from those Scriptures that enjoin the increase of particular Graces
upon us, 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Jude v. 20. But ye Beloved, Building up your selves in your most holy
Faith. 1 These. 4.10. We beseech ye^ Brethren, that ye increase more and more,
that is in love. Jam. 1.4. But let patience have he perfect work, that ye may
be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. And many more such instances might be
given. Now till this be done, thou art not actually ready to meet the Lord
Jesus. There is a certain measure of Grace assigned, and the period of time
fixed, for every Saint to come up to it in, Ephesians. 4.13. and t^^ this be done,
we are not completely ready.

Thirdly, Actual Readiness consists in this To have your Evidences clear for
Heaven; T^ be able to prove to your own Souls, that you are in a state of
Grace. Till you be come up t^ this length, you are not so ready as you should
be; The Apostle enjoineth Saints, To give ^^ diligence to make their Calling
and Election sun^ 2 Pet. 1.10. that is, sure to themselves: And when you have
done this, then are you ready for the Bridegroom's coming. When you can say
with Paul, and the other Apostles, 2 Corinthians. 5.1. We know that if our earthly
house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens; then are you actually ready and
prepared for the Coming of the Lord. O then try your own selves, your states
and conditions, to see whether Christ be in you or not; Never think that you
can be ready in any good measure, till you understand something of this. Can a
man be ready to meet Christ, that knows not whether he belongs to Heaven or
Hell, to Salvation or Destruction? Alas! Such an one is yet short of that
degree of readiness that should be attained, in order to Christ's coming.

Fourthly, There is also this in Actual Readiness to meet the Lord Jesus, viz.
A completing of the work that God has given us to do. Every man has his
Generation-work set him of God to do and finish; and till this be done, no man
is ready for the coming of the Lord. It is said of David, Act. 13.46. That
after he had served his Generation, he fell asleep. When a man has done all
his Generation-work, he is then fit for Death, and ready for Christ. St. Paul
foreseeing his Death, has these Expressions, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7. I am now ready to
be offered, and the time of my Departure is at hand; I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith. Mark, Paul says he is
ready to be offered, as our Translation has it (though I know the Greek word
may be translated otherwise): But how proves St. Paul that he is ready? Why?
For (says he) I have finished my course, etc. As if he had said, I have done
all my Generation-work, and therefore I am ready. O Souls, then, and not till
then, are you ready to meet the Lord Jesus, till you have done all the work
which God has given you to do in the world. Most men (God knows) spend their
time for very Vanity, not considering that they have their task to do, and yet
they think, when they have lived as long as they can, then there is no more but
dying and entering into Glory. Poor mistaken Soul! Thou have thy Generation-work
to mind, and also to complete; And if thou have not set about it; and brought
it to its period, thou art far from the Kingdom of God, and consequently very
unfit to die, and unready to meet the Lord Jesus. Be not deceived, There is
much to do before thou can be ready for Christ. Try then what thou have done
this way, Have thou wrought out thine own Salvation with fear and trembling?
Phil. 2.12. Have thou filled up thy time with Duty? Have thou done all the work
of thy Place, Condition, and Relation? If not, thou art not yet ready enough to
meet the Lord Jesus.

Fifthly, This Actual Readiness lies also in this, viz. To have the Affections
in subjection, and under command, and (as it were) brought under ones feet;
That when the Lord Jesus comes with a Summons for the Souls appearance, then
the Soul to have so much power over it self, as to say, Arise, let me go hence:
So that there needs no more but Christ's Call, and the Soul is ready to set
forward, and to take sits march to meet him, this now is actual Readiness. It
is said of Abraham, that when he was called to go into a place that he should
afterward receive for an Inheritance, he obeyed, Heb. 11.8. So when Christ
gives the Soul a Call to go from hence, for the Soul then to have its
Affections so subdued, and so under command, as forthwith to obey the Lord's
Call, this ^s Readiness indeed. It is also said, That the Witnesses, upon a
voice crying from Heaven to them, Come up hither, ascended to Heaven in a
Cloud, Rev. 11.12. So when Christ's voice from Heaven bids the Soul come up
hither, and the Soul upon the call ascends to Heaven, this is Readiness ( in
multis gradibus, in many legrees) to meet the Lord Jesus. We read that when the
Lord shall give the poor Jews a Call to return, that they shall be so ready in
their Affections to make answer to their Call, as that they shall forthwith
make this Reply, Behold, we come unto thee for thou art the Lord our God, Jer.
3.22. So when Christ says, Return ye Children of Men, and we answer, Behold we
come unto thee, then are we in a proportionable measure prepared to meet the
Lord Jesus. The Centurion told Christ, That his Servants were so under his
Authority, that if he bid one of them go, he goes; and if another come, he
comes; and if he bid the third do this, he does it, Mat. 8.9. So if our
Affections (like the Centurion's Servants) be so under Christ's and our
Authority, that if they be bid go, they gp or come, they come; or do this, they
do it. This is to be fitted for the coming of Christ. B^^ on the other hand
now, If the Affections be ^^ unruly, unsubdued, and masterful, as that the^
will not bend to the Call of Christ, when eve^ he summoneth any of us to appear
before H^^ we are not yet ready to meet the Lord Jesus Many Souls (I know) will
pretend, that if th^^ be to be ready, then they are already prepared for they
are (as they pretend) willing to depa^^ from hence, when ever the Lord shall
call the^ But alas! How far are such mistaken, for let b^ Christ Call for their
Souls, and they wou^^ (whatever they pretend to the contrary) petit^^ for a
Respite, like the poor man in the Fa^^ that wished for Death, when he was
overbuy thened with his sticks; but when Death a^ peared, the man gets up with
his Burden, and away goes he. Poor men! whatever they think or pretend, they
would find their Affections lime-twig'd with something or other, that they
cannot yet be ready to meet the Lord Jesus: ^ Sixthly, There is this also in
Actual Readiness to meet the Lord Jesus, and that is, To have the Affections
elevated and upon the wing ^o meet the Lord Jesus. The Affections are truly
said to be, Alae Animae, The wings of the Soul; for they are the wings that
carry the Soul after as desired Object; Now when the Soul is ^eady to take its
Flight to meet the Lord Jesus, and mounteth upwards to meet him in the ^ay, as
if it would prevent Christ of the pains to ^^me and fetch it, this is Actual
Readiness with ^^ Accent, or Preparedness in summo gradu, in ^e highest degree
that man is capable of, to ^eet the Lord Jesus. We read of Elijah's ^cending to
Heaven in a fiery Chariot; so when ^e Soul has its Affections, like so many
fiery ^hariots, to carry it swistly on to meet the Lord ^sus, here is Readiness
indeed. So we find ^. Paul thus setting forth his desire to be with thrist,
Phil. 1.23. (...), having a ^hement hot and flagrant Affection to be with
christ, which is best of all.

Seventhly, To be Actually ready for the Coming of the Lord Jesus, Is to have a
suitable ^ame and temper of Spirit for a Dying Hour: Thou art not prepared to
meet Christ, till thou art prepared to die.

Now I will show you when a man is of a suitable frame of Spirit for a dying
hour, and take it in these Four Particulars.

First, When a man is freely willing to b^ disposed of by God, this is a
suitable frame (...) Spirit for a Dying Hour. When God sender his Messenger,
Death, to summon a man to appear before the Lord, and the man then is able to
say, Good is the Will of the Lord concerning me, and let him do with me as
seems good in h^ sight. Here is a man of a suitable frame of Spirit for a
Dying Hour, and consequently ready (in a good degree) to meet the Lord Jesus.
Thus the Man Christ Jesus showed his readine^ for dying in this suitable frame,
when he said Not my Will, but thine be done, Mat. 26.39, 43. And good old Eli,
1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord let him do what seems him good. And Davi^ 2 Samuel
15.26. Behold, here am I, let him d^^ me as seems good unto him.

Secondly, When a man can take complacence in God's so disposing of him, this
is to be of suitable frame of spirit for a Dying hour. Th^^ is, as I may say,
the highest pitch in this spiritual frame. When a man comes to this length as
to take pleasure in God's taking him off b^^ Death, this is to rise high in
this Heaven^ frame: This I grant is rarely attained, unto by those that are
come up to some considerable legrees of Assurance, that they are already passed
from death to life. Thus we find it was with Paul, and those Saints of whom he
speaks, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know (says he) that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, ^e have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens: here is his and their Assurance. Now mark what
follows; For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be ^^athed upon with our
house, which is from Heaven. Paul and the rest of these Saints with him, ^ere
so straightened in the Body, as that they were (...), summo amore complectentes,
em^acing with the greatest delight (as an hungry ^an his food, or a naked man
his clothes) their ^use which they were waiting for from Heaven. ^ut how were
they to come to be clothed upon ^ith their house from above? No other way
ordinarily) but by being uncloathed of the ^uses of their Bodies. But could
they be ^eased to have their clothing of Flesh stripped off ^em? Not simply as
such, for this was against ^e Law of Nature, which is for the preservation ^^
it self; but yet as the Bodies uncloathing was ^e way and means to bring them
to be clothed ^^th Immortality, so they could take pleasure ^^d delight in it.
This is no more than what ^^ul has elsewhere expressed, Phil. 1.23. Having
desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better; The word (...),
that is here translated to depart, signifies properly to be dissolved, or to
have the cords of Nature loosened, the bands between the Soul and Body untied.
Now St. Paul says, It is his desire, or as the word is, his fervent desire to
be dissolved: No that he simply took pleasure in the dissolution (...) his
compositum, or union between his Soul and Body; but as his dissolution would be
the wa^ to bring him to Christ, which he so much longe^ for, so he took
pleasure, or (as Beza expound it) contended in his desire to be dissolved. So
those Martyrs we read of in Heb. 11.39 would not accept of deliverance, though
the^ were tortured, or as the word is, stretched form upon the Rack, that they
might obtain a be^^^ Resurrection. They would not thank their Adversaries for
saving their lives, or be beholden to them for their sparing mercy, but rath^^
took pleasure in so cruel a Death (as ordered (...) them by the Almighty) that
they might obtain better Resurrection. It is said of Aaron, th^^ he received a
commandment from the Lord (...) die in Mount Hor, Numb. 33.38. But h^^ did he
die? Did he take complacency in th^^ disposal of the Almighty? Yes, as appeared
from Numb. 20.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. where (...) is said, That Moses stripped
Aaron of his Garments (not against the will of Aaron, but with the free consent
of Aaron) as appears by (...) freeness and readiness, without the least
reluctance intimated, to go with Moses unto Mount Hor to die there.

Aaron (as far as we can gather any thing from the letter of the Text) made no
more of dying, than a man does of putting off his clothes to go to Bed, or of
having them taken off, that he may go to his rest, which (ordinarily) is an act
of complacency and delight to a man, after his weariness and toilsome labor.
The same may be gathered from Moses himself, Deuteronomy. 32.48, 49, 50. with Deuteronomy.
34.5. compared, which is in excellent frame of Spirit for a Dying-hour.

Thirdly; When a man can hang loose from, and freely part with all his worldly
comforts and enjoyments; this is an excellent frame of Spirit for a Dying hour.
For a man to set his earthly comforts at his back, and have only Heaven before
his face, this is a blessed temper of Spirit. It is said of Abraham, That when
he went to sacrifice up his Son Isaac to God, he left his Young men with the
Ass behind him, Genesis 22.5. to when a man sacrifices up his life to God, for
him then to leave all at the foot of the hill, this ^^ a suitable frame of
spirit for a dying hour. It ^^ said of those Worthies in Heb. 11.15. That ^hey
were not mindful of the Country from whence they came out: They did not (like
Israel in the Wilderness) think of Egypt, or look ^ack (like Lot's wife)
toward Sodom; but they hung loose from the world, and only fixed and fastened
their Affections upon Heaven. How did several of our famous English Martyrs in
Q. Mary's days hang loose from their dearest comforts and Relations, That when
they were set before them (sometimes for a Temptation, or Aggravation of their
sorrows and torments) could easily overlook them, and go on in their Suffering
down to the Valley and Shadow of Death, with the greatest cheerfulness
imaginable. O blessed frame! when a man is so dead to his Life, Relations, and
all other worldly enjoyments, as that he is not captivated in his Affections
with it, but has (in a holy manner) so forgot it, as that he is got above it;
here is a person indeed of a suitable frame of Spirit for a Dying hour. How
many are there, that have the world set in their heart, as the expression is,
Eccles. 3.11. That have the very Essigies or Scheme of the world drawn upon
their hearts, as Calice was upon the heart of Q. Mary, as she her self
expressed it. Alas! such are like to have as sorrowful a parting with, and from
it, as (we may imagine) the rich Fool had from his Goods laid up for many
years, in that night when his Soul was required of him, Luke 12.19, 20. Poor
men These are far from this suitable frame of spirit for a Dying hour.

Fourthly, When a man has a relish of Heaven upon his Spirit, a taste and
fore-taste of the fruit of the Vine that is drunk in that eternal Canaan; this
is a suitable frame of Spirit for a Dying hour. A man is never fitter for
Dying, ^hen when his heart is in Heaven, and his spirit ^lipt in the honey of
Canaan; When the grapes of Eshcol, and Pomegranats and Figs of Canaan are
tasted, and leave such a tang upon the spirit behind them, as sharpen the
appetite, and scent the Soul with the sweet odours and perfumes of Heaven; here
is a glorious frame of Spirit for a Dying hour. When good Simeon, that had
waited for the Consolation of Israel, had got Christ in his Arms, He tasted so
sweet to the spiritual Palate of the good man, as that he is forward for dying;
Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for mine
ties have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2.28, 29, 30. Heaven dropped into the spirit
of a man, and the scent thereof retained, puts a man into a right and suitable
frame of heart for a dying Hour: All the Pains, Aches, Troubles, and Tortures
that attend such cannot unframe them, while Heaven and their Souls are thus
incorporated together. Nihil crus sentit in nervo, cum animus ^est in coelo.
Tertul.

And thus much shall serve for the opening of the first Particular, viz.
Wherein this Readiness to meet the Lord Jesus does consist.

Secondly, Now it follows next in order to show you, Why it is the great
Concern of all that would be saved, to make ready for the Coming of the Lord
Jesus.

GROUNDS.
First, Because of the great hazard that all men run into, that make not ready
for the coming of Christ. Let me explain this a little to you, and that in Two
Particulars.

First, In reference to the wicked. The hazard they run in not preparing and
making ready for Christ's coming, is most dreadful and dangerous. They do
inevitably expose their Soul to everlasting Ruin and Destruction. It has been
shown you already, that there is a Fundamental Readiness which positively lies
in Regeneration; and if the work of Regeneration pass not upon you before the
coming of the Lord Jesus, you are undone to all Eternity. What is more plain
from the infallible Scriptures, than that unless a man be born again, he cannot
se^ the Kingdom of God? Does not the Scripture tell you, That no unclean thing
shall enter into that Holy City of Heaven, nor any thing whatsoever that
works Abomination, or makes a Lie? Rev. 21. last. And what then will become
of such? Now see what the Scripture says in this particular; Except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3, 5. Now consider his, all ye that
forget God, lest he tear you in ^ieces, and there be none to deliver. And you
Hypocrites, Though you have cleaner faces than he profaner sort in the world,
yet your hearts ^^e as black as theirs, and the hazard you run is ^^ost
dreadful. Read at your leisure, Mat. 25.^, 8, 10, 11, 12. Were not the Five
foolish Virgins shut out of the Bridegrooms Chamber? ^h consider it seriously!
Is it nothing to venture ^our Souls, and to expose them to so great a ^azard,
as you certainly do, while you neglect regarding this Fundamental Readiness?

Secondly, In reference to the Godly themselves; ^^en they expose themselves to
hazard for want of Actual Preparation. Though their Souls be ^^fe in the main
through their habitual Readiness, so that they cannot finally miscarry; yet
^ere are hazards they run, through their Defectiveness in actual Readiness: I
will show you in Four Particulars.

1. They make their passage through this valley of Bacha exceeding difficult and
dark, their salvation at last is a surprizal to them. And their fears at
present cannot but be great upon them, especially upon occasions when Eternity
^^ before them, and they see themselves before ^e very face of it. It cannot be
otherwise, but ^ose Souls that have had no due regard to actual Preparation for
the coming of Christ (unless they have lost all sense of their Souls, and
Eternity to come) must have doleful Fears, and inward pinching Perplexities,
especially when Death stareth them in the face. When a man has been lamentably
off from the exercise of Grace, and putting on the Wedding Garment and making
out his title to everlasting life, (^^ his conscience be awakened) he must
needs walth sorrowfully through the Valley of the shadow ^^ Death. This is
apparent from the Five was Virgins, they were not actually ready when th^^
Bridegroom came upon them, and then in what an hurry were they, Mat. 25.7. then
all th^^ Virgins arose and trimmed their lamps. The^ arose with a fright, like
men that are sudden^ alarmed out of their sleep at Midnight. N^ question, they
were startled to purpose through the greatness of those fears that were upon
then and were surprised with their Salvation. And is it nothing to you, O
Saints, to run this hazard, or to bring upon your selves all this trouble and
perplexity? Assuredly you will be ^^ danger of falling under many Pannick fear
and griping pangs of trouble, if you do not ^^riously mind the work of actual
Preparation (...) the coming of Christ; even to you will death ^^ as Bildad
speaks, The King of Terre Job 18.14.

2. Even such as are Godly in the main, ^^ run this hazard through their
Defective-act^^^ Readiness, or want of actual Preparation; They really (for
ought I know, or can gather from ^he Scriptures) lessen that glory that should
otherwise be conferred upon them in Heaven. And is not this a great hazard to
run, and danger ^o incur, viz. to expose your selves to the loss of ^o many
degrees of Glory? Are you so careful ^o avoid hazards in your estates in this
world, and will you make nothing of losing such a measure of Glory? Surely if a
little of Heaven be ^etter than much of the world, then the loss of a little of
Heaven, is greater than the loss of much ^f the world, nay than all the world
it self. Now it is concluded by many worthy Divines, That ^here are Degrees in
Glory; and if so, Then it will strongly follow, that where there is the least
Grace, there will be the least Glory; And where there is the least of Actual
Readiness for Heaven, there is the least measure of Grace. For, ^^ the Exercise
of Grace be the means of encreaing of Grace, (as undoubtedly it is) and this
Actual Readiness lie in the exercise of it, as ^ath been already showed; then
it clearly follows, That where there is the least of Actual Preparation for the
coming of Christ, there must ^eeds be the least measure of Grace, because the
^ast exercise of Grace; and so consequently the ^ast degree of Glory. But let
us see what the ^cripture says in this point, and for this consult that place
in Luke 19.16, 17, 18, 19. where we find the two Servants that had traded with
their Masters money, to have received a proportionable reward to their
improvement of it; The first that had made his Masters pound ten pounds, is
made Ruler over ten Cities. And the second that had made his pound five pounds,
is made Ruler over five Cities. The scope of the Parable seems to be this,
that according to the improvement of Grace received, so answerably shall the
reward be. They that make the greatest improvement of Grace, shall have the
greatest reward of Glory; and they that make a lesser improvement thereof,
shall have lesser degree of Glory: See for this also, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. So that
from hence to me it is clear, that there are different degrees of Glory, as
well as different degrees of Grace; And those Saints that concern themselves
the least about Actual Readiness to meet the Lord Jesus, shall have the least
share in Heavens Glory. And is it a small thing, my Brethren, to deprive your
selves (through your remisness and negligence) of the weight of Glory? Would
you do thus by your selves about the things of the world? There are none of you
that would hinder your external Prosperity through your neglect. Be but as wise
and careful for your Souls, and you cannot then but be making ready for the
Coming of Christ.

3. They expose themselves to this hazard also, of falling into an hour of
desertion. I grant, the Almighty sometimes may, and does, hide himself from his
gracious ones, that have made great Conscience of making Preparation for the
Coming of their Lord. But ordinarily, those Souls that are the most remiss and
careless about the work of Actual Preparation for the meeting of the Lord
Jesus, are mostly left and forsaken of him (as to actual favor) in times of
trial, and especially in a dying hour. And this is no more but a just
Punishment upon them for their Neglect: It being most equal, that they that
have not cared to fit themselves for Him, should not find Him friendly to them
when they stand in most need of his favor; Then God shows them his back, and
not his face, as he did to the Jews in their troubles. I grant, to dispense
favors this way, belongs to the Divine Prerogative; and therefore he both
can, and may deal them forth as he pleases, and to whom he pleases. And
(possibly) sometimes he may let some Souls sip of this Cup, that have not every
way carried suitably to this favor, Isa. 57.18. I have seen his ways, and will
heal him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his
mourners; And this is done, notwithstanding his going on frowardly in the way
of his heart, v. 17. Now this he does, when he sees it will make for the
advancement of his Grace and Glory: But ordinarily he suffers not these to
see his Smiles, that have not been fitting themselves for him; But they must
now be, as if they were cast out of Favor; and must apprehend his Frowns to
make them sensible of the^ great neglects about the concerns of their Souls.
And hence it is that many Souls (though otherwise honest in the main) do go
mourning without the Sun, as the Phrase is, Job 30.28. through the black entry
of death, and (perhaps) never see Gods face in peace again, till they find him
to be their friend in the other world.

4. They run the hazard also of entering into great Temptations. Though Satan,
when let loose by the Almighty, will trouble the best of Saints, and fill their
Spirits with great perplexing Fears, especially in times of Trial, and mostly
in a Dying Hour; when they are left to be tried by him: yet most commonly the
secure, slothful, and careless Saints are most perplexed with his Temptations,
at such times and seasons. Now if ever, he will endeavor to unsaint them. And
this he labors to do, by setting before the eye of their Conscience, and
charging upon them, all their former carelessness and remisness in and about
their actual Preparation for the Coming of Christ, as not consisting with a
state of Grace. Though before he did secretly (yet strongly) persuade them to
the contrary, when he did tempt them to slacken the reins, and grow remiss in
the Duties of Preparation; yet now he appears openly to the Conscience, and
charge it home upon it, as that which can no way comport with the spirit of a
Saint. Hence it is that so many, when brought to their dying hour, are ready to
cast away all their hopes of the life to come; though (peradventure) some time
before, they were groundedly persuaded that their state was good, and that they
had a Right (through Faith in Christ) to the purchased Inheritance. You secure
Saints! that please your selves at present in your Remisness, take heed lest
the Devil have a field with you before you die. Though you may have your quiet
at present, through his lulling you asleep, yet you may come to be awakened,
and your Consciences filled with many black, hellish fears. And reckon you it
nothing to fall into the hands of a merciless Devil, that will not spare you a
blow, I warrant you? O fear an After-clap to come upon you, if you do not
speedily awake, and set about this Actual Readiness for the Coming of Christ.
The Apostle's counsel is, To put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be
able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.11. The Devil is subtle
and wily, not only to draw into sin, but also to trouble for sin; and
especially he does this in a Dying hour. What is said of the natural Serpent,
is as true of the spiritual, Nunquam nisi moriens producitur in longum, that it
never stretches it self to its full length, but when it dies: So the Devil
never stretches himself forth at such a length to do thee a mischief, as when
thou art in a Dying hour; for then he knows that his time is but short, and
that thou will quickly be beyond his reach.

Secondly; It is the great concern of all th^^ look to be saved, to make ready
for the coming (...) Christ; because it is indispensably required of them. God
will not dispense with the want of Preparation in any Person whatsoever. It is
at your utmost perils, if you get not habitual Readiness, and endeavor not
after actual Readiness against the day when Christ shall come to call for your
Souls; Do not the words in the Text run by way of command, Be ye ready? The
Ver^ (...), is in the Imperative Mood, and imports Authority in the person
commanding. And is it not your concernment to obey him? Believe it, you will
find it to be to your cost, if you do not observe what he gives you in command
to do. You cannot now plead Ignorance in this Case, for now you have heard, and
herein may read (if you knew it not before) that he requires you to make
ready. And mark how it will fare with that Servant that obeys not Christ's
will, after the knowledge of it, Luke 12.47. And that Servant, which knew his
Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall
be beaten with many stripes. There is no Dispensation for him, but smart he
must, and that severely.

Thirdly, Because Heaven is ready only for them that are ready for it. It is a
fond Fancy that many ignorant Souls have, that they cannot ^^iss of Heaven,
because there is an Heaven pre^ared: But mind, though Heaven be made ^eady, it
is only for such, as are made ready for (...). There is a Meetness absolutely
requisite in ^^l those that must pass over into those Eternal ^ansions. It is
true, Christ has prepared a ^ace, Joh. 14.2, 3. and Salvation is ready in it
If, only it must be revealed in its time, 1 Pet. 1. (...) But the place of
Glory, and Salvation in it, ^e only prepared for such as are made meet and ^ady
for them, Colos. 1.12. Which has made meet to be partakers of the Inheritance
of the ^ints in light. There is both a Jus hereditari^^, and aptitudinarium;
that is, a Right of ^^irship, and a Right of Fitness, or Meetness, ^t must be
come by, before any Admission (...) be expected or obtained into this Heavenly
^^untrey. And the latter, viz. That of Fitness ^^th in making ready for it;
that is, in having work of Sanctification begun, and wound up such a height or
degree, as may make the Soul table to it, and meet for it. Mark that Text
Matthew. 25.10. And they that were ready, went with him to the Marriage, and the
Door was (...). Not a Soul gets into Heaven, but such as ready for it. The Door
is shut against all rest, and no entrance can be had for them. Now then my
Friends, are you not concerned upon this ground to make ready for the coming of
Christ? I am sure if you be concerned to look after Heaven, you are also
concerned to make ready for it: Because where there is no Readiness for it,
there will be no Entrance got into it.

Fourthly; Because the Lord Jesus comes at an hour when we think not. This is
Christ's own Argument in the Text, by which he presses us to make ready for
his Coming. Christ's coming is set forth by the Similitude of the coming of a
Thief, whose coming is always sudden and unexpected, Luke 12.39. Rev. 3.3. If
therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee at a thief, and thou shall
not know what hour I will come upon thee: So Christ's coming (though cercain,
yet) as to us, is very uncertain. And therefore it behooves us to be always
ready. It is said in the Parable of the Ten Virgins, that at Midnight (the dead
time of the Night, as we say, when we have the least expectation of any Comers)
there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him,
Matthew. 25.6. The Lord Jesus comes upon men at Midnight; that is, at an Hour
when they look not for him, when men are still and quiet, and their
expectations dormient. And how dreadful is it to hear him cry at Midnight, and
men not ready to go meet him. Christ comes upon many at unawares and gives
them Summons to appear. And is it not most sad to hear his Alarm, and not be
prepared to appear before him? Woe to those Souls that are no way ready when the
Lord calls! Their Doom is like to be black, and their Con^itions miserable:
See what Christ says shall become of those Souls that look not for his coming,
and so begin to be loose, and careless, and pro^ne, Luke 12.45, 46. But and if
that Servant ^y in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming, and ^all begin to
beat the Men servants and Maidens, and to eat, and drink, and be drunken; The
lord of that Servant will come in a day when he ^oketh not for him, and at an
hour when he is not ^are, and will cut him in sunder, and will ap^^int him his
portion with the Unbelievers. Here ^sad work you see that follows in upon it;
the ^^n is undone, and cast away eternally. O ^emble at it, all ye that forget
God, and wait ^^t for his coming. Though you may forget the ^^ing of Christ,
and neglect to prepare for it, (...) Christ will not forget to come, nor to
punish (...) when he comes upon you, Watch there^^e, for ye neither know the
day, nor the hour ^^erein the Son of man comes, Matthew. 25.13.

And so much shall serve for the grounds of (...) point. The Application now
follows, and ^^e calls for Brevity.

Thirdly, By way of Application, that I may bring the point home to you all.

Use 1. First, Is it so, that it is the gran^ Concern of all that would be
saved, to make ready for the coming of Christ? Then certainly there are many
persons that will fall under ^^^^nviction from this Doctrine, I mean they (...)
be brought under a Doctrinal Conviction (...) that they may be laid under a
persona Conviction! Assuredly, Friends, it is your concernment to measure your
selves by th^^ truth; but I will name a few sorts of Persona that come under
the lash of this Point.

First, There is the Carnal Professor, tha^ justly falls under Conviction,
who deceives himself with his fair pretenses, and mere sha^^ dows; he looks
like one that is making ready for Christ, and yet really, and in good earne^^
he never endeavors to get his Soul furnishe^ with those Preparations that
would fit him s^^ Christ. This poor man (like the five fooli^^ Virgins) has
his lamp, but he has no oy^^ it. His heart is graceless, and yet he goes o^^
till he see himself deceived, when it is too late^ My Friends, believe it for a
truth, It is not wh^^^ you appear to be by your Profession, but wha^^ you
really and actually are by powerful impressions within you, and spiritual
actions done b^^ you, that will make you to be ready for t^^ Coming of the Lord
Christ. Do you think tha^ the Lord Jesus will look upon your outward Profession
to be all the Preparation he required, when he shall come and call for your
Souls? Be not mistaken! Whatever you think or judge in this Case, the Lord
Christ will be of another mind; yea, and will disown such to be ready for him.
Mark his own words, Math. 7.21, 22. Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; But he that does the Will of my
Father which is in Heaven. Many will say in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name, and (...) thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy Name one
many mavelous works? But ma^k what answer he returns them: And then will I
pro^ss unto them, I never knew you, Depare from ^eye that work iniquity.

Secondly; There is the earthly Miser, whose ^art is eaten out, and devoured
with the ca es ^ the world. This silly Muckworm comes ^^der the whip. Alas!
This covetous Wretch ^^ndeth at the widest distance from Prepara^^n for the
coming of Christ. It is true, he is ^^king himself ready, but what is it for?
on^^for his Incomes from the world. There is no ^^n of greater Contrivance,
Care and Action, ^^n this wretch; but all is spent and laid out ^ut his earthly
Concerns. His Thoughts. ^ections, Head, Heart, and Hand, are all ^aged, but
still about his carnal Contemements. Though he sometimes talk of Heaven, and
the Coming of Christ, yet is he not at leisure to think leriously of either. He
cannot spare time from the world to prepare for Heaven and Christ. See his
Emblem, or Portraicture to the life, in the Parable of the Rich man, recorded
in Luk 12.16, 17, 18. where we have hi^ Thoughtfulness, Care, Contrivance and
Activeness set forth about his earthly Profits. And t^ speak the truth, A
worldly man looks upon the world, and his concerns in it, to be (...)
greatest concerns. As for Heaven, and going to it, he is willing to run the
hazard; this shall not trouble either his head or heart at present But if he
must think of Heaven, and the com^ of Christ, he will defer that till he has
do with all his concerns in the world, and that when he comes to die, then he
will cry (...) mercy, and ask forgiveness, and this is all (...) Readiness (in
his judgment) that will be requisite to be minded.

Add to these, your Jovial Sirs, that sp^^^ their days in mirth, and in a
moment go do^^ to the Grave; That live as if their lives were be sacrificed to
their lusts. Poor men! T^^^ put far from them the evil Day, and all thou^^ of
the coming of Christ, Amos 6.3, 4, 5, 6. (...) men in the world are more
unready for a d^^ hour than these. And God many times co^^^ upon these on a
sudden, and sweepeth them to the Grave in the midst of their Jollity; read and
tremble at those words of Christ, Luke 12.20. But God said unto him, Thou fool,
this night shall thy Soul be required of thee. If you mark, it was that very
night after the poor Miser had been pleasing himself with the thoughts of what
stores of Wealth and Pleasure he had laid up for his Soul against the time to
come, v. 19. I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many
years, eat, drink, and be merry. But this poor Fool is cut off, in the midst of
his pleasing thoughts, before the morning. The like you have in Belshazzar, who
in the midst of his Cups, is fairly presented with the Finger of Death to cut
him off, Dan. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Thirdly, There is the Secure Sinner, that is fast asleep upon his Pillow of
ease; who is not ^t all awakened, either by the Threatenings of the Word, or
other Providential Alarms that ^^e has. He has many Spectacles of Morta^ity
before his eyes, yet is he not at all startled ^^r awakened by any of these to
consider his ways; these also are far from this Readiness to meet the Lord
Jesus. Poor secure Sinners! what will you do in the Day when the Lord shall
^ome forth against you? Do you think that then ^e shall be able to sit quiet,
and remain secure (...) trow not: When God shall arise and com^^ upon you, he
will awaken you to purp^^^ When there was a cry made at Midnight, (...) hold,
the Bridegroom comes! the slumbering Virgins could sleep no longer. They had
been secure and sleepy under Ordinances and Pr^^dences before, but when Christ
comes upon them, they rouse up to purpose, Matthew. 25.^^ will it be done to
you. There is not the sec^^^ rest Soul among you, but when the Lord Christ
alarms you, shall rise up with trembling: yo^^ will be made to quake for fear
at his appearance O then, to prevent this, awake your selves b^^^ times, and
get ready, that Christ may not co^^^ upon you at unawares.

Fourthly, The Presumptuous Sinner fallen under Reproof by this Doctrine, who
hardened himself in his Wickedness, and sins with a^ high hand, and yet
concludes he shall ha^^ peace, though he walks after the Imaginations of his
own evil heart, to add Drunkenne^^ to Thirst. But what says the Scripture
about this sort of men? The Text is terrible, Deuteronomy. 29^ 19, 20. The Lord will
not spare that man, but b^^ anger and jealousy shall smoke against him. (...)
then be not so foolishly mad, as to hope for Mercy at the coming of Christ,
whilst ye go on a^ so round a rate in Sin. Though ye have made (...) Covenant
with Death, and with Hell are at agreement; yet because ye have made lies your
refug^^ and hid your selves under falsehood, your Covenant with Death shall be
disannulled, and your agreement with Hell shall not stand. The Hail sh^^ sweep
away your refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow your hiding place; and
when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then shall ^e be trodden down by
it, Isa. 28.15, 16, 17, 18.

Fifthly, To add no more, There is the languishing Professor that falls
under the rebuke of this Doctrine, who (though his condition be safe, because
of his habitual Readiness, the grace of Regeneration being found within him,
yet) may he sadly smart for his Relapses before ^e give up the Ghost. Have thou
not heard before what hazards even the Godly do run, for want of actual
Preparation? Is it a small thing in thine account, to be under the Troun^ings
of Satan, the hidings of God's Face, the ^remblings of Conscience, and the
terrors of Death? Remember therefore from whence thou ^^rt fallen, and repent,
and do the first works, or ^^se the Lord Christ will come unto thee quickly,
and remove thee out of thy place, except thou re^ent. Be watchful, and
strengthen the things that are ready to die, which yet remain, for thy works
are not found perfect before God. Remem^er therefore how thou have received,
and heard, and hold fast, and repent: If therefore thou shall ^ot watch, the
Lord Christ will come on thee as Thief, and thou shall not know what hour he
will ^ome upon thee, Rev. 2.5. and 3.2, 3.

Use 2. Secondly, Is it the great concernment ^f all that look to be saved, to
make ready against the coming of Christ? Then it is the greatest Folly
imaginable, to neglect making ready for Christ's Coming. That man lies a^^
ways under the imputation of extreme Folly that neglects his principal
Concerns. Is (...) not an arrant Fool, that will not mind his mo^^ necessary
Concernments, wherein his very l^^^ and welfare is wrapped up?

-- Quae te dementia cepit? That you may see the extreme folly and ma^ness of
men herein, I will show you it a lit^^^ more particularly, and that very
briefly.

First, That man that neglects making re^dy for Christ's coming, he has no
regard (...) or care of, his great Soul. His Carelessness about making due
Preparation to meet the L^^^ Jesus, does plainly speak forth thus much That
whether his Soul sink or swim, be sa^^ or damned, he mattereth it not; He
will^^^ so much as trouble either his Head or Heart about it. And is not this
the greatest piece^^ Folly that can be? What man more mad^^ foolish than he,
that sets his Soul aside, (...) forgets, or else cares not to do any
th^^ about it, that may tend to save it. Our (...) Jesus tells us, That the
Soul of man is be^^^^ than the whole world, for so much his wo^^^ do sound,
Math. 16.26. What is a man prof^^^ ^f he gain the whole world, and lose his own
Soul? ^r what shall he give in exchange for his soul? Now is that man any other
than a simple Fool, that neglects his Soul, which the whole world cannot
equalize the worth of, or repair the loss of; if he could enjoy it all to
himself?

Secondly, That man that neglects Preparation for the Coming of Christ, he
does but treasure up wrath unto himself against the day of Wrath and Revelation
of the righteous Judgment of God. And is not he a Fool, that provideth
Instruments of Cruelty for himself? And thus does every one (though they think
it not) that neglects to make ready for Christ's appearance. I speak to such
as never mind the work of Repentance, but go on in a course of Sin, these of
all others are the greatest Fools, in that they do all the while store up
plagues for themselves, Romans 2.4, 5, 6.

Thirdly, The Folly of him that minds not making ready for the coming of
Christ, appears in this; That he does but harden himself against ^he coming of
Christ. And is he not a grand Fool, think ye, that thus sets himself against
Christ? Whoever hardened himself against God, and prospered? I do not think
that every one that minds not to make himself ready to meet ^he Lord Jesus,
does intentionally and resolredly harden himself against Christ, for these ^re
only that Atheistical and debanched Crew, that are void of all Fear and
Conscience, that bid open defiance against Heaven, Psalm. 73.9^ But my Friends,
after you have heard it to be your Duty to make ready against that time, when
you shall be called to appear before Christ; i^ you then neglect to do it, it
will be interpreted of Christ to be a hardening your selves against him:
Because you know it to be your Duty, and yet will not do it. And what a Madman
(...) he that will put himself into such a posture, a^ will bespeak him to be
hardening himself against Christ? Can their hearts endure, or their hands be
strong in the day that God shall deal with them? Ezekiel. 22.14. Will ye provoke
the Lord to jealousy? are ye stronger than he? Remember it was Isreal's
overthrow in the Wilderness, that they hardened themselves against God: this
made their Carkases fall there, so that they never came to Canaan, Psalm. 95.8,
9, 10, 11. Heb. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. I shall leave but that one place further with
you, and then consider of it, Revel. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. And the Heaven departed
at a Scroll when it is rolled together, and every Mountain and Island were
moved out of their places: And the Kings of the earth, and the great Men, and
the Rich men, and the Chief Captains, and the Mighty men, and every Bondsman,
and every Freeman, hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the
Mountains, And said to the mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from
the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For
the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? You see
that Christ will make the stoutest of men to tremble, that harden themselves
against him.

Fourthly, Their folly appears by this, who neglect to prepare and make ready
for Christ Jesus his Coming; in that so doing, they undervalue Heaven. And is
he not to be reckoned a prosane Fool, that makes no reckoning of Heaven? The
poor Indians folly was seen in this, That they were so willing to part with
their Gold for some pieces of Brass, or for other Toys and Trifles that were of
no great value. Now that man that takes no care to make himself ready to come
before the Lord Jesus, his neglect does plainly declare, That Heaven bears to
price with him. For there is no man that ^ometh within the sound of the Gospel,
^ut he hears, That without Repentance no salvation; and that without
Holiness, no man shall see the Lord. Now after the declaration ^^ all this in
the ears of such a person, If he shall sive in the neglect of looking after
Repentance, ^r the work of Holiness, he does evidently ma^ifest, That Heaven
signifies not much to him; for he that will not carefully look after the
heans, and also use them, that relate to such an and, his very neglecting of
the means, does bespeak him to have no great regard to the end, especially when
he knows, that it is not possible (in an ordinary way) to come to enjoy such
an end, without making use of such means. And will not this prove a man to be a
Fool? Remember that Esau is called a profane person, (or, as the word may be
rendered) a profane Fool, for despising his Birthright; which showed his
undervaluing of Heaven, and preferring the earth before it, Heb. 12.16. with
Genesis 25.34.

Use 3. Thirdly, Is it the grand Concernment of all that would be saved, to
make ready for Christ's coming? Then let it serve for Exhortation, to press you
all, seriously and earnestly to make your selves ready. Entertain the Lord
Christ's advice in the Text, Be ye therefore ready also; I shall enforce the
Duty upon you with two or three Considerations, because I must hasten.

Considerations.
First; Consider that your sasety lies in making ready for Christ. I would
think, That there is not a person among you this day, but would give something
to know, that his Soul is safe and shall be secured against all future hazards
of miscarrying eternally. Why, my Friends, I can tell you, how you may have
them secure enough: Do but you get and make sure of that ^undamental-Readiness
you were told of, and abour still after Actual Preparation, and your Souls will
be safe, and past the peril of miscarrying eternally. Though you may dash
sometimes against some Rocks, before you get over ^^e troublesome Sea of this
world, yet shall not ^he Vessel of your Soul be split upon any of these ^ocks,
but shall come safely in into the Harbor (...) Heaven.

Secondly, Consider that Christ may come upon (...) at unawares. The time of
his coming may love a surprizal to you. O then get ready, my ^riends. There is
none of you that knows ^ow soon you may have a call to go from hence; which
of your Funerals may be the next, neither (...) nor I know. But this I know,
That few (...) us thought that we should have seen this ^ournful day on such a
sudden. Was it not a ^^prizal to the most? Though not to the party ^^eceased,
for she had strong impressions of ^^eath, when others had no fear of it at all.
^atch therefore; for ye neither know the day, nor (...) hour, wherein the Son
of man comes, Mat. ^.13.

Thirdly, Consider what comfort it will be to (...) in a Dying hour, to know
that you are ready? though Death is, and will be the King of Ter^^urs to
others, yet it will be a welcome Mes^ger to you: Then shall ye be able to
reckon up for one of your Privileges, yea, your last Privilege in this world;
according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.22. Death is yours.

Fourthly, Consider how readily ye shall be entertained and received of Christ,
if you do but get ready for him. There shall no stop be made, but forthwith ye
shall enter into Glory, Mat. 25.10. And they that were ready, went in with him
unto the Marriage. So soon as Lazarus was dead, his Soul was carried into
Abraham's bosom Luke 16.22. Do but you mind to make you ready, the Lord Christ
will quickly pass the Sentence for your entrance into his Eternal Kingdom.

The Fourth Use.
Fourthly, Is it the great Concern of all that would be saved. to prepare for
the Coming of Christ? Then this Use may serve for Consolation to all such, as
have in some good measure been fitting themselves for the appearance of Christ,
and are still making it their business to be completing their Readiness for
his Coming. It speaks Comfort to such in two or three Particulars.

First; Take this for your Comfort at present, That you shall certainly sit
down with Christ in Glory; The Marriage-Supper is prepared for you, and you
shall be Guests at the Bridegrooms Table. All the attendance that can be
expected, you shall have; Christ himself will gird himself, and come forth and
serve you, Luke 12.37. Blessed are those Servants, whom the Lord when he
comes, shall find watching: Verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself,
and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. And what
an honorable attendance is this! for the Master of the house ^o wait on his
Servants.

Secondly, It speaks this comfort to them, That when ever Christ comes, it
shall not be a surprisal to them. If you continue your preparation for Christ
his Coming, and do not fall asleep, or grow secure again, Christ will not come
on you unawares, you shall then speak of Christ's Coming eternally to save you,
as the Church peaketh of the Lord's coming eternally to save ^er, Isa. 25.9.
And it shall be said in that day, Lo, his is our God, we have waited for him,
and he ^ill save us: This is the Lord, we have waited or him, we will be glad,
and rejoice in his Salvation. They are only the sleepy and slumbering Virgins
that are surprised with his Coming; such ^s are making ready for him, and
expecting him, shall not be taken at unawares. Though they ^now not the time of
his Coming, yet because ^hey are looking and waiting for his Coming; ^hey shall
not be surprised when ever he comes. ^urely I come quickly, says Christ:
Amen, ^ith the prepared Soul. Even so, come Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.20.

Thirdly, There is this further comfort also in it, That such prepared Souls
shall (ordinarily) have some comfortable foretasts of glory to come: Such shall
eat of the Grapes of Eshcol, while they are in the way to Heaven, before they
come into the Land of Canaan it self. I do not say, that it is always thus
with prepared Souls a for some (possibly) that have diligently endeavored to
prepared themselves for the Coming o^ Christ, may yet notwithstanding feel
nothing bu^ bitterness in their spirits in their way to glory, a^ the case
seems to have been with precious Heman, Psalm. 88. throughout: And the 15
vers^ thereof tells us, That this was his case from hi^ youth up. I am
afflicted, and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer thy terrors, I am
distracted. The Hebrew word (...) that is translated, from my youth up,
signifies Childhood and comes from a root, that signifies to shakeout,
(...); as if he had said, I am afflicted, an ready to die, from my very shaking
out of the Womb; Nay (possibly) such Souls may some times go away in a Cloud,
without the lea^ taste of that Glory, which immediately after Death, they do
fully possess and enjoy. But ye^ (ordinarily) they do more generally taste
(...) those pleasures that are at Gods right hand forevermore, while they are
in their way to Heaven. They depart in peace, as the Phrase ^^ Luke 2.29. that
is, They die with satisfaction and comfort, nay, with joy and gladness, Revel.
19.7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the Marriage of
the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready. And the reason is,
Because they have the Testimony of their Consciences, according to that of
Paul, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience,
that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by ^he
grace of God, we have had our conversation ^^ the world.

Use 5.
Lastly, Is it the great Concernment of all that would be saved, to make ready
for the Coming ^f Christ? Then it would be needful to lay ^own some Directions
how to get ready against ^he time of Christ's Coming: But the time ^ow calls
me off, and therefore I must desist; only take this single Direction, Think
daily of ^he Day of thy Death, and the uncertain time ^f Christ's certain
Coming, and this seriously ^hought on, will spur thee on to get ready for is
Coming.

Men too commonly cast off the thoughts of ^eath, and of Christ's Coming to
Judgment, and this makes them so remiss and careless, as that they mind not
preparing for a dying Hour, and appearing before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
to give an account of all that they have done in the Body, whether it be good,
(...) whether it be evil.

FINIS.
In Obitum MARIAE WILSON, Filiae Ricardi Wilson, Generosi; (...)
HEu dolor infandus! cur mors saevissime vitam
Amputat innocuam? quae sibi culpa fuit?
Rara fides hujus, radiis pietatis amoenis
Affulsit, vitii nescia, vana fugit.
Omnia sancta petit, semper sua facta benigna
Omnibus; and pura numina mente colit.
Occubuit morti, lacrymarum ex valle rev^lli,
Hei mihi! virtutis flosculus hic moritur!
Quod fecit Anagram, Marie Wilson, Crosfie^d
Flores Deus illos creamine constat;
(...)! Stat sine Morte decus.
^mbre rigate genas! abiit, (moriente Maria
Ipsa arbusta dolent) nunc dolor urget idem;
(Dicere si fas est) rupes fragore movere,
Cum Phoenix mundi (desine Musa!) perit,
To Mr. R. W. depressed with grief for the loss of his so virtuous and only
Daughter.
What? Mourn excessively, under your Cross? O Sir, Abandon Sorrow, though you R
Loss (I grant) be Real, And Of large extent Your only Child! Yet know She was
but lent. A fruitful Plant she Was in the Field of God, But being Ripe In Grace,
now her abode God changed has: for Earth- Ly dwellings given A Mansion Large,
among the Saints in Heaven: And yet Do you think hardly Of your God? For, Sure
there is Mercy latent i N his Rod,

Then stay your Tears, and ( David-like) submit,
For he who sent the Cross, will hallow it.
Ad pium Lectorem.
PArdon me, Reader, if thou judg't unmeet;
That my rude Muse (with her decrepit feet)
Should thus intrude herself into the Press,
('Among others) to proclaim the worthiness,
Of this accomplished, pious Virgin, who
(While here) did all her Age and Sex outgo,
In virtues race; and now has won the Goal,
Whilst we, her friends, with tears her loss condole
^hen God to the world had shown this polisht ^tone,
^soon (for ends best known to mself alone)
^^mov'd her hence, and placed her among them,
that do adorn the New Jerusalem.
^e're thou did converse with her, I Have done;
^er spiritual worth was obvious as the Sun.
^anscendent Love she to the truth did bear;
^o pains she spared, Gods Sacred Word to hear.
and if this Heavenborn Dorcas thou knewst not,
^m all perfection up, and she was that.
^ut stay, my Muse, let her good works commend
^er (whom I dare not praise, because a Friend)
^e mute, no more with hobling Verses come,
^th her blessed Life 's her best Encomium;
Which the foregoing Narratives exemplify,
and will perpetuate her Me mory
^o us who do survive. Let Us imitate
This Heavenly pattern then; and always wait
^he Master's coming, lest when it is too late,
We cry, Lord, Lord, open to us the Gate.
^ may we not (like Goats) at Christ's left hand
^e found (oh dreadful!) but still ready stand,
With oyled lamps to meet the Lord; for he
Will surely come to judge both thee and me.
M. C.

Upon the Death of Mrs. Mary Wilso^ who was Buried, August 4. 1672.
HEre lies the first, of that name from Cro field,
Lord grant that place may more such flow^ yield.
Her early buds that place did so perfume,
As tho her Soul had brought it from the Womb.
No pains she thought too hard Gods sacred Word hear,
And when she harrow'd it, she watered it with tear.
And yet she would complain of her unfruitful^^
Tho she foretold her Death, much like a Prophetess.
Her dying Breath was such, as filled the eyes ^ ears,
Of her Spectators all, with Joys, and yet w^^ Tears.
As to her Natural parts, her Genius still was such
What Learning ere she saw, to take it in was ^^ much.
Her works behind her left, most amply have declared,
That not unlike she may, to Dorcas be compared.
She, she, she was, most singly set apart,
To be the Joy of her poor Parents heart,
But now she is gone to her Eternal Rest,
Amongst the Saints, for ever to be blessed.
To all those that love virtue.
Reader,
WHen my serious thoughts had reflected upon the Death of so virtuous a Damsel,
I could not but deplore her Departure; and being importuned by her virtues, I
gave my Pen the privilege (assisting it with the uttermost of my power) to
compose this Elegious Poem upon her Death; which I cannot expect will be
consonant to all humors, but only to those that love virtue. And Reader, thou
knowing that the tallest Cedars were but Twigs at first; I desire thee to let
the strength of thy goodness, pardon the weakness of him, who is thine in what
he may,

Christopher Rickerby.

An Elegy, upon the Death of a virtuous young Damsel, Mrs. Mary Wilson, late of
Cross-field in Cumberland.
YE grief-supporting Muses, here is that
Will sublimate your Senses; Ask not what,
But lend assistance soon, do not deny,
For fear I make complaint to Mercury.
What? Are your Heliconian waters spent?
Or do you stay t'expect a Complement?
Be not so slow, for Sorrow hates delay;
Oh hear my hasty call, and come away.
I crave your aid, lest Melancholy I
Ravished with what I speak, should faint and die
Times full-mouthed Herald, will exactly tell
How Death has rambled from his misty Cell,
And called her hence: whose never-dying name
Gives Golden feathers to the wings of Fame:
Whilst she enjoyed the fullness of her breath,
Her Life was a Preparative for Death.
It was her whole Delight, and Study still
To prosecute her great Redeemers Will.
Faith, Hope, and Charity did sweetly rest
Within the Councel-Chamber of her Breast.
Nay in a word, the Graces did agree
^o make one happy Soul, and this was she.
Which was a Pattern sent, that thou and I,
And others, by her Life might learn to die.
^s for her Moral Duties, they were such,
That should I strive, I could not speak too much;
^er whole delight was always to appear
^t any place, where she God's word might hear.
^om whence she sucked such wholesome streams, that she
^ft got a plaudit for her Memory;
^ay she in every thing did so excel,
That it was hard to find a parallel.
This same was she, within whose tender breast,
A mighty Magazin of worth did rest.
Her comely Carriage to all men, might claim
A perfect right to a beloved Name:
Her actions were so just, that they may tell
She lived uprightly, and she dy'd-as well;
Her Love and sweet Society did call
^en thoosand tears to attend her Funeral.
And now she is gone: I hope her Soul's aspired
so Heavens high Ralace, where she sits attired
With glorious Immortality; and sings
^^elodious Tunes unto the King of Kings.
Oh there she rests, free from the rubs of earth,
Hugging no Shadow, but a real Mirth;
Where still me thinks I hear her sweetly sing?
Grave, where is thy power? Death, where is thy sting?
Methinks I hear her warbling tongue declare,
How good her works, how great her wonders are.
Methought I saw in what triumphing state
Her soul was led to Heaven's refulgent Gate;
Where, when she came disro'bd of all her Sin,
The Gates flew open, and her Soul flew in.
There, there, the Alpha of her joys will never
Know an Omega, but endure for ever.
Perhaps some will conclude me wondrous bold
When this Elegious Poem they behold;
It is an Error, that my hasty Quill
Too rashly stepped into, against my will.
I hope it is venial; for in former times
Boldness in truths were pardonable crimes;
Her splendent virtues did importune me
To calculate and write this Elegy
Of her; That now is taking sweet repose
In Heaven's eternal bed; where none but those
Shall sleep, that in their Life-times studied still
Their hungry Lamps, with precious Oil to fill;
Since thus she lived, since thus she died, O then,
Let Us imitate so good a Life; And when
We hear the sweet Narration of her Death,
Let Us learn to die; Let them that live by breath,
Examine her brave actions, and they will find,
She had true zeal imprinted in her mind.
Reader, As often as report shall send
Unto thy ears the Death of such a Friend,
Wonder not that she is dead; that is too much wrong,
But rather wonder that she lived so long.
For Life's but like a Candle, every wind
May puff it out, and leave a Snuff behind.
Live we a Thousand years, we do but run
Indebt to Nature; when those days are done
This is most sure, our earthen vessels must
At last dissolve, and turn again to Dust.
Sic voluere fata.
Her Epitaph.
Mortality may here survey
A Grave, within whose bosom lay
Rare Virtue, Zeal, whilst she had breath,
Yet quickly was blockt up by death.
Wholesome streams of rare zeal did rest
In the close Chamber of her Breast.
Like Dorcas, she sought to fulfill
Sound work for her Redeemer still.
O, but Death came, and said thou must
Now go dissolve, and turn to Dust.
She is the first that ever came
Hither, from Cross-field, of that name;
Whose vertuoos Life, none will deny,
Taught Death to live, and Life to dye;
I hope the Alpha of her joys will never
Omega know, but last for ever.
Spes mihi magna subit. By me Christopher Rickerby Schoolmaster of Lazonby.

For his invaluable Friend, Mr. Richard Wilson, at Crosfield.
My Dear and Well-beloved Brother,
IT shall not be my work at this time, to set your wound a bleeding a fresh, or
to add weight to your present Affliction; But I hope I shall willingly
endeavor to heal it, and to bear a part of your burden, and to have you upon
my heart, when I make my Address to God for Mercy, and Pardon for mine own
Soul: And shall beg of God, to support your Soul, and to be to you instead of
all Relations and Comforts, which this vain, fading, perishing and deceitful
world can afford you; and that Christ may be to you instead of ten Children,
and give you a Name, better than that of Sons and Daughters; yea, That Christ
may be your all in all: And I hope the Lord has taught you not to sorrow as
one without hope, for she whom you so dearly loved, is gone to her dearly
Beloved, there to dwell for ever, where she is freed from Satan, Sin and
Sorrow; all tears being wipt away from her eyes: yea, she is gone to her
Husband, Lord, and King, where she reaps the fruit and comfort of all her
Labors, and is blessed, for So are the dead that die in the Lord; Yea, She now
enjoyes th^^ sweet of all her private Retirements in Prayer and Meditation,
wherein she kept her communion with God in Christ whilst here: And she, w^^
lately shined as a glor ous Star in this Church is now glorified in Heaven; she
is possessed o^ those mansions of Glory purchased, and prepared by Christ for
her, Joh. 14.2. and there she (...) beholding the Face of God, reconciled to
he^ Soul by Christ, where she is singing Hallelujahs yea the pure Praises of
God; and this shall ^^ her work, yea rather her delight to all Eternity And
then, My dear Brother, why should no^ you with David (the Child being dead)
arise and come into the House of the Lord to worship? 2 Samuel 12.20. Brother,
Let me tell you, in some sense (if I may adventure to spea^ it) you have as
much, yea more reason to be contented, and thankful than David had: for your
Daughters name was Mary, who has chosen the better part, which cannot be taken
from here is And, O that you were prevailed with willingly and thankfully to bear
the indignation of the Lord, and to walk humbly with him, who kills and
makes alive; who brings down to the grave, and brings up, Deuteronomy. 32.34. I
believe, Faith will teach you to kiss a striking Lord, and to acknowledge the
Sovereignty of a^^ angry God, in the Death of your only Daughter, to be above
the power of Mortals, who ^lucks up a Flower in its prime, and is not to be
^lamed by us for it; Our Lord hathpluckt up ^ne of his Roses, let us pray that
his blessed Will may be done; our Lord has numbered man's months, and set him
his bounds, which ^e cannot pass, Job 14.5. I verily believe, your Lord has
taught you to lay your hand upon your Mouth; but I shall be far from desiring
any to make light of such great trials and losses, ^ut rather could wish, that
every cross were ^ook't in the face seven times, and were read ^ver and over
again; It is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, and speaks something, has
some ^^and, and the man of understanding will learn ^o hear, and fear the Rod,
and him that appointed it. O try what is the taste of the Lord's Cup, and
drink; the Lord sanctify it to you, that you may grow thereby. I trust in God,
that whatever speech it utter, that that is one word in it for you, in Job
5.17. Behold, blessed and the man whom the Lord corrects; and that it is safe
for you, you are from home while here, you are not of this world, as your
Redeemer was not of this world; there is something a keeping for you, that is
worth the looking after: All that is here is condemned to dye, and to pass away
as a snow-ball before a Summers Sun: And since Death took possession of
something of yours, it has been and daily is creeping near your self; Howbeit
with no noise of feet, your Husbandman and Lord has lopped off one branch
already, the tree it self is to be removed into the higher Garden; the Lord fit
you for your change, and help you to bear these crosses (for indeed they are
great and many) and give you a sanctified use of them, and to make you white
and ripe for the Lord's Harvest-hook by them.

I have seen the Lord weaning you from this world and its vanities, it was
never his mind that it should be your portion; and let the Lord be praised,
that it is so: you look the liker one of the Heirs of Glory; let the movables
go why not? They are not yours, but fasthold on the Heritage, Even our Lord
Christ; make your interest sure, and give you to grow as a Palm tree upon Mount
Zion, howbeit shaken with winds and many sore blasts, yet the root is fast. I
pray Him, whose you are, to supply your wants another way; for though we cannot
see the Lords design, in this his wise Providence, who rules all, yet I verily
believe this is not only good, but best of all: For wise Solomon says, Better
is the end of a thing, than the begiuning: Yea, Christ calls from Heaven, and
bids, Write, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. And after Paul had seriously debated the
Case, whether to live or dye was better for him; he concludes, that of the two,
To die, and to be with Christ, was best of all. And therefore, my dear Brother,
this should teach us, and work in us a careful Preparation for Death, and
vehement longings after it, and cheerfulness in entertaining it, and moderation
in our sorrowing for her that is dead; Mourning only for our own loss, and that
especially, because the Death and removal of the Godly is a sad, if not a sure.
presage of ensuing Evil. When Noah was entered into the Ark, then the Flood
came, Genesis 7.12. When Lot was gone out of Sodom, then it must be burnt. When
the Lord resolved to destroy Jeroboam; house, he took away the Child in whom
there was some good thing found 1 Kin. 14.10, 11, 13. Thus when the Lord in
ended to bring evil upon Jerusalem, good Josiah must first be brought to his
grave in peace, Because his heart was tender, and he humbled himelf at the
hearing of the Law of God, 2 Kin. 22.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

Woe is me therefore, considering that even amongst us the righteous are taken
away; that in four or five Months time, almost the tenth man on this side
Hartside should be removed; yet not considering, at least not as they ought to
do, That The righteous are taken away from the evil to come, Isa. 57.

When our Jacob for wrestling, our Caleb and Joshuah for following the Lord,
and our Nathaniel, and besides our Mary is removed, How should this awaken us,
and the very thoughts of it make us tremble, and our knees to smite one against
another? Its true they are beyond the Storm; But the presence of the Godly, in
all Ages, has drawn the love and favor of God to the places where they were:
For they are dear to God, As the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. And he will be a
wall of ire round about the place where they are, v. 5. Yea many a time does
God spare the wicked for the godly, as the husbandman does the tares for the
wheat's sake, Matthew. 13. As God would have spared Sodom and Gomorrah, if there
had been but ten, nay five righteous persons, Genesis 18.32. Act. 27.24. Besides,
the Prayers of the Godly, in all Ages, have been mighty prevalent with God,
both for the obtaining Mercies, and also for the preventing miseries, and
keeping of judgments from the places where they live^ Psalm. 106.23. He would,
says the Psalmist, have destroyed them, had not Moses his Servant stoe^ before
him in the breach, to turn away his wrath lest he should destroy them. Besides,
they are (...) great force for the vanquishing and overcoming of Enemies; Moses
prevailed more by h^^ Prayers, than Joshua with all his Soldiers, againt the
Amalekites, Exodus 17.11. One godly man Prayers, says one, can do more than a
great so^ of Sinners (...) do with fighting. So that as N^hal's servants said
of David's men, so we may ^y of our dear friends that are removed from us, they
have been very good to us, and we have had no hurt whilst we have been
conversant with them, They have been a wall unto us, both by day and by night.
What cause have we then to fear that may follow the removal of them; And then
alas! What have we lost, that have lost ^uch good Examples, as most of them
were, and (...) particular your Daughter, she, one of a thou^^d: Her counsel,
her wisdom, her blameless talking was of great use to restrain some from ^in,
and to allure and draw others (at least) to be outward performance of many good
Duties; ^^d I think I may say, that she exceeded most ^^at ever I knew (except
Mrs. Catherine Rea of ^^^ma) in her constant care to please God, and ^qual
respect to the keeping of all Gods Commandments; and in her holy diligence to
im^ove all opportunities for her Souls profit, as (...) Meditating, Praying,
Reading, Hearing, and Conferring; And then her Seriousness in Duties, and great
delight in both First and Second Table Duties. What shall I say! Her ^^avity,
Chastity, and Humility, and her or^ering her self every way so holily, so
meekly, ^^d blamelesly; So, that to my knowledge, it was a great Conviction to
those that were in a great measure strangers to Godliness or any ^trictness:
and I Will assure you, I often wished, that her Conversation had been better
known to some, and that it might have so been, I did fully purpose to have sued
for your Consent (having gotten hers) that we might have had he^ a while
amongst us; That our Professors, chiefl^ of her Sex, whose Carriages and
Conversation were not so answerable to the Gospel as they should be, might have
been convinced of the evil of them, and by her Gospel-conversation might have
become more wise, solid, sober, serious, grave, and more careful to provide so
their eternal Welfare: But alas, it is now to late, the time is past and gone,
which man make us mourn upon our own account: But u^ on their account, this may
not only reason (...) into a Moderation of Sorrow, but also cause (...) to
rejoice, in that they are landed safe in Hea^ven, where she also is even with
Christ, which is best of all; she is now set at liberty and fre^ dome. Who is
not comforted to see and know that his Friend is brought out of Prison, to
(...) his Friend set free from all Persecutions, Si^ Sorrow and Death, and to
live and rejoice wi^^ Christ? 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. And may you (...) be glad, that
she is now in a full, peaceable, y^^ glo^^ous condition and state in Heaven?
Y^^ have great cause of rejoicing, since her joy (...) begun, which shall never
end: Now the Lo^^ has betrothed her to himself in Righteousne^^ and that for
ever, Hos. 2.19. I cannot remember that you were ever absolutely against her
Marriage, no, nor that you were against it at all, provided that she got a good
Husband: She has now gotten a good Match indeed, the Marriage betwixt Christ
and her Soul is completed and consummated, 2 Cor. 11.2. Rev. 19.7, 8. Let us
be glad and rejoice in him, since she is now married to Christ; and will you not
rejoice, at least a little, with your Daughter on ^her Wedding Day? She has
sown in Tears, and now is reaping in Joy, Psalm. 126.6. And let this also a
little prevail with you, God gave you your Daughter but during pleasure, He
might have taken her away the very first day he gave her, and have done you no
wrong. We are Tenants at Will: God may, when his pleasure is, put us out of
Possession, and therefore we should learn with Job to submit our selves, and
bless his Name when he gives or when he takes away: You shall shortly go to
her, she shall not return to you; It Is but a little while and you shall for
ever have her company: Wherefore comfort your self with these words, 1 These.
4.13, 14-17, 18.

This is all that I can further do, to recommend your Case to your Lord, who
has engraven you upon the Palms of his Hands: If I were able to do more, you
may believe me that I gladly would.

Now the God of all Grace confirm and stablish your heart in Truth and Peace,
till the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God be obtained, and I pray that God
may be to your Soul the God of all Consolation.

I pray remember my Love to your Wife, and to all our Christian Friends with
you. My Wife has her Love remembered to you, and begs your Prayers.

Blacklough, Aug. 27. 1672. Your unworthy Brother, J. H.

The Copies of two Letters written to Mr. Rich. Wilson, that tender and
sorrowful Father, which lately buried his dear and hopeful Daughter.
Dear Friend,
I Was informed of the sad tidings of the Death of your Daughter; and yesterday
yours of ^ugust 10. came to my hand, and the Relation (...) the manner of her
Death did somewhat allay ^^e sorrow; and since the Lord has dealt boun^fully
with her, in giving her Grace and Glory, you may sing. I confess, if you
respect your ^ss, it is so great, that you may mourn, and ^efuse to be
comforted, because she is not. But ^nsider, she was a Loan lent of the Lord.
All (...) Comforts are but lent Comforts; and we are not to repine when God
calls for them again, but ^^tiently to submit to Gods holy Will. Seeing it (...)
the Lord who has done it, who has abso^^ute Sovereignty over all his
Creatures. We ^^st be dumb and say nothing, and, as Aaron, ^^ld our peace. She
is taken away in the flow^^ of her Age, but God knew it the best time to ^op
her, and happily she is taken away from ^e Evil to come; She is entered into
peace. ^ou may account your self more happy that once you did enjoy her, than
now miserable that she is so suddenly removed; for she is not lost, but gone
before us: We shall go to her she will not return to us. The Lord has
delivered her from Sin and Sorrow, and you fro^^ Fear and Care concerning her.

How happy would you have esteemed you^ self, if she had been matched to one,
who ha^ all desired Accommodations, and to a Person who had been endowed with
all possible A^^ complishments, both Sacred and Civil, you^ eyes seeing it.
Thus it has been done to be^ whom the King of Heaven had a delight to ^^nour.
He has betrothed her to Himself for eve^ and this day of her Espousals may be
the Day (...) the gladness of your Heart: For this has in the bowels of it
many glorrous Mercies. God has done it, and that is enough to satisfy any
Sou^^ and he has done it for ever. His heart is so (...) it; that there shall
never be any breach of (...) Conjugal Love and Communion. -- Y^^ have heard of
the Patience of Job, and ha^^ seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is ve^^
pitiful, and of tender mercy, and happily (...) end of the Lord in this is,
for to draw you heart Heavenward; Where not only you^ Child, but your best and
chrefest Love is.

Be now more frequent in Heavenly Visi^ and have your Conversation in Heaven;
a^^ where your Treasure is, there let your Heart also. Mourn not that you go
Childless, but rejoice that you do not go Christless. Neither ^^y I am bereft
of the comfort of my life, when ^^e God of all comforts is yours. David at
^^glag comforted himself in the Lord his God. ^o and do likewise, for God is
All-sufficient to apply all our wants; and the Earth is never so ^^id of
Comfort, but there is Comfort enough ^^the God of Heaven, in whom Wives,
Children, and every good thing are lodged.

You could not be assured (though you say ^our Daughter never grieved you in
all her ^^me) that you should always have comfort in ^^er; But in the Lord
Jehovah there is constant ^^msort, and constant joy, Psalm. 37.4. You ^now the
Comforts of the world are but cisterns, and may fail: Therefore wipe away all
Tears, and go to the Fountain God, whose Favor is ^^ter than Life, and better
than all in this life; ^^n whose Light, we shall see light.

However, sorrow not like them that have no ^ope: The Egyptians bewailed Jacob
Seventy Days, and Joseph his son mourned but seven Days. Which teaches
Christians to keep a mean in Mourning; we may sorrow, but it must be with
sobriety, and in measure.

When David's Child was dead, he arose from the Earth -- and went into the
House of the Lord and worshipped. And Job, when his Children were dead, he
blessed the Name of the Lord. And indeed, the People of God turn all their
Afflictions and Crosses, into Prayers and Praises: Grace makes every condition
work Glory to God; as God makes every condition work together for good to them
that love him. And if we bless God in our Afflictions, then our Afflictions are
Blessings to us.

Unto the Righteous (says David) there arise Light in Darkness: Comfort in
Troubles, and Deliverances out of all Distresses, are the fruit of Gods Grace;
therefore wait on God in the way of his Judgments, and you shall y^^ find that
he is good, and can do you good^ Though others dye, yet God lives, and eve^
lives to do good. When therefore you look o^ the right hand, and see your
Dearly-Belove^ gone, then cry to the Lord, and say, Thou (...) my Refuge and my
Portion in the land of the ^^ving. And ever remember that of the Apost^^ Christ
is all, and in all.

Aug. 23. 1672. I am Sir, Yours.

The other Letter is as follows.

Dear Friend,
I Am very sensible of your great Loss, yet did (...) hope, that you had been
comforted over our Dead; But by your last, I find that the ^ound bleeds afresh.
I shall desire the Father (...) Mercies, and the God of all Consolations, to
Apport your Spirit, to make you to hear of Joy and Gladness, and restore
comfort to you and (...) your Mourners.

But Sir, Though Affection commands, yet ^e Word of Faith forbids excessive
Mourning. ^e pray that God's Will may be done, and we ^^ght to be quiet and to
praise God when it is ^^ne, knowing that God does every thing in ^^fection of
Wisdom: and this present sad ^^pensation, God, only wise, sees best for you;
^^d doubtless it shall work for your good. In ^our Afflictions Christ is
afflicted; and though ^^n feel the burden heavy, yet He bears the ^^aviest end
of the Cross, and has bid you to ^^sider Him, that endured the Cross, lest ^ou
be weary and faint in your mind. Happily ^ur Heart was too much let out to that
your ^^lov^d, and God would not have his Childrens ^ections set on things below
himself. Though others fail and are gone, yet Jesus Christ is the (...),
yesterday, to day, and for ever. The Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot
help and comfort; Though the C stern be empty, yet the Fountain is full. O go
and take of that fully heap Jesus Christ, and rejoice in the God (...) your
Salvation, and rise up from your dead lest your over-grieving displease God.
World Sorrow causes death, and therefore turn you into the right channel, and
sorrow after a god sort; Knowing, that as Sufferings abound, shall Consolations
abound much more, in a^^ through Jesus Christ; and since you have so^^ in
Tears, expect a performance of that Promi^ That you shall reap in joy. God told
Abrahas Genesis 15.1. That he was his Shield, and ^ exceeding great Reward; And
Abraham said v. 2. Lord God what will thou give me, sein go Childless? A good
man observes on the place, The weakness of Gods Children, even Dear ones and
Chief ones; if things answer ^^ their Desires, they are a little impatient, a^
think less of many Mercies, that both they ha^ and are promised after to have,
because the want some one thing that they would glad have and enjoy. So was
Abraham for want o^ Child; as if he should have said, What is thou promisest,
seeing this is wanting, I have Issue. This is a great corruption in us, and must
beware; for if God were not merciful, was the way to rob us of all, to think
light any, for the want of some Blessing. God of stones raise up Children, and
out of the Lions dead carcass give honey, and I hope he will sanctify and
sweeten his rod, that you shall say, It was good that I was afflicted; and find
that of very faithfulness He has caused you to be troubled.

As you feel the Cross of Christ, so see the ranity of the Creature, and the
All Sufficiency of thy Creator, God blessed for ever; and happy you shall
experimentally find, that Christ ^^ all in all: and cry out with that Martyr,
None ^^ Christ, None but Christ. Light is sown for the righteous, and Joy for
the upright in heart. A wet Seed-time may have a good Harvest; The Husbandman
waits for the precious fruit of the ^arth, So do you, for the fruit and benefit
of this Affliction. It is good that a man should both ^ope, and quietly wait
for the Salvation of the Lord. The Lord waits, that he may be gra^^ous to you;
and will be exalted, that he may have Mercy on you; Blessed are all they that
wait ^^ him, Isai. 30.18.

The Lord fill you with all Joy and Peace in elieving, and with all the Graces
and Comforts of his Holy Spirit.

I am Sir, Your very affectionate Friend.
Sept. 14. 1672.
A Letter written to Mr. Rich. Wilson of Crosfield, after the Death of his
deart and only Daughter; upon the receipt of a Letter of Complaint from him
for long Absence, after promise of Presence.
My very Dear and Beloved Son in the Faith, through our well-beloved Savior.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace be to thee from God our Father, and from Christ Jesus
our Lord.
THe receipt of yours upon the 20th instand has occasioned this return. I will
readily acknowledge my too long (yet necessitated absence in Body from you; but
I can really say and certainly assure you, that I have been present in Spirit
with you, sorrowing for you, and sympathising with you in your present
Suffering And though I have not had one opportunity given for speaking with you
at your earthly house yet several opportunities granted for speaking for you at
our heavenly Habitation. Silent, it true, I have also been as to speaking by
Pe^^ and Paper to you, yet not mute as to Prayer and Intercessions to God for
you on your be half, That you may wisely weight, seriousl^ consider, and
spiritually improve the prese^^ perplexing Providence, in so sad a stroke for
your Souls profit, that you may partake of more of the Holiness of God, and
that you may drink deeper and more refreshing, and Soul-satisfying draughts of
Comfort in the Fountain, than you did ever before in the Stream which is now
dried up. And whereas you hint that you apprehended I had serious purposes of
giving you a Visit at such a Season, you hit the nail o'th ^ead, you mist not
the mark, neither were you ^istaken in your apprehensions, but very right a
your Judgment; For what I purposed, and then promised, (which was with a
condition) I did really intend to perform at the time appointed, but the Lord
by intervening Providen^^s prevented: I may therefore say, as the Apostle Paul
in the like case, about his Promise to come to the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor.
1.17. When I was thus minded, did I use lightness, ^^ did I mind those things
that I minded according to the flesh, as men do, that rashly promise any thing,
and change their purpose at every turning of an hand; that with me should be
Yea and Nay, that I should say and unsay, and be diverse and inconstant to my
self and words? No, but my words toward you were not yea and nay, and for all
possible endeavors to answer your expectations at the time prefixed, they were
not wanting; but other more public and weighty employments called louder for
my then attendance on them, and private concerns must give place to public,
and particular to general. I doubt not but your desires of my personal presence
have been very ardent and earnest, and my endeavors, assure your self, to
satisfy and fulfill your desires, have been every way suitably answerable and
correspondent thereunto; yet the Lord hitherto by his Providence has hindered
our meeting and communien: what his mind and design herein is (whether because
of your too much depending upon instruments at present, or of your too much
shghting them in time by past) it is possible you do not now perceive, but I
hope you shall afterward, to the bringing forth of the peaceable fruits of
righteousness, as Christ and one of his Apostles speak in another case, John
13.7 Hebr. 21.11.

And its no wonder that you so earnestly desir some assistance and succor for
your support, since the present Providential Dispensation toward you is sad, and
you in much sorrow and heav^ness because of it, and in a sad condition under
it, though good old Mr. Dod says, That n^ man is in a sad condition, but he
that has a hard heart, and cannot pray: But I will suppose that your condition
is sad enough, all thing considered, and that you are very sad and so^ rowful
in and under (...), and it may arise from one or all of these three following
things:

First, The Remembrance of the no small commodity and comfort, both bodily and
spiritual that your enjoyed by her sweet company, and comfortable and
profitable communion with her.

Secondly, Your irrecoverable loss of her, as to her bodily presence in this
world, and consequently your deprivation of partaking of the like profit and
comfort from her for the future.

Thirdly, Your former and present Sins, which possibly you may apprehend to
have had an hand in this sad and sudden stroke that is now fallen upon you; But
that neither of these asunder, nor all conjoined, are ground sufficient for
such Sadness and Sorrow, that you seem to be affected and afflicted with and to
labor under; I shall now come to demonstrate.

First, As to the former Profit and Comfort you did partake of, through her
presence.

1. Consider that you are more bound to bless God for what you have already
enjoyed this way, and in this regard, than to be burdened with, or troubled
for the present sensible want of it; As God sets the day of Prosperity over
against the day of Adversity, as Solomon speaks Eccless. 7.14. So should you
set the former prosperous days you had with her, over against the present
adverse days you have now in the want of her, and then you will soon see, that
there is no comparison betwixt the one and the other, and that you have no such
cause to be so afflicted with the present want of it, as to hinder you from, or
in blessing God for the former enjoyment: And if Epicures could satisfy and
comfort themselves in their greatest dejections, Ex praeteritarum voluptatum
recordatione, through the thoughts of former pleasures that had affected their
Sense. How much more may you comfort your self in the remembrance o^ the
pleasure, profit and comfort that you had by the almost twenty years enjoyment
of her, and through the thoughts of it, be raised up to bles^ God for it, as
Joseph did for the last Seventeen years enjoyment of his dear father; And as
Joh did, when his Children were taken away by death, whom the Lord had given
him to enjoy so long; and as Saint Jerome did, Lord says he, thou have taken
away my father, whom thou gave; I am not sad because thou have received him,
but I give thanks to thee, because thou gave him: you have cause and ground
enough to go and do the like.

2. Consider that by drawing near to God acting faith upon him; by living by
Faith, you may enjoy all that profit, comfort and counsel in a larger and
fuller manner and measure that you ever did in and by her presence: She was but
the instrument by which, but God the principal Agent, who can comfort without
her, as well as with her, the comforts you had we not from her, but from God by
her, 2 Cor. 7.^ Comforted us by Titus; he was a good man, and ^rought good
tidings, yet he does not say that Titus did comfort them, but God comforted
them ^y his coming: It Is not your Friend or Relation that comforts you, but God
by them. She was but ^he stream, He the Fountain; she was but a ^reature, He
the Creator; she was but the vessel through which it was poured, He the Ocean
of ^ll good and comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4. And in^eed, God often deprives us of
precious means and instruments of good and comfort, that we ^ight come to Him,
and enjoy it all in Him; That we might see, that it was neither in, nor ^ame
from the creature; but that it was in, and ^ame from himself alone, where you
may find ^ for seeking: And go with your bucket of ^aith to this Fountain, to
sill your Soul full of ^ll Comforts. And surely it is your happiness, as well
as of all the People of God, that all com^^rt is in his hand, and at his
disposing, con^^dering his nature that makes him willing and ^^ady to relieve
and comfort you, his Relation ^^ you, he is your Father; And will a Father ^t
his Child lie comfortless, when he can help ^im? His Omniscience knows where
your shoe brings, He knows what comfort you want, He ^es your afflictions, I
have seen, I have seen ^^e Afflictions of my People Israel, Exodus 3.7. ^^e
knows what you need, Mat. 6.32. His ^mnipresence, you are ever within his
reach, He can lay his hand upon every joint where you are pained, and put a
Plaster on every wound; His Omnipotence, He is able to comfort, there is
nothing too hard for him to do; He can command, yea create Comforts: Commit
therefore the keeping of your all to him, as unto a faithful Creator, 1 Pet.
4.19.

Secondly, As to your great and irrecoverable loss of her, I will not say as
you, unparalled loss; for it does not at all run parallel with somes loss,
witness Job 's and Elie 's; but I will suppose the loss very great, as indeed
it is:

Yet First, Consider together with your loss her gain, oppose her present gain
to your present loss, you have lost a good Daughter, she has got a better
Father and Mother; she i^ gone to God her Father, and to Jerusalem above which
is her Mother: which is a greater gain t^ her, than your loss is a loss to you;
You have lost a Daughter that was mortal, and was bo^^ to die, she has got a
Father that is Immorta^ that shall never die: You have lost her bodily
presence, she enjoyes the presence of God, Christ his Spirit, Angels, and the
Spirits of just one made perfect: Your loss is but temporal, h^^ gain is
eternal: Your loss is but earthly, h^^ gain is heavenly: Your loss is but a
bodily loss her gain is Spiritual: Yours was but the loss ^ her Graces, as to
the actings of them among you, her gain is Glory: She is gone from the Valley
of Achor, of Bacah, and Bochim, from Trouble, Tears and Mourning; to the Valley
of Berachah, to the Valley of Blessing and Praise, to fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore; where all tears shall be wiped away from her eyes,
where is no more Death, or Sorrow, or crying, or pain, she is freed from the
body of Sin and Death, which is our burden, and which we groan under Romans
7.24. She shall sin no more, nor sorrow no more, nor die no more; though she be
dissolved, yet she is with Christ, which is best of all; she is perfectly holy,
and perfectly happy, where she shall rest from her labors, and her works shall
follow her, R^vel. 14.13.

There are three things that make Men and Women count themselves happy here
below; To have a good estate, to have it in a good place, and to have it by
good Neighbors, now all these three she, and every one that dies in the Lord,
do eminently enjoy: First, Their Heavenly inheritance is exceeding great, 2
Cor. 4.17. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard the like, 1 Cor. 2.4. 1 Pet. 1.4.
Secondly, It Is in a good place, Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1, which is an House and City
made for them, and builded by God, and therefore must needs be good, Heb.
11.10. Thirdly, It Is by good Neighbors, God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, Angels,
and Just Men made perfect; Adam had a good inheritance, and in a good place,
but he had an evil Neighbor of the Devil that troubled him, and marred all;
but there are no ill Neighbors in Heaven, whether she is gone, and therefore
perfectly happy: You must not understand this, as if I asserted that I had an
absolute certainty and assurance of her happy state, for its God's Prerogative
alone to know certainly who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. and therefore Grace is called
the hidden man of the heart: we cannot certainly know the good state of
another. 1. Because there is not any thing in Religion which can be expressed to
another, which may not flow from an Hypocritical, as well as a sound and
sincere Heart. 2dly. Peter was deceived in Simon Magus, and calls Sylvanus a
faithful Brother, as he supposes, 1 Pet. 5.12. Yet first, the Scriptures speak
of such marks of Grace, whereby we may know that others belong to Christ, John
13.35. whereby Christians are made manifest to others, 1 Corin. 11.19. and
declared to be the Epistle of Christ, 2 Cor. 3.2, 3. Secondly, There is such a
sympathy and conformable working of God's Spirit in the Saints and their hearts
answer each^ other, as Face answers Face in a glass, that they are but as one
Soul, Acts 4.31. yet this amounts not to an absolute, but to a charitative, at
most but to a moral certainty, so far as its possible for a man to perceive the
gracious estate of another: such a certainty, yea as great a certainty as is
attainable by the forementioned ways from whence it comes (touching her happy
state) ^hath been no stranger to me, nor to your self neither; and therefore
since your loss is not comparable to her gain, sorrow not immoderatly, look
through your loss, and see her gain beyond it; and sorrow not as if you were
without hope: For if you should, this, first, would ^ewray your ignorance of
the blessed estate of God's Children after this life. Secondly, Such Sorrow is
rather for hopeless Heathens than for Christians, for Egyptians than for
Israelites or ^osephs, Genesis 50.3-7. or for David's, when ^hey fear that their
Absoloms are dead in an un^^generate estate. Thirdly, Her Death is no
^bolishing of Nature, but a Sleep for a time, and Resurrection and an awaking
time to eternal Life, to be satisfied with Gods likeness is certain; wherefore
comfort your self with these things, ^ll these you have in 1 Those. 4.13, 14,
etc. Psalm. 17. last.

Secondly, Though your Loss be great, yet his may lessen it, and give some
allay to it, that it ^ but a loss of her bodily presence for a time: you have
not lost your Friend, but sent her a little before you; praemittimus non
amittimus, says one) he is still your Daughter; Abraham's wife is ^alled his
wife, though dead, eight several times ^n the 23. Genesis to note, says Mr
Calvin, that ^he divorce of death is such, that there remains nevertheless some
conjunction, and there i^ other thing than the restoring to time, t^^ maintains
and preserves the law of mutual c^^ junction and neerness; to note out, says
Parus on the place, that death makes not any s^ divorce betwixt godly Couples
and Friends, (...) that there remains still a blessed conjunction (...) twixt
them, which is founded in the hope of happy Resurrection; now is it not better
have a Daughter in Heaven, than upon Earth.

Thirdly, How can you say that your Lo^^ great? When you have lost nothing that
(...) your own, she was God's first and last, b^ by Creation, Redemption,
Adoption, etc. (...) was never yours, only you had the loan of (...) God lent
you her so many years as she li^^ and now He has called for her, and taken his
own home again: And will you be troub^^ and grieve, and sorrow, because he has
sen^ and taken his own home again? If a man you any thing for a while, will you
grieve^vex, and take on when he sends for it, or (...) it home again; or will
you be troubled that was made fitter for God, when he called for by Death, than
when you received her (...) God at her first breath: She received o^ natural
being at her birth, but after a spir^^ being in the new Birth (God making you
i^ mental herein) that she might be meet for lowship with her Father in Heaven,
and partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in ^^ht, Colos. 1.12. And are you
troubled that ^^d called for his own, when fitted for him; ^s she so good that
she was too good for God, ^^d will you aggravate and greaten your sorrow ^on
this account? O wonderful! For a David (...) mourn immoderatly for his Absalom,
who ^^bably feared that he was gone to a place of ^^ment, was no wonder at all;
But for you (...) sorrow inordinately for her that is gone to ^aven, a place of
Pleasure and endless Joy, is ^^y strange; and gone to her Father, whose ^ughter
she was and is, and none of yours: For ^re is no earthly Comfort we enjoy that
is our ^^n, only lent us, and we are Stewards, be^sted with it for a while, at
length God calls (...) it again when he pleases; only Grace when ^en us is our
own, because its never taken from (...) this Seed remains in us, till it be
perfected Glory, Luke 16.12. 1 John 3.4.

Fourthly, Consider that though she be dead, ^^o you, yet living even in her
body as to God, (...) before him, Luke 20.38. For though death ^^aks the union
betwixt the Soul and Body, (...) it breaks not the bond of the Covenant be^^een
God and her; the Covenant is alive, ^^ugh she be dead, Matt. 22.31, 32. The
^^tion of God to Abraham was as strong when was dead, as when he was alive; God
is not God of the dead, but of the living, for all the Saints are alive to him,
though dead as to us, yet they are alive to him; as their Souls are alive, so
their bodies are as living bodies, and though rotting in their Graves, yet he
own^ them as much as if they were flour^shing in Stately Palaces; neither can
Death break the union between her and Christ, this outlive Death: Though Death
triumph over the natural union of Soul and Body, it can never break the
mystical union betwixt Christ and a Saint: the union betwixt Christ and her
Body remains in^violable, by virtue of which union it shall b^raised up again,
and united to her Soul, and then she shall be ever with the Lord.

Fifthly, Consider that if God should have continued her with you for a long
season in that pain and languishing condition, which he could and might justly;
Whether you would not have had greater cause to sorrow and to be trouble with
her presence in such pain, than now you have for her absence in her freedom
from it These things seriously considered, and laid (...) heart, I should think
might keep you from to much sorrow and trouble for your loss.

3. As to Third, viz. Your Sins, which y^^ may possibly judge to have had an
hand in this pr^^sent sad stroke: to this I would say as follows.

First, If this Afflictive Providence be for your gain and advantage that
survive and remai^ alive, and for hers that is deceased; then yo^ have no great
cause to be troubled any further, ^^an as it may make the present Dispensation
an advantage to you: Now that it will be for her bod and great advantage, you
have no cause in ^e least to scruple, or at all to suspect or question: her
Soul is in Paradise, in Abraham's bo^^me; and for her Body, God has rock't it
^leep, and laid it in a bed, where it shall rest and sleep till it awake to
eternal Life, Isa. 57.2. and it will also be for your advantage, for hereby you
will be brought to search out, and (...) see those sins which lay latent, and
you saw (...) before, and to be sensible of them, so as to have recourse to
Christ for Remission, and will not this be your gain? Besides it will be as a
^ean to help you to avoid running upon the ^^e rocks for the future, so that
hereby sins past ^ill be pardoned, and for the future, falling ^^to them
prevented, which will be exceeding ^^od for you, and great advantage to you.

Secondly, Consider that God threatened to lay very heavy stroke upon Eli and
his Posterity or ever, and actually executed the threatening, and that for his
Sin, 1 Samuel 3.13. and yet see ^ow patiently he takes it, and quietly submits
(...) his Will, It Is the Lord, says he, let him do that seems him good, 1 Samuel
3.18. Do you la^our to be of the same frame, quiet your self un^er the present
sad Dispensation, and freely ^bmit to his Will; and that you may be moved
^ereunto, let these things following be as inducements; First, Death is
appointed for all; It Is appointed once for all to die, Heb. 9.27. We were all
born to die, it is inevitable, none can avoi^ it, none escapes it, and therefore
folly for a man to grieve for it, or at it.

Secondly, The time when every one shall di^ is appointed; All the days of my
appointed tim will I wait says Job, chapter 14.14, The bounds are se^ over which
none can pass, v. 5. And is there n^^ an appoin^ed time to man upon earth? Job
7.1.

Thirdly, The Saints have quieted themselve under sad Providence, and quietly
submitted because 'twas the Lord that was the Author and Orderer of them; Thus
Aaron, when his sor^^ were devoured by fire from Heaven, held h^^ peace, Levit.
10.3. Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. H^ zekiah, 2 Kin. 20.19. when his Sons were take away,
lays, Good is the word of the Lord. Thu^ David, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. and in Psalm.
39.9. was dumb, because thou did it. And Christ him self, Mat. 26.39. Not my
will, but thy Will ^^done; So should you endeavor to say and do^ since God has
not only appointed Death, and the time thereof, but lays on the stroke himself
whatever be the meritorious cause, or means by which is is done.

Fourthly, It Is your Duty to quiet your sel^ and freely to submit to his Will.
For First;

1. The Will of God is a Sovereign Will; H^ has absolute and unaccountable
Dominion over his creatures, as the Potter has power over his ^lay. I may say
here, as the Apostle in another case, Who art thou that reply against God,
Roman. 9 20, 21. It Is an uncreature-like temper to maintain reluctance against
the will of God.

2. His Will is a most righteous Will; the Lord never wills, or does any thing
wherein he swerves from the rule of Righteousness or wrongs the creature in the
least, Job 34.23. Jer. 12.1. Righteous art thou, O Lord. Non-subjection
therefore to the Will of God must needs be an ^^nrighteous thing.

3. Gods Will is an Holy Will; He wills nothing but in greatest Holiness,
neither does He do any thing, wherein he swerves from the rule of Holiness, He
is holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17. Habbak. 1.13, 14.

4. It Is a Will in conjunction with greatest Wisdom, proceeding in all things
according to wisest Counsels, doing all things in truest order, manner, season,
and beauty, In wisdom he made all things, Prove. 3.19, 20. He orders all things
according to the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11. and makes every thing
beautiful in its time, Eccles. 3.11. And though we, do not know now, yet we
shall afterward, the beauty of all his Providence; therefore it is perverse
folly to repine at his Will.

5. To the Saints it is a gracious Will, whatever the outside of any Providence
may be, Mercy is the inside to them; Mercy is the Soul, what ever the Body of
it may be, All his ways (...) mercy to his, Psalm. 25.10. All Providence wo^^
together for good to those that love him, Romans 8.2^ Even those afflictive
Dispensations toward his Children that proceed from Gods, Fatherly di^^
pleasure, and from Sin as the procuring cause the rise and principle is Love,
and the desig^^ and end their good. Due chastisement given t^ a Child by his
Father, is an argument that (...) loves him; a Father loves his Child when he
corrects him, yea when the correction proceed from fatherly displeasure; for a
Father never corrects his Child hut when he is displeased with him: As a man,
so God may be much displease with, and much love the same person at the same
time.

And as it is your Duty to quiet your heart and freely to submit to his Will,
so also its you^ Duty to bless God, though the providential D^spensation be
sad; There are many cogent Argu^ments to move you to it.

1. You came naked into the world, without a Daughter or any thing else, and
naked you shall return again; this was one Argument that moved Job to bless
God, Job 1.21, 22.

2. Its the Lord that has taken away, therefore bless the Lord, as Job did,
Job 1.21.

3. God's Will is done and fulfilled, and you^ Prayers are answered: You prayed
that h^^ Will might be done, now it is done, bless God.

4. There is the Love of God, from whence ^ arises; for all Saints afflictions
are from ^^ve; and there is the good God intends in it, ^^d promises to work
by it, which you are ^^und to bless God for.

5. Nay, Fifthly, You are bound to bless God (...) the grief and bitterness of
the Potion in the ^up also, as it is a necessary and effectual fur^erance of
that Spiritual good, which God in is fatherly Correction aims at; So we thank
^e Physician, and pay him too, not because his by sick is bitter, but because
Health is sweet.

6. You have cause also to bless God for giving our Daughter so long a
Visitation to prepare ^^r Death; He might have taken her away sud^nly, as he
did Job's children when feasting: likewise that she was of so sweet a temper
and ^ame, and of so composed a spirit in her affliction, that the Lord gave her
patience and com^^rt, that she was kept from dishonoring God in (...) Deathbed
Distemper, and that you have so ^^od hope and great satisfaction of her eternal
^^ppy state: Oh therefore bless God, give him ^^anks, you are bound so to do in
every thing, These. 5.18. I shall add some Directions ^^d Cautions, and I have
done.

First, Take heed of immoderate Mourning ^^nd Sorrow, let it not go beyond its
bounds ^^d limits; It Is true, we may mourn for the Dead, its not unlawful so to
do: Religion d^^ not abolish Affections, but only moderates the^^ Grace does
not destroy Nature, but only rectifies it, it does not abolish but rectify
reason deprives not of sense, but teaches right use (...) Senses;
proportionally, kills not Affections, but only orders them: And the mortifying
of All fections, pressed in Scripture, Galat. 5.24. mu^^ be so understood, that
the carnality of the^^ only is stricken at, not the Affections themselves.

The Corruption that has by the Fall grow upon the Affections, stands chiefly
in two thing. Their misapplying to unmeet objects, and the^^ exceeding, or
their coming short of their du^ measure; and this is that that God's Spirit
does in senctisying them, directs them (1.) To the^^ right Objects. (2.) Keeps
them to their j^^ proportion and meantime. Mourn we may therefore for the
deceased: Abraham did so for his wife, Jacob and Joseph did so for their
Relations, and are commended for it: I^'s one (...) the dues of the Dead; to be
lamented at the Funerals; the want of it is threatried as Curse and its a
practice warranted by in^^^^ of (...) ture, by Christ himself, by the Saints,
and by the best in all Ages. And to be touched with (...) feeling of Sorrow and
Gri^^ at the beholding (...) Death, it rather barbarous Senselesness, that
Fortitude of mind. It Is true also, that we may yea must seriously consider of
such Affli^^^ Providence, Eccles. 7.14. The contrary ^hereunto is condemned,
Isai. 5.12. and 42.^5. Jerem. 5.3. In special we are to take and ^y to heart
Gods hand in dying persons, Ec^^es. 7.2, 3. And to be moved with sorrow (...)
houses of Mourning, where the heart by being made sadder is made better; more
specially be death of righteous persons is to lie close upon our spirits. God
lays it to the charge of men, ^^at they do not consider this, nor lay it to
^eart, Isai. 57.1. But when you sorrow and ^ourn for the dead, you must see and
be are that there be a good ground or rise, a ^od end, that it be done in right
order and ^easure. The ground, that you may bewail the ^^mmon curse of Mankind,
the defacing of the ^^age of God through Death by Sin, for mourn^^g for the
Dead, sprang from this Original, that they which are alive might exercise
them^^ves in meditating on the curse of Mankind: The end, that you may be made
more serious, and put upon Meditation and Preparation for ^^eath: And for the
Order, that Sin the cause (...) it be sorrowed for first and most: And for be
measure, that it exceed not bounds, that it ^e not immoderate. O take heed that
you do not sorrow immoderatly; think not the moni^^n unnecessary, for
Affections are violent, specially having show of lawfulness to set them prward:
More frequent are the slips of Saints in things for their matter lawful, than
in those that are simply unlawful. Conscience even of good men sets it self
loose, having plea of lawfulness for the action, and therefore more caref^^ and
cautious you should be, lest in your sorrow you should exceed and be
immoderate. No^ Sorrow in this case is immoderate;

First, When it is too great, as Mr. Calv^ says Joseph's was in Genesis 50.10.
which ought not, says he, to be to us instead of a Rule and that great noise
and cry cannot be excused which the Inhabitants of the place hearing wo^dered
at: For though the purpose of Joseph w^^ good in Mourning, yet the excess was
evil. I true when the persons that dye are public p^^sons in Church or State,
and of very great u^ as the Chariots and Horsemen thereof, there m^^ be a
greater Mourning for them. Thus the made a great Mourning for Josiah, and for
S^phen, Act. 8.2.

Secondly, When it is too long for continuance a Seventy-daies Mourning is
Egyptian. like; ^^seph, who had more cause, but withal m^^ Grace, mourned but
seven days; not that (...) was less kind, but more Christian-like prude^
Abraham mourns for Sarah, even to weeping but lest he should forget his
measures; says o^^ desires to bu^y her out of his sight; he mour^^ for her,
but exceeded not, which is signified, the Jews, by that one Letter less than
ording (...) the Hebrew word Libcothah, used for weeping; Genesis 23.2. Buxtorf
also gives this reason, ^^ia luctus ejus fuit moderatus, because his sorrow was
moderate; and therefore in the next ^^^it's said, that he stood up from before
his dead there in likelihood he had sat a while on the ^^th, as was the manner
of Mourners to do, (...) 2.13.) to take order for her Burial; as ha^ing good
hopes of a glorious Resurrection. ^^hen it is too long for continuance, I say
its immoderate, when our Souls, as Rachel's did, re^^e comfort.

Thirdly, Then is your Sorrow immoderate, ^^en it does unfit us for any Duty we
owe ^^her to God, or man, or our selves; and there^^re take heed of immoderate
sorrow, and that (...) may be kept from it: consider (1.) That ^^sons sorrowing
out of measure, are carried ^ainst God with a blind outrage, says Mr. Cal^^,
for always the excess of sorrow carries us adlong to obstinacy. (2.)
Immoderate Sorrow, says another, for losses past hopes of revery, is more
fullen than useful; our Stomach ^ay be bewrayed by it, not our Wisdom. ^^.)
Immoderate Sorrow is the ready way to ^ocure an heavy stroke, as it sared with
Israel ^r their murmuring after the death of Corah, etc. ^ere died for that
repining Fourteen Thousand and Seven Hundred, Numb. 16.41, 45, 49. ^^.) It Is
the way to destroy your self, and to prove a Self-murtherer: The Sorrow of the
World (when men sorrow immoderately for the Ioss of some temporal good thing)
works death 2 Cor. 7.10. (5.) If you sorrow-inordinatly you will add Sin to
Affliction, as Jonah di^ when his Gourd came up and flourished for (...) time,
and withered away again, he vexed an^ was angry, and thought he did well in it;
S^ your gourd sprang up and flourished both nat^^rally and spiritually for many
years, and no^ God has withered her, and you sorrow an^ mourn, and that I fear
immoderatly, and (...) may be, you think you do well in it: O bewa^^ of this
for its an adding Sin to Affliction. No^ if your Sorrow has been immoderate,
and yo^ cannot yet contain, or well help it, and yo^ would prevent it for the
future; First, Avo^^ all those things that may any wise maintain (...) increase
it, or that may heighten your sorrow^ They had several Customs in former times,
(...) going to the Grave, John 11.31. and Minstre^lize for increase of sorrow,
Mat. 9.23. (which Christ intimates dislike of) and to provoke themselves to
weeping and lamentation; But you should avoid such things, and looking on the
clothes, or works of the Deceased, your Ast^ctions in this case need not the
Spur, but the Bridle rather. Secondly, Turn the stream (...) your Sorrow
another way, change the Obje^^ sorrow for Sin and Iniquity, as men when the
bleed immoderately at Nose or at a Wound, they use to open a Vein in another
place, that they may stop the former; so do you open a vein of Sorrow for Sin.
Thirdly, Let Sin be as Death to you, let Sin lie with a greater weight upon
you, and then your affliction will be ^ighter, and sorrow less; for as old Mr.
Greenham said to his Son Mr. Dod (when he came to complain of his great
Affliction, through outward wants) Son, Son, Where Affliction lies heavy, Sin
lies light, and so it is on the contrary.

Secondly, Take heed of adding Sin to Affliction, be not worse for the
affliction; let not Affliction draw forth corruption; add not Discontent to
Disasters, imp^tience, murmuring, muttering, and repining to the present
Affliction; this would be a charging of God, and a charging of him foolishly,
take heed of this: That it may be said of you, as of Job, when he was deprived
of his Children, In all this he sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.

Thirdly, Take heed of all harsh thoughts of the Lord and his works, which may
any way lessen your love to him, your esteem of him, or trust in him: would you
have worse thoughts of the Physician, because Physic is distasterul? Isai.
40.27.

Fourthly, Take heed of tumultuous disputing the ways and works of God, and of
questioning the worthiness of his proceedings; The Sai as are apt, through
infirmity, to run into this, a^ Job and the Psalmist, though this be ver^
sinful and unwarrantable.

5thly. Take heed of letting such a Providence pass, without a due search into
the mind of God in it, but labor to find out, and to lay hol^ on the good that
such a Providence is fraugh^ with, and for which its sent: Labor to fin^^
first, what sin especially it is sent to correct, an^ consider your heart and
ways hereupon. There are but two things that I can think of, that might have an
hand in depriving you of such (...) dear and precious Relation.

First, Your over-loving her; that which w^^ love inordinately is usually the
mark at which God aims his arrow: the readiest way to lo^^ any comfort is to
over-love it, and I am afrai^ you failed this way. The reason of my fear i^
because you over-mourn for her loss; That which is over-loved in the enjoyment,
will be over-sorrowed for in the loss of it. It Is the Saying of Reverend
Divine, that if the Parties were strangers, That he knew not, if they did
immoderately sorrow for the loss of any wordly comfort that he might charitably
conclude, that the hearts were set upon it, and that they did to much rejoice
in it. O seriously consider of ^^ and be humbled under it, if it were so, and
(...) to Christ for Pardon; and though it were (...) yet be not discouraged,
for though it be a gr^^ deal of smart to you, yet it may prove a great deal of
ease to you, to be wounded in that which you have over-affected: God in much
mercy to ^ose he loves, takes that from them which they ^^e too much, that so
they might love him the ^ore, to whom all their love and more, if they ^ad it,
is but due, Mat. 22.37.

Secondly, Pitching upon, and too great expectations of Release and Ease only
in one particular way, from some encumbrance and burden which you were
formerly cautioned against, lest you should be crossed in it.

Thirdly, Labor to find what Graces and what Duties it is sent to quicken
hereby, it will ^^come a path of Mercy, Peace, and Comfort ^o you; and you will
be able to say, That it ^ath been good for you, that you have been afflicted.

I have been long in writing, and longer in coming to give you a Visit; but I
intend now, the Lord willing, to be at Aulston-moore on the 4th of the Ninth
Month, where I should be glad to see you; and to accompany you to your
habitation, to stay some days with you, to impart some Spiritual gift and
comfort to you.

In the interim, I beg your Prayers for me, That I may finish my course with
Joy, and the Ministration which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the Grace of God. Now the good Will of Him that dwelt in the
Bush, be with you and make up your loss, an^ sweeten your cross, and the God of
Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of
the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in
all good works, to do his Will; working in you that which is well-pleasing in
hi^ sight, through Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.20, 21 to whom be praise for ever and
ever, Amen which is the wish and hearty Prayer of him,

From Welden the 25. of the 8th Month, 1672. Who is, and will ever be ready to
be a server of your Faith, and an helper of your joy, J. D.

For his very dear Friend, Mr. Rich. Wilson, a^ his House at Crosfield, in
Kirkouswould, these
My Dear Brother,
YOurs I received about two or three days ago^ by the Contents of which I find
your Spirit heavily pressed under the weight of that Affliction, which your
Father has been pleased to lay upon you: It (...) I confess an heavy
Providence which you have met with; for without doubt i^ is so as you write,
That your life of Comfort and Hope, as to your outward condition here, w^^
wrapped up in the Life of your hopeful Child. But (my Brother,) it is for us to
be silent and mute under the most pinching Providence, and that not from a
stupid frame, but because we should know that our Father does all, and He knows
what He does; He is wise in heart, and all things done by Him to any of his,
shall work for good, etc. We are Childish Creatures, and when we are out of our
Fits of Passionate Affection, we can see as much. It is our Folly and
Selfishness, to set more by our own transient Comfort, than our Childrens
superlative Exaltation. I have been sometimes taken with a passage that I have
somewhere met with; Namely this, Would a Father grieve to have his Daughter
married to a King, or rather taken into a Kings bosom, dearly and entirely
loving her? This is the Case as to your precious and only Child, She is now in
the arms of the Prince of Glory, in his embraces who has loved her, and washed
her from her Sins in his own Blood. O Dear Brother! Let not your heart say, The
Lord has dealt bitterly with me; How can I be comforted, wherewith will ye
comfort me? The Child is not, and whither shall I go?

I would say two things to you, (my Brother) they coming now before me. First,
God your Father has done you no wrong. Secondly, He has done your Daughter no
hurt: Now why should you be then so cast down by means of this Snatching
Dispensation? (1.) Your Father, I say, has done you no wrong. He has taken
but his own. His own, 1. By his own Creation. 2. His own by your Donation. 3.
His own by Purchase and Redemption. 4. By her own free Self-resignation. It is
somewhat strange, that God cannot take his own, but He must trouble us: Object.
1. But I thought the Lord would have lent me this mercy longer. Resol. But,
First, you had not a word for that. Secondly, You had this mercy longer than
some of your companions had the like. Further, Thirdly, The Lord made this
mercy yield more to you for the time you had it, than others have had in many
more years of enjoying the same mercy for kind. O the revenues of Comfort from
her, she bore by handfuls, which you your self do acknowledge. Object. 2. But I
am an unspeakable loser, O her great usefulness to me every way; I perceive
this pincheth you. Res. And 1. What is here but Selfishness. But again, 2. You
are not an unspeakable loser; for so long as interest holds above, our losses
are all inconsiderable, not to be accounted of. But 3. Suppose you were an
unspeakable loser; yet she (I dare say you do believe it) is an unspeakable
gainer. As for her great usefullness every way, I would only say this to that.
Her usefulness to you was from Influence, from above. She was but a Bucket, a
Pitcher, and it may be she kept you from the Fountain too much, and this the
Lord saw: precious Children may be Idols. Come (my Brother) your Father has
done you no wrong, He has taken but his own, his own out at nurse with you for
a time, during his good pleasure, and you have been well paid with comfort in
her, whilst you did enjoy her.

Secondly, And has your Father hurt your Daughter: Is this to hurt her? 1. To
put her to Bed. 2. To put off all her filthy Garments from her. 3. To gratify
her in her own longing desire. 4. To enshrine her in Glory? Well, (My Brother)
what shall I write to you? Come, consider what you have to take comfort in, in
this Providence; Pore not on the blackside of it only (as we are apt to do.) Is
this cloud all dark? Methinks here are great lightnings for you, I say for you.
(1.) Your Daughter knew the Lord before she died, she lived before she died.
(2.) Your Daughter, so I collect from yours, died in the daytime: there was no
Cloud, or Night of Darkness with her, when she died. (3.) Your Daughter died,
but not suddenly, not by a violent stroke: the Lord took her, she fell asleep.
(4.) Further, Your Daughter (as I perceive) left a Persume, a sweet Perfume
behind her: Thus, here is Honey for you in this Carcass, O take thereof in your
hands, and go on eating, and blessing God. But what stand I upon these matters?
Questionless these my Consolations are anticipated by fuller measures from
others; And then, besides; what will stick, till God fasten? But however, it is
our Duty to visit the afflicted, and thus only at present am I capacitated to
visit you in your Affliction. Now (my beloved Brother) what you request of me
for you, I hope shall be minded by me; we shall remember you, and beg that you
may be supported of the Lord: And be you confident, That your Father will
support you, He knows his Peoples Souls in Adversities. Now the Lord be with
you, and let your poor unworthy Brother be remembered by you, and all the Saints
with you: O pray for me, that I may work the works of God, while it is called
to day. And blessed be the Lord for this day of Liberty. Let me be remembered to
your Wife; to Brother Nicholson, to the whole Church. The 25th instant the
Church here will be together, to set apart our Brother E. (who remembers him to
you, condoling with you) to Office-place. We should be glad to hear of your
affairs from time to time, that so accordingly we might have you upon our
hearts before the Lord. Brother! I have blotted much Paper you see, in pouring
out my self to you, O that something from me might refresh you: The Lord has
sometimes chosen to do much by foolish and weak things. It is much to be a
comforter. I will conclude (though somewhat abruptly) with that known and
precious Scripture, 1 These. 4.13, 14.

October. 18. 1762. From your Fellow-feeling Brother, G. L.

Anagr. MARY WILSON, Your nam' liv's.
DEar little Soul, now shrin'd above in Glory,
Though thee we may not see, we will view thy Story:
It Is true, it is but short, yet sweet, and we
Will cheer our selves with this that is left of thee.
When as Elijah hence in whirlwind flew,
He cast a mantle, so have thou done too:
We Will take it up, there is in it some relief,
By it we may in part wade through our grief,
For thy removal: you are gone we know,
But Your nam' liv's, and shall with Saints below.
G. L.

Another, per eundem. MARY WILSON, In warm Soil.
WHat! ripe so soon! marvail we not,
Fruit ripes fast in a Garden plot.
In warm Soil there good trees will bear
As Soon as planted, the first year.
This little, tender, precious tree,
Dropped mellow-fruit, as you may see.
Here Is but a little, loads she bore,
But gathering vessel held no more,
What here you find collected by
A sobbing Heart, a weeping Eye;
(A Father mourning for his loss,
To him th'heaviest outward cross)
Take notice of, use to your good,
Such fruit from young ones is choice food.
When old trees fruitless grow, God then
Will raise fruit-bearing Childeren.
You that in warm soil are, O mind,
What this warm Soul has left behind.
Good Families and Churches are,
The warmest Soyls in the world by far.
G. L.

FINIS.

