HAPPY NEWS To England sent from OXFORD.

1. The joyful hopes of a Peace, and of an Accommodation that is to be made
between the King and his Parliament.

2. The Kings intentions to come to his high Court of Parliament.

3. The preparations that is made for his Majesty's coming to White Hall, and
the store of provisions of Wine and other things that is laid in there for his
entertainment.

4. The names of those Lords that are nominated to go to his Majesty with the
Answer to his late Propositions, and to know who his Majesty will nominate and
appoint for the Accommodation and Treaty, and the place where.

5. The security and Hostage which is offered by four Noblemen, and also by
their Estates for the Kings security there and his safe return to his Court at
Oxford, if in case the Parliament and his Majesty does not agree.

6. His Majesty's returning to London is suddenly expected, will under God
make all those lying Astronomers and deceivers, which Prophesied of a great
Battle prove false and counterfeit.

Printed 1642.

Happy News to England sent from Oxford.
AT this present, when in regard of civil wars begun and continued amongst
us, this Land was the vexed Theme of wretched misery, and described by many
pens, and all was ready to become a Wilderness of desolation; Peace that
divine Grace looking on us with eyes of compassion pittyed our sufferings, and
has lately brought about an unexpected change, and a long looked for happy
event of this bloody civil war. The King gracious in his own disposition,
and always heartily bleeding in the wounds of his Subjects (as himself has
often professed) has always labored by many Declarations for a peace with
his Parliament, and now by the advice of grave and learned Counsel, his Royal
Heart is inclined to embrace peace, by his Majesty always most mercifully
defired; so that now we have strong hopes that all divisions shall be be
composed by a firm and settled Union, between the Kings Majesty and his high
Court of Parliament. This ^^^olution accompanied with many other merciful
purposes, that his Subjects may know him in his own natural mildness, and
this the severity of the sword which he formerly used gave him as many wounds
of grief for his Subjects as it did blows to others. Let therefore all
true-hearted Subjects prepare to entertain him with hearty affections, since
London shall speedily be blessed with his happy presence, to bring them both joy
and comfort; those that with prayers and tears have implored Heaven to see the
King again, shall now forthwith behold his Royal person, and with continual
prayers bless the hour that brought him back again to London: for his
Majesty is now fully resolved to assure the Parliament that he is a patient and
merciful King, and that no former passages shall dwell within his memory to
separate him from them, that he is slow to wrath, and had rather suffer than
do his meanest Subjects any injury, and that the sad effects of War, as
pillaging, plundering, ransacking of Rich men's Houses may be all changed into
a blessed peace. O therefore let our hearts embrace him who does thus reach out
his arms of mercy to receive all his good Subjects into favor. And that it
may be more certainly known to all his Subjects that his Majesty is purposed
speedily to come to London, and that the desired peace shall with greater
convenience go forward, and that it may more forward with greater speed, being
helped on by his presence, provision is made for his coming unto White Hall,
that once Sun of Majesty may appear in this Sphere from whence his beams
darted comfortable influence on all his Subjects. His Palace now of White Hall
shall enjoy his presence. The Covet formerly turned into a Desert, shall be now
again a Court. Majesty shall now sit again enthroned within the ancient
walls of his ancient Palace, and with the same life and favor as formerly it
did shall cherish the hearts of all his loy^ll and most loving Subjects, and
the expected presence of a King does create a plenty wheresoever he comes; so
it being most certainly know that the King will come to White Hall, there is
preparation already made for his coming; the Genius of the house does already
rejoice, and that mirth may flow in the breasts of all the Court, there is
great plenty of rich Wine laid into the Cellars, which does happily
prognosticate the Kings coming to his palace of Westminster, the inhabitants
thereabout do feel their affections warmed, with a hope and expectation of
getting by the Courts return, and all London does listen to this news as they
would to a sacred Oracle of propheticke happiness; and those that do not wish
his Majesty's society and a happy peace, let them ship themselves for new
England, or for some other Island. The presence of a King long absent, and
transported from them does make all Subjects throw of all cares, all fearful
jelousies, all distrusts, and all narrow fears, and enlarge their mind to
know nothing but joy, nor speak nothing but VIves le Roy, God save the King.
For now the King is coming to rejoice his people, and that he may confide in
their perfect loyalty toward his Majesty, and know that their Effence does
consist in his safe and well being; four Noble men, namely the Earls of
Pembrooke, Northumberland, Holland and Salisbury, have for pledges of security
offered themselves and their estates for his Hostages, that the Kings Royal
Person shall not only be received into London with reverend adoration, but be
as safe amongst his true-hearted Subjects, as he conceives himself to be now
amongst swords; and if the happy agreement between his Majesty and the
Parliament should by any cross fate be concluded, or that they should not
comply in that happy manner which is expected (and which God forbid) the
aforesaid Noble men have interposed themselves, and given Hostages that the
King shall then rule over all their designs, and take his Will to be his
guide in all his actions as his pleasure leads him; knowing that he is a
regular King, desiring nothing but the liberty of his subjects, the maintaining
the Protestant Religion, and the Privileges of Parliament, and that all
matters being brought to a happy period, he shall if he so desire (if
agreement be not made) be safely and royally convay'd again to his Court at
Oxford. But if this City once again enjoy his presence, and that the King once
again refresh with his presence the drooping minds of the Parliament, the day
will shine glorious to the hopes of this kingdom, peace and plenty shall
again kiss each other, the Church much disturbed by Sects and Schisms shall
be confirmed in the true Protestant Religion, joy shall overflow the bosoms of
the common people; the City shall flourish again in Trading, the Country shall
enjoy the plump fruits of Nature, the times long sick of a Consumption shall
grow strong and lusty, Trading shall make the mechanic sing, and such a Jubilee
of joy shall succeed, that all the Land shall forget sorrow, and with a clear
countenance relate the stories of our mixed distresses.

We shall hear no more raging Drumms, no bragging Trumpets, but a peace as
soft as the nights rest shall cover the heads both of King and subjects. And
what a happiness this is we may conceive by contraries; what pillaging and
plundering has there been? Father against son, bathing their swords in one
another blood, as if cruelty were best expressed where there should be most
mercy expressed. What would be added to the fierce and bloody battle at Edge
Hill? these and future events shall be prevented by a happy Peace, by the
Kings happy coming and complying with Parliament, by that union and knot of
love which is looked to be tied again between them; and lastly by the
confirmation of a happy and desired Peace; for Heaven has prevented all
Petitions, and inspired the Kings Majesty's mind with his Fathers Motto, ^eati
Facifici, Blessed are the Peacemakers: Heaven is Wise and cannot be deceived,
but has brought about the great work, to lay shame and ignominy on those that
score out the doubtful fortune of the year with false Predictions; and to
confute those lying Astronomers that will needs make the Stars guilty of
foretelling of a great Battle to be fought this year. God that rules the
Stars will bring the King to London, Peace to the Land, and joy and comfort to
the whole Commonwealth.

FINIS.

