1681. Astrological OBSERVATIONS AND PREDICTIONS, For the Year of our Lord 1681.

WHEREIN Is briefly shown the Significations of the late COMET, which was seen
in December last, 1680. And what is signified by the Eclipses and positions of
the Planets, in the Figures of the four Solar Ingresses, etc.

AND What sorrowful Times are approaching to the World, and what eminent
Changes are like to happen in most Countries (from the Influences of the three
Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in the fiery Trigon, in 1682. and 1683.)

ALSO MONTHLY OBSERVATIONS.

For every Month this present Year.

Briefly containing the most Remarkable Events that are likely to happen in
some eminent Cities in ENGLAND, and in our Neighboring Nations.

By John Silvester.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1681.

TO THE READER.
I desire the Reader to take Notice, that my Astrological Observations were by
me, and many Friends of mine, expected to have been Printed, in an Almanac of
mine, which being sent to London, I was unkindly dealt with, by some Stationer
or Printer, by whom my Expectation was frustrated, and my Friends deceived, and
my Almanac hindered from coming to the Press; and not only so, but some part of
my Work was picked out, and unkindly Printed and Published, in an Almanac, set
forth in the Name of Richard Saunders: I know not why any should be so spiteful
to me (in my absence from London) unless any were so, because I laid open the
Dangers of the Times, for the good and Preservation of our King and Kingdom: I
suppose I have already, and shall, or rather should for the future, shoot as
near to the Mark, as most more Eminent Artists: And many of my Friends, and
Acquaintance know, that I Wrote of the late great PLOT, and Treacherous Design,
almost in plain Terms; and also of many eminent Matters, the next year
following, which so happened accordingly: and having been hitherto very
unkindly dealt with, and for the sakes of many of my Friends, that expected to
have seen my Work Published; I thought it not amiss to accept of this
Opportunity to publish my Astrological Observations, alone by it self h^^^ng it
will be accepted, not only in the City of Bristol, but also in many other
respective places in England.

Bristol the 22th of December, 1680. John Silvester.

Astrological OBSERVATIONS For the Year 1681.
Of the Comet that was seen in December last.
THIS Comet (when I first saw it) seemed to show it self in the beginning of
the second Face of Capricorn, near the Sun and the Planet Mercury, and near the
opposite place of Saturn, and in that part of Heaven, called the House of War:
but it was reported, That its Tail was seen about a Fortnight before; if so, it
may very well be supposed that it had its first beginning or Birth in the fiery
sign Sagitarius, because of its swift motion. The Tail of it, when I first saw
it, was very long, reaching about sixty Degrees and pointing Eastwardly. The
Star or Comet it self was very small, seeming about the bigness of a fixed Star
of the fourth Magnitude, or the Planet Mercury. The color and complexion of
it, I could not discern then, because of the Mists or thickness of the Air, but
since it seemed to be rather pale than fiery or otherwise, that I rather judge
it to be Saturnine, or more of the nature of Saturn, than any other Planet, and
so more fit to cause the more evil effects.

If it first began in Sagitary (as probably it might) a sign of the fiery
Triplicity, it signifies terrible Wars, fiery and bloody Actions, and the
motion of great Armies will begin those sad times that are approaching, and
Denotes the suppression of Great and Noble Men, Wise and Learned Men, and great
Students; and this the rather, because it appeared so near the Sun, and the
Planet Mercury. And whereas it chiefly first showed it self to us, in that part
of Heaven called the House of War, it denotes the more terrible wars and
slaughters of great multitudes, but whereas it first chiefly showed it self to
us in Capricorn, it is not unlikely, but it will not only run through Aquary,
but also through Pisces (and Aries; the Ascendant of England and France,) and
so through a Sign of every Triplicity, and of the nature of every Element. If
it so happen, it increases the Miseries that are coming amongst us: For when a
Comet appears in an Earthy Sign, it denotes Barrenness through drought; in
watery Signs drought, through abundance of Rain; in airy signs it denotes the
Pestilence, Seditions and mighty high Winds; In Fiery Signs, terrible Wars and
Slaughters: and it is very likely, that before it be extinguished, it will at
least runthrough a Sign of every Trigon, because of its swift motion (which I
judge cannot be less than 4 or 5 Degrees in a day) but so far as it has
already run, it certainly informs us of great Wars, Slaughters, the Captivity
or Death of Nobles and Great Persons, and Wise men, and great Students, and
persecutions about Religion, (thus chiefly if it began in Sagitary, (as it is
very probable it did) and further Scarcity, Robberies, the Pestilence, and
great Mortality, and many Calamities, that are approacing to Visit the Nations:
all its significations are not as yet fully known. Farther, this being a Comet
of a very swift Motion, it denotes foreign Wars, and one Nation invading
another: for when a Comet is immovable, it rather signifies Seditions: and
wherereas it has already showed it self in the Houses of War and Death, it the
more confirms the aforesaid Judgment, That Wars and a great Slaughter is near
and approaching: It may before it be extinguished, yet appear in several other
Houses, partly because of its swift motion, and partly because it is likely to
continue a great while, because of the strong appearance as yet of its Rays and
Beams by which a conjecture may be given, that it may appear as yet to us the
space of two Months, or till the latter end of February: For, as the Ancients
have Observed, some Comets have appeared almost three Months, which they count
is the longest time any Comet can appear. A small Comet, say Authors, will be
soon extinguished, because the matter whereof it is made, will be soon burnt,
unless it be fed with new exhalations, as we know not but this may.

Comets chiefly show their effects to those parts to which they send out their
Beams or Rays, and in those Regions where they are seen; but more chiefly to
those places that are subject to the Sign or Signs wherein they appear. By the
first Rule, it has relation to England, and if it Transit the Sign Aries, as
its likely to do, then it adds to our Miseries, that it may be said, Woe to
England, France, and many other Regions, Cities and places of the Earth, and as
it has already appeared in Capricorn, the Ascendant of the City of Oxford, it
may be feared that City will be greatly in danger of the Pestilence, and other
Miseries; and the worse, because Saturn is now in the opposite Sign; and if
Capricorn belongs to Oxford, may not the Planet Mercury therein posited,
represent the great

Augusts Observations.
GREAT Melancholy, trouble and discontent possesses many Hearts; its probable
some religious Controversy may happen in the City of Oxford, more than many
other places: Magistrates there, and in other places resolute to disturb some
meeting or religious professors: variances among Rulers and Men of Power, and
among Magistrates, and probably in Bristol: abundance of people dye this Month,
Note on the 5th. day the Planet Saturn goes out of Cancer, into the fiery sign
Leo, about which time we may expect to see some unusual sights and Apparitions
in the Air, which usually happen when he goes from one sign to another.

Septembers Observations.
LET Bristol beware of Fire and all other mischiefs, and sly doings: The
Magistrates thereof I doubt will some way be slily affronted, and vexed by some
sly Enemies there, that probably may cause Divisions and Controversies amongst
them. The second day of this Month, at three in the morning, the Sun will
suffer an Eclipse, which denotes the Death of some great and very wise person
or persons is approaching, and in a few Months will end this Life: Let London
also beware, for some Plot or mischievous Designs, may now be feared: Rulers of
Nations affronted by some slily, causing much Variance and Divisions amongst
them. Many are now Imprisoned, a very sickly Season, abundance dye.

Octobers Observations.
SLY Actions and sly Enemies are still to be feared, causing much trouble and
vexations: variances amongst high and low: preparations for War against the
next year: abundance dye.

Novembers Observations.
MAgistrates Oppress some meetings or persons professing Religion: beware of
your Servants, for they will be very much inclined to cheat their Masters, now
more than at other times: often variances between them: and Servants will be in
danger of the Cudgel.

Decembers Observations.
VEry notable Contentions and Controversies amongst Kings, Princes, Nobles and
Rulers of Nations and Kingdoms, some more than ordinary stir; I wish there may
not happen any Rebellion this Month against National Supreme Powers; God
preserve the Magistrates of the City of Bristol in Peace and Unity this Month:
great robberies on the Land and at Sea: take Notice of the variances and evil
events that happen, about the 19 day of this Month; we cannot be too wary of
the bloody-minded Papists. Thus the year for the most part is tending to great
contentions or Wars, or preparations against the next year; for without doubt
woeful times are approaching to the Earths Inhabitants, with Plagues,
Calamities, and great and remarkable Changes, in many or most Nations and
Kingdoms in the World.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce my Observations were sent to the Press, before they were Published, I
thought it the more satisfactory to inform the Reader, that the Comet is now
(to our sorrow) weakly appearing in the Ascendant of England, (and France),
therefore it may the more be feared that Englands trouble and affliction is
approaching; is a fiery Sign, and a Comet in a fiery Sign is the more apt to
cause the Nations (subject to it) to be concerned with Wars: it is now
appearing very weakly, but if it continue about a month longer (or till about
the 10th. day of February, of which now there is some doubt) it is probable by
that time it will Transite,,, and, ( viz. the Ascendants of Ireland, London,
Scotland ( Holland and Bristol,) but it will signify the less evil to those
places, because it grows weaker and weaker, but it woefully threatens those
Nations, Cities, Towns, Villages, Places and Persons that are under the Signs
and because it not only appeared powerful therein, but the Infortunes afflicted
those Signs then by Opposition: many places in England may be under and, though
we have not the knowledge thereof from the experiences of ancient Astrologers:
Lastly, whereas this Comet has been already in a Sign of every Triplicity, by
reason of its swift motion it denotes the more varieties of evils, for a Comet
in a Fiery Sign has more power to cause Wars than in another Sign, and in an
Earthy Sign, most power to cause Barrenness and Unfruitfulness than in another
Sign. In short, I fear a besome of Destruction will shortly follow in many
Nations, partly by the Pestilence, and partly by War, if not also by a Famine
or great scarcity, if humility of heart and speedy Repentance do not either
divert it, or preserve us from it, Libera nos Domine si sancta sit tua voluntas.

Swift Comets and Saturnine signify
Wars, Plague, Destruction, Woes and Scarcity:
The infected Air often kills the Fowls that fly,
The Earths and Waters, Animals will dye.
Though man knows part, the Omniscient God knows all
Those sad Contingents, that will man befall:
Oh God, thou giv'st us some foresight, that we.
With speed repent, and turn from Sin to Thee.
Effects below, proceed from Cause above,
From Stars that by thy Blessed Order move,
From Comets and strange Visions in the Air,
Which we Spectators on the Earth admire.
Bristol the 8th. of January, 1680. John Silvester.


