MEDIA: The Middle Things, In reference to The First and Last things: OR, The
Means, Duties, Ordinances, BOTH Secret, Private and Public, For continuance
and increase of a Godly life, once begun, till we come to Heaven.

Wherein are discovered many blessed Medium's or Duties, in their right method,
manner and proceedings; that so a Christian (the Spirit of Christ assisting) may
walk on in the holy Path, which leads from his new birth to everlasting life.

Drawn, for the most part, out of the most eminently Pious, and learned
Writings of our Native Practical Divines: With Additionals of his own, by ISAAC
AMBROSE, Minister of the Gospel at Preston in Amoundernes.

Matthew. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the
same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

John 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

John 15.14. Yea e my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

Luke 17.10. When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.

LONDON: Printed by John Field for Nathanaell Webb and William Grantham, at the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

TO The Right Honorable, truly Religious, and Virtuous Lady, the Lady MARY VERE.
MADAM,
I Took it as a special Providence, that in my troubles at London I got
acquaintance with your Honor: Your Contribution at my parting, won much upon my
heart; but your fellowship and communion at our first meeting in
Church Assemblies, and especially at that sweet Ordinance of the Lords Supper,
obliged me more, and faster to you in purer loves. I bless God for the Friends
I found in my distress, but for the Communion of Saints, and for the Comforts I
found in such Communion, Bless the Lord, O my soul, Psalm. 103.1.
and all that is within me, bless his holy Name. You may wonder, that upon so
small acquaintance I should lay this Book at your feet; it is not because I
wanted other Patrons, but because at that very time, when I left it with the
Press, I observed God stirring you up, as a right Patron, to encourage, relieve
and comfort the Composer of it. I was then (as the Lord ordained it) in some
trouble, and you encouraged me, and relieved me; but especially you comforted
me with your society at that Soul-feast, when originally I drew all my comfort
out of the wells of Salvation. Isa. 12.3.
I cannot but love and honor you in this last respect; for indeed I am, and I
desire to be very choice and careful with whom I join in that sacred Ordinance
(yet am no Sectary;) and this increases my affections to the Saints so much
the more. Madam, I hope you will countenance (for I partly know, and am verily
persuaded, that you are a constant practioner of) all Duties, both Secret,
Private and Public: and if this weak Work, Patronized by you, may in any sort
be helpful to you, or to any of the Saints, I have my desire, and shall give
God the Glory.

Your Honors in all Christian bonds, I. A.

TO THE READER.
OF many Books there is no end, and much study is a weariness to the flesh: The
Experience of this Truth (especially in these latter days) has sometimes put
me to sad and serious thoughts, How should a Christian furnish himself with a
sufficient Library, to help him on in his way Heavenward? Should he buy up all
the Ancients, or (in case he want the Tongues) should he buy up all our Modern
English Writers, Positive and Polemical, they might fill his Closet, but he
should find no end of buying, as there is no end of making Books: and if he
resolvedly fell to reading he might conclude with the wiseman, Much study is a
weariness of the flesh; nay, in in such variety, he would find the most of his
study so impertinent, so unprofitable, that he might further conclude, Such a
study is a loss to his Soul, and rather an hinderer, then an helper of it in
the way to Heaven. To prevent this, some have advised Christians to choose out,
amongst that world of variety we now enjoy, such Authors as are most suitable
to their Genius and Employment. The Lord Verulam, with some others, give their
opinions, That if the choice and best Observations, which have been made
dispersedly in our English Sermons (leaving out the largeness of Exhortations
and Applications thereupon) were set down in a Continuance, it would be the
best work in Divinity that has been written since the Apostles times. And Dr.
Hackwith repeats almost the same words, saying, That the Sermons of this latter
Age, specially in this Land, have doubtless been more exquisite and effectual,
then ordinarily they have been in any precedent Age; insomuch as it is
observed, that if there were a choice Collection made of the most accurate
since the entrance of Queen Elizabeth to these present times (omiting the large
Applications thereupon) it would prove one of the rarest Pieces that has been
published since the Apostles times: Dr. Hackwiths Apology of the Power and
Providence of God in the Government of the World, lib. 3. Cap. 7. Sect. 2.
Indeed, had we such a Book extant, I would advise the Christians of our Age to
buy the Bible, and that Book, and to study them, and no more, as to their
Spiritual good. But alas, this Book is rather wished for, then hoped after; we
may expect and wait for it till our eyes sink in our heads, and be never the
nearer. However, it was my design to have carried on such a business as this in
the main necessary things; not that I would read over all Authors on all
subjects, but that I would first limit my self to such subjects, and then upon
them cull out the best and choice Observations of many godly and learned
Authors. In this design I have practiced and observed these particulars: --

1. I have brought into method the Duties of a Christian, which I call The
Middle things, in reference to The First and Last things, before Printed: The
matter I have for the most part drawn from others, only the method I have
framed, as the Lord has enabled; and wherein all Authors that ever I saw were
silent, I have thereto added, to complete the work for the matter also.

2. I have purposely omitted the many Controversies, and tedious Disputes of
this Age: For my part, I see little edifying in them; nay, is not the fat and
marrow of Christian Religion lost by them? Were I to advise against any Error,
Heresy, I had rather bid my Adversaries read some Books of Positive, Practical
Divinity, wherein Truth and Religion is laid out in its life and power, then
all the voluminous Controversies that ever I could write, or ever have been
writ by any other of the Sons of men. I deny not but these kind of Books (the
Spirit concurring) may convince men's judgments; but the other sort works both
on judgment and Conscience, on their heads and hearts: The Controversial way
of arguing, pro and contra, I cannot but approve; but the way of the Spirit, in
which he leads and convinces the Soul irresistably, I must needs prefer. Hence
you see the reason of the method I have propounded; wherein I dare say (yet
with a spirit of submission) the workings of the Spirit, the breathings of
Christ, the pantings of a Soul after Christ, are more fully manifested, then in
all the jarring Pamphlets which this Age has copiously afforded: My desire is
both to inform, and to reform; to inform the judgment, and to reform life.

3. I have the rather fallen on this subject of Duties, both because necessary
in their way, and because they are so much opposed by many of our Age, who
surely are not acquainted with them (with the workings of the Spirit in them,
and by them) for otherwise it could not be so: If this Error spread, it will
quickly eat out all Religion, and throw down Souls to Hell. Their pretense is,
who are the Abettors of it, That they have found out a near and easy way to
heaven; Mr. Rutherford in his Survey of Spiritual Antichrist.
but I rather believe Christ (says Rutherford) who tells us it is a way of
many miles, strait, narrow and thorny; indeed the Meritorious way to us is
easy, but the way of a Christian conversation (whether they will or no) lies
through Duties; Matthew 7.21. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25 2 Timothy 4.7. Luke 13.24. Rev. 2.7.
Acts 14.22. Rev. 1.9. 1 Cor. 15.58. Heb. 12 4. Matthew. 16.24 James 1.12. Gal.
6.8. Acts 20.19. Matthew. 24.42. and 11.29. 1 John 5.3.
it is not words, Lord, Lord, but working, sweating, running, wrestling,
fighting, striving, overcoming, bleeding, suffering, abounding in the work,
denying our selves, taking up the cross, enduring temptations, sowing to the
Spirit, serving the Lord with all humility, and with many tears and
temptations, watching, praying, taking Christ's yoke upon us, selling all our
sweetest delights, keeping the commandments of Christ, which howsoever they are
not grievous, yet they are not so easy, as that the only bare act of
Believing should be the only Gospel work. Might we still lie in our Ivory
Beds, under no Law, no Obligation of doing, no danger of sinning, no broken
bones, no terrors, no sense of sorrow for sin, no progress in personal
Repentance, Mortification, Sanctification, no care of watchful walking to
perfect holiness in the fear of God, no abstaining from worldly lusts, no
strictness of Conversation, but only Believe that Christ has Suffered, and
Christ has done all Duties for us, Repented for us, Mortified lusts for us,
walked strictly and holily for us, this were an easy work indeed. For my part,
I would not willingly make the way to Heaven longer then Christ has made it;
but if we believe the Scriptures, Romans 12.1, 2, 3 Ephesians. 5.1, 2, 3, 4 Col. 3 1,
2, 3, 4 1 These 4.1, 2, 3 Iam. 2.13, 14.15. 1 John 3.17.
we shall find other Commandments on us under the Gospel, then Believing only
for Righteousness: There is the Righteousness of Christ received by us, and
working in us; the first is the Righteousness of Justification, the second of
Sanctification, and our Establishment lies in both.

4. I have in every Duty, prescribed the manner of performing it; not that I
would tie every spirit to this particular way or method: those who are
accustomed to these exercises of Devotion, may perhaps devise other more
fitting courses, or ways of proceeding, then these are; and it is reason, and a
point of wisdom, for every man to make use of those Rules which in his own
Experience he finds most proper to his own disposition, and most powerful for
his own Reformation: Only the Reader that is not better furnished, may please
to make use of these, and I trust (by Gods Blessing) he will find them
profitable; which if he do in any measure, it shall be to me sufficient joy,
contentment, recompense.

5. I have made use in this Treatise, not of one, or two, but of many precious
men; as, Angier, Ash, Ball, Bolton, Byfield, Downham, Dyke, Goodwyn, Gouge,
Hooker, Leigh, Mason, Rogers, Shepherd, Torshel, White, etc. that the
Adversaries of Duties may see what a Cloud of such Witnesses are for Duties. It
was sometimes Eliah's trouble, 1 Kings 19.10, 18.
The children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine Altars,
and I, even I only am left: but 'twas the Lords encouragement of Eliah, I have
left me Seven thousand in Israel which have not bowed the knee to Baal. I bless
God it has encouraged me, and me thinks it might trouble the Opposites, that
not only many thousands of Gods people, but many Eliahs amongst those
thousands, should appear with me, and against them. This is one Reason, why I
chose rather to bring in the Authors, Gal. 2.9. Rev 3.12.
who seem to be, and indeed are Pillars in the Temple of our God, then to speak
only in my own Dialect, or altogether from my own invention.

6. I have writ nothing, but in some measure I have, by the Lords assistance,
practiced the same, and felt the comfort of it in my own heart and soul; yet by
way of caution I desire the Reader to remember, if at any time in the exercise
of any of the Duties within written, he also feels his heart warmed, or
savingly affected (which is the very Spirit, Power, Grace, Comfort, Presence
and Sweetness of Christ) that he consider, it is not the Duty, it is not the
bare Ordinance that elicites such divine and noble acts in the heart and
affection, but it is the Blood of Christ, the Intercession of Christ,
sprinkling those Duties, that makes them work such Graces in the Soul. In this
case, the Blood of Christ is as the salve, and Duty is as the cloth or leather
to which it sticks, and by which it is applied: Now from the cloth (the Duty)
comes no virtue; no, no, it is only the Blood of Christ which by Duty heals,
and chears the Soul. Many have wondered, why sometimes they are so lifted up in
Duties, and sometimes again they are no more moved by them, then a Mountain of
Brass is moved by the winds; Why should the same Truth, the same Scripture, the
same Meditation affect me at one time, and not at another, when I am as fitly
disposed to be affected as at the first? Why should the same Instruction, the
same Reproof, the same Consolation, awaken, wound and revive my Spirit at one
time, and move me no more at another, then a charm does a deaf Adder, as the
Psalmist speaks? I grant, Psalm. 58.4, 5.
in respect of the subject, the Spiritual sense is sometimes benumbed, and
sometimes it is awakened; but in respect of the Efficient, it is only Christ's
Blood, Christ's Intercession that does all by an admirable and secret operation.
I have no more to say of this Book, only, The Lord give a Blessing to it, and
to the Reader of it: So prays

Thy Servant in Christ Jesus, I. A.

FOR The Reverend, his worthily much esteemed Friend, Mr. Isaac Ambrose,
Minister of the WORD at Preston.
Reverend Sir,
I Crave your pardon for keeping your Papers so long: I have at length perused
them, and returned them. I wonder at, and could almost envy you, that can find
so much leisure, and employ it so well, in these hurryings and clatterings of
the Times. I am yet, by Ordinance of both Houses, a Licenser of Books to the
Press, and have made use of that Authority, by Subscribing my Name at the end
of your Papers. I pray God bless you, and them, and all the rest of your
labors, to the good of his Church, and the praise of the glory of his Grace: So
rests

Winwick, March 29. 1649. Your true Friend, Brother and Servant, Charles Herle.

To the Conscientious Reader.
IT is thy privilege who read, for Soul-help, to receive this Conscientious
Contexture, a teaching and exciting pattern of choice Piety, out of the hand of
thy dearest Husband Jesus Christ, who gave himself for thee, that he might give
himself to thee; and with himself, that which does convey himself, the Gifts,
Graces, Evidences, Experiences, Improvements, and Spiritual actings of all
those that are partakers of the Root and Fatness of that Olive. Here is then a
Love-token, thy loving Husband has been preparing for thee weeks and months
(it may be some years) by the Study, Pains, Prayers, Tears, the Soul and
Body-travel of a tenderhearted Brother; be thou ready for a meeting of Loves,
that at the receipt, of this, comfortable fruit of love, Christ and thy Soul may
rejoice together. Is there not not a cause? does he not rejoice over thee with
joy? does he not rest in his love? does not he joy over thee with singing? let
this Love-token speak; herein thy free given Royalties are heaped up as high as
Heaven, Justification, Reconciliation, Adoption, Sanctification, Glorification;
Thy helpful Experiences remembered, and improved; thy heart-chearing Evidences
collected, and cleared; thy love- Duty discovered, and precious Directions
given, for an advantageous performance of them, in Secret, in Family, in
Public, for the mutual overflowings of love betwixt Christ and thy Soul. Upon
serious and sad thoughts, that the godly generally of later times, have been
taken up with wrangling Disputes, and thereby taken off from Christian
affection, and Communion (and I fear from Christ too in dangerous measure) It
has been amongst my desires, That God would stir up the hearts of some of his
Servants, to call off his people from these Soul-hurting Contendings, unto the
Reading, and Study of Soul- helping Treatises; assuring my self, That if the
people of God were helped against their contentious, and jarring Corruptions,
the differences in their heads would be more easily reconciled, as to dear
love, and due Spiritual Communion. I could not but observe, when these Papers
were brought to my view, that the forementioned desires of my heart were
imprinted thereupon, which made them more dear to me, and more willing to
endear them to the sincere-hearted, as a happy mean of helping hearts, healing
differences, and preparing the Lords lot for those better times, which are more
looked after, and boasted of, then prepared for: In reference to these
restoring and refreshing times (though the workings of God have been very
various, and seemingly contrary, now setting forward, and then setting
backward) God has not been wanting to feed the laboring, and sometimes almost
fainting Faith of his people, by Divine arguments; amongst which, this is one,
and not the least, That whilst Providence has been at work to remove
hindrances, and to open a full and free way amongst men, the in-dwelling
Spirit has been as busy in holy men, to stir up some to Pray, others to
Preach, and others to Write, for the wide-opening of a door in men; the
gracious enlarging of the heart, which gives assurance, that when God has
suffered them that are for no Religion, to play a first game, and them that are
for all Religions, to play a second, that both the open and secret enemy of
true Religion might be discovered, and discarded; he will then grant a longed
for, joyful meeting of Holy times, and Holy hearts. To further the holiness of
the heart, which gives the leading to holy times, is the happy project of
compiling and Printing this Book. That it may be sanctified by the Spirit of
Holiness, unto so good and promising an end, let be thy Prayer, that the Pains
and Prayers of the Author, may be turned into Comforts and Praises; which is
the hope and prayer of him

Denton, May 10. 1649. Who is joyful in this, and all other thy Soul-helps,
JOHN ANGIER.

To the Christian Reader.
AMongst the multitude of Books in this Age, superlatively above our ability to
buy or read, those seem to me most worthy of thy choice, which compendiously,
in a methodical, plain and familiar way, set forth to us totum hominis, the
whole duty of man, the service of God in holiness and righteousness, the right
use, and wise improvement of the means of Grace: These being wells of Salvation
to quench our thirst, and breasts of Consolation, to strengthen, revive, and
comfort us in our Pilgrimage from Earth to Heaven: Voluminous Controversies may
clear the understanding, and help to deliver and preserve that light from the
poisoning clouds of Heretical darkness; but they do not quicken us to duty, to
the love, and life of Christ, to the hope of Glory; they do not increase, but
rather weaken the power of godliness. Diligence in reading of tedious Disputes,
is not the way to possess that fatness and fullness of true life, peace and joy,
which are treasured up for us in the Meritorious sufferings of our Redee^er.
The Promises are the life of that faith, whereby the just do live; and good
Works, uniform, steadfast and abundant, are the trial and glory thereof;
whereunto not Speculative, and Polemical, but Practical Discourses are an
useful manuduction. In the reading of these with fervent Prayers, with serious
and settled Meditations, many poor burdened sinners have been raised up out of
the depths of a wounding, condemning Conscience, and brought to a transfigured
Mountain, and Heaven on Earth in ravishing Consolations. Such a Discourse is
here presented to thy view, by a Reverend and Religious Author, who has
experimentally learned, and does daily copy out in his life the precious Truths
of Jesus Christ, the Mysteries of Godliness. It is an high privilege, and
great advantage to the Souls welfare, to learn of those, who have what they
teach, not only in their lips, but also in their hearts and lives; who are
able to say, In these ways we have found rest; as ye have heard or seen us do,
so do ye. When the Conversation of Pastors preaches Christ and Heaven, as well
as their Doctrine; when vocal, real, and experimental Sermons go together,
that is likely to be a successful Preaching. This Treatise may well be called,
The Marrow of Christianity, A good and perfect guide to the New-Jerusalem, A
golden Conduit-pipe, to convey to us streams of life from the Fountain of
Living-waters, or the godly man's Vade mecum, wherein is compendiously, yet
fully delivered the Rule and Life of the new Creature. Believe me, in the
diligent, reiterated and religious reading thereof, thou will find, that these
Titles are low enough, having a solid foundation, reality of Truth to bear them
up; and that thy labor was not in vain, not a losing, but a regaining, a well
improving of precious time, which ought to be redeemed. That the composing and
publishing, the attentive reading and studying of this elaborate work, decked
with the breathings of a gracious Spirit, may advance the glory of God, in the
repairing of the Saints, and the edifying of the body of Christ, is the hearts
desire and prayer of

Halsall, April 19. 1649. Thine in the Lord, THO: JOHNSON.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GOod Reader, suffer me to say to thee, as that ancient and famous Orator,
Isocrates, in his Oration ad Nicolem, said to his, (...); Aut hisce praeceptis
utere, aut ipse tu inveni meliora; Either make use of these wholesome
Directions, or else publish better thy self: and if thou be able to publish
such in the future, yet will it much profit thee to make use of these for the
present. Neither is it every speculative ability, that can bear such fruit;
such as these must arise out of much inward observation of the work of God upon
the Soul, and Christian long Experience: Weaker Christians may gain much growth
in the diligent perusal of this sweet Composure, and strong ones may hence be
instigated to try theirs; that which issues from the heart of an experimental
Christian, usually reaches to the heart of such as labor after the like
Experience. Every one that reads this work, perhaps knows not the Author so
well as my self, therefore may I the more boldly speak of him: I have long
known him of a weak body, but of a precious and strong mind; yet a man qui de
se modice sentit, that judges but meanly of himself. These his (Media) nomine,
so called in reference to his (Prima and Vltima) long since brought to light,
thou shall not (Christian Reader) find to be Media re, but Remedia to thy
sighing soul: He is one that has much fed upon the Marrow of Practical
Divinty, so that he may be ranked in a better kind amongst the Orators wise
men, (...); Isocr. ibid.
Sapientes existima, non eos qui de rebus minutis curiose rixantur, sed qui de
rebus maximis egregie dicunt. Such shall thou find the Author. No more, but

Thine in Christ, JOHN WAIT B.D.

The Contents of this Book.
Chap. 1. Sect. 1. THe Proeme, or Entrance into the Book, Page 1 Sect. 2. Of
the first Privilege of a Believer, viz. Justification, Page 1 Sect. 3. Of the
second Privilege, viz. Reconciliation, Page 5 Sect. 4. Of the third
Privilege, viz. Adoption, Page 8 Sect. 5. Of the fourth Privilege, viz.
Sanctification, Page 10 Sect. 6. Of the fifth Privilege, viz. Glorification.
Page 12
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. OF Duties in general, and first of the Equity of Duties,
Page 13 Sect. 2. Of the insufficiency of Duties, Page 15 Sec. 3. Of the healing
of Duties, Page 16 Sec. 4. No resting in Duties, Page 17 Sec. 5. Of the ase and
ends of Duties, Page 20 Sec. 6. Of the Saints abilities, or power to do Duties,
Page 26 Sec. 7. Of the Saints delights in Duties, Page 28 Sec. 8. Of the
essential Requisites in Duties, Page 33 Sec. 9. Of the kinds of Duties, in
several Divisions, Page 36
Chap. 3. Sect. 1. OF Duties in particular, and first of the nature of
Watchfulness. Page 38 Sec. 2. Of the objects of Watchfulness, ibid. Sec. 3. Of
the manner of Watchfulness over Original sins, Page 39 Sec. 4. Of the manner of
Watchfulness over Actual sins, Page 40 Sec. 5. Of the manner of Watchfulness
over special sins, Page 41 Sec. 6. Of the manner of Watchfulness over our
Hearts, Page 45 Sec. 7. Of the manner of Watchfulness over our Tongues, Page 48
Sec. 8. Of the manner of Watchfulness over our Actions, Page 51
Chap. 4. Sect. 1. OF the nature of Self-Examination, Page 55 Sect. 2. Of the
objects of Self-Examination, Page 57 Sec. 3. Of the manner of Examining our sins
in general, Page 58 Sec. 4. Of the manner of Examining our special sins, Page 59
Sec. 5. Of the manner of Examining our Hearts, Page 62 Sec. 6. Of the manner of
Examining our Tongues, Page 65 Sec. 7. Of the manner of Examining our Actions,
Page 66 Sec. 8. Of the time of our Self-Examination, Page 69 Sec. 9. The daily
Register of a weak unworthy Servant of Christ for some years, Page 71
Chap. 5. Sect. 1. OF the nature of Experiences, Page 86 Sect. 2. Of the
gathering of Experiences, ibid. Sec. 3. Of the improving of Experiences, Page
87 Sec. 4. Of the Sanctification of Experiences in their several uses, Page 89
Sec. 5. Of the consideration of Experiences in a Practical course, Page 95 Sec.
6. Of the Experiences of a weak Christian cast into method, Page 98. 1.
Judgments on the wicked, ibid.. 2. Gods love to his Saints, Page 100. 3.
Several Chastisements or Afflictions on my self and others, Page 102. 4.
Performances of gracious Promises to my self and others, Page 104. 5. The
temptations of Sin, Satan and the World, Page 106. 6. Victories of the World,
Lusts, Temptations, Corruptions, Satan, Page 107. 7. Observations of Gods
Providence, Page 109. 8. The breathings of the Spirit in my soul and others,
Page 111. 9. Deceits of the heart beguiling, Page 113

Chap. 6. Sect. 1. OF the nature of Evidences, Page 117 Sect. 2. Of the
gathering of Evidences, ibid. Sec. 3. Of the improving of Evidences, Page 125
Sec. 4. Of the sanctification of Evidences in their several uses, ib. Sec. 5.
Of the Evidences of a weak unworthy Servant of Christ, laid down according to
the Rules aforementioned, Page 133
Chap. 7. Sect. 1. OF the nature and kinds of Meditation, Page 136 Sect. 2. Of
the circumstantials of Meditation, Page 137 Sec. 3. Of occasional Meditation,
Page 138 Sec. 4. Of deliberate Meditation, and the parts thereof, Page 140 Sec.
5. An Example of the Souls love to Christ, Page 142 Sec. 6. Another Example of
Eternity, Page 151
Chap. 8. Sect. 1. OF the nature of the Life of Faith. Page 162 Sect. 2. Of the
manner of this Life of faith in general, ib. Sec. 3. Of the manner of this Life
of Faith in particular, as in Temporal evils, Page 166 Sec. 4. Of the manner of
this Life of Faith in Temporal blessings, Page 171 Sec. 5. Of the manner of this
Life of Faith in Spiritual evils, Page 175 Sec. 6. Of the manner of this Life of
Faith in Spiritual blessings, as derived to us from God, and Christ, and the
Spirit of Christ, Page 181 Sec. 7. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in
spiritual graces, Page 186 Sec. 8. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in
spiritual duties, Page 190 Sec. 9. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in things
Eternal, Page 194 Sec. 10. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in regard of
others, Page 196
Chap. 9. Sect. 1. OF the nature of Family Duties, Page 199 Sect. 2. Of the
preparatives to Family Duties, ibid. Sec. 3. Of the Duties of Governors in
general, Page 201 Sec. 4. Of the Duties of Parents to their Children, Page 204
Sec. 5. Of the Duties of Masters to Servants, Page 208 Sec. 6. Of the Duties of
Husband and Wife, Page 209 Sec. 7. Of the Duties of Children to Parents, Page
216 Sec 8. Of the Duties of Servants to their Masters, Page 217
Chap. 10. Sect. 1. OF preparatives to Christian-Society, Page 221 Sect. 2. Of
a mutual exchange of gifts and graces, Page 225 Sec. 3. Of a mutual
serviceableness to the Bodies and Souls of one another, Page 226 Sec. 4. Of a
mutual walking together, and holding hands in the Ordinances of Christ, Page
229 Sec. 5. Of some Orders to which some Christians subscribed before
Conference, Page 231 Sec. 6. Of some Questions of Practical Divinity, which at
the Conference were propounded and answered, Page 232. 1. What was the happiness
of man's condition in innocence? ibid.. 2. What are the miseries of man in state
of Nature? Page 233. 3. What means has God appointed to come out of this
state? Page 234. 4. What are the signs of a sound humiliation? Page 235. 5.
What are the signs of an hard heart? Page 236. 6. What means for brokenness of
heart? Page 237. 7. What means for the obtaining, and increase of faith? ibid..
8. What are the signs of a true justifying faith? Page 238. 9. What motives to
Evangelical Repentance? Page 240. 10. What signs of true Evangelical
Repentance? Page 241. 11. How may a Believer Redeemed by Christ, acknowledge
his thankfulness to Christ? ibid.. 12. What are the signs of a sincere love to
Christ? Page 242. 13. What are the causes in us of Christ withdrawing from us?
Page 243. 14. What are the causes for which Christ on his part withdraws
himself from us? ibid.. 15. What means for the recovery of Christ's comfortable
presence? Page 244. 16. Of what use is Christ to a Believer already justified?
Page 245
Sect. 7. Of some Questions or Cases of Conscience, which at the Conference
were propounded and answered, Page 246. 1. Whether a Believer may profit more,
or be more intent in publ^ke, or in secret Prayer? ibid.. 2. Whether a
Christian in his own apprehension decaying in grace, may not yet grow in grace?
and what are the reasons of his mistakes? Page 247. 3. What signs of true
grace, though for the present but weak? Page 248. 4. Whether is a Christian
always bound to reprehend an offender? or in what cases may he forbear? Page
249. 5. How may we know whether we profit by afflictions? Page 250. 6. How
should a Christian fortify himself against the reproaches of wicked men? Page
251. 7. Whether a true Believer may not sometimes doubt? and what are the
causes? Page 252. 8. What are the cures or remedies of doubting incident to
Believers? Page 253. 9. What are those Remora's that hinder the growth of
Christianity, or the spreading of the kingdom of Christ? ib.. 10. What means to
preserve unity and amity amongst Christians, Page 254
Sect. 8. Of some Questions or Controverted Points, which at the Conference
were propounded and answered, Page 256. 1. Whether does God see sin in
Believers, so as to be offended at it? and how may it appear? ibid.. 2. Whether
are Believers to repent for their sins? and on what grounds? Page 257. 3.
Whether are Believers to pray for pardon of sin? and what are the reasons? Page
258. 4. Whether is it the duty of Christians to observe the Lords day as a
Christian Sabbath? and what grounds for it? ibid.. 5. Whether may not
Christians lawfully sing David's or Moses Psalms? and how may it appear? Page
259. 6. Whether admiting of, or joining with scandalous persons in the Lords
Supper be sin? and how may it appear? Page 260. and sine operis.. 7. What is
the duty of admitters and joyners to keep themselves blameless, and the
Ordinance undefiled? Page 261. 8. In what cases is it lawful to enter into
fellowship, association, confederacy and covenants with scandalous sinners? and
in what cases is it not lawful? Page 262

Chap. 11. Sect. 1. OF the necessity of preparation to the Hearing of the Word,
Page 264 Sec. 2. Of the manner of preparation to hear the Word, Page 265 Sec. 3.
The duties of the soul in hearing the Word, Page 269 Sec. 4. The duties
required after hearing, Page 274
Chap. 12. Sect. 1. OF the two Sacraments of the new testament, Page 276 Sect.
2. Of the duties in general, before we receive the Lords Supper, ibid. Sec. 3.
Of the manner of Examining our sins before the Lords Supper, Page 277 Sec. 4.
Of Examination of the wants of graces, Page 278 Sec. 5. Of the Examination of
the truth of our graces, and first of our Conversion, Page 281 Sec. 6.
Examination of Knowledge, Page 283 Sec. 7. Examination of Faith, Page 284 Sec.
8. Examination of Repentance, Page 286 Sec. 9. Examination of Love to the
Brethren, Page 288 Sec. 10. Examination of Obedience, Page 289 Sec. 11.
Examination of our desires after this Ordinance, Page 290 Sec. 12. Examination
of the growth of graces, ibid. Sec. 13. Of the duties in Sacrament, of the
exercise of Repentance, Page 291 Sec. 14. Of the exercise of Faith, Page 293
Sec. 15. Of the exercise of Thanksgiving, Page 300 Sec. 16. Of the exercise of
Love and Mercy, Page 301 Sec. 17. Of Examination after Sacrament, and the
result, if not a good day, ibid. Sec. 18. Of Thankfulness, if a good day, Page
303 Sec. 19. Of Obedience, and faithfulness in our lives, Page 304
Chap. 13. Sect. 1. OF preparation to Prayer, Page 305 Sect. 2. The general
duties of the soul in Prayer, Page 307 Sec. 3. The particular duties of the
soul in Prayer, Page 311 Sec. 4. The duties of the body in Prayer, Page 314
Sec. 5. Duties after Prayer, Page 316 Sec. 6. A Case of Conscience: Suppose I
prayed, how may I know that God hears and will answer? Page 317 Sec. 7. A
second Case: Suppose the thing I desire shall not be answered, how may I know
that yet God does hear? Page 319 Sec. 8. A third Case: Suppose I cannot
discover that God will hear and answer, what shall I do then? Page 321 Sec. 9.
A fourth Case: Suppose the thing I desire is answered, how may I know it was by
my prayers, and not out of common Providence? Page 322 Sec. 10. A fifth Case:
Suppose others joined with me in prayers, now answered, how may I know that my
prayers had ^n hand in obtaining those answers? Page 325 Sec. 11. A sixth Case:
Suppose I am assured that God has heard and answered my prayers, what must I
do then? Page 327 Sec. 12. A Directory for Prayer, ibid. Sec. 13. A Form of
Prayer in Scripture phrase, Page 331
Chap. 14. Sec. 1. OF the nature of Reading the Scriptures, Page 340 Sec. 2. Of
fit times and seasons for reading the Scriptures, ibid. Sec. 3. Of the manner of
preparation before reading of Scriptures, Page 341 Sec. 4. Of the necessary
duties in reading of the Scriptures, Page 343 Sec. 5. Of duties after reading
the Scriptures, Page 345 Sec. 6. A Calendar once composed, but now referred to
the Reader, to show how we may read over the Scriptures several ways once in a
year, Page 346 Sec. 7. Of the Analysis of the whole Bible, and especially of
the Old Testament, Page 347 Sec. 8. Of the Pentateuch, or Books of the Law,
Page 349 Sec. 9. Of the Prophets Historical, Page 355 Sec. 10. Of Prophets
Dogmatical, Page 362 Sec. 11. Of Prophets Prophetical, Page 364 Sec. 12. Of the
New Testament; and 1. Of books Historical, Page 369 Sec. 13. Of Books
Doctrinal, Page 373 Sec. 14. Of the Book Prophetical, Page 376 Sec. 15. Of
common places for profitable things, Page 377 Sec. 16. Common places observed
by one in his private reading of Scriptures, ibid. Sec. 17. Of the use of these
Collections, Page 380
Chap. 15. Sect. 1. OF preparatives to Fasting, Page 398 Sect. 2. Of the duties
required in Fasting, Page 399 Sec. 3. Of duties after Fasting, Page 401
Chap. 16. Sect. 1. OF preparatives to feasting or thanksgiving, Page 403 Sect.
2. Of the duties required in thanksgiving, ibid. Sec. 3. Of duties after
thanksgiving, Page 404 Sec. 4. Psalms suitable to this duty, Page 405

THE Believers Privileges.
CHAP. I.
SECT. 1. The Proeme, or Entrance into the Book.
YOu have heard in my first things the Doctrine, Precepts, and the Pattern of a
man in his second, or New birth: Now remains what follows all his life; and
therein is considerable 1. His Privileges. 2. His Duties.


1. His Privileges, as he is now a Believer in Christ, are Justification.
Reconciliation. Adoption. Sanctification. Glorification.


Of these some of our Worthies have written largely; and amongst the rest, that
watchful Soul-rowzing, Shepherds Sound Believer.
Soul-searching Shepherd: I shall not therefore dwell on them, but sum what he
has delivered, in these following Sections.

SECT. 2. Of the first Privilege, viz. Justification.
THe first Privilege which immediately follows our Union with Christ, is
Justification; which consists in these particulars, Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and Remission of sin.

To prevent erroneous misconceits, which spring from the confounding of things
that differ, understand, That a man may be said to be justified either
intentionally, or virtually, or actually; either in God, or in Christ, or in
himself.

1. Intentionally in God (i.) in Gods Purpose and Decree: This is from all
eternity, but this Decree and Intention does not put any thing into a state of
actual being, but in the fullness of time.

2. Virtually in Christ: And this is from the day of Christ's Passion, and in
the virtue of his Satisfaction; yet this intends no more, but that
Satisfaction is made, and Remission purchased by the Blood of Christ.

3. Actually in himself: When a man has the possession of Justification,
immediately after his Union with the Lord Jesus Christ. Now this Justification
considered as it is a state of favor, a Covenant state with God, which a man at
his first believing is put into, is not reiterated, no more then a wife, after
that first entrance into the relation, is frequently made a wife; yet the
particular acts of Pardon, and Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, are
continually by God communicated unto the Believer. In this respect this actual
Justification (or particular acts of pardon) has its degrees of progression:
The beginning thereof is laid in our first Union and Incorporation into Christ;
the consummation of it is not till the Judge at the latter day has solemnly
pronounced the Sentence of final Absolution, and so set us in full possession
of entire Remission: Between both these, there is a progressive work of
Justification, by the constant actings of the Spirit, applying the blood of
Christ by the hand of Faith, to the quiet and comfort of the soul: The first we
may term initial Justification, the second progressive, the last perfective;
the second is the fruit of the first, and the preludial assurance of the last:
The first is wrought and sealed in the first Sacrament, the second is wrought
and sealed in the second Sacrament; and both these branches of Sacramental
Justification, are to us the preassurance of that complemental and perfective
Justification, the sentence whereof puts an end to all fears, changing our
Faith and Hope into fruition and full possession.

It has been commonly said by some of our best Divines, That Justification is
transacted in our first Union and Incorporation into Christ; at which time it
is conceived, That the pardon of all sin is sealed to the Believer at once. But
I fear the misunderstanding of this point (not untrue in it self, if not
mistaken and misapprehended) has laid the ground upon which some build that
unhappy Structure which turns the grace of God into wantonness: who knows
not that Justification in the proper acceptance of thew ord, according to the
Scripture phrase, is the act of a Judge pronouncing a judicial sentence,
wherein he absolveth the person of the sinner from all sin and punishment due
to him for sin, and that for the alone Righteousness of the surety Christ
freely imputed, and by Faith received of him. And according to this, I suppose
we shall not err from the truth, if we say, 1. That the main work of
Justification, is even as yet to us future, viz. at the great and last day of
Judgment, when we shall receive a final Quietus est, and discharge, and when
God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes: And yet 2. That in our first Union
with Christ there is a work of Justification, viz. actual Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and actual Remission of what sin for the present the soul stands
guilty of, at that time when it is first united to Christ. I dare not say that
Justification, quatenus it comprehends Imputation, and Remission of sin, is one
individual act; or that all sins, past, present, and to come, are remitted to
the Believer at once; but this I say, That in our first Union, all our sins
past and present, are actually pardoned; and this favor received, is a pledge
of assurance, That in future also, by applying our selves to Christ, we may and
shall receive the forgiveness of our daily sins, and that at the last day we
shall at once be absolved from all Accusations and Charges laid in against us;
and that Justification (besides those particular acts of pardon, and Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness) does connote a state that the subject at his first
believing is put into, viz. A state of grace, and favor, and reconciliation
with God for the imputed Righteousness of Christ, without Apostasy from it,
either total or final.

O glorious Privilege! especially in these respects:

1. By this a sinner is righteous; a wonder that may astonish Angels, for a man
accursed and sinful in himself, to be at that very instant blessed and
righteous in another: Our own Duties, Works, and Reformation may make us at the
best but less sinful, but this Righteousness makes a sinner Quoad reatum.
sinless.

2. By this a sinner is righteous before the Judgment Seat of God: Romans 8.32.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? not Christ, he is our Advocate;
not Sin, for Christ was made sin for us; not the Law, for Christ has fulfilled
the Law for us; not Satan, for God is his Judge, and if he have acquitted us,
what can the Jailer do?

3. By this we have perfect Righteousness: we are as perfectly righteous, 1 Ioh
3.7.
Non formali and intrinseca justitia, sed relativa, non quoad quantitatem, sed
veritatem, fit enim finita applicatio infinita justitiae. Si aliter aeque justi
essemus ut Christus, possimus alios salvare ut Christus; at non. Justitia
Christi sit nostra non quoad universalem valorem, sed particularem
necessitatem, and imputatur nobis non ut causis salvationis, sed ut subjectis
salvandis, justitia Christi est vere meritoria, nostra autem ex mera gratia.
Justitia Christi est subjective inhaesiva, nobis tantum communicativa quoad
virtutem and efficaciam.
as Christ the Righteous. Little children, let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. Indeed our own
righteousness, though it be the fruit of the Spirit of grace, is a blotted,
stained righteousness, very imperfect, and very little; but by this, the Faith
of David, Peter, Paul, was not more precious then ours is, because we have the
same righteousness as they had: what sincere soul but esteems of perfect
holiness, more then of heaven it self? O consider, we have it (in this sense I
now speak of) in the Lord Jesus.

4. By this we have continual righteousness: Do we complain because we feel new
sin, or old sins confessed, lamented, subdued, returning upon us again, and the
springs in the bottom filling our souls again, that we are weary of our selves?
O but remember, Zech. 13.1.
this is not a Cistern, but a Fountain opened for us to wash in; as sin
abounds, so grace in this gift of righteousness abounds much more: Z^ch. 3.4.
The Lord has changes of garments for us, by means whereof there shall never
enter into the Lords heart one hard thought toward us, of casting us off, or
of taking revenge upon any new occasion, or fall unto sin, so as for final
destruction.

5. By this we have eternal righteousness, that never can be lost: If the Lord
should make us as perfectly righteous as once Adam was, or as the Angels in
heaven are, we might be in danger of losing this; but now the Lord has put our
righteousness into a safer hand, which never shall be lost: Christ has
obtained an eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. Dan. 9 24.
he has made an end of sin, and brought in an everlasting righteousness.

6. By this we please God more, then if we had a perfect righteousness in our
selves: Do not say, This is a poor righteousness, which is out of my self in
another: Suppose it were in our selves, such a righteousness at best would be
nothing but man's righteousness, but this is called The Righteousness of God; 2
Cor. 5.21.
Now what is Angelical righteousness, to the righteousness of God? it is but a
Glowworm before the Sun; the smell of Esau's garments (the Robes of this
righteousness of the Son of God) are of sweeter odor then ours can be, or ever
shall be.

7. By this we glorify God exceedingly: Abraham believed, Romans 4.20.
and gave glory unto God; so when we believe, we glorify God, we advance his
Mercy and Free Grace, and triumph in it.

8. By this we have Peace in our Consciences: Romans 5.1.
For Christ's blood is sprinkled on them, and that cools the burning torments of
them: None of our duties can pacify Conscience, but as they carry us hither to
this righteousness; only if this Rainbow appear over our heads, it is a
certain sign of fair weather, and that there shall be no more deluge of Wrath
to overwhelm us.

9. By this all miseries are removed: When our sins are pardoned, there is
something like sickness, shame, and death, but they are not; The inhabitants of
Zion shall not say, I am sick: Isa. 33.24.
the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity; it is no
sickness in a manner, nor sorrow, nor affliction, if the venom, sting, and curse
be taken away by pardon of sin, this is the blessedness of all Believers.
Blessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: Psa. 32.1,
2.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. Here Is a blessing
pronounced, what should we do but believe it, and rejoice in it?

SECT. 3. Of the second Privilege, viz. Reconciliation.
THe second Privilege is Reconciliation: This I called the state or condition
which a Believer in his Justification is put into; and here I consider it as a
Privilege, which in order of nature follows pardon of sin, as pardon of sin in
order of nature follows Imputation of Christ's righteousness: Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God; Romans 5.1.
(i.) Christ's righteousness being imputed, and sins pardoned, we have peace
with God; not only peace from God in our Consciences, but peace with God in
our reconcilement to him, and in his favor toward us; in our Imputation and
Pardon the Lord accounts us just, in our Reconciliation the Lord accounts us
friends: Indeed our meritorious Reconciliation is by Christ's death; as the
Kings Son, who procures his Fathers favor toward a Malefactor, who yet lies in
cold Irons, and knows it not; and this is before actual pardon, or actual
being: But actual and efficacious Reconciliation, whereby we come to the
fruition and possession of it, is (to my weak conception) after pardon of sin.
Now this Reconciliation consists in two things: 1. In our peace with God,
whereby the Lord lays by all acts of hostility against us. 2. In the love and
favor of God: he now loves us not only with a love of good will, as in our
Election, but with a love of complacency and delight. O consider what a blessed
state is this!

1. That God should be pacified with us after anger, after provocation by sin,
after such wrath, which like fire has consumed thousand thousands, and burnt
down to the bottom of Hell, and is now, and ever shall be burning upon them in
Hell.

2. That God should be pacified wholly and thoroughly, that there should be no
consuming fury left for us to feel: Fury is not in me, Isa. 27 4.
says God; indeed briars and thorns (i.) obstinate sinners, that prick and cut
him to the very heart by their impenitency, he will burn them together: God out
of Christ is a consuming fire, 1 John 4.16.
but in Christ he is Love; and though there may be fatherly frowns,
chastisements, reproofs, and rods, though he may for a time hide his face, shut
out our Prayers, defer to fulfill Promises, yet all these are out of love to us
in some sort, and we shall see it, and feel it so in the latter end.

3. That the Lord should be pacified eternally, never to cast us off again for
any sins or miseries that we fall into: This is wonderful. Those whom men love,
if their love be abused, or if their friends be in affliction, they many times
forsake, but the Lords love and favor is everlasting: The mountains may depart,
Isa. 54.10.
and the hills be removed, but my kindeness shall not depart from thee, neither
shall the Co^enant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on
thee: Nay, that which is something more, the abounding of our sin, Romans 5.20.
is now the occasion of the abounding of his grace; our very wants and
miseries, are the very objects and occasions of his bowels and tender mercies:
O what a Privilege is this! Did the Lord ever show mercy to the Angels that
sinned? Did not one sin cast them out of favor utterly? and yet that so many
thousand thousand of sins should gush out of my heart, and thy heart that
read, against the mercy, love and kindeness of our good God, and for all
this he not be incensed; that the Lord who poured out all his anger upon his
own Son for us, cannot now pour out, nay has not one drop left (though he
would) to pour out upon us for any one of our sins! Stand amazed ye Angels, and
all the Host of Heaven at this!

4. That the Lord should be thus pacified with enemies: A man may be easily
pacified with one that offends him but a little, but with an enemy that strikes
at his life (as by every sin we do at the living God) what can we say to this?

5. That he should be pacified by such a wonderful way as the blood of Jesus
Christ: This is such a love, as one would think the infinite wisdom of a
blessed God could have devised no greater: It is enough to burst the heart with
astonishment and amazement, to think that the party offended (who therefore had
no cause to seek peace with us again) should find out such a way of peace as
this: Woe to the world that despise this peace.

6. That being thus pacified, we may come into Gods presence with boldness at
any time, and ask what we will; I wonder what he can deny us, if he love us: 1
Ioh. 5.14.
This is the confidence that we have in him, That if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us.

7. That all Creatures should be at peace with us: Thou shall be in league with
the stones of the field, Job 5.23.
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee: As when the Captain
of the Army is pacified, none of the Soldiers must hurt or strike that man; so
no Creature must hurt us, nay all the Creatures that seem our enemies, shall be
forced to do us good: O Death, 1 Cor. 15.55.
where is now thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? All our wants will make
us pray the more, our sorrows humble us the more, our temptations make us
exercise our graces, our Spiritual desertions make us long for heaven, and to
be with Christ; not only Paul, and Apollos, and the world, and life, but death
it self is ours, Job 11.19. Psa. 112.7.
to do us good: We may now sleep, and none shall make us afraid; we shall not
be afraid of evil tidings, our hearts are fixed, trusting in the Lord.

SECT. 4. Of the third Privilege, viz. Adoption.
THe third Privilege is Adoption, which in order of nature follows
Reconciliation; whereby the Lord accounts us Sons, and gives us the Spirit and
Privilege of Sons: Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us,
1 Ioh. 3.1.
that we should be called the Sons of God: The Lord accounts us just in our
Justification, friends in our Reconciliation, Sons in our Adoption: Now this
Adoption is either begun here in this life, or perfected in the world to come,
when we shall receive all the Privileges of Sons, not one excepted. Romans 8.23.
For this latter Adoption, to wit, The Redemption of our Bodies, we wait; but
of the former we speak, the manner of which is thus:

1. God loves Jesus Christ with an unspeakable love, as his only Son, and our
elder Brother.

2. Hence when we are in Christ his Son, he loves us with the same love as he
does his Son.

3. Hence the Lord accounts us Sons, having predestined us unto the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ to himself, Ephesians. 1.5.
according to the good pleasure of his will. O the excellency of this
Privilege! It appears in these respects:

1. That the Lord should prize us as his Sons: A man that has Sons, esteems
them more then all his goods and Servants; so the Lord esteems of the poorest,
unworthiest Believer, more then of all his household stuff, more then of Heaven,
Earth, and all the glory of it, more then of all the Kings and great men in the
world.

2. That the Lord should take care for us as for Sons: In times of want we are
ready to question, What we shall eat or drink? how we shall live? Mat. 6.31.
O consider, are we the Sons of God? then he that feeds the Ravens, and clothes
the Lillies, will provide for us; or suppose we continue in the want of
temporal things, why the Lord is therein plotting our eternal good: No
chastening for the present seems joyous, but grievous; nevertheless,
afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, Heb. 12.11.
unto them which are exercised thereby.

3. That the Lord should love us as his Sons: Sometimes we think that the Lord
loves us not, because we do not feel his love, or know his love; but do not we
love our Sons, because whiles they are young, they know not their Fathers, or
because their Fathers are sometimes out of sight, and have not them always in
their arms? Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, Isa. 49.14, 15.
and the Lord has forgotten me: Can a woman forget her sucking child, that
she should not have compassion on the Son of her womb? yea, they may forget,
yet I will not forget thee. We may think, because we have so many sins, or so
many afflictions, that therefore the Lord loves us not; but judge we
righteously? have our children no love from us, because they are sick, and we
keep them under a spare diet? God knows our mold, and that we are but dust: He
has freely chosen us to be his Sons, and therefore (notwithstanding all our
sins and sufferings) he loves us still: If he sees Ephraim bemoaning his
stubbornness, as well as sickness, the Lord cries out, and cannot hold, Is
Ephraim my dear son? Ier. 31.20.
Is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly
remember him still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely
have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

4. That the Lord should make us heirs and coheirs with Christ: Sons by Nature
are not always heirs, Romans 8.17.
but all Sons by Adoption are: We are heirs 1. Of the visible world, 1 Cor.
3.22. 2. Of the other world, 1 Pet. 1.4. 3. Of all the Promises, Heb. 6.17. And
herein Jehovah himself comes to be our Inheritance and Portion for ever: O that
such vessels of wrath, firebrarnds of Hell by nature, should thus become the
children of God by grace, and heirs of heaven!

5. That the Lord should give us the Spirit of Sons, The Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father, Romans 8.15.
The Spirit of Assurance, witnessing with our Spirit, that we are the children
of God: It does not only witness to our Spirits, but with our Spirits, (i.)
with our renewed Consciences, thus, All Believers are Sons, but I am a
Believer, therefore I am a Son: Herein the Spirit bears witness with us in
every part, premises, and conclusion; only it testifies more clearly,
certainly, comfortably, sweetly, ravishing the soul with unspeakable joy, and
peace, in the conclusion: Sometimes indeed it may be suspended, and sometimes
we may not hear it; or if we do, we may object against it, through the unbelief
in part remaining in us: yet Quando actus intermittitur, habitus non amittitur.
Ephesians. 4.30.
if we want it in the witness and comfort of it, we have it in the holiness of
it: Hence it is called, The holy Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed unto the
day of Redemption.

SECT. 5. Of the fourth Privilege, viz. Sanctification.
THe fourth Privilege is Sanctification, which in order of nature follows
Adoption: No sooner are we Sons, but we receive the image of our heavenly
Father in Sanctification; The manner of it is thus:

1. The Spirit works in us a Principle of Spiritual life: The Scripture
sometimes calls it a Seed, 1 Ioh 3.9. Ioh 4.14. 2 Cor. 4.10, 11
sometimes a Spring, or Fountain, sometimes The life of Christ, because it is
conveyed unto us by the Spirit of Christ, by means of our inseparable union
with Christ. What name soever we give it, we may not conceive it to be a new
faculty added unto those which are in men by nature, but an improvement of
those abilities to work Spiritually, as they did naturally before Regeneration:
Hence it is that a regenerate man in Scripture is said To walk after the
Spirit, Rom 8.1. Gal. 5.18. Gal 5.25.
-- To be led by the Spirit, -- To walk in the Spirit.

2. From this Fountain springs all those habits of Spiritual grace, which are
severally distinguished by the names of Faith, Hope, Love, etc. although to
speak properly, they are but the diversifications of that Spiritual Principle
within us, distinguished by these names.

3. From these habits of grace abiding in us, ordinarily proceeds Spiritual
motions and operations according to those habits. And as it is with Natural
habits, so it is with Spiritual, they are much increased and strengthened by
their motions, operations (i.) by the use and exercise of them, and are as much
weakened by disuse, and neglect of such an exercise. I deny not but for all
this, there is within us a woeful, sinful nature, cross, and contrary unto
holiness, and leading us daily into Captivity: yet here is our Privilege, even
Sanctification in part; surely the Lord has given us another Nature, a new
Nature: there is something else within us, which makes us wrestle against sin,
and shall in time prevail over all sin: A bruised reed shall he not break, Mat.
12.20.
and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto
victory.

The excellency of this Privilege appears in these particulars:

1. This is our glory, and beauty, even Glorification begun: What greater glory
then to be like unto God? We are changed into the same image, from glory to
glory; 2 Cor. 3.18.
every degree of grace is glory, and the perfection of glory in heaven,
consists chiefly in the perfection of grace.

2. This will give us abundance of sweet peace: For whence comes troubles, and
doubts of Gods favor and love? Is it not some guile or decay here? Is it not
some boldness to sin? Is it not our secret dalliance with some known sin,
continued in with secret impenitency? On the other side, what was Paul's
rejoicing? Hezekiahs peace? the one cried, that In all sincerity and simplicity
he had his conversation amongst men; the other, 1 Cor. 1.12. Isa. 38.2, 3.
Lord remember, I have walked before thee uprightly: not that this was the
ground of their peace, for that only is Free Grace in Christ, but the means of
their peace: That is a cursed peace, that is kept by looking to Christ, and yet
loving our lusts.

3. This will make us fit for Gods use: A filthy unclean vessel is good for
nothing, till cleansed; a man must first purge himself, and then he shall be a
vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the masters use, and prepared unto
every good work. 2 Timothy 2.21.


4. By this we have a most sweet and comfortable evidence of our Justification:
Nor is this a running upon the Covenant of Works; Is not Sanctification (the
writing of the Law in our hearts) a privilege of the Covenant of Grace, as
well as Justification? and can the evidencing of one Privilege by another, be
a running upon the Covenant of Works? O consider, how many Evangelical Promises
are made to persons invested with such and such graces! as of Poverty,
Mourning, Meekness, Mat. 5.3, 4, 5, 6.
etc. and to what end? but that every one may take, and be assured of his
portion manifested particularly therein? surely none are justified, but they
are sanctified; or if not sanctified, they are not justified.

SECT. 6. Of the fifth Privilege, viz. Glorification.
THe fifth Privilege is Glorification, which is the last in execution of Gods
eternal Purpose toward all his beloved and chosen ones: And hereby we are made
partakers of those endless and unutterable joys, which neither eye has seen,
nor ear has heard, nor the heart of any man conceived: But of this you have
several Sermons in my Last things, enough to cheer up all those precious hearts
that have any title to, or interest in the Lord Jesus Christ: My meaning
therefore is to pass by these Privileges, and secondly to come to the Duties,
which gracious Spirits, in all faithful and thankful obedience unto him that
has called them, are ready to fall upon.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1. Of Duties in general: And first, of the Equity of Duties.
NO sooner is the soul translated into the state of grace, and crowned with
those glorious Privileges, but immediately it cries out, O Lord, what shall I
now do for thee? how shall I now live to thee? Good reason, the soul should now
give up her self to Christ, for she knows, she is not her own, but Christ's. Can
there be such a heart in any Christian, as now to cast off Duty, and to
continue in sin, because so much grace has abounded? O no! The love of Christ
constrains us (says the Apostle) because we thus judge, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
-- That he dyed for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which dyed for them, and rose again. There is a
Principle of love now in the hearts of believers, and this love of Christ
constrains them to live to Christ: Ye are now a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, a holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a peculiar People, that ye should show forth the praises of Christ, who has
called you out of darkness into his mavelous light: What blessed Titles are
these? and to what end? but that they who are so ennobled by Christ, may now
adorn the Gospel of Christ, and show forth the praises of him who has called
them? 11.
Dearly beloved (says the Apostle) I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain now from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul, having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as
evil doers, 12.13.17.19.
they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day
of visitation. But what duties must they fall on? 1. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. 2. Honor all men. 3. Love the
Brotherhood. 4. Fear God. 5. Honor the King. 6. Suffer wrongs: You have herein
Christ for example, and you must do all for Christ's sake; or if these Duties
will not contain all, Zachary tells us, Luke 1 74, 75.
that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we must serve him
without fear, in holiness (in all Duties of the first Table) and righteousness
(in all Duties of the second Table) all the days of our life. Indeed, how can
we love Christ, and neglect duty to Christ? John 14.15.
If you love me (says Christ) keep my Commandments; the love of Christ will
constrain us to embrace his Commandments, as a most precious treasure. I hope
assuredly, An ingenuous Confession of Dr. Crisp our open adversary; some that
extol him may do well to remember it. See Dr. Crisp Assurance of Faith.
that the God of grace and mercy will keep, by his power to Salvation, all
those persons he does deliver; and that he will sow the seeds of grace in their
hearts, that they may not sin (i.) presumingly. And I hope also, God will meet
with such as are disturbers of the truth of Christ, and peace of the Gospel, by
their base and vile conversations: And I shall recommend to them the reading of
the Epistle of Jude, where they may see the fearful wrath of God upon such
persons as abuse the grace of God to sin. O let not the love of Christ thus
manifested, be so basely requited at your hands, seeing the Lord has so freely
loved you, and given Christ to you, that you might be to the praise of the
glory of his grace, in a godly Christian conversation, whereunto you are
ordained. For you are Gods workmanship (says the Apostle) created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
which God has before ordained, that you should walk in them. And I beseech
you always to remember, That you cannot answer the free love of God toward you
any other way, but by showing it in a fruitful conversation in the world;
considering that one end of your Redemption, that Christ who gave himself for
you, might redeem you from all iniquity, and purify you unto himself, Tit. 2
14.
a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Here Is good equity for Duties; the
soul cannot consider her deliverance by the blood of Christ, and by the Spirit
of Christ, but she cries, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? Psalm. 116.12.13.14.1^.
I will take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord: I will
pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his people: O Lord, truly
I am thy servant, I am thy servant and the son of thy handmaid; thou have
loosed my bonds. For a man that has a touch of the loving kindeness of Christ,
and therefore stands ready to speak forth the praise of the glory of his grace,
that has so freely saved him, it must needs be an acceptable service to God in
Christ.

SECT. 2. Of the Insufficiency of Duties.
BUt alas, what are these Duties to my Lord? or what are these Duties in
themselves?

1. All the Duties of man, they are nothing at all unto God: Can a man be
profitable unto God, Job 22.2, 3.
as he that is wise can be profitable unto himself? Is it any pleasure to the
Almighty, that thou art righteous? Or is it gain to him, that thou make thy
ways perfect? If thou be righteous, what give thou him? Job 35.7.
or what receives he from thine hand? O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord,
Thou art my Lord: Psalm. 16.2.
And what then? what recompense to God for this propriety? Nay, David is here
non-pluss'd, My goodness extends not to thee. All the service of men and
Angels, though they run parallel with the longest lines of eternity, are
insufficient recompense for my souls deliverance: When we have done all we can,
still we must say, We are unprofitable servants. Luke 17.10.


2. All the duties of man, as they are done by man, are in that respect sinful:
What is Duty, but man's tie to that which is due? or (if we follow the Latins)
what is Duty, but obedience commanded by God, to be performed by man? Now
wherein any thing is to be done as of man, therein is some mixture of sin: All
our righteousness is as filthy rags, as a menstruous cloth; Isa 64.6.
How? All our righteousness? It is true, whilst a Believers heart is overcast
with gross vapors, and is more then ordinarily dull in hearing, whilst it
flies low and slow in praying, and is somewhat stiff, and untoward in fasting
above measure, such Righteousness goes usually for sin; but if a soul gets
under full sail; if it be filled with a stiff gale of the Spirit of Christ; if
stoods of meltings flow from it; if it cry mightily, be swift to hear, be
greedy in sucking in Divine Truths, and be somewhat exact in observing
practical righteous means, to mourn and pray lustily, being helped by the Spirit
herein: Are such Prayers, Mournings, and other Divine Exercises in any sort
sinful? yes, as there is some mixture of man's infirmity in them; and in our
best Duties there is some such mixture: for all our righteousness is as filthy
rags, as menstruous clothes; I know who has said it, and yet I know not
wherein to contradict it. Christians may distinguish between that which is the
Spirits, Dr. Crisp in his Sermon on Phil. 3.8. A known adversary to the pure
Doctrine of Duties.
in works after renovation, and the whole work after they have done it: Now
although the motions and assistance of the Spirit be pure, holy, and without
skum in the spring, to wit, in it self; yet by that time these motions and
assistance have passed through the channels of their hearts, and have been
mixed with their manifold corruptions in doing, even the whole work thereby
becomes polluted. If this be so, that our best recompense to Christ for his
loves be unprofitable to him, and sinful as done by man, What shall I say? how
must I carry (says the soul) to my Redeemer?

SECT. 3. Of the healing of Duties.
I Dare not but obey; though all the Duties in the world are insufficient to
recompense those bowels of Gods mercies in Christ, I must not therefore cast
away Duties. It is true, I cannot but sin in all I do, my best Duties (nakedly
and barely considered in themselves) are tainted, poisoned, and mingled with
sin: But will it follow, That because I cannot be more clean, therefore I must
be more filthy then needs? Nay, O my soul, if thou art married to that
Bridegroom Christ, Duties and all things else are clean to thee. Dr. Crisp on
Phil. 3.8.
The whole filth and dung of our works, through faith in Christ, is extracted
by Christ, and he presenting the same, purged by himself alone, they are
accepted with God: In this respect there is an healing of Duties, if we be in
Christ. Certainly, that fruit which comes from a root of Faith, Psalm. 116.10.
must needs be good fruit: I believe, therefore I speak, says the Psalmist: O
my soul, can thou say thus? I believe, therefore I pray; I believe, therefore
I sanctify the Lords day; I believe, therefore I do all Duties of obedience:
Thy obedience then is the fruit of Paradise, for it grows on the very Tree of
Life. Mal. 4.2.
Christ is The Sun of Righteousness, that arises with healing in his wings:
Christ is that Sun, that by his heat of love extracts all the filth of sin out
of thy Duties performed; and so thy Duties are healed, the Spiritual part of
them being presented by the intercession of Christ, and the carnal defects
covered by the Righteousness of Christ, in whom the Father is always
well-pleased.

. 1. Of the manner of healing our Duties.
NOw the manner (O my soul) how Christ heals our Duties, it is thus:

1. He takes our persons, and carries them in to God the Father, in a most
unperceivable way to us; he knows, that if our persons be not first accepted,
our Duties cannot be accepted: Love me, and love my Duty; hate me, and hate my
Duty. It is true, that in the Covenant of Works, God first accepted of the
work, and then of the person; but in the Covenant of Grace, God first accepts
of the person, and then of the work: Now therefore, that our works (our Duties)
may be accepted, Christ Jesus our great High Priest first takes our persons,
and carries them into the presence of God the Father: This was plainly shadowed
out to us, by that of the High Priest, Exodus 28 29.
who went into the holy of holiest, with the Names of all the Tribes upon his
breast.

2. As Christ takes our persons, and carries them in to God the Father; so when
we perform Duty, he observes what evil or failing there is in that Duty, and
draws it out, before he presents it to God the Father: As a child that would
present his father with a Posie, he goes into the garden, and gathers flowers
and weed^ together; but coming to his mother, she picks out the weeds, and
binds up the flowers by themselves, and so it is presented to the father. Thus
we go to Duty, and we gather weeds and flowers together, but Christ comes, and
picks out the weeds, and so presents nothing but flowers to God the Father: Who
may abide the day of his coming (said the Prophet of Christ) and who shall
stand when he appears? Mal. 3.2, 3, 4.
for he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap: And he shall sit as a
refiner and purifier of silver, and shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge
them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness; then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto
the Lord: mark, Thou shall their offerings be pleasant: then? when? When he had
purged their sacrifices and their offerings. Thus it was in the days of his
flesh, and much more now.

3. As Christ takes away the iniquity of our holy things, so he observes what
good there is in any of our Duties, and with that he mingles his own Prayers,
Intercessions, Incense, and presents all as one work mingled together unto God
the Father: And another Angel (viz. the Angel of the Covenant) came and stood
at the Altar, having a golden ^c^ser, Rev. 8.3, 4.
and there was given to him much incense, that he should offer it with the
prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the Throne: And
the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up
before God, out of the Angels hand.

. 2. The Souls Quaere's in this case.
Duties performed with many fillings, infirmities, hardness of heart,
straitness of Spirit, distracting thoughts? and is there any healing for such a
Duty as this?

Duty we perform, there are two things; there is the sacrifice, and there is
the obedience in offering of the sacrifice; the sacrifice may be imperfect, and
yet our obedience in offering the sacrifice may be perfect with Gospel
perfection. Secondly, God deals with our Duties as with our persons; though he
find a great deal of ungodliness in them, yet he imputes his righteousness
unto them, and so he justifies our Duties, which in our eyes are most ungodly.
This indeed is a wonder; did we ever hear or read of any seal, that when it was
set upon the wax, would change the wax into its own metal? or did we ever hear
or read of any stamp, that being set upon brass, it would change the brass into
silver, or being set upon silver, it would change the silver into gold? O but
when Christ comes unto a Duty, and sets his own stamp, and his own
righteousness upon a Duty, that which was brass before, (i.) full of failings,
and much unrighteousness, he changes it into silver, into gold; he only has
the Philosophers Stone (as I may so speak) and all that Christ touches, it
presently turns into gold; he turns all our Duties into golden Duties, and so
presents them unto God the Father.

Duties and heals them, and mingles them with his own incense, and carries them
in unto God the Father?

Duty, or after Duty? In the times of the Old Testament, if they offered up a
sacrifice, and a material fire came down from heaven, and burnt up the
sacrifice to ashes, it was a certain testimony that the sacrifice was accepted:
Now in the times of the Gospel, we must not expect material fire to come down
upon our Duties, but has the Lord at any time caused an inward and Spiritual
fire to fall down upon thy heart, warming thy Spirit in Duty? there the Lord
speaks thus much to thee, That thy sacrifice is turned into ashes, and it is
accepted by Jesus Christ.



our Great high Priest; it is the efficacy of his blood, and power of his
glorious intercession, that when thou feel any good in Duties, does at that
very instant prevail with God the Father for what thou feel: say then, Do I
now in this Ordinance, or in this Duty, feel my heart warmed, or savingly
affectect? O I see, I am bound to believe, that the Lord Jesus who sits in
glory at the right hand of God, now, now he remembers me a poor worm on earth;
now I feel the fruit of his death and intercession in Heaven; now I feel his
spirit, power, grace, comfort, presence, sweetness; now I taste, I drink, I
enjoy, and am abundantly satisfied with his rivers of pleasures: And if this
presence of Christ be so sweet, what is himself then? O my soul, if ever thou
do thus relish the blood and spirit of Christ upon thy spirit in Duties, go
thy way, and give glory to God.

SECT. 4. No resting in Duties.
ANd yet be wary, O my soul: It was Luthers saying, Take heed not only of thy
sins, but also of thy good Duties; they are apt (by reason of our corruption)
to bring men into themselves, and this is very dangerous. Certainly, a man may
not only exclude Christ from his soul by gross sins, but by self-confidence:
You are they which justify your selves, Luke 16.15.
said Christ to the Pharisees. Take a profane man, what makes him drink,
swear, cozen, game, whore? Is there no God to punish? Is there no Hell hot
enough to torment? Are there no Plagues to confound him? Yes: Why sins he then?
Oh! he prays to God for forgiveness; he sorrows, and repents in secret (as he
says) and this bears him out in his lewd prancks. Take a Moral man, he knows
he has his failings, and his sins, as the best have, and is overtaken
sometimes as the best are; Why does he not remove these sins then? Why is he
not more humbled under his sins? The Reason is, he constantly observes Evening
and Morning prayer, and then he craves forgiveness for his failings, by which
course he hopes to make his peace with God: And hence he sins without fear,
and rises out of his fall into sin without sorrow; he maintains his sins by
his Duties.

Take a Professor, such a one as may be exceedingly troubled about his sins, as
endeavors very much after Mourning, Repenting, Reforming, and others commend
him for a diligent Christian, Do you not see how he mourns, and weeps, and
prays? and now the wind is over, the tempest down, and there is a great calm in
his soul, how comes he to this quiet? Oh! his affections were enlarged, he has
reached so high, as to a very proportion of repentance, and tears, and sorrow,
and fasting, etc. and this has given him ease, this has took away the
burden, and laid his soul at rest: O poor soul, is this all the remedy to rid
thee of the sting and guilt of sin? Have thou no more pantings, but only after
bitterness, heaviness, mourning, melting, extraordinary inlargements? Why then,
let me tell thee, all thy righteousness (though it were more perfect then it
is) is but a filthy rag. Isa. 64.6.
Could thou weep thy heart out, should thy heart melt like wax, Shepherds
sincere Convert.
dissolve into water; Could thou desire and pray till heaven and earth shook*
till thou had worn thy tongue to the stumps; Could thou fast till thy skin
and bones cleave together; Could thou promise and purpose with full
resolution to be better; Could thou reform thy heart, head, life, tongue,
some, nay all sins; Could thou live like an Angel, shine like a Sun, walk up
and down the world like a distressed Pilgrim; Coulst thou dye ten thousand
deaths, lie at the fire back in Hell so many many millions of years, as there
be piles of grass on the earth, or sands on the sea shore, or stars in heaven,
or motes in the Sun; I tell thee, not one spark of Gods wrath against thy sins,
can be quenched by all these Duties, nor by any of these sorrows or tears.

It was Austins saying, though it sounds harsh, that Repentance damns more then
Sin; meaning, that thousands did perish by resting therein: It is no digging
within our selves, for power to leave sin, to be more holy, and humble, and
religious, and conscientious, and so to think to work out our selves in time
out of this state: The words which the Prophet put into Isreal's mouth, if they
would truly turn unto God, Hos. 14.2.
were these, -- Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, q.d. We
will trust no more to these outward means, we will not save our selves by our
graces, or our abilities.

But how shall any man know, that he rests in his Duties?

I answer, By these signs following:

Signs of man's resting in Duties. Shepherds sincere Convert.
1. It is a sign that a man rests in his Duties, if he never found it a hard
matter to come out of his Duties: Examine, if thou never yet saw, if thou
can not tell the time when thou did rest in Duties, and then did groan to
be delivered from these intanglements, thou have just cause to fear.

2. It is a sign that a man rests in Duties, if he exceedingly prize the bare
performance of Duties; those Duties that carry thee out of thy self unto
Christ, make thee to prize Christ: Now tell me, Do thou glory in thy self?
Do thou say, Now I am some body? I was before ignorant, forgetful,
hard-hearted, but now I understand better, now I can sorrow for my sins, I can
pray with some life, now I have done very well. Alas poor soul! if thou restest
here, if thou thus inhancest the price of Duties, that thou beginn'st to dote
on them, then do I pronounce from God, Ph^l. 3.8.
That thou do rest in Duties: These things (says Paul) I accounted gain (i.
before his conversion) but now I account them loss: This is the reason why a
child of God commonly after his prayers doubts much of Gods love toward him;
whereas another man that falls short of him, never so much as questions his
estate: The first sees much rottenness and vileness in his best Duties, and so
adjudgeth meanly of himself; but the other is ignorant of any such vileness,
and therefore he prizeth and esteems highly of them.

3. It is a sign that a man rests in his duties, if he never came to be
sensible of their poverty, and utter emptiness of any good in them. Did thou
never feel thy self in this manner? Oh! I am as ignorant as any beast, as vile
as any devil; what a nest and litter of sin and rebellion works in my heart? I
once thought, at least, my heart and desires were good, but now I feel no
spiritual life; O dead heart, I am the poorest, vilest, basest and blindest
creature that ever lived! If thou never feel thy self thus, thou never
came out of thy Duties.

4. It is a sign that a man rests in his Duties, if he gain no Evangelical
Righteousness by Duties (i.) if he prize not, desire not, delight not in union
with the Lord Jesus Christ: Hence a child of God asks himself after Sermon,
after Prayer, after Sacrament, What have I gained of Christ? Have I got more
knowledge of Christ? more admiring of the Lord Jesus Christ? on the contrary, a
carnal heart, that rests in his Duties, asks only, What have I done? Luke
18.12.
I thank God (said the Pharisee) I am not as other men are, -- I fast twice in
the week I give tithes of all that I possess: So, I pray, and hear, and reform,
and sorrow for sin, therefore I think verily I shall be saved; no such matter:
let a man have a Bucket of Gold, does he think to get water, because he has a
Bucket; no, no, he must let it down into the well, and draw up water with it:
So must thou let down all thy Duties into the Lord Jesus Christ, and draw life,
and light from his fullness, otherwise (though thy Duties be golden Duties) thou
shall perish without Christ.

SECT. 5. Of the Use and Ends of Duties.
ANd can thou not, O my Soul, be saved by thy Duties? to what end should
thou pray, or hear, or sorrow, or repent, or meditate, or examine, or confer? I
answer, There are many ends and purposes, for which Christians may, and must
perform Duties.

1. That herein, and hereby, they may express their obedience to Gods will: 1 Thessalonians. 5.16, 17, 18.
Rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, in every thing give thanks, for this
is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you (says the Apostle;) and this
was the ground of David's inference, Psalm. 119 4, 5.
Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently: And what then? O that
my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.

2. That God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ may be honored by the
performance of these Duties: Herein is my Father glorified, John 15.8.
that you bear much fruit; and as the Apostle, Ye are a chosen Generation, 1
Pet. 2 9.
a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that ye should show
forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness into his
mavelous light; Abraham believed, and gave God glory: So we should pray, and
meditate, and hear, and all should tend to the glory of God. Indeed, Hypocrites
ayms are at other ends, by giving alms, and praying, Mat. 6.2.5.16.
and fasting, that they may have glory of men, -- That they may be seen of men,
-- That they may appear unto men, -- But the child of God ayms at the glory of
God. I confess, it s Gods grace to account of man's Duty as his glory, seeing it
is so defective.

3. That Duties may be as Evidences of Gods everlasting love to them who are in
Christ Jesus: They cannot save, but they let the foul into Christ, and follow,
and accompany such a man as shall be saved. We hear of some that boast of joys,
feeling, gifts, Spirit, Sheph. ibid.
and Grace; but if they walk in the commission of any one sin, or in the
omission of any one known duty, or in the slovenly illfavored performance of
Duties, they can have no assurance (say what they please) without slattering of
themselves: If these things be in you (says Peter) and abound, 2 Pet. 1.8, 9,
10.
they will make you that you shall never be barren, or unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; and he that lacks these things is blind:
-- Wherefore, Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure.
Duties bring you in to Christ, and are Evidences when you are in Christ, that
the Lord and mercy is yours, even as at the Sacrament, the Elements of Bread
and Wine are outward signs to bring Christ and the heart together; indeed, the
heart must not rest in these signs, but when the soul is let in to Christ, then
Faith must let go the outward Elements, and close, and treat immediately with
the Lord Jesus Christ. So Grace and Duties are signs inward, and whiles men
make use of them only, as bare signs, to let them come in unto Christ, and
their rejoicing is not in them, but in Christ, their confidence is not pitched
upon them, but upon Christ, there is and will be no danger at all in making
such use of signs; especially seeing in nature, the effect is a sign of the
cause: Neither is it more derogatory to Free Grace, or to Christ's honor, for
God to make such effects Signs of our union with him, then it was to make
outward Signs of his presence: It Is true, these are not full testimonies
without the Spirit of Christ.

4. That they that use and exercise Duties may obtain the Promises: 1 Timothy 4 8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things (says the Apostle) having the
promises of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. There are many
Promises scattered up and down in the Word, and hereby if God be not a debtor
unto thee, yet he is to himself, and to his own faithfulness. Reddis debita,
nulli debens, cried Austine; Thou Lord payest debts, and owe to none; it was
free for thee before thou had promised, whether to to give me heaven, or no:
but now the word is out of thy mouth, I use Duties as means, though I adhere
only to thee, and to thy faithfulness, who have promised. To prevent mistake,
Duties are considered in a double relation: First, as services, in respect of
the command; and Secondly, as means to obtain and procure blessings at Gods
hands, in relation to his promise: Now the most in the world perform Duties as
acts of obedience only, and so rest in the present performance; but if we do
them in Faith, we shall have an eye to the Promise, and look on Duties as means
to obtain some mercy, yea, Salvation it self at Gods hands, Phil. 2.12. Phil.
2.12.
Romans 10.10. Romans 10.10.
2 Cor. 7.10. 2 Cor. 7.10.
1 Pet. 1.9. 1 Pet. 1.9.


But is not this to be saved by Duties?

No such thing: For herein we speak not of Duties originally, or per se, but
instrumentally, and with relation to the Lord Jesus Christ; not as meritorious
causes, but as subordinate means of our salvation in the name of Christ: The
best of Duties carry no such luster, beauty, and Energetical virtue in their
own faces and natures; they are but mere empty pits, and dry channels (of
themselves) though never so curiously cut out, but Christ fills them (and as
some desire Ministers to do) so I am willing for my part to say and express
thus much of Christ, Dr. Crisp on Phil. 3.8.
that the people may clearly understand and remember so much, and be guided
explicitly to the Fountain it self, Christ alone.

5. That these Duties may turn to our comforts: Not so, as to put confidence in
them, to take comfort from them as a cause; that cannot be, for who can look
upon any thing he does with that boldness? but as the testimony of Gods eternal
love to us. 2 King. 20.3.
Thus Hezekiah, not as a proud Pharisee, but as a thankful acknowledger of what
was in him, prayed, I beseech thee, O Lord, remember me, how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight: Some suppose, that such a temptation as this might fall on
Hezekiah, that when he had labored to demolish all those Superstitions, and now
became dangerously sick, that he had not done well; and therefore he comforts
himself in his heart, That he did those things with a perfect heart, not
absolutely, but comparatively perfect: We may therefore take comfort from
Duties, not so as to rest in them, but so as to praise God thereby. It Is a good
way, nesciendo scire, in not knowing, to know, that so we may praise God for
them; and sciendo nescire, in knowing, not to know, that so we may be humble in
our selves.

6. That others might receive good, and thereby be occasioned to glorify God:
Tit. 3.8. Mat. 5.16.
These things are good, and profitable unto men, says the Apostle; and, Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven. Christ does not here encourage vain glory, but
he propounds the true ends of our visible holiness; for godliness being light,
it ought not (in suitable Duties) to be hid under a bushel: My goodness
extends not to thee, Psalm. 16.2, 3.
but to the Saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all
my delight. Hierome said of Augustine, That he loved Christ dwelling in
Augustine; so ought we to walk, that others may love Christ dwelling in us.

There Is an Exhortation to wives, so to walk, 1 Pet. 3.1.
that their husbands may he won to the Lord: Sweet soul, it may be thou prayest
for thy husband, in a carnal condition, thou desire him to go to hear such a
Minister, such a Sermon; go on in these Duties, adding this to the rest, See
that thy life also may convert him.

7. That Duties may carry us to the Lord Jesus, Heb. 7.25.
the only Savior; he alone is able to save them to the uttermost that come
unto God by him (i.) in the use of the means: Hear a Sermon to carry thee to
the Lord Jesus; Fast, and pray, Shepherd ibid.
and get a full tide of affections in them, to carry thee to the Lord Jesus
Christ (i.) to get a more love of him, more acquaintance with him, more union
in him, and communion with him; use thy Duties, as Noah's Dove did her wings, to
carry thee to the Ark of the Lord Jesus Christ, where only there is rest: If
she had never used her wings, she had fallen in the waters; and if she had not
returned to the Ark, she had found no rest: So, if thou shall use no Duties,
but cast them all off, thou art sure to perish; and if they convey thee not to
Christ, thou may lie down in sorrow: or as it is with a poor man, that is to
get over a great water for a treasure on the other side, though he cannot fetch
the Boat, he calls for it, and uses it, to carry him over to the treasure: So
Christ is in heaven, and thou on earth, he does not come to thee, and thou
can not get to him, now call for a Boat; though there is no grace, no good,
no salvation in a pithless Duty, yet use it to carry thee over to the treasure,
The Lord Jesus Christ: When thou come to hear, say, Have over, Lord, by this
Sermon; when thou come to pray, say. Have over, Lord, by this Prayer to a
Savior: But this is the misery of people, like foolish Lovers, when they are to
woo for the Lady, they fall in love with her Handmaid, that is only to lead
them to her: So men fall in love with, and dote upon their own Duties, and rest
contented with the naked performance of them, which are only Handmaids, to
lead the soul unto the Lord Jesus Christ.

8. That the Lord Christ may be exalted, and advanced by Duties. The main end
of Duties, is the glory of him who has Redeemed us with the price of his
blood, and by the power of his Spirit; this sets the Crown on his head: Behold
King Solomon, Cant. 3.11.
with the Crown wherewith his mother crowned him. How many perform Duties, not
to set the Crown on Christ's head, but to set the Crown on their own heads? So
do hypocrites, that seek their own praise, and credit, and profit; so do all,
especially that do any thing with a conceit of meriting at Gods hands. Now this
is the main end of right obedience, That the Crown may be set on Christ's head,
that he who is King of Saints, may have the honor given him, due to his Kingly
Office. In this respect, I cannot blame them who blame others, for crying up,
and magnifying man's works in their own name. To say that Christ is always
supposed as principal, Dr. Crisp in Phil. 3.8.
is no sufficient Apology: For why only supposed? why not he named, as well as
Duties, and Righteousness? Certainly, it is not good manners (to say no worse)
to forget him, whiles his poor Instruments are so highly remembered. When
Servants bring Presents from their Masters to any, they do not say, I bestow
such and such a thing on you, but, My Master sends it you; if he should take it
on himself, he should go for an arrogant fellow: nor will it salve the matter,
when he is taxed for such arrogance, to say, My Master should have been
supposed, when he gave no hint of him. Me think it were comely (says the
Author rightly in this) in extolling of Man's Righteousness, explicitly to
ascribe all the praise to the glory of Christ, Mr. Burges Vindiciae legir.
and his grace: And, I see not (says another ingeniously) but that Ministers
may be humbled, that they have pressed religious Duties, but not so as to set
up Christ: and hereby people have been content with Duties, and Sacraments,
though no Christ in them: but as vessels were to be of pure Gold in the Temple,
so ought all our Duties to be of pure and mere Christ for acceptance. Again,
If Bernard said, He did not love to read Tully, because he could not read the
Name of Christ there; how much rather may we say, That in many Sermons, in many
a man's Ministry, the drift and end of all his preaching is not, that Christ
may be advanced. And again, Let Christ be the matter of our Righteousness and
Comfort, more then he has been; you know the posts that were not sprinkled
with blood, were sure to be destroyed, and so are all those persons and duties
that have not Christ upon them. How sweet is the harmony of Dissenting
Brethren? Me thinks, I would not lose a shred of that gold which both Authors
(so strongly my heart beats and pants after unity) give out to be weight in the
Balance of the Sanctuary: It is observed by the former, That when the Church
grew into credit, then Religio peperit Divinitas and filia devoravit matrem; I
may as truly say, Christus peperit Justitiam, and filia devoravit matrem: just
as if a King should promote a Favorite, and then he should be so applauded for
his usefulness to the Subjects, that the King must be dethroned, and he Crowned
in his place: -- In all exigences, wants and extremities, how few followers
has Christ himself? how rarely are men sent to shelter themselves under the
shadow of his wings? In the mean while, what hideous outcryes for Prayers,
Mournings, Fastings, etc. to help men at a dead lift? What sending and posting
to them in extremities, as if they kept a Court by themselves? for Christ is
seldom heard of, at least not set up so high as to do all; and that this
Righteousness is but merely his ministering servant: What the Apostle said of
himself, I may as truly say of the best Righteousness best assisted, What is
Prayer, Mourning, Fasting, Hearing, but ministers by whom ye believed, and
received mercy? 1 Cor. 3.5.
and if but as ministers at best, shall they be greater then the Lord? Let me
not be mistaken, I intend no derogation to Righteousness, but the bringing of
it into it is own place, namely, that it is to be used as that, where according
to Christ's directions we may meet with him, from whose hands alone we may
expect whatever we pant after, according to his will; reserving a submission to
be disposed of otherwise, if he see fit. Again, it is not the Spiritualness,
nor the fervency in the performance of Duties that carries it, but when Duties
are performed as to the Lord, and for the Lord, and not to and for our selves;
O my soul, in respect of all these ends, use and exercise Duties, but be sure
of Christ in all, above all, more then all: O let Christ have the Crown set on
his head, give him all the glory. Cast not away Duties, but cast them down at
the feet of Jesus Christ, as the Twenty four Elders cast their Crowns, saying,
Thou art worthy, Rev. 4.11.
O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou have created all
things (all Duties) and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

SECT. 6. Of the Saints abilities or power to do Duties.
Psalm. 77.10.
But alas, how should I perform my Duty? by nature I am dead, and except God
give me an heart and strength, what can I do? There is no power in my hands, I
am nothing in my self, and therefore till God come, or naked Christ come, I
will sit down in discouragements; Let God do all, I see I have no ability at
all, etc.

this is thine infirmity; these conclusions are ill drawn from a true
Principle: It is true, all is of God, and by nature I am dead; but it is ill
urged in this case, for that the Regenerate have in them a Seed, a Spiritual
Principle, a power to do good: First, because such are living, and all life is
a power to act. 2. Else there is no specifical difference betwixt a man
regenerate and unregenerate, if both were still dead, and without strength. 3.
Grace is a renewing of that image of God and Holiness which we lost in Adam;
but that was a power to do what God required, Ephesians. 4.24.
therefore so far as that image is repaired, so far there is power. 4. Else we
should not have as much benefit by the second Adam, as we had by the first: for
the first would have communicated his power to do good, and being corrupted,
does communicate power to do sin; therefore much more by Christ have we a life,
a power to do good in our measure.

John 15.5. Sol. (...) sco^sm a me. Calv. John 15.5.
It may be objected, Without me ye can do nothing.

The meaning is, Except ye be implanted into me, ye can do nothing: The word
[Without me] signifies, Separate from me, or apart from me; and intimates
this only, That till we are knit unto Christ, we are but dead, and barren
branches, and so Christ explains himself, As the branch cannot bring forth
fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide
in me.

Phil 2.13.
It may be objected again, It is God that works, both to will and to do of his
good pleasure.

A seed, a spring, a principle of life, a power; but on the contrary, it
affirms, That they have a power, only that this power is of God: We should
work out our salvation in humility, not boasting in our own selves, for all is
received of God: More fully, God is said to work the will and the deed, 1. By
giving a principle of Spiritual life, habitual grace, a renewed frame of heart.
2. By exciting and strengthening this grace: and both these are ever afforded to
the Saints, only the latter is more or less, according to his pleasure: So
that in the worst times, a Believer has power to do good, though not alike at
all times; and this power we must use, and put forth our selves as we are able,
or we cannot with reason expect his help. A Ship has instruments of motion
(though not an internal principle) and if the Mariner would have help by the
winds, he must loose his Cables, and hoise his Sails; so must we, or else we
may lie still.

Now that which we are to do, is, --

First, To stir up our selves; for God has promised to meet us, and to reach
out his hand to help us, if we be not wanting to our selves: It is certain, a
godly man cannot by his own endeavors alone raise up his soul, nor recover his
loss, though he should lay Mountain upon Mountain, and pile endeavors upon
endeavors; yet as endeavors without God cannot, so God without endeavors will
not help us herein, and therefore labor we to quicken our selves (i.) work we
upon our own hearts, by our understandings; as the striking of the Flint and
Steel together begets fire, so the meeting of these two faculties, having an
internal life in them, do quicken the soul. Thus we see David pleading with
himself, sometimes chiding, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? Psalm. 42.5. Psalm 103.1.
sometimes exciting himself to Duty, Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that
is within me, praise his holy Name: sometimes comforting himself in God, Turn
to thy rest, O my soul, Psalm. 116.7.
for God has dealt bountifully with thee: It was an usual thing for him to
talk with himself, and he found so much good in this way, that he puts all upon
it, Commune with your own hearts upon your beds, Psalm. 4 4.
and be still; the understanding is to the heart, as the stomach to the body,
all is fed by it: Set therefore upon our hearts with quickening thoughts: for as
rubbing and chafing the hands with hot Oils, is a means to recover them, when
they are benumbed; so the plying of the heart with stirring thoughts, and
enforcing arguments, is a means to revive it: And amongst all thoughts, there
are none more prevalent, then Of sins past, Of Heaven, Hell, Eternity, Love of
Christ, these are strong Cordials to cheer up the Spirits.

2. To fall on the Duty; for if we be doing, he will work with us, in us, and
for us. Is it thus (O my soul) that thy heart is stirred, rowzed, revived? then
set to thy hands, idle beggars must be whipped, he that will not work, must not
eat: Remember, we have a life in us, if we be in Christ; and as we have a life,
so there is a never-failing presence of the Spirit, to attend that power which
we have: If then we put forth our selves to that we are able, and as far as our
power extends, God will draw near to us. It is true, that which we want is out
of our reach, we are not able to make crooked things to become straight, to lay
those swelling Mountains of Corruption level, but yet we must set to the work:
Joshua could not with the strength of Rams horns sounding, cast down the walls
of Jericho, but yet he must set upon the work; when the Midianites fall, there
must be The Sword of the Lord, Judge. 7.18.
and Gideon: The father holds an Apple to the child, the child cannot reach
it, yet his short arm must be put forth, and then the father, whose arm is long
enough, will reach it to him; we must be doing, and yet when all is done, our
hearts must learn habitually to say, Not I, but Christ in me: Let us still
interest Christ in all we do, as the efficient-final cause.

SECT. 7. Of the Saints delights in Duties.
Mat. 11.30.
MY yoke is easy, and my burden is light, says Christ; and that which makes
it so, is, The delights which the Saints have in Gods service: Psalm.
119.14.16.24.47.117.143.
I have delighted in the way of thy testimonies, says David: I have? yes, and
I will delight in thy statutes: I will? yes, and Thy testimonies are my
delight: They are? yes, and My delight shall be in thy Commandments: They shall
be? how long? even to perpetuity it self; I will delight continually in thy
statutes. These are the strings David beats upon, and they make heavenly
Music; Music even cheering him in the midst of his sorrows: 92.
Trouble and anguish are upon me, yet are thy Commandments my delight: and,
Unless thy Law had been my delight, I should have perished in my affliction.

Now the reason why Gods people find such delight in Duties, is, 1. Because in
Duties they come to see the face of God in Christ: Hence Duties are called The
face or presence of God; Exodus 23.17.
the Worship of the Jews was called, An appearing before God: David breathes
out his desires in the same expression, When shall I come and appear before
God? Psalm. 42.2.
The Queen of Sheba counted it an high favor to stand before Solomon, What high
favor then is this to stand before Jesus Christ, and to hear wisdom it self
speak to our souls? 2. Because in Duties they have converses, and communion
with God, who is the God of all Consolation; and with the Spirit of God, who is
called the Comforter: Now as a man that walks amongst Perfumes, must needs
smell of the Perfume; so they that converse with the God of all joy, must needs
be filled with all joy: and therefore David calls God His exceeding joy. The
Saints look upon Duties (the Word, Psalm. 43 4.
Sacraments, Prayers, etc.) as Bridges to give them a passage to God, as Boats
to carry them into the bosom of Christ, as means to bring them into more
intimate communion with their heavenly Father, and therefore are they so much
taken with them: When they go to the Word, they go as one goes to hear news of
a friend; when they go to Pray, they go to talk with a friend; when they go to
Read, they go to read a Letter from a friend; when they go to receive, they go
to Sup with a friend: They look upon Duties and Ordinances, as those things
whereby they have to do with God and Christ, and therefore are Duties so
precious. Indeed, to them who have to do with nothing but Duty in Duty, but
Prayer in Prayer, but Hearing in Hearing, to them Duties are dead, and dry, and
spiritless things; but they that have to do with God and Christ in Duty, to
them Duties are passing sweet and precious. This seems a Riddle to unregenerate
men, they wonder what the Saints find in Duties, where the sweetness, what the
comfort is, what secret golden Mines they find in these diggings, when
themselves find nothing, but burthensom Stones, and Clay: Oh! the Saints meet
with Christ in Duties, and therefore they cannot but find great treasure:
David's soul was athirst, not for a Kingdom, but for God, for the living God,
Psalm. 42.2. It is the highest reward, Psalm. 42.2.
the very wages which the Saints look for in Duties, to find God in them:
Psalm. 65.4.
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that
he may dwell in thy Courts: We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy Temple.

A good Caveat in these days, when so many do cry down Duties: What, My
Brethren, Shall we look upon that as our burden, which is our delight? our
bondage, which is our Privilege? What is the happiness of a glorified Saint,
but that he is always under the line of love, ever in the contemplation of, and
converses with God? And shall that be thought our burden here, which is our
glory hereafter? Take heed of this; take heed you do not think it an hell, a
pain, a vexation, to be in God-approaching, and Christ-meeting Duties. I know
weariness may be upon the flesh, there are weaknesses, and distempers there,
but chide them away, entertain them not: Number it among your choysest
Privileges, Comforts, Delights, to converse with God in Christ: Consider if
there be an Heaven, it is the very presence of this God in Christ. Hence they
who meet with God in duty, usually find their hearts sweetly refreshed, as if
Heaven were in them: Psalm. 16.11.
For in thy presence there is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand there are
pleasures evermore.

But if there be such delight in Duties, what is the reason that wicked men
account it a wearisomness, and burden, and snuff at it: Mal. 1.13.
Behold, what a weariness is it? and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord.

Duty, he is like a fish out of his Element; the Duty is heavenly and
Spiritual, but he is worldly and natural, no wonder therefore he delights not
in it. But more particularly, a wicked man delights not in Duties, --

1. Because of his ignorance of the worth and excellency of Duties, he cannot
possibly delight in what he knows not: So much as we know, so much we desire
and delight, and no more.

2. Because of his infidelity: Faith is the main organ of comfort, and
therefore no wonder (as it was said of the Jews) if the word preached do not
profit him, Heb. 4.2.
not being mixed with faith in him that heard it.

3. Because of the absence of the all-seeing and quickening Spirit: It is the
Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; Ioh 6.63.
the words that I speak to you are Spirit and life: As the Body is dead without
the Spirit, so Duties without Christ's quickening Spirit, are dead and lifeless.

But if there be such delight in Duties, what is the reason that the Saints
themselves do miss of their comforts in Duties

Duties, or from Duties. 2. If at any time they miss of comfort, it is because
they do not meet with God, whom they came to converse withal: As when a man
goes to meet with a friend, and meets him not, he comes away sadded in his
Spirit; so when a child of God comes to some Duty, hoping to enjoy sweet
communion with God in it, and then fails of his expectation, this must needs
fill him full of sadness. It was an excellent speech of Bernard, I never go
from God without God; happy Christian, Nunquam abs te recedo Domine sinc te.
that when he goes to converse with God in some Duty, can say, I never go from
God without God; I never go to God, but I meet with God; and, I never go from
God, but I carry God with me.

But if no comfort, no delight without God in our Duties, What then is my case,
that have no sense, no feeling of Gods presence in Duties? When I have done all
I can, methinks I cannot find God, I cannot meet with Christ.

Duties; as, Much liberty of Spirit, much Joy, much Peace, assurance of Faith.
2. There are more inward and reserved fruits of his presence; as, Sense of
want, sorrow for want, desire of enjoyment, willingness unto further Duties, to
find that which we want in some other: In the former, God is with us, and we
know he is with us; in the latter, God is with us, and we know not so much:
This was the case of the two Disciples going to Emmaus, Their eyes were holden,
Luke 24.16.
that they could not know Christ; yet afterward when they did know him, they
remembered, that they had sufficient evidence of his presence, even when they
knew him not, Luke 24.32.
Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and
opened to us the Scriptures? Now whence was that fire, but from the Spirit of
Christ conveyed in his Word?

But what is the reason that Gods people do sometimes miss of Gods comfortable
presence in Duties?

vessels at all to hold the Consolations of God; I mean, no hunger after Gods
presence in the Ordinance: or 2. Because they bring vessels so little, and so
narrow-mouthed, that they will hold but very little water; I mean, they bring
so little hunger after God, that God will not vouchsafe to satisfy it: or 3.
Because they bring their ordinary hearts, their carnal and worldly hearts to
heavenly and Spiritual Duties, hearts unsuitable to the Duties, hearts
unsensible of the Duties: Thus a man finds no sweetness in his meat; the
reason is not, Because his meat is unsavory, but Because his taste is
distempered; the Ordinances are sometimes sweet, and wound always be so, were
the souls palate always in the same temper: or 4. Because there is some Achan
unstoned, some sin unrepented of that eclipseth the light of Gods countenance,
some Spiritual obstructions; these, and such like are the causes, why the
Saints sometimes miss of their comforts. -- But the fault is never in the Duty,
which is brim-full of rare and ravishing comfort; Beatum me predicarem, etc.
Sed rara hora, brevis mora, oh si duraret. Bernard.
that as Bernard relates the story of himself, Sometimes when he went to his
Prayers, he found himself dull, and heavy; but after he had strugled a little
with his dullness, all on a sudden he was visited with the visitations of the
Almighty: I should account my self happy (said he) if these visitations would
always last; but Oh, it continues but a while! And Austine relates this story
of himself, that Upon a time, when he and his Mother Monica were discoursing
together about the joys of Heaven, and the comforts of Gods Spirit, they were
so filled with joy, that Austine uses these words, Quam mundus eviluit cum
omnibus suis delectationibus. August.
Lord, thou know in that day, how vilely we did esteem of the world, with
all his delights. -- The comforts of the world are not worthy to be named that
day that we speak of these comforts: O the pure, the undefiled comforts and
delights that are to be found in Duties, when God is found in them: Can a man
who is cold, come to the fire and not be warmed? Can he that is in the dark,
come into the open Sun and not be enlightened? God is the spring of Comfort,
and therefore surely our hearts will be comforted, if we meet with God in our
Duties.

SECT. 8. Of the essential Requisites in Duties.
BUt what are they we call Duties? or what are those essential Requisites (O my
soul) in Duties? Many by Duties intend nothing but that which is external and
sensible, as Coming to the Church, and receiving of Sacraments, etc.

I answer, These are like clothes upon a dead man, that cannot warm him,
because there is no life within: The soul of all Duties is that which is
internal, or essential; In which respect three ingredients are necessary, viz.

That they be From God. Through God. To God.


1. From God: It is of the very essence of a Duty, that it be commanded by God.
Hence in one Chapter we read thirteen several times, I am the Lord; q. d. such
and such Commands I enjoin you: Would you know the grounds? I am the Lord, Lev.
19.
a God of sovereign Power and Authority, and my Will it is that such Duties be
done. Look to this (O my soul) in thy Duties, know the Commands, and do them,
because they are commanded: If thou do them, and yet know not that God
commands them, this is no true obedience; or if thou know they are
commanded, but yet do them not because they are commanded, or in Conscience
to his Command, neither is this obedience to God. In all Duties rightly
performed, there must be a knowledge of, and an eye to the will of our God,
Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 5.17. Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 5.17.


2. Through God (i.) Through the Spirit, who does Spiritualize them. Through
Christ, who presents them, and makes them acceptable to God.


1. Through the Spirit of God: Now the Spirit works on our Spirits, stirs up
the regenerate part to the performance of our Duties; and therefore look how
much there is of the Inner man, of the regenerate part, of the holy Spirit in
Duty, so far it is sanctified, so far it is accepted, and no further. God is my
witness (says Paul) whom I serve with my Spirit in the Gospel of his Son: Romans
1.9.
In every service we perform, our Spirit stirred up by Gods Spirit, must needs
have a hand in it, or it is but the body and carcass of a right service: The
soul, will, and affection, must go together with our Duties (that I mean by our
Spirit) or the vitals are wanting. Ex. gr. If a man come to confess his sins,
and yet slights them inwardly in his heart; if a man pray for reconciliation
with God, and yet have no longing, and sighing in his heart after it; if he
earnestly ask grace, or the Spirit of Mortification, and yet his heart does not
inwardly seek it, Now he prays not in the Spirit, and therefore God will not
accept it; For God is a Spirit, John 4.24.
and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth: In Spirit
(i.) not only in the understanding and mind (Prayer is not a work of wit, or
of memory) but also in will and affection: When all within us is opened, and
explicate, and exposed to the view of the Lord; when we call in all our
thoughts and affections, and recollect them together, as the lines in the
Center, or as the Sunbeams in a Burning-glass, That makes Prayer to be hot and
fervent; whereas otherwise it is but a cold and dissipated thing, that has no
strength or efficacy in it.

If this spiritualness in Duties be so necessary, how is it that the Saints
have so much of earth and flesh ordinarily in their Duties?

Flesh and Spirit; It may be the Flesh lies uppermost, and the Spirit lies in
the bottom, so that a man, though a Saint, may hear carnally, receive carnally,
pray carnally, that is, when the flesh has gotten the upper hand, as in some
fits it may, when the mind is filled with worldly sorrow, worldly rejoicing,
and worldly desires; such Duties the Lord regards not, be the man never so
holy: But if the regenerate part be acted and stirred up by Gods Spirit, and
the Flesh that always hinders, be removed by the same Spirit, then are the
Saints able to do their Duties to God in Christ Jesus Spiritually.

2. Through Christ: For Christ perfects, perfumes, and presents our Duties to
his heavenly Father; as Duties come from us, they savor of flesh, but the Angel
of the Covenant mingleth much Incense with them, Rev. 8.3.
and so he offers them upon the golden Altar, which is before the Throne. Here
is sweet comfort (O my soul) What though thy Duties are weak, and cold, and
confused, full of distempers, and damps? yet through Christ they are fortified,
and enlivened, with his pacifying perfection, and intercessory Spirit: Through
Christ they are perfumed with the precious odours of his fresh-bleeding Merits,
and blessed Mediation, and so they are made acceptable to God, that he may
receive them, that he may not refuse and reject them.

Observe here a double Intercessor: One is the Spirit, that helps our
infirmities. The other is Christ, that makes them acceptable to God.


3. To God: (i.) to set forth his Glory, and Free Grace; for as his Name is
blasphemed when we walk in wickedness, so it is glorified in doing our Duties:
This is the end of all our Duties, indeed of all our doings; Whether ye eat or
drink, 1 Cor. 10.31.
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God: One Duty sanctifying Christ
and Free Grace in the heart, is more then a thousand. Young Christians it may be
do more works, but not as works of grace; the more Evangelical our works are,
and the more to God (for that is the end of the Gospel, to honor Christ and
Free Grace) the better they are: We are of the Circumcision, who rejoice in the
Lord Jesus, worship God in the Spirit, Phil. 3.3.
and have no confidence in the flesh.

SECT. 9. Of the kinds of Duties in several divisions.
THese Duties some have distributed according to their several objects, God,
our Neighbor, and our selves: 1. The Lord claims our Love, Fear, Honor, and
Obedience. 2. Our Neighbor claims our Duty, Courtesy, Bounty: And for our
selves, we must 1. Instrust the Understanding: 2. Bridle the Will: 3. Moderate
the Affections. Others in retribution to Christ, give us another scheame of
such Duties, as they call mere Gospel- Duties. So it is our Duty, 1. To think
and muse much on Christ, and upon his loves toward us. 2. To speak much of
Christ, and to commend him to others: When the Spouse was asked, Cant. 5.9.16.
What her beloved was above others? she sets him forth in every part of him,
and concludes with this, He is altogether lovely. 3. To be often in the company
of Christ, and to grow up thereby into a familiar acquaintance with him. Now
Christ is with us here but two these ways, Either in his Ordinances, or
Providence, by his holy Spirit: So that to be often in Christ's company, is to be
much in his Word, in Prayer, in Sacraments, in Christian communion, in
Meditation, in examination of our hearts, in his Providence of mercies,
Crosses and Trials. 4. To do much for Christ, and that willingly: This is love
indeed, To keep his Commandments, 1 Ioh. 5.3.
and those are not grievous. 5. To suffer and endure any evil for Christ: What
tell you me (says Paul) of bonds and imprisonments? Acts. 21.13.
I am ready, not only to be bound, but to dye for the sake of Christ at
Jerusalem. My life is not dear to me, Romans 8.36.
that I may finish my course with joy: For thy sake we are killed all the day
long. No question these Heads will include all sorts of Duties: But the method
I shall prosecute (wherein I desire to confound Duties, Ordinances, and Means,
whereby a Christian walks on in the holy path) I have otherwise digested thus:
The Duties of a Christian are either of The first kind, as Watchfulness. The
second kind: And these have reference --

Either only to Secret Ordinances, as Self-examination. Experiences.
Evidences. Meditation. Life of Faith.
Private Ordinances, either In one Family, as Family Duties. In more Families
joined, as Christian Society.
Public Ordinances, as Hearing the Word. Receiving the Sacraments.

Jointly to all three, and they are either Ordinary, as Praying. Reading the
Word.
Extraordinary, as Fasting. Feasting.





That in this Analysis there is not that express mention of Christ; and the
reason why some vilify Duties, is because the very Name of Christ is not in
them.

Christ is not. I have heard of many that have stood much in appearance for
Jesus Christ, so that they would bow, and do homage to the very sound and
syllables of his Name, and yet none more enemies unto Christ then they, being
the very limbs of Antichrist: Many (says Christ) will say to me in that day,
Lord, Lord, Mat 7.22.
have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and
in thy name have done many wonderful works? 23.24.
(as if the name of Christ had been a Spell) And then will I profess unto them,
I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity; and thereupon he
concludes, that he only is a wise man, 25
and builds upon the rock who hears Christ's sayings, and does them. Hence learn
(O my soul) that he that presses to the practice of the word of Christ, he
preaches Christ, he sets up Christ, though he do not directly name Christ, or
though his Text be not literally of Christ; even as a man may have no other
subject of his Sermon but Christ, and yet betray Christ. Thus much of Duties in
general.

CHAP. III.
SECT. 1. Of Duties in particular: And first, of the Nature of Watchfulness.
Watchfulness is the first and principal help to all exercises of Religion; it
is the eye to see them all well done and used, and therefore we set it in the
front of all Duties: We are to watch unto prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. Ephesians. 6.18.
and we are to watch unto hearing, Luke 8.18. Luke 8.18.
and we are to watch unto fasting, Mat. 6.18. Mat 6.18.
we are to watch to almsgiving, Mat. 6.1. Mat. 6.1.
and we are to watch in all things, 2 Timothy 4.5. 2 Timothy 4.5.


Now for our better direction in the exercise of this Duty, observe we the
Nature. Objects. Manner of it.


For the Nature of it: Watchfulness is a continual, careful observing of our
ways, in all the passages and turnings of our life, that we still keep close to
the written Word of God. Keep thy heart in all diligence: Prove 4.23. Psa. 39.1.
Psa. 119.9.
I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: Wherewith
shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy word.

SECT. 2. Of the objects of Watchfulness.
THe object of our Watch is either Evil works, or sin. Good works, or Duties,
or any thing in its own being, good.


1. Watch we must over sin, More general Original sin, or corrupt Nature.
Actual sin.
More special, as sins of our Calling. Constitution.



2. Watch we must over any thing (in its own being) good: And herein if we look
for the adequate object, including every thing that ought to be watched, it is
either Hearts, Tongues, Actions,
which howsoever good in themselves, yet if we watch not, they will soon
contract evil.

SECT. 3. Of the manner of Watchfulness over sin Original.
THat we may watch over sin Original, or that inward corruption we carry about
us, observe we these Rules:

1. Let us take matter and motives to humble our souls under the sight and
sense of this inherent pollution. And to that purpose, consider we the rueful
complaints of the holiest Saints against it: Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am (says Paul) who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? Behold, I was shapen in iniquity (said David) and in sin did my
mother conceive me: Psalm 51.5.
Did not God in Christ accept of our complaining, striving, grieving, and
hating this, how could we find any comfort?

2. Let us pray against it, that though it be in us, yet it may not hurt us,
nor be imputed to us; That God would give us his Spirit to bridle our
corruption, and especially that he would give us the Spirit of Sanctification,
that he would cleanse us from this filth more and more, that he would season
the fountain, and at last dry it up.

3. Let us strive after contrary holiness, and endeavor the reformation of our
natures and lives: Put we off the old man, Ephesians. 4.22.23.
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and be we renewed in the
Spirit of our mind.

4. Let us consider the Promises of Remission, and those Privileges which the
Saints have in the blood of Christ; and let us actuate and exercise our Faith
in respect of such Promises: I knew that thou would deal treacherously (says
God) and that thou wast called a transgressor from the womb; Isa. 48.8, 9.
yet for my Names sake I will defer mine anger, and for my praise I will
refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.

SECT. 4. Of the manner of Watchfulness over sins Actual.
THat we may watch over Actual sins, observe we these Directions: --

1. Avoid we all occasions of evil: Be afraid, not only of the fire and flame,
but of the very smoke of sin; it is dangerous to approach near the Whirl-pit,
or to play about the hole of the Asp, or the den of the Cockatrice; and
therefore prayed David, Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; Psa. 119.37.
not my heart only from affecting it, but mine eyes also from beholding it:
There is a shutting of the eyes from beholding evil, Isa. 33.15.
brought in amongst other Duties by the Prophet Isaiah, to which is affixed
this promise, 16.
that such a one shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the
munition of Rocks.

2. Resist we the temptations of sin: It may be (notwithstanding all our care)
temptations will offer themselves, and urge us to evil, but then we must
constantly resist, and this is praise worthy: If a man keep himself sober, when
he cannot come to wine or strong drink, it is nothing; but for a man to be
careful not to break the bounds of sobriety, when he shall be in place where
wine is plenty, and no restraint of it, and where company will be urging him to
take more then is meet, this is true temperance indeed: If a man live chastely
when he wants his lewd company, it is nothing; but for a Joseph (sued and
sought to by his Mistress, yea, urged and solicited day after day to condescend
to her adulterous desires) to refuse then, and to choose rather loss of present
liberty by not sinning, Suadere and solicitare potest cogere omnino non potest.
Aug. Hom. 12. Habet astutiam suadendi, non potestatem cogendi, Idem in Psalm.
91. and in Ioh. 12. Prove. 8.13.
then to gain further preferment by consenting to sin, this is true chastity
indeed. Away then with those idle apologies, I was urged to sin, I was provoked
to lewdness, etc. Neither man nor Devil can compel you to sin, unless you will
your own self: * The Devil may persuade, entice, suggest, and provoke, but he
cannot enforce nor constrain; nor (unless your own hearts give consent) can he
cause you to sin.

3. Confess we our sins, mourn we for sin, and especially labor we for hatred
of sin: The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, Prove. 8.13. not only to forbear
it, but (as the Apostle speaks) to abhor it, Romans 12.9. Romans 12.9.
as the meat that sometimes we have surfeted of, our stomach nourishes and
goes against it; so should our hearts rise against sin: And to this purpose
consider we 1. The foulness of sin; it is fouler then the foulest Fiend in
hell. 2. The illness of sin; it is a greater ill then the damnation of a man's
soul, or then the destruction of all the creatures in the world. 3. The
infectiousness of sin; it is of that pestilential property, that it pollutes
every thing it comes near. 4. The perniciousness of sin; it deprives us of Gods
favor, of our part and portion of the blood of Christ, of the Providence of
that blessed Trinity, of the guard of Angels, of the Communion of Saints, of
heavens joys; and it brings upon us infinite sorrows, as blindeness of mind,
hardness of heart, deadness of Spirit, desperate thoughts, horror of
Conscience, vexation of Spirit, and (without Repentance) all the terrors of
Hell. 5. Christ's sufferings for sin; shall we not hate him that kills our Friend,
Brother, Father? how much more sin, that put to death the Lord of life, who is
indeed our dearest Friend, Brother, Father, Savior? Look on Christ crucified,
and see if this will not make us hate sin.

4. Believe, and by Faith expect victory over our sin; yea, by that Faith in
which we have confessed, mourned, prayed, let us rest persuaded, That such
means shall not be used of us in vain: O lift we up the hand of Faith toward
heaven, and lay hold on the promises of pardon, on the mercy of God in Christ
Jesus.

SECT. 5. Of the manner of Watchfulness over special sins.
THat we may watch over our special sins, our Dalilah sins, our
darling-delights, observe we these Rules:

1. Endeavor we the mortifying of this sin: Some one sin there is in every soul
of us that is most predominant. Now it is the main work of a Christian, as to
fall out for ever with all sin, so especially to improve all his Spiritual
forces and aid from heaven, utterly to demolish, and to beat down to the ground
this hold, this bosom-sin.

2. Lay we load of deepest groans, and strongest cries for mortifying grace
against this dominiering sin; especially every Morning and Evening strive with
God in our Prayers for a comfortable conquest over it, enforce and enlarge that
passage with an extraordinary pang of fervency, cry we mightily to God for
power and strength against this lust, that continually wars against the soul.

3. Bend we our selves against the special acts, occasions, and opportunities
of this sin; as suppose rash anger, the sin which a man sifteth, and pursues
to the extirpation of it; in this case, he should resolve with himself, not to
speak harshly, nor to look fiercely, nor to use any churlish behavior, whether
his Servant displease him with negligence, or his Friend offend him with
unfaithfulness, or his enemy provoke him with ill language, or some malicious
dealing.

4. As often as we find any motion of this sin to stir, and show it self in us,
it will be convenient, not only to withold our consent, but withal to
exercise some act of contrary holiness: As suppose Desire of revenge be the
sin, which stirs up our blood, and boileth within us, we must not only
forbear to avenge our selves, but also bend our selves to pray for him that
has offended us; and if he hunger, to feed him, if he thirst, to give him
drink.

5. Settle we in our selves a purpose of heart to forbear it for time to come:
In undertaking of which purpose, it will be expedient to set our selves some
short space of time, in which we may force our selves to the forbearance of it,
as for a day, or a month, or the like; and when the prefixed time is come, we
should then question our selves, How well we have performed? or how, or wherein
we have failed? and then begin a new purpose, and prescribe our selves a like
time, for shunning of the same sin; and so on from time to time, till we have
gotten a full victory.

6. If in our daily or monthly review, we find that we have been defective in
performing of what we had purposed, then with an holy revenge we should correct
our former errors, beg pardon for our defects, and punish our selves for such
slothfulness, or wilfulness, by abstinence from meat, ease, recreation; Keeping
under our bodies, 1 Cor. 9.27.
and bringing them into subjection, by mulct, or forfeiture of some portion to
the poor, whereby we may feel smart: This holy revenge is commended by the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.11. as a worthy fruit of serious Repentance.

7. Above all, without which all the rest are as nothing, Believe the Promises
of pardon in the blood of Christ: It is Faith in the Promises which will be
able to cleanse, and purge the heart from this sin; Heb. 9 13, 14.
If the blood of Bulls and of Goats (says the Apostle) and the ashes of an
Heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; how
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead works, to serve
the living God? the sense is, When a man has once applied the blood of Christ
for his Justification, this effect will follow it, That there will accompany it
a certain vigor, virtue, power, and ^^rength, which will also purge his
conscience from dead works; there will go a power of the Spirit together with
this blood, that shall not only forbid him, and show him that he ought not to
do such and such evil things, but it shall cleanse his conscience from those
roots of dead works, those corrupt lusts, and sinful affections that are in
him, and that dispose him to that evil: Now this power is gotten by applying
the blood (i.) by applying the Promise of pardon and forgiveness by the blood
of Jesus Christ: Let no man think by his own strength to prevail against any
lust; it is not our endeavoring, praying, bending our selves against the
special acts and occasions, exercising some acts of contrary holiness,
purposing to forbear it, punishing our selves for it (if gone about by our own
might, and power, and strength) will ever kill this sin; no, no, we must do all
these at the feet of Christ, and draw virtue from Christ; we must Believe the
Promises, get assurance of pardon, get assurance of Gods love to us in Christ;
we must labor to delight in God, to get communion with Christ, and then our
hearts will grow to an application of the Commandment; and whereas before they
resisted it, rebelled against it, they will then cleave to it, and love it, and
delight in it, and receive an impression from it. This I take it is the meaning
of that Text, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these
we might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that
is in the world through lust; q.d. by believing the Promises we are made
partakers of the godly nature, and we overcome our corruptions and lusts:
Consonant to which, is that of the Apostle, Romans 6.3.
Know ye not, that as many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his
death? q.d. as many as are baptized into Christ, for reconciliation with God,
must needs be baptized into his death; they must be dead to sin, as he was
dead: We cannot be baptized into him for Reconciliation or Justification, but
we must be baptized likewise for Mortification of the flesh, and for
Resurrection to newness of life. To wind up all in a word, He that has the
strongest Faith, that believes in the greatest degree, the Promises of pardon
and remission, he has the holiest heart, the most mortified life:
Sanctification and Mortification arise from that root of Justification. The
blood of Christ has not only a power to wash us from the guilt of sin, but
also to cleanse us, and purge us from the power and stain of sin* And therefore
I say, the best way to get a great degree of Sanctification, the best way to
get a greater measure of the graces of the Spirit, the best way to mortify our
sinful lusts, the best way to watch over our special sins, is to labor to grow
in Faith, in the belief of those Promises of the Gospel of Christ; and this
would be well observed by those that are a little legally biased, or carried
to mortify sin only by Vows, Promises, shunning occasions, removing
temptations, strictness and severity in Duties, fear of Hell and Judgments,
scarce rising so high for their Mortification, as Christ. Now these in
themselves are but empty, weak means of prevailing against sin, like the mighty
Sails of a Ship, without wind and tide; no question but shunning occasions,
strictness and severity in Duties, watchfulness, etc. dwell in their place and
order, Saltmarsh Free-grac^, page 68. who though a perfect adversary, y t here
brings truth abed.
like Oars in a Boat (See Saltmarsh, Free Grace, page 68.) which though it be
carried with the Tide, if well managed, yet they may help it to go the faster:
Howsoever, it is Christ crucified which is the power of all in all; it is
Christ lifted up, as Moses lifted up the Serpent, which strikes more soundness
into the wounded beholder, then any other way; wherein some have toiled all
their time for power over corruptions, and like Peter, have caught little or
nothing, because Jesus Christ was not in the company.

SECT. 6. Of the manner of watchfulness over our Hearts.
THat we may watch over our hearts, observe we these directions:

1. Guard we the windows of our soul, the Senses: I made a Covenant with mine
eyes (said Job) why then should I think upon a maid? Job 31.1. Psalm. 119.37.
Turn mine eyes from beholding vanities (said David) and quicken thou me in thy
way. It is incredible, what a deal of pollution and ill the Devil conveys
insensibly into the heart, through these floodgates of sin, and therefore we
had need to watch over the Senses.

2. Go we down into our hearts, and consider well all our thoughts; these, if
good, will bring forth good fruit; and if evil, they are the parents and
begetters of all sins, the first plotters and contrivers of all Treasons and
Rebellions of our life, the bellows and incendiaries of all inordinate
affections, the Panders to all other lusts, that take thought to provide for
the satisfying of them, the disturbers in all good Duties, that interrupt, and
soil, and fly-blow all our Prayers, that they stink in the nostrils of God; and
therefore consider and weigh well all our thoughts, for as our thoughts are, so
be our affections, prayers, speeches, actions.

3. Let us make Conscience of our thoughts: By them especially do we sanctify,
or sin against God; by them especially do we evidence our selves, to be
sincere-hearted Christians, or dissembling hypycrites; by them especially will
the Lord judge us at the last day, when he will make manifest the counsels of
our hearts; 1 Cor 4.5.
by them especially (if we will not make Conscience of them) will God lash us
in Hell to all eternity, even by thoughts accusing; Isa. 33.8,
there shall thou meditate terrors, and study Gods wrath, together with thy own
sins and miseries, for ever and ever.

4. Resist and crush we every exorbitant thought which draws to sin, at the
very first rising: Is the temptation strong? encounter it with this dreadful
Dilemma, If I commit this sin, either I must repent, or not repent; if I
repent, it will cost me more heart-break and spiritual smart, before I can
purchase assurance of pardon and peace of Conscience, then the sensual pleasure
can be worth; if I never repent, it will be the death and damnation of my soul.

5. Lodge we not so much as light thoughts, unprofitable or vain thoughts in
our hearts; they will still be entering in, whilst we are in these houses of
clay, yet lodge they must not. Hence the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.26.
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath; q. d. if thoughts of anger come in,
in the morning or day time, they must be turned out ere night; or if idle
thoughts offer to come to bed to thee, let them not lodge with thee. I deny not
but many good thoughts and motions may pass, as strangers through a bad man's
heart, and multitudes of vain thoughts and motions may make a through-fare of a
Believers heart, and disturb him in good Duties, by knockings, and
interruptions, and breakings in upon his heart, but still they lodge not there,
they are not there fostered and harbored.

6. Forget and stifle we all thoughts of sinful actions already passed: The
mind is very apt to run over the passages and circumstances of the same sins,
long since committed, with a new and fresh delight; this argues wickedness of
heart, and such as when it is ordinary with the heart to do so, is not
compatible with grace: Romans 6.12.
What fruit had you of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? All that the
Saints reap out of such fruits, is shame and sorrow, and many a sad sigh: When
Ephraim remembered his sins, he was ashamed and repented; a truly sanctified
soul will hate the appearance of his former sins, and will have his heart
inflamed with a zeal and revenge against it. What, do you repeat to your selves
your old sins with delight? this provokes God exceedingly, you thereby stand
to, and make good your former act; you show a delight to rake in those wounds
you have given Christ already, and therefore in hell it will prove the greatest
gall, to remember your old sins; every circumstance in every sin then, will be
as a dagger in your hearts. O study not these thoughts, forget them, stifle
them!

7. Entertain all good motions put into your heart by the blessed Spirit,
howsoever occasioned; whether by the Ministry of the Word, mindefulness of
Death, Christian admonition, reading some good Book, some special Cross, or
extraordinary Mercy; feed, enlarge, and improve them to the utmost, so shall we
preserve our hearts in a soft, comfortable temper, and heavenward, which is a
singular happiness.

8. Endeavor we to preserve and keep up lively, holy, and Spiritual affections,
and suffer them not to cool; or if we have grown remiss, endeavor to recover
those affections again: Thoughts and affections are mutual causes of each
other; Whilst I mused, the fire burned, said David: and again, Psalm. 39.3.
How love I thy Law? It is my meditation day and night. First, Psalm. 119 97.
his thoughts were the bellows that kindled and inflamed his affections: And
secondly, his affections inflamed, made his thoughts to boil, and to meditate
on Gods Law day and night. Hence it is that men newly converted to God, having
new and strong affections, can with more pleasure think of God then any else
can.

9. Let us captivate and conform all the thoughts and imaginations of our
heart, to the Rules and Sovereignty of grace; Bring into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ: 2 Cor. 10 5.
If thy change in words, actions, and all outward carriages were Angelical, yet
if thy thoughts be sinful and unsanctified, thou art a limb of Satan still:
Purity in the inward parts, is the most sound evidence of our portion in the
purity and power of Christ. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, Ier.
4.14.
that thou may be saved: How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?
God sees (says the Psalmist) and understands our thoughts afar off: And
hence it is that many humble souls, Psalm. 139.2.
sensible of their secret sins, in the presence of Gods pure eye, are more
grieved (setting aside ill example and scandals) for the rebelliousness of
their thoughts, then the exorbitancy of their actions, for of these the world
sees the worst; but concerning the other, it cuts them to the heart, that they
are not so well able to preserve their inward parts in purity, toward the all
searching eye of God, as their words and actions in plausibleness toward man.

10. Get we our hearts possessed with deep, strong, and powerful apprehensions
and impressions of Gods Holiness, Majesty, Omnipresence, and Omniscience: If
any thoughts be of power to settle, fix, and draw in the mind of man, they are
thoughts of him. What is the reason that Saints and Angels in Heaven have not a
vain thought to eternity, but that their eye is never off him? we find it by
experience, a blessed means to avoid distractions in Prayers, to enlarge a man's
thoughts in his preparations before, or at the beginning, if with a
consideration of Gods Attributes and Relations to us, he sets on the Duty.

11. Let us elevate, and often lift up our hearts toward heaven: Consider the
blissful depths of Gods boundless Mercies in Christ; Consider the glory, the
everlastingness, the unutterable excellencies of that immortal shining Crown
above, which after this life (and this life is but a bubble, a smoke, a shadow,
a thought) shall be set on our heads by the hand of God; a very glimpse whereof
is able to sweeten the bitterest griefs that can be, and to dispel those mists
of fading vanities, which the world (heated by the fire of inordinate lusts) is
wont to evaporate, and interpose betwixt the sight of men's souls, and the bliss
of heaven.

12. Let us spend some thoughts, yea many thoughts, about the saving
excellencies of Jesus Christ: Consider the wonder of our Redemption, the most
admirable, and most astonishing plot of the blessed Trinity, sitting in Council
about the saving of our souls; a Mystery which the Angels stoop down to pry
into, an Orient Pearl, that will outshine all the sparkling Jewels of the
whole Creation; Consider the Love Letters of Christ in his glorious Gospel; the
Love Tokens he has sent to our dear souls: And ah! what flames of divine
affection? what raptures of zeal? what ravishments of delights? what brinish
sorrows, and great indignation against sin? what ecstasies of obedience can be
enough for our blessed Lord, and dearest Redeemer?

SECT. 7. Of the manner of watchfulness over our Tongues.
THat we may watch over the tongue, two things must be heeded: 1. That it be
not unseasonably idle. 2. That it be not sinfully exercised.


1. That it be not unseasonably idle; and herein observe those generally, and
much neglected Duties of Christian Reproof. Heavenly Discourse.


1. For Christian Reproof, observe these Directions: --

1. If a Brother be overtaken with a fault, or some less offense, admonish him
in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, Gal 6.1.
lest thou also be tempted.

2. If he offend more grievously, then reprove him freely, and suffer not sin
to rest upon his soul. Lev. 19.17.


But in this case, when, or how must we reprove?



1. With his Spiritual wisdom; it is that must suggest to him, when, and how to
reprove, whether presently upon it, or sometimes afterward; whether directly
and downright, or indirectly and by intimation; whether personally, or in the
general; whether in a fair and milder manner, or with a more bold and resolute
spirit; whether only by discountenance, or by discourse, etc.

2. With his heart: A reproof must not spring from any imperious humor, of
censuring, and meddling with his brethren; from any secret ambitious desire, to
purchase an opinion and reputation of holiness to himself, or from any other
by-end, but from an heart truly humbled with sight and sense of its own
infirmities, graciously resolved into compassion, and commiseration of the
offender, and lifted up in a secret supplication for the success of the
Reproof, and salvation of the party, all at once to Gods Throne of Grace.

2. For Spiritual and Heavenly discourse, observe these Directions: --

1. Apprehend all opportunities and occurrences which may minister matter of
digression from worldly talk, into Divine discourse. It is pity that Professors
should ever meet, without some talk of their meeting in heaven, or of the
blessed ways and means that lead thereunto; and therefore by some wise
transcision, turn thou the current of the discourse toward some heavenly good:
It was the practice of our Savior, upon mention of bread, he pressed upon his
Disciples a disswasion from the Leaven of the Pharisees: Mat. 16.5, 6.
And upon occasion of Drink being denied him by the Samaritan woman, John 4.10.
he (forgetting his weariness, hunger and thirst) labors to allure her to the
wellhead of everlasting happiness.

2. Have ever in a readiness some common heads of more stirring and quickening
motives to mind heavenly things; as the cursed condition of our natural state,
the dear purchase of Christ to Redeem our souls, the incomparable sweetness of
Christian ways, the vanity and vexation of earthly things, the uncertainty and
misery of this short life, the everlastingness of our state in another world,
the terrors of death, the dreadfulness of that great and last day drawing on
now apace, the horrors of damned souls, etc. Mention of these things many times
may strike full cold to the heart of the most sensual Belshazzar, and drive him
into his dumps; and by Gods blessing may sometimes prepare the hardest hearts,
for some thoughts of remorse, and more heavenly impressions.

3. Get we into our hearts an habit of more heavenly-mindedness, by much
exercise, and intercourse, and acquaintance with God, by often contemplation,
and forecast of the sweetness, glory, and eternity of those Mansions above, by
reflectings on time past, how long thy soul was detained in the state of
darkness, what bitterness and terrors it passed through in the pangs of its new
birth, what relapses and desertions it has been incident to, ever since that
time to this; and being thus busied at home in our own hearts, we shall find
our selves much more pregnant and plentiful in holy talk when we come abroad:
Men for the most part speak most, and most willingly of those things they mind
most; such provisions within, will make the tongue so ready, that it cannot be
unseasonably idle.

2. Watch we must over the tongue, that it be not sinfully exercised: And
herein observe these Directions: --

1. Be dumb to all unsavory communication; as, Lying, Swearing, Cursing, etc. O
how do these sins wound the heart of Christ, and crucify again the Lord of
glory?

2. Be silent from Slandering, Backbiting, False accusing, Censuring: A true
heart is ever most angry and displeased with, most Eagle-eyed, and watchful
over, most strict and severe against its own sins; which homebred employment
happily hinders, and moderates a man from too much meddling abroad.

Mat. 7 6.
3. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast your pearls before
swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you: By
Dogs are meant obstinate enemies, that maliciously revile the Ministers of the
Word, and the Messengers thereof: By Swine are meant those sottish, scurrile
wretches, who scornfully and contemptuously trample under foot all holy
Instructions, Reproofs, Admonitions, tendered unto them by any Christian out of
the word of truth. Now if accidentally such a son of Belial, or scoffing
Ishmael, be in our company, we are commanded by Christ to say nothing, at least
of the consolations of Christ, of the special promises of Christ, of the gentle
entreaties of the Gospel of Christ: Consider this, and tremble, all ye that are
scornful, and furious opposites to the purity and power of the Word; it is the
Lords will that you should run furiously toward the pit of hell, and that no
body should stay you; not a man must call and cry unto you, to tell you of such
things as are peculiar to the Saints, in way of application to you: But he that
is filthy, let him be filthy still; let him drink, be drunk, Rev. 22.11.
despair, dye, and be damned: All this while not a word of comfort belongs to
you.

SECT. 8. Of the manner of Watchfulness over our actions.
OUr actions are either Natural, Civil, Religious,
In all which observe these Directions:

1. Concerning Natural actions, as Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Visitations,
Recreations, etc. no constant Rule can be prescribed, because it is much
diversified by health, sickness, age, constitution; and every one has either
learned by his own experience, what seasons, and proportions of such natural
helps are fittest for his temperament, or he is most unworthy of that precious
thing (an Understanding soul) which he bears in his bosom; only let me inform
Christians, that they may sin in any of these actions, and therefore let them
beware and watch over themselves in the use and enjoyment of these things;
which howsoever lawful in their own nature, yet by our corruption are capable
of inordinateness and excess. Some are of opinion, That Christians are in more
danger of being Spiritually undone, by a sly insinuation and insnarement of
licentiousness and immoderation in such lawful things, then by the gross
assaults of foul sins and temptations; their hearts may rise against any work
of darkness, as Adultery, Murder, Swearing, Profaning the Lords day,
Speculative wantonness, etc. which yet may too often be insensibly seized upon,
by an excessive sinful delight, in things unsinful in themselves; and therefore
we had need to watch over our Natural actions.

2. Concerning Civil actions, as Bargains, Contracts, Covenants, Dealings,
Negotiations, etc. observe these Directions:

1. Think we seriously and solemnly of that Principle, Do as thou would be
done by: In a fellow-feeling real conceit, put thy self into the place, and
impartially put on the person of the party with whom thou art to deal, and then
returning to thy self, deal out and proportion unto him that measure in every
particular, which thou would be willing to receive at another hand, Mat 7.22.
if thou were in his case: Whatsoever (says our Savior) ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

2. Abhor with an infinite disdain, to get any thing by any wicked means, wrong
doing, or unconscionable dealing; we may assure our selves in such cases, That
besides the secret grumblings of our self-accusing Consciences, the angry eye
of God sees secretly our doings, and will shortly, and most certainly revenge.

3. Let our desire and delight never fasten it self immoderately upon any
earthly thing, though never so excellent: Exorbitancy and error this way,
brings many times with it either a loss of the thing so doted on, or it may be
a cross, or howsoever a curse. O consider we the vanity of these earthly
things! Consider we the glories above! Methinks this one preservative would be
powerful enough to keep the heart of every Christian from doting upon the
world, or suffering it to be possessed thereof, it is this, Every Christian by
a fruitful Faith, may be assured of a Crown of life, either by assurance of
adherence, or evidence, or both: Now if that once a day he should take a
serious survey of the glory, everlastingness, and unutterable excellencies of
that immortal Crown, which our dear Redeemer holds for him in his hand, ready
to set upon his head, when he shall be dissolved from this vale of tears;
Methinks it were able so to dull the edge, and dissolve the drossiness of all
earthly desires, that they should never be able to heat or harden his heart any
more.

3. Concerning Religious actions, as Meditating, Hearing, Reading, Fasting,
Praying, Almsgiving, etc. observe these Directions: 1. In general. 2. In
special.


1. In general, observe, That we draw and derive from Christ by the attractive
force of Faith, Special abilities, 1. To perform all Duties. 2. To exercise all
Graces. 3. To resist and overcome all Temptations and Corruptions which shall
be befall us: To this purpose are those Promises of Grace and Strength, Isa.
44.3. Ezekiel. 36.27. Zech. 10.12. Joh. 1.16. And these are Securities given us
from God, that we shall receive grace through Duties, which are the
Conduit-pipes or instruments of conveying the same into the soul from Christ.
This is to do all in the strength of Christ, and to take forth a great deal of
Christ into the soul, so that not I, but Christ may live in me. Gal. 2.20.


2. In special, observe these Directions:

1. That before the doing of Duties, we remove all lets and impediments which
may hinder, and improve all occasions which may forward us thereunto.

2. That in doing of them, we behave our selves well and wisely, performing
them rightly and religiously.

3. After all is done, that we be careful all be not lost through our own
vileness, and viciousness, privy pride, or secret hypocrisy.

For instance, Would we watch unto Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18.
as the Apostle injoyns us?

1. Then, before we fall on our knees, let us shake off three impoysoning and
heavy hindrances, which otherwise will clog and clip the wings of our Prayers,
that they will never be able to ascend up into heaven; as, Sin, Anger, and
Distrust: and let us possess our selves of three excellent helps and inflaming
furtherances; the first is a right apprehension of Gods Dreadfulness, Purity,
Power, etc. The second is, a true sense of our own Vileness, Abominableness,
Nothingness, etc. The third is, an hearty survey of the Infiniteness, and
unexpressibleness of Gods Bounty, Blessings, and compassionate forbearance
toward us.

2. After we are down on our knees, first repel with an undaunted Spirit,
Satan's Blasphemous injections: Secondly, watch over the world with care and
timely opposition, that if it be possible) not an earthly thought may creep
into our heart all the while: Thirdly, strive to hold our hearts in heat, as
well in Confession as Deprecation, in Deprecation as Petition; as well for
purity of heart, as for pardon of sin throughout: Prayer is the creature of the
holy Ghost, every part whereof we should heartily wish, and earnestly wrestle,
That he would proportionally animate and enliven, even as the soul does the
body.

3. After we are risen off our knees, first, take heed of resting in the Duty,
take heed of privy pride, and secret hypocrisy, take heed of returning with
the dog to his vomit: Secondly, pursue and press after the things prayed for,
by a timely apprehension, fruitful exercise, and utmost improvement of all
occasions, and heavenly offers, which may any ways concur to the compassing of
them: But of this I shall speak more largely, when I come to the Duty of
Prayer. Thus much of Watchfulness.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. 1. Of the Nature of Self-Examination.
WE have done with Watchfulness, the eye that oversees and directs all other
Duties: Now to the Duties themselves; wherein we shall follow this method: 1.
To consider them as in reference to private persons: 2. As in reference to
Families: 3. As in reference to public Assemblies. The Philosopher in his
method of Practical Philosophy, first handles Ethics, in reference to
particular persons; and then he proceeds to his Oeconomicks, in reference to
Families; and lastly, to his Politics, in reference to Cities and Countries.
Of many particulars arise a Family; of many Families is constituted a City: The
same order shall we follow in these Divine Arts, of our Ethics, Oeconomicks,
and Politics. And we shall first handle Duties in reference to particular
persons; of which sort are these: 1. Self-Examination. 2. Experiences. 3.
Evidences. 4. Meditation. 5. Life of Faith.


The first Duty is Self-Examination: And for our better direction in the
exercise of this Duty, observe we 1. Nature. 2. The Objects. 3. The Manner. 4.
The Time of it.


For the Nature of it, Self-Examination is a kind of judiciary proceeding, in
which a man keeps private Sessions at home, passing a Sentence on his
Thoughts, Words, and Actions.

Or, for more distinct knowledge, two sorts of actions are employed in this Duty
of Examination, some Essential. Accidental.


1. Of the former sort, or of Essentials, are these three, Discussion.
Application. Censure.


1. Discussion is a sifting of our life and dealings, by which we pull things
out of the heap, where before they lay confused, and unseen, and by which we
set every fact of ours in open view, that it may be scanned, and seen by it
self what it is.

2. Application is a laying of these acts, thus searched and found out, to the
Rule of Gods Law, which is the Touchstone of all our doings, and according to
which God will judge us at the last day.

3. Censure is the judgment that our Minds and Consciences give upon our
Thoughts, Words and Deeds, according to the Rule of the Law. These three laid
together, make up the nature of this work of Examination: So that we may not
unfitly describe it out of its own Principles, thus: --

Self-Examination is, A Discussion of a man's life, that his Thoughts, Words and
Deeds may be seen, and censured according to the Rule of Gods Law.

2. Of the latter sort (or of Accidentals) are these two; viz. The one going
before Examination. The other following after Examination.


1. That which goes before, is a purpose to better a man's Spiritual estate, by
Correcting what is amiss. Confirming what is right.


2. That which follows after it, is a practice of such Rules as may back our
Examination, and make it more effe^tual to us: I shall mention only these
three Rules:

1. That after we have examined, we then compare our present, with our former
estate, and consider whether we have increased or decayed in grace.

2. That if we have profited in grace, we then consider by what means we have
profited, that so we may make more constant use of such means; or if we have
decayed in grace, we then observe by what temptations we were overcome, that so
our former errors may make us more wary, and more resolute against them for the
future.

3. That as we meet with any occasions of moment, concerning which we had a
purpose to better our Spiritual estate, we then recall home our thoughts, and
make use of our former resolutions, and practice what we did purpose. -- Out of
all these laid together, we may more fully describe it thus:

Self-Examination is a discussion of a man's life, for the finding out the true
estate of a man's soul toward God, accompanied with a purpose and practice of
whatsoever upon trial shall appear requisite for the salvation and good of a
man's soul.

SECT. 2. Of the objects of Self-Examination.
THe object of our Examination, is either Evil works, or Sin. Good works, or
Duties.


1. We must examine our sin in General. Special.


1. In General, whether of Omission or Commission: For as in the last
Judgment, our Lord will not only give Sentence against Murders, and
Oppressions, but against Uncharitableness, and Unmercifulness, in not feeding
the hungry, in not lodging the stranger, in not clothing the naked, in not
visiting the sick: So when we judge our selves, we must censure not only our
Robbing the poor, but our not Relieving the poor; not only our Commissions of
evil, but our Omissions of good.

2. In Special, whether of our Calling or Nature: These sins may breed special
danger, because we are ready to drop into them of our own dispositions; and
therefore in the daily care of our souls, we had need to examine our selves
concerning these sins.

2. As we must examine our evil works, so our good works.

1. Because we are many times deceived with shows, thinking that good which is
evil: Thus Paul thought he showed much zeal, when he persecuted the Churches of
Christ; Phil 3.6.
and Micah thought he highly merited Gods favor, Judge. 17.13.
when he kept a Priest for Idolatrous service.

2. Because in the very works which are truly good, we do many times
intermingle corruptions of our own; sometimes evil ends, and sometimes evil
thoughts, and sometimes we perform them in an evil manner; but always in our
best devotions there are many imperfections and failings. Indeed this
Examination is a Duty necessary to all Duties: If we believe, we must do it
with the heart, Romans 10.10. Romans 10.10.
If we sing Psalms, we must do it with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15. 1 Cor. 14.15.
If we come to the Lords Supper, first Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat, 1 Cor. 11.28. 1 Cor. 11.28.
If we pray, we must therein examine: And hence (as some observe) the same (...)
Hebrew word signifies to pray, and to judge a man's self.

But because Duties are of several sorts, inward outward
of Heart. Tongue. Action.
In examining these three, we shall inclusively examine all sorts of Duties
that are in reference to them.

SECT. 3. Of the manner of examining our sins in general.
THat we may examine our sins of all sorts, observe these Rules:

1. Procure we a Catalogue of our sins, both before, and since our conversion;
and to that purpose, go we through the Commandments one by one, and in each of
them consider what sins are condemned, and what Duties are enjoined: And
hereupon question with our own hearts, Whether have I committed this or that
sin? 2. Whether have I neglected this or that Duty? and as the heart answers,
be ready to note down those sins whereof we stand guilty.

2. The sins thus found out, make we a solemn Confession to God, with deep
Humiliation; let them be dolorous Confessions, with grief and sorrow for sin,
and from a sight and sense of it: Thus Ephraim did, and God was feign to
acknowledge it, Ier 31.18.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoan himself: O the Lord loves to hear such
bemoaning Ephraims, and such bemoaning Confessions.

3. The sins thus confessed and bewailed, let us judge and condemn our selves:
This is that Duty instanced in by the Apostle, If we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged. 1 Cor. 11.31.
There is a Tribunal that we should every one erect within us, where Conscience
is the Accuser, Reason the Judge, Fear the Jailer, Sorrow the Executioner.

4. After we have thus judged our selves, let us then appeal to Gods Throne of
Grace; let us desire of God salvation in the Lord Jesus Christ; let us cast all
our confidence on him; who never fails them that put their trust in him, and in
his precious Merits.

SECT. 4. Of the manner of examining our special sins.
THat we may examine our special sins, our Dalilah sins, observe we these Rules:

1. Endeavor we to find out this sin; and in our scrutiny, our examination, we
may discover it by these marks:

1. That it is the Dalilah, which thy own Conscience and the finger of God in
the Ministry many times meets with, and chiefly checks thee for.

2. That which thou art lothest to leave, have least power to resist, and which
most hinders the resignation and submission of thy soul and body to the Word
and Will of God.

3. That which God often corrects in thee, even in the interpretation and
guilty acknowledgement of thy self-accusing heart; and if ever the sword of the
Spirit shall cleave it from thy bosom (which is infinitely to be desired) it
will cost the bitterest tears, and deepest groans.

4. Thoughts, Plots, and Projects about it (a thousand to one) ordinarily seize
upon thy heart at the very first waking, if they have not broken thy sleep, and
troubled thee in thy dreams.

2. The sin once found out, do we pursue it, and make we a solemn Confession to
God of it; mourn we under it, and desire we help from God for his mortifying
Grace.

3. Settle we in our selves a purpose of heart, to forbear it for time to come:
In undertaking of which purpose, it will be expedient to set our selves some
short space of time, as for a day or a month, etc. and when the prefixed time
is come, we should then question our selves, How well we have performed? or
how, or wherein we have failed? and then begin a new purpose.

4. Be we ever jealous of our selves, and of our infirmity and proneness to
this sin. Now we have two grounds of this jealousy: 1. Lest we be deceived
about it. 2. Lest we be overtaken with it.


1. We may be deceived, in supposing that we are utterly divorced, and quite
delivered from this bosom-sin, when it is nothing so; as thus: --

1. We may change only in the outward form, and not in truth: For instance,
whereas the same sin of Covetousness does utter and express it self by Usury,
Symony, Sacrilege, Bribery, Grinding the faces of the poor, Detaining
ill-gotten goods, without restitution; we may perhaps insensibly glide out of
one gulf of griping cruelty into another, or it may be from one of these more
notorious, to some other less observed, and less odious in the world, and yet
still abide in the chambers of Death, and under the tyranny of this reigning
sin.

2. We may surcease, and refrain from the outward gross acts of such hateful
villainies, and yet our inwards be still defiled with insatiable, sensual
hankerings after them: For instance, Whereas the foul sin of Uncleanness does
actuate it self by Fornication, Adultery, Self-pollution, immoderate abuse of
the Marriage Bed, Speculative wantonness, we may perhaps forbear the external
acts of uncleanness, and yet lie and languish in the delightful revolvings of
them in our mind, in adulteries of thought.

3. We may change the kind of our bosom-sin, in respect of the matter, form,
object, every way; and yet upon the matter it self, it is but the exchange of
one foul fiend for another: For instance, Wantonness may be our sweet sin in
youth, and Worldliness in old age; Hypocrisy may reign at one time, Apostasy
at another; Furious Zeal for one while, Profane Irreligiousness for another.

4. We may for a time pull our necks out of this strong yoke of Satan (out of a
melancholic pang of slavish terror, serious forethought of death, lying
everlastingly in Hell) but because it is not the work of the word, humbling us
soundly under Gods mighty hand, planting Faith, and infusing mortifying power,
anon will this unclean Spirit return, and rule in us again far more imperiously
then before. -- I know it is not impossible, but that a man after his
conversion, by the sudden surprisal of some violent temptation, and cunning
train of Satan, may be haled back to commit his sweet sin again (though it be
an heavy case, and to be lamented, if it were possible, with tears of blood)
yet he never does, nor never can return to wallow in it again, or to allow it:
Here is the difference, The temporary man, after his formal enforced
forbearance, engulphs himself again with more greediness into the sensuality
and pleasures of his bosom-sin, he lies in it, and delights in it, and hardens
himself more obstinately in it: but the sound convert after a relapse, his
heart bleeds afresh with extraordinary bitterness, and he cries more mightily
to God, for the return of his pleased countenance, and he prays, and fortifies
the breach with stronger resolution, and more invincible watchfulness against
future assaults; observe then, if our change be but formal, outward, mistaken,
temporary, we are utterly deceived, and therefore we had need to be jealous of
our selves.

2. We may be overtaken with this sin, before we be aware; our nature is very
apt to take fire, our corrupt heart is like Tinder or Gunpowder: This sin is
called Pecatum in deliciis, our darling pleasure, our minion delight; it is
ever ready at every turn to allure us, tempt us, persuade us; and the soul by a
secret sensual inclination is apt to follow it, to feed upon it, with much
affectionate sweetness: It may be we have sometimes given it a deaths wound, by
the power of his might, who is our all in all, and yet as it is said of the
first Beast, this deadly wound is ready to be healed again; it is an Hydra with
many heads, Rev. 13.12.
and if we be not still hacking and hewing, it will revive and recollect
strength, and at last rage more then before; and therefore what need have we to
this holy jealousy?

5. Above all, without which all the rest are nothing, believe we the Promises
of Pardon, and of Sanctification: The Promises of the first sort, I spoke to in
our Watchfulness over this sin, and therefore now I shall speak of the latter.
The Lord has promised to deliver us from all our enemies, Luke 1 72, 74, 75.
Heb. 10.16.
that we may serve him in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life;
The Lord has promised to write his Law in our hearts, and that can never be,
except he obliterate all the old-writing: Now then believe these Promises, and
press the Lord with them, or we shall never be able to outwrestle our lusts;
what though we find our sweet sins, confess them, resolve against them, be
jealous over them? unless we go to God and Christ in the Promises for strength,
we shall lie down in sorrow: Could we of our selves subdue our Corruptions, God
would not take this upon him, to give us new hearts, and new Spirits, to
sanctify us, to make us new creatures, to crucify the flesh, to weaken the
dominion of sin: Alas, he knows our weakness, and he knows all is in his own
power; and therefore if we would mortify these lusts, we must go to him, and
beseech him to do it. When a man is once in Christ, he lives by a Principle
without himself: I live by the faith of the Son of God (said Paul) who loved
me, Gal. 2.20.
and gave himself for me: If we ask, Why will the Lord have our strength out of
our selves? why may not a man have sufficient habitual strength in himself, by
which he may be able to outwrestle lusts, and overcome temptations? The reason
is, Because no flesh shall rejoice in it self, and therefore Christ is made
Sanctification unto us: O let us believe these Promises, and have continual
dependence on the Lord Jesus Christ.

SECT. 5. Of the manner of examining our hearts.
THat we may rightly examine our hearts, observe we these Rules:

1. Use we retiredness when we fall on this work: To this purpose, Psalm. 4.4.
says the Psalmist, Commune with your own hearts on your beds, and be still:
When we get alone purposely to study our hearts, our hearts will then come to
us, they will be more apt to discourse with us privately, then in a crowd; and
therefore set we some time apart out of our public or particular occasions to
deal with our hearts, as David, who after the public business was done, turned
home to visit, 2 Samuel 6.20.
and to bless his own house.

2. Examine what thoughts are within, and which way runs the stream of our
thoughts: The heart is an house of common resort, into which multitudes of
thoughts, like so many guests, enter, and have free and open access; only if
it be sanctified, it ordinarily distills holy, sweet, and useful Meditations out
of all objects; as the Be sucks honey out of every flower, and a good stomach
sucks sweet and wholesome nourishment out of what it takes to it self: So does a
holy heart (so far as sanctified) convert and digest all into Spiritual and
useful thoughts: But on the contrary, if it be wicked, then a world of vain,
light, wanton, profane, and dissolute thoughts lodge there, and defile those
rooms they lodge in; which made the Lord say to Jerusalem, O Jerusalem, Ier.
4.14.
wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: How long shall
thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?

3. If upon examination we find a lothness to entertain holy thoughts, and
unsteadiness in them, a misplacing of them (which disorder is a vanity and sin,
be the thought materially never so good) or if we find in us many times a
taking thought to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Romans 13.14.
a representing or acting over sin in our thoughts (O how much of that precious
sand of our thoughts run out this way) then let us humble our selves for them;
and thus Agur teaches, Prove. 30.32.
If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought
evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth; (i.) be humbled, be ashamed of these
thoughts.

4. After humiliation, we must proceed to Judgment: And to that end consider,
what will be the subject of that great Inquest at the last day? The Apostle
answers, 1 Cor. 4.5.
The counsels of the heart: And who will be the Executioner? even Thoughts
accusing: O then let us prevent this doom, and this execution, by our own
Judgment and Self-condemnation; let us sentence our hearts, and whip out our
evil thoughts, and give them their pass.

5. Let us watch over, and observe our hearts ever after: Thoughts will be
crowding in, when we have done all we can, yet let them know that they past not
unseen; where strict watch and ward is kept, where Magistrates, and Marshals,
and Constables are diligent to examine vagrant persons, you shall have few of
them there: The reason that such swarms of vagrant thoughts make their
Rendezvous, and pass in our hearts, is, Because there is no strict watch kept,
we observe not our hearts with all diligence.

6. Set our thoughts in order every morning, strengthen and perfume our Spirits
with some gracious Meditations on Gods Holiness, Majesty, Omnipresence,
Omniscience: My soul waits for the Lord (said David) more then they that
watch for the morning; Psalm. 130.6.
observe it, if you please, when we first open our eyes, there stand many
suitors attending on us to speak with our thoughts, even as Clyents at Lawyers
doors; but speak we first with our God, and he will say something to our
hearts, and settle them for all the day after.

7. Now and then propose we to our hearts these two questions: 1. Heart, how
do thou? a few words, but a very serious question: you know, this is the
first question, and the first salute that we use to one another, How do you
Sir? I would to God we would sometimes thus speak to our hearts, Heart, how
do thou? how is it with thee for thy Spiritual estate? 2. Heart, what will thou do? or, Heart, what do thou think will become of thee and me? as that
dying Roman once said, Animula; vagula, blandula, etc. Poor, wretched,
miserable soul, whither art thou and I agoing, and what will become of thee,
when thou and I shall part? This very thing does Moses propose to Israel,
though in other terms, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
O that they would consider their latter ends! And O that we would propose this
question constantly to our hearts to consider and debate upon! Psalm 4.4.
Commune with your own hearts, said David; q.d. debate the matter betwixt you
and your own hearts to the very utmost: Let your hearts be so put to it in
communing with them, as that they may speak their very bottom. Commune,] or
hold a serious communication, and clear intelligence and acquaintance with your
own hearts: It was the Confession of a Divine, sensible of his neglect in this
kind, Mr. Lightfoot.
I have lived (says he) forty years, and somewhat more, and carried my heart
in my bosom all this while, and yet my heart and I are as great strangers, and
as utterly unacquainted, as if we had never come near one another: -- Nay, I
know not my heart, I have forgotten my heart; Ah my bowels, my bowels! that I
could be grieved at the very heart, that my poor heart and I have been so
unacquainted! We are fallen into an Athenian age, Acts 17.21.
spending our time in nothing more then in telling or hearing News: How go
things here? How there? How in one place? How in another? But who is there that
is inquisitive, How are things with my poor heart? Weigh but in the Balance of
a serious Consideration, what time we have spent in this Duty, and what time
otherwise? and for many scores and hundreds of hours or days that we owe to our
hearts in this Duty, Can we write Fifty? or where there should have been fifty
vessels full of this Duty, can we find Twenty or Ten? O the days, months,
years we bestow upon sin, vanity, the affairs of this world, whiles we afford
not a minute in converse with our own hearts, concerning their case.

SECT. 6. Of the manner of examining our Tongues.
THat we may rightly examine our Tongues, observe we these Rules:

1. Search we into our dispositions, whether we are men of few words, or given
to much speaking? The tongue may offend both ways, but especially if we are
wordy.

2. Peruse with a broken heart and bleeding affections, the many kinds of
those sins of the tongue, whereof (no doubt, at one time or other) we have been
deeply guilty. Some number them in thirty particulars; as, Blasphemy, Murmuring
Defense of sin, Swearing, Forswearing, Lying, Equivocating, Slandering,
Flattering, Cursing, Railing, Brawling, Scoffing, Giving ill counsel, Sowing
seeds of Discord amongst Neighbors, Double-tonguedness, Boasting, Discovering
of secrets, Hasty or indiscreet, Threatening, Rash Promises and Vows, Idle
words, Loquacity, or Immoderate talkativeness, Filthy talking, Scurrility, or
foolish Jesting, Tale-telling, Raising of rumors, Sinful silence, Rash
censuring, Malicious informing, Whispering.

3. Consider we the last Judgment, when men shall give account for every idle
word; Mat. 12.36.37.
for by our words we must be justified, and by our words we must be condemned.
Will it not be a fearful Bill, wherein must be written every word that we spoke
all our life long? O let us tremble to think of it, and judge and condemn our
selves, and seal up our lips with amazement, as if we were struck dumb.

4. Let us ever after set a watch at the door of our lips: I said, Psa. 39.2.
I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; I will keep my
mouth with a bridle. It is storied, That when this verse was read, or Lectured
upon to a religious person, he cried out, Tripart. lib. cap. 1.
Stay there, and I will hear the rest when I have learned that verse: A long
time after being demanded, Why he returnrd not to his old Master, he answered,
that As yet he was not perfect in his first lesson: And hence the Apostle could
say, If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to
bridle the whole body. James 3.2.
It is an hard work to bridle the tongue, and therefore we had need to watch
over it.

5. Pray we the Lord for the guidance of his Spirit in right governing of our
tongue; The preparation of the heart in man, Prove 16.1.
and the answer of the tongue, is from the Lord; and therefore prayed David,
Psalm. 141.3.
Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of my lips: James 3.6.
O the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity, as the fire flies about, so the
tongue is said to have wings; as the fire assimulates and turns every thing
into its own nature, so the tongue assimulates the hearts of men to whom it
speaks; we had need therefore to pray, that God will order this fire in our
mouths, lest we kindle such a fire in the breasts of others, as we shall never
live to quench again, and so kindle the fire of Gods wrath, which shall smoke
to our destruction.

SECT. 7. Of the manner of examining our Actions.
THat we may rightly examine our actions (I mean such actions as are matters
and concernments of the soul, whether the work of saving grace, or the
individual companions of this saving work, as Duties and Graces) observe we
these Rules:

1. For the work of saving grace or Conversion, examine --

1. Whether ever our souls were wounded by a clear discovery and wide opening
of our many ulcerous secret corruptions? Whether ever they were affected and
pressed with a through sense and feeling of the fierce wrath of God, ready to
break out into unquenchable flames of vengeance against us?

2. Whether after these bruisings and breakings, our souls ever cast their eyes
upon that infinite sea of Gods mercy, gloriously streaming through the bleeding
wounds of Jesus Christ upon every truly broken, contrite and wounded heart?
Whether ever they settled and fastened their sight steadfastly upon their blessed
Redeemer, as he was hanging on the Cross, struggling with his Fathers wrath for
our sins, and crying out at last, It is finished?

3. Whether after this sight, and consideration of the work of our Redemption,
our souls ever hungered and thirsted after the precious blood of the Lord Jesus,
far more greedily and insatiably, then ever the panting heart thirsted after
the rivers of water? Whether ever with strong cries, prays, groans and sighs,
they threw themselves with some comfort and confidence into the bleeding and
blessed bosom of our dear Redeemer, and there hid themselves sweetly and deeply
in his sacred wounds, and goared side, from the eager pursuit of the wounding
Law, the rage of Satan, and stingings of their own Consciences?

4. Whether after this fast-hold upon the Passion and Merits of Christ, our
souls ever received this comfortable news, That we were pardoned, justified,
entitled by the Covenant of grace unto a Crown of Immortality, and endless joys
in the Heavens? Whether this ever melted us into an Evangelical Repentance, to
bewail heartily all our sins, and former wretchedness of life, for having so
vilely and rebelliously grieved and offended so gracious and loving a Father?

5. Whether after these comforts and sorrows, our souls ever resolutely
abandoned the practice of every gross sin, and threw out of their affections
the liking and allowance of every the least infirmity? Whether we have ever
since settled our selves to holiness of life, universal obedience to all Gods
Commandments, though not in perfection and height of degree, yet in truth and
sincerity of heart?

It maybe every soul (truly converted) cannot speak affirmatively to every of
these Quaeres in intention, or height of measure, though for the substance they
can; and if so, we may conclude, there is the work of saving grace.

2. For the individual companions of this saving work, as Duties. Graces.


1. For Duties, examine --

1. How we manage them before, in, and after the work? Of this we shall inform
more particularly in most of the Duties, as we handle them in order.

2. What sensible and quickening communion we have with Christ in our Duties?
This is the main business and end of all the Ordinances of Christ. It is
ordinary with us to terminate our Devotions with a circular course of praying
Morning and Evening, or of coming to Church every Lords day; we look no
further, but only to the exercise of the body, we see not any thing in the
power of Christ shining out in strength in these Duties: And therefore examine
we particularly --

1. Whether we have (in the use of any Divine Ordinance) an intimate, tender
and effectual presence of Christ himself with us?

2. Whether we have a constant influence, a quickening power of Spiritual
refreshing, a sensible Spiritual taste of Divine love, or of God himself by
this presence of Christ? In right performance of Duties, we come to have fuller
Union with Christ, and by this coming to him, we come to, and see the Father by
him: And hence follows by this presence of Christ, these three things, 1. Peace
with, and a Spiritual joy in God: 2. A strength communicated to walk with
Christ, and in his power with God. 3. A sealed assurance of eternal communion
with God in glory.

2. For Graces, examine --

1. The truth of our Graces.

2. The growth of our Graces.

3. The wants of our Graces: All which we shall discuss at large in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

SECT. 8. Of the time of our Self-Examination.
THe Scriptures have determined no set time, yet some rules there are, partly
in Scripture, and partly prescribed by holy men, which we may make use of, as
thus:

1. There is no danger of surfeiting upon too much; the oftener we reckon with
our souls, the fewer things we shall have to reckon for every time; and the
fewer things there be, the more readily will they be called to mind, and more
exactly be scanned: This made Bernard Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 58. fin.
say of this work, If we will do it as often as we need, we must do it always.

2. The time that learned and devout men commend to us, is once every day: So
Chrysostom, Chris. Exp. in Psalm. 4.
Let this account be kept every day; -- Have a little book in thy Conscience,
and write therein thy daily transgressions; and when thou layest thee down on
thy bed, then bring forth thy book, and take an account of thy sins.

3. The time that especially Scripture holds forth to us, is at evening or at
night: I call to remembrance, said David, Psalm 77.6.
my song in the night; I commune with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent
search: And thus he bids us, Psalm. 4.4. Chrysostom. in loc.
Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Upon which words says
Chrysostom, What means this that he says, Commune with your own hearts upon
your beds? q.d. after supper, when you lie down, and are ready to sleep, and
have great quietness and silence, without presence or disturbance of any, then
erect a Tribunal for your own Consciences.

4. Other times may be as occasion requires: When the Church of Israel was in
distress, and sighed to God, then they encouraged each other, Let us search and
try our ways, Lam 3.40.
and turn again to the Lord. When Christians purpose to receive the Lords
Supper, then Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat: 1 Cor. 11.28.
When we observe days of Fast for humiliation of our souls; or when we observe
a Sabbath of Feasts, or especially when we are cast down upon our sick beds,
and in expectation of our dissolution, then it is time to examine, and to judge
our selves, 1 Cor. 11.31.
that we be not judged.

5. Besides those daily and casual times, it is convenient also, after some
good space of time, to examine our selves over again, ex. gr. after a month or
a year, to consider our selves for the month or year past, that we may see how
we have profited or decayed for that space of time; for as our members grow,
and our shape every day changes, and our black hairs turn gray, while we
perceive it not, yet after some space of time, we may easily discern; so it is
in our souls, besides the manifest changes which sometimes appear at the
instant, there are certain insensible alterations, which are not to be
discerned, but after some continuance of time: And for rectifying of these, it
is necessary to take a more general view of our souls, in a monthly or yearly
examination; by this means we shall see wherein we are better or worse, how our
zeal is increased or decreased; if we are bettered since our last general
account, we shall have occasion to praise God; if otherwise, we must therefore
be humbled, and blow the coals of zeal, and stir up the grace of God in us,
that we may strengthen the things which remain, Rev. 3.2.
and are ready to dye.

To this purpose we read of many Ancients that were accustomed to keep Diaries
or Day-books of their actions, and out of them to take an account of their
lives: Such a Register (of Gods dealings toward him, and of his dealings
toward God in main things) the Lord put into a poor creatures heart to keep in
the year 1641. ever since which time he has continued it, and once a year
purposes (by Gods grace) to examine himself by it; the use and end of it is
this:

1. Hereby he observes something of God to his soul, and of his soul to God. 2.
Upon occasion he pours out his soul to God in prayer accordingly, and either is
humbled or thankful. 3. He considers how it is with him in respect of time
past, and if he have profited in grace, to find out the means whereby he has
profited, that he may make more constant use of such means; or wherein he has
decayed, to observe by what temptation he was overcome, that his former errors
may make him more wary for the future.

Besides many other uses, as of his own Experiences and Evidences, which he may
(by the Lords help) gather out of this Diary.

SECT. 9. The daily Register of a weak, unworthy Servant of Christ, for some
years.
IT may be expected that I give some Example hereof; wherein, if I may any way
advance Christ, or benefit his Church, though I lie in the dust, I shall
willingly, in such things as are fitting to publish, subscribe the daily
Register of a poor unworthy Servant of Christ, indeed one of the meanest of his
Masters family for some space of time.

Memorandum That in this Diary the year begins with January.
1641.
JAnuary 24. This day came the news of my Mothers death, whom (for the daily
prayers made, and many tears shed for me) I esteemed as another Monica, and
therefore I had cause to mourn for such and so great a loss.

May 20. This day in the Evening the Lord in his mercy poured into my soul the
ravishing joy of his blessed Spirit. O how sweet was the Lord unto me? I never
felt such a lovely taste of Heaven before: I believe this was the joyful sound,
the Kisses of his mouth, the Sweetnesses of Christ, the Joy of his Spirit, the
new wine of his kingdom; it continued with me about two days.

1642.
January 6. This day I observed a private Fast in my house; where by the Spirit
of Prayer in some Christians, all hearts were warmed, affections moved, and
Christ manifested his presence in the midst of us.

Feb. 2. I Preached (at the desire of the people) the first Sermon that ever
was Preached in Garstange Chapel: I hope a blessed beginning, the Lord prosper
the Word in that place.

Feb. 5. The Lord (as once before wonderfully) so this day again delivered me
from the danger of fire, which had seized on some part of the house or stuff in
it where I lived.

May 15. I first Preached against all Superstitious vanities, and particularly
against the Cross in Baptism: This was the first occasion of the peoples
general discontent, ever since when some of them have been irreconcilable: Now
begun the Divisions of Church and State. Reformation proves an hard work. I
received strong consolation afterward out of Psalm. 37. v. 32, 33, 34. and out
of Psalm. 57. throughout.

Aug. 2. This day I observed a private Fast, with a godly Neighbor-Minister,
wherein some of his, and some of my Hearers joined: I took this as a
forerunner of Consociation of Churches.

November. 15. I was taken Prisoner, but some Gentlemen offered themselves to be
bound for my appearing when called; and so the Lord set me free: Now began the
troublesome times; and this year the Lord many a time assisted me in the
Preaching of his Word boldly to the Enemy, both above ordinary, and far above
my self.

1643.
Febr. 9. This day the Lord gave Preston (which was kept Garrison by the
Commissioners of Array) into the Parliaments hands. I saw much of God in it; O
that Preston would have known, or yet would know the things belonging to its
peace!

March 20. This day the Lord gave Preston again into the hands of the
Commissioners of Array, much blood was shed; I was taken Prisoner, and yet
preserved and delivered by the good hand of God.

July 5. The Affairs of this County were (by Gods Providence) so altered again,
that this day we observed an holy Fast, and Thanksgiving to God publicly, for
his peoples deliverances in Lancashire. There was many mixtures this year of
Gods frowns and smiles to his Saints.

1644.
Jan. 28. Many godly and sweet Ministers exiled from Yorkshire, were provided
for in Preston, and the parts adjacent: And this day they were pleased to
observe with me a private Fast in my house; it was a comfortable day.

May 2. Bolton was taken: Colonel R. Forces Routed, and many a sweet Saint
slain; no Quarter would be given, so that it grew into a Proverb,
Bolton-quarter (i.) present death without mercy: Now I removed into Yorkshire,
and the Lord provided for me comfortably, especially in Leeds.

June 14. Other two godly Ministers of Lancashire with my self, observed a
public Fast in Leeds new Church: The best people in and about the Town joined
with us.

June 21. This day the same Ministers joined in a private day; some Christians
of the place joined with us, and the Lord sweetly enlarged our hearts: A good
sign that he would return favorable answers.

July 2. and 5. Two solemn Fasts were observed at Manchester: It was observed,
That at the very same time of the former day, whilst an holy grave Minister
was praying, that the Lord gave us the Victory (which was the turn of England)
over Prince Ruperts Forces.

July 10. and 11. were days of Thanksgiving observed at Manchester for the same
Victory: They were two comfortable days.

Aug. 17. I returned to Preston, and the next day Preached there before the
General and Colonels: This was the Lords doings, to him be the glory and praise
for ever.

1645.
Feb. 27. This day I had given me an Augmentation to my former Means; The Lord
grant I may rightly improve it to his glory. Incline my heart unto thy
testimonies, Psalm. 119 36.
and not to covetousness.

March 11. This day, with some other Christians, I observed a private, but
solemn day of Thanksgiving: The Duty no sooner done, but News came to the house
(which exceedingly heightened our joys in the Lord) that Bristol was taken.

December. 2. This day Latham-Hall was delivered into the Parliaments hands: It
is observed, That as it was twice Besieged, so on the same day twelve-moneth
that the former Siege was raised, was the latter Siege laid; and it is supposed
(as it was foretold by a well-wisher to the house) that the blood shed at
Bolton pulled down those walls.

1646.
Febr. 8. This day, after the Lord had enabled me in the Preaching of his Word,
one of my Hearers came to me with tears and complaints, doubting her case and
Spiritual condition: Now the Lord bring in souls, and make his Word powerful
unto them.

May 20. I came to Weddicre, which I did upon mature resolution, every year
about that pleasant Spring time (if the Lord pleased) to retire my self, and in
some solitary and silent place to practice especially the secret Duties of a
Christian: In this place are sweet silent Woods, and therein this month, and
part of the next, the Lord by his Spirit wrought in me Evangelical Repentance
for sin, gave me sweet comforts, and Spiritual refreshings in my commerce, and
intercourse with him, by Prayer, and Meditation, and Self-Examination, etc.
discovered to me the causes of my many troubles and discouragements in my
Minister^: whereupon I prayed more fervently, pressed the Lord with his
promises, set his Power, and Wisdom, and Mercy on work; Psa 66.19, 20
and so waited and believed, till the Lord answered every Petition, and I could
not but observe his hand in it. This was a comfortable time to my soul. June
26. I returned home again.

Aug. 7. I was ill troubled concerning the Divisions amongst us, and the
reproaches of some cast upon me; but at last I drew comfort from Psalm. 37.4, 5,
6, 7, 8.

Aug. 23. I Preached, and all the hour the Stitch was sore in my side; after
Sermon I grew worse, and my sickness daily increased, the Physician could not
by any means give me ease: I then made my Will, gave Exhortations to the chief
of my Hearers; yet after it pleased the Lord to recover me, and September. 13. I
Preached again, when Mr. A. joined with me as Assistant. O the fruit of Prayers!

December. 8. We observed a private Fast: Some Ministers joined with me; it was a
heavenly day, the Lord walking in the midst of us. All glory to him.

1647.
March 1. This day Mistress C. sent for me, expressing that my Sermons of
Eternity had struck her with fear and trembling, and that she was troubled in
Conscience, and desired to be informed in Gods ways: I advised her, and prayed
with her; many a tear came from her: The Lord by his Spirit work in her a
through and saving Conversion.

March 3. Mr. B. a godly Minister in the North, being troubled in Conscience,
came to me, and desired some Spiritual advice: After acknowledgement of my
unfitness and weakness, I directed, as the Lord enabled. On March 8. we joined
in a private day of Humiliation; and the terror of Conscience had so worn out
his Spirit, and wasted his body, that he was not able (as he said) to perform:
yet desiring him to depend on God, and to cast himself on him for ability; he
prayed with such fervency, humility and brokenness of heart, that he opened the
fountains of all eyes about him, and caused a flood of tears in my Chamber, I
never saw the like day. All the glory to God.

March 29. This day I received a Letter from Mr. B. who expressed, That he had
found a great and constant ease and quietness of mind, ever since that day he
was by the good Providence of God cast amongst us; and that he enjoyed that
quietness, as Gods gracious return of our powerful Prayers. O our Father,
hallowed be thy Name in this and all things.

March 30. I received a Letter from Mr. S.B. then at Warwick-house in L. who
amongst other things, complained of our great Divisions, many fears, frustrated
expectations; so that if God show mercy now, 'twill be strange to us: but this
was our Unum Magnum, to have recourse upwards, to shelter our selves there, and
either to wait for better times, or our pass for eternity: This Letter coming
from so worthy, holy, and able a Divine, sadned my heart exceedingly, which
helped on the Duty of the next day, being a public Fast day.

April 1. Two Suns were seen in the Firmament by many in Preston: I dare not
stick in the natural cause, but rather consider it as a token of Gods heavy
displeasure.

April 17. I received a Letter from Mr. C. Minister at H. who visited with
sickness, expressed his grief for some former miscarriages; desiring that his
head were waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears, to weep for his sins:
adding, That whatsoever I was minded to say to him, whether by way of
Exhortation, Admonition or Reproof, it should be heartily and lovingly
accepted, and be as oil, which should not break his head. O Lord, make his
Repentance sincere, and sanctify his sickness to his Spiritual advantage.

May 2. This day (after three years want) we administered and received the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; it was the most heavenly heartbreaking day
(especially at the time of the Ordinance) that of a long time we enjoyed: Many
souls were raised, many hearts melted. Blessed be God.

May 19. This day I went to Weddicre, that in those sweet silent Woods (where I
have found God many a time) I might fall upon the practice of some secret
Duties, and enjoy sweet communion with my Lord and my God; accordingly I found
him in the several Duties of Self-Examination, Meditation, Prayer, Praises,
etc. June 21. I returned home again.

June 26. I visited (upon call) R. M. in his bed of sickness, who confessed
that the Lord made me an instrument of his souls Conversion; and now in his
sickness the Spirit of God had filled his soul with Comforts, and given him
Assurance, which he drew from Christ in that precious Promise, Believe in the
Lord Jesus, Acts 16.31.
and thou shall be saved.

June 27. I visited (upon call) E.W. whose heart God touched in the midst of
our Prayers, and she received some Spiritual Comforts.

July 1. R. M. sent for me again, and drawing to his end, he proclaimed Gods
goodness, and sweetness, and mercy, which were his last words; and after, in
the midst of our Prayers, he gave up the ghost. Now he enjoys that of which he
had such sweet fore-tastes. The next day I Preached his Funeral Sermon on that
Text which he hit on for his comfort, when he cried, It is come, it is come.

July 19. This night desiring God to sanctify my sleep and dreams, that I
sinned not in them: I dreamed, that after some troubles of life, my time
limited was at an end, and that I heard the very voice of God calling me by
name into his glorious Kingdom; whither when I came, heavenly ornaments were
put upon me by the hand of God, and of Christ: My soul was exceedingly
ravished. The Lord grant I may make some use of this, to be more
heavenly-minded, and to breathe more after Christ.

July 27. E.W. dyed in midst of our Prayers; the day after was our Monthly
Fast; which done, I Preached again her Funeral Sermon, and the Lord was then
pleased so to enlarge my heart, and to pour words into my mouth, that I am
confidently persuaded he spoke in me, and by me. O Lord bless thy word to the
people, and enable me still by the power of thy might.

October. 4. This day I was called by some discontented Brethren to a private
Fast: I construed this as good news from Heaven, was obedient unto it, and
joined with them. Some sparkles of former love still remained in every one of
us: notwithstanding former breaches, I trust God will by degrees unite our
hearts more and more.

October. 12. This day I was told by a godly Minister Mr. C. that Mr. B. residing
in Glasco, and lighting by Providence on my Book of the First and Last things,
it was a means (as he acknowledged) of his Conversion; at this time he was
ordained Minister by the L. Classis, and reported to be a holy and able man.
Glory and praise to thee, O my Lord and my God.

October. 15. A Letter full of Invectives, without any Name subscribed, was in
the night cast into my house: I guess the man, but I desire to look up to God,
to search my own heart, and to bind the Reproofs as a Crown unto my head; be
the Author who he will, I much matter not, Psalm. 27.11, 12, 13, 14.

November. 29. This night I was told that Mistress E. D. was upon my Prayer the
last Fast troubled in Conscience; and that since she had much talked of me, and
desired to see me, but her Companion concealing it, she now apprehended the
time was past, and utterly despaired: I sent to her, and at her first entrance
into my Chamber, she cried, O that face! I dare not look on it! Shall such a
lost creature as I look upon thee? -- Had I seen thee yesternight, I might have
been saved; but now I am lost time is past; -- O the terrors of the Lord are
upon me, etc. yet after she was pleased to hear me pray: And then I advised
her, To search out her sin -- To submit to the Lord, to wonder at Gods mercy,
that yet she lived, and was on this side Hell; -- To acknowledge Gods Justice;
-- To bear the indignation of the Lord; -- Not to quarrel with the Lord; -- Not
to limit him to this or that time; -- To learn Eli 's and David 's lesson, Here
I am, let him do with me as seems him good in his own eyes. To this she spoke
sensibly, acknowledging God to be righteous, That she deserved the state she
was in; yet promised to yield, and to be quiet under Gods hand, and to search
out her sins: so for that time we parted. After this I understood she grew to a
deep melancholy, took Physic, but before she was cured, she was took by her
friends into Ireland.

December. 5. I was very weak in body; yet being desired, I went out to pray for
R. G. who received thereby some soul-comfort, and within an hour after departed
this life.

1648.
January 24. I was troubled in mind to hear, and consider of the many
oppositions I found in my Ministry; at night I read a feeling passage in
Rogers on Judges 13. thus: -- I have often thought it Gods mercy, to keep the
knowledge of such discouragements from them that are to enter into the
Ministry, lest they should be deterred wholly from it, till by experience they
be armed against it.

March 17. I had news of a Justice of Peace who took offense at some passages
in my Sermon before the Judges; and after a Messenger came to me from the
Judges themselves, to give me an account of the Assizes, and especially of the
Trial of the Jesuit S. concerning whom was the exception taken.

May 3. We had sudden news of some Cavaliers driven out of Scotland, and
drawing toward us: At morning, in order of our Family-duty, we read Psalm. 124.
and at night 1 Pet. 5.7. both which places refreshed and cheared my soul.

May 5. We had blessed news from London, of an happy accord betwixt the
Parliament, City and Army; a strange alteration on a sudden: Thus God, when he
pleases, wheels things about, and is that Spirit in the wheels.

May 7. I administered the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; wherein I found much
sweetness, and blessed impressions of the Spirit of Christ, and Spiritual
inlargements above my self, and a return of Prayers, in that the Lord hedged
his Sacrament, that some such came not in, whom I desired to keep out.
Halleluiah. Blessed be God.

May 16. I came to Weddicre, to renew my engagements and loves with my Lord and
my God this Spring also: My ground is that of Cant. 2.11, 12. Cant. 2.11, 12
Come my beloved, let us go forth into the fields, etc. there will I give thee
my loves. The bridegroom of our souls (said Bernard) is bashful, and more
frequently visits his bride in the solitary places.

May 17. I went into the solitary Woods, to practice the secret Duties of a
Christian: No sooner stepped in, but the green Trees, and Herbs, and the sweet
singing of Birds, stirred up my soul to praise God. After, I begun my work, and
continued it during that month: At several times I ran through the Duties of
Watchfulness, Self-Examination, Experiences, Meditation, the Life of Faith; and
many a time I felt many sweet stirrings of Christ's Spirit: The Lord Jesus
appeared to my soul, gave me the kisses of his mouth, especially in my Prayers
to, and praises of his Majesty. Surely thou art my Lord, and I will praise
thee: Thou art my God, and I will exalt thee. Halleluiah. June 19. I returned
home again.

June 20. I observed this day an experimental truth, That it is the nature of
Mortification to press forwards to have more virtue from Christ: So a Christian
should 1. Prevail against the outward act of lust: 2. Against the rising and
rolling of it in his fancy: 3. He should then come to hate it, and the thought
of it. O Lord write this Law in my heart.

July 3. I observed with some Christians a private Fast, for the removal of
Gods hand in immoderate Showers, Sword, Pestilence, etc. and the next day we
observed a public Fast to the same purpose. O when will the Lord return
answers!

July 12. We had news that the Scots had invaded this Kingdom.

August 1. In the morning, a little before day, I dreamed fearfully of Satan's
being busy with me about my bed, and in terror I awaked; the night was rough:
Hereupon I meditated on Gods Judgments now abroad on the earth. After in my
Family-duty was read Psalm. 103. and from ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. whence I
drew some Spiritual comfort.

Aug. 5. I read the Story of Mistress Sarah Wight; I found many a sweet passage
in it, that exceedingly affected me, and melted my heart. Now the Lord Christ
be magnified and exalted, whom I desire to be my All in All.

Aug. 6. I read a Story of the Indians receiving the Gospel in New England,
written by Mr. T. Shepherd, wherein was expressed many gracious impressions of
God upon them, as the precious first fruits of America to Jesus Christ, it much
affected my heart to read it. All glory to God.

Aug. 9. Upon further advance, and near approach of D. Hamilton and the Scots,
I was forced to remove; and presently after I heard the enemy was come into
Preston.

Aug. 16. A Fast was upon the occasion observed in Manchester. In my
preparation unto it (reading in the Bible) I light upon Isa. 49.17. -- 51.12,
13. After the Duty begun, the Lord kept my heart up as in a flame: The day was
sweetly observed, but the Conclusion of it (when Mr. Angier prayed) was
exceeding sweet; his Prayer was so working, that I believe it melted all
hearts: and for my own, it pleased the Lord so to soften it, and break it, that
(so far as I can remember) it was never in such a melting frame in any public
Ordinance before.

Aug. 22. I returned to Preston, and saw the wonderful works of God, and heard
of many miracles of Mercies; -- as 1. That the Infantry of the Scots was
ruined, 150 Colors taken from them, 36 Barrels of Powder, 100 Barrels of
Match, 6000 weight of Bullet, 5000 Muskets, 2000 Pikes, the Enemy being above
30000, and the Parliament forces not above 9000. -- 2. That no place (whither
the Enemy came) escaped Plundering, except Preston, which was prevented by the
Armies coming in the very nick of time. -- 3. That provision of meat was
brought into the Town Hall for the Scots, to the value of a thousand pounds at
least, but the Armies seasonable march saved that provision for themselves. --
4. That some of the Scots in the pangs of death cried out, They had broken the
Covenant, notwithstanding that the word COVENANT was interwoven in their
Colors. Upon meditation of the whole business, I believed that the Lord heard
my Prayers: 1. In that my heart sympathized: 2. In that my heart was filled
with joy in the accomplishment: 3. In that the Mercy concerned me, in respect
of my person, Family, Congregation, as much as any other.

Aug. 30. and 31. we observed as days of public Thanksgiving to God.

September. 25. R.H. dyed: In his life he was incontinent, and run away with a
Journeymans wife that wrought with him; he was a frequenter of Alehouses, and
kept in his Shop a Jugge, which he called Jack of Newberry, of large size,
which he would have sent to the Alehouse sometimes about, and sometimes above
twenty times in one day: He was a great Prophaner of the Lords day, and
ordinarily would have wrought in the way of his Calling on it: Once being
demanded to pay Lays, he answered, How could they honestly demand moneys of
him, that would not suffer him to work; there were but seven days in the week,
and one day he must watch, and another day he must Fast, and a third day he
must rest from his work, because it was the Lords day. But this wicked life had
a miserable end: for some weeks together he consumed away; at which time of his
weakness, Mr. T.A. advised him to repent, to whom he answered in loud language,
Let me alone, let me alone: Another advised him to call upon God; to whom he
answered, I care not for God, and God cares not for me: A Gentlewoman advised
him to send for the Minister to pray for him; to whom he answered, Yes, when I
have need: and the party then going from him, he bade, The Devil go with her.
Upon remembrance of that Text (which he often repeated) No unclean person has
any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ; he concluded, That then he should
never see Gods face in his Kingdom. One whole night (which was terrible to the
hearers) he spent in cursing himself and others, bidding often, The Devil take
thee, and the Devil fetch me: Sometimes he was heard to say to the bystanders,
See, do you not see that black grim fellow that stands there? there will be
whisking even now: The very day before he dyed, he drank eighteen Cans of Ale,
and (without any visible repentance) the day after, he dyed, without any man or
woman in presence, to the amazement of them who first found him dead. O Preston
take warning!

October. 23. I had this Relation, That one Sir G.C. of an ancient Family, sprung
from many Knights, was much addicted to the sin of Uncleanness: An ancient Hall
he had, which for the statelyness he Idolized; he left behind him one Son, and
two Daughters: His on Sir H. C. followed his Fathers steps, and had only two
Sons lawfully begotten, whereof his younger dyed first, together with his Lady;
and the other Son having a Maid to wait upon him, she brought the Pestilence
into the family, of which his Son and Heir dyed also: He himself (now being in
a Consumption) said, That he knew his house was come to its period. About this
time his fair house was made a Garrison, by which means all his Barns and
buildings about it were pulled down; but the storm being over, he began to
repair the house, and two Workmen being lately come out of Ireland, having the
bloody Flux, brought that disease into the Family; hereupon he removed: And
when the house was clear, he returned, and began again to repair the Building;
but then the Pestilence by some means or other was brought into the Family, and
so he was forced to remove again: The house once again cleansed, he (being now
far spent in his Consumption) desired two days before his death to be carried
to it, saying, He must be the last of that house, and he would dye where his
Father dyed before him; accordingly his Servants conveyed him thither in a
Chair. His great affliction was the want of an Heir, and especially that he
knew none of his own Name in England (except Bastards) to whom he might convey
his Estate: But after much enquiry, he was resolved that there was a Gentleman
near his Name (it being but a syllable longer) who lived near the City of Y.
This pleased him so well, that he made him (though a stranger) the Heir of all
his Lands: In the mean while one of his Sisters dyed, and he himself (being
conveyed as aforesaid) dyed in the same place he so much desired. There was
none now alive of that Family, except one Sister, and she not long after his
death, dyed also; at whose very time of death (as it was observed by strict
calculation) a fire (not known certainly how) seized on that stately Hall,
which was so vehement, that none could quench it, till at least two parts of it
were burnt to the very ground. Here Is a Looking-glass for all unclean persons,
and vainglorious worldlings.

November 6. At night in my sleep I was exceedingly troubled with fearful
dreams of the Kings danger in reference to his person, and of great Commotions
in the Kingdom, and Uproars every where; and that I was got into the throng,
and could not avoid: At my waking I was exceedingly troubled.

November. 8. Some Christians with me joined in a day of Humiliation, and sought
God for a blessing on our Conferences the beginning of this Winter season.

November 14. A public Fast was observed in Preston, for a blessing on the
Provincial Meeting. Mr. A. and Mr. H. undertook the Burden, and performed it
very ably and sweetly.

December. 6. The Army (as I heard) turned the City Guard back, as they were
going to the Parliament House, and undertook the Guard themselves; after, forty
one Members were seized on, and carried away, and the next day they turned all
others back, whom they judged not expedient to sit in the House.

December. 25. was a day of jollity to all about us; but some Christians
considering the evil days we lived in, joined with me in humbling our selves,
and we found by sweet experience, that It is better to be in the house of
mourning, then in the house of mirth.

1649.
January 30. The King (as I heard) was Beheaded before White Hall: The news
came to me on Feb. 3. and on Feb. 4. I observed a day of Humiliation with my
own Family; which was helped on (for some part of the day) by the public
Ordinances: my ground was 2 Samuel 1.12.

Feb. 16. news, That the Commons Voted the House of Peers useless and
dangerous, and therefore to be abolished: As also, That the Office of a King in
this Nation is unnecessary, burthensom, and dangerous to the Liberty, Safety,
and public Interest of the People of this Nation, and therefore also to be
abolished. To this purpose ^hey Voted further, That the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy should from henceforth be made void, and never more imposed upon
any People in this Nation: On March 14. Acts were brought in to these purposes:
Hos. 3.4. -- 10.3, 4.

April 2. Some Christians with me joined in a private Thanksgiving day, for
Gods assistance and gracious appearings in our Winter Conferences: It was a
comfortable day. All glory to God.

April 7. news, that the Lord Major of London refusing to Proclaim the Act for
taking away Kingly Government, was put out of his Majoralty, put into the
Tower, Fined Two thousand pounds: And that four Ministers were sent for by the
Commons out of this County, to answer for their Papers against the Agreement of
the People, whereof my self (the most unworthy) was one.

April 8. I preached upon that subject of the Two Witnesses, and cleared it by
Scripture proofs, That they were Magistrates and Ministers, and that the time
of their killing is yet to come: Zech. 4.14. Rev. 11.3, 4, 7, 10.

April 10. Some Christians with me observed a private day of Humiliation, in
reference to our sins and manifold miseries threatening us more and more: It was
a good day. O Lord return favorable answers.

April 20. I received a Summons from the Committee of Plundered Ministers, to
appear before them, and to answer all such matters as should be objected
against me, concerning a Paper entitled, The Agreement of the People taken
into consideration, etc. by the Ministers of the Province of Lancaster; The
next day I went up toward London.

May 5. I appeared, with the rest of my Brethren, before the Committee: where
we confessed our Subscription, and owned the Papers for the substance of them.
On May 10, 13, 21, 22, 23, 24, we appeared again, and were not at all
questioned of any thing in the Book, but some few Interrogatories were made,
Whether we owned the present State-Government, and would submit to it? we had
many precious Prayers put up to God for us in the City, many Prayers and
private Fasts for us in the Country, many sweet encouraging Letters both from
Ministers and people in our own parts, and many unexpected friends and
acquaintance stirred up by God wheresoever we came; the Lord encouraged and
enabled us from time to time, so that the last day Mr. M. (Chairman of the
Committee, in whose eyes we found favor) wished publicly there, I would the
business of the Lancashire Ministers were well rid out of our hands. All glory
and praise be to our good God.

May 6. and 27. I received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper at the hands of
Mr. Nalton and Mr. Ash: Their Exhortations, Prayers, Consecration and
Administering of the Sacrament, exceedingly melted my heart. Blessed be God for
them: Blessed be they of the Lord.

May 28. Upon serious consideration of the manifold miscarriages both in Church
and State, which I observed since my coming to London, I had some resolutions
to spend the remainder of my uncertain days in a more retired and private way.
At this time I set out of London, and left this Book in the Stationers hands
for the Press. The Lord bless it to his people for his Names sake. Amen.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I. Of the Nature of Experiences.
EXperience (say some) is a knowledge and discovery of something by sense not
evident in it self, but manifested by some event or effect. This description
contains both Natural and Spiritual Experience; but my purpose is to speak
only of the latter, and in that respect I look strictly at Experiences, as
Real proofs of Scripture truths. When I mark how true every part of Gods Word
is, how all the Doctrines, Threatenings and Promises contained therein, are
daily verified in others, and in my own self, and so improve, or make use of
them to my own Spiritual advantage, this I call Experience.

SECT. 2. Of the gathering of Experiences.
THat our Experiences may further us in the way to Heaven, we must learn 1. To
gather them: 2. To improve them. 1. For the gathering of them, the only way is
--

1. To mark things which fall out; To observe the beginnings and events of
matters, to eye them every way, on every side, that they may stand us in stead
for the future: This observation and pondering of events, with the causes that
went before, is the ripener of wit; Isa. 42.23. Psalm. 107.43.
Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken for the time to come?
Whosoever is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall understand the
loving kindeness of the Lord.

2. To treasure up, and lay in these observations, to have ready in remembrance
such works of God as we have known and observed. The Philosopher says, that
Experience is multiplex memoria, A multiplied memory, because of the memory of
the same thing often done, arises Experience: I remember the days of old,
says David; Psalm. 143.5.
I remember how thou did rebuke Abimelech, and overthrew Nimrod, and Pharaoh,
and Ahitophel: and thus would we treasure up Experiments, the former part of
our life would come in to help the latter, and the longer we live, the richer
in Faith we should be; even as in Victories, every former overthrow of an
Enemy, helps to obtain a succeeding Victory. This is the use of a sanctified
memory, it will lose nothing that may help in time of need, or in the evil day;
it records all the breathings, movings, stirrings, workings of a soul toward
Christ, or of Christ toward a soul.

3. To cast these things thus marked and laid in under several Spiritual heads,
of Promises, Threats, Deceits of the heart, Subtilties of Satan, Allurements of
the world, etc. I might enlarge the Heads into any thing that is good or evil:
1. Into any thing that is good, whether it be God, or the things given us by
God; his Spirit, his Councels, his Ordinances, his Work of Sanctification, and
all the fruits of the Spirit. 2. Into any thing that is evil, whether it be
Sin, or the fruits of Sin, as Corruption, inability to good, vanity of all the
Creatures, the Judgments of God. Thus we must sort our Experiences, as the
Apothecary sorteth his Drugs.

SECT. 3. Of the improving of Experiences.
2. FOr the improving of Experiences, --

1. We must consider what Scripture-truth is verified thereby in Others. Our
selves.


1. In others, as if we consider how God blesses and cheareth the religious;
wherein that Text is verified, Isa 3.10.
Blessed are the righteous, for it shall be well with them, for they shall eat
the fruit of their doings: Or if we observe how God punishes the carnal and
hypocritical, wherein that Text is verified, Woe unto the wicked, it shall be
ill with them, Isa. 3.11.
for the reward of their hands shall be given them.

2. In our selves, as if by a Spiritual Experience we taste God to be good; 1
Pet. 2.3.
wherein that Text is verified, If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious: If we find the things given us of God to be good; as that his Spirit
is good, according to that Text, Thy Spirit is good: Psalm. 143.10.
That his Ordinances are good, according to that Text, Psa. 73.28.
It is good for me to draw near to God; -- and, This is my comfort in
affliction, Psa. 119.50.
for thy word has quickened me: That Sanctification, and the fruit of the
Spirit, are good; according to that Text, Lam 3.26.
It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord: -- It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, Psa. 92.1.
and to sing praises unto thy name, O most High: Gal 4.18. Heb. 13.9.
-- It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing: -- It is a good
thing that the heart be established with grace; or if by Experience we discern
the evil of sin it self out of measure sinful, Romans 7.13.
according to that Text, Sin by the Commandment is become exceeding sinful: If
we find out the corruption of our own Nature, Psa. 51.5.
according to that Text, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me: If we discover the abomination of our own righteousness,
according to that Text, Isa. 64.6.
We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy rags:
If we feel our own inabilities to do any good, according to that Text, Romans
7.18.
To will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good, I find
not: -- Not that we are sufficient of our selves, 2 Cor 3.5.
to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God: If we have
trial of the vanity of all creatures, as of Riches, Honor, Wisdom, according to
that Text, Vanity of vanities, Eccles. 1.2.
all is vanity: O how will these blessed Experiences, backed by Scripture
truths, kindle our affections! I deny not, Faith works more stedfastness, and
firmness of adherence, but Experience usually breeds the greater strength of
affections: I love the Lord, Psalm. 116.1.
(says David) and why so? because (of this Experience) he has heard my voice,
and my supplications.

2. We must endeavor to produce that fruit, that frame of heart, which the Lord
requires, directs, and looks for in such and such cases. Thus the
Sanctification of Experiences is evidenced by the Dispositions answering Gods
mind, which are left upon the heart, and brought forth into the life
afterward; namely, when Divine discoveries are the more strongly believed; the
heart by threats more kindly awed; adherence to the Promises more strongly
confirmed; the deceitful heart more narrowly watched; Satan's suggestions more
watchfully resisted; the bewitchings of the world kept at a greater distance
from the soul; in a word, when by this experimental application of Gods works
to his word, God is more advanced, and Self more abased, the honor of the Lord
is more studied, and the edification of his people endeavored, holy love
increased, service quickened, faith strengthened, Christ improved; then is this
business Christianly managed indeed. But of these more largely in the next
Section.

SECT 4. Of the Sanctification of Experiences in their several Uses.
THe Sanctification of Experiences is evidenced (as we said) by such
Dispositions as these: --

1. When Divine discoveries are more strongly believed; this is one fruit of
Experience, it wonderfully strengthens our faith: When the Israelites saw the
Egyptians drowned, then they believed the Lord, and his servant Moses. Exodus 14
31.
When we find all things in the event to be as we believed, this confirms our
Faith, as David knew that God favored him, by his deliverances. Psalm 41.11.


2. When the heart by threats is more kindly awed: This another fruit of
Experience, Psalm. 52.6.
The righteous also shall see and fear; first see, and then fear: When the
Primitive Christians saw Ananias fall down, and give up the ghost, Acts 5.5.
then great fear came on them that heard those things; this holy fear many a
time possesses the Saints: Psalm. 119.120.
My flesh trembled for fear of thee (says David) and I am afraid of thy
judgments. -- When I heard, my belly trembled (says Habakkuk) my lip quivered
at the voice; Hab. 3.16.
rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might rest
in the day of trouble: As the child quaketh when he sees his Father correct a
servant, so the faithful tremble when they observe the severity of Gods wrath
against impenitent sinners.

3. When the deceitful heart is more narrowly watched: Has it cozened us once
and again? Experience hereof will breed in us a godly jealousy and suspicion
over our hearts; we are now conscious of our own weakness, and of the snare
that is in every creature, to take and entangle us; and this will make waking
Believers circumspect and careful, how they entertain evil motions, how they
keep up holy thoughts, how they perform holy duties, how their affections move
toward that which is above, lest they should miscarry upon the sands.

4. When Satan's suggestions are more watchfully resisted, this is the voice of
Experience in such a case, Does Satan furiously assail us? be not dismayed; Are
his temptations most fierce? be we most diligent in the means of grace, the
practice of holiness, the labors of an honest calling; Pray earnestly, exercise
faith, stick faster to the word of promise, stop our ears against scruples and
doubtings; Draw nigh to God, for Satan will then cease to vex thee with his
temptations any more: Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you: Lam. 4.7.
it is true, the Believer is too weak of himself to withstand the least
assault, but if we rely on the Lord, we may through his power be made
victorious in the greatest assaults whatsoever; and here is the comfort of
Experience, That a Soul having once returned with victory, through the power of
his might, He will abide in the secret place of the most high for ever.

5. When the bewitchings of the world are kept at a great distance from the
Soul: This was Solomon's case and cure, after all his travels and great
delights, he no sooner returns as to himself, Eccle. 1.2.
but he fills the world with this news; What news? Vanity, And what more?
Vanity of vanities; And what more? All is vanity: Experience of its vanity,
weans him from the love of this earth, it takes him off the creature, and lifts
him unto the Lord his Creator; so should we (if ever we were charmed with such
Siren songs) be more careful, lest we be drawn away with the pleasing delights
of things transitory, and keep them at a greater distance from us.

6. When the Lord Jesus is more studied and advanced: The man that feels
Christ's gracious power and virtue, will be sure to exalt Christ, and set him up
on high; when Israel saw the mighty work of David in overthrowing Goliath, then
David was much set by: The Believers experience of Christ's mighty and gracious
working, makes Christ very precious to him, then he cries, as the Soldiers of
David, 2 Samuel 18.3.
Thou art worth ten thousands of us: Hence it is that Gods people value him
above all their profits, friends, ease, credit and lives. Matthew left the
Receipt of Custom, James and John their Ships, and Nets, and Father, and
followed him, yea, Rev. 12.11.
many for his sake loved not their lives unto death; no wonder they had many
sweet experiences of Christ: Christ to their apprehension was the fairest of
ten thousand, none but Christ, none but Christ.

7. When the peoples edification is endeavored: Have we tasted of the goodness
of God? let us then provoke others to believe, and to serve the Lord together
with us; this is one end of Experience, and that use we should make of it
toward others. When Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the
interpretation thereof, he worshipped, and turned into the host of Israel, and
said, Arise, Judges 7.15.
for the Lord has delivered the host of Midian into your hands.

8. When a man's own self is more abased: Do we live the life of grace and true
holiness? this will teach us to deny our selves wholly: If any man (says
Christ) will come after me, Luke 9.23.
let him deny himself; q. d. If any man will come after me in the knowledge of
my Will, in the belief of my Promises, in the love of my Truth, in the
obedience of my Precepts, let him deny himself, let him lay aside his own
wisdom, his own will, his own imagination, his own affections, his own ends, as
base and unworthy marks to be aimed at: Let him deny himself; whatsoever is of
himself, or belonging to himself, as a corrupt and carnal man; let him go out
of himself, that he may come to me; let him empty himself of himself, that he
may be capable of me, that I may rule and reign in him, and that he may wholly
subject himself to me and my service: This the Apostle styles, A living, not
unto our selves, but unto him that dyed for us; he alone understands, 2 Cor.
5.15.
and has experience of the end of Christ's death, that makes Christ's glory the
end of his life, and lives not to himself, but to Christ.

9. When holy love is more increased: I love the Lord, Psalm. 116.1.
because he has heard my voice and my supplication: We cannot taste of the
Lord, but we must have an hearty love to the Lord: Will you hear the voice of
Experience? this it is, O taste, Psalm. 34.8. Can. 2.5.
and see how good the Lord is; and then, O stay me with flaggons, and comfort
me with Apples, for I am sick of love; such a one truly affects Christ, and all
that follow Christ; such a one loves the person of Christ, without his
privileges; a naked Christ, as well as a Christ clothed with all his robes,
in all his glory and resplendent beauty; Christ in a Prison, as well as Christ
in a Throne: Thus John (after all his Experiences of Christ's love to him) could
love Christ on the cross, when other forsook him, as well as in the Temple,
when he was working miracles.

10. When hope is quickened, such times may come, that death and darkness may
surround us, and we may grovel in the dust: But here is our comfort, That
tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope:
Have we any Experience of Gods gracious dealings with us in former times? Romans
5.4.
have we sometimes been refreshed by his hand? has he sometimes helped us? was
he found of us when we sought him? nay, often unsought for? has he come to our
souls, and renewed our stock, and filled our becalmed spirits with fresh gales
of grace? how should we then but hope? As it was in this respect, it is, and
ever shall be; if new temptations arise, and new lusts break in and spoil, 2 Timothy 4.17, 18
it is the voice of Experience, I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion,
and the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto
his heavenly kingdom, to whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever -- and,
We had the sentence of death in our selves, 2 Cor. 1 9, 10.
that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead, who
delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver us, in whom we trust he
will yet deliver us.

11. When joys of the Spirit are raised and stirred up: Who is he that has not
been delivered out of some miserable exigents? and if we have, Psa. 71.20, 21.
we may well say with David, Thou have showed me great troubles and
adversities, but thou will return and receive me, and wilt come again, and take
me up from the depth of the earth, and comfort me: Former comforts are as a
bill obligatory under Gods hand, to assure us that he will not forsake us: John
13.1. Psalm 63.7.
Whom God loves, he loves unto the end -- Because thou have been my help,
therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.

12. When Faith is more and more strengthened, Experiences should be turned
into Confidences: Thus David improved his Experiences, 1 Samuel 17.36, 37.
The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of
the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine: In like manner
should we take notice of Gods dealings, and after we have once tried him and
his truth, let us trust him for the future; Tried Truth, and tried Faith unto
it, sweetly agree, and answer one another. Hence it is that Experience of Gods
love, should refresh our Faith upon any fresh onset; Judge 5.31.
So let all thine enemies perish (said Deborah, the heart of that blessed woman
was enlarged, as it were Prophetically) when one falls, they shall all fall;
there is the like reason, So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord. Experience
in our selves or others, will enlarge our faith to look for greater matters
still from our gracious powerful God: Has the Lord given us a victory over the
Philistines? then Awake, awake Deborah, awake, and be enlarged, O my faith!
Every new Experience is a new knowledge of God, and should fit us for new
encounters: I deny not but we ought to trust God upon other grounds, though we
had never tried him; but when he helps our faith by former Experiences, this
should strengthen our confidence, and shore up our Spirits, and put us on to go
more cheerfully to God, as to a tried friend. It was the speech of one eminent
in holiness, upon occasion of the accomplishment of a great request made to God
by him, I have tried God often, now I will trust him indeed. If we were read in
the story of our own lives, we might have a Divinity of our own, drawn out of
the observation of Gods particular dealings toward us: we might say, This and
this truth I dare venture upon, I have found it true, I dare build all my
happiness upon it; as Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have trusted, and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him against that day; q. d. I have tried him, he never yet
failed me, I am not now to seek how faithful he is to all those that are his.

13. When scruples and doubts are removed, O (cries the soul) I have many
Experiences, but no Comfort as yet. Thus David, after the remembrance of his
songs in the night, left his soul still in doubt; and he goes on to say, Psa.
77.7.
Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? In this
case it is the duty of Christians, to call to mind their former Experiences of
Faith and Joy again and again: for though they comfort not at one time, yet
they may at another. Have we found a Promise (which is a breast of Consolation)
milkless? yet again suck, Comfort may come in the end: If after we have
impanell'd a Jury and Grand Inquest to search, and our first Verdict condemns
us, or they bring in an Ignor^mus; yet do, as wise Judges often do, send them
about it again, they may find it the next time: Jonah Jonah 2.4.
looked once, it seems, and found no comfort, for he said, I will look again
toward thine holy Temple: So some have looked over their hearts by signs at
one time, and have to their thinking found nothing but Hypocrisy, Unbelief,
Hardness, Self-seeking, etc. but not long after, examining their hearts again
by the same signs, they have espied the Image of God drawn fairly upon the
Tables of their hearts, and so found a world of comfort.

O but (cries the soul) I have tossed and tumbled over my heart, I have
searched into the Registers and Records of Gods dealings, and me thinks, I can
call nothing into remembrance betwixt God and me: What, nothing? look again:
Did God never speak peace to our hearts? Did Christ never shed his love abroad
into our souls? Have we at no time found in our heart pure streins of love to
Christ? Pure drops of godly sorrow for offending Christ? Have we never an old
tried Evidence, which has been acknowledged and confirmed again and again in
open Court? What, not one? Surely, if we can now call to mind but one, if in
truth, it may support us: If one Promise do belong to us, all do; for every one
conveys whole Christ, in whom all the Promises are made, and who is the matter
of them: As in the Sacrament, the Bread conveys whole Christ, and the Wine
conveys whole Christ: so in the Word, every Promise conveys whole Christ; if we
can but say as the Church of Ephesus, This thing I have, Rev. 2.6.
that I hate sin: we may plead this to God, yea though it be in a lesser
degree, if in truth and sincerity (for God brings not a pair of Scales to
weigh, but a Touchstone to try our graces) if it be true gold, though never so
little of it, it will pass current with him: Isa. 42.3.
He will not quench the smoking flax, though it be but a smoke, not a flame;
though it be but as a wick in the socket, (as it is in the Original) likelier
to dye and go out, then to continue, which we use to throw away, yet he will
not quench it, but accept it. O let us comfort our selves with these words!

O but (cries the soul again) I have searched all crevases for light, but alas,
I cannot see the least beam of it: What help now remains? If it be thus, poor
soul, Be not faithless, but believing. Christ helps some to live above glorious
Manifestations; sometimes in absence of these Manifestations, just ones may
live, and rejoice in the invisible Essence of God: Christians may live waiting
on God, when his face is wholly hid from them; or Christians may live depending
on God, when all other subordinate stays or helps are lost: In such a soul
there may be this resolution, Let God do what he will with me, I Will hang on him
still, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, and there is comfort in this.

If so (says the soul) then what need of Experiences, so long as I have the
Promises, and may live by Faith? O but for all this, be not careless of
Experiences: for 1. It is the goodness of God, that besides the promises of
good things to come, he is pleased to give us some present evidence and taste
of what we believe: This heightens his mercy, that besides Faith, he should
train up his Children by daily renewed Experiences of his fatherly care. 2.
Though it be one thing to live by Faith, another thing to live by sight, yet
the more we see, and feel, and taste of God, the more we shall be lead to rely
on him, for that which as yet we neither see nor feel: This is the very meaning
of God, that by that which we feel, we might be strengthened in that we look for.

SECT. 5. The consideration of Experiences in a practical course; or some
practical Rules to be observed.
IT were good for Christians intending the practical part, to observe these or
the like Rules: Some Cautionary. Some Directory.


1. The Cautionary Rules may be these: --

1. In gathering Experiences, Beware of misprision of Gods Providence. There
are many mistakes now adays, and therefore it is our best and only course, for
our security, to interpret all Gods works out of his Word: We must make the
Scriptures [as we said before] a construing book to the book of Gods
Providence: Judge neither better of prosperity, nor worse of adversity, then
Gods word warrants us. This was the Psalmists cure, his Experience put a
Probatum est to this prescription, When I thought to know this, Psa. 37.16, 17
it was too painful for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then
understood I their end: God may prosper a wicked man, and he may construe this
as an argument, and note it as an Experience of Gods gracious dealing with him,
and dear love unto him: Isa 8.20.
O take heed! To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this word* it is because there is no light in them.

2. In improving Experiences, beware how we argue from one Experience to
another: Judgments threatened, are not always inflicted after one and the same
manner; God meets with the wicked sometimes in this life, and sometimes he
reserves their plagues for another. In like manner the gracious Providence of
God are not always dispensed after one and the same manner; indeed David could
say, 1 Samuel 17.36, 37.
The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of
the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine; and Paul could
say, I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and the Lord shall deliver
me from every evil work: 2 Timothy 4.17, 18.
and so we may say, that God many times has delivered us, and does deliver us,
and therefore that he will deliver us still: But this manner of arguing, as it
is demonstrative, so it has some limitations, which we must carefully take
notice of; as

1. That besides a mere Providence, we take notice of some Promise of God on
which we build: Thus Paul delivered from death at one time, argued that God
would deliver him at another time; but in his arguing he eyes the Promise, he
hangs on God, 2 Cor. 1.9,10
which (says he) raises the dead.

2. That we consider the manner of the Promise, because

1. Some Promises are disjunctive; as when God in his mercy conveys any thing
to us either in particular, or in the equivalent, by way of Commutation and
Compensation with Spiritual things. Rom 5.4.
Thus a Christians Experience works Hope, but not always of the self-same
outward issue, and manner of deliverance out of his trouble, which he has
before time found; No, we must hope according to the Word, or according to the
quality of the Promise: Paul's hope (after Experience of many deliverances) was
not expressly or peremptorily, that the prick in his flesh should be removed,
but that Gods grace should be sufficient, and so he had the fruit of his former
Experience, because he obtained an equivalent supply, but not otherwise.

2. Some Promises are conditional in respect of us; as when God promises
protection from contagious sickness, and from trouble, and war: If my people
which are called by my Name, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will
heal their land. In these or the like Promises, God may give us the Experience
of his Word at one time, but deny it at another, because we fail in the
condition of the Promise on our parts. Observe, Christians! would we conclude a
deliverance as formerly, be sure then to look to the frame and disposition of
our Spirits: If we are in the way of the Promise, then we may conclude it for
certain; if we meet God in the course of his Providence, or in the improvement
of the means he has appointed, then we may set it down, That God will do
whatsoever he has promised to give, in his own way, or otherwise not.

3. Some Promises are indefinite; as that in Jam. 5.14, 15. James 5.14, 15.
Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them
pray over him: -- and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord
shall raise him up: In this case God may sometimes, yet does not always perform
promise according to the letter, though a man may be truly qualified with the
conditions specified in that Promise, toties quoties, again and again. It only
intends thus much, That God may, and sometimes will save the sick, and raise
him up at the Churches prayers, but he will not ever do so. Now as God does not
always perform, so neither are we absolutely, or infallibly, or universally to
conclude, The Promise is not universal, but indefinite, and accordingly our
conclusions should not be universal, but indefinite: we should indeed, because
of the Promise, adventure our selves upon God in such a condition, not knowing
but in his outward dispensations he may make it good to us, yet with submission
to his pleasure, if otherwise he dispose of us: And as this is all we must do,
so this is all we can say, or conclude in such a case as this is.

2. The Directory Rules may be these: --

1. Let us communicate our own Experiences to the good of others. David in his
deliverances invites others to have recourse unto him: Bring my soul out of
prison, that I may praise thy name; Psalm. 142.7.
then shall the righteous compass me about, when thou shall deal bountifully
with me. Conceal not within our bosoms those things, the communicating whereof
may tend to public profit: Surely it were a course much tending to the
quickening of the faith of all, if we would impart to one another our mutual
Experiences.

2. Let us trade others Experiences to our own particular profit. Thus David in
desertion has recourse to Gods gracious dealings with his forefathers: Our
fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver them; they cried
unto thee, and were delivered, they trusted in thee, Psalm. 22.4, 5.
and were not confounded. What favor God shows to any one, he will vouchsafe
to every one that seeks him diligently, if it may be for his good: Thus we
find in Scripture, that sometimes a personal Experience was improved to an
universal advantage, James 5.11. Psalm. 73.1. Heb. 13.5, 6.

3. Let us cast our Experiences under several heads, and make the Word and
Works face one another, and answer one to another: Or to make the work
complete, it were not amiss to distribute the frame into three Columns; and in
the first to set down Experiences, in the second the Texts, in the third
Dispositions answering Gods mind, in such and such a case, to be left on the
heart afterward.

4. Let us pray with fervency (when ever we set a time apart to view over our
Experiences) that those Dispositions, answering Gods mind in every particular
Experience, may be written in our hearts, and brought forth in our life
afterward. This will be the chief use and choice comfort of the soul in this
Duty. And this method a poor creature and servant of Christ has followed in
his own particular practice: whereof I shall give you a taste in the following
Section.

SECT. 6. The Experiences of a weak Christian, cast into the method propounded.
. 1. Judgments on the Wicked.
Experiences.
1643.
FEb. 9. Preston was taken by the Parliaments Forces; several Papists slain in
it, some naturally of a good disposition, and therefore many mourned for their
untimely death, but rejoiced in the accomplishment of the promise.

Octo. 29. This day a Soldier was slain in Preston in the open Fair; and not
long after another Soldier was slain in the very act of drunkenness: It is
reported that he was drunk the night before, and that he threatened that very
morning, before night either to kill or to be killed.

1648.
June 6. H.M. (as it is said) drunk together 18 Cans of Ale, and presently upon
it fell sick, and after dyed; others in like manner surfeted: But above all, most
terrible was the death of R.H.

October. 23. A strange and fearful relation of the ruin of a family, and of a
stately house, of one who was exceedingly addicted to the sin of uncleanness;
and now (excepting two of his brothers base born) there is not a man left of
his name in all England; for which cause he conveyed his Estate to a stranger.

Texts.
Rev. 16.6, 7. They have shed the blood of Saints, and thou have given them
blood to drink. -- Even so Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy
judgments.

Rev. 19.2. He has judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with
her fornication, etc.

Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these,
-- Hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like.

Isa. 5.11, 14. We unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink, that continue until night, till the wine inflame them: --
Therefore Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure,
etc.

Prove. 5.8, 9, 10, 11. Remove thy way from the strange woman, lest thou give
thine honor to others; -- lest strangers be filled with thy wealth -- and thou
mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed.

Dispositions required in this case, and to be prayed for.
Rev. 18.4 Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues.

Rev. 18.20. Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets,
for God has avenged you on her.

Gal. 5.16. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts.

1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body,
and in your Spirit, which are Gods.

Prove. 23.20. Be not amongst wine-bibbers.

Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and so that day come upon you
unawares.

Romans 13.13. Let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness.

Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with the
Spirit.

Coloss. 3.5, 6. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection: -- For which things sake the
wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.

1 Thessalonians. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye
should abstain from fornication.

. 2. Gods love to the Saints.
Experiences.
1642.
SEpt. 29. This night some Christians observed a night of Humiliation and
Prayer for besieged Manchester; and October. 1. the Siege was raised: Gods love
was exceedingly manifested herein to the Saints, both within and without that
prayed for Town. O let the mercy never be forgotten!

December. 23. Thus they prayed for Blackburn, and December. 24. the siege was
raised thence.

1647.
Feb. 11. This evening one was desired to pray for Mr. L. sick child; and it
was observed in the heat of Prayer, at the commending of its soul to God, the
soul at that very expression left the body: Blessed be God for this Providence,
and for the assistance of his spirit at so needful a time

1648.
August 7. A Letter from Mr. Tho:Shepherd, of the Indians receiving the Gospel
in New England: He calls them, The precious first fruits of America to Jesus
Christ; it much affected the hearts of many.

Aug. 22. many Miracles of mercies to England, to the County Palatine of
Lancaster, and especially to Preston, by that glorious Victory over the Scots:
The Army came to Preston in the very nick of time, by which means it both
escaped Plundring and firing, the Enemy having threatened it both ways. Surely,
God now answered Prayers, of which the LORD gave some signs the very day
before, at a public Fast observed in Manchester.

Texts.
2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people which are called by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then
will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.

2 Chronicles. 6.28, 29, 30. If their enemies besiege them in the cities of their
land, -- then what prayer shall be made by any man, -- hear thou from heaven.

Isa. 65.24. And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer,
and whilst they are yet speaking, I will hear.

Acts 7.59, 60. Lord Jesus receive my spirit: -- and when he had said this, he
fell asleep.

Isa. 60.5, 8. The abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the
forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee: -- Who are these that fly as a
cloud, and as the doves to their windows?

Judge. 20. 28,42,43,45. Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children
of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And the Lord said, Go up, for to
morrow I will deliver them into thy hand: -- So they turned their backs before
the men of Israel -- but the battle overtook them, -- and chased them, and trod
them down with ease over against Gibeah -- and they gleaned of them in the high
ways, and pursued after them to Gidom, and slew 2000. See the occasion of this
battle, v. 13, 14, 15.


Dispositions required in this case, and to be prayed for.
Psalm. 28.6. Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my
supplications.

Psalm. 116. 1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my
supplications, because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call
upon him as long as I live.

Psalm. 6.8. Away from me, ye workers of iniquity, God has heard the voice of
my weeping.

Ps. 66. 16, 17, 18, 19. Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will
declare what he has done for my soul: I cried unto him with my mouth, and he
was extolled with my tongue: If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will
not hear me; but verily God has heard me, he has attended to the voice of my
Prayer.

Isa. 54.1. Sing O barren, thou that did not bear; break forth into singing,
and cry aloud, thou that did not travel with child: for more are the
children of the desolate, then the children of the married wife, says the Lord.

Psa. 2.11. Rejoice with trembling.

Psalm. 44.8. In God we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever.
Selah.

Exo. 15.11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods? who is like unto
thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?

Judge. 5.15. For the divisions of Reuben, there were great thoughts of heart.

. 3. Several Chastisements or Afflictions on my self and others.
Experiences.
1641.
JAn. 24. This day one heard of his Mothers death, whose daily prayers and
tears, now missing, he could not but mourn for her loss.

March 5. This day the LORD visited one with a Fever, but not long after
restored him to his former health.

1645.
Jan. 21. This day fire took hold on the clothes of a young child, and burned
his face very ill.

1646.
Aug. 23. one fell into a sore sickness; many gave him for gone, but the Lord
recovered him.

1647.
December. 27. This day one understood of the slanders, and consultations and
threat^ of some eminent persons against him; at which time he fell upon
reading, and the Lord seemed to speak to him out of Psalm. 31.

1648.
Jan. 24. I had a grieved and troubled heart, by reason of some opposition of
wicked people; at night I read a feeling passage of Mr. Rogers on Judges 13.
thus, -- I have often thought it Gods mercy, to keep the knowledge of such
discouragements from them that are to enter into the Ministry, lest they
should be deterred wholly from it, till by experience they be armed against it.

July 1. or thereabouts, one gave me a Relation of her sad desertion, thus --
That one night as she sat by the fire, she thought she saw the ground open,
and a gulf of fire appearing; whereupon she cried, I am damned, I am damned: If
at any time she saw any fire, she supposed that she must go into it, and that
the Devils would fetch her into it. Once wringing her hand^, she cried ou^, O
what was I born into the world for? one standing by, answered, To glorify God;
to whom she replied, You say true, for God shall be glorified in my damnation:
If any offered to pray, or to read, she usually cried out, It was too late to
pray for her; and they should not read that pure Word of God by her, for it
belonged not to her. At last God appeared, and she felt mavelous comforts.

Texts.
Psalm. 35.14. I bowed down heavily, as one that mourns for his Mother.

Luke 4. 38, 39. Simons wives mother was taken with a great fever, and they
besought Christ for her; and he rebuked the fever, and it left her.

Zech. 3.2. Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?

Phil. 2.27. For indeed he was sick nigh unto death, but God had mercy on him.

Psa. 31.13. I have heard the slander of many, fear was on every side, while
they took counsel together against me.

Joh. 15.20. Remember the word that I have said unto you, the servant is not
greater then the lord; if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.

1 Cor. 4.13. We are made as the filth of the world, and are as the
offscouring of all things unto this day.

Job 13.24, 26. wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thy enemy?
thou writest bitter things against me.

Psa. 88.14, 15. Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face
from me? I am afflicted and ready to dye; -- while I suffer thy terrors, I am
distracted, etc. v. 16, 17, 18.

Dispositions required in this case, and to be prayed for.
2 King. 2.12. And he cried, My father, my father, the charet of Israel and the
horsemen thereof.

1 Thessalonians. 4.13. Concerning them which are asleep, sorrow not, even as others
which have no hope.

Psalm. 103. 2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits;
who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.

Isa. 43. 1, 2. Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy
name, thou art mine; when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee,
when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt.

Psalm. 30.3, 4. O Lord, thou have brought up my soul from the grave, thou have
kept me alive -- Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his.

Joh. 11.4. This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the
Son of God might be glorified thereby.

Psa. 31. 14, 15, 16. But I trusted in thee, O Lord; I said, Thou art my God,
my times are in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from
them that persecute me: Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, etc.

Matthew. 5.12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in
heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.

Matthew. 5.44. Pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you.

Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation,
or distress, or persecution? etc.

Romans 12.14. Bless them which persecute you: bless, and curse not.

Psalm. 77.5, 6, 7, 10. I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient
times: I call to remembrance my song in the night, I commune with mine own
heart, and my Spirit makes diligent search: Will the Lord cast off for ever?
and will he be favorable no more? -- And I said, This is my infirmity.

Isaiah 50.10. Who is among you that fears the LORD, that obeys the voice
of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him trust in
the Name of the LORD, and stay upon his God.

. 4. Performances of gracious Promises to my self and others.
Experiences.
1642.
JAn. 6. This day a private Fast being observed, the Lord gave some, that
exercised, the very spirit and power of Prayer, to the ravishment of hearers;
surely it was the Spirit spoke in them.

Feb. 5. The Lord wonderfully this day (as once before) delivered one from the
danger of fire, which had begun in his house, but was discovered by the smoke.

1643.
Ian. 2. This day was snares laid for a poor Christian; the Sheriff of the
county sent for him, but the Lord delivered him.

1644.
July 2. This day was a public Fast observed in Manchester, and the very same
day the Lord returned answers, by overthrowing Pr. Ruperts forces at York.

1646.
Sept. 13. The Lord restored one to his health, out of a dangerous disease, and
he praised God for it in the public Assemblies.

1647.
December. 11. This day one observed GODS goodness, in supplying fully all his
Temporal wants: This he construed as an earnest both of Spiritual and Eternal
favors and mercies in Christ.

1649. May 5. Some Ministers were convented before the Committee of plundered
Ministers, and examined by them concerning a Book put forth by the Ministers of
Christ in the Province of Lancaster; but the Lord stood by those Ministers, and
gave them in that hour what to speak for Christ and his Cause.

Texts.
Zech. 12.10. And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, and of supplications.

Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, -- it makes
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered.

Isa. 43.2. When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

Psa. 64.5, 7. They commune of laying snares privily: -- But God shall shoot at
them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded.

Psalm. 55.18. He has delivered my soul.

Isa. 65.24. And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer;
and whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear.

Deuteronomy. 7.15. And the Lord will take away all sickness.

Exodus 23.25. And I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.

Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you.

Pro. 13.4. The soul of the diligent shall have plenty.

Matthew. 10. 18, 19, 20. And ye shall be brought before Governors and Kings for
my sake. -- But take no thought how, or what ye shall speak, for it shall be
given you in that same hour what ye shall speak: for it is not ye that speak,
but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you.

Dispositions required in this case, and to be prayed for.
Jer. 29.12, 13. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go, and pray unto me,
and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall
search for me with all your heart.

Jer. 31.9. They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead
them.

Dan. 3.15. Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace.

Isa. 24.15. Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the fires.

Psalm. 64.9, 10. And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God: for
they shall wisely consider of his doing; the righteous shall be glad in the
Lord, and shall trust in him, and all the upright shall glory.

Psa. 66.13, 14. I will pay thee my vows which my lips have uttered, and my
mouth has spoken.

Psa. 66.20. Blessed be God, which has not turned away my prayer, nor his
mercy from me.

Psa. 30.3* 12. Thou have kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit;
-- to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent. O Lord
my God, I will give thanks to thee for ever.

Psalm. 62.10. If riches increase, set not your heart upon them.

Prove. 30.8. Remove far from me vanity and lies, give me neither poverty nor
riches: feed me with food convenient for me.

Matthew. 10.16. Be ye wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

Matthew. 10.26. Fear them not therefore, for there is nothing covered that shall
not be revealed, and hid that shall not be known.

Matthew. 10.28. But rather fear him, who is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell.

. 5. The temptations of Sin prevailing, of Satan cheating, of the World
ensnaring.
Experiences.
1646.
MAy 25. The Lord opened a poor creatures eye, to see in some measure the
depths of Satan, and deceitfulness of his own heart: he acted in things
doubtful, against the reluctance of his own conscience before; no question this
is sin, because it is not of faith.

1647.
Jan. 23. This evening one fell into exorbitancy of passion; it was so strong
in him, that it cast him into Palpitation of heart.

March 27. Ones heart was overpowered, and exceedingly troubled with the cares
of this life; and this occasioned some discontentments in his family. O base
world! how do thou vex them that intermeddle with thee?

October 5. One was overcome with a strong temptation of Satan, for which his
conscience immediately smit him very sore.

1648.
April 4. and 17. A poor creature in the night was fearfully troubled in his
dreams with Devils, and Torments, and Satan's power over his soul: He
apprehended strongly that Satan was with him, and very busy to ensnare him;
which at his first awaking struck him with trembling and horror.

Texts.
Romans 7. That which I do, I allow not.

Romans 14.23. He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of
faith, for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Job 18.4. He teareth himself in his anger.

Prove. 15.1. A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger.

Pro. 19 11. The discretion of man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to
pass over a transgression.

Eccles. 1.2, 14. Vanity of vanities, says the preacher, vanity of vanities,
all is vanity. -- Behold, all is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

Romans 7.23. I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.

2 Cor. 2.11. We are not ignorant of his devices. --

Ephesians. 6.11. Of the wiles of the devil. -- Rev. 2.24. Of the depths of Satan.

1 Thessalonians. 3.5. By some means the tempter has tempted you.

1 Pet. 5.8. Your adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walks about seeking
whom he may devour.

Dispositions required in this case, and to be prayed for.
Romans 14.22. Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God: Happy is he that
condemns not himself in that thing which he allows.

Gal. 2.14. Walk uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel.

Psalm. 37.8. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thy self in any wise
to do evil.

Ephesians. 4.31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil
speaking, be put away from you, with all malice.

Col. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore bowels of mercies, kindeness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another.

Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that
day come upon you unawares.

1 John 5.4. Whosoever is born of God overcomes the world; and this is the
victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.

Matthew. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation; the Spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

Ephesians. 6.11, 16. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil. -- Above all, take the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

Jam. 4.7. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you. -- 1 Pet 5.9. Whom
resist stedf^st in the faith.

2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations.

. 6. Victories of the World, Lusts, Temptations, Corruptions, Satan.
Experiences.
1646.
MAy 25. the Lord discovered to a poor creature his sins, not only in things
absolutely sinful, but in things doubtful; and by the power of his might, began
blessedly to subdue in him those his iniquities.

1647.
Jan. 24. One troubled in conscience for his rash anger, reconciled himself to
his adversary, and immediately God spoke peace to his conscience.

March 27. A poor soul being mightily ensnared with the world, and finding by
experience its vanity and vexation, he resolved against it, divided his estate
betwixt his wife and children, desiring thenceforth piously to make his soul to
rejoice in Gods blessings and his own labors, and to give himself to the LORD
wholly for the remainder of his days: This desire he makes at the feet of
Christ.

1648.
March 6. This night in his sleep a troubled soul was by Satan tempted to sin,
but the Lord stood by him, put prayers into him though asleep, whereby he
overcame the temptation; then awaking, he deeply apprehended Satan's approach
and busy temptations: it struck him into fears, but praising God for his
assistance, he received boldness, and then slept again.

Texts.
Romans 14.14. I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self; but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him
it is unclean.

Mat. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee, -- go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother.

Eccles. 2.24.-3.22.-5.19. There is nothing better then that a man should
rejoice in his own works, for that is his portion. Every man also to whom God
has given riches, and wealth, and has given him power to eat thereof, and to
take his portion, and to rejoice in his labor; this is the gift of God.

1 Timothy 6.9, 10, 11. They that will be rich, fall into temptation and a snare:
-- for the love of money is the root of all evil: -- But thou O man of God,
flee these things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love,
patience, meckness.

2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. There was given to me a thorn in the flesh; -- for this
thing I besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me; and he said unto
me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness.

Dispositions required in this case, and to be prayed for.
Romans 14.^9. Let us follow after the things which make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another.

Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void
of offense, toward God, and toward men.

Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls.

Tit. 1.7. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God, not
self-willed, not soon angry.

Phil. 4.11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.

1 Timothy 6.8. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, that they be
rich in good works, ready to distribute, -- laying up in store for themselves a
good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal
life.

1 Cor. 15.57. But thanks be to God, which gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

2 Cor. 12.9. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that
the power of Christ may rest upon me.

James 4.5, 6. The Spirit that dwells in us, lusts to envy, but he gives
more grace.

. 7. Observations of Gods providence.
Experiences.
1642.
FEb. 5. This day one observed a special providence in preventing a sin, to
which he had given consent, with some reluctance of spirit. O gracious
Providence!

May 25. A Minister being generally opposed and discountenanced by the people,
who had formerly expressed singular love to him, which arose from his casting
off some unlawful ceremonies of the Church; it pleased the Lord that he
observed this day a special providence, which put a courage into him, by reading
(as it fell in course in his family duties) Psalm. 57.

June 24. One this day understood by a Knight, that some snares were laid for
him, and by a special Providence at the same time he opened the Bible, and cast
his eye on Psa. 37. v. 32, 33, 34. to his great encouragement and comfort.

1647. Aug. 9. this day some Christians observing a private Fast in reference
to the Distractions betwixt the City and Army, in midst of the duty, there came
into them an Emissary from the Army, with Papers and Declarations; of this
Providence (though sad) they made use in their Prayers.

Aug. 13. This day hearing the proceedings at London, a Minister brake out into
those words written in Is. 59.14, 15, 16.

1648.
March 1. This day one musing on Gods Providence, he occasionally took up a
Book, and read in it, That the recording of Providence is not the least
portion of Gods Praise, of our Duty, of Posterities Patrimony.

Texts.
2 Thessalonians. 3.3. The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from
evil.

Psalm. 94.18. When I said, My foot slippeth: thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.

1 Samuel 2.9. He will keep the feet of his saints.

Psalm. 69.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. For thy sake I have born reproach, shame
has covered my face, I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien
unto my mothers children: for the zeal of thy house has eaten me up, and the
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me: When I wept, and
chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach: -- But as for me, my
prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable time.

Psalm. 37.32, 33. The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him;
the Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

Psalm. 38.12. They that seek after my life, lay snares for me: and they that
seek, my hurt speak mischievous things.

Dan. 9.16, 20, 22, 26. I beseech thee let thine anger and thy fury be turned
away from thy city Jerusalem: -- And whilst I was speaking and praying, and
confessing my sin, -- the man informed me, and talked with me, and said, Unto
the end of the War desolations are determined.

Isa. 59.14, 16. Judgment is turned away backwards, and justice stands afar
off, for truth is fallen in the streets.

Job 5.27. Lo, this we have searched, so it is; hear thou it, and know it for
thy good.

Dispositions required in this case, and to be prayed for.
Joh. 17.15. I pray not that thou should take me out of the world, but that
thou should keep me from the evil.

Isa. 30.21. This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand and
when ye turn to the left.

2 Samuel 16.11, 12. Let him alone, and let him curse, for the Lord has bidden
him; it may be the Lord will look on my affliction, and that the Lord will
requite good for his cursing this day.

Isa. 51.7. Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose
heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their
revilings.

Mat. 5.12. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven,
for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

Psalm. 37.34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to
inherit the land; when the wicked are cut off, thou shall see it.

Psalm. 38.13, 15. But I as a deaf man heard not, and I was as a dumb man that
opens not his mouth: for in thee Lord do I hope, thou will hear, O Lord my
God.

Isa. 26.16, 17, 18. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they pour out a
prayer when thy chastening was upon them, like as a woman with child that
draws near the time of her delivery: -- We have been with child, we have
been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind, we have not wrought any
deliverance in the earth.

Lam. 1.20. Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress, my bowels are troubled, mine
heart is turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled.

Psalm. 34.8, 9. O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that
trusts in him; fear the Lord, ye his saints.

. 8. The breathings of the Spirit in others, and my own Soul.
Experiences.
1641.
MAy 20. This day the Lord cast one into a Spiritual, heavenly ravishing
love-trance; he tasted the goodness of God, the very sweetness of Christ, and
was filled with the joys of the Spirit above measure. O it was a good day, and
blessed foretaste of heaven.

1644.
April 21. This day one received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but found
not in it the comfortable presence of Christ as at other times; it troubled his
soul, and then falling to examination and prayer, the Lord was pleased at last
to give him a sweet visit, and spiritual refreshing.

1645.
March 17. After some extreme torment, one voided a Stone; and suddenly the
Spirit of Christ injected this motion into his heart, That the best cure for
the stone in his heart, was to look on Christ, whose heart he pierced; and to
consider that Christ looks on him in every action, and therefore that he should
still carry as in his presence, that his heart should be still on Gods eye

1646.
May 22. The Lord by his spirit wrought in one a depth of humiliation for sin,
and yet he was troubled that he was not more troubled for it.

1647.
Feb. one was struck into very sad, serious, and withal sweet stirrings of Gods
Spirit within him, at the consideration of Eternity.

1648.
May 7. This day one felt many sweet impressions of Gods Spirit in his heart,
sometimes melting, and sometimes cheering his soul, in the public Ordinances
of his Word and Sacrament.

Texts.
Cant. 2.3. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste.

2 Cor. 7.4. I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our
tribulation.

Acts 13.52. And they were filled with joy, and with the holy Ghost.

Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. I sought him whom my soul loves, I sought him, but I
found him not: I will rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in
the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loves; I sought him, but I found
him not: -- it was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom
my soul loves.

Zech. 12.10. And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one that mourns for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we
have to do.

Isa. 38.14. Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter, I did mourn as a
dove, mine eyes fail with looking upwards: O Lord undertake for me.

Ps. 39.3, 4. while I was musing, the fire burned; then spoke I with my tongue,
Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days.

Cant. 5.1. I am come into my garden, my sister my spouse, I have gathered my
myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have drunken
my wine with my milk: Eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved.

Dispositions required in this case, and to be prayed for.
1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom though now we see him not,
yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

Rev. 22.17, 20. And the Spirit and the Bride say Come, and let him that
hears, say Come, and let him that is athirst come. -- He which testifies
these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen, even so come Lord Jesus

Cant. 1.7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou
make thy flock to rest at noon? for why should I be as one that turns aside
by the flocks of thy companions?

Cant. 3.4. I found him whom my soul loves, I held him, and would not let him
go.

2 Thessalonians. 5.19. Quench not the Spirit.

Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. I will take away the stony heart out of their flesh, and I
will give them an heart of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes, and keep
my ordinances to do them.

Zech. 12.11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Haddadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.

James 4.9, 10. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned
to mourning, and your joy to heaviness: humble your selves in the sight of the
Lord, and he shall lift you up.

Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end.

1 Timothy 6.12. Lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called.

Psalm. 89.15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound, they shall walk
O Lord, in the light of thy countenance.

. 9. Deceits of the heart beguiling.
Experiences.
1641.
FEb. 19. This day one fell upon a religious work, but too strongly intended
himself and his own ends therein. O deceitful heart!

1643.
Jan. 2. A poor soul was this day strongly moved, and ready to drop into evil,
which would have been scandal; but by a subtle kind of dealing, he declined
the temptation, so that it brake not then forth into outward act: yet in this
carriage was more policy then piety, O it was devoid of that plain si^plicity
which the Gospel requires.

April 17. A poor soul committed sin, and concealed it; but the Lords eye was
upon him, which after he was sensible of.

1644.
July 2. One made a show of that grace and godliness, which he may well say he
had not in that measure as he made show of.

1645.
March 8. One concealed and smothered the grace and conscience that was in him,
in respect of the place and company, which might have been prejudicial unto
him. O deceitful heart!

1646.
May 13. One performed indeed a good action, but he exceedingly overprized it;
which he found afterward.

May 15. This day a poor soul upon strict examination of his heart, found that
formerly he had judged many sinful actions lawful and good, and had excused
many actions though in themselves sinful: he felt not such a powerful operation
of his corruptions before, and so through Pride and Ignorance thought better of
himself then he had cause.

1647.
March 27. A poor soul woefully breaking such Vows as he had formerly made, he
now saw the unsoundness and unsetledness of his deceiveable heart.

1648. May 29. One felt many strivings and contrary workings in his spirit;
sometimes in prayer ravished, and sometimes heavy; sometimes full of comfort,
and sometimes exceedingly dejected; sometimes patient, and other whiles
impatient. O the sickleness and uncertainty of the heart in the course of piety.

October. 24. One many times, but now especially, took notice of the slipperiness
of his heart in the very act of performance: Sometimes (said he) it slily
steals away after idle and wandering imaginations: sometimes it lets in base
thoughts of praise, vain glory, etc. sometimes it raises up many good and holy
motions, meditations, desires and affections, which yet are nothing to the
present performance, and therefore come not from the Spirit of grace, but from
Satan. O cheating cozening heart!

Texts.
Romans 7.21, 22, 23. I find a law, that when I would do good, evil is present
with me. I delight in the law of God after the inner man; but I see another law
in my members, warring against the law of my mind.

Gal. 6.12. As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain
you -- only lest you should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.

Gal. 2.14. But (howsoever I yielded not) I saw that I walked not uprightly
according to the truth of the Gospel

Psalm. 69.5. O God, thou know my foolishnes, and my sins are not hid from
thee.

Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above things.

2 Cor. 12.11. I am become a fool in glorying, ye have compelled me.

Mat. 26.58, 70. But Peter followed him afar off unto the high priests palace,
and went in, and sat with the servants to see the end; -- and saying (to the
damsel that came unto him) I know not what thou say.

2 Cor. 11.7. That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were
foolishly in this confidence of boasting.

2 Cor. 12.11. I am become a fool in glorying.

Gal. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past, --
being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers. But when it
pleased God, who separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace,
to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen, immediately
I conferred not with flesh and blood.

Romans 7.5. What I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that do I.

Romans 7.18, 19. To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is
good, I find not: for the good that I would do, I do not, but the evil which I
would not, that I do.

Gal. 5.17. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other.

Romans 7.22. For I delight in the law of God after the inward man; but I see
another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind.

Jerem. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
who can know it?

Romans 7.21. I find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with
me.

Dispositions required in this case, and to be prayed for.
Romans 7.24, 25. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Matthew. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself.

2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing should be this, The testimony of our Conscience,
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
grace of God, we had our conversation in the world.

2 Cor. 11.3. But I fear lest by any m^ans, as the serpent beguiled Eve through
his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.

Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity.

Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we have
to do.

2 Cor. 12.5. Of my self I will not glory, but in mine infirmities.

2 Cor. 12.6. But now I forbear, lest any man should think of me above that
which he sees me to be, or that he hears of me.

Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, for
he is faithful that promised.

Psalm. 40.10. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart: I have declared
thy faithfulness and thy salvation, I have not concealed thy loving kindeness.

1 Cor. 4.7. And what have thou that thou did not receive? now if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it?

Jer. 9.23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom: -- 2 Cor. 10.17. But he
that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

Phil. 3.12, 13, 14, 15. Not as though I had already attained, either were
already perfect; but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which
also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self to have
apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward
the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us
therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded, and if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this to you.

1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong.

Psalm. 76.11. Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God.

Eccles 5.4 When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has
no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have vowed.

Romans 7.24, 25. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: So then, with my mind I
my self serve the law of God, but with my flesh the law of sin.

Gal. 5.18. But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law.

Gal. 5. 24, 25. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts: If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.

Genesis 15.11. And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them
away.

Mat. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation; the Spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

1 Pet. 4.7. But the end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and
watch unto prayer.

CHAP. 6.
SECT. I. Of the nature of Evidences.
THe Scriptures set out the ways of discovering things spiritual, by sight and
by taste: By taste, Experience is meant; and by sight, faith, and assurance of
faith is intended: Peter speaks of tasting that the Lord is gracious; 1 Pet.
2.3. Heb. 11.27. Psalm. 34 8.
and Moses by faith saw him which is invisible: David joins both together, O
taste and see that the Lord is good: Blessed is the man that trusts in him.
We have done with tasting, the next is seeing, which I call Assurance, or
Evidence: Would we know what these Evidences are? I look at them as inherent
and habitual observations of the Spirits actings in the Soul; of which the
beloved Apostle speaks so often, Hereby we know that we know him, 1 John 2.3.
if we keep his Commandments. -- We know that we have passed from death unto
life, because we love the Brethren: 1 John 3.14. and 5.2. and 5.13.
-- By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep
his Commandments: -- These things have I written unto you that believe on the
name of the Son of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.
that ye may know that ye have eternal life; and the Apostle Paul, Now we have
received, not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things that are freely given to us of God.

SECT 2. Of the gathering of Evidences.
NOw for Evidences (as Experiences) it is our duty 1. To gather them. 2. To
improve them.


1. For the gathering of them, observe we 1. A right season. 2. The right way.


1. Seasons must be observed; for when thick mists surround us, and black
clouds cover us, we cannot so well judge either of our selves, Psalm. 77.2.
or of our own concernments: David in desertion refuses to be comforted; he
spilt all the cordials and physic that was brought him, he was not only void
of comfort, but refused it: What? bring me promises (will a Soul then say) you
may as well carry them to one in Hell; What? are these the Evidences of Gods
love? I see no such thing, here is nothing but scruples, and doubts, and flaws:
O how apt is such a one at such a time, Jonah 2.8.
to forsake his own mercy, to take Satan's part, to plead against his own title,
his own interest, in the best things he can have interest in: Now therefore, if
we will draw a Book of Evidences, it is good to observe times, and such
precious opportunities of comforts and refreshings as God vouchsafes unto us.

2. The right way must be observed, and that consists --

In eying 1. The precious promises of Christ. 2. The inward graces unto which
those promises are made. 3. The truth of those graces written in our hearts. 4.
The testimony of the Spirit, witnessing with our spirits that we are the
children of God.


1. We must eye the precious promises, and yet not so as that we must close
with them, or rest on them alone, without seeking for, or closing with Christ
in those promises; the Promise is but the Casket, and Christ the Jewel in it;
the Promise is but the field, and Christ the Pearl hid in it, and to be chiefly
looked at; the Promises are the means by which we are assured, not the things
on which we are to rest: It were folly for a man to think he has an interest
in an Heiress Lands, because by some means or other he has got the writings of
her Estate into his hands; all know that the interest of the Lands goes with
her person, and with relation of marriage to her, otherwise without a title to
her self, all the writings may justly be fetched out of his hands again; so it
is with the Promises, they hang all upon Christ, and without him there is no
interest to be had in them.

2. We must eye the inward graces to which the Promises are made, not that we
must be too much carried away with the signs of Christ in our hearts, and not
after Christ himself; as pleasures that are lawful in themselves, may be
unlawfully used, when our thoughts and intentions are too long, or too
frequent, or too vehement in them; so that to dead the heart either to the
present delighting in God, or pursuing after him with the joint strength of our
Souls, as our only chiefest good; so an immoderate recourse unto signs (barely
considered as such) is as unwarrantable, when thereby we are diverted, and
taken off from a more constant actual exercise of daily thoughts of Faith
toward Christ immediately, as he is set forth to be our Righteousness; and yet
the minds of many are so wholly taken up with their own hearts, that as the
Psalmist says of God, Christ is scarce in all their thoughts: Let these
consider, what dishonor this will be to Christ, that his train and favorites
(our Graces) should have a fuller court, and more frequent attendance from our
hearts then himself, who is the King of glory: Now to rectify this error, the
way is not wholly to reject all uses of such Evidences, but to order them
rightly; as thus, --

1. Let not the use of graces go before, but follow after an address of Faith
first renewed, and acts of Faith first put forth upon Christ himself: Thus
whenever we would go down into our own hearts, and take a view of our graces,
let us be sure first to look wholly out of our selves unto Christ, as our
Justification, and to close with him immediately, as if we had no present or
bypast grace to evidence our being in him; and if then (whiles Faith is thus
immediately clasping about Christ) we find either present or forepast graces
coming in, as handmaids, to attend and witness to the truth of this adherence
unto Christ, this will derogate nothing from Christ's honor, or the Doctrine of
Free Grace.

2. Let us in the closure of all, begin afresh to act Faith upon Christ
immediately, with a redoubled strength; as Faith should give a leading to the
use of Graces, so the sight of our Graces should be as a backdoor to let Faith
in again, to converse with Christ: Even as at the Sacrament, the elements of
Bread and Wine, are but outward signs to bring Christ and the heart together,
and then Faith lets the outward elements go, and closes and treats immediately
with Christ: So grace is an inward sign; and whiles men make use of it, only
as of a bare sign to let them come in to Christ, and their rejoicing is not in
it originally, but in Christ; their confidence is not upon it, but upon Christ:
There is no danger at all in making such use of signs; for thus we make our
Graces subordinate and subservient to Faith, whilst it makes Christ its Alpha
and Omega, The beginning and the end of all. I know it is strongly objected
against Christians, That many forget, and seldom use an entire, immediate close
with Christ, whilst in the mean time the stream of their most constant
thoughts and deepest intentions, are ever running upon their Graces, and the
gracious workings thereof in duties toward Christ: Others on the contrary run
all on Christ, despising the Graces of the Spirit, because (say they) Christ is
all in all to them; so that if we ask such, Have you any Grace, change of
heart? etc. tush, what do you tell them of Repentance, Holiness, etc. they have
Christ, and that is suffient; they have the substance, and what shall they now
do with shadows of Ordinances, Duties, Graces? they have all in Christ, what
should they look for Evidences, from any Graces inherent in themselves? O let
those mourn over themselves, that have with much affection been seeking after
Christ's benefits, peace of conscience, holiness of heart and life, but have not
sought first and last to embrace, and have the person of the Lord Jesus Christ
himself; and let such tremble, who in advancing Christ himself, and Free Grace,
will needs abolish and despise those heavenly Graces which flow from him unto
all the Elect: The Law of God is written on the heart of Christ, Heb. 10.7.
Heb. 10.7. with Ps. 40 8.
and if ever he wraps us up in the Covenant of Grace, He will write his Law in
our hearts also, Heb. 8.10. Heb. 8.10.
The right way for both, is to order their Evidences aright, and by this course
Graces will have their due, and the life of Faith will still be actually
maintained and kept upon wing, in its full ure and exercise toward Christ
alone for Justification.

Why would not some men have Grace or Sanctification an Evidence?

Witness of water or Sanctification, to testify in the Court of Conscience; in
others, I think it does not arise from want of grace, but because the Spirit of
Grace and Sanctification runs very low in them; it can speak little, and that
little very darkly and obscurely for them, therefore they have no great mind
that it should be brought in as any witness for them; others I think may have
much Grace, yet for a time they cast it by as an Evidence unto them, because
they have Experience how difficult and troublesome it is to find this Evidence,
and when it is found, how troublesome to read it, and keep it fair, and thereby
to have constant peace and quietness: And hence arise those speeches, Why do
you look to your Sanctification? it is a blotted Evidence, you may have it to
day, and lose it to morrow, and then where is your peace? These men, because
they feel not that measure of Sanctification they would, do therefore vilify
and deny that they have; because they feel a Law of sin in their members,
leading them away captive, therefore they will not take notice of the Law of
their minds, whereby that inner man delights in the Law of God, and mourns
bitterly under the body of death, by which they might see with Paul, That there
is no condemnation to such, Romans 8.1. Romans 8.1.
But I shall propose one thing to Conscience: Suppose thou were now lying on
thy Deaths-bed, comforting thy self in thy elected and justified estate;
suppose the Spirit of God should now grapple with thy Conscience, and tell
thee, If thou art justified, then art thou sanctified, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 2 Thessalonians.
2.13.
Is it thus with thee? what will thou answer? if thou say, Thou art not
sanctified, the Word and Spirit will bear witness against thee, and say, Thou
art not then justified: If thou say, Thou know not, thou look not to
Sanctification, or the fruits of the Spirit; they will reply, How then can
thou know or say thou art elected or justified? for it is a truth as clear as
the Sun, None are justified, but they are sanctified, and if they are not
sanctified, they are not justified: O bless God for any little measure of
Sanctification, do not scorn or secretly despise this Spirit of Grace, knowing
that without it thou shall perish, but if thou have it, thou have an Evidence
of thy part in Christ; surely Grace is the image of Christ stamped upon the
Soul, and they who reflecting upon their Souls, see the image of Christ there,
may be sure that Christ is theirs; Christ has given all himself to those, to
whom he has given this part of himself.

3. We must eye the truth of those Graces thus written in our hearts: There is
a great deal of counterfeit Grace in the world; a true Christian can have
nothing, as discernable to others, but an hypocrite may have and do for the
outward semblance as much as he; it is good therefore to try the truth of our
Graces, and herein the rise, manner and end of our motions carry much
manifestation in them. But of this more largely in the Duties of
Self-Examination, and Receiving of the Lords Supper.

Romans 8.16.
4. We must eye the testimony of the Spirit, witnessing with our spirit, that we
are the children of God: As God has set up a frame of holiness in every
Believer, 2 Cor. 5.5.
so he has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit: The Graces of the Spirit
are a real earnest of the Spirit, yet they are not always an Evidential
earnest, therefore an earnest is often superadded to our Graces.

There is a threefold work of the Spirit; 1. To convey and plant Grace in the
soul. 2. To act and help us to exercise the Graces which are planted there. 3.
To shine upon and enlighten those Graces, or to give an earnest of those Graces.


This last work the Spirit fulfils two ways; 1. By Arguments and Inferences,
which is a mediate work. 2. By presence and influence, which is an immediate
work.


1 John 5.8.
This the Apostle calls Witness-bearing, the Spirit brings in the witness of the
water, and of the blood, which is his mediate work; but besides and above
these, he gives a distinct witness of his own, which is his immediate work, and
is in a way of peculiarity and transcendency, called, The witness of the
Spirit: Hence that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.12.
We have received not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God,
that we may know the things that are freely given us of God: The things freely
given us, may be received by us, and yet the receipt of them not known to us;
therefore the Spirit for our further consolation, does (as it were) put his
hand and seal to our receipts; Ephesians. 4.30.
whence he is said, To seal us up unto the day of Redemption.

But how may a man discern between the testimony of the Spirit, and the
illusion of Satan?

by the Word. Thus in the Old Testament, all Revelations were to be examined by
the Word, Deuteronomy. 13.1. Isa. 8.20. and in the New Testament our Savior tells us,
That the Spirit shall lead you into all truth: How so? John 16.13.
For he shall not speak of himself, but what he shall hear, that shall he
speak: And what is that which the Spirit hears, is it not that which is
already contained in the Scriptures?

Nay then (say some) the credit of the voice of the Spirit, Dr. Crisps
assurance of Faith.
must depend upon the Word, but this must not be allowed, that any thing should
be of such credit, as to give credit to the Spirit.

the truth of what the Spirit speaks does not depend upon the Word, yet the
credit of it does.

But there is no more Evidences (say they) save only the revealing Evidence,
the Spirit of Christ, and the receiving Evidence, Dr. Crisp ibid.
which is Faith; the Spirit within thee says, Thy sin is forgiven thee, and
Faith receives it, and sits down satisfied; now here is thy Evidence, if thou
have only these two, thou have thy portion, thou need no more.

That the Spirit says it, and I believe it. 2. The revealing and receiving
Evidence (i.) the Word of the Spirit, and the subscription of Faith, do not lay
the ground of perfect peace, except there come in also the Evidence of inherent
qualifications. For the better understanding of this, observe, That the
Evidence of the Spirit is either mediate, when it enables the Soul to frame a
Syllogism, wherein the minor, sc. the dictate of the Conscience, so far makes
to this Evidence, as our Graces are witnessed unto by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.12.
or immediate, which is indeed without any such discourse of our conscience, and
wherein our spirit is merely passive or receptive, an act of irradiation or
impression of Gods love, or (as some call it) a transcript of the decree of
Gods election set upon the Conscience; the Scripture calls this especially, A
seal of the Spirit, which imports the mere passiveness of the heart to it, as
of the wax to the seal; and this Evidence is solitary, without reference to
Inherent Graces, yet howsoever, it excludes them not, nor comes in till that
mediate Evidence precede, Ephesians. 1.13. Hence I infer, the mediate testimony of
the Spirit, that ordinarily concludes; for hic and ille, does not speak
according to the Word, but where a Text of Scripture has a Quicunque for the
Proposition, and a work of the sanctifying Spirit for the assumption; as thus,
the Scripture says, They that repent and believe: -- They that are led by the
Spirit of God, are the sons of God, Mark 1.15. Romans 18.14. Hereupon the renewed
and sanctified Conscience says, I do repent and believe, I am led by the
Spirit, therefore I am the child of God: Now this conclusion deduced, if
afterward the immediate testimony of the Spirit (manifested by an heavenly
impression and irradiation upon the Soul) comes in with his attestation to
confirm it, we may not doubt either of this or of the former testimony, because
now they both speak according to the word and work of Grace in the heart; the
ground of all this is in the nature of this testimony of the Spirit, which is
rather an attestation, then a testimony; a secondary, not first deponent: Is
not this rightly concluded from that of Romans 8.16. Romans 8.16.
The Spirit witnesses with our Spirit?] where we have two witnesses joining
together their testimonies to assert this truth, That we are the sons of God;
two, I say, viz. our spirit, and the Spirit of God: The witness of our spirit
(i.) of our conscience, is the first, the Spirit of God is the second: His work
is not (...), but (...), to witness together with our Spirit; (i.) To confirm
and ratify what that has asserted; so that indeed the evidencing of this
testimony of the Spirit, is after the testimony of our own Conscience; if this
do not first speak and conclude, that other of the Spirit speaks not at all:
Now the testimony of the Conscience is the conclusion of the practical
Syllogism, and the certainty of this conclusion depends upon the verity of the
assumption, which mentions the work of Grace in the heart: So then, let it be
the care of the Christian, to make good the verity of the assumption, that he
may truly say, I do repent, I do believe, I am led by the Spirit; and this
shall not only afford him comfort by the conclusion, but also (when the
immediate testimony of the Spirit comes in with his attestation to confirm it)
it will assure him, that he is not misled by the suggestion of Satan, but
guided by the Spirit in this point of assurance: Surely (will he say) this is
the Spirit of God, for now he speaks according to the Word of God, and
according to the work of his own Grace within me.

SECT. 3. Of the improving of Evidences.
2. FOr the improving of Evidences, we must endeavor to produce that fruit,
that frame, that disposition of heart which the Lord requires, directs and
looks for in such a case, as the admiring of Gods unsearchable Grace in Christ
Jesus; a sober, moderate and self-denying use of our Evidence-comforts; a
fiducial pleading of all the precious promises of the Gospel; a cheerful
bearing of crosses, a holy contempt of Creature comforts, a bold approaching to
the Throne of Grace upon all occasions, a valiant adventuring for Christ,
longings for the appearings of the Lord Jesus, a confident contest with sin, a
courageous resisting of temptations; I may add humility, love to God, fear of
offending, zealous labors to advance Christ in the power of Grace, etc. all
which are the fruits of legible Evidences in true Christian hearts: And our
Evidences thus improved, then is the whole business Christianly managed indeed.
But of these in the next Section.

SECT. 4. Of the Sanctification of Evidences in their several uses.
THe Sanctification of Evidences is manifested (as we said) by several
Dispositions: To enlarge my self; No sooner is the Soul settled in its
Scripture-perswasions, and Spirit-perswasions, that God has translated it unto
Christ, but immediately there follows, --

1. A deep admiring of Gods unsearchable grace in the Lord Jesus Christ: Has
the Lord assured me that I am his? O my Soul, stand amazed at this endless,
boundless love of the Lord; it is of his grace that ever I did bethink my self
of the danger of my sinful course I was formerly in; it is of mere grace that
the Lord Christ dyed for my sins, and rose again for my Justification; It is of
his special grace, that the Spirit of Christ should thus whisper to my Spirit,
Thy sins are forgiven thee. O the bountifulness and love of God to man! O I am
swallowed up in this depth! It is a mystery which may astonish Angels, an
Orient Pearl which out shines all the sparkling Jewels of the whole Creation.
When the Jews heard of the Proclamation of King Cyrus, by which they were set
free from their long and tedious captivity, they were wrapped with joy, Psalm.
126.1.
they were like to men that rather dreamed, then possessed the thing that their
souls longed after: How much more will Assurance that we are set free from the
perpetual bondage of sin, and restored to the everlasting freedom of
righteousness and life, make us wonder at the infinite wisdom; and unspeakable
goodness of our heavenly Father? The Saints considering the goodness of God
toward man in his creation, brake forth into holy admiration, Psalm. 8 4, 5.
Lord, what is man, that thou art mindeful of him? The Prophet calling to mind
long after, what God had done for his soul, cannot pass it over without servent
praise, What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Psalm.
116.12.
How much more ought and will that man that is assured of Gods favor and love
toward him, for ever admire the mighty power, unspeakable goodness, and rich
mercy of God, who has delivered him from the pit of hell, from the power of
Satan, from the curse of the law, and from the waiting for of all the wicked
Devils, and damned Spirits, and withal, has translated him into the kingdom of
his dearest Son? O needs must his heart be inflamed with love, and enlarged in
praises!

2. A sober, moderate, and self-denying use of Evidence-comforts: I speak not
herein against the frequent actings of grace, or against the simply looking on
them, or comforting our selves in them, especially under sad hours; but against
the excessive, overflowing, over-loving way of Evidence-comforts, against the
abuses thereof: which may be in these particulars; as 1. When we pore more
frequently upon the comforts of our own gracious actings, then upon Jesus
Christ and his death; when we live too much on the sight of a new-created birth
in our selves, and the image of the second Adam, though indeed we have Christ
himself to live on. 2. When we wonder so much at what is done in our selves by
the grace of Christ, that we begin to make a mixture of self therewith, and
immediately we sit down and write of our selves an hundred in stead of fifty.
3. When we think graces and comforts so rooted in our selves, that we neglect
God and Christ for the upholding, increase and exercise of them. 4. When we
rest upon, and too much confide in the power of inherent grace, former
revelations, and witnesses of Gods Spirit, which are all but creatures, acts of
God upon us, and in us; and therefore in doing thus, we make an Idol of
inherent grace, and put that trust in it, which we should repose in the Lord
alone: and so, as the Lord speaks, Number 15.39.
We go a whoring after our own hearts. Now all these flow from the corruption
of our nature, and not from the nature of assurance; the product of true
Evidences is, a praising of God for them, and a comforting our selves in them,
as in the fruit of his eternal and unchangeable love: Our rejoicing is this, 2
Cor. 1.12.
even the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
we have had our conversation in the world; but not a making of them the only
or chief grounds of our hope and comforts, for God in this case may leave us to
our selves, 1 Cor. 1.19.
That no flesh should rejoice in his presence.

3. A fiducial pleading of all the precious Promises of the Gospel: And has
the Lord indeed given me a kiss of his mouth, a sure sign of his love? Why
then, O my soul, arise, and lay hold on all the Promises, which God of his
mercy in Christ does offer in the Gospel: Be not dismayed by reason of thy
unworthiness, for the Promise is of grace, freely offered, and freely given to
them that be most unworthy in their own eyes: Thou art unworthy of the least
crumb of Mercy, but of the riches of his grace God has given thee the Promises
of highest advancement, if thou will but embrace them. I will be a father unto
you, 2 Cor. 6.18.
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty: -- And it
shall be in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, Rom
9.26.
that there they shall be called, The children of the living God: -- He that
overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, Rev. 21.7.
and he shall be my Son. Surely Lord, I will lay hold on these promises: I will
yet draw nigher to thee, and put my trust in thy mercy; I will henceforth fly
to the throne of Grace, to get my title made surer and surer unto my
conscience. O Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. Thus the soul pleads with
God, and God is well pleased with such pleadings; the soul is assured of
salvation, and yet prays in the midst of assurance, 2 Samuel 7.25.
Who am I, Lord, that thou should make such ample and free promises unto thy
poor servant? Of thy free mercy, and according to thine own heart have thou
spoken all these great things, to make thy servant know them; and now O Lord
God, establish, I beseech thee, the word that thou have spoken concerning thy
servant.

4. A cheerful bearing of crosses: Hence Paul eying that object of assurance, 2
Cor. 4.17.
that weight of glory, he counts all his afflictions light, momentary; he sung
in the dungeon, and reckoned it a special favor to be a sufferer for Christ:
The fire of divine love so inflames Christians in this condition, that much
water of Persecution cannot quench it; yea, such is the nature of this fire,
that it feeds on those waters, and grows more fervent by that which would
quench it; no wonder: it is but a light affliction, but it causes unto us a
more excellent and eternal weight of glory; and parts of this glory the
Christian now receives aforehand, as earnests of the whole: This makes him to
rejoice (even in the midst of crosses and losses) with a joy unspeakable and
glorious: And hence it is that a Christian despises the sufferings for the
joys, yea, the sufferings are so overcome by the joys, that the sufferings do
not turn his joys into sadness, but his assurance turns the sadness of his
sufferings into joys, Phil. 2.17.
for he rejoices in his sufferings.

5. An holy contempt of Creature Comforts: This is another fruit of assurance,
it will make a man endeavor to rid himself from such feculent matters here, to
contemn them, to trample them under his feet, and out of the greatness and
goodness of his spirit, ambitiously to long after the presence of the Lamb. Do
I speak or write to the denizens of Heaven? tell me then, you that carry the
Evidences of Heaven in your hands and hearts, is it not thus with you? has not
God wrought your hearts to this frame and divine disposition? if not, he will
do it first or last; for citizens of Heaven set not much by the best things on
earth, when they are themselves, and act like their Savior. It was a good
speech of an Emperor, whatsoever he himself was, You (said he) gaze on my
purple Robes, and golden Crown, but did you know what cares are under them, you
would not take them up from the ground for them; but suppose there had been no
cares but pleasures in them, yet Moses when he had this assurance of Faith, He
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 24.25, 26.
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sins for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches
then the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect unto the recompense of reward.

6. A bold approaching unto the throne of Grace upon all occasions: Because we
are assured, therefore we beg any thing of God with greater affiance; Prayer is
nothing else but the stream and river of Faith, and an issue of the desire of
that which we joyfully believe: John 10.28. and 17.11.
Our Savior Christ knew that his sheep should never perish, and yet he prays,
Holy Father, keep them in thy name: Paul knew assuredly, that the Lord would
deliver him from every evil work, 2 Timothy 4.18.
yet without ceasing he prays to be delivered from evil. Assurance adds
fervency to prayer; the firmer our Faith, the more free is our access, with
boldness and confidence to the throne of Grace, the more fervently and boldly
can we pray, Abba Father: Assurance hearkeneth what the Lord speaks, and
speaks back again in fervent groans and desires; it has the promise of God,
and therefore is bold to pray, and will not keep silence, Thou, O Lord of
Hosts, 2 Samuel 7.2^.
God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an
house, therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto
thee; nay, Assurance puts on the Soul to ask any thing it wants; these be the
times when the Spirit moves the waters, therefore, Now (says Assurance) cast
in your Petition, and whatsoever grief it has in it, you shall be cured of it:
Now the King holds out his golden Scepter, And therefore (says Assurance) let
the Queen come in boldly with her request, though it be for a Kingdom; yea,
this King likes it best, if first we seek a Kingdom, and the Righteousness
inseparably annexed to it, Mat. 6.33.
for then we shall have all other things with it.

7. A valiant adventuring for Christ: Is a man assured of Gods love in Christ?
such a one fears not any troubles, he knows all comes through his Fathers
hands, and that man and Devil cannot do what they would, and therefore he goes
on comfortably to day, to morrow, and to the end; he is like one of David's
Worthies, or like David himself, that having got experience, fears nothing; he
walks up and down the world like a Giant, higher by head and shoulders then
most men, he holds in his hand a strong shield, that the Devil himself cannot
pierce, but it quenches his fiery darts: He gets a victory against the world
by his Faith, and Samson-like, breaks all bands of temptation as straw, he
leaps over a wall, breaks a bow of steel, lays heaps upon heaps.

8. An earnest longing for the appearing of the Lord Jesus: As he adventures
and conquers in life, so he can think of death, without any prevailing fear; he
can say with Paul, I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23. Acts 7.59. Can. 8.14.
and to be with Christ; and with Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; and
with the Spouse in the Canticles, Come away, my Beloved, and be thou like a
Roe, or to a young Heart upon the Mountains of spices. It is the voice of
Assurance, My life is hid with thee, O Christ, and therefore appear quickly, my
Life, my Jesus, that I may quickly appear with thee in glory; let the day of
gladness quickly come, wherein both soul and body, even my whole self, may
eternally enjoy thee: I cannot be still put off with these tastes and earnests,
my love and longing is rather inflamed by them to the fruition of thee: The
very voice of these earnests is, Come; yea, they scarce know any other language
but Come, therefore again and again they s^y, Come; yea, after they have said,
Come, as if that were not enough, they say, Come quickly; and now, what can the
Soul say more to her Lord? only as before she still said, Come, so now will
she still say, Amen; even so, Amen and Amen.

9. A loathing of sin, indignation for sin, contest with sin, and a continual
watch against the baits and allurement of sin: How can it be conceived that a
man should be assured of the pardon and forgiveness of many sins, but it will
work a greater loathing and detestation of sin, unfeined abasement for former
weakness, and continual watchfulness, to keep himself pure for the future, that
he lose not his comfort, nor dishonor God, who has done so great things for
him? It is Satan's cavil against the Saints, That Assurance begets security:
Assuredly, if it be true Assurance, it will through Christ mortify our lusts,
and quicken us to more sincere, settled and constant obedience; nor is it
possible that a Christian should hold his assurance any longer, then whiles he
follows, cherishes and feeds in himself this heavenly affection.

But some may object, If we say we have no sin, 1 John 1.8. Prove. 20.9. Eccles.
7.20.
we deceive our selves: -- Who can say his heart is clean? -- There is no man
just, that sins not: -- And how can these two stand together, Sin and
Assurance?



10. A courageous resisting of doubts, scruples, temptations; not but that
doubts will come after assurance: We see the Sun is one day bright, and the
next day is covered; Evidences may be lost, though interest be continued: yet
Assurance and Evidences rightly improved and sanctified to us, may help us
against all the shakings, and shiverings, and doubtings of the Soul, and of
their own nature they do resist them: Hence the best cure and remedy of
doubtings, is to perfect and strengthen our assurance; the more purely the fire
burns, the less smoke it has; when the light and heat of the Sun are greatest,
then the clouds and misty vapors are fewest: Assurance and Doubting are like a
pair of scales, where the weight of the one bears away the other.

But how should assurance be strengthened?

O Lord (say) my knowledge is dim, lighten that candle, open mine eyes yet more
and more, that I may see thy truth; my assents many times shake, but do thou
establish and confirm my heart in thy truths; my embracings, applications, are
very trembling, and broken, and interrupted, but do thou guide my eye to look
upon my Savior, and do thou guide my hand to lay hold on him, do thou enable my
will and affections, to embrace all the goodness of thy self, of thy Christ, of
thy Word; my faith is but weak, but Lord, I would have more faith, even full
assurance of faith, and thou can work it, O do it for thy weak servant.

2. Be in the way of strength: There are ways in which God does reveal his arm
(i.) his Ordinances; he that is too good for the Ordinances, will ever be too
weak in his faith. One thing (could David say) have I desired of the Lord,
Psalm. 27.4.
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life: and to what
end? that I may behold the beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 48.9.
and visit his Temple: what this beauty is, he himself expounds, We thought of
thy loving kindeness in the midst of thy Temple: The loving kindeness of God,
his mercy and countenance upon his own servants, that is the Lords beauty, that
is it which makes him amiable in his own people.

3. Let assurance know its privileges, and then it will grow stronger. 1. Pet.
2.3.
Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people: they who descended from the blood of Abraham had more privileges then
others, and have not they greater who come of the blood of Christ? The Priests
of the Law had singular exemptions, and Kings of all men are most highly
privileged; and do Believers come short, who are not profane, civil, typical
Priests, but royal Priests? who are not Priests only, nor Kings only, but
both Kings and Priests: A royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people.
If we did once thoroughly know our privileges, the grants of favor, the free
access, the singular acceptance we have with God in and through the Lord Jesus
Christ, how might we keep down our fears, and our doubtings, and with fullest
eagerness embrace our God, our Christ, our Promises.

4. Observe, and call to mind our former Experiences of Gods favor and love:
Psalm. 77.10.
I will remember (says David) the years of the right hand of the most High
(i.) the years and times of my life, wherein I had sweet experiences of Gods
mercies and love: why, what of that? he tells you, Because thou have been my
help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. Psalm. 63.7.
But of this point in the last Chapter.

But what if after all these means used, no Sun appears, our Evidences are
quite lost, God suspends all comforts?

Evidences, by working the soul to close with, and depend upon an absolute
Promise: To this purpose it pleases the Father of Mercies; sometimes to
convince and persuade the soul, that he will supply what is wanting, heal
backslidings freely, work both will and deed fully, whereby he sustains the
soul in life, and raises it up as it were from the grave of despair and dismal
distress. Thus David expected to receive his Assurance, when he cried, Psalm.
42.5, 12.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? -- Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise
him for the help of his countenance: And if at our first conversion, when we
had nothing but the offer of Free Grace to look upon, we cast our selves on
God, why not now, when our Assurances wholly fail?

SECT. 5. The Evidences of a weak unworthy servant of Christ, laid down
according to the Rules aforementioned.
THe life of all we have said, is Practice: Hence I make bold to lay down the
Evidences of a poor creature, not worthy to be named, much less to have his
Name written in the Book of Life. -- He gives them thus: --

1. The Texts containing Promises. 2. The Graces to which Promises are made; or
my particular Evidences. 3. The truth of these graces examined 4. The testimony
of the Spirit. After acts of faith first put forth upon Christ himself, and
closing with him immediately, as if I had no present or bypast grace to
evidence my being in him: I now bring in these graces or workings of the Spirit
of Christ in me, as handmaids to attend, and to witness to the truth of this
adherence unto Christ, which I call my Evidences. See in the duty of
Self-examination and Receiving of the Lords Supper. Which is either by
Arguments and Inferences from the word and work of grace in the heart, or by
presence and influence, manifested by an Heavenly impression and irradiation
upon my soul! 1. John 3.5, 8. 1 Pet. 1.23.

2. Joh. 1.11, 12. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.

3. Gal. 2.20.

4. Psalm. 119. 6, 7.

5. Psalm. 119.5, 128.

6. 2 Cor. 7.10.

7. Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. Psa. 119.136. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.

8. Romans 10.1.

9. John 4.19. Psa. 119.165. 1 John 3.10, 14 1 John 4.7.

10. Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17.

11. Psalm. 19.12.

12. 1 John 3.3. Rev. 15.3.

13. Mat. 10.39. Mark 10.21. Luke 9 23, 24

14. Psalm. 89.15. Isa. 12.3. John 15.11. Romans 14.17. Gal. 5.22. 1 Pet. 1.8.

1. My Conversion from corruption to Christianity, the time whereof (I bless
God) I remember.

2. My desire and endeavor to rely on the Promises of Christ, both for this
life and that to come.

3. My Experience that I could act Faith, and lay hold, and rest upon the
Promises of God in diverse cases and conditions.

4. The chief aim and bent of my heart, which for the main is Godward and
Christ-ward.

5. My respect to all Gods Commandments, desiring that I could give up my self
wholly to God to do all his will.

6. My renewed repentance for my often failings, and sins committed against God.

7. My grief for the sins of the times and places where I lived.

8. My earnest desire and prayer to God for Israel, and for all I know, That
they might be saved.

9. My love to God in Christ, to his Word, Services, Saints, and all things
that belong to him.

10. My sense and feeling of the fight and combat between the flesh and the
Spirit.

11. My watch to strive against secret sins, which no eye sees, as well as
against public, notorious, scandalous sins.

12. My desire after Christ for his holiness, as happiness; taking him for my
King and Husband, as for my Jesus and Savior.

13. My willingness to suffer shame and disgrace, and (if my heart deceive me
not) persecution and death for Christ my Savior.

14. The unspeakable joy of Gods Spirit, which sometimes I have felt in and
after Ordinances; and especially once, when for the space of two days I was
carried away into ecstasy and ravishment: This was when I began to see
Spiritual things; and upon which followed more desire and endeavors after grace.

15. Mal. 4.2. Ephesians. 4.15. 2 Pet. 3.18.

16. Psa. 119.67. Heb. 12.7, 8, 11.

17. Col. 2.2. Heb. 6.11, 19. Heb. 10.22. 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 5.22. Romans 8.15, 16

18. Psalm. 27.14. Psalm. 40.1.

19. Psalm. 28.6. Psa. 66.18, 19 Psalm. 116.1, 2.

20. 2 Timothy 4.8. Rev. 22.20.

21. Phil. 1.10, 11.

22. Psa. 139.23, 24.

23. Romans 7.24. Romans 8.13. Gal. 5.17. Col. 3.4, 5.8, 9. Tit. 2.11.12.

15. My sensible growth in the measure of Gods sanctifying graces, as in
knowledge, and faith, and hope, and patient expectation of Gods presence and
assistance in all things to come.

16. My patience under infirmities and afflictions, with an earnest desire that
I may be bettered by my afflictions.

17. My assurance of faith, and of my spiritual safety; which is 1. Both by the
evidences of internal vision or reflection, for I know that I believe, as
certainly as I know that I live: and 2. By application of the Promises of the
Gospel: and 3. By the effects and fruits growing from the root of grace: and 4.
By the testimony of Gods Spirit, which sometimes (after prayer especially) has
suggested to my Spirit that I am Gods child.

18. A desire to wait upon God, if at any time he delay to hear prayers.

19. The return of my prayers, which many a time God has graciously made
sensible and known to my soul.

20. My sincere and hearty longing for the time of restoring, and for the
appearing of Christ, who is my chiefest treasure, and my all in all.

21. My Conscience has born witness with me, that my heart was sincere toward
God.

22. I rest not in the approbation of men, unless I can approve my heart unto
God.

23. Besides these and the like, I may fetch (say some Divines) as good, if not
better Evidences from Mortification, in denying my self, in overcoming my
passions, in crucifying my corruptions, as from any graces whatsoever.

But, O my soul, rest not on these inward graces of the Spirit; now when all is
done, begin again to act faith upon Christ immediately with a redoubled
strength.

See in the duty of Self examination and Receiving of the Lord's Supper. This is
either by Arguments and Inferences from the word and work of grace in the
heart, or by presence and influence of the Spirit, manifested by an Heavenly
impression and irradiation upon the soul by a sweet motion and feeling of Gods
goodness, and pardon, and mercy, and saving presence to me.

His Evidences thus gathered in, the prime and especial work of the soul is,
the sanctification of Evidences in their several uses. But of that before,
Sect. 4. And thus much of Evidences.

CHAP. VII.
SECT. 1. Of the nature and kinds of Meditation.
MEditation is a deep and earnest musing upon some point of Christian
instruction, to the strengthening of us against the flesh, world and Devil, and
to the leading us forward toward the Kingdom of Heaven; or Meditation is a
steadfast bending of the mind to some spiritual matter, discoursing of it with
others, till we bring the same to some profitable issue.

Now this Meditation is either sudden or set, occasional, or solemn, and
deliberate.

1. Occasional or Extemporal Meditation, arises from such things as God by his
providence offers to our eyes, ears and senses. When I consider the Heavens,
Psalm. 8.3, 4.
the work of thy fingers, the Moon and Stars which thou have ordained: What is
man that thou art mindeful of him, or the son of man, that thou visitest him?
This Meditation of David's was occasional.

2. Deliberate, set, or solemn Meditation, arises out of our own hearts, when
purposely we separate our selves from all company, and go apart to perform this
exercise more thoroughly, making choice of such matter, time and place as are
most requisite thereunto: Now this Meditation is double, for it is either
conversant about matters of knowledge, for the finding out of some hidden
truth, or about matters of affection, for the enkindling of our love unto God:
The former of these two we leave to the Schools and Prophets, the latter we
shall search after, which is both of larger use, and such as no Christian can
reject, as either unnecessary, or over-difficult.

SECT. 2. The Circumstantials of Meditation.
THe circumstantials of our Meditation, are time and place; I shall add to
these (though I cannot call it a circumstance) the subject matter, which by way
of preparation to the duty we may take notice of.

1. For the time: No time can be prescribed to all men; for neither is God
bound to hours, neither does the contrary disposition of men agree in one
choice of opportunities; some find their hearts most in frame in the morning;
others learn wisdom of their reins in the night season; others find Isaac's
time the fittest time, who went out in the evening to mediate: Genesis 24.63.
No practice of others can prescribe to us in this circumstance; it is enough
that we set apart that time wherein we are aptest for that service.

2. For place: We judge solitariness and solitary places, fittest for
Meditation, especially for set and solitary Meditation: Thus we found Jesus
meditating alone in the Mount, John Baptist in the desert, David on his bed,
Daniel in his house, Isaac in the field. The Bridegroom of our Soul, the Lord
Jesus Christ, is bashful (said Bernard) and never comes to his meditating Bride
in the presence of a multitude: Hence was the Spouses invitation, Come my
beloved, let us go forth into the field, Can. 7.11, 12.
let us lodge in the villages, let us go up early to the vineyards, let us see
if the vine flourish, whether the tender grapes appear, and the pomegranates
put forth, there will I give thee my loves: We must in this case abandon
worldly society, both outward and inward: Many sequester themselves from the
visible company of men, which yet carry a world within them; both these
societies are enemies to this Meditation.

3. For the matter of our Meditation, it must be Divine and Spiritual; viz.
Gods Word, or some part thereof: It is woeful to think how some meditate on sin,
contrary to Gods Word, studying to go to Hell with the least noise of the
world; others bend their thoughts only on the search of natural things; as,
The motion of the Heavens, the reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Seas,
the kinds of simples that grow out of the earth, and the Creatures upon it,
with all their qualities and operations; but in the mean while, the God that
made them, the vileness of their nature, the danger of their sin, the multitude
of their imperfections, the Savior that bought them, the Heaven that he bought
for them, etc. are as unregarded, as if they were not: The matter of our
Meditation must be some thing divine; I remember thee on my bed, Psalm. 63 6.
and 77.12.
and meditate on thee: -- I will meditate of all thy works, and talk of thy
doings.

SECT 3. Of occasional Meditation.
OCcasional Meditation arises from such things as God by his providence offers
to our eyes, ears or senses: Examples of this sort are infinite, for a taste
take these few:

1. Upon our first waking in the morning, meditate how the Lord can at the last
day as easily raise up our dead bodies from the dust, as he has now awaked us
out of sleep; and as now we rise from the grave our bed, so then we must arise
from that bed our grave.

2. Upon sight of the morning sky, meditate, That if one Sun make so bright a
morning, what a shining morning will that be when Christ (the Son of
Righteousness) shall appear, attended with all his bright Angels, Archangels,
Cherubims, Seraphims, Bodies and Souls of Saints? When there shall be as many
Suns on a day, as there are stars on a bright winters night.

3. Upon the occasions of the day, meditate, how the Lord sees us, and
understands all our thoughts, and is acquainted with all our ways: 2 Chro. 16.9.
The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show
himself strong in behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him, and
therefore we should do all things as in the awful presence of God.

4. Upon our particular callings we may accordingly meditate; as --

1. A Magistrate, thus, As I judge others, so will the Lord judge me; it will
not be long ere death arrest, and I must go without bail: Me thinks I hear that
sound in mine ears, Psalm. 82.6.
I have said ye are gods; but ye shall dye like men.

A Minister, thus, The time I have to spend is not mine, but the peoples: Me
thinks whiles I idle it away, I hear them crying after me, To your closet, and
there pray for us that we perish not; study for us, that we may learn of you
how to walk in his paths; for if we perish, and you will not give warning, then
must our blood be required at your hands. Ezekiel. 3.18.


3. A Tradesman, thus, What is that balance in my shop, but a memento of
distributive and commutative Justice? if my dealings be not just to a point or
pin, I shall then be weighed in Gods balance, and be found too light: Prove.
11.1.
A false balance is an abomination to the Lord, and so is a true balance,
without true dealing with all men.

4. An Husbandman, thus, As I sow in spring, so I reap in harvest, and God has
said, He that sows iniquity, shall reap vanity, but they that sow in tears,
shall reap in joy: Lord, Prove. 22.8. Psalm. 126.5.
whiles I sow in tears, give me April showers of Repentance, that when the
harvest comes, and the Angels must reap, they may gather me into thy barn of
Heaven.

5. A Soldier, thus, What trade is this I follow? what devices are these I
carry about me to murder afar off? whose image do I bear in this killing
disposition, but his whose true title is, The Destroyer? I had need look about
me that I be in a righteous cause; I am sure, all the titles of God sound of
mercy and gracious respects to man, God the Father is his Maker and Preserver,
God the Son his Savior and Redeemer, God the Holy Ghost his Sanctifier and
Comforter: O Lord, that my enemies may be thy enemies, and my cause, thy cause,
or that I may leave this calling.

5. Upon night approaching, meditate, That seeing our days are determined, and
the number of our months are with the Lord, and our bounds are appointed,
which we cannot pass, Job 14.5.
that one day more of our limited time is gone and past, and we are now nearer
to our end by a day, then we were in the morning.

6. Upon occasion of lights brought in, meditate, If the light of a poor candle
be so comfortable, which is nothing but a little inflamed air, gathered about a
moistened snuff, What is the light of that glorious Sun, the great Lamp of
Heaven? but much more, what if the light of that infinitely resplendent Son of
Righteousness, who gave that light to the Sun, and that Sun to the world?

4. Upon the sight of a bright sky full of stars, meditate, How worthy a
Science it is to see and observe those goodly spangles of light above our
heads, their places, qualities, motions: But the employment of a Christian is
far more noble, Heaven is open unto him, and he can look beyond the vail, and
see further above those stars, then it is thither, and there discern those
glories that may answer to so rich a pavement: I see indeed those glittering
glorious stars, with my bodily eyes; but I see withal by the eyes of my faith,
that this is but the floor of that goodly fabric, the outward curtain of that
glorious tabernable: I see within that incomprehensible light, which none can
see and not be blessed: How many are these stars before my eyes? but Oh! what
millons of pure and majestical Angels? what millions of happy and glorified
Souls? how many mansions of my Father (one of them being my own) do I see by
Faith? Come down no more (O my soul) after thou have once pitched upon this
heavenly glory; or if this flesh force thy descent, be unquiet till thou art
let loose to immortality.

Thus from our uprising to our down-lying, we may upon every object presented
to our senses, frame a sudden or occasional Meditation.

SECT. 4. Of deliberate Meditation, and the parts thereof.
DEliberate Meditations arise, and are wrought out of our own hearts: Now every
such Meditation consists of these parts, The Entrance. Proceedings. Conclusion.


1. The entrance is either Common. Proper.


1. The common entrance is some short, yet pithy prayer, that God may guide and
direct us therein, by the gracious assistance of his holy Spirit.

2. The proper and particular entrance, is the choice of some theme or matter,
and a settling of our selves on that which we have chosen.

2. The proceedings of our Meditation are in this method: 1. To begin in the
understandings. 2. To end in the affections.


1. Concerning that part which is in the understanding, it is good to keep that
course which the common places of Natural and Artificial Reason do lead us
unto: as to consider the matter of our Meditation, 1. In its description: 2. In
its Distribution: 3. In its Causes: 4. In its Effects: 5. In its Use: 6. In its
Properties: 7. In its Opposites: 8. In its Comperates: 9. In its Scriptural
Testimonies; only in these heads observe these cautions:

1. That we be not too curious in prosecution of these Logical places; the end
of this Duty is not to practice Logic, but to exercise Religion, and to kindle
Piety and Devotion: Besides, every theme will not afford all these places; as
when we meditate of God, there is no room for Causes and Comparisons: it will
therefore be sufficient, if we take the most pregnant and voluntary places.

2. That if we stick in the disposition of any of these pla^es (as if
meditating of sin, we cannot readily meet with material and formal causes) we
rack not our minds too much with the inquiry thereof, but quietly pass over to
the next.

2. Concerning that part which is in the affection, it is good to follow that
course which the common places of Rhetoric do lead us unto: These are six:
viz. 1. A relish of what we have meditated on. 2. A complaint, bewailing our
wants of this relish. 3. A wish of the soul for what it complains to want. 4.
A confession of our inabilities, to effect what we wish. 5. A petition for the
supply of our inabilities. 6. A confidence of obtaining what we petition for.


3. The conclusion of the work contains these parts: 1. A thanksgiving. 2. A
recommendation of our souls and ways to God.


I shall add no more, but only wish the soul thus concluding, to lift up the
heart and voice to God, in singing a Psalm answerable to its disposition, and
matter meditated on; and by this means shall the soul close up it self with
much sweetness and Spiritual contentment.

SECT. 5. An Example of the souls love to Christ.
AFter entrance by Prayer, and choice of this theme, the soul may proceed thus:
--

1. Description.
O my soul, what is this souls love to Christ, whereof thou studiest? It is a
Spiritual fire kindled from above in the hearts of his darlings, toward their
Bridegroom the Lord Jesus Christ.

Or it is a sparkle of that fire of the holy Ghost, struck into the tinder of
our souls, which immediately smokes, and sends up the flame thitherward, whence
it first had its rise: Or, it is the souls rest or reposal of it self in the
bosom of Christ, with content unspeakable and glorious, being persuaded of her
interest in that song of the Spouse, Cant 6.3.
I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine. This, O my soul, is the nature
of thy love to Christ.

2. Distribution.
There is a twofold love, one of desire, which is an earnest longing after that
which we believe would do us much good, if we could attain to it; another of
complacency, when having attained that which we desire, we hug and embrace
it, and solace our selves in the fruition of it: Now the first of these loves
is an Introduction to the second, and both of them (in relation to Christ)
issue from a proportionable act of faith precedent: 1. That affectionate
longing, and thirsty love, wherewith we pant and gasp after Christ, proceeds
from the first acts of faith, whereby we assent to all Gospel-promises, as true
and good in themselves, and better unto as then any thing in the world, could
we but once be assured that they belong unto us. 2. That other love of
complacency, when (with the Psalmist) we return unto our rest, Psa. 116.7.
because the Lord has dealt bountifully with us; when sweetly we repose our
selves in the lap of our Savior, with content unspeakable, and full of glory, it
proceeds from the last act of faith, whereby we are actual persuaded by those
welcome whistlers of the Spirit of adoption, that certainly Christ is our
Savior, and that our debts are cancelled to the very last mite; only observe (O
my soul) these two things of this love: 1. That it is subject to all variations
or changes, ebbings and flowings of that persuasion; sometimes in a violent
temptation, or in a sensible desertion, our persuasion fails, and so this love
of complacency is either stupefied, or it falls back into that thirsty auxious
love of desire. 2. That this love of complacency admits of degrees,
proportionable to the degrees of our persuasion; if that be clear and strong,
this love is more cheerful and pleasant; if that be weak and obscure, this love
is more cold, with many fears and jealousies, -- whence this love of
complacency may not unfitly be subdivided into an Ordinary and Heroical love;
ordinary love proceeds from a weak degree of that last act of Faith; Heroical
love springs from a more eminent and transcendent pitch of persuasion,
concerning our own reconciliation in particular: It is called Ordinary, because
most Christians (though effectually called) do ordinarily feel but such a
timorous love in themselves; it is called Heroical, because it is constantly
only in such, as either besides the evidence of the Word and Spirit, have had
some special revelation to put them out of all doubt, concerning their estate
to Godward; or in such as by a certain close walking with God, have been long
exercised in a Christian course, have often entertained Christ Jesus at supper
in their hearts, and habituated themselves into a more familiar acquaintance
with that holy Spirit, which brings all the good news from Heaven, to those
diligent souls which carefully wait for it.

3. Causes.
But whence is this love, O my soul? The Apostle is plain, 1 John 4.13.
We love him, because he first loved us: When the Spirit of God in the promises
lets in some intimation of Gods love into the soul, then she loves him again:
That expression of the Psalmist, The Lord will command his loving kindenesses
in the day time, Psalm. 42.8.
is pertinent to this; it is a phrase taken from Kings and Princes, and great
Commanders in the field, whose words of Command stand for Laws: so the Lord
sends out his loving kindness, saying, Go out, my everlasting love and
kindeness, take a Commission from me, go to that humble, thirsty, hungry soul;
go and prosper, and prevail, and setle my love effectually upon him; I command
thee do it: It may be at the first visit, the poor soul cries out, What, I
love? What, I mercy? will Christ Jesus accept of me? Oh, I am the worst of
sinners; could I pray, or perform duties as some others do, I might have some
hopes of mercy; but what? is it possible that the Lord of Heaven should love
me? Yes, thee, even thee, says the Lord: go out my loving kindeness to that
poor soul, break open the doors of that weary weltring heart, knock off those
bolts of carnal reason, and all base arguments, and clear and warm that broken,
bruised, humbled soul, and tell him from me, That his sins are pardoned, his
sighs and prayers are heard, and he shall be saved; I charge thee do the work
before thou come in again: Here, O my soul, is the immediate cause, Gods love
thus affecting the heart, it breeds a love in the heart to God again: I drew
them (says God) with the cords of a man, Hosea 1.4.
even with the bands of love.

4. Effects.
And what are the effects (O my soul) of this love? O this love has many holy
gracious effects, it will make the soul to rejoice in Christ's presence, to
grieve in his absence, to please Christ in all things, to desire union with
Christ, though it never see good day, though it have no other wages; to bestow
readily and freely any thing it has on the Lord Jesus Christ, to deny it self,
or any thing that may come in competition with Christ, to part with her
Isaac's, her dearest things, To account all things as dung and loss, Phil. 3.8.
that she may win Christ, to be content with nothing, but love again from the
party beloved, to be ever and anon thinking and musing on the Lord Jesus
Christ, to be ordinarily and frequently speaking of Christ: Love is full of
eloquence in the praises of her beloved, so is the souls love to the Lord Jesus
Christ. O how that Spouse of Christ runs on in a description of his rarities
and transcendencies, My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten
thousand (or as it is more elegantly in the Original, Can. 5.10.16.
He is an ensign-bearer among ten thousand) -- He is altogether lovely, or he
is all-entire, he is all composed of loves: Betwixt those Verses [10. and 16.]
there is a description of Christ, so stuffed with choicest delicacies of
expression, that thou can not match it (O my soul) out of any of those Poets
which have flown highest in amorous inventions; at last she concludes with a
triumphant Epiphonema, This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters
of Jerusalem: Nay, love will make the soul not only speak, but do any thing
for the Lord Jesus Christ: O then she cries, How may I please Christ better?
what duty must I do? and what sins must I avoid? if there be any of the
bedchamber of the Bridegroom, tell me I beseech you, how may I hear, and pray,
and walk, and approve my heart to my Christ and King, that nothing may
displease him. Lastly, love will make the soul suffer for Christ, and to
rejoice in such sufferings; Acts 5.41.
it is a fire that much water of persecution cannot quench; nay, it feeds on
those waters, and grows hotter by them: As opposition rises against it, so it
rises against opposition, yea, it rises by it, until it rise above it.

5. Opposites.
Now what are the contraries to this love of Christ, but an hatred of Christ?
One would wonder there should be such a thing in the world, as hatred of
Christ: But why then should the Apostle threat, If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16.22.
let him be Anathema, Maranatha; (i.) If any man hate Christ, let him be
accursed with all manner of execrations or curses in the most desperate manner,
expecting due vengeance from the Lord, Jude v. 14, 15.
when he comes with his holy millions, to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly: No question there is a world of wicked men, that
are under this curse; I speak not of poor Indians, and other Savages of the
unchristian world, whose souls are over-clouded with the blackest mists of
irreligion, that the prince of darkness can possibly inwrap them in, who come
into the world, not knowing wherefore, and go out of the world, not knowing
whither; an heavy case, which cannot sufficiently be bewailed with an ocean of
tears and blood; but of those that live within the paradise of the Christian
Church, that have nothing to distinguish them from those Indian Miscreants, but
an outward conformity, outward formalities, the charity of other men, and their
own slight imaginations: As 1. All open enenemies, gross, heinous and grievous
sinners, swearers, blasphemers, drunkards, railers against God, his Ministers,
his People, these and the like love sin more then Christ, they love the Devil
more then Christ. 2. All fawning Hypocrites, that profess (it may be) a
mavelous affectionate love unto the Lord Jesus Christ, but they are inward
haters of Christ.

6. Comparisons.
But to inflame thy love (O my soul) upon Christ, consider whereunto it is
like, or to what it may be compared: The Scripture has described the outgoings
of such a Soul, 1. By the parched ground: Psalm. 63.1.
My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty
Land, where no water is. 2. By the pantings of a chased Heart: Psalm. 42.1, 2.
As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God. 3. By the longings of a teeming woman: Psa. 119.174.
I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord, and thy Law is my delight. 4. By the
fainting and swooning of one that is in good earnest sick of love: Cant. 5.8.
I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my Beloved, that ye tell
him I am sick of love: Such souls are commonly cast into an agony, into pangs
of love, that love Christ indeed.

7. Testimonies.
And does not the Scripture express these loves of the soul to the Lord Jesus?
John 8.42. Cant. 1.3.
If God be your Father (said Christ to the Jews) then will ye love me: -- and,
Thy name is as an ointment poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee: --
and, We will remember thy love more then wine; Cant. i. 4. 1 John 4.19. Psalm.
18.1.
the upright love thee: -- We love him (says the Apostle) because he loved us
first: I will love thee (says David) O Lord my strength: -- I will cause those
that love me (says Wisdom) to inherit substance: Prove. 8.21. John 14.21.
-- He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and
he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, Psalm.
119.132.
and I will manifest my love unto him: -- Look upon me (says David) and be
merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name.

Thus for Information of Judgment, now for the stirring up (O my soul) of thy
affections.

1. Relish.
O divine love! O the pleasures, O the joys of this love! O honey and sweetness
it self! it is the love of Christ, that sets a price on all other Duties; the
least service (even a cup of cold water, or a widows mite) if it have but a
grain of this love in it, is a most acceptable sacrifice to God; it is love to
Christ that has the Promises of this life, and that which is to come: I will
cause those that love me, to inherit substance, Prove. 8.21. James 1.12.
and I will fill their treasures; -- yea, there is a crown of life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him; it is love to Christ, that by Christ
assures to us all the glorious privileges, flowing from Christ, as
Reconciliation, Adoption, Forgiveness of sins, Justification, Righteousness,
Wisdom, Sanctification, Redemption, Possession of all things, All things are
yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to
come, all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. O who can think
of this love of Christ, and not be ravished therewith! Had I a thousand hearts
to bestow on Christ, they were all too little, they were never able to love him
sufficiently; it is the Lord Jesus that is all strength, and all wisdom, and
all honor, and all beauty; the fountain of all graces, and virtues, and
qualities in men: whatsoever grace, or virtue, or quality is in us, they are
but so many rays that come from this Sun of righteousness; he is fairer then
the children of men, Psalm. 45.2.
and grace eminently is poured into his lips.

2. Complaint.
But alas! where is my soul? how dull is my understanding? my affection? how
careless, how peevish is my soul, in a business which concerns it so much? how
prejudicate is my opinion? how vain are my conceits? O my soul! how ignorant
art thou of the incomparable worth, and delightful sweetness that is in the
Lord Jesus? how secute, and sleepy, and senseless art thou? O this hard heart of
mine! thou can mourn for losses and crosses of this life, but for the loss of
Christ, thou can not mourn one jot: Did thou, O my soul, truly affect
Christ, the pillow would be washed with thy tears for thy want of Christ, and
for thy want of assurance: Woe, and alas, that my mind is taken up with a
confluence of worldly lusts, worldly cares, and worldly desires! O it is this
that quenches the Conjugal love of my soul to her bridegroom; my loves are now
become very adulterous loves: woe, and alas, that I have loved the world, 1 John
2.15.
and the things that are in this world, that I have followed my base lusts, and
adulteries, and abominations; that in stead of loving Christ, I have loathed
him, and whipped him, and scourged him, and crucified him, and preferred the
vilest lust (any sin whatsoever) before the Lord Jesus. And now I am musing of
this love of Christ, alas, I feel it not, or if I feel a little, little love of
desire, yet I have no sense, no taste, no relish of that love of complacency;
there is no such fire, no flames in my breast toward the Lord Jesus.

3. Wishing.
And yet, O that I could love the Lord Jesus! O that he had my heart! O that
now I could bid adieu to all other lovers! O that the Father of love, and the
Spirit of love would strike one spark of love from the Promise, to kindle it in
the heart of his poor creature! O that I felt a dilatation of my desires after
Christ! that God would stretch them, and widen them to the utmost, that I might
love Christ with all my heart, soul and might! O that I were even sick of love!
O that I were cast into the melting pangs of a divine Christian love! O my
soul, consider the want of Christ, and the worth of Christ! O consider the
benefits of Christ's death, the sweetness of Christ's promises, the pleasantness
of his commands, the preciousness of his graces, and above all, the
infiniteness of his love, and thou can not but love him! Consider that
soul-ravishing Text, God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he
loved us, Ephesians. 2.4.5.6.7.
even when we were dead sins, has quickened us together with Christ, and has
raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus; that in ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in
his kindeness toward us through Christ Jesus: and thou can not but cry out
with the ardency of affection, with the strength, the zeal of love, Revel. 1.5,
6.
O! To him, unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, and has made us kings and priests unto God, and his Father, To him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

4. Confession.
O my soul, these are sweet motives: But alas, how dull is thy understanding,
how dead thy affections? I clearly see there is no strength at all in thee. O
how cold, and weak, and faint, and heartless are these thy wishes! O Christ! I
would love thee, but I cannot; I find no ability in my self to love thee; I am
no more able to love thee, then cold water is able to heat it self, O where be
those scalding affections to Christ Jesus, which holy men have felt in all
ages, and striven to express in their Soliloquies? O where is this holy,
constant, conjugal love? O where are those swellings, and throwings, and
wrestlings, which others have felt in their bowels? O where be those holy fits,
those pangs of love, those love-trances, those Seraphical flames of conconjugal
affection, which made the Spouse cry out, Cant. 2.5.
I am sick of love? Alas, I feel a distemper in my affections; I find it not
so easy to love Christ, as many men think, surely it is a very hard and
difficult thing to love the Lord Jesus.

5. Petition.
Come then blessed Lord, and show thy own self to me, I beseech thee, if I have
found grace in thy sight, Exodus 33 13.18.
show me the way that I may know thee: -- I beseech thee show me thy glory; --
give me the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Christ; let me
see the beauties and glorious excellencies, Ephesians. 1.17.
and by this means blow my love into a pure flame, yea advance it to a degree
of Angelical sublimity. Surely, Lord, I cannot love what I see not, and
therefore anoint mine eyes with thy eye salve, that I may see thy loveliness,
and love thee with my best loves: O kindle, inflame, and enlarge my love, that
it may rest largely in thee; enlarge the crany which the Spirit has bored
through the flesh into my Spirit, that I may largely see thee, and so largely
love thee; enlarge the arteries and conduit-pipes, by which thou the head and
fountain of love flowest into thy members, that being abundantly quickened and
watered with the Spirit of love, I may abundantly love thee: and do not only
come much, but come often into me, and let my Spirit often be one Spirit with
thee, in communitive and fruitive unions; for such often unions with thy
Spirit, will make my Spirit more Spiritual, and the more Spiritual she is, the
more will she love thee, the God of all Spirits. Blessed Lord, will thou love
the image, and shall not the image much more love the pattern? O that I were
sick of love! that my understanding, will and affections were all overflown,
overcome and amazed, that my faintings were inflamed toward thee, and even
melted into thee! O sweet Jesu, touch my soul with thy Spirit, that virtue may
go out of thee into me, and draw me unto thee; let the savor of thy ointments
(whose very breath is love) be ever in my nostrils: Give me the flaggons of the
new wine of the kingdom, which may lift up my soul above my self in my loves;
give me to forget the low and base loves of this world, and by an heavenly
excess, transport me into an heavenly love, that I may embrace Christ who is
the Lord from heaven with a love like himself: O give me to believe, for faith
and love grow together, and the stronger my faith, the greater will be my love.

6. Confidence.
And this (sweet Jesu) I am fully persuaded thou will do: I believe, Lord help
my unbelief; surely thou art God, who can not lie, Cant. 1.4.
and thou have promised, that the upright shall love thee. O how should I but
believe thee? and now thou have in some sweet measure convinced me, now thou
beginn'st to warm my heart, and to cast me into a love-trance; now that my
Spirit is somewhat raised, my heart in some sort enlarged, my mind in some
measure fixed upon thee: I make bold (Lord) to conclude with this Spiritual
Epithalamium, Blessed Lord, I am thine, only thine, ever thine, all that I am
is at thy command, and all that I have is at thy disposing; be pleased to
command both it and me: I know whatsoever I adventure or lose for thy sake, I
shall receive with infinite advantage in thy blessed self. I dare trust my Lord
with the best thing that ever he gave me, my precious soul. O my bleeding heart
and broken spirit does languish, in a thirsty love, panting and gasping after
thee, my blessed Savior: O let me taste how gracious thou art, by some real
experiments in my own heart, smile upon me from heaven, answer me with some
assuring whispers of the Spirit of Adoption; Kiss me with the kisses of thy
mouth, Cant. 1.2.
for thy love is better then wine. O let me bathe my soul in the delicious
intimacies of a Spiritul communion with thee my God, that I may for ever adhere
unto thee with a sincere constancy, and rest in thee with a love of
complacency: for I feel, I find my soul cast into a longing sweat for thee,
and nothing can satisfy the importunate longing of my perplexed soul, but thy
own self; for thou art my Lord, my love, my life, and thou art altogether
lovely, O my dear Jesu! O my dearest Husband! O these holy fits! O these sweet
pangs of love grow upon me apace! Upon a sudden, my King, my Savior, I am even
sick of love!

Conclusion.
Psa. 116.7.
And now, O my soul, return unto thy rest, for the Lord has been beneficial
unto thee: The reason of thy love is Christ's love; Thou love him, because he
first loved thee. Is it thus, O my soul? has the Lord Christ indeed discovered
his will, to take thee for his Spouse? What, he that is so holy, to marry such
an impure wretch as thou art? O how should this but melt thee into a flame of
love? what stirrings of love should thou now feel in thy bowels? how should
thou now value him, and prize him, and praise him? how should thy glory now
sing praises to him, and not be silent? how should thou admire and wonder,
that thou could endure to be without Christ so long? that thou could so
slightly think of Christ heretofore? O my soul, henceforward cling to thy
Savior, go out of thy self, and creep to him, and affect not only union, but
very unity with him; bathe thy self hereafter again and again, many and many a
time in those delicious intimacies of thy spiritual marriage: And to that
purpose (O my soul) if sometimes thy love to thy Savior shall cool, O then
sweet Savior look upon me in mercy; one look of thine will awaken my love, and
make me weep bitterly, that I have loved thee so little, whom to love
sufficiently, my best and mightiest loves are most insufficient: Prevent my
seeking with thy seeking, be thou present with me in thy providence and power,
when thou seem to be far off me, in the taste of thy sweetness and fruition
of thy loves; and then when I have regained thee, I will hold more hardly, and
keep more fastly, and love thee more vehemently, by thy power assisting:
Provide a stock of loves in the summer, against winter, if it return any more:
Come Lord Jesus, and be as the Roe on the Mountains; my life is hid with thee,
O appear quickly, Rev. 22.20.
that I may quickly appear with thee in glory, and in the happiness of a
consummate marriage: Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen, Amen, Psalm.
18. to ver. 7.

SECT. 6. Another example of Eternity.
AFter entrance by prayer and choice of this theme, the soul may proceed thus:
--

1. Description.
O my soul, what is this Eternity whereof thou studiest? It is the entire and
perfect possession of a life (together and at once) that never shall have end:
The description may be imperfect, and no wonder; For how can that be defined,
which has no bondage or limits: Whatsoever is said of eternity, comes
infinitely short of it, no words can utter it, no figures number it, no time
can measure it: Eternity is of this nature, take from it what you will, it is
still the same, it is neither increased by addition, nor diminished by
subtraction: What is Eternity? it is a circle running back into it self, whose
center is always, and circumference, without all end: What is Eternity? it is a
duration always present, it is one perpetual day, which is not divided into
that which is past, and that which is to come: What is Eternity? it is an age
of ages, never expiring, but always like it self, without all change: What is
Eternity? it is a beginning without beginning, middle or ending, or a beginning
never ending, always beginning: and this, O my soul is Eternity.

2. Distribution.
There is a twofold Eternity, an Eternity of woe, and an Eternity of joy: First
of woe, O woe that never shall have end! The worm shall not dye, Isa. 66.24.
the fire never shall be quenched: After a thousand thousand millions of years,
there are still as many more to come, and when those many more are come and
gone, the woes are yet as far from the last as they were at the first: It is
now above Four thousand years since Esau, who hated Jacob, was cast into this
pit of woes, and yet the number of his years of torments are as many, as it was
the first day of his torment. Secondly, of joy, O joy, Isa. 9.3.
above all the joys in harvest; they are the joys of Heaven: There joys the
understanding, by a perfect knowledge and vision of God; there joys the memory,
by a perfect remembrance of all things past; there joys the will, by enjoying
all manner of good, without all fear of evil: In this joy there is no
corruption, no defect, no old age, but solemn glory, and continual solemnity;
there is an everlasting spring, there is always the flower, and grace of youth
and perfect health: With thee is the fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9.
and in thy light shall we see light.

3. Causes.
Whence are these two Eternities, O my soul, but from him that is only eternal?

Isa. 30.33.
1. Eternal woe is from him, For he has prepared Tophet of old: God is the
efficient, but sin the meritorious cause of this woe, Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin is death.

2. Eternal joy is from him, the Father bestows it, the Son merits it, the Holy
Ghost seals and applies it: God has given thee a Savior (O my soul) to give
this eternal joy to thee, and God has given thee faith, whereby thou may
attain to this Savior; and God has given thee his Word, whereby thou may
attain to this Faith: Look up therefore to him as the beginner and finisher of
this Eternity, and whilst thou magnifiest the author, be ravished with the
glory of the work; there is nothing that is good, that is not comprehended
herein: Psalm. 16.11.
In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures
evermore.

4. Effects.
What ^re the effects, O my soul, of this Eternity?

1. Of Eternity in Hell, these amongst others; heavy, heavy, most sad and heavy
thoughts, when the damned shall consider their dooms, Go ye into everlasting
fires, then shall they cast their deep thoughts on Time past. Eternity to come.


1. For time past they shall remember, that sometimes they lived (at least some
of them) in a glorious Goshen, enlightened with the fairest noontide of the
Gospel that ever the Sun saw, and that they heard many and many a powerful
Sermon; any one passage whereof (had they not suffered Satan to blindefold and
baffle them) might have been unto them the beginning of the new birth; that
many times they were told of this danger by Gods faithful Ministers; that they
had many calls and offers of salvation, and the Spirit of God many a time cried
behind them, This is the way, walk in it: That sometimes they were half
persuaded to be Christians, and they were near salvation, and they had a golden
opportunity for it; but alas, they revolted again, and preferred their lusts,
and passed by those offers and opportunities, with an inexpiable neglect, and
horrible ingratitude, and now they lie drowned and damned in that lake of fire
and brimstone, which they might have so easily and so often escaped: O what a
shrike will this cause in Hell? whiles at every of these considerations, the
worm of conscience shall give them a deadly bite, even to the heart? that the
memory of things here on earth, remains still with all spirits in the world of
Hell, is manifest, Luke 16.25.
Son, remember thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus
evil, now therefore is he comforted and thou art tormented, said Abraham to
that rich man in Hell.

2. For Eternity to come, they shall consider, That this Eternity is another
Hell in Hell; might they endure those horrible pains, and extreme horrors, no
more millions of years, then there are creatures both in Heaven and earth, they
would comfort themselves with this thought, My misery will at last have an end;
but this word [Eternity] it rents their very heart in pieces, it rents their
very throat with hideous roarings, it gives a new life to their insufferable
sorrows: O my soul, do thou not tremble at this consideration. Imagine thou
heardst Judas roaring in Hell flames, I have now suffered above One thousand
six hundred years since I betrayed Christ, and through the extremity of
torment, I have thought these One thousand six hundred, to have been a
thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand years: O when will be an end of these
sufferings! When? could thou tell stellas coeli, stillas roris, undas aquei
flueris, etc. all the stars of Heaven, stills of dew, drops of rain, fleeces of
snow, flowers of the Spring, colors of flowers, fruits of the earth, grains of
corn, leaves of trees, beasts of the field, motes of the Sun flying in the air,
hairs on thy head, sands on the sea shore, piles of grass growing on the earth;
and should thou add to these, all the thoughts of men, the motions and
mutations of all the creatures, and number all these by all the additions and
multiplications of Arithmetic, enough to fill volumns reaching from earth unto
Heaven, as yet thou have not measured the length, the middle of Eternity: O
Judas here is thy lot, thou have fried in Hell above a thousand years, thou
must be tormented in those flames a hundred thousand years, ten hundred
thousand years, a thousand millions of years, a thousand, thousand, thousand,
thousand millions of years, of ages; and when all those years and ages are gone
and past, thou art as far from the end of thy torments, as thou were at the
beginning, when thou hangedst thy self, and first wentst down to Hell. O my
soul, here is a Meditation able to startle thee from the sleep of sin: No
question, at these thoughts, Judas and all the damned in Hell take on with
infinite anguish, and enraged indignation: Hence comes that horrible hatred,
and perpetual blasphemies which the damned utter against God: O how they tear
their hair, and bite their nails, and gnash their teeth, and dig furiously into
the very fountain of life, desirous (if they could do it possibly) to spit out
their very bowels. O my heart, well may thou tremble in the midst of this
Meditation! O Eternity! Eternity! Eternity!

2. Of Eternity in heaven, these (amongst others) are the effects, rowzing,
raising, and most ravishing thoughts, when the blessed shall consider their
doom, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom: Then shall they cast
their thoughts on Time past. Eternity to come.


1. For time past, they shall remember, That sometimes they were in troubles,
in sorrows, in sicknesses, in contempt of others, in dangers by Sea and Land;
That sometimes they were ready to perish, and to cast away their souls by this
or that sin, but that God still held his special hand over them, and gave them
grace, and now has brought them into the Port and Haven of Security, where is
no shadow of miseries: O what ravishing of Spirit will the souls of the just be
cast into at this recalling of time past! and that the memory of things here
below, remains still with all the Spirits of the just made perfect, is
manifest: Luke 23.42.
Remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, said the good Thief to Christ.

2. For Eternity to come, they shall consider, That the joy they enjoy, they
shall enjoy for ever: Dan 12.3.
They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. They shall shine:
how? as the firmament, as the stars, or as the Sun, says our Savior: Matthew
13.45.
Not so (says Chrysostom) as that they should not surpass the brightness of
the Sun, but the Sun being the most glittering thing in the world, he takes a
resemblance toward the expressing of their incomparable glory: But to heighten
this glory, observe the auxesis, it shall be for ever (i.) for eternity, or for
ever and ever, (i.) for eternity and eternity; or as the Latins, in perpetuas
aeternitates, for perpetual eternities: If one eternity be without end, what
are two? what are ten? what are an hundred? what are infinite? O what a life is
this that knows no end? what a glory is this that never fades? what a love
is this that never cools? what a joy is this that never cease?

5. Opposites.
Why then, O my soul, do thou set up thy rest on this side Jordan? what are
those few short pleasures thou here enjoyest? what is this brittle life, on
which depends eternal bliss or woe? what is earth to heaven? what a minute to
eternity? if any thing be contrary to eternity, what is it but this punctilio
of time we have here to spend? this little brittle life, what is it but an ell,
a span, an inch, a point? O dear penyworth, to buy the merry madness of one
hour, with ages of pangs, infinite and eternal! O dearest bargain that ever
was, to sell away Heaven, (our everlasting inheritance) with Esau, for a sip of
momentany pleasure. I see this world and the other are mere opposites; my life
is so little, and eternity so long, that I cannot tell what is more contrary
then these two: My life is nothing but a Now, this instant is properly my own,
I cannot promise to my self any thing future, and therefore my life and
eternity are as contrary as may be.

6. Comparisons.
But to what shall I compare this Eternity? as a drop of water is unto the sea,
Eccles. 8.9.
and a gravel stone in comparison of the sand, so are a thousand years to the
day of Eternity: Nay, if we multiply a thousand years a thousand times, it
would not amount to the least fraction of the numberless number of Eternity.
They say, That the eighth Celestial Orb or Sphaere, is moved wonderful
leisurely, for though it be daily wheeled about by the rapid motion of the
Primum mobile, yet it finisheth not its own proper Circuit, but once in Thirty
six thousand years; and this space of time they call the Great year, or Plato's
year: but compare this with Eternity, and it will appear but as a moment, a
very nothing at all; to what then may thou compare this Eternity? O my soul,
it is like an Orb, every way round, and like it self, or like a wheel, that
turns, and turns, and does never cease turning; or like a year, continually
wheeling about, which turns again to the same point whence it began, and still
wheels about again; or like an ever-running Fountain, whither the waters after
many turnings flow back again, that they may always flow; or like a Snake bowed
back unto it self orbicularly, holding the tail in her mouth, which in its end
does again begin, and never cease to begin; or like a Ring, or like a Globe,
or like a Sphaere, or like the circuit of Sun and Moon, without all end.

7. Testimonies.
Is not the Scripture (O my soul) frequent in the mention of Eternity? These
shall go into everlasting punishment, Matthew 25.46.
but the righteous into life eternal: -- Their worm shall not dye, their fire
never shall be quenched: Mark 9 44.46.48. Matthew 25.41. John 4.14. 2 Cor. 5.1.
-- Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire: -- Whosoever drinks of
the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, but the water that I shall
give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up into eternal life: --
We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: --
Surely he shall not be moved for ever, Psalm. 112.6.
the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance: Dan. 12.3.
-- They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they
that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

Thus far, O my soul, for the information of thy judgment: Now for the
stirring up of thy affections.

1. Relish.
O Eternity, whether of joys or woes! Job 19.23, 24.
O that thou were written in a book, that thou were graven with an iron pen and
lead in the rock for ever! O that my heart were the book! that my Meditation
were the iron pen and lead! and that this word Eternity were so imprinted and
engraven in my heart, that I might still have it in my mind, when Pleasure
fawneth, when Lust provokes, when the Flesh rebelleth, when the Spirit
fails! O Eternity, how is it I forgot thee! O my soul, be established, and
say with David, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: Psalm. 57.7.
Set thy self in a sure place, and stand awhile; and standing, admire at this
Eternity, which always stands, and never passes away; and that thou may
taste and relish, that thou may be affected and moved with this Eternity.

1. Consider the never-dying worm, and the everlasting fire: O the bitterness
of this Eternity! there is a man in fire, and a worm at his heart; the fire
burns him, and the worm bites him, yet neither of these make an end of him;
there he roars, and yells, and howls, and cries, O woe is me for ever! A man
said I! alas, Broad is the way, and many there are that walk hell-ward: It were
enough indeed to make all tremble, though there were but one amongst all the
sons of Adam to suffer eternally, but that Hell should enlarge her self, Isa.
5.14.
and open her mouth without measure, and their glory, and their multitude, and
their pomp should descend into it; that there should be millions of men of the
same flesh and blood that I am, chained together in hell, where one roars, and
another answers, and all bear the Burden, Woe and alas for ever. In one nook of
Hell there is a lamentable shreek, Woe for ever: in another corner far remote
there is another fearful shreek, Woe for ever; in all the corners of those smoky
Vaults there is a cry, or an echo of this cry, For ever, for ever, for ever, for
ever. -- O my soul, how is it thou can sleep in the night, or be merry in the
day, whilst thou think attentively, or considerest thoroughly of this
Meditation? less matters have sometimes bestraught men of their wits, and
bereaved them of their lives.

2. Consider the Eternity of joys. O the sweetness of this Eternity! O blessed
estate of Saints in the kingdom of heaven! O glory, not to be expressed, even
by those who are glorified! there is that perpetual spring, which through the
fresh and sweet breathings of the Spirit of God, shall flourish ever; there is
time (if it be time) always after one sort, not distinguished into evening and
morning, but continued with a simple Eternity. O Eternity of joys, worthy of
continual songs of Saints and Angels to celebrate thy praise! O Eternity of
joys! how should I extol thee, desire thee, love thee, and hate all this world
for thee?

2. Complaint.
But alas, where is my fear, my trembling for that Eternity? my love, my
longing after this Eternity? what little taste and savor have I of that
bitterness, or this sweetness? My soul, what dullness and heaviness is this that
hangs upon thee? How has the world bewitched thee, and thou art become so
carnal, so corporeal, so senseless of Spiritual things? Thy thoughts run after
riches, and they are uncertain; thou art ambitious after honors, and they are
slippery; thou art in love with pleasures, and their end is sudden, and there
is bitterness in the end; thou art daily conversing with men, but death shall
dissolve all knots of friendship with others. O preposterous care! what, all on
the world? and now that Eternity is thy Meditation (on which thou should
taste largely, and be affected deeply) art thou now all a mort? O what dullness,
what drowziness, what security is this? if thou have in thee any sparks of that
heavenly fire, first breathed into thee by the Spirit of God; awake, awake, O
my soul, away, away with this dull senseless security, and consider there is but
a step betwixt thee and Eternity.

3. Wish.
O that I could find this Eternity! that I could taste or relish this
Eternity! that I were fitted and prepared for Eternity! O that I were wise,
that I understood this, Deuteronomy. 32.29. 2 Cor. 6.2.
that I considered my latter end! O that now while it is called to day, while
it is the accepted time, and the day of salvation, I had a diligent and intent
eye upon this Eternity! O that I could still reason thus, What if I endure
hunger and thirst, emptiness and injuries, sickness and poverty? What if I were
beaten with rods, 2 Cor. 11.23, 25.
or suffered shipwreck? what if I were stoned to death? all these are nothing
to that Eternity of woes; on the contrary, What if I had Croesus riches,
Solomon's Wardrobe, Belshazzars Cup-board, Sampsons strength, Absoloms beauty?
What if an Angel should take me up into an exceeding high mountain, and show me
all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and say unto me, All
these will I give thee? all these are nothing to Eternal glory: O when shall
this day come, that I shall enter into these confines of Eternity, and solace
my self in my God? As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my
soul after thee, O God: My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: O when
shall I come and appear before God?

4. Confession.
I desire Lord, but alas, how weakly, how dully, how heartlesly? I am not able,
Not sufficient of my self, 2 Cor. 3.5.
to think any thing as of my self, but my sufficiency is of God: It is nature
that pulls me from this holy Meditation; nature favors it self, loves the
world, abhors death and Eternity in another world: It is my misery that I dote
on nothing, or on sin, that is worse then nothing: How long shall these vanities
thus besot me? Ier. 4.14.
How long shall these vain thoughts lodge within me? Why Lord? there is no
strength in me, I can neither will nor do; Phil. 2.13.
It is thou only must work in me both to will and to do (both to meditate on,
and to prepare for Eternity) of thy good will and pleasure.

5. Petition.
To thee, Lord, I make my moan, to thee I tender my humble Petition, and pour
out my soul: O give me a taste and relish of this Eternity; O give me this
water, that I need thirst no more; O give me such a taste or relish of this
water, that it may be in me a well of water, springing up into eternal life: O
inflame my soul with a love of these thoughts, with a longing desire after this
Eternity of joys: O let me not always be thus dull and brutish, but thou that
have prepared Eternity for me, prepare my soul for Eternity; teach me so to
carry on this earth, that I be not shut out of those eternal Mansions in
Heaven; give me repentance for sin, that I be not thrown into those Eternal
woes in Hell; open my eyes that I may see, draw aside this vail, that I may
know what Eternity is; give me so to live, as one that labors for Eternity,
contend for Eternity, suffers for Eternity; let me never be so foolish as to
settle my self on vanity, and to neglect this Eternity that never shall have
end.

6. Confidence.
Behold, O my soul, and do not merely crave, but challenge this favor of God,
as that which he owes thee; he owes it, because he has promised it, and by his
mercy he has made his gift his debt: Psalm. 89.15. Can. 2.3.
Is there not a promise made, Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound,
they shall walk in the light of thy countenence, O Lord: and is it not an
experience tried, I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his
fruit was sweet to my taste: O what is this but the taste of Eternity? what is
this but a glimpse of unspeakable joy? press on, O my soul, and do not only
believe a taste, but a hearty draught of Eternity; these tastes are but
earnests, but there is a promise of everlasting fruition: John 3.16. Heb. 9.15.
Dan. 9.24. 1 Pet. 1.4.
Has he not given thee his word for Eternal life, for an Eternal inheritance,
for everlasting righteousness, for an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and
that fades not away? Awake, arise, O my soul, and lay hold on the promises of
this blessed Eternity; be not dismayed by reason of thy unworthiness, for the
promise is of Grace, freely offered, and freely given to them that be unworthy
in their own eyes: Christ has purchased righteousness and everlasting life,
believe in him, and live to all Eternity. O my soul, why art thou dull and
sluggish, wherefore do thou not put forth thy self to embrace and receive
this promise of Eternity? Gods promises are ever certain, never less, but
rather more in accomplishment then in tender; why do thou not cast thy self
upon this blessed issue, John 3.36.
If God be merciful, I am eternally happy? It is the sure promise of God, That
he that believes has Eternal life; therefore if I believe, I am already a
free denizon in the new Jerusalem; Eternity of joys is already reserved for me:
Why Lord, I believe, come glory, come Eternity, come and welcome glorious
Eternity, eternal glory.

Conclusion.
Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has been beneficial unto thee:
Psalm. 116.7.
O the incomprehensible love and favors of the Lord! Was it ever found that any
King or Potentate should adopt the blind, the lame, the deaf, the dumb, to
succeed him in his Inheritance? and shall such a one as I (the vilest, the
worst of sinners) inherit everlasting life, a crown that never withers, a
durable treasure, which can never fade: O what shall I give unto the Lord for
this Eternity? My soul, rejoice thou in the Lord, and bless his holy name: Now
begin that Alleluiah on earth, which in Heaven thou shall sing more sweetly to
all Eternity, Alleluiah! and again Alleluiah! Amen, Alleluiah!

And now (O my soul) give up thy self to God, and repose thy self wholly on thy
Maker and Redeemer; wait patiently on him, for the full possession of this
Eternity, and walk cheerfully in the way that he leads thee thereunto: Say at
the parting of this Meditation, O Lord, O Eternity it self, O thou First and
Last, Alpha and Omega, without beginning, and without all end, I recommend my
soul, my ways to thee; take me to thy keeping, and prepare me for Eternity,
through Christ thy only Son, my only Savior. Psalm. 16. beginning at Verse 7.
ad finem.

CHAP. VIII.
SECT. 1. Of the Nature of this Life of Faith.
TO live by Faith, is by Faith in Christ to assent and adhere unto, and to
possess the whole Word of God, as our own in all estates and conditions,
resting quietly upon his gracious and faithful promise, and yielding our selves
unto his good pleasure, in sincere, universal and constant obedience: Or, to
live by Faith, is to feed upon the several promises of God made in his Word,
and to apply them to our own selves, according to our needs, and so to uphold,
comfort and encourage our selves against all temptations, and unto every good
duty. This Life of Faith is a very Heaven upon earth, a sweet Sanctuary to any
hunted soul; hereby our hearts will be cheared, our life will be sweet to us,
God will be glorified, and the glory of his truth will be mightily advanced. O
blessed Duty!

SECT. 2. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in general.
OUr Directions for this life of Faith are either General. Particular.


In general, that we may live by Faith, we must endeavor two things, 1. To get
matter for our faith to work upon. 2. To order our faith aright in the work.


1. That we may provide matter for our faith to work upon, we must observe
three things: 1. That we store up all the good promises of God, and our own
experiences seasonably: It is good to lay up in a good time aforehand.

2. That we lay in promises of all kinds: We had better leave then lack; it is
the wisdom of a man, that he may not live feebly and poorly, but to have
somewhat to spare.

3. That we so lay them up, that we may have them at hand: It is folly to say,
I have good provision as can be, Col. 3.16.
but I have it not here: Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously and
richly in all wisdom.

2. That we may order our Faith aright in the work, observe these Directions:

1. Take possession of the promises, and value them as our own.

2. Expect nothing from the promise, but that which is suitable to the nature
of it: To this purpose some promises are absolute, which God has simply
determined to accomplish; as the promise of the Messiah, Isa. 7.14. and of the
calling of the Gentiles, Romans 11.26. Some promises are conditional, which God
will accomplish in his own order, in his own time, and in his own manner and
measure; in a word, they are no further promised, then God sees in wisdom to
be most meet for his glory, and our good; as, all temporal blessings, less
principal Graces, and the measure of all sanctifying Graces: now in all these
expect nothing from them, but that which is suitable to the nature thereof.

3. That done, then eye that particular good in the promise which we stand in
need of, and set Gods power, and faithfulness, and wisdom awork, to bring it
about; for instance, thou art in persecution, and either thou would have
deliverance out of it, or comfort and refreshment in it: In this case see all
this in the promise (referring the order, and time, and manner to God) and then
set Gods power and faithfulness awork that can do it, and his wisdom awork to
contrive it, which way he knows best: This is the meaning of that Text, Psalm.
37.5. 1 Pet. 5.7.
Commit thy ways unto the Lord, trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass;
and hurl your care upon the Lord, for he cares for you.

4. By faith wait upon God, in that way he has appointed; it is true, God will
work that good for us, yet we must use the means, and meet God in the course of
his providence, otherwise we live not by Faith, but tempt God, and throw away
his promises and all.

5. Set it down and conclude, that God will do whatsoever he has promised, and
we shall receive it in the ways of his providence: This is the very work of
faith it self, thus it draws sap and virtue from the promise, when it
concludes, That according to the good in the promise, it is sure to be done.

6. But imagine the Lord delays, and does not suddenly accomplish, then must
faith take up its stand, and stay till it come: He that believes, Isa. 28.16.
makes not haste, the vision is for an appointed time, and therefore wait for
it; so the Psalmist, As the eyes of a servant look to the hands of his Master,
and the eyes of a maiden to her Mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God, until he have mercy upon us; Psalm. 133.2.
not until we will, or until we see it fit, but until he will have mercy upon
us.

7. Imagine the Lord not only delays, but seems to frown, and to say, He will
not hear: In this case, labor with an holy humility to contend with our God,
and by strong hand to overcome him, for the Lord loves to be overcome thus.
When Jacob wrestled with God, Let me go, says the Lord; I will not let thee
go, Genesis 32.26.
says Jacob: So do we catch the Lord Jesus, and strive with him, and leave him
not, till we have those comforts he has promised, and which we have begged:
Surely this is the glory and victory, 28.
and triumph of faith, when the Lord is fain to lay down his weapons, and to
yield himself as conquered; Thy name shall be no more called Jacob, but Israel,
because thou have prevailed with God.

Two cautions concerning promises, and the life of faith, are mainly to be
observed in the general.

1. That not barely the promises, but the person of Christ, is the object of
faith: We are not to wrest on the promises alone, but to close with Christ in
those promises; and therefore in receiving of, or having recourse unto a
promise, we are first to seek out for Christ in it, as being the foundation of
it, and so to take hold of the promise in him: Thus Philip directs the Eunuch,
Believe on the Lord Jesus: Acts 6.31.
The promise is but the Casket, and Christ the Jewel in it; the promise but the
field, Christ is the Pearl hid in it, and to be chiefly looked at: Thus it is
said, That promises of pardon, are not as pardons of a Prince, which merely
contain an expression of his royal word for pardon; but Gods promises are made
in his Son, and are as if a Prince should offer to pardon a Traitor, upon
marriage with his child, whom in and with that pardon he tenders: The reason
hereof is, because Christ is the grand promise, in whom all the promises are
Yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 11.29.


2. That promises in things temporal and spiritual (not absolutely necessary to
salvation) are not universal, but indefinite, (i.) he makes such promises,
because sometimes (though not always) he grants accordingly. For instance, that
promise of healing the sick, cannot be universal, Iam. 5.15. Heb. 9.17.
for it might then be supposed, that sick men should never dye, seeing the
Elders may at all such times of danger of death, still come and pray with them,
but we all know it is appointed for all men once to dye; the meaning thereof
is, that prayer is an Ordinance to which God has made such a gracious promise,
and he often does restore the sick at their prayers; and therefore upon every
such particular occasion, we are to rely upon God for the performance of it by
an act of recumbancy, though we cannot with an act of full assurance, the
promise not being universal, but indefinite: Of like nature are all other
promises of things temporal or things spiritual, not absolutely necessary to
salvation; as, long life, riches, honor, Assurance of Evidence to them that
fear him, the tenor and purport of which promise, is not as if absolutely,
infallibly, and universally, God does always perform these to those that are
truly qualified, with the conditions specified in those promises; the contrary
both Scripture, instances, and common experience shows, they are therefore
indefinitely meant, and so to be understood by us; because when ever God does
dispense any such mercies to any of his, he would do it by promise: And he
requires answerably an act of faith, suitable to that his meaning in the
promise; that as he intended not in such promises, an absolute, infallible,
universal obligation of himself, to the performance of them to all that fear
him, so the act of faith, which a man is to put forth toward this promise, in
the application of it for his own particular, is not required to be an
absolute, infalible persuasion and assurance, that God will bestow these
outward things upon him, having these qualifications in him, but only an
indefinite act (as I may call it) of recumbancy and submission, casting and
adventuring our selves upon him for the performance of it to us, not knowing
but he may in his outward dispensations make it good to us; yet with submission
to his good pleasure, if otherwise he dispose it; and if he grant, to consider
then, That whatsoever we have, it is not by a mere Providence, but by virtue of
a Promise.

SECT. 3. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in particular, as in Temporal
evils.
IN particular that we may live by faith, observe we, -- 1. The Promises. 2.
The exercise of faith concerning the Promises.


And both these are considerable, either in regard of Our selves. Others.


1. In regard of our selves; and therein we shall consider matters Temporal.
Spiritual. Eternal.


Things Temporal are either Evil. Good.


We shall begin first with Temporal Evils; and concerning them, first give you
the Promises; and secondly, the exercise of faith in respect of those Promises.

1. The Promises that concern Temporal Evils, have reference to those evils,
either in General. Special.


1. Evils general, are afflictions and dangers, concerning which we have
Promises, some to Prevent, Qualify, Remove those Afflictions.


1. The Promises to prevent Afflictions, you may read in the Word, and they are
these and the like: Psalm. 91.10. Psalm. 121.7. Job 5.19. Zech. 2.5. where the
Lord promises to be a wall of fire to his people; not of stone, or brass,
says Theodoret, that it may both fray afar off, and keep off too at hand;
protect them, and destroy their enemies.

2. The Promises to qualify evils, are these and the like: Psalm. 103.13, 14.
Isa. 49.13, 14, 15. Hos. 11.8, 9. In this last Promise, God imitates Parents
(says Theodoret) when any misery is upon their child, their bowels yern more;
never sits the child so much on the Mothers lap, never lies so much in her
bosom, as when he is sick: So the Spouse being sick of love (i.) in some
misery, Cant. 2.5, 6.
Christ stays her with flaggons, comforts her with apples, his left hand is
under her head, and his right hand does embrace her: Psalm. 56.8. where we may
read Gods compassion to his children in their calamities, that he narrowly
observes every one of them; Thou tellest my wandrings] yea, he makes so
precious a reckoning of their griefs and sorrows, that not a tear falls to the
ground, but he keeps it, preserves it (as precious liquor) in his bottle; Put
my tears into thy bottle] yea, he keeps them in memory, he notes them and
writes them his book, as if he would chronicle our tears for everlasting
remembrance; Are they not in thy book?] 2 Chronicles. 4.17. Is there or can there be
any richer or fuller expression in Tully, then there is in the Greek, where
there is both an elegant Antithesis, and double Hyperbole, beyond Englishing,
(...); for affliction, glory; for light affliction, heavy, massy, substantial
glory, a weight of glory; for momentany affliction, eternal glory: nay, the
Apostle adds degrees of comparison, yea goes beyond all degrees, calling it
more excellent, far more excellent, an Hyperbole, Hyperbole, exceeding
excessive, eternal weight of glory.

3. The Promises to bear them, or in due time to remove them, are these and the
like: Psalm. 37.24. Jer. 29.11. Micah 7.8, 9. Psalm. 97.11. as sure as harvest
follows a seeding, so to the righteous, comfort follows mourning, John 16.20. 1
Cor. 10.13.

2. Evils special, are Sickness, Poverty, Famine, War, Captivity, Witchcraft,
Possession, Oppression.

1. For sickness, we have Promises, some to Prevent, Qualify, Remove sickness.


1. The Promises to prevent, are these and the like: Exo. 15.26. Deuteronomy. 7.15.
Psalm. 91.10.

2. Promises to qualify sickness, are these and the like: Ps. 41.3. Heb. 12.6,
7, 8.

3. Promises to remove sickness, are these and the like: Exo. 23.25. Deuteronomy.
7.15. Isa. 4.31.

2. For Poverty, we may store up these Promises, Psalm. 23. throughout, Psalm.
34.9, 10. Psalm. 37.25. Heb. 13.15. The wicked indeed may have more abundance
then the Christian, but here is the difference, the wicked has all by a
Providence, the Christian has all by a Promise: and this distinction the poor
Christian would not part with for a world of gold.

3. For Famine, we may store up these Promises, Job 5.19, 20. Psalm. 33.18, 19.
Prove. 10.2, 3. Psalm. 37.18, 19. Isa. 41.17, 18. Some Martyrs being cast into
Prison, and denied necessary food, they had faith to return this answer, If men
will give us no meat, we believe God will give us no stomach. When Christ was
an hungered, and Satan tempts him to command stones to be made bread, he
answered, Matthew. 4.4.
Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God; q.d. a man may feed on a Promise, he must depend on Gods
allowance, and when provision fails, then not to distrust the provision of God,
is a notable trial of faith.

4. For War, we may gather up these Promises and the like, Job 5.20. Prove.
3.24, 25, 26. Jer. 39.17, 18.

5. For Captivity, gather in these Promises and the like, Deuteronomy. 30.3, 4. which
very Promise Nehemiah sueth out, Nehem. 1.9. Psalm. 106.46. Ezekiel. 11.16.

6. For Witchcraft or Possession, consider that Promise, Numb. 23.23.

7. For Oppression, we have these Promises, Psa. 12.5. Psa. 68.5. Psa. 146.7,
8, 9.

2. For the exercise of faith, concerning these Promises, that we may live by
them, go to Meditation. Prayer.


1. For Meditation, and the matter of it, consider these things, and let your
faith chew on them.

Amos 3.6.
1. That all affliction comes from God: Shall there be evil in a city, and the
Lord has not done it? I form the light, and I create darkness; Isa 45.7. Psalm.
119.75.
I make peace, and I create evil: I the Lord do all these things. I know, O
Lord, (says David) that thy judgments are right, and that thou in thy
faithfulness have afflicted me.

2. That as God sends it, so none can deliver us out of it but God alone: ^
Chr. 20.12.
O our God, will thou not judge them? We have no might against this great
company that comes against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are
upon thee. This Meditation draws the heart from carnal repose, in means or
friends; it expels vexatious and distracting cares, and estrangeth from the use
of unlawful means of deliverance: The horse is prepared against the day of
battle, but safety is of the Lord.

3. The causes of all miseries and sorrow, is sin, and therefore its time for
us to examine our ways, to humble our selves, and to set upon Reformation:
Psalm. 119.59.
I thought on my ways (said David) and turned my feet unto thy testimonies: 2
Chro. 33.12
when Manasses was in affliction, He besought the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly before the God of his Fathers: Surely it is meet to be said
unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more: Job 34.31, 32
That which I see not teach thou me; If I have done iniquity, I will do no
more: The end of chastisement, is amendment of life, whence it receives the
name of Correction, which signifies, to set aright or straight.

4. That now God tries our faith, patience, contentation, and meekness of
Spirit, He has said unto Crosses, Go ye to such a man, not to weaken his
faith, or to waste any Grace of the Spirit, but to purge him, refine him, try
him, exercise him, to breed the quiet fruits of Righteousness, to confirm his
patience, support his hope, etc. -- Hence Gods servants by their faith have
been enabled to say, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, Micah 7.9.
because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute
judgment for me: And if he say thus, 2 Samuel 15.26.
I have no pleasure in thee: Behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems
good to him. This Meditation makes the heart willingly, freely and constantly
to resign it self to the good pleasure of God in all things.

5. That it is Gods will, after we have gone to the promise, to use all lawful
means of help which God in his providence affords; but in point of dependence,
that we solely rest on Gods promises: Faith coupleth the means and the end, but
looks to the Promiser (whose truth, and wisdom, and power, and mercy, never
fails) and not to the probability of the thing promised: Abraham against hope,
believed in hope, -- That what God had promised, Romans 4 18, 21
he was able to perform.

6. That the promises are in Christ, Yea and Amen, and therefore set it down
and conclude, that God will do whatsoever he has promised, and we shall
receive it in the ways of his providence; Isa. 28.16.
it may be not yet, what then? He that believes will not make haste: Daniel
waited Seventy years for deliverance out of captivity in Babylon, and may not
we wait Seventy weeks, Seventy days?

2. For prayer, and the parts and manner of it, observe this method:

1. Lay open our sorrows before the Lord, pour out our complaints into his
bosom: Lam 3.22.
I am the man that have seen affliction by the rod of thine anger, thou have
brought me into darkness but not into light: Psalm. 3.1.
-- Lord, how am I beset with miseries? how do my sorrows increase daily? Psalm.
38.18.
how are they increased that trouble me?

2. Confess our sins with hatred and godly sorrow: I will declare my iniquity,
Hos. 5.15.
I will be sorry for my sins: For want of this, God threatened the Israelites, I
will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offenses, and seek
my face, in their affliction they will seek me early.

3. Importune the Lord, and direct we our supplications to our God: Lord, how
long will thou look on? O rescue my soul from their destruction, Psalm 35 17.
my darling from the Lions; look upon mine affliction and my tears, for I am
brought very low.

Psalm. 125.3.
4. Then press we the Lord with his promises: Lord, thou have said, The rod of
the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the Righteous: Isa. 10.25.
Thou have said, Yet a little while and the indignation shall cease: Isa. 54.8.
Thou have said, In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but
with everlasting kindeness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy
Redeemer: O these are thy promises, Lord, make them effectual to my poor soul.

5. For conclusion, tell we the Lord, whatever becomes of us we will trust in
him: Job 13.15. Psa 56.3.
Though thou should slay me, yet will I trust in thee: -- For what time I am
afraid, I will will trust in thee.

These are the acts of faith by which it puts forth, and exercises it self in
time of afflictions.

SECT. 4. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in temporal blessings.
COncerning temporal blessings, or good things, consider we 1. The promises. 2.
The exercise of faith in those promises.


1. Promises that concern temporal blessings, have reference to those
blessings, Either in General. Special.


1. The general promises are these, and the like, 1 Timothy 4.8. Psalm. 34.8, 9.
Psalm. 84.11. Phil. 4, 19. 1 Cor. 3.21. all things are yours, we are heirs of
all the world.

2. The special promises have a relation, some to our name, some to our bodies,
some to our estates, some to our callings.

1. Those promises that have a relation to our good name, are such as these, 1 Samuel 2.30. Prove. 3.16. Prove. 4.8. Prove. 14.19. Isa. 56.3, 4, 5.

2. Those promises that have a relation to our bodies, are either for long
life, concerning which, Deuteronomy. 5.16, 33. Prove. 3.1, 2. or for health, concerning
which, Prove. 3.8. Psalm, 103.3, 4, 5. or for safety, concerning which, Prove.
1.33. Job 11.18. Hosea 2.18. Job 5.23. or for peace, concerning which, Levit.
26.6. Psalm. 29.11. Psalm. 37.11. Prove. 16.16. or for sleep, concerning which,
Job 11.19. Prove, 3.24. or for food, concerning which, Psalm. 37.3. Psalm. 111.5.
Joel 2.26. or for raiment, concerning which, Deuteronomy. 10.18. Matthew. 6.25, 30, 32.
or for posterity, the fruit of the body, concerning which, Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13, 14.

3. Those promises that have relation to our estates, are these, Job 22.24, 25.
Prove. 8.18, 19. Psalm. 37.5.

4. Those promises that have a relation to our calling, are either for plenty,
concerning which, Prove. 10.4. and 12.11. and 13.4. and 28.19. -- or for
protection, concerning which, Psalm. 91.11. -- or for promotion, concerning
which, Prove. 12.24. and 22.29. -- or for good success, concerning which, Prove.
12.14. Isa. 65.21, 23. I deny not but the wicked may enjoy all these Temporal
blessings by a general Providence, but only the just have a Spiritunl right to
them; they only have them as rewards of their righteousness, as testimonies of
Gods love and care over them, and by virtue of a Promise.

2. For the exercise of faith concerning these Promises, observe that we may
live by them, either in the want enjoyment
of these Temporal mercies.

1. Of the want of them, go we to Meditation. Prayer.


1. For Meditation, and the matter of it, consider these things:

1. That faith in this case does ransack, and fan the soul narrowly to find
out and remove whatsoever does offend: If thou return to the Almighty thou
shall be built up, Job 22.23, 24
thou shall put iniquity far from thy tabernacles: then shall thou lay up gold
as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks. This advice faith
digests, and labors the reformation of what is amiss, and whatsoever hinders
the Promise.

2. That faith is painful, provident and frugal; it shakes off idleness, takes
the opportunity, husbands thriftily, and observes Gods providence in all
affairs, otherwise we live not by faith, but tempt God, and throw away his
Promises and all.

3. That faith preserves from the use of all unlawful means: The believer
consults ever what is just, not what is gainful; or what may be compassed by
honest courses, not what may be gained by fraud, deceit, cozenage, or the like
carnal dealings: Better is a little with righteousness, Prove 16.8.
then great revenues without right.

4. That faith leans upon the providence of God, who will keep back nothing
from us, but what is hurtful and pernicious: Here Is a sweet act of faith, it
submits to Gods wisdom, and rests on his providence, after the use of all
lawful means; and this maintains a Christian in some measure of contentment.

2. For Prayer, and the parts or manner of it, observe this method:

1. Confess our sins, especially those sins which upon search we are persuaded
hinders prosperity: O Lord, I have thought on my ways, and I find (this or
that) sin in my bosom, this or that corruption has gotten head, and hinders
thy blessings: O Lord, how should I expect needful things? What have I to do
with thy Promises, that have committed such and such sins?

2. Importune the Lord for his Temporal blessings, at least so far as he sees
them to be for our good, and for the glory of his great name: Thus Bildad tells
Job, Job 8.5, 6, 7.
If thou would seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the
Almighty, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous: Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end
should greatly increase. Thus Jabez prayed, 1 Chro. 4.10.
O that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coasts, etc. and God
granted him that which he requested. In like manner was Jacobs prayer, If God
will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, Genesis 28.20, 21.
and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to
my fathers house in peace, Then shall the Lord be my God: And thus may we
importune the Lord, and make our supplication to the Almighty.

3. Then press the Lord with his Promises, as with so many Arguments: Lord,
thou have said, Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, as well as
that which is to come: Thou have said, Fear the Lord, ye his saints, for there
is no want to them that fear him, etc. O these are thy Promises, make them good
to us as it stands best with thy wisdom.

2. In the enjoyment of these Temporal blessings, go we to -- Meditation.
Prayer.


1. For Meditation, and the matter of it, consider these things:

1. Faith in prosperity, keeps the heart in a holy temper and disposition (i.)
in humility, meekness, tenderness and compassion toward others, in
thankfulness, obedience, and in the fear of the Lord: Satan himself could reply
to the Lord, Job 1.10.
Does Job fear God for naught? have thou not made a hedge about him? in this
case faith will remember man of his duty, and persuade him to be so much the
more serviceable, as Gods mercies are more plentiful upon him.

2. That faith makes a man heavenly-minded in the use and possession of a
prosperous estate; as it receives all earthly blessings from God, so it winds
and pulls up the soul to God again: and if it be rightly considered, prosperity
is the fittest season for heavenly contemplation; the less trouble lies upon
our estate, the more liberty we have to think of heavenly things: howsoever,
faith considers these things as pledges of Gods love, as parts of our
childes-portion, and so it makes us look at the better part, those never-fading
riches which God has reserved in heaven for all that fear him.

3. That faith breeds a godly jealousy and suspicion, lest the heart should be
drawn away with the pleasing delights of things transitory, for by grace it is
that we are made conscious of our own weakness, and of the snare that is in
every creature, to take and entangle us: Prosperity is pleasing, but dangerous;
a man may quickly surfeit of sweet meats. This makes the waking believer
circumspect and watchful, and jealous, and suspicious of his own heart, lest he
miscarry in prosperity, considering there is a snare in it.

4. That faith minds a change, even when our mountain seems strongest: Job
3.25.
The thing I greatly feared (says Job) is come upon me, and that which I was
afraid of, is come unto me; by this it appears, that Job always thought upon a
change: There is no wind (says the Proverb) which may not blow rain, if God so
please. Riches have their wings, Prove. 23.5. Prove. 27.12.
and take their flight like an Eagle: now faith minds this, and prepares for
this; The prudent man foreseeth evil, and hides himself.

2. For Prayer, and the manner of it, observe this method:

1. Confess and acknowledge Gods mercy both in his Promises and performances:
say, Lord, thou have promised, That no good thing will thou withhold from them
that walk uprightly; and surely thou art true in thy sayings, I believe by
virtue of thy promise I enjoy this land, and those goods, etc. I have nothing,
Lord, but merely of Free Grace, and by virtue of a promise.

2. Pray, importune the Lord for sanctification of prosperity, and for Gods
blessings upon the means: the more we prosper, the more earnest should the
prayers of faith be; for of our selves we have no power to wield a good estate
well, no ability to preserve or keep it: in greatest wealth we lie open to many
temptations, and if we pray not earnestly that God may sanctify all his
Temporal blessings to us, we shall cool in grace.

3. Praise God for his mercies, and devote our selves unto him from whom we
have received all: What shall I render unto the Lord (says David) for all his
mercies toward me? Psa. 116.12, 13.
I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. Men look
for thanks, for a small kindeness, and shall not we magnify God for all his
favors and loving kindeness toward us? O praise the Lord, bless the Lord, O my
soul! Psa. 103.1.


SECT 5. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in Spiritual evils.
THings Spiritual are either Evil. Good.


We shall begin with Spiritual evils: and concerning them, first give you the
promises, and secondly the exercise of faith in respect of those promises.

Evils Spiritual arise either from the Devil, or the Flesh, or the World, or
from Man, or God, or from our own selves.

1. Those evils that arise from the Devil, are temptations of several sorts;
and the man whose heart is upright, shall find strength enough against every
temptation: To that purpose consider these Promises, Matthew. 16.18. 1 Cor.
10.13. 1 John 5.18.

2. Those evils that arise from the flesh, are lusts or temptations of
Uncleanness; and for strength and ability against such a temptation, consider
these Promises, Prove. 2.10, 11, 16. Eccles. 7.26. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 23, 24.

3. Those evils that arise from the World, are covetousness, cares, evil
company, etc. and for strength against such, consider these Promises, 2 Cor.
6.17, 18. Gal. 1.4. 1 John 5.4. Heb. 13.5. (...), there are five Negatives
together in the Original that strongly affirm; q.d. I tell thee, I will never,
never, never, never, never forsake thee.

4. Those evils that arise from men, are either oppositions against truth,
concerning which, Mat. 10.19. Acts 18.9, 10. or oppositions against goodness,
concerning which, Mat. 5.10. 1 Pet. 3.14. -- or oppositions against both, and
so they fall either on our good name, concerning which, Psalm. 37.6. where
howsoever thy innocence be at some times covered (as it were) with a thick and
dark mist of slander and oppression, yet the Lord will in his good time scatter
and dissolve the mist, and so make thy innocence apparent to the world; yea, he
will make thy righteousness as evident as the Sun when it arises, yea, as noon
day, when it is at highest, and shines brightest, Psalm. 68.13. Mat. 5.11, 12. 1
Pet. 4.14, etc. -- or they may fall on us in respect of our liberty, and
concerning which, Psalm. 69.32, 33, and 102.19, 20. Rev. 2.10. -- or they may
deprive us of our goods, concerning which, 2 Chro. 25.9. Mat. 19.29. Habak.
3.17, 18. -- or they may take away life, concerning which, Matthew. 10.39. John
12.25. Revel. 14.13.

5. Those evils which arise from God, are desertions; and for comforts against
them, consider these promises, Isa. 49.14, 15, 16. and 54.7, 8. and 50.10.

6. Those evils that arise from our selves are sins and infirmities, and they
are either spiritual blindeness, concerning which, Luke 4.18. 1 John 2.27. Isa.
35.4, 5. -- or spiritual lameness, concerning which, Isa. 35.6. and 40.31. --
or heaviness of mind, concerning which, Isa. 35.1, 2. Jer. 66.12, 13, 14. --
or weakness of memory, concerning which, John 14.26. or fears of losing Gods
love, concerning which, Isa. 49.15. and 54.10. Jer. 33.20. Psalm. 89.33, 34, 35.
Joh. 13.1. Romans 11.29. -- or fear of falling away from God, concerning which,
see the impossibility in regard of God, 2 Timothy 2.19. in regard of Christ, Luke
22.32. in regard of the Holy Ghost, John 14.16. Ephe. 4.30. in regard of the
promises, Psalm. 94.14. 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. -- or indisposition, distraction, defects
in our best performances, concerning which, Numb. 23.21. Cant. 2.14. -- or
particular falls, daily frailties and infirmities, concerning which, Isa. 55.7.
Jer. 3.1. Psalm. 37.24. and 145.14. Hosea 14.4. 1 John 1.9.

2. For the exercising of faith, concerning these promises that we may live by
them, go we to Meditation. Prayer.


1. For Meditation, and the matter of it, consider we these things,

1. That of our selves we cannot resist these spiritual evils; all our comfort
is, that neither the Devil, nor the world, nor the flesh, nor sin, can oppose
any further then God will give them leave; not the Devil himself can tempt who
he will, nor when he will, nor how he will, nor how long he will, but in all
these he is confined by the providence of God. A legion of Devils could not
enter into a Gaderene Hog, till Christ had given them leave: Satan could not
touch one bleat pertaining to Job, till he had obtained liberty; nor after lay
a finger on his body, till his liberty was renewed: O meditate on God and his
power, who has all our enemies in a chain; as for our selves, we have no
ability to resist any of these evils.

2. That faith fortifies the soul against all oppositions, the more they rage,
the more faith heartens the soul to believe, and to keep close under the shadow
of the Lords wings: as the child affrighted, clings faster to the mother; so
the poor soul pursued by the Devil, or World, or Flesh, or Man, or God, or our
own Corruptions, it runs to Christ, the everlasting Rock, and in his name
resists all these evils, and in his name gets the victory.

3. That in the most forcible tempests, which God, Devil or Man raises against
us (when to present sense and feeling all sight and hope of the grace and
goodness in Christ Jesus is lost) then faith tells the heart, that a calm is at
hand. The last temptation wherewith Satan set upon Christ, was the most
furious, and when he could not prevail thereby, he departed for a season: The
Lord will not suffer us to be tempted above measure. This faith assures of, and
persuades us quietly to wait for the issue.

2. For prayer, and the manner of it, observe this method:

1. Confess our sins of former ignorance, vanity of mind, self-confidence,
solitary musings on the temptations of Satan, misinterpreting of the Lords
doings, etc. which set open the soul to all other spiritual evils: -- O my God,
I have disesteemed thy mercy, distrusted thy promises, harbored thoughts of
unbelief, etc. and so have exposed my soul to the most violent, horrible and
fiery temptations of the world, flesh, Devil, and my own lusts: my soul, which
should have been ravished with the joys of Heaven, and with the kisses of
Christ, is continually pestered and assailed with the black and hellish
thoughts of Atheism, Blasphemy, and soul-vexing fears; my heart trembles, my
strength fails, my life is spent with grief, my spirit within me is
overwhelmed, and prevailing fears so tyrannize over me, that I cannot speak, I
am sore wounded and broken, I go mourning and desolate all the day long.

2. Importune the Lord for pardon of sin, and for help against all oppositions:
Pardon, O Lord, my yielding to the temptations of the Devil, or Flesh, or
World, or Man, or Sin: Pardon, O Lord, the infidelity, doubtings, dejectedness,
infirmities, and carnal excessive fears of thy poor servant; and for the
future, deliver my soul from the snares, strengthen me in the combat against
all my enemies: Arise, O Lord, disappoint Satan, cast him down, deliver my soul
from the wicked one; O be thou my strength in my trouble, for I fly unto thee
for help and for succor.

3. Then press the Lord with his Promises, as with so many arguments: Lord,
thou have said, That the gates of hell shall not prevail against us: That whosoever
pleases God, shall escape the strange woman: That whosoever is born of God
overcomes the world: That if we suffer for righteousness sake, happy are we:
That in a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindeness will I have mercy upon thee: That a good man though he
fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his
hand. O these are thy golden sweet precious Promises; now Lord make them good
to my soul, let me draw the sweet, and juy^^, and virtue from every of these
Promises; let not a word of these Promises fall to the ground, let me have my
share, and part, and portion in these comfortable Promises, through the Lord
Jesus.

. An Appendix of the manner of this Life of Faith, in oppositions against truth
and goodness, and more particularly against our good Name, whereby an unworthy
servant of Christ sometimes found abundance of Spiritual comfort.
HIs innocence being sometimes overshadowed with a thick and dark mist of
Slanders, Reproaches and Defamations, he endeavored first to review the
Promises, and secondly to act his faith on them.

1. The Promises were these: Psalm. 37.5, 6. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. 1 Pet. 3.14. 1
Pet. 4.14. Psalm. 68.13. Though you have lain among the pots, yet shall ye be as
the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold;
q.d. though hitherto you have been as so many abjects, cast into the ends of
the earth, as thrown amongst black and smoaky pots, oppressed with mighty
calamities, yet the time is at hand that ye shall be made white as doves; your
innocence and happiness shall appear, and your white shall be intermixed with
the color of pure and yellow gold; (i.) you shall come to the top of the
highest felicity, and ye shall be freed from slanders, and obtain illustrious
glory.

2. In the acting of his faith, he endeavored 1. To Meditate: 2. To pray.

1. His Meditations were these: --

1. That we know not how to prevent it. Men may slander, and men will slander,
so long as the world lasts; only we have these Promises for comforts, and it
is the Lord who promises, and if he please, he can hide us from the scourge of
tongues; Job 5.21. Isa. 61.7.
or if he please, he is able to restore us double to our shame.

2. That true faith will fortify the soul against all Reproaches: There is an
encouraging voice of the Lord to this end; Isa. 51.7.
Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness; the people in whose heart is my
law: fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.

3. That if the wicked reproach more and more, yet it is the duty of Christians
to exercise patience. Experience of their vanities, and Gods gracious dealings
with us, will fortify our hearts: Fear not thou worm (thou poor despicable
thing) I will help thee, Isa. 41.14.
says the Lord thy Redeemer; and as for thy reproachers, their doom is before,
Behold, all they that are incensed against thee, 11.
shall be ashamed and confounded; they shall be as nothing, and they that
strive with thee shall perish.

4. That faith makes the soul circumspect, and in this case does ransack and
fan the soul narrowly, to find out what is the matter and rise of those
slanders and reproaches: 1 Pet. 3.14.
If ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; it must be for
righteousness sake, or there is no blessing upon it: and so the Apostle adds,
16.
You must have a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you as of
evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in
Christ: for it is better, if the will of God be so, 17.
that ye suffer for well-doing, then for evil-doing. We are ordinarily more
impatient at undeserved, then deserved sufferings; but it is better (says the
Apostle) so to suffer, 1 Pet. 4.15, 16
then otherwise. Let none of you suffer as a murderer, a thief, an evil door,
but if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorify God on this behalf.

5. That true faith esteems all such slanders as the most honorable badges of
innocence that possibly can be. If mine adversary should write a b^ok against
me, Job 31.35, 36
surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me. I
rejoice (said Luther) that Satan so rages and blasphemes, it is likely that I
do him and his Kingdom the more mischief. And they that reproach me (said
Austin) do against their wills increase mine honor both with God and good men.
The more the dirty feet of men tread and rub on the figure graven in gold, the
more luster they give it: so the more causless aspersions the wicked cast on
the godly, the more bright do they rub their glory. And hence was that choice
of Moses, rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, Heb. 11.25, 26.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt.

2. For Prayer, his method was, --

1. To complain to the Lord, as sometimes David did, Thou, O Lord, Psalm.
69.19.20.
have known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor: mine adversaries are
all before thee. Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness: and
I looked for some to take pity, but there was none, and for comforters, but I
found none.

2. To petition to the Lord, as otherwhiles David did, Let me not be ashamed,
Psalm. 31.17.18.19.
O Lord, for I have called upon thee: let the wicked be ashamed, and let them
be silent in the grave: let the lying lips be put to silence, which speak
grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous. O how great
is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that trust in thee before
the sons of men? Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the
pride of men, 20.
thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues. Thus
Lord I beg at thy hands, or if otherwise, 2 Samuel 16.11, 12.
thou know it best in thy wisdom: Let them alone, and let them curse, it may
be the Lord will look on my affliction, and thou Lord wilt requite good for
their cursing this day.

3. To press the Lord with his gracious Promises: as thus, Thou have said,
Matthew. 5.11.
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 1 Pet. 3.14. and
4.14.
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my names sake: And if
ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye: And if ye be reproached for the
name of Christ, happy are ye: These are thy golden promises, now Lord make them
good to my soul, let me draw the juice, and sweet, and virtue from every of
these promises; let not a word of these promises fall to the ground, but let me
have my part, and share, and portion in them.

4. To pray to the Lord to forgive all his Enemies that trespassed against him,
as sometimes Christ did, Father, forgive them, Matthew. 6.12. Luke 23.34.
for they know not what they do: Surely in these two things there is much
matter of comfort: 1. That our hearts are well, and not ill-affected to any
man. 2. That going alone we can humble our selves, and pray for the authors of
all the reproaches and slanders that are unjustly cast on us.

SECT. 6. Of the manner of this life of faith in spiritual blessings, as derived
to us from God and Christ, and the Spirit of Christ.
COncerning spiritual blessings, or good things, consider we 1. The promises.
2. The exercise of faith in respect of those promises.


1. The Promises are of such blessings as arise either from God. Christ. The
Spirit of Christ.


1. From God proceeds his Love of us. Presence with us. Providence over us.


1. Concerning his love of us, we have these promises, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8, 13. Isa.
54.8. Jer. 31.3. Hosea 2.19. and 14.4. John 3.16. Ephe. 2.4. 1 John 4.19.

2. Concerning his presence with us, we have these promises, Genesis 26.24. and
28.15. Exodus 3.12. Joshua 1.5. Jer. 1.8. 1 Chronicles. 28.20. Isaiah 41.10. Math.
28.20. Rev. 2.1.

3. Concerning his providence over us, we have these promises, Psalm. 34.7. and
91.11, 12. Job 36.7. Zech. 2.8. whence (He that touches you, touches the
apple of mine eye) observe, That the Lord to express the tenderness of his
love, names the tenderest part of the body, nay the tenderest piece of the
tenderest part, The Crystal humor, as the Philosophers call it.

2. From Christ we have promises 1. Of the person of Christ. 2. Of the benefits
that flow from Christ.


1. Of the person of Christ, in Genesis 3.15. where was the first promise, and
the foundation of all other promises, because God intended to make good every
promise in Christ.

2. Of the benefits that flow from Christ, whether Redemption. Vocation.
Justification. Reconciliation. Adoption.


1. Concerning Redemption, we have these promises, Tit. 2.14. Ephe. 1.7. Gal.
3.13. Heb. 9.12.

2. Concerning Vocation, we have these promises, Acts 2.39. Romans 8.30.

3. Concerning Justification, we have these promises, Isaiah 53.11. Acts 13.39.
Romans 8.33.

Now this Justification consists of two parts, in 1. Not imputing sin. 2.
Imputing righteousness.


1. For not imputing (or forgiving) sin, we have these promises, Psalm. 32.2.
Jer. 31.34. Isaiah 55.7. Jer. 33.8. hither tend all those Metaphors, Isa.
43.25. and 44.22. and 38.17. Micah 7.19.

2. For imputing Righteousness, we have these promises, Romans 5.19. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Romans 10.4. Isaiah 61.10. Gal. 3.6. this phrase is used ten times in one
Chapter, Romans 4.3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 23, 24.

4. Concerning Reconciliation, we have these promises, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Ephe.
2.14, 16. Col. 1.21, 22.

5. Concerning Adoption, we have these promises, Gal. 3.26. John 1.12. Romans
9.26. Gal. 4.4, 5, 7.

3. From the Spirit of Christ, we have promises, -- 1. Of the Spirit himself.
2. Of the operation of the Spirit.


1. Of the Spirit himself, in Joel 2.28, 29. Acts 2.17, 18. John 14.16, 17.
Ephe. 1.13. Gal. 3.14.

2. Of the operation of the Spirit, and that 1. In general, as Sanctification.
2. In special, as Spiritual Graces. Spiritual duties.



1. Concerning Sanctification, we have these promises, Micah 7.19. Jer. 31.33,
34. Heb. 8.10. and 10.16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. 1 John 1.7. Revel. 1.5. --

Concerning Graces and Duties, we shall handle them anon.

2. For the exercise of faith concerning the promises, that we may live by
them, go we to Meditation. Prayer.


1. For Meditation, and the matter of it, consider these things:

1. That faith (considering the privileges of Gods children) admires and
adores, Psalm. 31.19.
O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men?
Psalm. 36.7.
-- How excellent is thy loving kindeness, O Lord; therefore the children of
men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

2. That faith (in consideration hereof) rests upon God, and Christ, and the
Spirit of Christ, to receive whatsoever may be good and profitable to the Soul:
The Lord is my shepherd, Psalm. 23 1. Isa. 40.11.
I shall not want: -- He shall lead his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather
the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead
those that are with young. What can they want, who have God for their Father,
Christ for their Savior, the Spirit for their Sanctifier? Thou Israel art my
servant, Isa. 41.8.
Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend: Thou whom I have
taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, 9.
and said unto thee, Thou art my servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee
away: Fear thou not, for I am with thee; 10.
be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strenghthen thee, yea I will help
thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my Righteousness.

3. That faith hereupon sets an high price upon Christ, upon God in Christ,
upon the Spirit of Christ: These promises are more worth then Kingdoms,
Empires, the whole world, which made holy David say, Psalm. 94 19.
In the multitudes of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul; q.
d. I have multitudes of thoughts, some running this way, some running that way,
some on this pleasure, some on that profit, but my soul is only comforted in
the thoughts of thee: Pleasures, profits, honors, all are vain and empty, and
nothing is to be rested on, to be delighted in, but Jesus Christ; yea, there is
a full content in Jesus Christ; let the world be filled with trouble and
sorrow, even now faith carries a merry heart.

4. Faith in these promises does greatly enlarge the heart toward God, and
stirs up to earnest study of holiness; if a Christian be much in the
Meditation of Gods singular goodness in Christ, it will even constrain him to
yield up himself wholly to God, Psalm 26.2, 3.
in all manner of godly conversation: Examine, O Lord, and prove me, try my
reins and my heart, for thy loving kindeness is before mine eyes, and I have
walked in thy truth.

5. Faith ever runs to these promises in all straits, and here it finds
comforts: Nature teaches man and beast in troubles and storms to make to a
shelter; the child runs to the arms of the mother, Prove. 30.26.
the birds to their nests, the conies to the rock, so must the soul have a
sanctuary, an hiding place, when danger and trouble comes; now where can it
take up a surer and safer refuge, then with God and Christ, and the Spirit of
Christ? indeed God it dares not look at, but in Christ; and the Spirit proceeds
not but from Christ, to Christ therefore it runs immediately; it is Christ, who
of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, 1 Cor.
1.30.
and redemption: Come (says faith) let us out to Christ, and if he receive us
not presently, let us stay a little; he is full of bowels and tenderness
toward poor sinners, h^ keeps open house for all comers, he invites all,
entertains all, old sinners, young sinners, John 7.37.
great sinners, less sinners, his promise is sure to: him that comes unto me,
I will in no wise cast out: Thus faith takes the Believer off from self, civil
life, estate, friends, and hangs the soul alone upon that true friend, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who has manifested the greatness of his love to poor sinners,
John 15.13.
by dying for them, and sending his Spirit to sanctify and comfort them.

2. For Prayer, and the manner of it, observe this method:

1. Confess and acknowledge Gods mercies both in his promises and performances:
Say, Lord, thou have said, Hosea 14.4.
I will love thee freely: -- And I will be with thee, Mat. 28.20.
even to the end of the world: -- He that touches you, touches the apple of
mine eye: 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. John 14.16.
-- And all is yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: -- And I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever, etc. Surely Lord thou art true in thy sayings; I believe by
virtue of this and that promise, I have the love, and promise, and providence
of God, I am redeemed, called, justified, reconciled, adopted by Christ; I have
the Spirit of Christ, I am sanctified in some measure by that Spirit, I have
all this of free grace, and by virtue of a promise.

2. Pray for this increase of faith, and for a further and further sight of
this belief: Give me, gracious Father, to believe as thou have promised; create
in me the hand of faith, and make it stronger and stronger, that I may
effectually receive, what in mercy thou reachest forth; and then give me the
Spirit of Revelation, that I may discern truly what thou have given me, that my
lips may sing of thy praise all the day long.

3. Praise God for his mercies, and quietly rest in the promises: O Lord, thou
have freely loved, and redeemed, and sanctified my soul; O how should I praise
thee, how should I advance and set thee up on high? Salvation, and Glory, and
Honor, and Praise be given to thy name, etc. I praise thee for my Election,
Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, etc. but above all, for the fountain
of all, the Lord Jesus Christ; It is my Christ justifies, and my Christ
sanctifies: Lord, thou have given Christ for my Wisdom and Sanctification, as
well as for Righteousness and Redemption: Lord, thou have appointed Christ to
be the beginner and finisher of my holiness, and surely he will not leave that
work imperfect, whereunto he is ordained of the Father; were the progress of
this building committed to my care and oversight, there might be cause of fear,
but since thou have laid all upon Christ, my only and all-sufficient Redeemer;
Lord increase my faith, that I may hold him fast and be safe, and so at last I
may sing Hallelujahs to thee in Heaven for ever and ever.

SECT. 7. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in Spiritual Graces.
THe operation of the Spirit in general, we told you was Sanctification; now
the operation of the Spirit in special, appears. in Spiritual Graces. Spiritual
Duties.


1. Spiritual Graces we shall consider in their Kinds. Degrees.


And of them both give 1. The Promises. 2. The exercise of Faith in respect of
those Promises.


1. The kinds of Graces are these, Knowledge, and Faith, and Hope, and Joy,
and Love, and Fear, and Obedience, and Repentance, and Humility, and Meekness,
and Patience, and Righteousness, and Uprightness, and Peace of Conscience, and
Zeal, and Perseverance; sixteen Graces in number: concerning which the Lord
has made gracious Promises.

1. Of them, to give them. 2. To them, to reward them.
The first Grace is Knowledge, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, Psalm.
25.14. Jer. 31.34. Isa. 2.2, 3. Micah 4.1, 2. Ephesians. 3.5. Rev. 21.23. 2. To it,
as Prove. 3.14. Psalm. 91.14. 2 Pet. 1.2. Prove. 3.18.

The second Grace is Faith, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as Ephesians.
2.8. Joh: 6.37. observe here these promises of assurance, the highest measure
of faith, Psalm. 50.23. Ezekiel. 34.30. Isa 60.16. Psalm. 97.11. 2. To it, as 2 Chronicles. 10.20. Prove. 29.25. Isa. 26.3. Acts 10.43. Romans 18.4. Acts 13.39. John
1.12. and 7.38. and 3.16, 36. and 5.24. and 6.47.

The third Grace is Hope, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as Psalm. 65.5.
Prove. 14.32. Job 13.15. 2. To it, as Psalm. 40.4. Romans 4.18, 22. Romans 8.24.

The fourth Grace is Joy, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, Psalm. 36.8, 9.
and 64.10. and 68.3. and 97.11. and 118.15. Isa. 12.2, 3. Isa. 35. throughout,
Isa. 56.7. and 66.13, 14. John 16.22. Romans 14.17. 2. To it, Psalm. 89.15, 16.

The fifth Grace is Love, especially of God, and we may find some promises, 1.
Of it, as Cant. 1.4. Deuteronomy. 30.6. 2. To it, as Psalm. 91.14. and 145.20. Prove.
8.21. Deuteronomy. 7.9. 1 Cor. 8.3. and 2.9, 10. James 1.12. and 2.5.

The sixth Grace is Fear, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as Jer. 32.39,
40. Hosea 3.5. 2. To it, as Psalm. 103.11. and 31.19. and 147.11. Mal. 3.16, 17.

The seventh Grace is Obedience, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as Ezekiel.
11.19, 20. and 36.26, 27. 2. To it, as Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2. to 14.

The eighth Grace is Repentance, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as Acts
5.30, 31. Exek. 11.19. and 20.43. and 36.31. 2. To it, as Mal. 3.7. Isaiah
55.7. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Isaiah 1.16, 17, 18. Job 3.27, 28. Jer. 4.14.

The ninth Grace is Humility, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. Gal. 5.22. 2. To it, as Prove. 15.33. and 22.4. James 4.6. 1 Peter 5.5.
Isaiah 57.15. Matthew 5.3.

The tenth Grace is Meekness, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as Isa.
11.6, 7, 8. Gal. 5.22, 23. 2. To it, as Psalm. 37.11. and 147.6. Isa. 29.19.
Psalm. 25.9. Zeph. 2.3. Matthew. 5.5. and 11.29. Psalm. 149.4.

The eleventh Grace is Patience, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as James
1.5. 2. To it, as Hebrews 10.36. James 5.11.

The twelfth Grace is Righteousness, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as
Rev. 19.7, 8. 2. To it, as Psalm. 11.7. Isa. 32.17, 18. Prove. 14.32. Psalm.
112.2, 6. Mat. 25.46.

The thirteenth Grace is Vprightness, or Sincerity of heart, and we find some
promises, 1. Of it, as Jer. 31.33. Jer. 50.5. 2. To it, as Psalm. 84.11. Prove.
14.11. Psalm. 112.2. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Psalm. 112.4. and 84.11. Genesis 17.1, 2. 1 Chronicles. 29.17. Prove. 12.22. Psalm. 37.37. Prove. 28.18. Psalm. 15.1, 2.

The fourteenth Grace is Peace of Conscience, and we find some promises, 1. Of
it, as John 14.27. Gal. 6.16. Isa. 57.19. Isa. 54.10. 2. To it, as Phil. 4.7.

The fifteenth Grace is Zeal, and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as Jeremiah
20.9. 2 Cor. 7.11. 2. To it, as Numbers 25.12, 13. Revel. 3.19, 20.

The sixteenth Grace is Perseverance; and we find some promises, 1. Of it, as
Psalm. 89.28. Prove. 12.3. Isaiah 46.4. 2. To it, as Mat. 10.22. Revel. 2.26.

2. The degrees of Graces follow; and we find some promises 1. Thereof, as
Isaiah 44.3, 4. Mal. 4.2. Psalm. 84.7. Prove. 4.18. 2. Thereto, as Romans 13.11. 2
Pet. 1.8.

2. For the exercise of faith concerning these promises, that we may live by
them, go we to Meditation Prayer.


1. For Meditation, and the matter of it, consider these things:

1. That of our selves we have no ability to attain any of these Graces: Every
one can say, I purpose well, but the question is, whether they build not on
their own strength: Many a man (especially in time of his sickness, danger,
disgrace) will make fair promises of amendment, but when the rod is removed,
all is forgotten: What may be the reason? he stands on his own feet, he
presumes to go alone of himself, and by his own strength, and then no marvel if
he falls and catches many a knock: If we will have any of these Graces, Psalm.
119 8.
then deny we our selves: I will keep thy statutes (said David) but immediately
upon his resolution he cries, O forsake me not utterly: Purposes thus grounded,
bring forth holy performances, but of our selves we can expect nothing.

2. That Gods Spirit will infuse these Graces, and the increase of these Graces
into them that believe: Many would fain have Knowledge, and Faith, and Hope,
and Joy, etc. but they exercise not their Faith to believe God and his
promises: 2 Cor. 12.2.
I knew a man in Christ (could Paul say) concerning his Revelation; so, I know
a man in Christ off and on, unstayed, dismayed at his manifold slips, strong
corruptions, little prevailings against them, and (when all came to all) he
could find no help till he went to a promise, and by faith believed that God
would aid and assist, and do the whole work for him; it is good to believe that
(according to his promise) God will sanctify our natures, enable us to
holiness, and bestow all his graces on us.

3. That for the degrees of these Graces, it is necessary to improve them;
graces improved, are the ready way to have them increased: God ever bestows the
greatest measure, where he finds a care to put them forth to advantage:
Whosoever has, Mat. 13.12.
to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance; as men increase their
substance by labor, and learning by diligence, so he that improves graces,
shall more and more abound in them.

2. For Prayer, and the parts of it, observe this method:

1. Confess and acknowledge our inabilities: O Lord, I have no grace by nature,
I have no power to cleanse my own heart: O Lord, I have defaced thine image,
but I cannot repair it; Romans 7.21.
I may say with the Apostle, When I would do well, evil is present with me, but
I find no means to perfect what I desire: I am not able to crawl about the
doing of that which is good: O when shall I be set at liberty, that I might do
the work of God, and run the race of his Commandments: O that I had Knowledge,
and Faith, and Hope, and Joy, and Love!

2. Look we up to the Power, and Grace, and Truth of God, and press him
therewith: Lord, I have heard of thy power, thou art God Almighty, who call
the things that are not, as if they were; thou can if thou will, work in me
these Graces, and create them in me, as thou did gloriously create them in
Adam, the first man: Lord, I have heard also of thy grace and truth, thou art
as faithful to keep, as free to make these sweet precious promises; Thy grace
is unsearchable, thy word purer then silver seven times refined: O then make
good thy promises, I press thee with thy Power, Grace and Truth: O replenish me
with thy Graces, give me Knowledge, and Faith, and Hope, etc.

3. Look we on the promises, and pray by them, or turn them into prayers: Faith
hearkeneth what the Lord speaks, and speaks back again in fervent groans
and desires to whatsoever it hearkeneth: Hence we can make no prayer in
boldness, faith or comfort, but for things promised, and in that manner as they
are promised. Thus Jacob (Genesis 32.9. Genesis 32.9.
) and David (2 Samuel 7.27, 28, 29. 2 Samuel 7.27, 28, 29.
) prayed by a promise; and thus should we pray by a promise, and then we may be
sure we pray according to his will. In want of other Rhetoric and Oratory, let
us urge God with this repetition: Lord, thou have promised, Lord, thou have
promised, thou have made many sweet precious promises of Graces, and of degrees
of Graces: Thou have said, Psalm. 25.14. John 6.37.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and, All that the Father
gives me, shall come unto me; Prove. 14.32. Psalm. 84.7.
and, The Righteous has hope in his death; and, The Righteous shall be glad in
the Lord, and shall trust in him; and, They shall go from strength every one of
them in Zion, appearing before God: O make these promises effectual to me, blow
on my garden, that the spices (these graces) may flow out.

SECT. 8. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in Spiritual Duties.
AS Spiritual Graces, so Spiritual Duties, are of the operation of Gods Spirit:
Now the duties are Twenty, concerning which we shall give 1. The Promises. 2.
The exercises of faith in respect of the Promises.


The first duty is Prayer, to which are affixed these promises, Psalm. 5.3. and
10.17. and 65.2. Prove. 15.29. Psalm. 50.15. and 12.17, 18, 19, 20. Zech. 13.8,
9. Romans 18.13. James. 5.15.

The second duty is Praises, to which are affixed these promises, 1 Samuel 2.30.
Psalm. 50.23. and 67.5, 6.

The third duty is Preaching, to which Matthew. 28.20. John 5.25.

The fourth duty is Reading the Word, to which Psalm. 19.8. Prove. 1.4.

The fifth duty is Loving the Word, to which Psalm. 119.165. and 112.1.

The sixth duty is Waiting on the Word, to which Proverbs 8.34, 35.

The seventh duty, Hearkening to the Word, to which Isaiah 55.2, 3. Acts 5.20.
-- 20.32. -- 13.26.

The eighth duty is Sacraments of Baptism, to which Acts 2.38. and 22.16. 1
Peter 3.21. Lords Supper, to which Isa. 25.6. Proverbs 9.5, 6. Mat. 26.26..


The ninth duty is, A lawful Oath, to which Jer. 12.16. Psalm. 15.4.

The tenth duty is Fasting, to which James 4.9, 10. Matthew. 6.18.

The eleventh duty is Meditation, to which Psalm. 1.2. Prove. 14.22. Phil. 4.8, 9.

The twelveth duty is Self-examination, to which 1 Cor. 11.31. Gal. 6.4.

The thirteenth duty is Sanctification of the Lords Day, to which Isaiah 58.13,
14. and 56. 2. Jer. 17.26.

The fourteenth duty is Watchfulness, to which Mat. 24.46, 47. Luke 12.37, 38,
43. Rev. 16.15.

The fifteenth duty is Conference, to which Prove. 12.14. and 16.13. Mal. 3.16.
Luke 24.32.

The sixteenth duty is Reproof, to which Proverbs 24.25. and 28.23.

The seventeenth duty is Almsgiving, to which Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3. Luke 14.13, 14.

The eigthteenth duty is Seeking of God, to which Psalm. 34.10. Ezra 8.22.

The nineteenth duty is Waiting on God, to which Isa. 40.31. and 64.4. and
49.23.

The twentieth duty is Delighting in God, to which Psalm 37.4.

2. For the exercise of faith concerning these promises, that we may live by
them, go we to Meditation. Prayer.


1. For Meditation, and the matter of it, consider these things:

1. That God deals graciously with his people, he might out of his absolute
sovereignty over us, command only, and we were bound then to obey in every of
these Duties; but he is pleased (the better to quicken us to obedience) to
annex these gracious promises.

2. That as he is gracious to us, so we should be cheerful in our Duties to
him: This cheerfulness of service, is the very fruit of faith; By faith Abel
brought of the firstlings of his flock, Genesis 4.4. Psalm. 4^.4.
and of the fat thereof, an offering to the Lord; By faith David went with the
multitude unto the house of God, with the voice of joy and of praise: It is the
voice of faith, I will sing and give praise with the best member I have.

3. That to make us cheerful, we should rowze our selves to awaken to the work
of our God: Arise, O my soul, why sleep thou! stir up thy self with
readiness to obey the charge of God in the duties prescribed; look on the
Saints who have gone before thee, they endured imprisonment, loss of liberty,
spoiling of their goods, hazard of life: Thou art not yet called to suffer, but
to obey, why do thou delay, or go forth unwilllngly? would thou reign
with them, and not labor with them? receive the prize, and not run the race?
divide the spoil, and not fight the battle? look on the promise annexed to the
duty: Isa. 45.19.
I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek me in vain, says God: O my soul,
arise, contend forward toward the mark, Heaven is worth all thy labor.

4. That to remove all remora's, the Lord has promised to assist us in these
duties by his own Spirit: Besides the promises to Duties, we have promises of
duties, God deals with us (as we do by way of commerce one with another)
propounding mercy by covenant and condition; yet his Covenant of Grace is
always a gracious Covenant, for he not only gives the good things, but helps
us in performing the condition by his own Spirit; he works our hearts to
believe and repent, etc. he gives what he requires: For instance, in one place
he commands, Cast away from you all your transgressions, Ez^k. 18.31.
and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; and in another place he promises,
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Deuteronomy. 10.16.
and you shall be clean from all your filthiness: A new heart also will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you: in one place he commands them,
Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts; and in another place he promises, That
he will circumcise their hearts: Deuteronomy. 30.6. Eccles 12.13. Ezekiel. 36.27.
in one place he commands us, To keep his Commandments; in another place he
promises to cause us, To walk in his statutes: in one place he commands us,
Eccles. 12.13. Ier. 32.40. Mat. 7.7.
To fear him, and in another place he promises, To put his fear into our
hearts: in one place he commands us, To pray, to ask, seek, and knock; and in
another place he promises, To pour upon us the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication: Zech. 12 10.
These promises of duties are the foundation of all our performances, and those
promises to duties are the rewards of his Free Grace and good pleasure; we do
not by working cause him to fulfill his promises, but he by promising does
enable us to perform our works, and so he rewards us accordingly.

2. For prayer, and the parts of it, observe this method:

1. Acknowledge the goodness and Free Grace of God in these promises: O Lord,
why should thou allure me to that which I am every way bound to? If I had
none of these promises, I have already in hand a world of mercies, which do
infinitely bind me to duty; and will thou yet add this and that promise, to
this and that duty? O miracle of mercies! O the goodness of God!

2. Bewail our own dullness and sloth to the duty: And yet (O Lord) how dull,
and remiss, and slightly am I in the practice of this or that duty? thou have
said, Ier. 48.10. Mal. 1.14.
Cursed is the man that does the work of the Lord negligently; and, Cursed be
the deceiver, that has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto
the Lord a corrupt thing: O then what is my portion, who have sacrificed that
which is torn and sick unto the great King and Lord of Hosts, whose name is
dreadful among the Heathen? no marvel if I feel no power, no sweet in the
Ordinances of Grace, whilst I deal partially, hear perfunctorily, pray coldly,
labor not to feed on the promise, and to suck vigor out of it: O Lord, thou
love a cheerful giver, but my services are maimed, and corrupt, and dead, and
superficial, and very unchearful.

3. Importune the Lord to revive and quicken our dead hearts to the duty; so
prays David, Teach me to do thy will, Psalm. 143.10:
thy Spirit is good, lead me in the Land of uprightness; so prays the Church,
Draw me, and we will run after thee; and so let us pray, Cant. 1.4.
Give me a cheerful heart in thy service, animate and enliven my heart by thy
blessed Spirit, give me to do what thou requirest, incline my heart to thy
statutes, and not to covetousness. Psalm. 119.36.


4. Implore the assistance of Gods Spirit to every good duty, beg acceptance of
our persons and performances in the Lord Jesus Christ, press him with his
promises to set on duties, and to reward duties; and what ever duty we do,
press him with that especially promise belonging unto it: Thus if we meditate
and pray, and pray and meditate, we may live by faith, in reference to
Spiritual duties.

SECT. 9. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in things Eternal.
THings Eternal are either Evil, as Damnation. Good, as Salvation.


Concerning both we shall first give you the promises, and secondly the
exercise of faith in respect of these promises.

1. Concerning Damnation, or eternal confusion, we have these promises against
it, Isaiah 45.17. Romans 8.1.

2. Concerning Salvation, we have these promises for it, Romans 6.23. 1 Thessalonians.
4.17. God has promised us a Kingdom, Mat. 25.34. An heavenly Kingdom, Matthew.
7.21. And eternal Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. A Crown of life, James 1.12. A Crown of
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. An unaccessible Crown of glory, 1 Peter 5.4.

2. For the exercise of faith concerning these promises, that we may live by
them, go we to Meditation. Prayer.


1. For Meditation, and the matter of it, consider these things:

1. That faith in the precious promises of eternal life, quiets and chears the
heart in the midst of discouragements: This we see in the lives and deaths of
Gods faithful servants, who took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Heb.
10.34.
knowing in themselves, that they had in Heaven a better and an enduring
substance.

2. That faith strives to enter into the possession of this Kingdom by degrees:
Men that purchase an inheritance to come in hereafter, they are glad if any
part fall into their hands for the present: Fullness of glory is reserved for
the life to come, but the beginnings of glory (as peace of Conscience, joy in
the Holy Ghost, Sanctification of the Spirit) are vouchsafed here; grace if the
beginning of glory, and glory is the perfection of grace; now as grace grows,
so we enter upon the possession of our inheritance: Hence lively grace covets
grace more and more, that we may get Heaven by degrees, and by parcels.

3. Faith earnestly desires and longs after the full accomplishment of glory:
Romans 8.23.
Our selves also which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we our selves
groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the Redemption of
the body: Phil. 1.23.
I am in a full strait (said Paul) betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is far better: Salvation is the end of faith, Heaven
is the home of Believers: Now all would be at home, all things desire
perfection in their kind, this makes the Believer to long after glory.

2. For prayer, and the parts of it, observe this method:

1. Confess we our former carelessness to enter upon this inheritance: O Lord, I
have slighted thy promises, I have neglected the motions of thy Holy Spirit, I
have not carefully improved the gifts received, I have not labored more and
more to be sealed with the promised Spirit: Ah Lord, what a dwarf am I in
Holiness and Sanctification? by reason of my sloth, the powers of grace are so
enfeebled, that I can scarce breath or sigh, or crawl in the way to Heaven: O
that I have not so earnestly sought (as I might) to make Heaven sure to my
self, that I have not entered possession thereof, so far as in this life I have
given me of Grace.

2. Pray that the Lord would increase our Faith, seal us by his Spirit, lead us
in the way of peace, cause us to grow up in holiness, make us wise to prize and
value, to taste and relish the very joys of heaven; and above all, that he
would assure our consciences of our right and title thereto: O it is God that
seals, and makes us to read the sealing; it is God that promises Heaven, and
affects the heart with the goodness and worth of the thing promised; it is God
that (by the pledges of his favor, and earnests of his Spirit) does testify
our adoption, and causes us certainly to apprehend what he does testify: pray
then, Who am I Lord, that thou should make such ample, 2 Samuel 7.25.
and free promises to thy poor servant? it is of thy free mercy, and according
to thine own heart: And now, O God, establish I beseech thee, the word that
thou have spoken concerning thy servant: O seal unto me the promised
inheritance, and make me assuredly know what those hopes are, which thou have
reserved for me in Heaven: Of thy Free grace thou calledst me to this hope,
therefore is thy servant bold to entreat the sense of thy love, the knowledge
of this hope, the increase of Grace, the assurance of thy mercy.

3. Praise God for his Promises of eternal life: O Lord, thou have looked on my
base estate, and visited me with mercy from on high; of a stranger and
forreigner, thou have made me a free denizen of the New Jerusalem: Now I see, I
read it in thy precious Promises, that my name is registered in heaven; an
eternal weight of glory is reserved for me; Heaven is my home, my hope, my
inheritance: O where should my heart be, but where my treasure is? where should
my thoughts be, but where my hope is? now all glory, and honor, and praise be
given to my God! O the incomprehensible love and favor of my dear Lord! What a
mercy is this? What promises are these? my soul rejoices in thee my God, my
spirit shall bless thy name for ever and ever.

SECT. 10. Of the manner of this Life of Faith in regard of others.
WE have done with the Promises that concern our selves: Now follows such
special Promises as we find in Holy Writ concerning others, and they have
reference To Our own Family. Godly Society further enlarged. The Church of
Christ Particular. General.



1. The members of our Family are either Husband and Wife. Parent and Child.
Master and Servant.


1. For the Husband and Wife, if godly, they have a promise from the Lord,
Psalm. 128. Prove. 31.28. and 11.16. Job 5.25.

2. For Parent and Child, God has made a gracious Covenant with them, Genesis
17.7, 9. Acts 2.39. Jer. 32.39. Prove. 20.7. Good Parents (though poor) leave
their Children a good patrimony, for they have laid up many prayers for them in
heaven, and they leave Gods favor for their possession, and his promises for a
sure inheritance, Psalm. 37.25, 26. Prove. 11.21. Psalm. 112.2. and 25.13. and
37.29. Prove. 13.22. Isa. 44.3, 4. and 54.13. and Children obeying their
Parents, have these promises, Exodus 20.12. Ephesians. 6.2. Jer. 35.18, 19. Prove. 1.8,
9. and 6.20.

3. For Master and Servant, they have sweet promises, Pro. 3.33. Job 8.16.
Prove. 14.11. especially the servant that is truly obedient, Col. 3.23, 24. 1
Pet. 2.19. here consider Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20. Psalm. 132.18. Ministers,
Psalm. 105.15. Rev. 2.1. Isa. 49.4.


2. Godly Society (out of our own Families) has precious promises, as Prove.
13.20. Mal. 3.16, 17. Mat. 18.20.

3. The Church of Christ, whether particular (as public Assemblies) has
blessed promises, Isa. 33.20, 21. and 59.21. Mat. 18.20. 1 Cor. 5.4. Rev. 2.1.
Psalm. 26.8. and 133.3. Micah 4.4, 11, 12. or whether general and universal, it
has glorious promises, as Mat. 16.8. Isa. 27.3. Psalm. 125.2. Zech. 9.16. here
come in all the promises, First, of calling the Jews, as Isa. 59.20. Romans
11.23, 26. Hos. 13.14. and 14.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Secondly, of bringing in the
Gentiles, as Isa. 49.22, 23. Rev. 21.24. John 10.16. Isa. 60.3, 5, 8. Acts
10.14. Ephesians. 2.12, 19. Thirdly, of the destruction of Antichrist, as 2 Thessalonians.
2.8. Rev. 17.16. and 18.21. where each word has almost a gradation, in that an
Angel, a mighty Angel takes a stone, and a great stone, even a millstone, which
he lets not barely fall, but casts into the sea, whence nothing ordinarily
is recovered, must less a millstone, thrust from such a hand, and with such
force.

Now for the exercising of faith concerning these promises, that we may live by
them, go we to Meditation. Prayer.


1. For Meditation, and the matter of it, consider these things:

1. That we have had the performance of many of these promises in hand; and
this may persuade us, that the residue (especially of the Churches flourishing,
and of Antichrists downfall) is as sure as that part already accomplished, which
we see with our eyes; experience should strengthen faith, and breed an assured
hope in Gods people, of the Lords most glorious appearing, and this hope shall
not make us ashamed.

2. That the time is now for the Churches restoring, and for bringing in more
Kingdoms from Antichrist to Christ; what else mean all the shakings in all the
Kingdoms of the world at this time? therefore study we this time of God, and in
our places and callings, work with providence, now we have a season to help up
the Church, Gods holy Mountain.

2. For Prayer, and the parts of it, observe this method:

1. Confess our former neglect in our several relations: O Lord, I have not
done my duty in my own family, among Christians in the Churches of Christ, I
have not performed my vows, served my generation, helped onward the building of
Zion: And now Lord what shall I say, but confess to thy glory, and my own
shame, my disrespect of others good, or of the communion of Saints.

2. Pray for a blessing on others, as on our own selves, forget not our
relations to others in our best prayers; be importunate with God more
especially for Zion, Isa. 33 20.
O look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities, let thine eyes see Jerusalem a
quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; let not one of the
stakes thereof be removed, nor any of the cords be broken.

3. Press we the Lord with all his precious Promises, either to our Families,
or Christian Societies, or to the Churches of Christ: We have a promise, Isa.
4.5.
that The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon
the assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense: Now Lord make good thy word,
etc.

Conclude with, I believe, that whatsoever God has said in any of these
respects, he will fulfill it in his own time: Heaven and earth shall pass away,
Mat. 5.18.
but not one jot, one tittle of Gods word shall fail. It may be for the present
things seem contrary, yet God has said it (should a soul say) and that is
enough for me: If I can but really acknowledge, and believe, that God is able
to do it, he will then speak from heaven, Mat. 9.28, 29.
as he did once on earth, According to your faith be it unto you. Thus much of
The Life of Faith.

CHAP. IX.
SECT. 1. Of the nature of Family Duties.
HItherto of the Duties which concern every man in his own particular; next to
them succeed Family Duties: And they are such Duties as ought to be jointly or
respectively observed by the families and houses of the people of God. This is
employed by that threat, Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not,
Ier. 10.25.
and upon the families that call not on thy Name; and by that example of
Joshua, But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord; Josh 24.15. Ier.
31.1.
and by that promise of God, At the same time, says the Lord, will I be the
God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people.

SECT. 2. Of the preparatives to Family Duties.
NOw that we may comfortably carry on these Family Duties, observe we 1. Our
entrance into them. 2. Our proceedings in them.


1. For entrance, we must lay a good foundation for tractableness unto Religion
in those that belong to this Family, as 1. In the governor. 2. In the governed.


1. In the governor; whose duty it is

1. To endeavor in a special manner for knowledge in Gods word, and for holiness
of conversation in a Christian walking; this would tend much to the
preservation of his authority, who otherwise will be slighted and disregarded,
through an aptness in inferiors to take occasion therefrom.

2. To marry in the Lord, and then to live chastely in wedlock, 1 Cor. 7.39.
that there may be an holy seed: Mal. 2.15.
Now that he may marry in the Lord, 1. Let piety be the mover of his affection,
and personage, parentage and portion, be only as a comfortable accessory,
considerable in a second place: Christianity and grace is the chief golden link
and noble tie, which has the power and privilege to make marriage a lovely
and everlasting bond. 2. Let him ply the throne of Grace with fervency of
prayer; a good wife is a more immediate gift of God: whence Solomon could say,
Houses and riches are the inheritance of fathers, Prove. 19.14.
but a prudent wife is from the Lord: such a rare and precious jewel is to be
sued and sought for at Gods Mercy-seat with extraordinary importunity and zeal;
and if she be procured at Gods hand by prayer, he shall find a thousand times
more sweetness and comfort, then if she be cast on him by an ordinary
providence. 3. Let him observe and mark these six points in his choice; as, 1.
The Report: 2. The looks: 3. The speech: 4. The apparel: 5. The companions: 6.
The education: These are like the pulses, that show the fitness and godliness
of any party with whom he ought to marry.

3. To beware whom he admits to dwell with him, that they be tractable unto
religious courses: See David's resolution herein, Mine eyes shall be upon the
faithful of the land, Psa. 101.6, 7.
that they may dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect way shall serve me;
he that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house; he that tells lies,
shall not tarry in my sight.

2. In the governed; whose duty it is both to join together in the performance
of Family Duties with their governor, to submit to his government: Pro. 1.8, 9.
My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy
mother, for they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about
thy neck.

These preparatives I pin upon the front or porch of this Family: Now to the
Family Duties themselves, and how they must be exercised.

SECT. 3. Of the Duties of Governors in general.
IN the proceedings of these Family Duties, we are to consider the Duties 1. Of
the governors. 2. Of the governed.


1. The governors, if (as it is in marriage) there be more then one; as first,
the chief governor, to wit, the Husband; secondly, the helper, to wit, the
Wife: both these owe Duties to their Families, and Duties to one another.

1. The Duties they owe to their Families, are either In general to the whole.
In particular, according to their several relations.


1. That which in general they owe to the whole Family, is either to their
Bodies. Souls.


1. To their Bodies; concerning which, says the Apostle, He that provideth not
for his own, 1 Timothy 5.8.
and especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is
worse then an infidel. Now as the Spirit of God charge us with this duty, so
he sets us about such things whereby this may be compassed; as, 1. That
every one should have some honest and good calling, and walk diligently in it;
Let him that stole, Ephesians. 4.28.
steal no more (says the Apostle) but rather let him labor, working with his
hands the thing which is good. 2. That he bear a low sail, and keep within
compass; remembering that of Solomon, He that is despised, and has a servant,
is better then he that honoreth himself, and lacks bread. Prove. 12 9.


2. To their Souls; concerning which, some duties they are to Perform to the
Family. Require of the Family.


1. The Duties they must perform to them, are --

1. To provide that they may live under the public Ministry, for otherwise
how should they be brought into the sheepfold of Christ, if they hear not the
voice of the chief Shepherd speaking unto them by those whom he has sent?

2. To oversee the ways of their Families, that they serve God; and as in all
other duties, so especially in sanctifying the Sabbaths: To this the very words
in the fourth Commandment, do bind all Masters of families: Remember, thou and
thy son, and thy daughter, thy manservant, and thy maid; -- Where the Lord
speaks by name to the Governors, as if he would make them overseers of this
work of sanctifying his Sabbaths.

3. To set their house in order for the service of God, to offer prayers and
praises to the Lord morning and evening, before and after meals: Psalm 55.17.
This was David's practice, Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray and cry
aloud, and he shall hear my voice; and this was Jobs practice, Job 1.5.
who sent for, and sanctified his sons and daughters, and rose up early in the
morning, and offered burnt-offerings, according to the number of them all: --
Thus did Job continually: And this was Abraham's practice wheresoever he came,
Genesis 12.7. and 13.4. and 21.33.
to build an Altar to God, where God should be worshipped jointly of him and
his family: And this was Christ's practice for himself and his family, Matthew
14.19. and 26.30. John 17.1.

4. To instruct their families privately in matters of Religion, that they may
not only profess, but feel the power of Religion in their lives and
conversations: This duty has these specials belonging to it,

1. A familiar catechizing of them in the principles of Religion: Deuteronomy 6.7.
Thus were Parents commanded of old, Thou shall teach these words diligently
unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house,
Prove 22.6.
and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up.

2. A daily reading of Scriptures in their hearing, directing them to mark and
to make use of them: So Timothy was trained up by his parents, 2 Timothy 3.15.
and that from his childehood.

3. A careful endeavoring that they may profit by the public Ministry: To
this end 1. They must prepare them to hear the Word, by considering Gods
Ordinances, Promises, and their own necessities. 2. They must remember them to
look in the Word for a Christ, and for communion with Christ. 3. They must
examine them after the Ordinances, what they have learned, and what use they
can make of it; thus Christ, after he had preached a parable to his disciples,
he said unto them, Know you not this parable, and how then will you know all
parables? Mark 4.13.
and then he expounds the parable to them.

2. The duties they are to require of the family, are both carefully to
frequent the public Ministry, and diligently to be conversant in the private
worship of God, and constantly to practice all holy and Christian duties
comprised briefly in the Commandments of God; and they are to require these
things, not only by telling them, calling on them, catechizing them,
admonishing them, but if they be negligent, by correcting them.

Now this correction must be ministered in Wisdom. Patience.


1. In wisdom, whose property it is to find out the right party that committed
the fault, to consider of what sort and nature the fault is, to weigh
circumstances of age, discretion and occasions; and to look to the mind of the
doer, whether negligence or mere simplicity brought him to it.

2. In patience, whose property it is to make the fault manifest to the
offender, that his conscience may be touched therewith; to hear what the
offender can say in his own defense, and accordingly to allow or dissallow; to
avoid bitterness, which sooner will harden the heart, then reform the manners of
the offender: These Rules being observed, and the heart lifted up in prayer to
God for direction and blessing, this Correction is necessary, as is evident in
Genesis 30.2. Prove. 13.24. and 19.18.

These are the duties that Governors owe to their families, in respect of their
souls; to correct them, catechize them, admonish them, call on them, read to
them, pray for them, etc. only with these limitations:

1. That they presume not above their callings: This was Paul's Exhortation,
That no man take this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron: The honor here, Heb. 5.4.
is the honor of the public Ministry, except that, and I know not but that
every Governor of a family, who has special abilities, utterance, memory, may
read Scriptures, repeat Sermons, pray, teach and instruct them out of
Scriptures, 1 Pet. 4.10. Genesis 35.2.
Thus Jacob said to his household, Put away the strange gods that are among you:
Heb. 7.7. 1 Cor. 14.35. Orig. hom. 9. in Levit.
And without all contradiction (says the Apostle) the less is blessed of the
better: And if the women would learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at
home; thus Oriegn would have the Word expounded in Christian families; and
Augustine says, That which the Preacher is in the pulpit, the same is the
householder in the house.

2. That they presume not above their gifts: This was Paul's Exhortation to
every man, Rom 12.3.
Not to think of himself more highly then he ought to think, but to think
soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith; yet I
deny not but in some cases they may lawfully depute or substitute some one in
the family, whom they judge fittest unto the service and employment, which they
themselves should ordinarily perform, as in case of old age and weakness of
body; 1 Samuel 8.1.
Thus Samuel being old, made his sons Judges: Or in want of good utterance or
expression of what is to be said; Exodus 4.16.
thus Aaron was Moses his spoaksman, and in stead of a mouth: Or in want of
boldness and audacity, arising from a consciousness of weakness; thus the good
Centurion sent the Elders of the Jews to Christ to intercede for him: Luke 7.3.
Or in case that a Minister of the Gospel do sojourn in ones family, as
Archippus did in Philemon his house: Phil. ver. 2.
Or in case of necessary absence; 1 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2
thus the Apostle Paul made Timothy his deputy to the Christian Thessalonians:
Or in case the Lord has bestowed more of his gifts and graces to one then
another: I know not in this case, 1 Cor. 12.31.
but that we may Covet earnestly the best gifts in others, as well as in our
own selves.

SECT. 4. Of the Duties of Parents to their Children.
THe Duties in particular which Governors owe to the Family, according to their
relations, are either As Parents to their Children. As Masters to their
Servants.


The duties of Parents to their children, are either To their bodies. To their
souls.


1. The Duties of Parents to the bodies of their children, are in many
particulars, but may be all comprised under this one head, A provident care for
their Temporal good; and this extends it self to all times, as, 1. To their
infancy. 2. To their youth. 3. To the time of Parents departure out of this
world.


1. The first age of a child is his infancy, and the first part of its
infancy, is while it remains in the Mothers womb: Here the Duty lies
principally upon the mother, to have a special care of it, that it may be
safely brought forth. Why was the charge of abstaining from wine, strong drink,
and unclean things, given to Manaohs wife, but because of the child which she
had conceived? Judge. 13 4.


The next degree of a childs infancy, is while it is in the swadling-band, and
remains a sucking child; in this also the care more especially lies on the
mother, whose duty it is to take all pains she possibly may, for the education
of her child; and especially to give her child suck, if she be able thereto:
This not only Nature, but Scripture sets forth; 1. By Consequence, Genesis 49.25.
Hosea 9.14. 1 Timothy 5.10. 2. By Example, Genesis 21.7. 1 Samuel 1.23. Psalm. 22.9. 3.
By Grant, the Word giving it as a ruled case not to be denied, Genesis 21.7. Cant.
8.1. Luke 11.27.


2. The second age of a child is its youth, from the time it begins to be of
any discretion, till it be fit to be placed forth: Now the duty of Parents at
this time is, 1. To nourish. 2. To nurture their children.


Under nourishment, are comprised Food, Apparel, Recreation, means for recovery
of health when they are sick; in which if Parents provide not for their
Children, they are worse then Infidels: And under nurture, are comprised good
manners, a good calling, frequent admonition, reprehension, correction, the last
remedy, which may do good when nothing else can, Prove. 19.18. -- 23.13, 14. --
29.17.

3. The last time to which parents provident care extends it self, is the
time of their departure out of the world, and then they are to set their house
in order, and to leave their estates to their children.

2. The duties of Parents to the souls of their children, extends it self also
to all times, as, 1. To their Infancy. 2. To their Youth. 3. To the time of
Parents departure out of this world.


1. The first age of a child, is his infancy: and the first part of its
infancy, is while it remains in the mothers womb. Now the duty of parents at
that time are these: 1. That they pray for their children: Genesis 25.22.
Thus did Rebekah, while the children were quick in her womb. Those parents
that neglect this duty to their children, consider not rightly that they are
conceived in sin: and 2. That they make sure (so much as in them lies) that
their children be born under the Promise, or under the Covenant, in respect of
the Spiritual part of it: How? by making sure that they be under the Promise or
Covenant themselves: If God in Christ be their God, they may have a comfortable
hope, That God will be the God of their seed, according to the Promise, I will
be thy God, Genesis 17.7.
and the God of thy seed.

The next degree of a childs infancy, is when it is born: and the duty of
parents then is, To give up their children unto God, casting them into the
hands of his Providence, into the arms of his Mercy, begging for them a
gracious acceptance with God; and to tender them to the Ordinance, The
Sacrament of Baptism, to get the seal of the Covenant set upon them, to get
them marked out for salvation.

2. The second age of a child, is its youth: Now the Duty of Parents to their
children at this time, is to train them up in true piety, To bring them up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Ephesians. 6.4.
To this end --

1. When children begin to read, let them read the holy Scriptures: 2 Timothy 3.15.
so was Timothy trained up from a child; and thus will children suck in
Religion with learning.

2. Let children be Catechized constantly from day to day; only with this
caveat, That parents deal with their children, as skilful Nurses and Mothers do
in feeding their children, (i.) not to give them too much at once: overmuch
dulls a childs understanding, and breeds wearisomness to it; it is most
suitable to give them Precept upon precept, Precept upon precept, Line upon
line, Isa. 28.10.
Line upon line, here a little, and there a little: Thus shall they learn with
ease and delight, and in time a great measure of knowledge will be gained
thereby.

3. Let parents declare to their children, the admirable works that God in
former times has done for his Church, especially such works as he has done in
their time: outward sensible things do best work upon children, and therefore
this direction was given under the Law, Josh. 4.6, 21. Josh. 4 6, 21.


4. Let Parents be to their children a good pattern in piety, leading them to
Christ by their examples: This will take place with children, more then all
precepts or paternal instructions: But as for me (said Joshua) and my house, we
will serve the Lord; Josh. 24.15.
he sets himself first, as a guide to the rest.

5. Let Parents reprove and correct their children for sin; and that the Lord
may sanctify this correction unto them, Consider this, O ye parents, Do you
observe such and such sins in your children? enter into your own hearts,
examine your selves, whether they come not from you: Consider how justly the
hand of God may be upon you: and when you are angry with your children, have an
holy anger with your own selves, and use this or the like Meditation with your
own souls, Lord, shall I thus punish my own sin in mine own child? shall I
thus persecute the corruptions of mine own ancestors? how then may thou be
displeased with me for the too carnal conception of my own child? It may be, I
then lay in some sin, or I asked it not of thee by prayer: Be merciful to me, O
Lord, and in thy good time, show thou pity on me and my child!

6. As children grow in years, and in the knowledge of Christ, and of
justification by Christ, let Parents train them up in the exercise of all
Duties, as Prayer, Meditation, Self-Examination, Watchfulness, and all means
public and private: if this be done, the world to come may reap the benefit of
their education; such children as you bring up, such parents will they be (when
you are gone) to their children; and such children shall they have, who are
parents in the next generation, etc. You then are the very making or marring of
the world: but on the contrary, if this be neglected, the rich man shall rise
up against you in the day of Judgment, and condemn you; for he being in hell,
had a care of his fathers house, that they might be forewarned, he desired
Abraham to send Lazarus to his brethren, to testify unto them that they came
not to that place of torment; but you will not admonish your children, you will
not teach them Moses and the Prophets; you will not show them the danger of
Gods heavy displeasure hanging over their heads; you will not, whilst you
live, lead a good example before them: O you may fear that your children shall
be Furies of hell to torment you. Now the Lord open your eyes to foresee, and
to fly these judgments to come.

3. The last time to which the Duty of Parents extends it self, is the time of
their departure out of the world, and then they owe to their children Good
direction. Faithful prayer.


1. For direction: when Parents observe their time to draw near, it is their
duty then especially, to commend some wise and wholesome precepts unto their
children, the better to direct them in their Christian course; Genesis 49.1, etc 1
Kin. 2.2, 3. 1 Chro. 28.9.
so did Isaac, and Jacob, and David: The words of a dying Parent are especially
regarded, and make a deeper impression.

2. For prayer: then is the most proper time for parents to pray and to bless
all their children. As they commend their own souls into Gods hands, so let
them commend their children unto Gods grace: Gods providence and promises are
the best inheritance in the world, and if parents (in their prayers) leave
these to their children, they can never want any thing that is good. O the
faithful prayers of Parents for their Children (especially when they are
leaving their Children, and going to God) must needs, in, for and through
Christ, prevail mightily with God.

SECT. 5. Of the Duties of Masters to Servants.
THe Duty of Masters to their Servants, is either To their Bodies. To their
Souls.


1. The Duty of Masters to the Bodies of their Servants, consists in these
particulars; viz. In a due provision of food for them, Prove. 31.15. and 27.27.
In a wise care for their clothing, Prove. 31.21. In a well-ordering of their
labor, so as they may be able to undergo it: In their ease, rest, and
intermission from labor at seasonable times: In paying them sufficient wages,
Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. In a careful preserving of their health, and using means for
their recovery in case of sickness, Mat. 8.6. and that not of the Servants
wages, but of the Masters own charge, otherwise they undo not the heavy
burden, Isa. 58.6.
but rather lay burden upon burden.

2. The Duties of Masters to the Souls of their Servants, consists in these
particulars; viz. In teaching them the Principles of Religion, and all duties
of Piety: In causing them to go to the public Ministry of the Word and
Worship of God: In taking account of their profiting by the public and private
means of Edification: In praying for them; and as they observe any grace
wrought in them, in praising God for it, and praying for the increase of it:
Nothing so much wins a Servants heart, or the affections of any gracious heart,
as the edifying of it in grace.

SECT. 6. Of the Duties of the Husband and Wife.
THe Duties which the chief governor and his helper owe to one another, are
either Common and mutual. Proper and peculiar to each severally.


1. The common mutual Duties betwixt Man and Wife, are either Of necessity to
the being of marriage; as Matrimonial Unity. Mat. 19.6. Tit. 2.5. Mal. 2.15.
Matrimonial Chastity.
Of honesty to the welbeing of marriage; as a Loving affection of one another.
Provident care of one for another.



The former Duties presupposed: there ought to be --

1. A sweet, loving, and tenderhearted pouring out of their hearts, with much
affectionate dearness into each others bosoms. This mutual-melting-heartedness,
being preserved fresh and fruitful, will infinitely sweeten and beautify the
marriage state. Now for the preservation of this love, let them consider

1. The compassionate and melting compellations which Christ and his Spouse
exchange in the Canticles, My fair one, my love, my dove, my undefiled, my
welbeloved, the chief of ten thousand: such a fervent and chaste love as this,
all married couples should resemble and imitate.

2. The Command of God to this purpose, Husbands love your wives, Ephesians. 5.25.
Tit. 2.4.
Ephesians. 5.25. and Wives (or young women) love your husbands, Tit. 2.4. Me thinks
this charge often remembered, should ever beat back all heart-rising and
bitterness, all wicked wishes that they had never met together, that they had
never seen one another faces: when the knot is tied, every man should think
his wife the fittest for him, and every wife should think her husband the
fittest for her of any other in the world.

2. A provident care of one for another; which extends to the body: Ephesians. 5.29.
No man hates his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it: and to the good
name; Joseph was not willing to make Mary a public example: Mat. 1.19.
and to the goods of this world; in which if there fall out any cross
providence, they are both to join with Jobs spirit, Job 1.21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, etc. But especially to the soul;
in praying together, for and with one another; in taking notice of the
beginning and least measure of grace, and approving the same; in conferring
about such things as concern the same, mutually propounding questions, and
giving answers one to another; in maintaining holy and religious exercises in
the Family, and betwixt their own selves, in stirring up one another to hear
the Word, to receive the Sacraments, and conscionably to perform all the parts
of Gods public Worship: In case the one prove unconverted, let the other wait,
and pray, and expect Gods good time: or in case the one be a babe in Christ, or
weak in Christianity, let the other deal fairly, lovingly, meekly, and let our
Lord Jesus his tender-heartedness to Spiritual yonglings, teach us mercy this
way, who is said to gather the lambs with his arms, and to carry them in his
bosom, Isa. 40.11.
and gently to lead those that are with young.

2. The proper and peculiar duties to each severally, are --

1. Of the husband, whose Duty it is 1. That he dearly love his Wife. 2. That
he wisely maintain and manage his authority over her.


For the former, consider, 1. The matter. 2. The manner of his love.


1. The matter of it is a dear love, a special love, and a more special then
that common mutual love to one another: No question the Wife is to love her
Husband, and a Brother to love his Brother, and a Friend is to love his Friend,
but more especially, or with a more special love, is the Husband to love his
Wife. To this purpose she is called, The wife of his bosom, to show that she
ought to be as his heart in his bosom. He must love her at all times, he must
love her in all things: love must season and sweeten his speech, carriage,
actions toward her: love must show it self in his commands, reproofs,
admonitions, instructions, authority, familiarity with her; the rise of which
love must not be from her beauty, nobility, or because she contents and
pleases her husband; but especially because she is his sister in the
profession of Christian Religion, and an inheriter with him of the Kingdom of
heaven; because of her graces, and virtues, as modesty, chastity, diligence,
patience, temperance, faithfulness, secrecy, obedience, etc. because she bears
and brings him forth children, the heirs of his Name and Substance, and the
upholder of his family; and because of the union and conjunction of marriage.
Love growing of beauty, riches, lust, or any other slight grounds, is but a
blaze, and soon vanishes, but if grounded on the considerations, and
especially on this union of marriage, it is lasting and true: The want hereof
is the fountain of strife, quarrelling, debate, which converts the paradise of
marriage into an hell.

2. For the manner of this love, the Apostle gives it thus, Husbands, love your
own wives, even as Christ also loved the Church. Ephesians. 5.25.
Now the love of Christ to his Church, is commended to us in these particulars:
--

1. In the cause of his love, which is his love: Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
He set his love on you, because he loved you; his love arose wholly and solely
from himself, and was every way free: so should husbands love their wives,
though there be nothing in wives to move them, but merely because they are
wives.

2. In the order of his love: Christ began it to the Church, before the Church
could love him: and as a wall is first smitten on by the Sun beams, before it
give a reflection of her heat back again; so the Church is first heated and
warmed at heart by the sense of Christ's love, before she love him again: We
love him, 1 John 4.19. Cant. 1.2.
because he loved us first: -- Because of the savor of thy ointments,
therefore do the virgins love thee; so should husbands begin to love their own
wives: I know some wives prevent their husbands herein, and there may be reason
for it; but the greater is their glory. This pattern of Christ should rather
stir up the husbands to go before them.

3. In the truth of Christ's love: This was manifested by the fruits thereof to
his Church; Ephesians. 5.25, 16, 27.
He gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it, and
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle: So must
husbands love their wives in truth and in deed, by guiding them in the way of
life, and path that is called Holy: for this is the truest character of a
sincere love.

4. In the quality of his love: Christ's love is an holy, pure, and chaste love:
as he himself is, so is his love, such must be the love of husbands, an holy,
pure and chaste love. Away with all intemperate, excessive, or any ways
exorbitant pollutions of the marriage bed! from which, if the fear of God,
imitation of Christ, love of purity, awfulness of Gods all-seeing eye cannot
draw, yet that slavish horror, lest God should punish such a couple with no
children, or with misshapen children, or with idiots, or with prodigiously
wicked children, or with some other heavy cross, one would think should be able
to affright them.

John 13.1.
5. In the continuance of Christ's love: Having loved his own, he loved them unto
the end. His love is a constant love, an everlasting love: no provocation or
transgressions could ever make him forget his love; Ier. 3.1.
Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return unto me. Such must be
the love of husbands, a firm love, an inviolable love: the ground of it must be
Gods Ordinances, and the support of it must be an inviolable resolution, that
no provocation shall ever change it, or alter it. Husbands must pass by all
infirmities, endeavoring in love to redress them, if possibly they can, or if
not, to bear with them.

2. Duty of an husband, is, Wisely to maintain and manage his authority: Now
the managing of it consists in two things: 1. That he tenderly respect her. 2.
That he carefully provide for her.


1. He must tenderly respect her, as his wife, companion, yoke fellow, Ezekiel.
24.16.
as his very delight, and the desire of his eyes, and never be bitter against
her. Col. 3.19.
This bitterness ordinarily turns the edge of his authority: if therefore any
matter of unkindeness arise (as sometimes certainly will) then must he
carefully, with all lenity, gentleness and patience quiet all, and never suffer
himself nor his wife to sleep in displeasure: Ephesians 4.26.
Let not the sun go down upon your wrath; or if he shall have occasion to
reprove her, he must keep his words until a convenient time, and not do it in
presence of others, and then utter them in the spirit of meekness and love.
Surely if she be not corrected by a word of wisdom and discretion, she will
never amend by threats, or any hasty, rigorous carriage: and if she once begin
to lose her shamefacedness in the presence of her husband, it is likely there
will be often brawlings and quarrels betwixt them, and the house will be full
of disquietness: it is best therefore to deal wisely with her, to admonish her
often, to reprehend her seldom, never to lay violent hands on her; and if she
be dutiful, to cherish her, that she may so continue; if wayward, mildely to
suffer her, that she wax not worse.

2. He must carefully provide for her: To this purpose he is called her Head,
and Savior, as Christ is the head of his Church, Ephesians. 5 23.
and the Savior of the body: The Head (you know) is the fountain of motion,
quickening, life, sense and lightsomness to the body; so should the husband be
as the wellspring of liveliness, light-somness, light-heartedness to his wife:
she has forsook all for him, and therefore she should receive from him a
continual influence of cheerful walking, and comfortable enjoying of her self.
And a Savior (you know) both provides for, and protects the saved: Christ thus
saved his Church, he is every way a sufficient Savior, able perfectly to save,
even to the very uttermost; Heb. 7.25.
he saves soul and body, he saves from all manner of misery, from the wrath of
God, the curse of the Law, the venom of all outward crosses, the tyranny of
Satan, the sting of death, the power of the grave, the torments of hell, or if
sin be the greatest evil, (as indeed it is) he will save his people from their
sins: Mat. 1.21.
I cannot say thus of the husband; yet an husband carries a resemblance of
Christ, and is after a manner a Savior to his wife, to protect her, and provide
for her. David compares her to a vine, Psa. 128.3.
intimating, that as a vine is underpropped and raised by some tree or frame
near to which it is planted, so is the wife raised to the height of honor by
virtue of her relation to her husband; by his wealth is she enriched; by his
honor is she dignified: he is under God and Christ, all in all to her. In the
Family he is a King, to govern and aid her; a Priest, to pray with her and for
her; a Prophet, to teach and instruct her; a Savior, to provide for, and
protect her to his utmost, if not to the utmost, which indeed is proper and
peculiar to the Lord Christ.

2. The Duties proper to the wife, are these, 1. That she be in submission to
her husband. 2. That she be an helper to him all her days.


G^n 3.16. Ephesians. 5.22. 1 Pet. 3.1, 6.
1. Wives must be in subjection to their own husbands: Sarah obeyed Abraham, and
called him Lord: But here is a case of conscience: --

1. What if her husband be a son of Belial, an enemy to Christ? must she then
yield subjection? -- Yes: because in his office her husband is as in Christ's
stead: The Church is compared to a lilly among thorns, Cant 2.2.
she remains lilly like, white, soft, pleasant, and amiable, though she be
joined with thorns, which are prickly and sharp: So a wife must be meek, mild,
gentle, obedient, though she be matched with a crooked, perverse, profane and
wicked husband: She must in this case remove her eyes from the disposition of
her husbands person, to the condition of his place, and by virtue thereof
(seeing he bears Christ's image) be subject unto him as unto Christ.

2. What if her husband command things contrary to Christ? must she therein be
subject? Ephesians. 5.22.
-- No: Submit, etc. How? as unto the Lord: if she submits to things contrary
to Christ, she submits not as to the Lord. Conscientious wives must remember
they have an husband in heaven, as well as on earth, betwixt whom there is a
greater difference, then betwixt heaven and earth: and therefore in case they
bid contrary things, they must prefer God before man, Christ before all men.

G^n. 2.18.
2. Wives must be helpers to their husbands. Now this helpfulness consists in
these things:

1. That she be careful to preserve his person, in sickness or health, in
adversity or prosperity, in youth or old age.

A most memorable and famous pattern for this purpose, is recorded by Lib. 2. de
Christiana fam. page 360.
Vives: A young, tender and beautiful Maid was matched (as he reports) to a man
stricken in years, whom after marriage she found to have a very fulsom and
diseased body, full of many loathsome and contagious diseases: yet
notwithstanding, out of sense and conscience that by Gods providence she was
become his wife, she most worthily digested all with incredible patience:
friends and Physicians advised her by no means to come near him, and for their
parts they utterly forsook him; but she (passing by with a loving disdain those
unkind disswasions) becomes to him in their stead, Friend, Physician, Nurse,
Mother, Sister, Daughter, Servant, every thing, any thing to do him good any
manner of way. At last by extraordinary expense, and excessive charges about
him, she came to some want of some necessaries, whereupon she sold her Ring,
Chains, richest Attire, Plate, and choycest Jewels: and when he was dead, and
friends came about her, rather to congratulate her happy riddance, then to
bewail her widowhood, she not only abhorred all speeches tending that way, but
protested, if it were possible, she would willingly redeem her husbands life
with the loss of her five dearest children. Whence it appears, that this worthy
woman was wedded to her husbands soul, not to his body, seeing no infirmity or
deformity thereof, could cool or weaken the fervency of her love.

2. That she learn and labor to forecast, contrive and manage houshold-affairs,
and business within doors, as they say: for which see a right noble glorious
pattern in Prove. 31.

3. That she help her husband, in setting forward the rich and royal trade of
Grace, in erecting and establishing Christ's glorious Kingdom in their house,
and especially in their own hearts. This is that one necessary thing, without
which their Family is but Satan's Seminary, and a Nursery for hell: This will
marvellously sweeten all reproaches, cast upon them by envenomed tongues: This
will sweetly seal unto them, their assurance of meeting together hereafter in
heaven; -- where the husband and wife perform these and the like Duties,
there is an happy Family, there is a College of quietness; where these are
neglected, we may term it an Hell.

Thus much of the Duties of Governors: we now come to the governed.

SECT. 7. Of the Duties of Children to Parents.
DVties of Children to Parents, are either inward, as Love and Fear. or
outward, as Reverence. Obedience. Recompense.



1. The inward Duties which children owe to their parents, are, Love and Fear:
Love like Sugar sweetens Fear, and Fear like Salt seasons Love; there must be a
loving-fear, and a fearing-love. Hence the fear of a child, is opposed to the
fear of a slave; for a childs fear being mixed with love, has respect to the
offense which a parent may take: but a slaves fear, which is ordinarily mixed
with hatred, has respect to nothing but the punishment which his Master may
inflict upon him. This love-like-fear is so proper to children, as that the
awful respect which the Saints bear to God, is called a filial fear: Children
have received their substance, from the very substance of their parents, and
therefore they are to perform this Duty of Love and Fear to them.

2. The outward Duties, or the manifestation of this Love and Fear in children,
appears

1. In their Reverence, in speech and carriage: They must give to their parents
reverent and honorable titles, meek and humble speeches, obeisance, as becomes
their age and sex: Thus Joseph and Solomon bowed, Gen 48.12. 1 King. 2, 19.
the one to his father, the other to his mother. Contrary hereto is mocking and
despising father and mother; of which said Solomon, The eye that mocketh at his
father, and despises to obey his mother, Prove. 13.17.
the ravens of the valley shall pick it out: a phrase that sets forth the end
of a notorious malefactor, that is hanged in the air till the ravens pick out
his eyes.

2. In their obedience to their Commands, Instructions, Reproofs and
Corrections of their Parents, Ephesians. 6.1. Prove. 1.8, 9. the reason is, because of
God, whom the father represents: Children must remember, that whatsoever they
do to their parents, they do it to God; when they please them, they please God;
when they disobey them, they disobey God; when their parents are justly angry
with them, God is angry with them: nor can they recover Gods favor (though all
the Saints of heaven should entreat for them) till they have submitted
themselves to their own parents; only with this limitation, that they submit
or obey them in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. Ephesians. 6.1.


3. In their Recompense: This is a Duty whereby children endeavor (as much as
in them lies) to repay what they can for the parents kindeness, care and cost
toward them, in way of thankfulness: If any widow have children, or nephews, 1 Timothy 5 4.
let them learn first to show kindeness at home, and to requite their parents;
in sickness, they must visit them, in time of mourning, they must comfort them,
in want, they must provide for them; Gen 48.1. and 37.35. and 42.3.
as the children of Jacob, who visited, comforted, and went to buy food for
their father: in time of danger, they must endeavor their protection, as David
did, 1 Samuel 22.3, 4
Let my father and mother (said he to the King of Moab) I pray thee, come forth
and be with you, till I know what God will do for me: And he brought them
before the King of Moab, and they dwelt with him, all the while that David was
in the hold. If God please to take children out of this world before their
parents, and their parents be succorless (they must as they can) provide for
their well-being after their deaths: Thus Christ commended his Mother to his
Disciple John, John 19.27.
a little before he gave up the ghost. It is recorded of the Stork, That when
the dams are old, the young ones feed them; and when through age they are ready
to faint in their flying, the young ones help them; and when they are past
flying, the young ones carry them on their weak backs. Thus Nature teaches
children their Duty, how much more should grace?

SECT. 8. Of the Duties of Servants to their Masters.
DVties of Servants to their Masters, are either inward, as Fear. outward, as
Reverence. Obedience.



1. The inward Duty is Fear: Servants, 1 Pet. 2.18.
be subject to your masters with all fear, and account them worthy of all
honor: 1 Timothy 6.2.
So proper is this fear to a Servant, as where it is wanting, there is a plain
denial of his Masters place and power: If I be a master, Mal. 1.6.
where is my fear? said God: observe, I mean not an excessive, slavish fear; as
when a servant fears nothing but the revenging power of his Master (such was
the fear of that unprofitable servant, Mat. 25.24, 25.
who could say to his Master, I knew that thou were an hard man, -- and I was
afraid) but I mean an awful fear of provoking his Masters wrath, so as it makes
him cast every way, how he may please his master, and such a fear draws him on
cheerfully to perform his Duty.

2. Outward Duties which issue from this fear, are Reverence. Obedience.


1. Reverence, which is manifested in speech and carriage. Thus servants must
give reverend titles to their Masters, as Father, Lord, and Master, etc. They
must yield obeisance to them; as The children of the prophets, 2 Kin. 2.15.
when they saw that the Spirit of Elijah rested on Elishah, they came to meet
him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.

2. Obedience, which has respect to the Commands, Instructions, Reproofs and
Corrections of their Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20. But here is a case or two of
Conscience:

1. How far they must obey; or what is the extent of servants obedience to
Masters? Col. 3.22.
-- The Apostle answers, Servants, obey in all things your masters according to
the flesh: It is not sufficient that servants perform well their Duties in some
things; they must do it in all things, yea in things that may be against their
own mind and liking, if their Masters will have it so: This is clear in the
example of Joab, the King commands him to number the people; Joab declares
himself, 2 Samuel 24 2, etc.
that he thinks it a very unmeet thing, Why does my Lord the King delight
(says he) in this thing? yet against his judgment he yields unto the Kings
peremptory command, The Kings word prevailed against Joab. Look as Peter, when
Christ bid him lanch out into the deep, and let down his net for a draught,
Luke 5.4, 5.
He answered and said, Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken
nothing: nevertheless, at thy word I will let down the net. So must servants
say, when they have a peremptory command, though contrary to their own
judgments, this or that in all humility, I suppose, or I propound to you,
Neververtheless, at your word I will let down the net, I will do as you please.

2. But what if God and Master should command contrary things? -- In such a
case the Apostle sets down an excellent limitation in these four phrases, 1. As
unto Christ: 2. Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7.
As the servants of Christ: 3. Doing the will of God: 4. As to the Lord:] All
these imply, That if Masters command their servants any thing contrary to
Christ, they may not yield to it: Upon this ground the Midwives of the Hebrew
women, would not kill the Hebrew children, Exodus 1.17.
They feared God (says the Text) and did not as the King commanded them. In
this case Joseph is commended in not harkening to his Mistress; and the servants
of Saul are commended, for refusing to slay the Lords Priests at their Masters
command. When Masters command or forbid any thing against God and Christ, they
go therein beyond their commission, and their authority cease, so that
servants may say, Acts 5.29.
We ought to obey God rather then men.

3. But some Anabaptists object, That all men are alike, and that there is no
such difference as betwixt Masters and Servants, nay it is expressly forbidden
to be Servants of men. I answer, 1 Cor 7.23.
I answer, to be a servant, in that place, is not simply to be in subjection
under another, but to be so obsequious to man, as to prefer him before God:
Hence the Apostle elsewhere in the Duties of servants, lays down this
Antithesis, Not as men-pleasers, Ephesians. 6.6, 7.
but as the servants of Christ; again, doing service as to the Lord, and not to
men: The meaning is, That we must do Duty to a Master, not as merely to a man,
but as to one in Christ's stead. Masters by virtue of their office and place,
bears the image of Christ; Christ communicates his authority unto them, and so
in performing Duty to Masters, we perform Duty to Christ, and in denying Duty
to Masters, we deny Duty to Christ: Thus the Lord said to Samuel, when the
people rejected his Government, They have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me, 1 Samuel 8.7.
that I should not reign over them. Consider this, all ye that are Servants,
though Masters should neither reward your good service, nor revenge your ill
service, yet Christ will do both: This is your prerogative that fear God, above
all other Servants; others may serve their Masters with fear and trembling, in
singleness of heart, and with good will, but only Christians and Saints do
service as to Christ, and this makes them not content themselves with doing the
thing, but to endeavor to do it after the best manner they can, so as God and
Christ may accept of it.

I have now run through the Family, and informed you of the Duties both of
Governors and governed. Christians, look within you, look about you, that man
is not a good man, that is not good in all his relations. The same God that
requires us to serve him as private persons, requires us to serve him in our
relations: And therefore though you be never so careful of your Duty in the
former respect, yet you may go to hell for neglecting your Duties, as Masters,
Servants, Husbands, Wives, Parents, or Children; nay, I Will say a little more,
that though you should be good in one relation, yet if you endeavor not to be
good in every relation, you shall never go to heaven: for the same God that
commands you to serve him as a Master, commands you to serve him as a Father,
as an Husband, etc. And he that keeps the whole Law, Iam. 2.10.
and offends in one point, is guilty of all.

CHAP. X.
SECT. 1. Of Preparatives to Christian-Society.
HItherto of secret Duties, and private Duties, so far as they concern every
man in his own particular, and in his own family: Now as of many particulars
consists a family, so of many families may consist this Christian-Society we
are ready to treat of; and the rather do we fall upon it, because we hold it a
Duty, to keep a constant, indeared and loving correspondence with the Saints,
to communicate with experimental Christians, in their Experiences of Christ
working and dwelling in them, To exhort one another, Heb. 10.24, 25.
and so much the more, as we see the day approaching.

Now that we may jointly and comfortably carry on this Duty, observe we, 1. Our
entrance into it. 2. Our proceedings in it.


1. For entrance, we must 1. Renounce all sinful and wicked Society. 2.
Entertain such Graces as will fitly prepare us for this Society.


1. We must renounce and discharge all wicked society: 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16.
For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And what
communion has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial?
or what part has he that believes with an infidel? what agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? as melted gold will unite it self with the substance
of gold, but not incorporate it self with dross; so if God by his Spirit melts
the heart, and fits it for union with Believers, then he seperates it from that
which is Hetrogeneous and disagreeing to it: Lord, who shall dwell in thy holy
hill? says David; the answer is given, Psalm. 15.4. In whose eyes a vile person
is contemned, Psalm. 15 4.
but he honoreth them that fear the Lord: Understand the Text soberly
concerning Contempt of a vile person. David would not have us to deny him
courtesies and civil behavior: We may eat, and drink, and buy, and sell, and
show kindeness, and pity him, and pray for him, and carry our selves with all
wisdom toward him, though he be without; but as for holy communion, we must
say to him as Peter to Simon, Acts 8.21.
Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this body; or as Nehemiah to
Sanballat, Tobiah and Geshem, You have no portion, Neh. 2.20.
nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem.

2. We must entertain such Graces as will fitly prepare us for this Christian
Society, and they are such as these: --

1. Humility: Humble men contend not, censure not, quarrel not, disdain not:
They can meet with unequal respects of age, sex, state and parts; they can
discern even in women what is to be honored, and if there be not always so
profound a judgment, yet many times there is more holy, and more sweet
affections: They have not the faith of Christ in respect of persons, but can
say to the poor man (if he be of the poor whom God has chosen, rich in Grace,
and heir of the Kingdom) Sit thou here in a good place; they can prefer Grace
before parts, and delight in the sweet scent of creeping Violets: They can make
use of, and improve all other men's gifts, Romans 12.10.
For in honor they prefer one another, and so they come to be kindly
affectioned one to another in brotherly love; they can spy out Graces of all
sorts, in all sorts and ranks of people: They observe the sweet affability and
courtesy of some great ones, the honest diligence and patience of some poor
ones, the blushing modesty and humility of some solidly learned, the cheerful
activity of Gods worship of some illiterate, that love Christ in sincerity,
though they cannot dispute for him: Several sorts of men, have several lustres:
now the humble learn of all, and so receive much benefit in communion from all:
This Grace then gives him a fitness for this Society.

2. Acknowledgement, and the prising of others gifts: It is said of Apollos,
Acts. 18.24.25.
That though he were an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, yet he so
far acknowledged and honored the Graces of God, and the gifts that were in
Aquila and Priscilla, (a plain couple, an handy-crafts man and his wife) that
he was content to learn of them: O let not Brethren envy and grudge at one
another, but acknowledge and prize the gifts of others as their own gifts.

Phil. 2 4.
3. Self-denial: Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in
lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then themselves: Look not
every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others: How
goodly is it to see a man who has parts, and gifts, and graces, to deny
himself, and all for the edifying of the body? Paul could endeavor to please
all men in all things, Not seeking his own profit, 1 Cor. 10.33.
but the profit of many: He has a true public spirit, that prefers the body
of Christ, before his own private; that can deny himself, so that God may be
glorified.

4. Love: A grace of such use and influence, that without love there can be no
Christian Society; it is love that joins hands and hearts: So the soul of
Jonathan was knit to the soul of David, For Jonathan loved him as his own soul.
1 Samuel 18.1.
Love disposes men to all spiritual Offices, to pray together, sing together,
talk or confer together; on the contrary, all the gifts in the world, how
excellent soever, are nothing worth without love: Though I spoke with the
tongues of men and Angels; 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.
Though I had the gifts of all prophecy, and understood all mysteries, and all
knowledge, and have not love, I am nothing.

5. Amiableness, Facility or Condescension: Rugged stones unhewn and unsquared,
cannot fitly lie and join together in one building; sour, harsh and sullen
spirits, are not fit for society: If there be a Nabal, who is such a son of
Belial, that no man can speak to him, he may not be entertained: I know there
are some good men of an harsh and ridgid disposition, who make many a poor
Christian to startle back, though he came with a resolution to consult and
learn something of them: But there is in some others (whom I always prefer) an
alluring facility, that does call in the modest and blushing, who would
otherwise step back: Now this sweet disposition for gaining of souls into the
liking and relishing of the good ways of God, is a commendable Grace.

6. Sobriety of spirit, in the suspending of all rashness of censures, and a
patient bearing with some errors and offenses, which unavoidably will sometimes
fall out: The Apostle had respect unto this, when he admonished the Colossians,
To forbear one another, Coloss. 3.13.
and to forgive one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, or a matter
of complaint (as the word signifies) even as Christ forgave you: How
quarrellous are some men? How loud and shrill, and thunder-stormy in their
complaints? on the contrary, heavenly souls resolve to do good, and to suffer
evil: Such was David's carriage toward Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.7, 10.
and Shimei cursed him: Come out thou bloody man, thou man of Belial: David
said no more, but Let him curse, because the Lord had said unto him, Curse
David.

7. Innocence, harmlesness, or inoffensiveness of conversation: Nothing more
destroys Christian-Society, then frequent lies, flatteries, whispering, scoffs,
calumnies, and invented slanders: James 3.8. -- 1.26.
Hence James calls the tongue, An unruly evil, full of deadly poison; -- And if
this member be not tamed, all Religion is in vain; and consequently all
Religious Society.

8. An holy coveting of excellent gifts: Emulation ordinarily engenders strife,
and overthrows Christian-Society; But this holy contention, this spiritual
emulation, this zeal after more perfection of gifts and graces, 1 Cor. 12.31.
the Apostle enjoyneth, Covet earnestly the best gifts; q.d. affect, emulate,
be zealous after a further growth or improvement.

9. Wisdom: Both to discern where the rich treasure lies, and to be able to
draw it forth: There lies many times a great deal of spiritual wealth, in some
obscure and neglected Christians, which many supercilious and conceited
professors do pass by and neglect: One would not think what dexterity in
Scriptures, what judgment in Controversies, what fervency and expressions in
Prayer, what acquaintance with God and his Providence, what strength of Faith,
what Patience, Meekness, Moderation, Contentedness, Heavenly-mindedness, may be
now and then found out and discovered in plain people, that have plain carriage
and plain speech: Here then is the necessary use of wisdom, to discover those
gifts and graces; and when we find such a vein, to dig it, and draw it forth:
Do you observe one of great dexterity in Scriptures? propound to him some
difficult place where you were fain to make a stand: Do you observe one well
studied in controversies? desire him to untie a knot, where you have been a
great while looking for an end: Do you observe one acquainted with cases of
desertion and soul-clouds? learn of him what experiments he has collected, and
which was his way out of the mist: Do you observe one powerful in Prayer? get
him to commend your suits with you unto God: All men would be dealt with in the
proper way wherein they are versed, and wherein they excel.

SECT. 2. Of a mutual exchange of gifts and graces.
AFter the Preparatives, we come to the Duties themselves; which consist,

1. In a mutual exchange and imparting of Gifts and Graces.

2. In a mutual serviceableness to the bodies and souls of one another.

3. In a mutual walking together, and holding of hands in the Ordinances of
Christ.

1. There must be in Christian-Society, a mutual exchange and imparting of
Gifts and Graces: God has dispensed variety of gifts unto his people; as Job
was exemplary for patience and uprightness; Moses for faithfulness and
meekness; Josiah for tenderness and activity in the cause of Reformation;
Timothy for Ministerial diligence and care of the flock: The gift of Christ is
Grace, according to measure: He measures to one such gifts, to another such, to
another such and such, as he pleases: Unto every one of us is given grace,
Ephesians 4.7.
according to the measure of the gift of Christ: God gave the Spirit without
measure unto Christ, but we have it according to our scantling, and as he
pleases to honor and entrust us: To one is given the word of knowledge, to
another faith, to another prophecy, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
to another the discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of tongues:
Thus every man has his proper gift of God, One after this manner, 1 Cor. 7.7.
and another after that: One has quickness of parts, but not so solid a
judgment; another is solid, but not so ready and presential; one has a good
wit, another a good memory, a third a good utterance; one is zealous, but
ungrounded; another well principled, but timorous: One is wary and prudent,
another open and plain hearted; one is trembling and melting, another cheerful
and full of joy: Now thus God freely gives, and most wisely disposes, that we
may be engaged to use his bounty to each others help: The knowing Christian is
to impart to him that is weak in gifts, and the zealous Christian that has
fewer notions, is to impart his warmth and heat to his knowing friend: The
Christian that has collected experiences, or found out methods, for the
advancement of holiness, must not deny such knowledge to the body; Christians
must drive an open and free trade, they must teach one another the mystery of
godliness: Tell your experiences, and tell your conflicts, and tell your
comforts, make all that you have the bodies, and all the body has, yours: Some
say, The art of Medicine was thus perfected, as any one met with an herb, and
discovered the virtue of it by any accident, he would post it up in some
public place, and so the Physicians skill was perfected, by a collection of
those experiments and receipts: We must one day account how we have laid out
our Knowledge, our Utterance, our spirit of Prayer, our Ability of discerning,
our experience of God, our taste of the Promises, our enlargements after
Prayer, our improvements by Conference, our comforts after private Humiliation,
our strengthening by Sacraments, or what else may be instanced in for the use
of others; how we got rid of such a lust, how we mastred such a temptation, how
we attained to such a facility in this or that duty, and there must be this
commerce among them that are in this heavenly partnership.

SECT. 3. Of a mutual serviceableness to the bodies and souls of one another.
THere must be in this Christian-Society, a mutual serviceableness: 1. To the
bodies. 2. To the souls one of another.


1. To the bodies of one another: The primitive Christians excelled in this
care, they put their estates (by reason of the persecution) into a common
stock, Acts 4.32. and 34.35.
that all, even the poorest sort, that in those hard and uncertain times, gave
their names to Christianity, might be tended and looked on with equal care and
respect: I know some have stretched this too far, to make it a leading case and
binding example; but thus far it holds, that if the necessity of the faithful
call for it, even all that we have must be serviceable in order and in due
respects: The Catalogue runs thus; 1. The public state wherein we live, we
must provide for. 2. Our selves. 3. Our wives. 4. Our parents. 5. Our children
and family. 6. The household of faith. 7. Our kindred. 8. Our nearest neighbors
and common friends. 9. Our countrymen. 10. Strangers. 11. Enemies. It is truly
an acceptable service to God, and a glorious Ministry, to tend the Lords poor
and sick; therefore Paul sometimes took upon him the fellowship of the
ministering to the Saints, 2 Cor. 8.4, 7.
as he was desired by the Churches of Mecedonia, whom he commends for their
charity, and whose example he wills the Corinthians to follow.

2. To the souls of one another, and this several ways:

1. In watching over one another: I know we have Enemies that maliciously watch
over us for our haltings, but it is the part of a friend, to watch over his
companion for good; we are apt enough to neglect our own watch, we had need to
have either prying enemies, or faithful friends, to make us know our selves.

2. In admonishing and reproving those that fall: This is a great Duty, but
much neglected. Reverend Mr. Bolton, speaking of that grave and religious Judge
Nichols (who desired him sometimes to deal plainly with him) confessed after
the Judges death, Boltons quartior novissima, page 163.
that he was grieved at his heart that he had done no more in that kind: O
count not admonition an unnecessary meddling, we may through a foolish humor to
be esteemed peaceable and quiet, suffer many to miscarry and be lost.

3. In recovering those that are fallen, through a spirit of meekness:
Brethren, if any man be overtaken with a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such a one in the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1, 2.
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Christians should not triumph
over them that are on the ground, and thrown down by a temptation, but rather
they should sit by them on the same flat, and mourn with them and for them, and
feel some of their weight.

4. In instructing the ignorant, dull, and less capable: To this purpose we
should rather keep a slow pace, then willingly out-go the young and tender
Lambs: O despise them not here, with whom we shall have eternal company in
heaven; it may be they can reach no higher then the very Principles of
Religion, without which they could not be safe: yet if they know and can say
any thing of God in Christ Jesus, or if they would fain hear of him, be not too
high for their Society; neglect not the rear of the Christian army, but strive
with their infirmity or unfitness, whatsoever it be.

5. In encouraging weak beginners: bid them welcome that stand upon the
threshold, that linger in the porch of this Society, and would be glad to sit
down among the Disciples of Christ. It was prophesied of Christ, Isa. 42 3.
A brui^ed reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench:
It should be thus with Christians, they should not quench, but rather encourage
the smoking fl^x into a flame: Do you perceive a poor soul to listen after
Christ, and to hearken if some word of comfort may be let fall? open your
selves to him, and let him in to the pleasures and ravishments of the Kings
chambers: Take heed of making any one go back, or grow out of love with the
order and government of Christ's family.

6. In stirring up the Spirits and gifts of one another: Consider one another
(says the Apostle) to provoke unto love and to good works; Heb. 10.24, 25.
not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, but exhorting one
another. A mean person by asking a question, may lay the first stone, whereupon
a goodly frame of excellent and rich discourse may be reared: Christians must
quicken one another in the ways of godliness; as the iron sharpeneth iron, as
rubbing of the hands makes both warm, and as live coals makes the rest to burn,
so let the fruit of Society be mutual, sharpning, warming and inflaming.

7. In raising, chearing, comforting the dejected and dismayed Spirit: How did
the Martyrs in their Prisons set one another at liberty from the bondage of
fears? how did holy Bradford's sweet and cheerful company, make the very
dungeons lightsom, and Pallace-like to his fellow prisoners? An unbelieving
heart, oppressed many times with foolish cares and fears, does sometimes (by a
word duly spoken, or by a Promise applied in the season of it) feel the load
quite taken away.

SECT. 4. Of a mutual walking together, and holding hands in the Ordinances of
Christ.
THere must be in Christian Society. A mutual walking together in the
Ordinances of Christ: as --

1. In hearing the Word, by quickening one another unto it, by helping the
negligent to apply it, by taking forth the several portions belonging to the
several conditions and necessities of each, by praying for one another, that it
might be useful and seasonable to all.

2. In the Sacraments, Col. 2.5.
joining in one another, beholding their order and stedfastness of faith in
Christ: How should they but rejoice together in the love of God, feeding at the
same Table as those that shall meet and sit down with Christ in his Kingdom of
Glory? How should they but behold their order and stedfastness of faith, now
renewing their Covenant of love among themselves, and laying down all grudges,
rancour, prejudice, uncharitableness, surmises for Christ's sake, and giving the
right hand of fellowship, cordially and unfainedly to one another, as those
that find themselves to be all retainers to the same Master, and provided for
with the same care, and purchased by the price of the same blood.

3. In Prayer for and with each other: In Primitive times, they used to
transa^t one another affairs in the Court of Heaven by Prayer: Ephesians. 6.18, 19,
Pray always (said Paul) with all prayer and supplication, for all Saints, and
for me: -- and, Pray one for another (said James) that ye may be healed; James
5.16.
q. d. if the heart rankles, or if there be any fallings out, any differences
and jarrings among Christians, let them meet together, and humbly acknowledge
where the fault lies, and make up the matter before God, who is both a witness
of their mutual sincerity, and is only able to search the bottom of the wound,
and to cure it: Sometimes Christians have known blessed experiments of this,
and can tell when a Prob-tum est was written upon it.

4 In fasting for the afflicting, and humbling of the soul; so Ezra and his
men, and Esther and her maids, maintained communion together: Such
Fasting-days, are soul-feeding-days, and soul-curing-days; some diseases, some
lusts will go out no other ways.

5. In mutual bemoanings, confessions, and opening of our sores and wounds; it
may be, when the Apostle says, Confess your faults one to another, he means
more then acknowledgement of offenses, whereby a man has sinned against his
brother; viz. that Christians should also bewail their failings, infirmities,
deadness, unsavoriness, coldness, narrowness, unfruitfulness to one another, to
see whether others have been in the same case, and what course they took, and
what remedy they procured: many souls may perish through too much reservedness
and modesty.

6. In holy Conference: This indeed is it that might much improve the meeting
of Christians. In the Prophets time, when proud scorners, and profane spirited
men talked vainly, and did even what they list, Mal. 3 16.
then they that feared the Lord met, and spoke often one to another; no doubt
they spoke of God, and his councels, of his works and ways, of his providence
and goodness, of the baseness of Atheistical thoughts concerning God: would
Christians thus meet and exchange words and notions, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Luke 24.32.
Acts 28.15.
they might build up one another, they might heat and inflame one another, they
might strengthen and encourage one another, as the brethren did Paul: and have
we not an express Command for this Duty of Conference? Ier. 23 35.
Thus shall ye say every one to his brother, and every one to his neighbor,
What has the Lord answered? and what has he spoken?

And now I am fallen on this Duty, give me leave to lay down some experiments
and proceedings of some Christians as willingly joined themselves in a
Christian Society, and by Gods blessing thereby sweetly improved themselves.

SECT. 5. Of some Orders to which some Christians subscribed before Conference.
IN this Conference of Christians, 1. Some Orders were made, to which all
subscribed. 2. Some Questions were propounded, to which all answered.


1. The Orders were these: --

1. That every Wednesday (especially during winter) we will meet for Conference
about soul-affairs.

2. That if any difference in opinion shall arise amongst us, we will fully
debate, and then submit to the judgment of the Society, as it shall be made
good out of the Word.

3. If we observe any of the Society to fall into any sin or scandal, he that
observes it shall first warn the party thereof; and if he offend again in the
same kind, the observer shall then join with himself one or two more to warn
the same party; and if he will not hear them, the observer or any other shall
then acquaint the Society at our next meeting; and if he will not hear them,
that then he be excluded till he repent, and be voted for his admission again.

4. That whatsoever is spoken amongst us (the telling whereof may tend to the
prejudice of any one of us) shall be kept secret, upon pain of undergoing such
Censure as the major part of the company shall think fit.

5. That for admission of any into our Society, we will not be too strict nor
too large; not too strict in excluding any, in whom we have any good hopes of
sincerity, and real desire to increase their knowledge, and mutual love, though
they may be but weak in gifts; nor too large in admitting such, Romans 14.1. 2 Thessalonians. 3 6.14. Tit. 3 10.
who may be either heretical in opinion, or immoderate in life: And by this
Rule, those that are to be admitted shall be voted by the major part of us.

6. That for better regulating of this Society, we will have a Moderator. And
what further Orders we or any of us shall hereafter think upon, we shall
propound the same to the Society at our next meeting; and the same shall be
confirmed or adnulled, as it shall be agreed by the major vote of our Society.

7. That the Moderator shall propound the Question and matter of our Discourse
the week before it be discussed; and at every meeting begin with Prayer, and
end with Thanksgiving.

SECT. 6. Of some Questions of Practical Divinity, which at the Conference were
propounded and answered.
THe Questions propounded were of several sorts: 1. Choice Heads of Practical
Divinity. 2. Wholesome Cases of Conscience. 3. Some Contraverted Points.


The Questions of the first sort, were these and the like:

. 1. What was the happiness of Man's condition in the state of Innocence?
1. GOd made man in his own Image, Genesis 1.26, 27. and 9.6. Eccles. 7.29. Ephesians.
4.24.

2. Man was wonderfully and fearfully made, Psalm. 139.14.

3. Man was made Lord of all the creatures, Genesis 1.26, 28. Psalm. 8.6.

4. Man had a perfect knowledge of God, Romans 1.19, 20. the Creatures, Genesis 2.19.


5. Man had sweet and immediate communion and conference with God, Genesis 1.28,
29, 30. and 3.8.

6. Man was placed in Paradise, Genesis 2.15.

7. Man was made little lower then the Angels, Psalm. 8.5.

8. Man labored without pain, Genesis 3.17.

9. Man lived without sin or shame, Genesis 1.31. and 2.25.

10. Man was crowned with glory and dignity, Psalm. 8.5. 1 Cor. 11.7.

11. Man was Gods delight, Prove. 8.31.

12. Man had a possibility not to dye, Genesis 2.17. and 3.19.

13. Man had free choice of good and evil, not necessitated to either, Genesis
2.16.

. 2. What are the Miseries of Man in state of Nature?
1. HE is impure in his conception, Psalm. 51.5.

2. He is born in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5.

3. He is defiled with sin in the whole nature, Isa. 64.6. Ezekiel. 16.6. Romans
7.24.

4. His thoughts are corrupted with sin, Genesis 6.5. Ephesians. 4.17, 18.

5. All the members of his body and powers of his soul are defiled with sin, 2
Pet. 2.14.

6. His members are servants to unrighteousness and to iniquity, Romans 3.13, 14,
15, 16. and 6.19.

7. He is Spiritually blind, Rev. 3.17. Jer. 10.14. 1 Cor. 2.14. Ephesians. 5.8.

8. His mind is set in evil works, Ephesians. 4.18. Col. 1.21.

9. His will lusts after evil, Romans 8.7.

10. His heart is deceitful and desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9.

11. His affections are inordinate, Isa. 59.7.

12. He has a defiled conscience, Tit. 1.15.

13. He has an unsatiable desire after sin, Job 14.4. -- 15.16.

14. He is full of sin, Prove. 22.15. Romans 1.24. -- 7.5, 14. 2 Pet. 2.19.

15. He is dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.

16. His civil actions are sin, Prove. 21.4.

17. His best services are sin, Prove. 15.8, 9, 28, 29.

18. He is unable to any good, Romans 3.12. -- 7.19. -- 8.8. 2 Cor. 3.5. Rev.
3.17.

19. He is hated of God, Psalm. 5.5.

20. He is separated from all fellowship with God, Isa. 59.2. Ephesians. 2.12.

21. He is under Gods curse, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18.

22. He is without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. and out of the communion of Saints, Ephesians.
2.12.

23. He is a bondslave of Satan, John 8.34, 44. 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. Heb. 2.15.

24. He is a child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.

25. He is subject to all the calamities and curses of this life, Deuteronomy. 28.15,
16, 17, etc.

26. His life is short, and vain, and full of toil and care, Genesis 3.19. Eccles.
5.14. Psalm. 103.14, 15.

27. He is liable to death, Romans 5.12. -- 6.23. Genesis 3.19. Deuteronomy. 30.18. Psalm.
89.48.

28. He is guilty of damnation, Romans 5.17, 18. -- 8.6. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.

29. He shall not (as such) inherit the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 15.50. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.

30. He is an enemy to his children, Deuteronomy. 28.18.

. 3. What means has God appointed to come out of this miserable estate?
1. WE must enquire after the means of salvation, Luke 3.10, 12. Acts 2.37. --
16.29, 30.

2. We must lay hold on seasons and opportunities of grace offered, John 12.35.

3. We must hearken to, and entertain the motions of Gods Spirit, Rev. 3.18, 20.

4. We must seriously consider of our own ways, Haggai 1.5. Luke 15.20.

5. We must go to God by Christ, John 14.6. and 10.9.

6. We must search the Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 17.19. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. John 5.39.

7. We must wait on the word preached, John 5.24. Acts 26.18. Romans 10.14, 17. 1
Cor 1.18, 21. 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 John 4.6.

8. We must see our sin, Romans 2.20. Gal. 2.10. have a sense and feeling of sin,
Mat. 11.28. Acts 2.37.

9. We must confess our sins, Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.9.

10. We must be grieved for sin, Isa. 57.15. Mat. 5.4. James 4.9, 10. Zech.
12.10. 2 Cor. 7.10.

11. We must be instant in prayer, Acts 8.22. Romans 10.13. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.12.
Heb. 4.16.

12. We must endeavor after regeneration, John 3.3, 5. and mortification, Mat.
7.13. Romans 8.13.

13. We must consider the curse due to us for sin, Ezekiel. 18.28. Gal. 3.10. Col.
3.6.

14. We must remove all lets or impediments that hinder conversion, Deuteronomy. 12.8.
Ephesians. 4.17.

15. We must consider that by sin we had an hand in crucifying Christ, Zech.
12.10. Acts 2.36, 37.

16. We must judge our selves, that we be not judged, 1 Cor. 11.31.

17. We must forsake our ways and thoughts, and turn to the Lord, Isa. 55.7.
Joel 2.13. Acts 2.38.

18. We must avoid evil society, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.

19. We must desire after Christ and his righteousness, Mat. 5.6. Rev. 3.18. --
21.6.

20. We must believe on the Lord Jesus, John 3.15. -- 6.35, 65. Acts 16.31.
Gal. 3.22. Ephesians. 2.8.

21. We must rest on Gods Promises in Christ for conversion, Isa. 43.25. --
44.21, 22. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.

22. We must deny our selves, Mat. 15.24. Luke 14.26.

23. We must be doers of the word, and not hearers only, James 1.22.

. 4. What are the signs of a sound and sincere Humiliation?
1. A Sorrow for sin, because God hates it, Psalm. 51.4.

2. A breaking of the heart out of pure love to God, Romans 2.4.

3. A sorrow for sin, because it crucified Christ, Zech. 12.10.

4. A free acknowledgement of our unworthiness, in greatest fullness of our
worldly felicity, Genesis 32.10.

5. A suffering of sorrow to abide on the soul, and not putting it off by
worldly comforts, Isa. 58.5, 6. Joel 2.13.

6. A mourning for lesser sins, as well as for greater; for the evil that
cleaves to a man's best works, as for his other evil actions, James 2.10.

7. A submission to Gods will, let him do what he pleases, Josh. 10.15. 2
Kings 20.19. Jer. 10.19.

8. A throwing of the soul (being affrighted with the threats of the Law, and
accusations of his own conscience) wholly upon Christ and his Promises, Luke
13.12. Acts 16.31.

9. A hatred against, and shunning of all sin, Job 42.6. Psalm. 119.113. 2 Cor.
7.11.

10. A leaving of all sin, and doing the contrary good things, Isaiah 58.6, 7,
8. Micah 6.8.

11. The seven marks of godly sorrow, laid down in 2 Cor. 7.11.

. 5. What are the signs of an hard heart?
1. IMpetitence, Romans 2.5.

2. An evil heart of unbelief, Heb. 3.12, 13.

3. Inflexibleness under the means of grace, Exodus 7.14. Mat. 23.37. Jer. 6.16.
-- 44.16.

4. Spiritual blindeness, and obstinacy in error, Isa. 44.18. John 12.40. Ephesians.
4.18.

5. A contemning of God and of Christ, 1 Samuel 6.6. Mark 3.5.

6. A slighting of divine miracles, Mark 6.52.

7. A distrusting of the Almighty, Psalm. 78.17, 18, 19, 20.

8. A slighting of the mercies of God, Deuteronomy. 32.15.

9. A slighting of Gods threats and judgments, Jer. 5.3.-44.16

10. Abuse of Gods lenity, bountifulness, patience, and long-suffering, Romans
2.4, 5.

11. A desire of Gods departure from us, Job 21.14.

12. A greedy affection to sin, Ephesians. 4.18, 19.

13. A despising of the blessed means of salvation, Psalm. 81.11, 12. Jer.
32.33. Zech. 7.9, 10, 11, 12. Acts 2.51.

14. A not being bettered by the means, but rather the contrary, Isa. 6.9, 10.

15. A growing worse and worse after judgments, Exodus 8.15. -- 9.34. Psalm.
106.43.

16. A wilful provocation, Number. 14.11. Psalm. 95.8.

17. Pride against God, and cruelty against the people of God, Exodus 5.2.

18. Wilful and desperate speeches, Jer. 18.12.

19. Opposition of Gods people in their service to him, Exodus 13.15. Deuteronomy. 2.30.

20. War against the people of God, Josh. 11.20.

. 6. What means has God appointed for brokenness of heart?
1. THe word powerfully preached, Jer. 23.29.

2. Attendance unto, and hearing of the word preached, 2 Kings 22.19.

3. A sight and sense of our own sins, Ezra 9.6. Psalm. 31.9, 10, -- 38.3, 4,
17, 18. Jer. 23.9, 10.

4. A consideration of the sins of our Prophets, Jer. 23.9.

5. A consideration of Christ crucified for and by our sins, Zech. 12.10. Acts
2.37.

6. A consideration of the hardness of others hearts, much more of our own,
Mark 3.5.

7. Prayer for contrite spirits, Psalm. 51.10. Ezekiel. 36.26. Luke 18.15.

8. A remembrance of our affliction and misery, Josh. 7.5. Lam. 3.19, 20.

9. A consideration of Gods withdrawing his comfortable presence for us, Lam.
1.16.

10. A consideration of Gods infinite love and grace to our souls, Joel 2.13.
Romans 2.4.

11. A consideration of the death of Gods Saints, who are as the pillars of the
places where they live and abide, Isa. 38.2. -- 57.1.

12. A consideration of Gods judgments on others, who have been hardened in
sin, Heb. 3.8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

13. An actuating of our faith in respect of the precious promises of softning
hearts, Ezekiel. 11.19. -- 36.26.

. 7. What are the means both for the obtaining and increasing of Faith?
1. THe preaching of the word John 4.42-5.24. Acts 13.48. -- 14.22. --
16.14.32, 34. Acts 18.8. Romans 1.16, 17. -- 10.8, 14, 17. Ephesians. 1.13.

2. The influence and assistance of the Spirit concurring with the word, 1 Cor.
2.4, 5.

3. A forsaking of our own legal righteousness, Romans 3.27. -- 9.30, 31. Phil.
3.8, 9.

4. Godly conference with others, John 4.7, 29, 39. Acts 17.2.4.

5. Due administration of the Sacraments of Baptism, Romans 4.11. Heb. 10.22, 23.
The Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.4, 16. Gal. 3.1.


6. Fervent prayer and wrestling with God, Luke 17.5. -- 22.32. Ephesians. 3.16, 17.
1 Thessalonians. 3.10.

7. A complaining of our own unbelief, Mark 9.23, 24.

8. Experiences of Gods former dealings, 1 Samuel 17.37. 2 Cor. 1.10.

9. A consideration of the faithfulness of God in his Promises, Heb. 11.11.

10. A drawing nigh to God with an heart sprinkled from an evil conscience,
Heb. 10.22, 23.

. 8. What are the signs of a true justifying Faith?
1. THe blessed fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23. 1 Timothy 2.15. -- 6.11.

2. All the graces linked together in that golden chain, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.

3. A love of Christ, John 16.17. 2 Timothy 1.13. Philem. 5. 1 Pet. 1.8. 1 John
5.1.

4. A love of the Saints, Ephesians. 1.15. Col. 1.4.

5. Love and peace with the brethren, Ephesians. 6.23.

6. Love and hope of salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8.

7. A joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Romans 5.1, 2.

8. Patience in waiting for the Promises, Isa. 28.16. Heb. 6.12, 15.

9. Patience in enduring affliction, 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. James 1.3. Rev. 3.10.

10. Hope in God, 1 Cor. 13.13. 1 Pet. 1.21.

11. Repentance from dead works, Heb. 6.1.

12. Righteousness, peace and charity out of a pure heart, 1 Timothy 2.15. 2 Timothy
2.22.

13. A heart weaned from the world, 1 John 5.4, 5.

14. A resistance of Satan, and his fiery darts of temptation, Ephesians. 6.16. 1
Pet. 5.9.

15. A confidence in Christ, without being ashamed, Romans 10.12. 2 Timothy 1.12.

16. A firm resolution to cling to Christ, maugre all discouragements, Mat
15.28. Romans 8.35, 36.

17. A relying upon Gods power, when all worldly means fail, Romans 4.18, 19, 20.

18. A relying on mercy, not upon merit, Romans 4.5. Phil. 3.9.

19. A throwing our selves on God, though he frown on us, Job 13.15.

20. A pure heart, and a good conscience, Romans 5.1. 1 Timothy 1.5, 19. Heb. 10.22.

21. A sanctified life, or pure conversation, Acts 15.9. -- 26.18. Heb. 11.7.
James 2.17, 18.

22. Obedience to God in things contrary to, or above humane Reason, Romans 11.7,
8, 11.

23. Fervent and hearty prayer, Romans 5.1, 2. Ephesians. 3.12. Jam. 1.6. Mark 9.24.

24. A contempt of the world in respect of the heavenly inheritance, Heb.
11.24, 25, 26.

25. The seal of Gods Spirit, which is the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians.
1.13, 14. 1 John 5.6.

26. A glorifying of God, Romans 4.20.

27. Thankfulness for the promises, as for the performance, Heb. 11.13.

28. A disregard, and defiance of the tyranny of man, Psalm. 56.4, 11.

29. A sense of our own infidelity, and an earnest desire of the increase of
our faith, Mark 9.24.

30. A true, real and cordial confession of faith, John 20.28. Acts 19.18. Romans
10.10.

31. A constancy in our holy profession, 2 Cor. 1.24.

32. An earnest longing after the coming of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.7, 8.

. 9. What motives to Evangelical Repentance?
1. SIn laid open before us, to the conviction of conscience, Acts 2.37, 38.

2. A consideration of Gods Judgments threatened, Ezekiel. 18.30. Jonah 3.4, 5.
Jer. 4.3, 4. -- 6.26. -- 26.4. Amos 4.12. Luke 13.3, 5. Rev. 2.4, 5, 16.

3. A consideration of the Lords chastisements and corrections on us, Lam.
3.19, 20. Rev. 3.19.

4. A fear of the enemy prevailing against us and over us, Judges 10.9, 10, 15,
16. 2 Chronicles. 12.5, 6. Jer. 6.26.

5. A fear of Gods removing the Candlestick from us, Rev. 2.5.

6. A consideration of the great Judgement-day, Acts 17.30, 31.

7. A consideration of Gods mercies and grace, Hosea 6.1. Jer. 18.8. Joel 2.13.
Zech. 1.3.

8. A consideration of Gods patience and goodness, Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9.

9. A consideration of Gods travelings after our souls salvation, Ezekiel. 33.11.

10. The approaching of Gods Kingdom, or of the beauty of Religion, Mat. 3.2,
4. Mark 1.15. Acts 17.30. Ezekiel. 43.10, 11.

11. A consideration of the Promises of Remission upon our Repentance, Isa.
55.6, 7. Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. Acts 3.19.

12. A consideration of the Promise of Life upon Repentance, Ezekiel. 18.32, 38.

13. A consideration of the Promise of Gods communion and fellowship with us,
Isa. 57.15.

14. A consideration of Christ crucified for us, Zech. 12.10, 11.

15. A consideration of Gods former dealings with us in mercy, Hosea 12.3, 4,
5, 6.

16. A hope and belief of Gods acceptance when we come to him, Jer. 3.22.

17. The publication of Christ's marriage with our poor souls, Jer. 3.14.

18. A consideration of those comforts that await Repentance, Mat. 5.4. Luke
15.7, 17, 18.

. 10. What are the signs of true and Evangelical Repentance?
1. AN abhorring of sin, and of our selves for sin, Job 42.6. Amos 5.15.

2. A godly shame for sin, Ezra 9.6. Jer. 3.24, 25. -- 31.19. Ezekiel. 16.61, 63.

3. A mourning for sin, because God is offended, 1 Samuel 7.2. Psalm. 51.4. Zech.
12.10, 11.

4. Sorrowing mingled with hope, Ezra 10.1, 2.

5. Serious carefulness, 2 Cor. 7.11.

6. Judicious clearing, 2 Cor. 7.11.

7. Holy indignation, 2 Cor. 7.11.

8. Filial fear, 2 Cor. 7.11.

9. Eager desire, 2 Cor. 7.11.

10. Godly zeal, 2 Cor. 7.11.

11. Impartial revenge on our selves for sin, 2 Cor. 7.11.

12. Works meet for Repentance, Mat. 3.8. Acts 26.20. Isa. 1.16, 17. Hosea 12.6.

13. A forsaking of sin, Ezekiel. 14.6. -- 18.28, 33. Romans 6.6. Heb. 6.1. Isa.
30.22.

14. Self-denial, Luke 15.19.

15. A justifying of God, or giving him the glory, Hos. 14.1, 2. Luke 7.29.

16. A disesteem of all worldly helps, Jer. 3.23.

17. A submission to all offices of humility upon sense of sin, Luke 7.37, 38.

18. A dear love to Gods Ministers, whom God has made instruments of our
Repentance, Acts 16.14, 15.

19. An endeavor after this work on our selves, to work it on others, Psalm.
51.13. Ezekiel. 18.30.

20. An earnest longing after Christ's coming to Judgment, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9, 10.

. 11. How may a Believer Redeemed by Christ, acknowledge his thankfulness to
Christ?
1. BY a continual remembrance of Gods goodness to us, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4.

2. By telling others what Christ has done for our souls, Psalm. 34.3, 4. Ephesians.
1.3.

3. By walking holily, and without blame before Christ in love, Psalm. 116.8, 9.
Ephesians. 1.4. Phil. 1.11. Col. 2.6, 7.

4. By rejoicing in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Psalm. 34.2. -- 63.7.
Ephesians. 5.11.

5. By calling on God, and paying our vows, Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14.

6. By endeavoring the conversion of others, Psalm. 51.12, 13.

7. By administering to the necessity of the Saints, Heb. 13.16.

8. By singing of Psalms, making melody in our hearts unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19,
20.

9. By worthily receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.

10. By loving the Lord Jesus Christ, Cant. 1.3. Luke 7.47. 1 John 4.19.

11. By denying our selves and highest excellencies in respect of Christ, Rev.
4.10.

12. By a public profession of Christ's sovereignty, Phil. 2.11.

13. By suffering willingly for the Name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Pet. 4.14, 16.

. 12. What are the signs of a sincere love to Christ?
1. UPright walking with God, Cant. 1.3. John 14.15, 21, 23. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 John
2.5, -- 15.

2. A fainting and languishing desire after Christ, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. -- 5.8.

3. A love to the members of Christ, 1 John 4.12, 20.

4. A hating of evil, Psalm. 97.10.

5. A relieving of the poor members of Christ, Mat. 25.45. 1 John 3.17.

6. A full assurance of faith, Cant. 6.3. Romans 8.38, 39.

7. A disesteem of all things in comparison of Christ, Mat. 10.27. Phil. 3.8.

8. A conquering of all difficulties and discouragements for Christ, Cant. 8.6,
7. Romans 8.35. 2 Cor. 5.14.

9. A heart and tongue enlarged in the praises of Christ, Cant. 5.10. to the
end.

10. All the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

11. A contemplation of Christ's love, and desires after further sense of it,
Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19.

12. A restlesness of the soul in the non-enjoyment of Christ, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3,
4.

13. A contentedness to suffer censures, disgraces, and death for Christ, Cant.
5.6, 7, 8. Acts 21.13.

14. A rejoicing in Christ, whom we love, Psalm. 5.11. John 14.28.

15. A patient waiting for Christ's appearing, 2 Thessalonians. 3.5.

. 13. What are the causes in us of Christ withdrawing from us?
1. Covenant Breaking, Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17.

2. Idolatry, or Spiritual whoredom, Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17, 18. Psalm. 78.58, 60.
Hosea 5.3, 4, 6.

3. The pride of our hearts, Hosea 5.5, 6.

4. Hypocrisy in Gods service, Hosea 5.6.

5. Infidelity, and frowardness of hearts, Deuteronomy. 32.20.

6. Leaving our first love, Rev. 2.4, 5.

7. Carnal security, Psalm. 30.6, 7. Cant. 5.3.

8. Carelessness of accepting the seasons of grace, whether Christ draw near in
Ordinances, or in inward dispositions, Cant. 5.3, 6.

9. A preferring of the creature before Christ, Isa. 57.17.

10. A weariness of Gods Ordinances, Ier. 33.38, 39. Mal. 3.7.

11. A withdrawing from God in the duties of our obedience, Deuteronomy. 32.20. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Hosea 5.4, 6.

. 14. What are the causes for which Christ on his part withdraws himself from
us?
1. TO try us what is in our hearts, Deuteronomy. 32.20. 2 Chronicles. 32.31.

2. To bring us to an humble acknowledgement of our sins, Job 13.23. to the
end. Hosea 5.15. Deuteronomy. 31.17. Psalm. 30.7.

3. To prevent Spiritual pride in us, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.

4. To make us pray earnestly to him, Psalm. 3.7, 8. -- 13.1. -- 77.1, 2, 3. --
88.1, 2, 3, etc.

5. To exercise our faith in his Name, Isa. 50.10.

6. To make us seek him in the use of all means, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. -- 5.6, 8.

7. To make us prize him, and highly to esteem of him, Cant. 5.8. -- 8.1.

8. To make us hold him more surely when once we have found him, Cant. 3.4.

9. To stir up and exercise in us all our Spiritual graces, Cant. 5.6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11.

. 15. What means for the recovery of Christ's comfortable presence?
1. A Search after, and an acknowledgement of those sins which caused his
withdrawings, Psalm. 32.4, 5. Lam. 3.40, 50.

2. An hearty bemoaning, shame and repenting for sin, Ier. 31.18, 19, 20. Psalm.
34.18. Isa. 57.15.

3. A waiting upon God in the use of his Ordinances, Psa. 27.13, 14. Cant. 1.8.
Isa. 8.17. Luke 24.32. 1 John 1.3, 4.

4. A diligent enquiry after Christ, Cant. 3.3, 4.

5. A moaning and weeping for his loss till he be found, John 20.11, 13, 14,
15, 16.

6. A drawing nigh to God in the duty of prayer, Lam. 3.57. Psalm. 51.12. --
145.18. James 4.8.

7. A pressing of God in prayer with his word and promises, Psalm. 119.49, 50.

8. A due receiving of Christ in the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.16.

9. A feeding upon Christ Spiritually, by a true and lively faith, John 6.56.
Isa. 50.10.

10. A recourse to our former experiences, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10.

11. An hope that for all this we shall enjoy Christ, Psa. 43.5.

12. A listening and submitting to the voice of his Spirit, Rev. 3.20.

13. A walking in his statutes, and keeping his commandments, Lev. 26.3, 11, 12.

. 16. Of what use is Christ to a Believer already justified?
1. CHrist is wisdom and sanctification unto us, 1 Cor. 1.30.

2. Christ is the satisfaction of all our desires, John 6.35.

3. Christ is our example in forgiving of others, Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.12, 13.

4. Christ is our example in suffering injuries with patience, Heb. 12.3. 1
Pet. 2.21.

5. Christ is our example in holiness, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.

6. Christ is our example in love, Ephesians. 5.1, 2.

7. Christ is our example in meekness, lowliness, humility, Mat. 11.29. John
13.14, 15. Phil. 2.5.

8. Christ is the way and means for our access to God the Father, Romans 5.2.
Heb. 10.19, 20.

9. Christ is both the representer and the granter of our requests, doing for
us whatsoever we desire in his Name, John 14.13, 14. Rev. 8.3.

10. Christ is our consolation in sufferings, 2 Cor. 1.5.

11. Christ is our continual joy, Romans 5.11.

12. Christ is the death of sin in us, Romans 8.10. 1 Cor. 15.57. Heb. 9.14.

13. Christ crucifies the world in us, Gal. 6.14.

14. Christ is our freedom, the end of the law for righteousness, Romans 8.2. --
10.4. Gal. 5.1.

15. Christ is our life, the very life of grace in us, John 14.6. Romans 8.11.
Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 3.17.

16. Christ makes intercession for us, Romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25. 1 John 2.1.

17. Christ is our upholder in temptations, Heb. 2.18.

18. Christ is our harbinger for heaven, John 14.2, 3.

19. Christ is our Master, Mat 23.8, 10. our Lord, Romans 14.9. our Head, Ephesians.
4.15. our Master and Lord, John 13.13.

20. Christ is our inabler to do all things, Phil. 4.13.

21. Christ is both the Author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2.

22. Christ is our Savior, yea salvation it self to us, Romans 5.9, 10. 1 Thessalonians.
5.9. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.

23. Christ is our very being, the food, and soul of our souls, John 6.55. Acts
17.28.

24. Christ is our all in all, Col. 3.11.

SECT. 7. Of some Questions or Cases of Conscience, which at the Conference
were propounded and answered.
THe Questions concerning Cases of Conscience, were these and the like:

1. Whether a Believer may profit more, or be more intent in public, or in
secret Prayer.
IT was answered, That this Case might better be resolved by experience then
Scripture; and accordingly some preferred public Prayer for these Reasons: --

1. Because in public they are stirred up by others; but in private or secret
Prayer, they had none others to join with them.

2. Because in public they that exercised had more excellent gifts, which
exceedingly tend to their edification; but in secret they found themselves
weak, and dull, and dead-hearted ordinarily.

Others answered otherwise, and preferred secret Prayer on these grounds: --

1. Because in secret they could confess more inlargedly and feelingly their
own sins, then others could do it for them in public, to whom they were not
particularly known.

2. Because in secret they had fewer occasions of distraction, then in public,
and consequently they kept closer to God in the Duty.

3. Because they found by experience, that in secret their hearts were more up;
and when they themselves were to perform in public, the Society whom they
joined with, did ordinarily more straiten them.

4. Because in secret they could take more pains with their heart; as in midst
of Prayer to prostrate, or by breaking off to meditate, etc. which conveniently
they could not do in public.

In conclusion this Case was resolved, That some Believers may profit more, or
be more intent in public, others in private: And the reason rendered was,
Because the Spirit that helps us to pray, is a free agent, and works diversely
in the hearts of his people, to show the diversity of his gifts, and his
diverse manner of working.

. 2. Whether a Christian in his own apprehension decaying in Grace, may not yet
grow in Grace? and if so, What are the reasons of his wrong apprehensions?
TO the first Question it was answered Affirmatively; as in case of temptation,
Psalm. 73.21, 22, 23. or in a Spiritual desertion, Psalm. 51.12. Psalm. 88. Isa.
49.14.

To the second Question these reasons were given in: --

1. The neglect of Self-examination.

2. The want of Gods lively Ordinances.

3. A too much eying of our afflictions.

4. A too much poring upon sin, without any thoughts of Christ or Free Grace.

5. The want of the light of Gods amiable countenance.

6. The insensibleness of grace, which is of a Spiritual nature, and not so
easily to be perceived.

7. A present deadness or dullness of Spirit.

8. A misapplying of some one or more places of Scripture, as Heb. 6.6, etc.

9. Weakness of knowledge, or want of judgment in such experimental passages,
especially in the beginning of Christianity.

10. The distemper of the soul (especially in desertion) when as in the
distemper of the body, a man thinking or speaking idly, we say it is not he,
but his sickness; so it is in this case.

In conclusion, these reasons were approved; but we agreed, That all the
succeeding Answers or Resolutions should be proved out of Gods holy word.

. 3. What signs of true grace, though for the present but small or weak grace?
1. A Willingness to be admonished, and to have our sins discovered, Job 13.23.
Psalm. 141.5.

2. A consideration of our sins, with endeavors to turn to our God, Psalm.
119.59. Lam. 3.40.

3. A feeling sin to be a burden, Mat. 11.28. and a sorrow for sin, Zech.
12.10.

4. A loathing of our sins, Ezekiel. 36.31. 2 Cor. 7.11.

5. An hatred of the occasions of evil, Jude 23.

6. A resolution to relinquish sin, Psalm. 17.3. Prove. 28.13. Luke 15.17, 18. 1
John 1.9.

7. A weak apprehension of the promises of God concerning forgiveness, Psalm.
31.22.

8. An importunate enquiry after Christ and salvation, upon sense of sin, Acts
2.37. -- 13.12. -- 16.30.

9. An hunger and desire after Christ, Psalm. 42.1, 2. -- 107.9. -- 145.19. Mat.
5.6.

10. A precious esteem of Christ, John 8.42. Phil. 3.7, 8. 1 Pet. 2.6, 7.

11. A love of the word, Psa. 119.103. John 10.4, 27. 1 Pet. 2.2.

12. A Spiritual joy in the word, Psalm. 119.77.

13. A receiving of the word with all readiness, Acts 16.14. -- 17.11.

14. A longing desire to keep Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.5.

15. A sorrow that others keep not Gods Law, Psalm. 119.136. 2 Pet. 2.8.

16. A love of the brethren, Psalm. 16.3. -- 137.6. 1 John 3.14.

17. A Spiritual joy in the Churches deliverance, Psalm. 68.3. -- 106.5. Isa.
66.10. -- 61.10.

18. A reverence and fear of God, Heb. 12.28. and trusting in God, Prove. 30.5.

19. A delight in doing well, Prove. 21.15.

20. An hatred of evil Assemblies and wicked Society, Psalm. 26.4, 5. -- 129.21,
22.

21. A holy despair in our selves, through our own abilities to attain heaven,
Ezra 9.6. Luke 15.17.

22. A poverty of Spirit, and purity in heart, Mat. 5.3, 8. Mark 9.24.

23. An holy endeavor after growth in grace, Phil. 3.13. 2 Pet. 3.18.

24. A continual conflict betwixt Flesh and Spirit, Romans 7.22, 23, 24.

25. A competent measure of Spiritual knowledge, Acts 26.18. Col. 3.10.

26. A careful endeavor after perseverance, Psalm. 119.111, 112. John 8.31. Gal.
3.3.

27. The unutterable sighs and groans of the Spirit in prayer, Romans 8.26.

28. A sense and bewailing of the hardness of our hearts, Isa. 63.17.

29. A pure love of God, and desire to fear his Name, Neh. 1.11. Psalm. 18.1.
Isa. 26.8, 9. Romans 8.28.

30. A godly conversation, Psalm. 16.8-50.23. Acts 2.25.

. 4. Whether is a Christian always bound to reprehend an offender? or in what
Cases may he forbear?
IT is answered, That a Christian is not bound ever to reprove, but he may
forbear in such cases as these: --

1. When the party offending is a scorner, and we perceive he will but scoff at
it, Prove. 9.8. -- 23.9. Mat. 7.6.

2. When the offender sins of infirmity, Gal. 6.12.

3. When the offended is not able to convince the offender that it is a sin,
Job 6.25. Tit. 1.9.

4. When there is no hopes to prevail in respect of the evil times, Amos 5.13.

5. When the offenses are small, and but little, Prove. 19.11. -- 20.3.

6. When we know not certainly whether the supposed offense be a sin, or not,
Josh. 20.16, etc.

7. When the reprehender is faulty in the same thing, Mat. 7.3, 4, 5.

8. When the party offending is not capable of reproof, as in case a man be an
idiot, or drunk, or in the height of his passion, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37.

9. When our reproof may breed some dissension, or imminent and dangerous
disturbance; as in case it be amongst rude, boisterous and desperate company,
Mat. 7.6.

10. When the offender is obstinately and wilfully bent to go on in his sin,
Mark 14.60, 61. -- 15.4, 5.

. 5. How may we know whether we profit by afflictions?
WE may know by these signs:

1. If by affliction we come to be sensible of Gods heavy displeasure, Deuteronomy.
31.17. Ruth 1.13. Mic. 6.9 1 Cor. 11.37.

2. If by affliction we are drawn to search our ways, 1 Kings 8.38. Ezra 9.14.
Psa. 32.4, 5. Lam. 1.5. -- 3.39, 40.

3. If by afflictions we are soundly and sincerely humbled, 2 Kings 22.19, 20.
Job 1.20. 1 Pet. 5.6.

4. If our afflictions work on us to make our peace with our God, Isa. 27.5.
Hosea 5.15.

5. If by afflictions we be drawn to make and pay vows of better obedience,
Psalm. 66.13, 14.

6. If in our greatest afflictions we rest upon God, 2 Chro. 14.11. and wait on
God, Psalm. 37.7, 34. Micah 7.9.

7. If in our afflictions we mind the promises, and roll our selves on them, 1 Samuel 30.6. Psalm. 119.49, 50, 92.

8. If in our afflictions we clear God when he is judged, Psalm. 119.75.

9. If for afflictions we bless God, and his afflicting hand, Job. 1.21.

10. If by afflictions our graces are stirred up and exercised, Job. 13.15.
Psalm. 42.5. Jer. 31.18. Romans 5.3. 2 Cor. 1.10. Heb. 10.34. James 1.3.

11. If by our afflictions our prayers are more fervent, Neh. 1.3, 4. Psalm.
77.2. -- 116.3. -- 142.4, 5.

12. If in our affliction we gather in some experiences of Gods love and help,
Psalm. 34.46. -- 66.16, 17.

13. If in our afflictions we submit willingly and cheerfully to Gods good will
and pleasure, Levit. 26.41. 1 Samuel 3.18.

14. If in afflictions we look more at the hand of God that strikes, then at
the instrument, 1 Samuel 3.18. 2 Samuel 16.11.

15. If in affliction we reject all worldly sinful hopes, and unlawful means of
deliverance, and rest only on God, 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. Heb. 11.25, 26.

16. If in present afflictions we gather assurance of deliverance from former
experiences, 1 Samuel 17.37. Psa. 77.9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 3.11.

17. If by afflictions we find corruptions to weaken, and to be mortified,
Isa. 27.9.

18. If our afflictions beget assurance of our adoption, Heb. 12.8.
sanctification, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. glorification, Mat. 5.12. 2 Cor.
4.17. 2 Pet. 2.8.

. 6. How should a Christian fortify himself against the reproaches of wicked
men?
1. LEt him consider the command of God in this case, Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.19. 1
Pet. 3.9.

2. Let him look on reproaches as the very hand of God, 2 Samuel 16.11.

3. Let him consider what an honor it is to suffer reproaches for Christ, Acts
5.41.

4. Let him eye the blessedness of those that are reproached for Christ, Mat.
5.11, 12. 2 Timothy 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.14. -- 4.14.

5. Let him consider it as the lot of Gods servants to suffer reproaches, 2 Timothy 3.12.

6. Let him consider that in his reproaches he suffers with and for Christ,
John 15.20.

7. Let him consider, that though the wicked reproach, yet God will in his time
justify and approve, Psalm. 37.33. -- 147.11.

8. Let him consider, that the Lord in due time will both clear his servants,
and punish the reproachers, Micah 7.8, 9, 10.

9. Let him set before him the examples of Christ, his Apostles, and Prophets,
Isa. 53.7. Mat. 5.12. John 15.18. 1 Cor. 4.13. 1 Pet. 2.21.

10. Let him pray with ferven^^y and faith, Job 16.20. Psalm. 109.1, 2, 4. 1
Cor. 4.13.

11. Let him be sure to keep a clear conscience within, 1 Pet. 4.15.

12. Let him refer the issue of all unto God, 2 Samuel 3.39.

13. Let him exercise that heavenly duty of the life of Faith, and fasten it on
these promises, Psalm. 37.6. -- 68.13. Isa. 61.7. 1 Pet. 1.7. -- 3.14. -- 4.14.

. 7. Whether a true Believer may not sometimes doubt? and what are the several
causes of doubting?
IT was answered, That without controversy (and as the following Texts will
evince) a true Believer may doubt of his salvation; and the causes are these:
--

1. The prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 38.17. -- 73.2, 3, 12, 13.

2. His own want of necessary provisions for this life, Numb. 20.3, 4, 5.

3. Suspension of divine favor, Job 13.24. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9, 10.

4. Imminent dangers and fears, Exodus 14.10, 11, 12. Mat. 8.25, 26. -- 14.30,
31.

5. Apprehensions of Gods denying his prayers, Psalm. 22.1, 2.

6. The afflicting hand of God lying sore on his soul, Psa. 116.10, 11. Lam.
3.17, 18.

7. Mistaken apprehensions and weakness of judgment, Mat. 14.26. Mark 6.49,
50. Luke 24.37.

8. Relapses, or reinsnarements into former sins, Psalm. 51.8, 12.

9. The littleness or smalness of faith, Mat. 14.30. Mark 9.24.

10. A poring on, or a studying too much of the life sense, Luke 1.18, 20. John
20.25.

11. A want of the true understanding of some divine mysteries, John 6.60.

12. A distrusting of Gods promises, upon humane reports, Numb. 13.32, 33. --
34.1, 2, 3.

. 8. What are the cures or remedies of doubtings incident to Believers?
1. FAith in the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 11.20. -- 14.23.

2. A wary and filial fear, Heb. 4.1.

3. A hope in God, Psalm. 42.11. and waiting on God, Isa. 8.17. Jer. 14.19, 22.

4. Earnest prayer: 1. Against doubting, Mat. 21.21, 22. Mark 9.24. Luke 17.5.
-- 22.32. 2 Cor. 12.1, 8, 9. and 2. To have our doubts resolved, Judges 6.37,
38.

5. A depending on the faithfulness of God and his promises, Heb. 10.23. --
11.11.

6. A striving to keep down the life of sense, Mat. 6.28, 29, 30, 31.

7. A recalling to mind the Lords dispensations in our former afflictions,
Lam. 3.18, 19, 20, 21.

8. A recalling to mind Gods former love to our souls, Psalm. 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Lam. 3.22, 24.

9. Diligence in the use of all means, Psalm. 73.17. Cant. 3.1, 2, 3.

10. A trusting in Gods Name, making him our stay and support, Psalm. 73.26.
Isa. 50.10.

. 9. What are those Remora's that hinder the growth of Christianity, or the
spreading of the Kingdom of Christ?
1. Want of a pious and powerful Ministry, Pro. 29.18. Romans 10.14, 15.

2. Negligence of the Ministry in place, Jer. 1.21, 22, 23. Ezekiel. 34.4, 5, 6.

3. A scandalous and vicious Ministry, 1 Samuel 2.17. Jer. 23.1, 2. Mal. 2.8.
Mat. 23.13.

4. The deceits and sophistry of false Prophets, Jer. 27.14. -- 28.15. Ezekiel.
13.6, 10. 2 Pet. 2.18.

5. A presuming to teach others without Gods call, Jer. 23.32.

6. A despising of the Ministry of the Gospel, Mark 6.3. John 8.57.

7. Envy and railing against the Word and Ministry, Acts 13.45, 46.

8. Persecution of Gods Messengers, Acts 12.1, 2, 3, 4.

9. Ambitious, factious, and malicious spirits, 3 John 10.

10. Fomentors of divisions amongst the people of God, Romans 16.17, 18. 2 Pet.
2.2, 3.

11. Enemies of the truth and power of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.6.

12. The evil example of Superiors, 1 Samuel 2.23, 34. 1 Kings 14.16. John 7.47,
48.

13. Seducing spirits, 1 Kings 12.27, 28, 29, 30. Acts 14.19. -- 20.30. 1 Timothy
4.1.

14. Scandalous Professors, Heb. 12.14, 15.

15. Evil Society, Psalm. 18.26. Prove. 4.14, 15, 16.

16. Conspiracy of the wicked, Acts 19.29, 34.

17. Satan and Antichrist, Zech. 3.1. 2 Cor. 4.4. Rev. 8.10, 11, etc.

18. Broaching and fomenting of errors, and especially of idolatry, 1 Kings
12.30. Acts 19.27, 28. 2 Peter 2.2. Revel. 2.20.

19. Mistake in the matters of Salvation, Hosea 4.6. John 6.66.

20. A profanation of holy things, 1 Samuel 2.17.

21. A preferring carnal things before Christ, Mat. 8.34. -- 19.22. Acts 19.26.

22. Obstinacy and unbelief, Jer. 44.16. Mat. 13.58. Heb. 3.19. -- 4.2.

23. Slavish fear, John 9.22.

24. Abuse of Christian liberty, 1 Cor. 8.9, 10, 11.

25. A giving offense in things merely indifferent, Romans 14.13. 1 Cor. 10.32,
33.

26. Persecution of the Church, Acts 8.1, 3. Revel. 11.7.

. 10. What means to prefer Unity and Amity amongst Christians.
1. FRequent and fervent prayer, Psalm. 122.6. John 17.11. Romans 15.5, 6. James
5.16.

2. Pithy and pious Exhortations, Romans 12.10, 16. 1 Cor. 1.10. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. 1
Pet. 1.8. -- 4.8.

3. The spirit of meekness and lowliness, of long-suffering and forbearing one
another in love, John 13.14, 15. Romans 12.10. -- 15.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.2, 3. Phil. 2.3.

4. A not rendering evil for evil, 1 Pet. 3.8.9.

5. A restoring such as are fallen with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1, 2.

6. A moderate reprehension of such as are contrary-minded, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.

7. A slighting of slanderous reports, Prove. 25.23.

8. A quelling of the spirit of pride, Prove. 13.10.

9. A seasonable visit of the Brethren, with whom we have had spiritual
commerce, Acts 15.36.

10. Meetings and Conferences about differences that have fallen out, Acts.
15.6.

11. A ready submission to the judgment of one another, according to the Word,
Ephesians. 5.21.

12. An endeavor to speak the same things, and to be of one mind, 1 Cor. 1.10.
Phil. 2.2.

13. A doing of all things in charity, 1 Cor. 16.14.

14. A readiness to forgive, as Christ forgave us, Mat. 18.33. Ephesians. 4.32.

15. A spirit of wisdom and discretion, Proverbs 19.11. Eccles. 7.9.

16. A mortifying of lusts, and subduing of passions, 1 Cor. 3.3. James 4.1.

17. A loving carriage and deportment of the outward man, Prove. 15.1. -- 25.23.

18. A cheerful admission of the weak into Christian-Society, and bearing with
their infirmities, Romans 14.1. -- 15.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

19. An avoiding of such as cause divisions amongst Christians, Romans 16.17.

20. An avoiding of ill speeches one against another, 1 Peter 2.1.

21. A not thinking too highly of our selves, but soberly, acording to the
measure of faith God has given us, Romans 12.3, 4. 1 Cor. 4.6.

22. A desire to do to others, as we wish others to do to us, Mat. 7.12.

23. A study to be quiet, and not to meddle with another man's business, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.

24. A solemn entering into Covenant with God, and with one another, Jer. 50.5.

25. A consideration of the command, Be of the same mind one toward another,
Romans 12.16.

26. A consideration that we all know but in part, and therefore that we should
bear with one another infirmities, 1 Cor. 13.9.

27. A consideration that a passionate, peevish and froward professor is seldom
acquainted with the truth as it is in Jesus, Psalm. 25.9. Proverbs 11.2. --
27.20. Isaiah 28.9. Romans 16.17. James 1.21, 26.

28. A consideration that unity in judgment is the promise and blessing of
another life, and that unity in affection is our present duty, Ephesians. 4.13.
Phil. 3.15, 16.

SECT. 8. Of some Questions or contraverted Points, which at the Conference
were propounded and answered.
THe Questions of contraverted points were these and the like: --

. 1. Whether does God see sin in Believers, so as to be offended at it? and how
may it appear?
1. IT is answered affirmatively, that God does see sin in his Saints, as
appears by these Texts, Exodus 4.14. 1 Samuel 3.12, 13. 2 Samuel 12.9, 10. Psalm.
135.14. Jer. 16.17, 18. Rev. 2.4, 13, 14. though not in reference to their
justification, yet in reference to their conversation and sanctification, which
is but in part.

2. This appears --

1. From the Lords complaining against believers for sin, Isa. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9. Jer. 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

2. From his threats if they do not repent, 2 Samuel 7.14. Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32.
Isa. 1.20. Rev. 2.5, 16. -- 3.8.

3. From his chastisements of them for sin, 2 Samuel 12.15. Psalm. 74.1. -- 99.8.
Amos 3.2. Jer. 30.15. Luke 1.22.

4. From Gods withdrawing the comforts of his Spirit for sin, Psalm. 51.12.

5. From the Prayers of Believers to God, for the hiding of his face from their
sins, and removing of his anger for their sins, Psalm. 6.16. -- 32.5, 6. -- 51.9.

6. From the Lords reproving of his people for their sins, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9.
Mat. 16.23.

. 2. Whether are Believers to repent for their sins? and upon what grounds?
1. ANswered, That they are to repent, as appears, Job 42.6. Jer. 31.19. Rev.
2.5. -- 3.3.

2. The grounds or reasons are these following --

1. Because God looks for repentance from them, Zech. 6.6.

2. Because God commands them to repent, Rev. 2.5, 16. -- 3.3, 19.

3. Because it is Gods pleasure that we should feel the bitterness of sin, as
well as the sweet of sin, Jer. 2.19.

4. Because believers sin as well as others, 1 King. 8.46. 1 John 1.10.

5. Because in believers there is a proclevity and disposition to all sin,
Psalm. 51.5. Romans 7.24.

6. Because repentance is a means for the diverting of judgments from a Land,
or a person, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Joel 2.13.

7. Because repentance is a means for obtaining mercies, Judge. 20.26. Neh. 1.9.

8. Because repentance is a means to Pardon, 1 Chronicles. 7.14. Salvation, 2 Corinthians. 7.10.


9. Because repentance is a necessary fruit of faith, Zech. 12.10. Acts 19.18.

10. Because after repentance we may expect comfort, Psalm. 126.5, 6. Mat. 5.4.
2 Cor. 7.9, 13.

11. Because that therein we shall give God the glory of his Justice, Psalm.
51.4. Rev. 16.9.

. 3. Whether are Believers to pray for pardon of sin? and what are the reasons?
1. ANswered, that believers are to pray for pardon, as may appear from these
Scriptures, Number. 14.19. 2 Samuel 24.10. Dan. 9.19. Psalm. 25.11. Mat. 6.12.

2. The Reasons are these and the like:

1. Because Christ taught his Disciples so to pray, Matthew. 6.12.

2. Because believers have renewed infirmities, Numb. 14.11, 19.

3. Because God is ready to pardon them that pray for it, Psalm. 86.5.

4. Because God has promised to pardon the sins of his Saints, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
Jer. 33.3, 8.

5. Because whatsoever we read in Scripture of pardon, it is always in
reference to sins past, Isa. 43.25. Jer. 33.8. Psalm. 79.8, etc.

6. Because yet the Judge has not solemnly pronounced the sentence of pardon,
neither will he till the last day, Acts 3.19.

. 4. Whether is it the duty of Christians to observe the Lord's Day (now being
the first day of the week) as a Christian Sabbath? and what grounds for it?
1. ANswered, That it is their duty; and proved from Mark 16.2. John 20.19, 26.
Acts 1.1, 2, 3. -- 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Rev. 1.10.

2. The grounds are these and the like:

1. Because Christ as that day did perfect the work of Redemption for our
eternal rest, Mat. 28.1, 2.

2. Because Christ did appear to his disciples upon that day more especially,
John 20.19, 26.

3. Because (as it is observed generally) the Holy Ghost as that day did fall
upon the Apostles, being met together in one place, Acts 2.1.

4. Because upon the same day the Apostles ordinarily dispensed the Word,
Sacraments, and other Ordinances, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.

5. Because such things as are named the Lords in Scripture, are ever of the
Lords institution; as, The Word of the Lord, 1 Timothy 6.3. The Cup of the Lord, 1
Cor. 11.27. The Supper of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.20. and so The Lords day, Rev.
1.10.

6. Because God does seem to honor the first day of the week above any other
day, as appears by his great works done upon that day; viz. In the creation he
made that day the first fruits of time; and in it he created the highest
heavens, the place of the eternal Sabbath; and in it he brought forth the light
of the world, answerable to which is the day of Christ's Resurrection, wherein
the Son of Righteousness, the true light of the world rose up, and became the
first fruits of them that sleep, and by virtue thereof will bring all his
Saints into eternal rest, Genesis 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. compared with Mal. 4.2. John
1.9. 1 Cor. 15.20. Heb. 4.9, 10, 11.

. 5. Whether may not Christians lawfully sing David's or Moses Psalms? and how
may it appear?
1. ANswered affirmatively: Ephesians. 5.19. where, under those three heads, of
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual songs, David's Psalms are contained.

2. This is proved by Precepts, Paterns and Reasons.

1. By Precepts, Ephesians 5.19. Colossians 3.16. James 5.13.

2. By Paterns: 1. Of Christ himself and his Apostles, Mat. 26.30. 2. Of Paul
and Silas, Acts 16.25. 3. Of the Church, Rev. 15.3.


3. By Reasons, as --

1. Because the people of God have used the very same words of David's Psalms in
singing, 2 Chronicles. 15.13. compared with Psalm. 136. and Ezra 3.11. compared with
Psalm. 118. and Rev. 15.4. compared with Psalm. 86.9. and Exodus 15.2. compared
with Psalm. 118.14.

2. Because Paul directing to sing Psalms, gives the very same word or title as
David gives in his Psalms, James 5.13. compared with Psalm. 95.2.

3. Because David's Psalms were indicted by the Spirit of God, as well as any
others that confessedly may be sung, 2 Samuel 23.2.

. 6. Whether admitting of or joining with scandalous persons in the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, and not endeavoring to keep them back (whiles such) be not
sin in the admitters and joyners? and how may it appear?
1. ANswered Affirmatively, That it is sin, 1. In the admitters, Mat. 7.6. 2.
In the joyners, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.


2. This appears to be sin --

1. In the admitters, by these grounds: --

1. Because it is against the command, of keeping unclean persons from such
like holy things, Number. 9.6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 23.19.

2. Because Christ cast out the man that came without his wedding garment, Mat.
22.11.

3. Because this was the practice of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy
1.20.

2. In the joyners, by these grounds: --

1. Because they are forbidden expressly to join with such, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.

2. Because scandalous persons ought to be censured, and so to be esteemed of
the joyners as Heathens and Publicans, Mat. 18.17.

3. In both admitters and joyners, by these grounds: --

1. Because God has forbidden us to eat with such, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.

2. Because by this means their sins would become ours, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. Gal.
5.9, 10.

3. Because the Ordinance of the Lords Supper is defiled thereby; which is not
to be understood simply in it self, but in some sort (i.) to them who are
scandalous, and to them who join with such as they know to be scandalous: And
this appears --

1. In that the Temple, which had a sacramental signification of Christ, was
polluted by the coming of profane persons into it, Ezekiel. 23.38, 39.

2. In that the Sacrifices of old were defiled by profane persons, Haggai
2.11, 12, 13, 14.

3. In that the profane are as Swine, which trample the pearls under their
feet, Mat. 7.6.

See these Proofs enlarged in Gelespi. Aarons Rod blossoming, l. 3. chapter 15.

. 7. In such a case, what is the duty of admitters and joyners, to keep
themselves blameless, and the Ordinance undefiled?
1. IT is the duty of admitters --

1. To eye and observe the flock, over which God has given them charge, Acts
20.17, 28.

2. If any be observed, or brought in as offenders, it is their duty --

1. To admonish them once or twice, Tit. 3.10. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.

2. If that prevail not, to suspend them, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 14, 15.

3. If that prevail not, then to Excommunicate them by the lesser
Excommunication, Matthew. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 Cor. 2.6.

4. If that prevail not, then (in some cases) to Excommunicate them by the
greater Excommunication, 1 Cor. 16.22. Gal. 1.8, 9. 1 John 5.16. This is only
when a man is visibly irrecoverable, or has committed the sin against the holy
Ghost; the case of Julian the Apostate, whom the Church would not pray for, but
prayed against.

2. It is the duty of joyners --

1. To eye and observe one another conversation, so much as they may, Heb.
10.24. and 3.12, 13.

2. If upon observation they find any faulty, then --

1. The Scandal being private, it is the joyners Duty, --

1. To admonish privately betwixt him and the offender alone, Mat. 18.15.

2. If that be not effectual, then to take one or two more with him, Mat. 18.16.

3. If that be not effectual, then to Tell it to the Church, Mat. 18.17.

4. If the Church be corrupt, and neglect its duty, he is then to mourn for it,
1 Cor. 5.2.

2. The Scandal being public, it is the joyners duty immediately to bring it
to the Church, 1 Cor. 5.1. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.

. 8. In what cases is it lawful to enter into fellowship, association,
confederacy and covenants with scandalous sinners? and in what cases is it not
lawful?
1. IT is lawful in some civil affairs to enter into association or Covenants
with them, Jer. 29.7. Romans 12.18. as --

1. For maintaining our own outward peace and quiet with them, Genesis 31.44. 1
Kings 5.12.

2. For commerce and traffic with them, Genesis 23.16. -- 47.20, 21. 1 Kings
5.10, 11, 12.

3. For maintenance of the several Orders, Liberties and Privileges of the
Towns and Cities where we live, etc. 1 Cor. 5.9, 10.

2. It is not lawful to enter into association or covenants with them: --

1. In some civil affairs; as --

1. In conjugal covenants, Deuteronomy. 7.3. 2 Kings 8.18. 2 Cor. 6.14.

2. In mili^^ry covenants or expeditions, 2 Chronicles. 18.3. compared with -- 19.2.
1 Kings 22.49. 2 Chronicles. 20.35, 36, 37. -- 25.7, 10.

2. In Religious affairs; as --

1. In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 5.11.

2. In private Religious conferences, Mal. 3.2. Acts 2.42. compared with 2 Cor.
6.17. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.

3. Nor may we enter into any other Religious covenants, of what kind soever
with Heretics, Blasphemers or Idolaters, Exodus 23.32, 34.12, 13. Judges 2.2.

CHAP. XI.
SECT. 1. Of the necessity of preparation to the Hearing of the Word.
HItherto of Duties in reference to our Spiritual Ethics and Oeconomicks: Now
follow our Divine Politics; viz. such Duties as have reference to public or
Church Assemblies; and they are either Hearing the Word Preached. Receiving the
Sacraments.


1. For our right, holy and conscionable importment in and about the Hearing of
the Word, we must look to Our preparation before we hear. Our carriage in
hearing. Our behavior afterward.


1. For preparation, it is of such necessity, that the want and neglect of it,
is the cause that the word to many becomes the savor of death unto death; and
to some professors, even of good hearts and affections, but a dead letter,
without any life or power in it. Is it not a general complaint of the best
Christians, that they are ordinarily possessed with much deadness of heart, and
dullness of spirit at these holy exercises? Alas, their zeal and fervency which
should be quickened and inflamed at every Sermon, is dull and benumbed with
senslesness and satiety; they do not tremble at divine Comminations, and
denouncements of Gods Judgments against sin; they are not so refreshed with
the gracious Promises of life and salvation, as they ought to be; they do not
enjoy and reap the thousandth part of that delight, comfort and benefit as they
well might, by the Ministry of the Word; they do not with that cheerfulness
receive, with that sweetness taste or relish, with that life and vigor digest
the food of life; they do not so clearly see and discern the infinite beauty of
the sacred Majesty represented unto them, or that glorious grace, shining unto
them in the face of Christ Jesus; their hand of faith does not with that
feeling and fastness lay hold upon, and clasp about the rich treasures revealed
in the Gospel: and why? because their hearts are not purged and prepared for
hearing. This duty then is of great necessity, and special use, for all those
which look for benefit or blessing by the preaching of the word: Take heed how
ye hear (says Christ; Luke 8.18.
) and Take heed to thy foot (says the Preacher) when thou go to the house
of God; and be more ready to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools,
Eccles. 5.1.
for they consider not that they do evil.

But understand we aright: God would not have us make an Idol of preparation,
as if therefore God draws nigh to us, because we are prepared; No, no: though
preparation in ordinary course is a means to find God, yet does God sometimes
hide himself when his people are prepared? he would have us know, that if he be
found of us at all, it is of mere mercy; he is not bound in Justice (setting
aside his Promise) to reward this preparation: it is but our duty, and he can
espy in it matter enough of displeasure, but ordinarily the godly find God
according to their preparation; and hereto the current of the Scripture bears
witness, They that seek the Lord, shall praise him: Psalm. 22.26. Psalm. 24 7.
Open your gates, and the King of glory shall come in: -- If any man open to
me, I will come in to him: Rev. 3.20.
-- If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thy hands toward him, Job
11.13, 14, 15.
-- then shall thou lift up thy face without spot.

SECT. 2. Of the manner of preparation to hear the Word.
THe manner of this preparation consists in these particulars: 1. In Prayer. 2.
In Meditation. 3. In Examination. 4. In the purging or cleansing our hearts. 5.
In a right disposition of our hearts.

1. In Prayer: If thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding; Prove. 2.3, 5.
-- then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find out the
knowledge of God. Christ bids us pray for our daily bread, and a blessing upon
it; much more should we pray for a blessing upon our Spiritual food, Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Mat. 4 4.
for Man does not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of the Lord, does man live. Now the particulars we are to pray for,
are these:

1. For the Minister, that God would open unto him a door of utterance, Col.
4.3, 4.
to speak the mysteries of Christ; -- and that he may make it manifest as he
ought to speak. Direct him, Lord (should every soul say) that he may speak
fitly to me, somewhat for my understanding, somewhat for my affections,
somewhat to help me against such or such a temptation.

2. For the Congregation, that Christ may ride with triumph in the midst of
them, that some may be converted, others may be confirmed and strengthened in
their most holy faith.

3. For our selves, that through Gods assistance we may hear profitably, and be
blessed in the hearing; that God would help us in our Preparation, Meditation,
Examination, in the purging of our hearts, and putting them into a right
disposition and frame: Psalm. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes (said David) that I may see the wonderful things contained
in thy law.

Psalm. 119.59.
2. In Meditation: I thought on my ways (said David) and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies; he first looked over his own ways, before he would set his feet
into Gods ways. -- Now the matter of our Meditation is, 1. Who we are, to hear
Gods Word: Alas, poor handfuls of dust and ashes, base and vile; thus Abraham
and Job in their converses with God confess: and this consideration will
stir-up our humility and repentance in us. 2. Into whose presence we come: Is
it not into the presence of an high, and holy, and powerful God? Is it not the
Lord, a person both of greatest place, and supreme authority? This
consideration will further our reverence and respect of God. When Jobs eye did
see God, Job 4^.16.
he abhorred himself in dust and ashes. 3. By whose assistance we come; we have
no strength of our own to do any good, nor is there any thing in us, that can
procure favor and acceptance with God, we must therefore by faith depend upon
Christ for assistance and acceptance: This consideration will stir up our
humility and faith. 4. With what affections we come; if we come to purpose, we
must come with inward Spiritual affections, with willingness, cheerfulness,
reverence, repentance, love, humility and faith. 5. To what end we come;
whether it be to Gods glory, and our own souls good.

3. In Examination, let us search and try our ways: Lam. 3 40.
-- Commune with your own hearts; Psalm. 4.4, 5.
-- and then offer to God the sacrifice of righteousness. -- Now the matter of
Examination is, 1. The general frame and temper of our hearts, whether they be
in a better or worse temper then formerly. 2. The special occasions, for which
our souls at such or such a time desire to meet God: It is the complaint of
some, I am weak in knowledge; of others, I want such and such graces; of
others, I am like to encounter such and such temptations: of all these we are
to examine our selves, that we may accordingly receive supply. 3. Our sins,
that we might have them slain by the sword of the Spirit in the Ministry of
the Word. 4. Our graces, that we may have them strengthened and nourished by the
Spiritual food of our souls. But the handling of these at large, I shall leave
to the Receiving of the Lords Supper.

4. In the purging or cleansing of our hearts, 1. From sin; Lay apart all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, James 1.21.
and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your
souls: with which agrees that parallel place, Wherefore putting away all
malice, as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word; 1 Pet 2.1, 2.
as it is with the body, when the stomach is foul and clogged with bad humors,
we should first purge it, before we feed it, otherwise whatsoever we eat, will
but nourish and increase the corrupt humors: so when the soul is stuffed or
clogged with sin, whatsoever is heard in the Ministry of the word, will but be
abused by it, and wrested to the destruction of it. 2. From worldly cares and
thoughts, which may draw away the heart: The cares of the world (says Christ)
do choke the seed of the word. Mat. 13.22.
When Abraham went up to the Mount to sacrifice, he left his servants in the
valley; and when we go up to the Mount where God appears, we should leave all
our servile affections, and worldly thoughts in the valley; or if any enter, we
should do by them as Abraham did by the birds that would have eaten up his
sacrifice, chase them away. It is said, that in the Temple, though there was
much flesh for sacrifice, yet there was not one fly appeared stirring. O that
it might be so with us, that not one thought might arise upon our hearts,
unsuitable to the place or work at hand: But this is the misery, we have not
Spiritual hearts in temporal employments, and therefore we have carnal hearts
in spiritual employments, the less of the Sabbath in the week, the more of the
week we find in the Sabbath.

5. In a right disposition in our hearts: We must have hearts seasoned, 1. With
softness, for if the heart be not soft and flexible, the power of the Word will
not make any print or deep impression upon it; all holy admonitions, reproofs
and instructions will be but as arrows shot against a stone wall. 2. With
humility, Psalm. 25.9.
For them that be meek will he guide in judgment, and teach the humble his
way: The proud heart is so swelled with the wind of vanity and vainglory, of
self-love and overweening conceit, that there is left no room in it for the
precious treasures of saving Grace to enter. 3. With honesty, For honest hearts
are the profitable and fruitful hearers, Luke 8.15.
resembled by the good ground; hearts that have no manner of purpose to live and
continue in any one known sin; hearts ready and resolved to serve and please
God in all the ways of his Commandments, and that sincerely and continually. 4.
With faith, for this makes the Word sink and soak into the soul with power and
profit. The old Jews heard the Word, Heb. 4.2.
but it profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in them that
heard it: Faith animates and inspires the promises of the Gospel, with such a
sovereign sweetness, that they are able to raise us from the depth of fears,
yea, to put us into a Paradise of spiritual pleasures, and possession of
Heaven, as it were already. 5. With teachableness: Sacrifice and burnt
offerings thou would not (says David) but mine ears have thou prepared;
Psalm. 40.6.
q.d. Thou have boared new ears in my heart, that I can now reverently attend
unto, rightly conceive, and with an holy greediness devour (as it were) the
mysteries of Grace.

6. With openness, or readiness to receive every truth that God shall teach us:
Acts 17.11.
It is said of the Bereans, That they received the Word with all readiness of
mind: When there is such an holy disposition in us, as to receive both in
judgment and practice whatsoever God shall reveal to us out of his holy Word,
this is a precious disposition.

Thus much of preparation, before we hear: what follows, but that we open our
hearts and hands? Surely the windows of heaven will be set wide open, that all
manner of spiritual comforts, all the blessings of peace and happiness, may in
abundance be showered down upon us; the rich treasury of everlasting glory and
mortality, shall be now unlocked to us, and we may row and tumble our selves
amidst the mountains of heavenly pearls, and golden pleasures, joys that no
heart can comprehend, but that which is weaned from all worldly pleasures, and
set apart, and sanctified for all holy services and business of Heaven.

SECT. 3. The duties of the soul in hearing the Word.
OUr Duties in hearing, consists in these particulars: --

1. That we set our selves in Gods presence whiles we are hearing the Word, and
that we consider it is God we have to deal withal in this business, and not
man, and that it is Gods Word; and not man's: This was the great commendation of
the Thessalonians, That they received the Word as the Word of God; 1 Thessalonians
2.13. Luke 10.16.
and it is the express saying of our Savior, He that hears you, hears me:
The Lord himself is present in a special manner, where his Word is preached;
Surely the Lord is in that place, Genesis 28.16.
as Jacob said of Bethel: Now this apprehension of Gods presence in the
assemblies of his people, will preserve our hearts from roving and wandering
thoughts: I hate vain thoughts, Psalm. 119.113
but thy Law do I love; yea, it will keep us in that awful and reverent
disposition that is meet for the majesty of Heaven.

2. That we diligently attend to that we hear, Luke 19 48.
thus all the people were very attentive to hear Christ; or (as it is in the
Original) They hanged upon him to hear him; they so carried themselves, as if
their ears and minds had been tied to his very tongue: Look as a Prisoner will
hearken to the sentence of a Prince, every word he speaks being life or death;
or as the servants of Benhadad, when they were in their enemies power, observed
diligently if any word of comfort would come from the King of Israel, and they
did hastily catch at it; so should we with all diligence and attention hearken
to the good word of God.

3. That we labor to understand what we hear; to this purpose, Christ called to
the multitude and said, Matthew. 15 10.
Hear and understand: Now the means to understand the Word are these: 1. Come
to the Word with a willing mind to learn; though the Eunuch understood not
what he read, yet because he had a mind to learn, the Lord provided for him,
and we know what a comfortable success Philips sermon had with him: Men love to
teach willing Scholars, so does God when we come with willing and ready minds
to be taught of him. 2. Be well acquainted with the Grounds and Principles of
Christianity; it is the want of this that makes men dull in understanding; they
that are not first well nourished with milk, will not be fit to receive and
digest stronger meat; if the foundation be not well laid, it is in vain to
build. 3. Walk according to the light revealed; A good understanding have all
they that do his Commandments: Psalm. 111.10.
If we employ well the little knowledge we have, there is a promise to give us
more.

4. That we hear the Word with all spiritual subjection, as that Word which
has power to command the soul and conscience: God to this purpose looks into a
Congregation, to see what hearts will yield to his Word; the Spirit of God
hovers over the Congregation, and here it waits, and there it expects, to this
man it comes, and knocks at the door of his heart, to that man and the other
man it goes, saying, Open your hearts, you everlasting doors, that the King of
Glory may come in: Surely now should we say, These are Gods testimonies, this
is the Word the Minister of God speaks to me in Gods stead, I must give account
of it, and therefore I will submit my self to it.

5. That we hear the Word, with application of it to our own hearts and lives;
Job 5.27.
Hear this, and know it for thy self: so did Christ's Disciples when our Savior
told them, that one of them should betray him, Mat. 26.21, 22.
They were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say, Lord, is it
I? as no plaster can do the Patient any good, unless it be applied; and as no
meat is able to do us good, unless it be eaten and digested, no more can the
Word preached profit us, unless it be mixed with faith, one principal work
whereof is to apply those things that are delivered in the Word, and this is
the meaning of the Prophet, Hearken diligently unto me, Isa. 55.2.
and eat ye that which is good.

6. That in hearing, we look to our affections, that they be rightly exercised:
Thus Josiah his heart is said to melt at the reading of the Law: 2 Chro. 34.27
Thus the Jews at Peter's Sermon were pricked in their hearts, and said, Acts
2.37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? Thus the hearts of the two Disciples that
went to Emmaus, burned within them, when Christ opened to them the Scriptures:
Luke 24.32.
Now the means to stir up these affections, are, 1. A belief of the Word, as
that which is undoubtedly true: God cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. Nor will he change
his mind, Numb. 23.19. 2. A love of the Word, for it is purity, perfection,
usefulness, and wonderful benefits to us. 3. An appropriation of the Word unto
our selves, for that which affects us, is that which most nearly concerns us;
without this means of quickening our hearts, they remain dead and senseless, and
the Word becomes utterly unprofitable. 4. A consideration of the nature of the
Word, which ever requires and calls for suitable hearts and affections; it is a
pure Word, Psalm. 119.140
and therefore we must cleanse and purify our hearts for the receiving of it;
it is spiritual and heavenly, Romans 7 14. Iam^s 3.17.
and therefore we must labor for spiritual and heavenly minds to entertain it;
it is a word of power and authority, the very voice of Christ, and therefore
our hearts must submit and stoop to receive it with meekness and trembling of
heart: It is a sure word, 2 Pet. 1.19. A faithful word, Tit. 1.9. A vision that
will not lie, James 1.21. Isa. 66.2.
Heb. 2.3. and therefore we must embrace it with faithful and believing hearts,
without which the Word cannot profit us at all, Heb. 4.2.

7. That above all other affections, we make sure to delight in the Word; it is
said of Christ's hearers, Mark 12 37.
that they heard him gladly, and it is noted for an especial sign of Grace to
hear the Word with delight: Psalm. 119.162
I rejoiced at thy Word (said David) as one that finds great spoils.

But whether may not ungenerate men have a delight in Gods Ordinances?

delight at all in Gods Ordinances: To whom shall I speak and give warning,
Ier. 6.10.
that they may hear? behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot
hearken; behold, the Word of the Lord is to them a reproach, they have no
delight in it; and if this be our case, if we can hear sweet Gospel-preaching,
the free offer of Jesus Christ, with all his glories and excellencies, to poor
sinners, to vile, lost, undone souls, and are no whit taken therewith; woe to
our souls, can we sleep away such a sermon? can we slight or neglect such
Gospel-offers, nay, do we attend them coldly? have we not heart-risings? no
stirrings and workings? no longings and desires? and thus we pass Sermon after
Sermon, and Sabbath after Sabbath: O then we are wholly dead unto the life of
grace, Jesus Christ as yet has not given us his true light, no work of
Conversion does at all appear in us: The end which Jesus Christ had in sending
out Preachers, was to discover his love to poor perishing sinners, that so they
might be affected with him, and long after him, and if we have no such relish,
our condition is sad.

2. Some unregenerate men may have some delight in the word: Isa. 58.2.
They seek me daily (said God) and delight to know my ways, as a nation that
did righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinances of their God: they ask of me
the Ordinances of Justice, they take delight in approaching to God. Mat. 13.20.
Mark 6.20.
The second ground received the word with joy, and Herod heard John Baptist
gladly. Ungodly men may delight in Gods word, as in these cases: --

1. When the Ordinances are a leading way unto some end that suits with corrupt
nature: Thus Jehu showed abundance of zeal in destroying the house of Ahab, and
the Idolatry of Baal, that thereby he might establish the kingdom to his
Posterity, and get himself a great name; 2 King. 10.16
Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord: he was so full of vainglory, that
he could not hold in, but was forced to burst out.

2. When the manner of dispensation of the Ordinances does suit with their
disposition: An understanding judicious man may love preaching that is
judicious and understanding; A man of meekness, may delight in a Sermon of
Peace, peace; a temperate man may like a Sermon that is tart and bitter against
drunkenness, uncleanness; the liberal man may delight in severe preaching
against covetousness; as a man musically affected, may delight in singing of
Psalms, because these things suit with their dispositions: The gifts of
Ministers may have an affecting pleasingness; they may express their minds in
such fit terms, or so pathetically, or they may have such a grace in utterance,
as may affect: Ezekiel. 33.32.
Lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song, of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can play well on an instrument; for they hear thy words, but do them
not.

3. When there is a common work of the Spirit of God upon them for a time: Heb.
6 4, 5.
They may taste of the heavenly gifts, and be made partakers of the holy Ghost;
they may taste the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, and
yet fall away; but this work is rather a work upon them, then in them, a forced
work, not natural, rather a flash, then a fire of affection; the affections are
lifted up, they cannot be altered and changed, acted only by an outward
principle; the experience that the Spirit has forcibly and powerfully wrought
on them, not by an outward and inward principle also, both by the Spirit of
God, and suitableness of affection to that which is good: it was otherwise with
David, I delight to do thy will, O God; yea, Psalm. 40.8. Romans 7.22.
thy law is within my heart: and otherwise with Paul, I delight in the law of
God after the inward man; till the law of God be within us, we cannot from
within taste the sweetness of Gods Ordinances: In true and solid delight, there
must be a suitableness betwixt the heart and the Ordinances; therefore says
the wise man, It is joy to the just to do judgment: Prove. 21.15.
The Justice that is in him, is suitable to the Judgment to be done by him,
and this makes the joy. Hence it follows, that so much grace, so much delight:
were we more holy, spiritual, heavenly, as the Ordinances are, we should be
more affected therewith. Thus it is not in the wicked, they have no such
delight.

Why is the word so brim-full of comfort to the dear Saints of God?

the Comforter: Now as a man that walks amongst Perfumes, must needs smell of
the Perfume, so they that converse with the God of all joy, must needs be
filled with all joy; and therefore David calls God his exceeding joy. Psalm.
43.4.
The Saints go to the word, as one that goes to hear news of a friend; they
look upon the Ordinances, as that whereby they have to do with God, and
therefore it is precious and sweet to them. No wonder, can a man who is cold
come to the fire and not be warmed? Can he that is in the dark come into the
open air and not be enlightened? God is the spring of all comfort, and therefore
sure their hearts must needs be comforted, that meet with God in the
Ordinances; on the contrary, if they meet not with God, if they miss of their
communion with the Lord Jesus Christ, then is comfort afar off: But we must not
argue against a general truth, from a particular temptation. The Position will
stand, That Gods word is brim-full of comfort to Gods people, though every
experiment comes not up to it.

SECT. 4. The Duties required after hearing.
THe Duties required after hearing the word, are these: --

1. That we carefully remember, and keep that which we have heard: Prove. 4.4,
21.
My son, let thine heart retain my words, -- keep them in the midst of thine
heart. As a man that has a Jewel will be careful to lock it up in his safest
Chest, so should we keep the word in our hearts, in the midst of our hearts.
Many hear the word desirously, but (as we say) it goes in at one ear, and out
at the other, it stays not for any after-use, but a little present admiration:
others hear, and the word smites them a little on their Consciences, and wounds
them, and one would think some good thing would be wrought on them, but they go
away, and the motion dies; like unto metals which are soft and pliable,
whilst they are in the fire, but shortly after they become harder then before.
Heb. 2.1.
Take earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we
should let them slip; or let them run out as a leaking vessel, for so the
Original bears it.

2. That we meditate, and seriously think of that we have heard: 1 Timothy 4.15.
Meditate upon these things (said Paul to Timothy) give thy self wholly to
them, that thy profiting may appear to all: Thus Mary pondred the words of the
Angel in her heart, Luke 2.19. Psalm. 119.97.
and David meditated all the day on Gods law: Meditation is as the bellows of
the soul, that does kindle and inflame holy affections: Meditation is of a
seperating and settling nature, it seperates heavenly thoughts from earthly, for
it often goes over with thoughts, and at last settles the heart on such
thoughts as these, O this is the word of God, this is the law, the proclamation
of the great King, whereby I must be judged: This may be the last Sermon that
ever I shall hear whiles I live, such a gale of Gods Spirit may never be
offered to me again: I will be wise therefore, and give way to the Spirit of
God, I will not beat it back again, but yield to the blessed motions of Gods
Spirit, that this day have been made.

3. That we repeat what we have heard, and confer of it, and examine the
Scriptures about the truth of it: Psa. 119.172.
My tongue (says David) shall speak of thy word, for all thy Commandments are
righteousness: and, Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19.
You shall lay up these my words in your hearts (says God) and you shall teach
them your children, speaking of them when thou sit in thy house. This is it
for which the noble Bereans are commended to us, Act. 17.11, 12
They searched the Scriptures daily, concerning the things that were delivered
by Paul: A man that comes into a pleasant garden, will not content himself with
the present scent only, but will carry some of the flowers away with him: So
after we have been in the Garden of spices, and have felt the savor of Christ's
ointments in Church Assemblies, let us take some of the flowers away with us,
and smell of them again and again. Repeating, conferring, examining the word,
is as the pounding of spices, that will make them smell more.

4. That we put in practice whatsoever we hear: James 1.22.
Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own souls; we
must do it, we must bring it nearer to us, that it may be an ingrafted word in
our understanding and affections, that it may be written in our souls, and in
the tables of our hearts; that it may be incorporated and naturalized into our
inward man, that so we may speak and think, and do nothing but that which is
divine: and in doing, observe we this frame of Spirit, to be quick and speedy
about it: I made haste, Psalm. 119.60.
and prolonged not the time to keep thy commandments; This speedy, this
immediate putting of the word into practice, is much advantage to the hearer;
the affections of the heart are then lively and quick, which with delays dye
and decay suddenly.

5. That (when the word is heard, and we are returned home) that we pray again
for a blessing on that we have heard, and as our memories will bear, let us
turn the word into prayer, especially the heads or principal parts of it:
Prayer must be the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending of this Spiritual
duty; we must pray in preparation, and pray in conclusion, and pray always. And
thus much concerning our Duties before, in, Luke 21.36.
and after the Hearing the Word.

CHAP. XII.
SECT. 1. Of the two Sacraments of the New Testament.
THe next duty of a Christian, as it has reference only to the public or
Church Assemblies, is a right receiving of the Sacraments, which are two,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper: Baptism is the Sacrament of our incorporation
into Christ, of our initiation or investing into the glorious state of
Christianity; The Lords Supper is the Sacrament of our continuance in Christ,
of our confirmation in spiritual life, and the power of Grace already planted
within us: By Baptism we are washed, we are sanctified, we are justified, in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God: By the Lords Supper
we grow in spiritual strength, we lay better hold by the hand of Faith, upon
the merits and mercies of Christ; we feel more soundly and sensibly the power
and virtue of his blood, we see more clearly, and are more fully and feelingly
ascertained of the forgiveness of our sins: Concerning the former, it is to
little purpose to give any directions, because infants (whom only are in our
days baptized) are merely subjects receptive, not active, and so far as concern
the Parents in relation to their infants, we have dispatched elsewhere.

SECT. 2. Of the duties in general, before we receive the Lords Supper.
I Shall now therefore proceed to the second Sacrament, and for right receiving
of the Lords Supper, there are duties of necessity required before in after
the Sacrament.

My meaning is not to speak of the habitual dispositions, but of the actual
dispositions of the heart, in reference to which --

Before Sacrament, the duty is Self-Examination: 1 Cor. 11.28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup: Of this Self-Examination we have spoken before; but in reference to this
Sacrament, we shall handle it more fully, and so consider of it, 1. In its
subject. 2. In its object.


1. For the subject matter, or the nature of this Self-Examination:
Self-Examination is a holy work of the soul, whereby it casts its eye, and
reflects upon its self, and so looks through it self, and takes, a true
scantling and estimate of its spiritual estate; for instance, I find such and
such sins forbidden in the Word, such and such Graces required in the Word;
whereupon, comparing my present condition with the Scriptures, I examine, Am
not I guilty of these sins? do I practice these duties? or am I possessed of
these graces? The conscience being thus closely and sincerely examined, it will
return a true answer to every question, whence it will be easy to give a true
censure of our spiritual estate or condition.

2. For the object of our Examination, it is generally -- Our sins. Our graces.


Of which in order.

SECT. 3. Of the manner of examining our sins before the Lords Supper.
FOr the right examining of our sins, observe we these rules: --

1. Procure we a double catalogue of our sins, the one before, and the other
since our conversion: Ier. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways (says Jeremy) and then turn again to the Lord:
If we will not, we may be sure God will: Job. 10.6.
Thou inquirest after mine iniquity (says Job) and searchest after my sin.

2. Confess we our sins: Bring we them out, as they brought the vessels of the
temple, Ezra 8.34. Levit. 16.21.
by number and weight: Aaron confessing for the people, he was to confess all
the iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all
their sins. As three make All, so here is three Alls to make up a right
confession; not only must be confessed All their iniquities, and All their
sins, but All their transgressions in all their sins; q.d. Aaron must number,
and Aaron must aggravate their sins, by laying out how many transgressions were
wrapped up in their several sins.

3. Labor we for grief and sorrow of heart for sin, otherwise all is to no
purpose: Psalm. 38.18.
I will declare mine iniquity (says David) I will be sorry for my sin: His
confessions were dolorous confessions; 38.4.
he felt sin, and this wrought upon him, as an heavy burden, they are too
heavy for me; there is nothing in the world can make an heart more heavy, then
when it feels the weight and heaviness of sin.

4. Judge we and condemn our selves for our sin: This is that duty instanced in
by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged: O Lord, I am not worthy
(could the Centurion say) that thou should come under my roof: But, O Lord, I
am not worthy (should every one of us say) that I should come to thy table.

5. Pray for mercy, pardon and acceptance, in, for and through the Lord Jesus
Christ.

SECT. 4. Of Examination of the wants of Graces, that should be feelingly in us.
FOr the right examining of our Graces, observe we this threefold search or
scrutiny of 1. The wants of our Graces. 2. The truth of our Graces. 3. The
growth of our Graces.


1. That we may rightly examine the wants of our Graces, practice we these
particulars: --

1. Procure we a catalogue of Graces, such as that in Gal. 5. 22, 23. Love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, Gal. 5.22, 23. 2 Pet.
1.5, 6, 7, 8.
meekness, temperance; or such as that in 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. Add to your
faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to
temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly
kindeness; and to brotherly kindeness, charity: if these things be in you, and
abound, they will make you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. This Catalogue procured, set we the same before us, and consider which of
these graces we have, and which of these graces we want. I know it is a
question, whether all graces are not so connex'd and chained together, that one
of them cannot be severed from another? But howsoever we may distinguish,
quantum ad habitus, and actus; in respect of habit, we grant they are always
connex'd and chained together, but not in respect of act or exercise: Add
grace to grace (says the Apostle) q.d. a Christian at first does not exercise
all graces; but as a man lives first the life of a plant, then of sense, then
of reason, though all were radically there at first: so it is in graces, there
are many forms that Christians go through, as Scholars at School do: The first
form is to teach them their sins and miseries, and so they go to school to the
Law, and are set to study it; and then after they have learned that lesson
thoroughly, they are led up higher, to have their faith drawn out, and to be
exercised about Free Grace, and about Christ his person, and union with him,
and about the art and way of drawing virtue from him, and doing all in him: nay
after this, though a Believer in his conversion has the substance of all these
taught him, yet he goes over them again throughout his whole life; and
sometimes his thoughts dwell more about the emptiness of his own righteousness,
sometimes about that fullness that is in Christ, sometimes about the Spiritual
strictness he ought to walk in; and this is to add grace unto grace: -- Nay,
there may be addition concerning one and the same grace, as when a man's grace
and the fruits thereof grow bigger, and more plentiful, when there are new
degrees of the same, ex. gr. for faith, when from a man's casting himself on
Christ, he comes to find sweetness in Christ, and from that grows up to an
assurance of faith: So for prayer, when we find our prayers to grow better;
when more Spiritual corruptions are put into our confessions, and stronger
grounds of faith are put into our deprecations, or petitions for pardon; when
we have more enlargedness us of thankfulness, more zeal to pray for the
Churches, Ephesians. 6.18.
when we go to pray with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit: So for
obedience, when we abound more and more in the work of the Lord, Rev. 2.19.
as it is said of the Church of Thiatira, that their last works were more then
their first; when as the boughs are laden, Phil. 1.11.
and we are filled with the fruits of righteousness: this is to add grace unto
grace, or one degree of grace unto another. Now if in this sense there be an
addition of graces, or an addition of degrees, examine, what is the grace? or
what is the degree of any grace that we want?

3. Pray we fervently for a supply of those wants in this Ordinance: Imagine we
saw Christ compassed with all his privileges, and promises, and pardons, and
mercies, and merits; imagine we heard him say, Come hither poor souls, you that
are sensible of your wants, and of your spiritual poverty, there is in me
bowels of compassions, and pardons in store; it is I that am your Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; what is it you want? What is it
you would have me do for you? shall not these sugared words of our Savior melt
your hearts, and bring you low on your knees: O Lord (should the soul say) I
beg of thee saving Knowledge, justifying Faith, sincere Repentance, fervent
love: O Lord, I would fain have assurance of pardon, strength of faith, power
against some special lust, healing virtues, to lanch my bloody issues: O Lord,
that thou would bestow on me meekness, or temperance, or patience, or
obedience, or quicknings in thy Spirit: Lord, that a pardon might be sealed for
all my sins, that I might receive the virtue of thy death, the comforts of thy
Spirit, the mortifying of such and such a lust: Lord, that my unclean heart may
be sanctified, that I may be enabled with more strength to perform such a duty:
-- O Lord, upon this very errand, and for this very end, do I now come to thee,
for help in this or that particular do I now come to thy Ordinances: And, O
Christ, I beseech thee, supply all my wants, and let me draw virtue from thee:
If thus we would pray, and come to Christ, then would Christ out of his bowels
and mercies, answer our souls: Receive (would he say) the Grace you feel want
of; receive my Spirit, receive power against lusts, receive strength to
obedience, receive all the Graces of my spirit, for I am all in all to you.

4. Raise and rowze we up our souls, and go we to the Ordinances, with strong
expectations to receive the benefits and Graces we have prayed for; never any
came to Christ to be healed, but they came with a strong expectation to receive
health; if a leper came, he came with expectation of cleansing; if a blind man
came, he came with expectation of seeing; if a lame man came, he came with
expectation of walking, and we never read that any coming with such
expectation, was turned empty away; the Creeple asking an alms of Peter and
John, they said to him, Acts 3.4.
Look on us, and then (says the Text) he gave heed unto them, expecting to
receive something of them: If we would come to the Sacrament, with our eyes on
Christ, to his Graces and Promises, John 1.16.
Of his fullness (for he is full of Grace, a fountain ever-flowing, and
overflowing) we should receive grace for grace; say then, Christ has promised
to give in the Sacrament his body and blood, the benefits of his death and
precious bloodshed; he has promised to seal pardons, to manifest himself, to
give power against lust, I will now therefore go to this Sacrament, with a
particular expectation of such and such a blessing as my soul stands in need of.

SECT. 5. Examination of the truth of our Graces, and first of our Conversion.
Our sins and want of Graces thus examined, the soul is in good measure
prepared; yet because the Lord Jesus abhors to be food to nourish, where he was
not seed to beget, it concerns all who desire to taste of the sealing power of
the second Sacrament, first to prove the sealing power of the former Sacrament;
before they come to be nourished as Saints, let them know whether they are
begot and made Saints: and to that end they must examine further, 1. The truth
of their Graces. 2. The growth of their Graces.


1. For the truth of their Graces, it is good to begin with the beginning; and
first to examine their conversion, and secondly the individual companions of
their conversion, as their Knowledge, and Faith, and Repentance, and Love, and
Obedience, and desires after this Ordinance.

1. For Conversion: A man may by such marks as these, try and consider whether
he be truly and soundly converted or no.

Ezekiel. 18.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
1. If he have turned from Satan in all sins, and turned unto God in all duties;
if he have left all gross sins, as Lying, Swearing, Usury, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, etc. in practice and action, and all frailties and infirmities, at
least in allowance and affection, so that with watchful resistance, and earnest
groanings of Spirit, he strive and pray against them, and be humbled and kept
in awe by them, and that he perform obedience to all Gods Commandments, though
not in perfection and height of degree, yet in truth and sincerity of heart.

2. If he be willing in all his purposes, desires, endeavors and actions, Psalm.
16.8. Gal. 6.16.
to set himself in the presence of God, and in them to be wholly, unreservedly
and entirely guided by his word.

1 John 4.17, 18.
3. If he can with an holy comfort, and humble triumph, think upon death, the
Law, that great judgment, hell, and those endless torments.

4. If he lovingly hunger and thirst after spiritual nourishment, the growth in
grace by the Word, 2 Pet 2.2.
Sacraments, Christian conference, sanctifying the Sabbath, and all other godly
exercises both public and private.

5. If truly and heartily he love and long after the coming of Christ; Tit. 2
13. 1 John 3.14.
and love such as are true Christians, and that because they make conscience of
sin, and serve God with singleness and sincerity of heart.

Psalm. 1.2. -- 19.10.
6. If his chief delight and best comfort be in holy duties and heavenly things,
and that he infinitely prefer them before gold, honors, pleasures, yea the
whole world.

7. If he would not change his present station, though never so base, Heb.
11.25, 26.
poor and neglected in the world (yet accompanied with the state of Grace and
Christianity) for the most rich and glorious estate of the greatest man upon
earth, where there is nothing but profaneness and unregeneration; if all this
whole great world about, were turned into gold, honor and pleasures, and in
respect of the comfort of Grace, it were dung, vanity, nothing.

8. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
If he would not be in the state and case he was before (though he then thought
that good enough) for any worldly good, for ten thousand worlds.

9. Ier. 31.19.
If he be truly humbled with consideration of the long time of his
profaneness, and impenitency, and very sorry he began no sooner, nor made
greater haste into the royal and glorious state of Christianity.

10. If those sinful pleasures and vanities be most tedious, Romans 6.21.
irksom and distasteful unto him, which formerly he pursued with greediness and
delight.

11. If he mourn for the abomination of the times: Grieve at the wicked courses
of others, Psalm. 119.136 2 Pet. 2.7.
and be very glad and heartily joyful, when godliness and sincerity gets the
upper hand, and when any one is converted.

12. If to the power of his gifts at all occasions, he be still plotting, Ezekiel.
18.30.32.
working and laboring the conversion of others with zeal and sincerity,
especially those that are nearest about him, any ways depend upon him, and
belong to his charge.

SECT. 6. Examination of Knowledge.
NOw for the individual companions of sound conversion: We must inquire within
our selves, for these Graces of Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, etc.

The first of these Graces, which every worthy and fit receiver must
necessarily find in himself, is Knowledge; and by such marks as these, he may
try and consider, whether his knowledge be a saving and sanctifying knowledge
or no.

1. If it beget humility and lowliness of mind; if the sight of Gods purity,
majesty, just indignation and vengeance against sin; if the sense of his own
blindeness, vanity, inward filthiness, and natural corruption, makes him
willingly entertain humility, and a lowly conceit of his own self.

Deuteronomy. 4.6. Psalm. 111.10. John 8.55.
2. If it be drawn into practice, and joined with conversion of the heart from
sin unto God, and with reformation of life from evil to good, otherwise
knowledge without practice will increase the guilt of Conscience, and the
damnation in hell.

3. If it be edged and eneagred with a longing desire and insatiable thirst
after more of those rich and saving treasures: There issues from out the
sanctuary Waters of Life (see their increase) first to the ancles, Ezekiel. 47.
then to the knees, then to the loins, afterward a river that no man could
pass: If we have once tasted how sweet the Lord is, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.
there will be a desire to increase more and more.

4. If it be diffusive and communicative of it self, if it shine round about,
and work all the good it can in all places: The lips of the righteous feed
many: Prove. 10 21. and 15.7.
-- The lips of the wise disperse knowledge, but the heart of the foolish does
not so: It is as new wine in vessels, desirous to vent; not to purchase a
little vainglory, or profane praises, but to work spiritual good, and for the
conversion of others.

Ier. 9.14. Psalm. 119.97, 98. Phil. 3.8.
5. If it beget reverence of that great majesty and love, to that holy truth it
knows and apprehends in the Word, and an holy estimation of it above all
possessions, Counting all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus our Lord.

John 17.8. Phil. 3.10.
6. If by it the soul knows God in Christ, and knows Christ as his own Savior,
and knows the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made conformable unto his death.

John 14.17. 2 Cor. 13.5.
7. If by it the soul knows the things given it of God, and especially the
inhabitation of the Spirit of Christ.

8. If it extinguish or greatly dull the savor of earthly things, and makes the
soul heavenly minded, 2 Cor. 2.14.
savoring of spiritual things.

SECT. 7. Examination of Faith.
A Second Grace which every worthy receiver must find in himself, is Faith;
and by such marks as these, he may try whether his faith be a true and
justifying faith.

1. Rom 10.14.
If it sprung in the heart by the public Ministry of Gods holy word; if the
heart was broken, and bruised, and brought to an holy desperation, whereby it
wholly renounced, disclaimed, Gal 3.24.
and disavowed it self, as unworthy of life, of breath, or being: if then it
began to lift up its eyes upon the precious promises of Salvation, revealed in
the Gospel, and shining gloriously in the face of Christ: And if lastly it
perceived some glimpses of comfort, hopes of pardon in the blood of Christ,
whence arose an hungring desire, and longing thirst after the mercies of God,
and merits of Christ Jesus; and so it casts it self with strong cries and
prayers into the arms of Christ his blessed Redeemer.

2. If it grow, and daily spring up toward height of assurance, Romans 8.38.
and fullness of persuasion: Ordinarily faith is weak at first, full of many
doubts and distractions, fears and tremblings, but after long experience of our
own sincerity, godly life, and good conscience, it grows up in time, and by
leisure to be a strong faith. Romans 4.20, 21. Acts 15.9.


3. If it purify the heart: Formalists may watch over their open outward
actions, but true believers set themselves with special care, and all good
conscience, to bridle and bring under all wicked stirrings of the heart. Prove.
11.23.
The desire of the righteous is only good (i.) the main streams of his
desires, the course and current of his heart, is to godliness and goodness,
though sometimes his corrupt Nature, and Satan's boisterous temptations, do
unawares and violently carry his thoughts another way, for which he sends out
many a prayer for pardon and purging.

4. If it bring forth a true and through Evangelical Repentance: Where Gods
comfortable favor shines, Zech. 12.10.^1
and is shed into the heart, it immediately melts and resolves into tears of
sorrow and grief for former rebellions, and makes unfeined and resolute vows,
for ever after, by Gods grace, to throw out of his heart and life, those sins
which have grieved so good a God.

5. If it beget in him whom it possesses, 2 Cor. 1.12.
a sanctification of all parts, both in soul and body, though not in
perfection; if the understanding be enlightened with knowledge in the great
mysteries of godliness; if the will be bent with the best things; if the memory
be a storehouse of heavenly treasures; if the stream of our affections be
turned from the world toward Gods glory and good causes; if the heart be
weaned from lusts, and fallen in love with eternal pleasures and heavenly things;
if the Conscience be watchful to discover, and sensible to feel the approach
and prickings of the least sin, etc.

Gal. 5.6.
6. If it work by love, first toward God and Christ, in that all his sins are
remitted, and he is eternally beloved of God in Christ: Psa. 16.3.
Secondly, toward Christians, in that the saving graces of Gods Spirit shine
in them: Thirdly, toward himself, with relation unto God, 1 John 3.14.
and reservation of his glory: Fourthly, toward kindred, friends, not so much
because they are of the same blood, as because of the mutual interest they have
in the blood of Christ: Fifthly, toward enemies, because of the precious
Command of Christ. Mat. 5.44.


7. If it cause a forsaking the world: No man can do this (if it be his sweet
sin) until his soul have received by the hand of faith from the Spirit of God,
Heb. 11.24. 1 John 5.4, 5.
an assurance of an immortal Crown in the heavens, sealed unto him by the blood
of Christ: but then how willingly does he bid the world farewell? how resolutely
does he cast out of his affections all greedy thoughts, and excessive desires
of earth and earthly treasures?

Romans 5.1. Acts 5.41. 2 Timothy 1.12. Romans 8.18. 1 Pet. 1.7.
8. If it speak comfort in distress, joy in tribulation, glorying in
afflictions: Faith teaches that God casts us in the fire, not to burn us, but
to refine us, and make us more orient in his sight: This is the beaten path to
heaven (cries faith) which all the glorious Saints have trodden before us.

9. If it will maintain a Christian in some measure of sufficiency and
contentment in all estates: Gal. 2.20.
The just shall live by faith, not by friends, money, earthly hopes, or helps,
etc. if it makes a man lay hold on Gods promises, and work an inward trust in
Gods never-failing providence, so as he will leave the success of all his
labors to the Lord.

SECT. 8. Examination of Repentance.
A Third grace which every worthy Receiver must find in himself, is
Repentance; and by such marks as these he may try whether his Repentance be a
sound and sincere Repentance.

1. If it be ashamed of sin: not as a Thief is ashamed, Ier. 31.19. Ezekiel.
16.61, 63. Ezra 9 6. Zeph. 3.5. Ier. 6.15. -- 8.12.
which shame arises from the effect of sin, as punishment or disgrace, but as
a Son is ashamed (whence it is called a filial shame) out of a sight of the
filth and loathsomness of sin; the impenitent glory in their shame, but the
truly penitent are ashamed of such glorying, as of every sin.

2. If it mourn for sin: Psa 51.3, 4. 2 Samuel 24.10, 17. Psalm. 42.3. Isa. 63.17.
Thus David mourned (not for the punishment, he is willing to bear it, but) for
sin, as it was sin. I deny not but sorrow may be godly, even for Judgments,
and then our trial will be, if we can mourn rather for Spiritual Judgments,
then for Temporal; and especially if we can feel and bewail hardness of heart,
mourning because we cannot mourn as we ought.

3. If it cause a great mourning, at least so great as our mourning would be
for outward losses: Thus Zachary instanceth, Zech. 12.10, 11.
the Spirit of God should cause them to mourn, as in the family one would mourn
for the loss of their only Son, or as in the Commonweal the Subjects would
mourn for the loss of a most worthy Prince.

4. If it rest not without cleanness: True Repentance is not water, but
washing, nor every washing, but such as makes clean; Isa. 1.16. Job 34.32.
could a man weep his eyes out, yet if he weep not his sins out, what is he
better? Sorrowing after a godly sort, what carefulness, 2 Cor. 7.11.
what chearing has it wrought? If I have done iniquity, I will do it no more.

5. If it bring forth fruits meet for Repentance: Mat. 3 8. Acts 26.20.
This was the sum, as of John's, so of Paul's preaching, that Jew and Gentile
should repent, and turn to God, and do works worthy amendment of life: nay, it
is the very sum of the Gospel, To mourn, Isa. 61.3.
to be comforted, that they might be called Trees of Righteousness, the
planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified.

6. If it be stirred up by the sense of Gods goodness: So that nothing more
fires a man to abase himself in the sense of his own vileness, then to feel and
find the gracious goodness and readiness of God in Christ, to show him mercy;
Hosea 3.5.
He fears the Lord and his goodness.

7. If the same Spiritual means assuage it, that first raised it in the heart:
Repentance that can be heal^d by sports, merry company, etc. was never sound;
It is the voice of the Church, Come, Hosea 6.1, 2.
and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us, he
has smitten, and he will bind us up.

8. If it be joined with a secret trust in the acceptance of God in Christ: If
no misery can beat thy soul from inward affiance, Psalm. 38.9.
or hope of mercy; if in the very disquietness of the heart, the desire of the
soul be to the Lord; if he be never so much cast down, Psalm. 42.5, 11.
yet he waits upon God for the help of his countenance, and in some measure
condemns the unbelief of his own heart, and supports himself with the hope of
the never failing compassions of God in Christ, wherein it differs from the
Repentance of Cain and Judas.

SECT. 9. Examination of love to the Brethren.
A Fourth grace which every worthy Receiver must find in himself, is Love to
the Brethren: and by such marks as these, he may try whether his love be a true
love.

1. If it be to the Saints as Saints; not because they are rich, learned, wise,
but merely because they have Gods image upon them: 1 Pet. 1.22.
Love one another with a pure heart, love must be pure, not mixed, and then it
is pure, when it springs from no other fountain but grace, and holiness, and
love of God in Christ.

1 Pet. 2.17.
2. If it be to the Saints above others: Others may have love and honor,
according to their relations, qualities, worths; but true love bestows its
Benjamins portion (the specialty and choice of its affections) upon the Saints.
Romans 12.10.


Philem. 5.
3. If it be to all the Saints: if it love grace in rags, as well as in Robes;
if it love the absent, as well as present; if it love for the truths sake those
he never saw, yet this hinders not the difference of degrees of love, which by
the special providence of God some Christians may have to others, in some
special eminency of respects.

4. If it extends as to all Saints, so to all times, as well in adversity,
disgrace, temptation, sickness, etc. as in prosperity, health, good estimation,
etc.

Psalm. 16.3.
5. If it delight in the fellowship of Saints: Such as find no need of, nor
delight in the society of Saints, Psalm. 119 63.
may doubt their condition, and be humbled for it.

6. If it cause forbearance of one another, Col 3.13, 14.
Forgiveness of one another: if in case the person injuring desires no
reconciliation, yet the person injured is willing to let fall all wrath,
malice, or desire of revenge.

7. If it make a soul to honor them that fear the Lord: Psalm. 15.4.
This honor has in it --

1. An estimation of them, Psalm. 16.3.
as the only excellent people in the world.

2. 3 John 6.
A free acknowledgement of their just praises in all places for their grace.

3. A willing proposing of them as examples to imitate. 1 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8


4. An holy endeavor to cover their infirmities, 1 Pet. 4.8.
taking things in the best part and sense.

5. An apology for them, against the reproaches and scorns of the world.

SECT. 10. Examination of Obedience.
A Fifth grace which every worthy Receiver must find in himself, is Obedience:
and by such marks as these he may try whether his Obedience be true:

1. If it arise out of love to God in Christ Jesus; John 14.15.
if it be voluntary and not constrained; if the heart be inflamed with the
sense of Gods love in Christ; Josh. 22.5.
and if it be humbled when it has done its best, that it can bring no more
glory to God.

2. If it be in all things, Psa. 119.128. John 15.14. Genesis 6.9.
with all respect to all Gods Commandments; if as Noah, we walk with God (i.)
if in a settled even course of obedience, we keep close to him all the days of
our life.

3. If it submit against profit, pleasure, credit, liberty, ease, etc. Heb.
11.8. Acts 5.29. Mat. 16.25.
if it prefer Gods Commandments above all things, yea above life it self.

4. If it obey the Commandments of faith, as well as life, Romans 16.26. Romans
10.16.
submitting to the Lord by believing, as by doing, yielding to the Gospel as to
the law.

SECT. 11. Examination of our desires after this Ordinance.
A Sixth grace which every worthy receiver must find in himself, is Holy
desires after this holy Ordinance; and by such marks as these he may try
whether his desires be holy.

Psalm 42.1, 2. John 7.37, 38
1. If they carry the soul after Christ, fellowship with Christ, communion with
Christ, a fruition of Christ and his benefits.

2. If they spring from any sense of the want of Christ, or from sense of
former sweetness or goodness in Christ, found in the use of the Ordinances.

Psalm. 42.2.
3. If there accompany them an holy kind of impatience in the want of the
Ordinance: When shall I come and appear before God?

4. If nothing but Christ will content the soul: If Christ be desired for
himself, and not for any base ends; If the soul be content with Christ, though
he be cast into prison and banishment.

5. If there follow a great and sweet contentment in the use of the Ordinances;
Judge. 15.19. Psalm. 63.5. Ier. 31.25.
if (as it was with Sampson drinking of the water that God sent him out of the
hollow of the jaw) our spirits come again and revive upon it; so that sometimes
the heart is filled with strange ecstasies, with excess of spiritual pleasures,
with an heavenly kind of satisfaction, contentation and delight.

Psalm. 63.4, 5. Isa. 44.3. 1 Pet. 2.2.
6. If there follow after the Ordinance holy vows and wishes of infinite and
eternal thankfulness; as also a growth and springing up as among the grass, or
as willows by the water courses.

SECT. 12. Examination of the growth of Graces.
THe truth of Graces thus found out; In the last place, examine we the growth
of Graces: Mark 4.27.
True grace is ever growing grace, and if a man grow, it will appear by these
signs:

1. By his outward appearance; not that any man can see him grow, but that we
may discern him (as the corn that springs and grows up) after some time, when
he is grown in Knowledge and Faith, etc.

2. By his appetite to his spiritual food: Young men have better stomachs then
old men, because they are growing; 2 Pet. 2.1, 2
and a gracious spirit has ever an appetite or desire after Spiritual dainties.

3. By his spiritual strength; a Christian is at first weak, Romans 14.1.
but if he grow, he is stronger and stronger, till at last he can wrestle with
a spiritual enemy, with lusts and corruptions, Powers and Principalities, and
get the mastery over them. Ephesians. 6.12.
To this duty of Examination, others add Excitation, as thus, -- There must be
a new exciting of Faith, and Repentance, and Love, and of desires after the
Ordinances; but of that more fully in the Ordinance it self.

SECT. 13. Of the duties in Sacrament, of the exercise of Repentance.
THus far of the duties before Sacrament: now follow the duties in the time of
the Sacrament; viz. The exercise of our Graces, I mean such Graces as are
suitable to the quality and nature of the Sacrament, as Repentance, and Faith,
and Thanksgiving, and Love, and Charity.

The first of these Graces, which must be stirred up or exercised, is
Repentance: And this will be actuated, if we consider Gods love in Christ, and
Christ's sorrows and sufferings for sin: There are many things in the Ordinance,
which if but looked upon with the eye of faith, will open all the springs of
true spiritual sorrow, or Repentance in the soul, but we name only these two
particulars:

1. Here is a discovery of the love and sweetness of God, in giving his Son to
dye for us: So God loved the world, John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. enough to cause us to mourn that
ever we offended: O that God should be more tender to us, then to his Son, not
sparing his Son, that he might spare us; give him to dye, that we might live;
pour the curse upon him, that the blessing might be poured upon us: Who can
think on this, and withhold from tears!

2. Here is presented to us the sufferings and breakings of Christ, enough to
break our hardest hearts: -- Consider them --

1. In themselves: What breakings, woundings, scourges, crownings, piercings,
did he endure in his body? what conflicts, struglings with the wrath of God,
terrors of hell? what weight, burden, wrath, did he undergo, when his soul was
heavy unto death, when he drank that bitter cup, that cup mingled with curses,
which if man or Angel had but sipt of, it would have sunk them into Hell? nay,
it made him who was God as well as man, sanctified with the Spirit, supported
with the Deity, comforted by Angels, swet such a sweat, as never man swet,
drops, very clods of blood?

2. In the meriting cause of all our good, the procurers of all our peace,
salvation: He was wounded, that we might be healed; scourged, Dan. 9.16. Isa.
53.5, ^.
that we might be solaced; He was slain, but not for himself: -- He was wounded
for our transgressions, broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.

3. As the effects of our sin, as those things our sins brought upon him, and
needs must this melt and thaw our icy stony hearts: It was I (should the soul
say) who was the Traitor, Murderer, Judas, Herod, Pilate; they were my sins
which were the bloody instruments, to slay the Lord of glory: Lord, I have
sinned, and thou sufferedst, 'twas I that eat the sour grapes, and thy teeth
were set on edge: This consideration must needs fill the heart with sorrow:
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced; Zech. 12.10.
and how then? They shall mourn, and be in bitterness of soul, as one in
bitterness for their first born: O how should we look upon Christ as wounded,
scourged, pierced for us, and not be affected with, afflicted for our sins, the
cause of it? If thou will be conformable to Christ (says Bernard) as thou
beholdest here a broken bleeding Christ, so labor to behold him with a broken
bleeding heart: O who can with the eye of faith look upon a broken Christ, but
with a broken heart? a wounded Christ, but with a wounded spirit? a bleeding
Christ, but with a bleeding soul: God has made in nature the same organ for
seeing and weeping; and in grace he who sees clearly, weeps thoroughly; The eye
will affect the heart: O Christ, Lam. 3.5.
that my eye would affect my heart; that whiles I behold Christ shedding his
blood for my sins, my heart would melt out at my eyes, and shed tears for those
sins for which I see Christ shed his blood: That I could turn the Sacrament of
the Supper into a Baptism of tears, that I could wash and baptize my self with
tears of Repentance.

SECT. 14. Of the exercise of Faith.
THe second Grace, which in time of Sacrament must be actuated and exercised,
is Faith; then should a communicant speak to his Faith, as Deborah to her soul,
Awake, awake, Judge. 5.12.
Deborah, awake, awake, utter a song: so awake, awake, O my Faith, bestir and
rowze up thy self, to receive Christ in this Sacrament.

But how, or in what manner is Faith to be actuated, and set on work in the use
of the Sacrament?

In the Sacrament we must consider three things: 1. Sacramental
representations. 2. Sacramental offers. 3. Sacramental promises; all which are
in the words of institution: Mat 26.26. Mark 14 22. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23,
24.
In the night that he was betrayed, he took bread and brake it: -- He took the
cup, and gave it, saying, -- Take, eat, this is my body which is given for you:
-- And drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the New Testament, which
is shed for you, and for many, for the remission of sins. 1. He took the bread,
and brake it, and cup, and gave it,] there is the Representation. 2. He bade,
Take, and eat, drink of this,] there is the offer. 3. He said, This is my body,
which is given for you: This is my blood, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins,] there is the promise: Now upon every of these must our
Faith be busied and set on work: As thus in order; --

For Sacramental Representations:

1. In the breaking of bread, and pouring out of the wine, there is a
representation of Christ's death and passion, both of his body broken and
wounded, and his blood poured and shed.

1. Of his body broken and wounded: Isa. 53.5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, -- And with his stripes we are healed:
What sweet comfort may faith fetch hence? Look now upon the wounds of Christ,
as healing wounds, as a City of refuge, whither thy pursued soul by the avenger
of blood, may fly for safety and sanctuary: Indeed I am a grievous sinner, I
have wounded my conscience with my transgressions, but behold my Savior here
wounded for my transgressions: I may well have a troubled conscience for the
wounds my transgressions have made therein; yet my conscience needs not sink in
a despondency of spirit, whiles I look at the wounds of Christ: Here are wounds
for wounds, healing wounds for stabbing wounds, curing wounds for killing
wounds: O what comfort is here for faith in the wounds of Christ crucified, the
nails, the spear, the wounds, all preach unto faith a reconciled God, that God
is in Christ, reconciling the world to himself: The Lords bowels are laid open
by these wounds, so as throughout them we may see the tender bowels of his
mercy, and so as through them, mercy flows from those bowels unto us: Cant.
2.14.
-- O my dove, that art in the clefts or holes of the rock! Some of the
Ancients understood by these clefts of the rock, the wounds of Christ, in which
the dove, the Church, lies and shelters her self: This is one work of Faith in
the Sacrament, when it sees these clefts of the rock opened, like a dove to
betake her self thereunto for shelter security, against all fears that wrath
and guilt may put their Conscience to: Do any fears of wrath trouble thee? does
any guilt of Conscience disquiet thee? why now for thy comfort, behold the
holes in the rock, where thou may shelter: Ier 48.28.
Dwell now in the rock, and be like the dove that makes her nest in the sides
of the holes mouth; see, and fully believe thy peace to be with God through
Christ, and look upon him broken and wounded for thy transgressions: Faith thus
actuated, cannot but send the soul from the Sacrament with much comfort.

2. Of the blood poured and shed; and what is to be done now when I see this
blood in the Sacrament, but to actuate my faith, and apply this blood to my
self? Christ's blood is a reconciling blood, Romans 3.25. Romans 3.25. and 5.9.
A justifying blood, Romans 5.9. A pacifying blood, Coloss. 1.20. Col. 1.20.
A pardoning blood, Ephesians. 1.7. Ephesians. 1.7.
A sanctifying blood, Heb. 13.12. Heb. 13.12. and 9.14.
A purging blood from dead works, Heb. 9.14. A cleansing blood, 1 John 1.7. 1
John 1.7.
A mortifying, crucifying blood, Gal. 6.14. Gal. 6.14.
A blood that sets prisoners free, Zech. 9.11. Zech 9.11.
A blood that makes men Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.5, 6. Rev. 1.5, 6.
A softning, mollifying blood, that makes the heart tender, a fleshy heart,
Zech. 12.10. Zech. 12.10.
Goats blood (some say) breaks the Adamant, which neither iron nor fire can do;
but surely the blood of this Lamb breaks the Adamant-heart of a man, which
nothing else can break: It is a quickening blood, that brings life and strength
with it; it is lifeblood, blood full of spirit, that fills the soul with
excellent vigor to holy performances, Heb. 13.20, 21. Heb. 13.20, 21.
-- Now what a deal of comfort may faith draw from all this? True, my person is
unrighteous, but, O Christ, thy blood is justifying blood; my heart is unclean,
but thy blood is is a sanctifying blood; my lusts are many and mighty, but thy
blood is mortifying blood; my heart is wondrous hard, but thy blood is softning
blood; my heart is exceeding dead, but thy blood is quickening blood: In this
blood of thine I believe, this blood of thine I thirstily drink down, this
blood of thine I heartily apply, with a comfortable expectation of all these
blessed benefits: Be of good cheer, O my soul, here is pardoning blood against
thy guilt, sanctifying blood against the pollutions of thy nature, crucifying
blood against thy lusts, softning blood against thy hardness, quickening blood
to help thee against thy deadness.

2. For Sacramental offers, in the words, Take, eat, drink,] Christ himself is
offered with all his benefits: Here then must faith actuate it self, and set it
self on work, striving with all its might to take Christ, to eat and drink
Christ offered: When Christ is offered to us, the act of faith then is that of
the Psalmist, Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, Psalm. 24.7.
ye everlasting doors; and why must these gates and doors be lift up? that the
King of glory may come in: Christ makes offer to come into our hearts, and
therefore we must open the gates, we must lift them up, even from off the
hooks, that fair and foul way may be made for ready entrance. If a great man,
especially a King, comes to a man's house, he will not only open the small
wicket, his little door, but he sets open his great gates, he throws them wide
open, to make spacious way for his entrance; so if thus it be, that Christ in
the Sacrament offers himself to come to us, let our faith busily bestir it self
in widening the passage, and opening our hearts to make Christ way, let us
strive with might and (...) so that Christ is full, and ever shall be full to
the brim; there is in him a fullness of merit, for our justification, and a
fullness of spirit, and habitual Graces for our sanctification: In him are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge (i.) vast heaps, Col. 2.3.
for some pieces of silver and gold, are not treasures; all the treasures, all
the heaps of Knowledge and wisdom that are in the world, all are in him; he is
all in all.

2. Faith casts its eye on the promise, for the conveyance of Christ, and of
Grace from Christ: Faith works by virtue of the promise; where there is no
promise, there can be no faith, and therefore faith discovers the promise, That
of his fullness we shall receive grace for grace; John 1.16.
That his body is given for us; That his blood is shed for us, and for many,
for the remission of sins: Hence the schools admit of a double fullness (i.) Of
abundance and redundance: The promise speaks not only of the fullness of
abundance in Christ, whereby he is sufficiently full in himself, but also of a
fullness of redundance, by which he overflows and fills all his Saints: He is
the wellhead or fountain, which is not only full it self, but springs and
flows over to the filling of the streams below it.

3. Faith looks upon this Ordinance, as an instrument, a means which God has
set up for the conveying of Christ, and nourishment from Christ: in Zachary we
find mention of two olive branches, Zech. 4.12.
which through two golden pipes, emptied the golden oil out of themselves: We
may thus interpret, Christ is the olive branch, and the olive tree, and from
whom comes all the golden oil of Grace and spiritual comfort, and he it is that
empties it out of himself, into our hearts; but how? it is by his Ordinances,
they be the golden pipes, by which this golden oil is conveyed unto us: Christ
does not immediately empty the oil into our hearts, but first into the golden
pipes of his Ordinances, and so through them into us.

4. Faith being steeled by such considerations as these, it goes over to
Christ, and by virtue of the promise, draws down his body and blood into the
soul; this therefore is the main work, to awaken, and to actuate our faith, to
set it on work upon Christ, and so to draw forth the efficacy of Christ in the
Sacrament: Lord, I believe that thy body was given for me, thy blood shed for
me, and for the remission of many sins: Lord, I cheerfully and gladly believe
that I am now partaker of thy body and blood, and that my sins are pardoned in
thy blood: I believe that Christ is mine, his death is mine, his resurrection
is mine, remission of sins is mine, pardon and heaven are mine: Lord, I accept,
I believe this sealed pardon of my sin: Lord, I believe that all Christ, whole
Christ is mine, from top to toe: Lord, I believe his person is mine, his
Godhead is mine, his Manhood is mine: Lord, I believe his merit is mine, his
virtue is mine, his benefits both of Grace and Glory are mine: Lord, I believe
that in Christ all fullness dwells, and that of his fullness I shall receive
grace for grace: Lord, I believe that through this golden pipe of the Lords
Supper, I shall receive the golden oil of Grace from Christ, now be it to me
according to my faith: Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief: O come down into
my soul, and fill it full of the Lord Christ, of the body and blood of Christ.
In this manner, as one said of the tree of Christ's ascension, though the fruit
were high, and above our reach, yet if we touch him by the hand of faith, and
tongue of prayer, all will fall down upon us: So here, if we can but touch him
with the hand of faith, though a palsy hand, though a weak and trembling hand,
if we can but go to him with a praying heart, Christ can withhold nothing from
us.

By the way, this may discover to us where the fault is; when we return home,
our faith never the more stretched, our hearts never the more warmed, our
Graces never the more nourished, our corruptions never the more weakened, our
assurance never the more heightened, it is a shrewd sign faith did not play its
part in the Mount: Faith was entrusted in this employment, to go over to Christ
for these and the like benefits, but thy faith did fail in the undertaking;
therefore God, suspends the bestowing of these benefits, because thou
suspendest thy faith: -- Well then, if thou see not the fruit and benefit thou
expectedst, to come into thy soul in the use of this Ordinance, charge thy
faith with it, and bewail the weakness of it; and for the future, put it to its
burden, let it have its full and perfect work, and thou will then find the
comfort and fruit of it: Never did faith touch Christ in any Ordinance, but
virtue came from him.

SECT. 15. Of the exercise of Thanksgiving.
THe heart being warmed, and growing hot with the sense of Gods goodness, a man
should then break out, and give vent to his heart, in magnifying the mercy of
God for the death of Christ, and the fruit thereof communicated to us. Now this
duty of Praise and Thanksgiving is actuated --

Psalm. 103.1, 2.
1. By our private ejaculations: Our souls should praise him, and all that is
within us should praise his holy name; especially our affections of joy and
love should taste largely of God. We should to this purpose now and then cast
up such a dart as this to heaven, We praise thee, O God, we acknowledge thee to
be the Lord, etc.

2. By our public and joint praises: Minister and people should both lift up
their voices, with Glory to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men.

3. By our singing of Psalms: Thus Christ and his Apostles, after the
celebration of the Lords Supper, they sung an hymn or psalm; and some say, it
was one of David's Psalms, which was to present purpose (the Jews at their
Passover used these Psalms, Psalm 113. to 119. which they called the great
Alleluiah) but others say, it was a Psalm composed by Christ himself,
containing the mystery of his Passion: howsoever, we learn our duty, as at
other times, so at this especially, to sing unto God a great Alleluiah.

4. By our obedience, by devoting, and giving up our selves to Christ, to be at
the will of him, who is our sovereign Lord. The proof and life of Thanksgiving,
is Thanks-doing; the life of thankfulness, is the good life of the thankful: Do
we praise God for his excellency? that strictly is the object of praise: or do
we thank God for his goodness? that strictly is the object of thanksgiving: O
then let it appear, that we acknowledge God in Christ to be such a one as we
say in our praises; and that we stand bound and beholding to him indeed, as we
say in our thanks. Let us carry our selves in our life toward him, as to God,
who only is excellent, who only is God, our God, the God of our life and
salvation.

SECT. 16. Of the exercise of Love and Mercy.
OUr love must be actuated --

1. In respect of all men, not only by doing them good, Gal. 6.10.
as we have opportunity, but if they be wicked, by pitying their souls, and by
unfeignedly desiring (even at this Sacrament) the conversion of them.

2. In respect of our enemies; by forgiving, Col. 3.13. Mat. 5.44.
and forgetting all injuries, by praying for them, as Christ has commanded.

3. In respect of the Saints, by delighting in them, as the most excellent of
the earth, the only true worthies of the world, Psalm. 16.3.
worthy for ever of the flower, and fervency, and dearness of our most melting
affections and intimate love, by simpathizing with them in their felicities and
miseries, Rejoice with them that rejoice, Romans 12.15.
and mourn with them that mourn.

Our mercy must be exercised to the poor, according to their necessities, and
our abilities; only with this caveat, That we give in faith, and cheerfulness,
and spiritual discretion, in preferring the Saints.

SECT. 17. Of Examination after Sacrament, and the result, if not a good day.
THus far of the Duties both before, and at the time of the Lords Supper: Now
follows the Duties after Sacrament, and they are these, -- Examination.
Thankfulness. Obedience.


1. A man is seriously and faithfully to consider, after he has been at the
Lords Supper, what entertainment and welcome God has given him? what comfort?
what increasing of Faith and Grace? what quickening? what refreshment? what
assurance? what friendship, and what communion with Christ? what virtue he has
found to flow out of Christ into his soul?

Now if upon such examination, a man have found no joy, no comfort, no
enlargement, no communion with, nor answer from Christ; but on the contrary,
his heart full of deadness, hardness, dullness, unfruitfulness, then two things
are to be done: --

1. Let such a one suspect himself, that some miscarriage has been in him,
either in his preparation to, or in his performance of the Duty; and let him
labor. to find out where the fail was; what it was that hindered the efficacy
of that Blessed Sacrament: and having found out what hindered, let him judge
himself for it, and be seriously humbled therefore: If he can but do thus, he
needs not be overmuch dismayed, because this is one fruit of the life of Christ,
which was undoubtedly received in the Sacrament; if he have not that which he
would have, yet he has that which was worth the going for: Let him construe
this Humiliation as a fruit of going to the Sacrament, and be thankful for that.

2. Let him endeavor by after-pains in prayer and humiliation, to quicken and
awaken the efficacy of the Sacrament: Sacraments do not always work for the
present, but the efficacy may come afterward; the actions of God are of
eternal efficacy, though he put forth that efficacy in such times and seasons
as he sees good. Physic does not always work when it is taken, but sometimes
afterward: Thus also it may be with the Sacrament, when a Communicant humbled
for his unprofitableness in the Duty, endeavors by after-diligence and
humiliation, to quicken and put life into it, it may work then. What hinders
but it may be in the case of the Lords Supper, as in the Sacrament of Baptism?
the efficacy and force of Baptism does not presently appear, no not presently
upon the years of discretion: many a one lives viciously in a sinful course, a
Swearer, Adulterer, etc. yet afterward when God gives a man the heart to be
touched with the sense of sin, and he begins to bestir himself, to seek God by
faith and repentance, the Lord then quickens his Baptism, and makes it as
powerful and efficacious, as if it had been administered that very day: So in
this case possibly a man has been at the Lords Table, and has more then once
been an unworrhy receiver, yet if he shall once come to be humbled for that
unworthiness, God will make Sacraments so often received unprofitably, to
become efficacious unto him: If then we have miscarried in our preparations and
dispositions, so as we have found no benefit, no comfort, yet here is a remedy
and help. Take this course by after-diligence, and after-humiliation, to fetch
life into the Ordinance in which we were dead, and which was dead unto us.

SECT. 18. Of Thankfulness, if a good day.
IF upon examination we find that we were refreshed, had our hearts enlarged,
had virtue from, and communion with Christ, then must follow Thankfulness.
Obedience.


1. Thankfulness: Return home now, as with thy heart full of benefits of the
Lord, so with thy heart full of praises to the Lord: Angels employments are
most suitable to Angels food; Shall we bless God for a crumb, and not for a
Christ? other mercies are but crumbs, in comparison of this rich mercy, and
shall our hearts savor them so much, and not relish these? what is corn and wine
to this? This is a mercy, in which all other mercies are folded up: Christ does
eminently contain all other mercies, and in the want of all, Christ enjoyed is
exceeding great reward; nay, all mercies are not only folded up in him, and
intailed to him, but he sweetens and sanctifies every mercy: let us then return
home, as full of the blessing from on high, so full of praises to the most
high: Thankfulness is the great grace to be excercised in, and Thankfulness is
the great grace to be exercised after; and therefore while the present sense of
this mercy warms our hearts, let the heat of it burst forth into Thankfulness
toward God; it is the most suitable service, and the most suitable time to
return it.

SECT. 19. Of obedience and fruitfulness in our lives.
THe second thing required in such a case, is Obedience. 1. Get we our hearts
now further set against sin, let our souls say, Has God been so gracious to
renew and confirm my pardon, and shall I again dishonor him? Has he wiped off
my former scores, and shall I run on afresh to offend him? Has he taken off my
former burden, and cast it on the back of his dear Son, and shall I again lay
more load on him? Has he spoken peace to me in his Ordinance, and shall I
again return to folly? No, far be it from me: I have washed my feet, how shall
I again defile them? I have put off my coat, how shall I again put it on?

2. Get we our hearts further strengthened to service: In this Ordinance is a
mutual sealing of Covenants between God and us; he seals to the first part of
the Covenant, Pardon, Mercy, Grace, and we must seal to the second part of it,
Service, Subjection, Obedience. God gives Christ to us, and we are to give our
selves back again to Christ. As there is matter of Bounty from God to us, so
there is matter of Duty from us to God: There was never any soul, to whom God
said in this Ordinance, I am thine, whose heart did not echo again to the same
God, Lord, I am thine. Let us then labor to get our hearts further strengthened
to service. And thus much concerning our duties before, in, and after the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

CHAP. XIII.
SECT. 1. Of preparation to PRAYER.
HItherto of all the duties in reference only to secret, private or public
Ordinances; now follow such duties as have reference jointly to all three, and
they are either ordinary, as Praying. Reading the Word.
extraordinary, as Fasting. Feasting.



The first of these duties is prayer, in which (as in the former) there is
required some things, 1. Antecedent. 2. Concommitant. 3. Subsequent.


1. There is something required before, viz. Preparation; now this Preparation
consists partly in Removing impediments. Using the means.


1. The Impediments to be removed are these: --

1. We must lay aside all carnal thoughts, and worldly cares, which might
distract our minds: Eccles 5.1.
Keep thy foot when thou go to Gods house, says Solomon; q.d. look with
what affection and disposition thou come to God in prayer.

2. We must put off our shoes (i.) remove our pollutions and corrupt
affections, as carnal lusts, anger and doubting: 1 Timothy 2.8.
I will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and
doubting.

3. We must avoid surfeting and drunkenness, which makes the heart dull and
heavy: Take heed to your selves, Luke 21 34, 53.
lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness,
and the cares of this world; with ordinary prayer we must join a moderate diet,
and with extraordinary, fasting.

Psalm. 26.6.
4. We must cast off our sins: I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I
compass thine altar, O Lord.

5. We must draw off from prayer, from resting in it, or trusting upon it; a
man may pray much, and in stead of drawing nigh to God, or enjoying sweet
communion with Christ, he may draw nigh to prayer, his thoughts may be more
upon his prayer, then upon God to whom he prays; and he may live more upon his
cushion, then upon Christ: but when a man indeed draws nigh to God in prayer,
he forgets prayer, and remembers God, and prayer goes for nothing, but Christ
is all.

2. The means to be used are Prayer. Meditation.


1. Prayer; a little eating prepares a weak stomach, and sets an edge upon
the appetite to eat more: To this purpose David prayed before prayer, Psalm.
141.2, 3.
Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my
hands as an evening sacrifice: Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep the
door of my lips.

2. Meditation, 1. On our own unworthiness, that so we may pray in humility:
Gen 32.10. Ezra 9.6.
I am less then the least of all thy mercies, said Jacob: O my God, I am
ashamed and confounded to lift up mine eyes, said Ezra. 2. On the glorious
majesty of God our Father: Eccles. 5.2.
He that speaks to God, must remember that God is in Heaven; nay, what is
prayer, but a coming before God, an approaching to God, a meeting of God? in
prayer we have to to do with God, and this will teach us to speak to him in
reverence. 3. On the mediation and intercession of our Savior Christ, which is
the very ground of our faith in prayer: Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name,
John 14.13.
that I will do. 4. On the promises of God in Christ, made to our prayers:
Thou, O Lord of hoasts, 2 Samuel 7.27, 28, 29.
God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an
house, therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto
thee: Genesis 32.11, 12.
-- And deliver me, I pray thee (says Jacob) from the hands of my brother
Esau; Thou said, I will surely do thee good: Mat 6.6.
Such promises have we all, Ask, and ye shall have; seek, etc.

SECT. 2. The general duties of the soul in prayer.
2. THe duties in prayer, are either internal or external: The former are the
duties of the soul, the latter are the duties of the body.

1. The duties of the soul we shall consider in general. in particular.


The duty in general is to pray, In truth. By the Spirit. In the name of Christ.


1. In truth, (i.) in sincerity and uprightness of heart: Psalm. 145.18
The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him in sincerity and in truth:
Hence two faults are to be avoided.

1. Praying with feigned lips, this is to pray with an heart and an heart, as
all hypocrites do: but it is otherwise with the Saints: Hear the right, O Lord,
attend unto my cry, Psalm. 17.1.
give ear to my prayer, that goes not out of feigned lips.

2. Praying with wandering thoughts, arising partly from the flesh, and partly
from the suggestions of Satan: The speech of the mouth must not go before, but
always follow after the conceit of the mind: Many times as a Musicians fingers
will run over a song which he has been used to play, although his mind be
otherwise occupied; so many in prayer will run over that form of words they
have been used to utter, though their minds be roving about other matters:
Such a prayer is called, Lip-labor: O let the absurdity of the fault, breed in
us a loathing of it; Do our minds wander in prayer? endeavor we to join into
one speech, the prayer of the mouth, and the speech of the heart, both which
sound in Gods ears, and then consider whether we would make such a speech (I
say not with Malachi, Mal. 1.8.
To our Prince, but) to any man whom we regard, which yet we are not ashamed to
offer unto the Lord: I will not deny in such a case, if we be grieved for, and
strive and pray against such wanderings; this infirmity through Gods mercy, and
the intercession of Christ shall not be imputed unto us. It is good to
distinguish of the cause whence these wandering thoughts may arise; if they come
from weakness in our selves, or from the temptations of Satan, the Lord will
consider this, and deal mercifully with us; but if they arise from mere
negligence, or voluntary admitting of loose thoughts, that is our sin, and we
had need to repent and mourn for it.

Romans 8.26.
2. By the help of the Spirit: It is the Spirit that helps our infirmities
(says Paul) for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered; q.d. when we put forth the graces of the Spirit in us, then the Spirit
comes and helps, and what comes from us now, it comes from the breathings of
the Spirit. This helping of the Spirit] is very Emphatical in the Original; as
a man taking up an heavy piece of timber by the one end, cannot alone get it
up, till some other man takes it up at the other end, and so helps him: So the
poor soul that is a pulling and tugging with his own heart, he finds it heavy
and dull, like a log in a ditch, and he can do no good with it, till at last
the Spirit of God comes at the other end, and takes the heaviest end of the
burden, and so helps the soul to lift it up. In our prayers we should eye the
Spirit of God, we should cast our souls upon the assistance of the Spirit, we
should press the Lord with this Promise, Lord, thou have said, that thy Spirit
helps our infirmities, when we know not what we pray for, nor how to pray for
any thing as we ought: Now make good this word of thine to my soul at this
time, let me have the breathings of the Spirit of God in me; alas, the
breathings of man, if it come from gifts and parts, thou will never regard,
except there be the breathings of the holy Ghost in me.

But how should we know whether the Spirit of God come in, or no?



3. In the Name of Christ: John 14.13.
for Whatsoever you ask the Father in my Name, that I will do. There is a
necessity of praying in Christ's Name, 1. In regard of Admission. 2. In regard
of Assistance. 3. In regard of Acceptance.


1. In regard of Admission: God is a consuming fire, and we are dried stubble;
there is no approaching to him, but in Christ, in whom we have access with
boldness to the Throne of Grace: God will not look pleasingly on us, if we come
without Christ, he is no Throne of Grace without him; it is Christ who makes
that which was a Bar of Justice, a Bench of Mercy; in him we have admission: Do
we fall upon the Duty of Prayer? do it not in the strength of man, but in the
strength of Christ: say, Lord, I come alone in the Merits of Christ, to partake
of the Merits of the Lord Jesus: I have endeavored to prepare my self through
thy grace, but I look not for admission through my preparations or
dispositions, but through the blood and mediation of Jesus Christ.

2. In regard of Assistance: We pray, but we have no strength to do it without
Christ; we might as well be set to move Mountains, as to pray without the
strength of Christ: Without me (says Christ) you can do nothing; without union
with Christ, without communion with Christ, John 15.5.
we can do nothing: from Christ we must have both operating and cooperating
strength, both inherent and assistant strength; otherwise though we have grace,
we shall not be able to perform any work, nor exercise our own graces: it is he
that must work all our works in us and for us, the inherent work of grace
within us, and the required works of duty for us: And blessed be that God, who
has given to us what he requires of us, and has not only made Precepts
Promises, but Promises Performances.

3. In regard of Acceptance: Our works, they are not only impotent, but impure
too, as they come from us: It is Christ that must put validity to them, it is
Christ that must put his own odours to them, it is Christ that must put both
Spirit and Merit to them, his grace to work, and his blood to own them, for
whatever comes from his Spirit, it is presented through his Merit: Here is
great comfort: Do we look over our performances, and wonder that ever God
should accept them? so much deadness, so little life, so much coldness?
consider then, that God looks upon them, not as ours, but as Christ's, in whom
not only our persons, but our performances are accepted: Christ gives us his
spirit, and Christ is willing to own what we present by his Spirit, and God is
willing to own whatever is presented to him by Christ his Son. This rightly
considered, it will cause us in every petition put up, to think our selves so
much beholding to Christ, that we shall be ready to say in our hearts, when any
petition is granted, I may thank Jesus Christ for this.

But what is it to pray in Christ's name?

I answer, 1. To pray in Christ's name, is to pray with reliance upon the grace,
favor and worthiness of the merits of Christ, in whom we have believed, Ephesians.
3.12.
and have access with confidence, by the faith of him: Christ's satisfaction is
the ground of our intercession, because Christ's blood has purchased this (we
pray) therefore, O Lord, grant this.

2. To pray in Christ's name, is to pray from his command, and according to his
will; as when we send another in our name, we wish him to say thus, Hosea 14.3.
Tell him, I sent you, and that I desire such a thing of him; so when we take
those words which the Lord puts in our mouths, and desire those things only
that the Lord commands us to seek, whether absolutely, or conditionally, this
is to pray in his name.

3. To pray in Christ's name, is to pray for his ends, for the sake and use of
Christ: Mat. 10.41.
Thus the phrase is used, To receive a prophet in the name of a prophet (i.)
for this end and reason, because he is a prophet. Now let Christians observe,
when they would have any thing of God, to what use and end, and for whose sake
it is: James 4.3.
You ask, and have not, because you ask amiss, to spend it on your lusts. A
lust is properly such a desire (though for lawful things) wherein a man must
have a thing, Exodus 17.2.
because it pleases him: Give us water, that we may drink (was the brutish
cry of Israel) not that we may live to him that gives it; holy desires or
prayers (opposed unto lusts) are such desires of the soul left with God, with
submission to his will, as may best please him for his glory.

SECT. 3. The particular duties of the soul in prayer.
THe Duties of the soul in particular, are such as are -- in the mind. in the
heart.


1. In the mind, two things are required, Knowledge. Faith.


1. Knowledge of God to whom we pray. of that for which we pray.


1. John 4 22.
We must know and acknowledge Jesus Christ whom he has sent: Christ told the
Samaritans, Ye worship ye know not what; far be it from Christians thus to do:
Without this knowledge we shall wander into Will Worship, and superstitious
inventions; 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
And therefore know thou the God of thy fathers (said Solomon) and serve him
with a perfect heart.

2. We must know and understand what we pray, otherwise we are subject to our
Saviors reproof, Mat. 20.22.
You ask you know not what: two sorts of men are here condemned 1. Those that
pray in an unknown tongue. 2. Those who pray in a known tongue, but understand
not what they pray.

2. Faith, more general. more special.


1. Faith more general is such a faith, as apprehends the main promise of the
Gospel concerning salvation by Christ.

2. Faith more special, is such a faith as apprehends the precious promises
made to our prayers, whereby we are persuaded that our particular requests
shall be granted unto us, only with this distinction, -- in matters spiritual,
necessary to salvation, we are to ask absolutely, as being persuaded that God
has subordinated our salvation to his own glory; and we are to believe
absolutely, that the Lord will grant them unto us; yea, it is a good sign, if
we desire any saving grace, that the same grace is begun in us: but in matters
temporal or spiritual, not necessary to salvation, we are to ask them
conditionally, so far forth as they may stand with Gods glory, and the good of
our selves and our brethren; and we are to believe that he will so far forth
grant them: Mat. 26.39.
Thus our Savior prayed in the like case, O my Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me, nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.

2. In the heart three things are requisite, Humility. Reverence. Ardency of
spirit.


1. Humility, which is derived ab humo, from the ground; intimating, that when
we pray, we should humble our selves, as it were to the ground: Thus the
Christians in the eastern Churches were wont to cast themselves down to the
ground, when they called upon God: Genesis 18.27. and 32.10. 2 Samuel 6.22. Isa. 6.5.
Thus Abraham acknowledged himself but dust and ashes; Thus Jacob confessed
himself less then the least of all Gods mercies; thus David professed, that he
would be vile before the Lord; thus Isaiah cried out, I am a man of unclean
lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: Ezra 9.6.
Thus Ezra prayed, O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to
thee, my God, for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass
is grown up unto the Heavens: Thus the Centurion, Lord, Mat. 8.8.
I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof: Thus the woman of
Sirophaenicia, confesses her self a dog in comparison of the Israelites; and
thus the Prodigal received to favor, confesses himself unworthy to be called a
son: Here Is a cloud of witnesses, concluding that Humility in the heart is
requisite in prayer.

Psalm. 2.11.
2. Reverence of the majesty of God: Serve the Lord with reverence, and rejoice
with trembling: The blessed Angels being in Gods presence, and sounding forth
his praise, are described as having six wings, whereof two pair serve to cover
their faces and their feet, Isa. 6.2.
hereby betokening their wonderful reverence of God: How much more should we,
who inhabit these houses of clay, (subject to infirmities, and corrupted with
sin) be stricken with an awful reverence of Almighty God? did we consider our
selves to be in the midst of Angels, before the God of Angels, performing the
like exercise as the Angels, how would this strike us with a reverence of this
great King of Heaven?

3. Ardency, or fervency of spirit; this gives wings to our prayers, and
causes them to ascend before God; this sets on work all the graces of Gods
Spirit, and the more fervent the prayer is, the more they are intended,
actuated, increased: I mean not thus of every fervency; there is a fervency of
faith, and a fervency of mere natural desires: In this latter, there is no
holiness, no fire of the Spirit, but in the former there is: When Christ lived
upon earth, many came to him, and some were exceedingly importunate to be
healed, or to have Devils cast out, etc. now if he answered their requests, his
usual phrase was, Be it unto thee (not according to thy importunity and
fervency, but) according to thy faith; q.d. I heed not, I regard not this
clamor and earnestness, if it be only out of mere natural desires, but if it
be out of Faith; if besides sense of need, you have in you a true hope of
mercy, then be it unto thee according to that: This fervency is set out in the
Word by diverse significant phrases; sometimes it is called A crying unto the
Lord, thus Moses cried unto the Lord, and Samuel cried unto the Lord, Exodus
8.12. 1 Samuel 7.9. 1 King. 17.20, 21. 2 Kings 20.11. Jonah 3.8. Isa. 37.4. Lam.
2.19. 1 Samuel 7.6.
and Eliah cried unto the Lord, and Isaiah cried unto the Lord; sometimes a
crying mightily: Let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily
unto God: sometimes a lifting up of our prayers; wherefore lift up thy prayer
for the remnant that is left, said Hezekiah to Isaiah: sometimes a pouring
forth our souls before the Lord like water; O wall of the daughter of Zion, --
pour out thy heart like water before the face of the Lord: Thus the Israelites
drew water, and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said
there, We have sinned against the Lord: sometimes a groaning in spirit, or
groans of the spirit; Romans 8.26. 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. Col. 4.12.
The Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered: sometimes a praying exceedingly; sometimes a praying fervently,
sometimes a striving with God: Romans 15.30.
Now I beseech you brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love
of the Spirit, Genesis 32.24.
that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for me: sometimes a
wrestling with God: Thus Jacob wrestled with a man (i.) with God in form of a
man, until the breaking of the day: -- All these ^^rases do set forth the
excellency, the necessity of this ardency, fervency of prayer, required in the
text.

SECT. 4. The duties of the body in prayer.
1 Timothy 4.8.
THus far of the duties of the soul in prayer; as for bodily exercise (of it
self) it profits little: but if joined with the soul, 1 Cor. 6.20.
it is of great importance; Therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
Spirit, for both are Gods.

The duties of the body may be reduced to these two heads: The gesture of the
body. The speech of the mouth.


Concerning the first; in public prayer we are to follow the custom of the
Church wherein we live, if it be without scandal and superstition: In private
prayer we may take our liberty, so that our gesture be correspondent to the
affections and dispositions of the soul. -- In Scripture we read of these
several gestures: 1. Standing, which is a token of reverence and service, 2
Kings 5.25. 1 Samuel 16.21. 1 Kings 10.8. Job 29.7, 8. Genesis 18.22. 2 Cor. 20.5.
Psalm. 134.1. Luke 18.13. Mark 11.25. 2. Kneeling, which is a token of our
humility and earnestness in prayer, Psalm. 95.6. 2 Chro. 6.13. Dan. 6.10. Acts
7.60. and 9.40. and 20.36. Luke 22.41. 3. Prostration, or falling on the
ground, or falling on the face, a gesture of the greatest humiliation, though
not used amongst us in these parts of the world, Numb. 16.22. Josh. 5.14. Ezekiel.
9.8. and 11.13. Mat. 26.39. 4. Sitting, lying, walking, riding, journeying, in
some cases, 2 Samuel 7.18. 1 Kings 19.4. Isa. 38.2. Psalm. 6.6. Genesis 24.26. 2 Chronicles. 18.31. 5. Uncovering of the head in men, covering of the head in women,
which is a token of subjection, 1 Cor. 11.7, 10. Rev. 4.10. 6. Lifting up, and
casting down of the eyes, the former being a token of faith, the latter of
dejection and hum^^^^tion, Psalm. 123.1. Mat. 14.19. John 11.41. and 17.1. Luke
18.13. 7. Lifting up, or stretching forth of the hands; expressing humility and
earnest affection; and knocking them on the breast, which betokens guilt, and
earnest desire of pardon, Exodus 9.33. Psalm. 143.6. 1 Kings 8.22. Psalm 134.2.
Lam. 3.41. Luke 18.13. Luke 23.48.

Concerning the second; viz. The voice or speech of the mouth; it is necessary
in Church or family, and most convenient in private: Now the voice used in
prayer, is either Inarticulate. Articulate.


1. The inarticulate, is that which is uttered in sighing, groaning and
weeping: Lord, all my desire is before thee; Psalm 38.9. Isa. 38.14.
and my groaning is not hid from thee, says David; and Hezekiah professes,
That he did chatter like a crane or a swallow, and did mourn like a dove; Romans
8.26.
And the Spirit himself makes intercession for us with groanings, which cannot
be uttered.

2. The articulate voice, is the external speech it self, whereby the prayer is
expressed, wherein three things are considerable, Quantity, Quality. Form.


1. For Quantity, we must not affect prolixity, as if for multitude of words we
looked to be heard: When ye pray, Mat. 6.7.
use not vain repetition, as the heathen do: The Heathen thought, that their
gods did not always hear, as being otherwise employed (so Elias told Baals
Priests) and therefore they used to repeat the same things often, that if they
did not hear them at one time, they might hear them at another time; thus
Christians must not pray, they must not lengthen their prayers, as conceiving
that either God hears not, or that he will hear for the lengths sake; but on
the other side, where is variety of good matter, uttered with the attention of
mind, and vigor of affection, there the longer we continue in prayer, the
better it is.

2. For Quality, we need not be curious in respect of the style, God looking to
the heart, rather then the speech: As it is not the lowdness of a Preachers
voice, but the weight and holiness of the matter, and spirit of the Preacher,
that moves a wise and intelligent hearer; so not gifts, but graces in prayers,
are they that move the Lord: The reason, prayer moves not God as an Orator, but
as a child moves his Father: two words of a child humbled, and crying at his
fathers feet, will prevail more then penned orations: it is the meaning of the
spirit that God looks unto, more then the expressions, for the groans are said
to be unutterable, Romans 8.26. yet must we not be more careless and negligent
for the manner of speech, then we would be, if we were to speak to a mortal man:
If ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame
and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased
with thee, or accept thy person? says the Lord of hosts, Mal. 1.8. Mal. 1.8.


3. For the Form: We are not tied to any set form, nor are we so tied to
conceived prayer, as that it must be without all study or meditation, either
against the instant, or in former times: A man may conceive a prayer ex
tempore, and yet without Euthusiasms, or extraordinary revelations; viz. by the
help of his former studies and Meditations: and that I may afford some help
that way, I shall in conclusion of this Chapter, lay down a directory for
prayer, together with a form of prayer (though broken) in Scripture phrases.

SECT. 5. Duties after Prayer.
3. THe Duties subsequent, which follow after prayer, are these: --

1. Quietly to rest in the good will and pleasure of God, not doubting but the
Lord has heard our Prayers, and in good time shall grant that which shall be
most for his glory and our good; and this is the meaning of the word Amen,
wherewith we seal up our prayers.

2. Diligently to use all good means for the obtaining of our suits; as if I
pray for faith, or any other spiritual Grace, I must besides prayer, use all
good means carefully, which the Lord has ordained for the begetting and
increasing of those graces in us, as hearing the Word preached, receiving the
Sacrament, reading the Word, and meditating on it, otherwise our prayers are a
tempting of God, as if he must grant, not by means, but by miracles.

3. Carefully to look after our prayers, and to cast up our comings in, and
gainings by prayers, otherwise we are like foolish Venturers, who have a great
stock a going, but look not after their returns: In the morning I will direct
my prayers, Psalm. 5.3.
and look up:] There are two military words in the verse, David would not only
pray, but marshal up his prayers, put them in array; and when he had done so,
he would be as a spy upon a tower, to see whether he prevailed, whether he got
the day: For the better unfolding this mystery of grace, I shall propound and
give Answer to some Quaeres or cases of Conscience as: --

1. Suppose I have prayed, how shall I assuredly know that God hears, and will
answer in his own time?

2. Suppose the thing I desired shall not be answered, how may I assuredly know
that God notwithstanding does hear my prayers?

3. Suppose after prayer I observe all I can, I can by no means discern, that
either God will answer, or does hear my prayers, what shall I do then?

4. Suppose the thing I desire is answered, how may I assuredly know it was at
my prayers, or out of common providence?

5. Suppose that others joined with me in those prayers now answered, how shall
I know that my prayers had an hand in obtaining those answers, as well as any
others?

6. Suppose I am assured upon former observations, that God has heard and
answered my prayers in their particulars, what must I do then?

SECT. 6. The first Case: Suppose I have prayed, how may I assuredly know that
God hears, and will answer in his own time?
WE may resolve this case, by some observations before prayer, in prayer, and
after prayer.

1. Before prayer: When God prepares the heart to pray, when he pours upon a
man a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, a praying disposition; when he puts in
motives, suggests arguments and pleas unto God, as materials for prayer; all
which you shall find to come in readily, and of themselves; and that likewise
with a quickening heat, and enlargement of affections, with a lingering, and
longing, and restlesness of spirit, to pour out the soul unto God: This is a
sign that God lends his ear, and will return answers: Thou will prepare their
heart; thou will cause thine ear to hear; Psalm. 10.17.
q. d. Thou fashionest the heart, and composest it into a praying frame, and
that is a sign, Lord, that thou meanest to hear.

2. In prayer: As 1. when God draws nigh, and reveals himself to thy soul, in
and upon such or such a particular petition, when God smiles upon thee, welcoms
thee, falls about thy neck and kisseth thee; when no sooner thou comes into his
presence to inquire of him, but he says, Here I am, as the promise is, Isa.
58.9. Isa. 58.9.
this thou art to observe as a sign that he hears thy prayer, Psa. 69.17, 18.
and accepts both thee and it: Hear me speedily (says David) and that I may
know thou hear me, draw nigh unto my soul, Psalm. 69.17. 2. When God does put
a restless importunity into the heart, maugre all discouragements, for this or
that mercy; and when this importunity is joined with a subjection to Gods will,
and runs along with it, then has God stirred it up, and then look for
something to come: You know the parable, Luke 18.5.
how the unjust Judge heard the widow, for her importunities sake: So when God
puts this importunity into the heart, it is a sign God means then to hear and
answer.

3. After prayer: This will appear in several particulars; as --

1. When God quiets and calms the heart after prayer, by speaking something to
the heart, though what is spoken be not always discerned; as when you see an
earnest or importunate suitor going in to a great man, exceeding anxious, but
coming out very cheerful, contented, and quiet in spirit, you would conceive
that certainly something has been said to him, which gave him encouragement:
So when thou go to God, and have been importunate in a business, and thy
desires were exceedingly up for it, and then thou risest up with thy mind,
calmed and satisfied, and thou feelst the anxiousness, the solicitude of thy
heart, about the thing taken off and dispelled; this is a good sign that God
has heard, and will return answer to the full: When Hanna out of much
bitterness, and with strong desires, had poured her soul out unto the Lord, it
is said, 1 Samuel 1.18.
That she looked no more sad; And then God gave her a son, a son of her desires.

2. When God gives an obedient, dependent heart, in walking before him, when
that consideration still comes in as a curb unto sin: If I regard iniquity in
my heart, God will not hear me: Psalm. 66.18.
When God does still after praying, keep the soul in a more obedient frame of
spirit; when he keeps thee from using ill means, etc. it is a sign that God
has heard thy prayers, and thou shall have returns: David praying for his
life, Hear my prayer, Psalm. 143.1.
O Lord, give ear to my supplications; in thy faithfulness answer me, and in
thy righteousness: -- Presently after he prays for holiness, knowing that sin
would enervate and spoil all his prayers; Cause me to know thy way, wherein I
should walk: 8.
-- Teach me to do thy will. 10.


3. When God after prayer, strengthens the heart to wait and expect for the
mercy desired; when a man after prayer, begins to wait rather then pray (though
he prays still) because he looks now God should perform; in this case, and at
this time he may look for some good answer from God: David having prayed, says
to his soul, Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, Psalm. 27.14.
and he will strengthen the heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.

SECT. 7. The second Case: Suppose the thing I desire shall not be answered,
how may I assuredly know that God notwithstanding does hear my prayers?
WE may resolve this case, if 1. we observe these particulars:

1. Whether thy prayer was framed in a right manner? did thou not pray
absolutely for such blessings, as were never absolutely promised? if so, no
wonder thy prayer is denied; or did thou pray conditionally (as Christ
prayed, If it be possible, etc.) then thy prayer may be heard, and yet the
things denied; for otherwise Christ had not been heard, when yet the text says,
He was heard in that he feared. Heb 5.7.


2. Whether there be not a reservation in that denial, for some greater mercy,
whereof that denial was the foundation? if we had many of our desires, we
should be undone: If the child had lived for which David so earnestly prayed,
he would but have been a living monument of his own shame; God therefore denied
his prayer, but after he gave him a Solomon.

3. Whether God does not answer thee still according to the ground of thy
prayer? Now the ground and intent of thy prayer, is after Gods glory, the
Churches good, thy own particular comfort; it may be God denies the particular
mercy thou desire, and yet he answers the ground of thy prayer, his glory
shall be advanced, his Church preserved, thy comfort made up (even for that
prayer of thine) some other way.

4. Whether God yields not far to give thee satisfaction, as if he were tender
of denying thee? So the Lord answered Abraham, Genesis 17.18, 20.
when praying for Ishmael, O let Ishmael live in thy sight! God went as far in
answering his request as might be, I have heard thee (said God) and I have
blessed him, and I will make him fruitful, and multiply him exceedingly, and he
shall beget twelve Princes; but my covenant I will establish with Isaac.

5. What effects that denial has upon thy heart? as --

1. Whether thy heart be enlarged to acknowledge God to be holy and righteous
in his dealings with thee, and thine own unworthiness the cause of his denying
thee? I cry in the day time (says David) but thou hear not: -- Yet thou art
holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. Psalm. 22.2, 3.


2. Whether God fills thy heart with holy contentment in the denial?

3. Whether thou can be thankful to God out of faith, that God has ordered
all for the best, though he has denied thee?

4. Whether thy heart be not discouraged, but thou can pray still, at least
for other things? it moves ingenuous natures to see men take repulses and
denials well, and so it moves God: Now if the case be thus, if upon observation
thou can say, that thy prayers, though denied, were conditional [if God will]
that thou perceivest a reservation in Gods denial, for some greater mercy; that
God answered thee, at least, according to the ground of thy prayers, that God
yielded far to thee; as if he were loath to deny thy prayers; that thou feel
such effects of denial upon thy heart, as these: -- 1. An enlargement, to
acknowledge God holy and righteous. 2. An holy contentment in the denial. 3. A
thankful heart. 4. An heart not discouraged howsoever. Surely then God hears,
or God has heard thy prayers, although the particular suits are not
accomplished.

SECT. 8. The third Case: Suppose after prayer, I observe all I can, and can by
no means discover, that either God will answer or hear my prayers, What shall I
do then?
WE may resolve this case by laying open the duties appertaining to such a
soul: Can thou not discern Gods dealings? spy no returns of thy prayers? it
is then thy duty --

1. To examine what is the cause; and if the fault be in our prayer, because we
did ask amiss, Iam. 4.3.
we must endeavor by Gods grace to amend; or if the fault be in our selves,
because we are impenitent, we must first repent, and then renew our prayers
unto God.

2. To persist and persevere in our prayers, without fainting, Luke 18.1. Romans
12.12.
Continue instant in prayer, as Hanna, and David, and Daniel, and Bartimeus,
and that importunate widow.

3. To expect the Lords leisure: Psalm. 40.1.
I waited patiently for the Lord (says David) and he inclined unto me, and
heard my cry.

4. To rest in the good will and pleasure of God: Let him do what seems him
good: Who can tell, but God in time may give thee a sign of his good will
toward thee, and that he has heard thy prayers? howsoever, it is the Lord
that gives or denies, let him do what he please.

SECT. 9. The fourth Case: Suppose the thing I desire is answered, how may I
assuredly know it was by my prayers, and not out of common providence?
WE may resolve this case by giving these directions to the soul, whereby it
may be enabled to discern when and how things prayed for, come in by prayer; As

1. From the manner of Gods performance: When God gives any thing in answer to
prayers, he often discovers a more then ordinary hand of providence i^ it: As

1. By bringing it to pass through many difficulties: Thus Peter was delivered
out of prison at the prayers of the Church; Acts 12.6, 10.
and we find 1. He was sleeping between two Soldiers, if they had wakened, he
had been discovered. 2. He was in chains, but they fell off. 3. The Keepers
stood before the door, but they minded him not. 4. When one watch is past, he
passes quietly through another. 5. When both those were past, an iron gate
flies open of its own accord: Now such difficulties are there in many
businesses, which yet in the end are accomplished by prayer; iron chains fall
off, iron gates, enemies hearts fly open of their own accord, and though not in
that miraculous manner, by the means of an Angel, yet no less wonderful.

2. By facilitating all means, and causing them to conspire to accomplish the
thing prayed for; thou have wind and tide, and a fair day, and all the way
paved and plain before thee; there falls out a great conjunction and meeting of
many circumstances together to effect it, which had influence into it,
wherefore if any one had been wanting, happily the thing had not been done: Thus
when Israel went out of Egypt (which was the accomplishment of their prayers,
Exodus 2.23.
their cry came up unto God (says the Text) how were all things facilitated?
the Egyptians that detained them, then came and entreated them to go out, Rise
up, Exodus 12.13.
and get you forth amongst my people, said Pharaoh; Yea, they were urgent upon
the people, that they might send them out of the Land; yea, They hired them to
go out with their jewels of silver, 33.
and jewels of gold, and raiment, 35.32.
and Pharaoh parts himself lovingly and fairly with them, and desires their
prayers, Bless me also; yea, to show there was no resistance, the Text says,
Exodus 11.7.
A dog did not move his tongue; the bruit creatures did not disturb them,
though at midnight, when these creatures use to be most obstreperous through
noises, especially at Travelers.

3. By bringing it to pass suddenly and unexpectedly; as the return of the
captivity of Babylon, which was the conclusion of many prayers, was done in a
trice; they were as men in a dream, Psalm. 126.1.
they could scarce believe it was so, when it was done.

4. By doing above what was desired, with addition of other mercies; so Solomon
asked wisdom, 1 Kings 3.12, 13.
and God gave him more then he asked, Peace, Riches and Honor: When prayers are
answered, usually mercies come thick; the thing we prayed for, comes not alone.

5. By adding some special circumstance, as a token of Gods special hand in it;
such a token as a man himself often takes notice of, yea, and others also often
takes notice of it; Psalm. 86.17.
Show me a token for good (says David) that others that hate me may see it,
and be ashamed: So when Abraham and Isaac, and Abraham's servant, had prayed for
a wife for Isaac; see by what a token God showed that he had heard their
prayers; Rebekkah was the first that came out, Genesis 24 14.
and if she be the woman appointed for Isaac (prays the servant) let her offer
me drink, and my camels also, and thereby shall I know thou have showed
kindeness to my Master; and God gave him the token, and therefore the servant
bowed at it, and worshipped the Lord: 26.
If we take notice of the sign, it was such as argued in her a kind, courteous
disposition, which therefore (it may be) he singled out as a token of a meet
wife, especially to be looked at in the marriage choice.

2. From the time, wherein the thing prayed for is accomplished: God who does
all things in weight and measure, shows his wisdom and love as much in the
season, as in giving the thing it self: God considers all times of thy life,
and still chooses the best and fittest to answer thy prayers in: Isa 49 8.
In an acceptable time have I heard thee (says God) As --

1. It may be at the very time when thou art most instant and earnest in
prayer: Isa. 65.24.
Whiles they are yet speaking (says God) I will hear; a time culled out on
purpose, that they might rest assured it was an answer to their prayers.

2. At that time when thou have most need, and when thy heart is most fitted
for mercy (l.) when thy heart is most subdued, and thy lusts mortified, for
then thou art fittest to relish his goodness alone, and not to be drawn away
with the carnal sweetness that is in the thing; Psalm. 10.17.
Thou will prepare thine heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear, thou will
prepare thine heart in taking it off from the thing desired, in making it
quieted and contented with God in the thing, and then thou will hear] this is
the fittest time.

3. From the effects upon thy heart that prayest: As --

1. If the thing granted by thy prayers, draw thy heart more near unto God:
Things granted out of ordinary providence only, do increase our lusts, and are
snares to us; but if thou find Gods dealings with thee, to be a kindly
motive to cause thee to mourn for sin, and to be a restraint against sin, it is
a sign it was a fruit of thy prayer: Psalm. 6.8.
Away from me ye workers of iniquity (says David) God has heard the voice of
my weeping; or,

2. If thou find Gods dealings with thee, to be a kindly motive, to cause
thee to rejoice in God, more then in the thing obtained, it is a sign it was a
fruit of thy prayer. Hanna blessing God for her child, 1 Samuel 2.1.
My heart rejoices in the Lord, says she: She rejoices not so much in the
gift, as in the giver, not so much in her child, as in his favor that answered
her prayer.

2. If the mercy obtained by thy prayer, enlarge thy heart with thankfulness:
Self-love makes us more forward to pray, then to give thanks, for nature is all
of the craving and taking hand; but where Grace is, there will be no eminent
mercy gotten with much struggling, but there will be a continual, particular
thankful remembrance of it a long while after, with much enlargement: Great
blessings won with prayer, are worn with thankfulness; such a man will not ask
new, but withal, he will give thanks for old: Thankfulness of all duties
proceeds from pure Grace, therefore if thy spirit stirs thee to it, it is a
sign he made the prayer: See Hanna's song when she had her desire, 1 Samuel 2.1.

3. If the mercy gotten by thy prayer, does encourage thee to go to God another
time, to pray again more confidently and fervently, it is a sign thou have
gotten the former mercy that way: Psalm. 116.2.
The Lord has heard me (says David) and I will call upon him as long as I
live.

4. If the thing obtained by thy prayer, does make thee careful to perform thy
vows made in prayer: Psa. 66.13, 14
I will pay thee my vows (says David) which my lips have uttered, and my mouth
has spoken, when I was in my trouble; and the reason follows, because that
verily God has heard me, when I cried to him; and so Eliphaz in Job, does
connect and hang these two together, Thou shall make thy prayer to him, and he
shall hear thee, Job 22.27.
and thou shall pay thy vows.

5. If the thing granted by thy prayer, prove a real and stable mercy; if the
curse be taken out, and it have few thorns and vexations in it: When the
blessing of God makes rich, Prove. 10.22.
he adds no sorrow with it: It may be the heart was put to some trouble in
the deferring, but its recompensed by the more settled; constant, immixt
sweetness in the enjoying.

6. If the mercy obtained brings with it assurance of Gods love, and an
evidence of his favor: I need not make that a sign, for when this comes with a
mercy, it carries its own evidence; you will then know well enough that it is
the fruit of prayer.

SECT. 10. The fifth Case: Suppose that others join with me in those prayers
now answered, how should I know that my prayers had an hand in obtaining those
answers, as well as any others?
WE may resolve this case by these observations: As --

1. If thy heart did sympathize and accord in the same holy affection with
those others in praying, then it is certain thy voice has helped to carry it:
Mat. 18.19.
If two of you shall agree on earth, (says Christ) as touching any thing that
they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven: If
two of you shall agree (the word is (...)) q.d. if you harmonially agree to
play the same tune (for prayers are music in Gods ears, Ephesians. 2.19.
and so called melody to God) if you agree not only in the thing prayed for,
but in your affections, for it is the affections that makes the consort and
melody: If the same holy affections were touched and struck by Gods Spirit in
thy heart, that was in others, then did thou help to make up the consort, and
without thee it had been imperfect; yea, without thee the thing might not have
been done, for God sometimes stands upon such a number of voices (as when he
named ten persons in Sodom) and so one voice may cast it.

2. If thy heart be filled with joy in the accomplishment of what was prayed
for, it is an evident argument that thy prayers did move the Lord to effect it,
as well as the prayers of others. When good old Simeon saw his prayers answered
in sending the Messiah into the world, he was even willing to dye through joy,
and thought he could never dye in a better time: Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, Luke 2.29.
according to thy word.

3. If the thing concern others, and thy heart be thankful for a blessing on
others, prayed for by thee with others, it is a sign thy prayers had some hand
in it: Thus Paul prayed for the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 7, 9.
and when Timothy came, and brought him good tidings of their faith and
charity, he was not only comforted, but in his ravishment he cries, What
thanks can we render again to God for you?

4. If the thing concern thy self which was prayed for by others, helping thee
in their prayers, what cause have thou but to think it was granted for thy own
prayers, and not for theirs only? It may be indeed that God heard thee the
sooner through the help of their prayers: Phil. 1.19.
I know this shall turn to my salvation, through your prayers, said Paul: but
if God stirs up thy heart to pray for thy self, as well as others pray for
thee, then God that gave thee an heart to pray, has heard thy prayers also,
and has had a respect to thee as well (if not more then) to others, because it
concerns thy self especially, as being a more special mercy to thee then to
others.

SECT. 11. The sixth Case: Suppose I am assured upon former observation, that
God has heard and answered my prayers in their particulars, what must I do
then?
WE may resolve this Case, by laying open the duties appertaining to such a
soul: Art thou now assured of answer and return of thy prayers, it is thy duty
then --

1 To be thankful to God for his goodness: Psalm. 28.6.
Blessed be the Lord (says David) because he has heard the voice of my
supplications.

2. To love God the more, and to resolve with confidence to call upon him so
much the more: I love the Lord, Psalm. 116.1, 2.
because he has heard the voice of my supplication; because he has inclined
his ear to me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.

3. To have such a deportment and demeanor ever after, as is suitable to such
who have commerce and intercourse with God; as, To depart from sin, to apply
our hearts to obedience, Psalm. 6.8.
and to pay all our vows: Away from me ye workers of iniquity, God has heard
the voice of my weeping: -- And I will pay thee my vows which my lips have
uttered; -- For God has heard me. Psalm. 66.13, 14, 19.


SECT. 12. A Directory for Prayer.
I Promised in conclusion of this Chapter, to lay down a Directory, and a
broken or interrupted Scripture-form of prayer: For the former, I shall draw
this Scheame.

In Prayer, observe ^e The Preface to it, which consists of a description of God
by his Attributes. Promises.
a craving of Audience. Acceptance.

The Parts of it, Confess^^^ Of sin. 1. Of the sin of o^^ f^rst Parents. 2. Of
O^^^inal pollution. 3. Of a^^ual Tra^^gression In th^^^^t, word, deed before
Conversion. since Conversion.
Against Light of Knowledge. Checks of Con^. Long (...) ^^^nce of God. Tend^^
M^^cies. (...) ^^^^^ents. (...) Frequent Promises. Multiplied Vows.
(...) age, sex, constitution, relations, etc. Se^^^ ^^en, bo^om ^us^, Ag^^^
(...) Against (...) Gospel of Christ; as Our not ^^^sting after Christ Ou^ not
relying on Christ. Our grieving Gods Spirit. Our continued impenitency.
In their aggravations by circumstances of The person against whom. The number
of them. The time, place, manner, etc.


Of the judgment and condemnation we ^^serve for sin.
Pe^^^^ For our selves. Apprecation for Pardon of sin, for his Names sake.
Promise sake. Mercies sake. Christ's sake.
Sealing of this pardon to our Consciences. Peace of Conscience, and joy in the
holy Ghost. Justifying and lively faith. Rep^^^^^^ unto life. Saving knowledge.
Lo^^ to God, Saints, E^^mies. L^vely hope, a dent z^al, filial fear, etc.
Growth in grace. Means conducing; as, The Word preached. The Sacraments. The
Sabbaths.
A blessing on our outward Calling. Sanctifying of all afflictions to us or
others.
Deprecation against All evil; of sin especially. The Devil, and all his
assaults. The World, and all its temptations. Our own Flesh, with all the lusts
of it. Our darling Corruptions, Dalilah sins. All judgments National. Personal
bodily Diseases. Plagues.
ghostly Terror of Conscience. Spiritual desertions.


The sting of death, and horror of the grave.
Thanksgiving for blessings Spiritual Election, with all the golden chain of
Graces hanging thereon; us, Redemption. Vocation. Justification. Sanctification
Hope of glory
Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths, Ordinances, labors of the learned. Power over sin,
Satan, our own selves.
Temporal Creation. Continual preservation. Life, health, peace, prosperity,
plenty, etc. Deliverance from judgments, National and Personal. Victory over
the Churches enemies.


For others. All belonging to Gods election, though as yet uncalled, as Jews.
Pagans, Infidels. Profane or ignorant Christians. Persecutors themselves.
All in the bosom of the Church In foreign Countries. In our own Kingdom,
King. Queen. Seed Royal. Parliament. Synod of Divines. Nobility. Magistracy.
Ministry. Gentry, Commonalty. Friends, Enemies. All afflicted in Soul. Body.







SECT. 13.
. 1. A form of prayer in Scripture Phrase.
IN this form observe, --

1. A description of God.
O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh. Number. 16.22.
--

Who have created the heavens, and stretched them out, Isa. 42.5.
who have spread forth the earth, and that which comes out of it, who give
breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein: See
Nehem. 1.5. Isa. 37.16. Jer. 23.24. Dan. 9.4. Psalm. 65.2. 1 Timothy 1.17. and
6.16, etc.

2. A begging of Audience.
Look down from heaven thy holy habitation: Deuteronomy. 26.15. 1 Kings 8.28
--

Have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servants, to hearken to the cry, and
to the prayer which thy servants pray before thee: -- See Nehem. 1.6. Psalm.
102.1, 2. Isa. 37.17. Dan. 9.17, etc.

3. A confession of the sins of our first Parents.
We confess, O Lord, Genesis 1.26. and 3.6.
thou createdst our first parents in thine own image, but the Serpent beguiled
them, and they did eat of the forbidden fruit: -- See Romans 5.12.

4. Confession of Original pollution.
We are risen up in our fathers stead, Number. 32.14.
an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the Lord toward
us: -- See Psalm. 51.5. Romans 7.14, 23. Lam. 5.7. Ezekiel. 16.4, 6, etc.

5. A confession of actual transgressions in thought, word, deed.
The words of our mouth are iniquity and deceit: Psalm. 36.3. and 64.3. Genesis
20.9.
--

We have whet our tongues like swords, and have bent our bows to shoot out
arrows, even bitter words. --

We have done deeds unto thee, that ought not to be done: -- See Genesis 6.5. Isa.
6.5. Dan. 9.5. Mat. 12.36. and 15.19. Tit. 3.3. Ezekiel. 16.8, 15, 23, 25, etc.

6. Acted against light of knowledge.
We have trusted in our wickedness, we have said, Isa. 47.10.
None sees us; our wisdom and our knowledge has perverted us: -- See Neh.
9.14, 16. Isa. 47.10. Jer. 6.16. Romans 1.22. and 2.18. Tit. 1.16, etc.

7. Against checks of Conscience.
Rom 2.15.
Our very Consciences have born witness, and our thoughts in the mean while have
accused us: -- See Romans 7.15, 18, 19, etc.

8. Against long forbearance of God.
Neh 9.30.
Many a year have thou forborne us, and testified against us by thy Spirit in thy
prophets, yet would we not give ear: -- See Eccles. 8.11. Romans 2.4, etc.

9. Against tender mercies.
Psalm. 23.6.
Surely Lord, thy goodness and mercy have followed us all the days of our life
--

Jonah 2.8.
But we have observed lying vanities, and forsaken our own mercy: -- See Deuteronomy.
32.15. Neh. 9.25, 26, 27, 28. Psalm. 106.43. Isa. 63.9, 10, etc.

10. Against terrifying judgments.
Psalm. 76.8.
Thou have caused judgment to be heard from heaven: --

Isa. 66 2.
But we have not trembled at thy word: -- See Deuteronomy. 29.19. Psalm. 78.31, 32. Jer.
5.3, 5. Romans 2.5, etc.

11. Against frequent Purposes, Promises, Vows of better Obedience.
Neh. 5.12. Eccles 5 4. Deuteronomy. 29.21.
We have not done according to our promise, -- Nor paid that which we have
vowed; -- Nay Lord, they have been sin unto us: -- See Deuteronomy. 29.25. 1 Kings
19.10. Psalm. 78.10, 37. Jermiah 2.20.

12. Sins of our Age, Sex, Constitution, Relation and Calling.
Prove. 22.15.
We have found by experience, that foolishness is bound in the heart of a
child: --

Psalm. 25.7.
O remember not the sins of our youth: -- See Genesis 42.21. Neh. 9.34, 35, etc.

13. Secret and open sins, our most beloved lusts.
Psalm. 10.8. 2 Samuel 12.11.
We have sitten in the lurking places of the villages, in the secret places have
we murdered the innocent, our eyes are privily set against the poor; -- Nay,
we have sinned openly in the sight of the sun; we have sinned without shame: --

Mat. 5.29, 30.
We lodge within us many bosom lusts, right hands, and right eyes, and we are
loath to cut them off, or pluck them out: -- See Psalm. 19.12. and 90.8. Jer.
6.15. Isa. 3.9. Mat. 19.22, etc.

14. Sins against the Law of God.
Numb. 15 22
We have erred, and not observed all these Commandments, which the Lord has
spoken: -- See Nehem. 1.7. Ezra 9.10. Romans 7.15, 19, 20, etc.

15. Sins against the Gospel of Christ.
We have not obeyed the Gospel; -- How then should we escape, Romans 10.16. Heb.
2.3.
if we neglect so great Salvation: See 1 Pet. 4.17, etc.

16. Our not thirsting after Christ.
Our souls break not for the longings that they should have unto Christ at all
times: -- See Psalm. 42.1, etc. Psalm. 119.20.


17. Our not relying on Christ his merits and promises.
We have relied on the King of Syria (outward helps and means) and not on the
Lord: See Heb. 3.12, 13. 2 Chro. 16.7.


18. Our grieving Gods Spirit.
We have grieved thy holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Jude 4.
and turned the graces of God into lasciviousness: -- See Mark 3.5. Heb. 3.10,
17. Genesis 6.6, etc.

19. Our continual impenitency, notwithstanding all means of Grace.
We have despised the pleasant Land, Psalm. 106.24, 25.
we have not believed thy word, but murmured in our tents, and hearkened not
unto the voice of the Lord: -- See Isaiah 1.6. and 5.4. and 28.13.

20. Aggravations of sin by the person against whom.
Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, Psalm. 51.4.
and done this evil in thy sight: See Numb. 21.7. Heb. 6.6. Heb. 10.29, etc.

21. By the number of them, time, place, etc.
Innumerable evils have compassed us about; Psalm. 40.12.
-- They are m^e then the hairs of our head: -- See Psalm. 38.4. Ezra 9.6. Job
9.3. Ifa. 26.10, etc.

22. An accusing, judging, and condemning our selves.
Should thou whet thy glittering sword, Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42.
and thy hand take hold on judgment, -- Thou might make thy arrows drunk
with blood, and thy sword might devour flesh from the beginning of revenges:
See Dan. 9.7, 8, 9. Neh. 9 33. Lam. 5.16. Isa. 28.17. Jer. 5.9. -- 50.15, 25.
Ezekiel 5.15. -- 14.8. -- 15.7.23, 33. -- 25.17. Rev. 4.5, etc. Thus for
Confession.

. 2. The 2d part of prayer is, Petition for our selves. others.

1. We petition for pardon of sin.
Exodus 34.9.
LOrd, pardon our iniquities, and our sins, and take us for thine inheritance:
See 2 Samuel 24.10. Neh. 4.5. Psalm. 119.132. Isa. 1.18. Isa. 44.2, etc.

For his holy Names sake.

Ezekiel. 20 9.
Do it Lord, for thy names sake: -- See Ezekiel. 14.22. and 20.44. Psalm. 25.11, etc.

For his Promise sake. Ier. 50.20.
Thou have said, In those days, and in that time, the iniquity of Israel shall
be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall
not be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve: -- See Neh. 9.17. Isa.
55.7. Jer. 5.1. and 33.8. and 50.20. Mic. 7.18.

For his Mercies sake. Psalm. 31.16.
Make thy face to shine upon thy servants; O save us for thy mercies sake: --
See Psalm. 25.7. Psalm. 79.8, etc.

For Christ's sake. Ephesians. 4.32.
O that God for Christ's sake would forgive us our sins: -- See John 1.29 Psalm.
51.7. Isa. 55.7. Jer. 33.20, etc.

2. For sealing of this pardon in our Consciences.
Psalm. 50.23.
Show us the salvation of God: -- See 2 Cor. 1.22. Exodus 14.13. and 33.13, 18.
Psalm. 35.3, etc.

3. For Peace of Conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost.
Romans 14.17. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Give us joy in the holy Ghost: -- And the answer of a good Conscience toward
God: -- See Psalm. 51.8, 11, 12. Romans 8.15, 16, etc.

4. For justifying and lively faith.
Ephesians. 2 8.
Give us ever that gift of God, a soul-saving and justifying faith: See Ephesians.
6.16. Phil. 3.9. Tit. 1.1. Heb. 11.1. Mat. 6.39. -- 7.20, etc.

5. For repentance unto life.
Ezekiel. 14.6.
Give us to repent, and to turn our selves from our idols: -- See Psalm 6.6.
Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. Mat. 11.21. Acts 11.18. 2 Cor. 7.10. Rev. 2.21, etc.

6. For saving knowledge.
Give us the Spirit of truth, who will guide us in all truth: John 16.13. Prove.
2.2, 3, 5.
--

Incline our ears to wisdom, and our hearts to understanding, that we may
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, that we may be
enabled to cry unto thee our God, We know thee: -- See Hab. 2.14. Ephesians. 1.17,
18. Psalm. 25.14. 1 John 2.20. Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19.

7. For love to God, Saints, Enemies.
Thou have said, Thou will circumcise our hearts, Deuteronomy. 30 6. John 13.34. Mat.
5.44.
and the hearts of our seed, to love the Lord our God, with all our heart, and
with all our soul: -- Give us also to love one another, as Christ has loved
us: -- Cause us to love our very enemies, to bless them that curse us: -- Luke
7.47. Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. Phil. 1.9, etc.

8. For lively Hope, ardent Zeal, filial Fear, Patience, Perseverance, etc.
Give us to set our hope in God, Psalm. 78.7. Rom 12.11. 2 Chro. 19.7. Heb.
12.1, 2, 3. and 10.23.
-- to be zealously affected always in every good thing: -- Let the fear of the
Lord be upon us; -- Make us run with patience the race that is set before us,
looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith: -- Help us to hold
fast the profession of our faith without wavering: -- See Prove. 14.32. Psalm.
146.5. John 2.17. 2 Cor. 9.2. 1 Pet. 4.12, 13. Romans 8.18. Phil. 1.29. Prove.
37.23, 24. Isa. 46.4. Psalm. 48.14, etc.

9. For growth in Grace.
Guide us continually, and satisfy our souls in drought: O make fat our bones,
that we may be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters
fail not: See Mal. 4.2. Prove. 4.18. Hosea 14.5, 6. Isa. 44.3, 4, etc. Isa.
58.11.


10. For the means of Grace, as the Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths.
Let the word of God grow mightily and prevail: Acts 19.20. Lev. 19.30.
-- Teach us to keep thy Sabbaths, and to reverence thy Sanctuary: -- See Psalm.
19.7. Prove. 20.12. Isa. 55.10, 11. and 50.4. and 53.10. Psalm. 36.8. Isa. 26.8.
Heb. 4.12, etc.

11. For a blessing on our outward callings.
Establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, Psalm 90.17. Job 10 15.
the work of our hands establish thou it: -- See Genesis 28.20, 21. 1 Chronicles. 4.10.
Neh. 1.11. Psalm. 91.11, 12. Jer. 10.23, etc.

12. For sanctifying of all afflictions to us.
O Lord, see our afflictions, Job 10.15.
-- and let our tribulations workout patience, Romans 5.3, 4.
and patience experience, and experience hope: See Psalm. 68.20. Zech. 2.5. Heb.
12.20. Jer. 46.28. 1 Cor. 10.13. Isa. 27.9. 2 Cor. 4.16, etc.

13. Against all evil of sin, the Devil, World, Flesh, our special sins.
Mat. 6 13. Ephesians. 6 11. Mat. 16.26. Cor. 7.1.
O Lord, deliver us from evil, -- from all the wiles of the Devil, -- from the
worlds allurements; for what will it profit us to gain the whole world, and to
lose our souls? -- from all the filthiness of the flesh, -- especially from our
darling lusts: See Romans 6.11, 12, 22. 2 Cor. 10.5. 1 John 5.18. John 16.33. 1
John 5.4. Romans 8.8. Psalm. 13.1, 2, etc.

14. Against all evil of punishment National. Personal.

Psalm. 76.5. 2 Chro 7.14. Psalm. 91.10. and 6 3.
Thou have plagued our Nation; The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept
their sleep, and none of the men of might have found their hands: -- O heal the
Land; -- Let no evil befall us, neither let any plague come nigh our dwellings:
-- Our souls are among Lions, our soul also is sore vexed, but thou, O Lord,
how long? See Psalm. 57.3. and 6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 25.16, 17, 18. Mat. 26.39.

15. For all that belong to Gods election, though uncalled as yet.
Isa 33.20.
Look upon Zion the City of our solemnities. -- Call home the Jews; thou have
revealed that they shall be graffed in again, and thou art able to graff them
in again: Romans 11.23.
-- Bring in the Gentiles; thou had said, I will lift up my hands to the
Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, Isa. 49.22.
and they shall bring their sons in their arms, and their daughters shall be
carried upon their shoulders: -- Convert profane and ignorant Christians,
Ezekiel. 34.11. John 10.16.
search thy sheep, and seek them out, -- that there may be one fold, and one
shepherd: -- See Isa. 49.16, 17. A^ 1. -- 5.15. Ezekiel. 34.12, 13. Isaiah 2.2.
and 60.3, 5, 8. and 54.1, 2. and 60.18, 19, etc.

16. For those called in foreign Countries.
Isa. 51.9.
Awake, ^wake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake as in the ancient days,
in the generations of old: -- Jer. 12.9, 10, 11. Psalm. 17.7, 8, etc.

17. For our own Churches.
Isa. 63.15, 16.
Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of
thy glory; where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and
of thy mercy toward us? -- See Jer. 14. 19, 20, 21. Daniel 9.19. Jer. 12.7.
Amos 9.11, 12. Mic. 2.12. Psalm. 5.12, etc.

18. For our King, Queen, Seed-royal.
Let thy mercy and truth preserve our King, Prove. 20.28.
and let his throne be holden up with mercy: -- See Psalm. 72.1. Prove. 22.6. 2 Samuel 25.19. Psalm. 89.29.

19. For Magistracy, Ministry, People.
Set godly Magistrates and Judges amongst us, Col. 1.25, 26.
which may judge according to the Laws: -- Give the Ministers fully to preach
the word of God, even the mystery which has been hid from ages, and from
generations, but now is made manifest to thy Saints: -- Bless all from Dan to
Beershebah, Isa. 62.12.
call them thy holy people, the Redeemed of the Lord: -- See Proverbs 11.14.
Isaiah 11.2. 2 Chronicles. 23.20. Psalm 105.22. Amos 5.24. and 6.12. Isaiah 53.10. 2
Samuel 17.11. Eccles. 12.10, 11. Isaiah 62.6, 7, etc.

20. For all afflicted in soul or body.
Give power to the faint, and to them that have no might: Isa. 40.29, 31.
-- Let them wait on thee, and renew their strength, and mount up with wings as
Eagles: -- See Isaiah 40.29. Psalm 41.31. -- 68.20. -- 79.11. Isaiah 30.26,
etc. Thus far Petition.

. 3. The third part of Prayer, is Thanksgiving for blessings Spiritual.
Temporal.

1. WE bless God for our election, with all the golden chain of Graces hanging
on it.
We give thanks to God, C^l. 1.3. Romans 11.^8.
and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby we are beloved for the
Fathers sake, and for that golden chain of Graces hanging thereon, having
predestined us to the adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will; Ephesians 1.5. and 1.6, 7.
-- Having accepted us in the beloved, in whom we have redemption through his
blood; -- Having given us the forgiveness of our sins, according to the riches
of his grace; Ephesians. 2.1.
-- Having quickened us who were dead in trespasses and sins: -- Walking in
times past according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of
the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience: 2.
-- But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ: 4,
-- And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places
in Christ Jesus, 5, 6,
-- That in ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace unto
us: -- See Col. 1.12, 21. Romans 11.7, 28. 1 These. 1.4. 7.
Romans 8.15, 23. Gal. 4.5. Ephesians. 1.5. Psalm. 111.9. -- 130.7. Romans 3.24. Heb.
9.12, 15. Col. 1.14. Romans 4.7. Ephesians. 4.32. 1 John 2.12, etc.

2. We bless God for his Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths, labors of the learned, etc.
Psalm. 147.19, 20. 1. Cor. 1.21.
Thou have showed thy word unto Jacob, thy statutes and thy judgments unto
Israel: Thou have not dealt so with all nations, and as for thy judgments,
they have not known them: -- Thou have been pleased by the foolishness of
preaching, to save them that believe, by preaching at the first or second
rebound, by lively voice, or printed Sermons: -- See Acts 2.41. Tit. 1.3. 1
Pet. 1.25. Jer. 15.16. Ezekiel. 20.46. -- 21.2. 2 Cor. 5.19. Phil. 2.16. Col. 1.5.
2 Pet. 1.19. etc.

3. We bless God for any power over sin, Satan, or our own corruptions.
Ephesians. 6.10.
We acknowledge, Lord, to thy glory, that all our strength is in thee, and in
the power of thy might: See Hosea 10.8. -- 12.8. Romans 5.20. and 6.6, 7, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Acts 26.18. Romans 16.20, etc.

4. We bless God for our creation, preservation, life, health, peace,
deliverance, victories.
Genesis 1.27. Psalm. 40.11. and 103.4. Ier. 30.17. Psalm. 122.7. Prove. 30.8. Isa.
54.7. Exodus 15.2.
We bless thee for our creation after thine own image; -- for our preservation,
by thy loving kindeness and truth; -- for our life once and again redeemed from
destruction; -- for our health once again restored; -- for our liberty,
prosperity, peace in our walls and palaces; -- for our food and raiment
convenient for us; -- for deliverance from judgments national and personal,
for a little moment did thou forsake us, but with great mercies have thou
gathered us: Judges 5.12.
-- For all the victories over thine and thy Churches enemies, well may we
sing, The Lord is our strength and our song, and he is become our salvation; he
is our God, and we will prepare him an habitation, our fathers God, and we will
exalt him: -- Awake, awake, O my soul, awake, awake, 1 Chro. 16.8, 9.10, 31,
34, 36.
utter a song: -- Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, make known his
deeds among the people; sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, and talk of all
his wondrous works; glory in his name, let the heart of them rejoice that seek
the Lord: -- Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice, and let men
say among the nations, The Lord reigns: O give thanks unto the Lord, for he
is good, for his mercy endures for ever: -- Blessed be the Lord God of Israel
for ever and ever, and let all the people say Amen, praised be God: See Psalm.
22.9, 10. -- 71.14, 15, etc. Isa. 12.1, 2. -- 42.10, 11, 12. -- 44.26, 27, etc.
Thus much of Prayer.

CHAP. XIV.
SECT. 1. Of the nature of Reading the Scriptures, what it is.
THe second Duty in reference both to secret, private and public Ordinances,
is Reading the holy Scriptures, which is nothing else but a kind of holy
conference with God, wherein we enquire after, and he reveals unto us himself
and his will: when we take in hand therefore the Book of Scriptures, we cannot
otherwise conceive of our selves then as standing in Gods presence, to hear
what he will say unto us: So much the Prophet seems to imply, when he
expresses his consulting with Gods Word, by that phrase of going into the
sanctuary of God (i. Psalm. 73.17.
) in going in unto God; as going into the Sanctuary is termed 2 Samuel 7.18. 2 Samuel 7.18.
so by reading the Word we come in unto God, we stand in the presence of God,
to enquire at his mouth.

SECT. 2. Of fit times and seasons for Reading the Scriptures.
Eccles. 3.1.
THere is a season to every purpose under the Sun, says Solomon; the
observation whereof not only adds grace to every good action, but many times
facilitates the work it self we have in hand: Now the times and seasons most
convenien to this duty of reading the Scriptures, are (besides the Sabbath)
left to Christian wisdom; only we have general commands to be frequent and
diligent in meditation of the Word, Josh. 1.8. Psalm. 119.97. and the particular
times may be either uncertain and occasional, or constant and set.

For the first, we may have occasions to read the Scriptures, to resolve us in
doubts, Psalm. 73.17. to comfort us in afflictions, Psalm. 119.50. to direct us
in matter of advice, Psalm 119.24. to guide us in our way, Psalm. 119.105. to
assist us in temptations, Ephesians. 6.17. such or the like occasions may make us to
have recourse to the word extraordinarily.

For the second, respect must be had both to order and proportion; for the
former, viz. Order, godly men have accustomed to begin the day with religious
exercises, as with prayer, Psa. 5.3. -- 55.17. -- 88.13. now although Prayer
and the Reading of the Word be two distinct exercises, yet they mutually help
one another, and consequently are fit to be joined together: And as we must
thus begin the day, so it is very fit to close up the day with the same duties:
The evening was David's time, Psalm. 55.17. and Isaac's time, Genesis 24.63. For the
latter, viz. Proportion of time to be allotted for this exercise, it must
indifferently respect both the duty, that we read all Scripture, and the person
that undertakes it; for more time is required of Husbands, Parents,
Magistrates, Ministers, then of others; though all must set apart some time for
this duty; but that I may generally commend the practice of this order and
proportion to all, I shall compose a Calender, to show how we may read all the
Scriptures over in a year.

SECT. 3. Of the manner of preparation before the Reading of the Scriptures.
THere is a double preparation needful; as first to the undertaking, secondly
to the performance of the duty: 1. For the undertaking of the work, we had need
to be prepared with a firm and constant resolution before we go about it,
partly because of the sluggishness of our carnal natures to holy duties, and of
our unconstancy and unstedfastness in persisting and going through with them to
the end; and partly because we know how dangerous it is to put one's hand to
the plough and look back: Luke 9.62.
Now the grounds upon which our hearts must be settled in the firmness of such
resolution, must be drawn --

1. From the sense of our own blindeness and ignorance, who of our selves have
not the knowledge nor understanding of a man, Prove. 30.3.
as Agur acknowledges.

2. From assurance that this is the means ordained by God to help us out of
ignorance: We have a more sure word of prophecy, 2 Pet 1.19.
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in our hearts.

3. From the delight which we may find in the use of it: This delight drew
holy David to the continual meditation of it; Psalm. 119.96, 97.
the sweetness of the word arising out of its suitableness to his sanctified
nature, overcame David.

2. A man's heart (being thus confirmed, with a full purpose and settled
resolution to undertake and continue constantly in the study of the holy
Scriptures) must be more particularly prepared to the work it self,

James 1.21.
1. By cleansing the heart of all superfluity and naughtiness; of all worldly
thoughts and cares, of all unquiet passions of anger, fear, joy, sorrow, etc.

2. By awing the heart with due reverence of God before whom we stand, because
he can find us out in all our failings, as knowing our very thoughts afar off,
Psalm. 139.2. and 119 168.
much more having all our ways before him, and being one who will not forgive
our wilful transgressions: Such considerations will cause us to receive the
Word with that trembling of heart which God so much respects. Is^. 66.2.


3. By stirring up in our selves a Spiritual appetite to the word, Psalm. 119.131
such as Job found in himself, who esteemed the words of his mouth more then
his necessary food; and David in himself, who opened his mouth, and panted, and
longed for his Commandments; which appetite arises both from the sense of our
emptiness (for the full soul loathes the honey comb) and from the fitness of the
word to supply unto us whatsoever we want and hunger after, Prove. 27.7.
as being the food of our souls.

4. By awaking our faith; and to this purpose we must consider, that it is the
word of him that speaks Righteousness, whose faithfulness is to all
generations; Isa. 45.19. Psalm. 119 90. Romans 1.16. 2 Cor. 10.5. Isa 55.10, 11.
and that God has made it his power to salvation, mighty through him to cast
down strong holds, and has promised that it shall not return empty, but shall
surely execute that for which it was sent.

5. By softning the heart, and making it pliable; and to this purpose we must
cast aside our own wills and wisdoms, which stiffens our hearts against Gods
councels, and seek after the Spirit of tenderness, which is called, The opening
of the heart, Acts 16.14.

6. By lifting up the heart unto God in prayer, to open our eyes, Psalm. 119.18.
and 119.32. and 119.36. and 119 112. Ioh. 14.16, 30
to enlarge our hearts, to incline our hearts to his testimonies, to keep them
to the end, and (according to his promise) to send his Spirit, and to lead us
into all truth: Some short effectual prayer to this purpose, to close up our
meditations in this preparation of our selves to the reading of the Word,
representing unto God our dependence on him alone, to prosper us in the use of
his own Ordinance, seldom returns without a gracious answer.

SECT. 4. Of the necessary Duties in Reading of the Scriptures.
THe duty now fallen upon, it is good for our profiting to observe these
particulars: --

1. That (in the beginning of our reading the Bible, or of each book in the
Bible) we view and read over some Analytical Table, that so we better mark the
drift and scope of the holy Ghost, and that we may with singular ease and
delight remember the same: To that purpose I have added such a Table toward
the end of this Chapter, which may well serve for the proposed ends.

2. That we attend diligently to what we read: Now there is good reason for
this attention, 1. Because of the authority and wisdom of him that speaks; A
child must hear his father, Prove. 4.1. Prove. 4.1.
and a Subject must attend reverently to the words of a Ruler, Job 29.21. Job
29.21.
yet none of them is our Potter as God is, Isa. 63.4. Isa 63.4.
nor made us as he did, Psalm. 100.3. Psalm. 100.3.
nor consequently can challenge such respect from us as he may. 2. Because of
the matter or subject which the Scriptures handle, not only for the weight and
importance of those high mysteries which are therein revealed, John 5.39.
but for the great interest which we our selves have in those things, Deuteronomy.
29.29.
as containing our evidences and directions, which we and our children must
observe, that we may do them.

3. That we keep still Jesus Christ in our eye, in the perusal of the
Scripture, as the end, scope and substance thereof: What are the whole
Scriptures, but as it were the spiritual swaddling clothes of the holy child
Jesus? 1. Christ is the Truth and Substance of all the Types and Shadows. 2.
Christ is the substance and matter of the Covenant of Grace, under all
administrations thereof; under the Old Testament, Christ is veiled, under the
New Covenant, revealed. 3. Christ is the center and meeting place of all the
promises, 2 Cor. 1.20.
for in him all the promises of God are Yea and Amen. 4. Christ is the thing
signified, sealed and exhibited in the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament.
5. Scripture-Genealogies are to lead us on to the true line of Christ. 6.
Scripture-Chronologies are to discover to us the times and seasons of Christ.
7. Scripture-Laws are our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3.20.
the Moral by correcting, the Ceremonial by directing. 8. Scripture-Gospel is
Christ's light, whereby we know him; Christ's voice, whereby we hear and follow
him; Christ's cords of love, whereby we are drawn into sweet union and communion
with him; yea, it is the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16.
unto all them that believe in Christ Jesus; and therefore think of Christ
still as the very substance, marrow, soul and scope of the whole Scriptures.

4. That we observe some special passages, where we find things represented
unto us, either more weighty in themselves, or more proper to our selves, for
our particular use and occasions. I deny not, but all Gods testimonies are
wonderful in themselves, Psalm. 119.129. Psalm. 119.129,
All of them pure, ver. 140. 140.
All profitable to give understanding, ver. 130. 130.
And to cleanse our ways, ver. 9. 9.
And to make the man of God perfect to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2. Tim.
3.16.
Yet there are some things in Scripture more important then others, and some
more useful then others, for some persons, times and occasions: And to this
purpose, I have in the end of this Chapter, composed some heads, or common
places, for observation of such profitable things.

5. That we approve and assent to that we read, both because it is the truth of
God, and because till our judgment approve it, we cannot believe it, nor
possibly bring our hearts to yield to it true and sincere obedience: It is
true, that every godly man at all times gives his assent to every truth of God
revealed unto him, yet that assent is not alike firm at all times, because the
evidence by which he acknowledges it, is not alike clear at all times; but
when it shines to us clearly, when men clearly discern the glory and beauty of
those heavenly mysteries, and taste of the goodness of them, they cannot but
ravish readers with admiration, yea transport them with strong and heavenly
affections of love, joy and desire, Psalm. 119. v. 97, 111, 131, 162. --
observe, that it happens sometimes such spiritual raptures may seize on a man,
even while he is reading the Scriptures; as the Disciples hearts burned within
them, Luke 24.32.
whilst our Savior talked with them, going to Emmaus; and if so, then the heart
opens it self to close with, and draw in that ravishing object, which will
necessarily enforce the soul to make a pause: -- And these pauses rather
further then hinder us in our work, for a godly spirit quickened by such sweet
refreshings, receives increase of alacrity, and is thereby strengthened to go on
with much greater life, to the end of this holy exercise.

SECT. 5. Of Duties after reading the Scriptures.
THe end of studying the Scriptures, is not only knowledge, but practice;
wherefore after we have read any part of the Scriptures, our special care must
be --

1. To recount and revolve in our minds those things we have read, and
seriously to meditate on them.

2. To search out the true sense and meaning of the words, together with the
scope unto which they are directed, and if our own understanding be too weak,
we may do well to make use of other men's Writings or Conference.

3. To single out and apply what is of more special use to our selves in such
sort, as if we were specially named in any Precept, Reproof, Promise,
Commination, Consolation, or the like, which is the most effectual means to
awaken and stir up affections, and to set our endeavors, as manifestly appears
in good Josiah his example, 2 Chronicles. 34.20, 21.

4. To work those things upon our hearts, till they warm our affections: This
is best done --

1. By appropriating them unto our selves; for that which affects us, is that
which most nearly concerns us.

2. By believing what we read as undoubtedly true; thus David believed, Psalm.
119.138. -- 151. -- 160.

3. By loving those counsels of God which we embrace by faith, for their
purity, perfection, righteousness, and especially for the usefulness and
wonderful benefit of them to our selves, Psalm. 119.63. and 119 98, 99. and 19 7.
in quickening the spirit, in giving wisdom, in converting the soul; these
eminent excellencies of the Word, cannot choose but make these heavenly
counsels precious in our eyes, and bring the soul to delight in them
exceedingly.

5. To advise about, and to resolve upon the means to bring all into practice,
especially for those duties which are laid before us in reading the word, or
some part of the word, at such a particular time.

6. To examine our ways, how near they come up to the rule, or come short of
it; that on the one side we may be encouraged in conforming our practice to the
Law, and withal rejoice in the Grace of God, working in us with thankfulness;
and on the other side, that we may be humbled and grieved for our failings, and
driven to seek unto Christ, to make up our peace, and then look better to our
ways for time to come, as David does, Psalm. 119.131, 132, 133, 176.

SECT. 6. A Calendar purposed to show how we might read over the Scripture
several ways once in a year.
IN reading of Scripture, we spoke of a proportion of time to be allotted for
this Exercise; and that we may so proportion our reading with the time, that we
read all the Bible or Scriptures over in a year, I bad composed a Calendar,
showing how we might read it over several ways.

As 1. by reading every day three Chapters or more in the Old Testament, and
two or more in the New. 2. By reading three Chapters a day, and some more of
the Psalms. 3. By reading strictly three Chapters a day of those that edify
most. 4. By reading two Chapters a day, most of the Old Testament, and all of
the New. 5. By reading only one Chapter a day out of such Books as are
principal, and a Rule for the rest: But every private Christian may with a
little industry find out this, or some other Calendar more beneficial to him;
and therefore (not to swell this book needlessly) I shall leave it to him; only
with this note, that after all these forms, it were not unprofitable, if he
read at least every morning a Psalm, and every evening a Chapter of those that
edify most in their order, which is now the constant use of a weak Christian
in his family duties.

SECT. 7. Of the Analysis of the whole Bible, and especially (as in the
first-place) of the Old Testament.
IN reading of the Scripture (Section 4.) we spoke of an Analitical Table, that
so we might better mark the drift and scope of the Holy Ghost, and that we
might with singular ease and delight remember the same: To this purpose I have
annexed this Analysis, 1. of the whole Bible; 2. of the several parts.

The whole Bible is divided into two Testaments, Old. New.


1. The Old Testament Christ divides into the Law. the Prophets.


1. The Law is in the Pentateuch of Moses, comprehended in this verse, --
Genesis, Exo: Levi: Numerorum, Deuteronomi.

Wherein is 1. The object of the Law to whom it was to be delivered, viz. To
the Church in its Original, in -- Genesis. 2. The promulgation of the Law,
which was delivered either Jointly, the Law Ecclesiastical and Civil in --
Exodus. Severally, the Law Ecclesiastical and Civil, in -- Leviticus.
Political, in -- Numbers.
3. The repetition of the Law after once delivered in -- Deuteronomy.



2. The Prophets are 1. Historical, declaring time past, comprehended in this
verse, -- Joshuae, Judicum, Ruth, Regum, Paralip. -- Ez. Neb. Esther. 2.
Dogmatical, instructing for faith and life present, as -- Job, David, Proverb:
Ecclesia: Cantic: 3. Prophetical, foretelling things to come, as -- Isaiah,
Jeremi. Thren. Ezekiel, Danielque, Hose: Joel, Amos, Obedi. Jona. Micha.
Nahumque, Habbakuk, Zephani: Haggai, Zachari: Malachia. As for Esdra: Tobit,
Judith, pars Esth: Sapit: -- Ecclesiastic. Baruch, tres Pueri, Susanna, Bell,
Machabaei. -- Non sunt de Canone libri.



SECT. 8.
. 1. Of the Pentateuch or Books of the Law.
Genesis treats of the Church, to whom the Law was to be delivered.

Genesis contains 1. The Creation of the Church; and therein 1. Of the great
world in which it was to live. 2. Of the lesser world, Man, of which it was to
be his Happiness. his Misery.

2. The Constitution of the Church, which must be considered as it was in the
two worlds. 1. The old world before the flood; wherein consider The propagation
of sin and punishment. The conservation of the Church. The condemnation of the
wicked world Foretold. Executed.

2. The new world after the flood in the ages of four men. 1. Noah; in whom
consider His deliverance from the deluge. His blessing from God. His posterity,
as United. Dispersed, out of which God chose his Church.
2. Abraham; in whom consider His vocation in the former part of Chapter His
peregrination 1. Into Egypt, in the latter part of Chapter 2. Into Canaan.
His dealings or action 1. With Lot. 2. With God, who Promised him issue, Gave
him a child, and Made his covenant with him. Of which Covenant, consider 1.
The form. Chap. 17. 2. The fruit, 1. On Gods part, in the communication of his
Councels and secrets. Benefits in Delivering Lot. Succoring Abraham. Giving him
Isaac.

2. On Abraham's part, who is commended for his Obedience and faith in offering
Isaac. Love and justice in burying Sarah. Providence and piety in marrying
Isaac.






3. Isaac; in whom consider His issue or kindred. His travels and troubles. His
Prophesies concerning the state of the Church in his two Sons.
4. Jacob; in whom consider his peregrination Into Mesapotamia, where note His
journey thither. His arrival and marriage. His riches and children.
Into Canaan, where His journey thither. Arrival; and there His congress with
Esau. His progress with grief in Dinahs rape. Rachels death. Joseph's selling.
Judahs incest.


Into Egypt, whither went 1. His Sons Joseph, in whom his Affliction. Dignity
and preferment
The other Brethren.
2. Himself, wherein His sending for by Joseph. Traveling thither. Abode
there; where his Conferring. Blessing. Prophesying Dying.









. 2. Exodus treats of the Law-giving to the Church generally Ecclesiastical
Political
together.
Exodus contains I. The deliverance of the people to whom the Law was to be
given. 1. Occasion of it, The Tyranny of the Egyptians. 2. Instrument by whom
effected (Moses) of whose 1. Birth. 2. Calling. 3. Assistant, Aaron. 4. Sayings
to the King of Egypt. 5. Signs which he wrought in Egypt Confirming his calling
Confounding the king

3. Deliverance it self, wherein the peoples 1. Departure out of Egypt. 2.
Ratification of it by signs and observations. 3. Passage through the Red Sea. 4.
Thanksgiving after they were over.
4. Consequents of their deliverance, 1. Provision of victuals and necessaries,
Quails and Manna. 2. Defense and protection from their enemies, Amalekites. 3.
Administration of Justice by Jethro's counsel.

II. The delivery of the Law it self unto the people; wherein consider 1. How
it was given by God, 1. The preparation before it. 2. Parts or kinds of it, 1.
Moral, in two Tables of stone. 2. Judicial. 3. Ceremonial Feasts. Tabernacles
and instruments. Priests and their garments.


2. How it was taken and obeyed by the people. 1. Moral Law, 1. Their
transgression in the golden Calf. 2. Reconciliation to God by Moses prayer. 3.
Restitution of the Law by the finger of God.
2. Ceremonial; wherein is set down the building of the Tabernable, from




. 3. Leviticus treats of holy observations and persons.
1. Sacrifices or offerings; their 1. Sorts or kinds, distinguished by their
Matter, of which Animalia. Inanimata.
Occasion for which they were 1. Good things from God. 2. Evils done by men.

2. Rites about them.


2. Persons 1. Public; viz. the Priests, their 1. Consecration to their
Office. 2. Execution of their Office. 3. Transgression in their Office.
2. Private, in respect of their Sanctification. 1. Particular, of one man;
where observe the ways whereby he is polluted -- viz. 1. Eating. 2.
Childebearing. 3. Leprosy. 4. Flux.
2. Common, of the whole Church, in things 1. Necessary, about which consider
1. The Laws which concern either 1 Purification for sins Ordinary.
Extraordinary.
2. Information of their lives. 1. Oeconomical about marriages. 2. Political
about their carriages. 3. Ecclesiastical: which laws consider 1. Persons. 2.
Things. 3. Times, Days. Years.



2. Obligation of them by Promises and Threatenings.
2. Voluntary, Chap. last.




. 4. Numbers, of Laws for most part Political, occasioned by the mustering of
the people for their journey to Canaan.
Numbers. This story contains 1. Their preparation to the journey; wherein 1.
Their mustering or numbering, which was either Civil, of the people that were
1. Numbered. 2. Ordered.
Sacred, of the Priests that were 1. Numbered. 2. Ordered.

2. Laws given them, which are either Common to all, about sanctity in things
Necessary. Voluntary.
Particular for the 1. Laity; viz. The Tribes. 2. Clergy; viz. The Priests and
Levites.

3. Manner of their 1. Sanctification and order. 2. Progress or journey.

2. Their journeys, which are distinguished by a story of eight murmurings of
the people: 1. For the tediousness of their journey. 2. For loathsomness of the
Manna. 3. For the emulation of Miriam and Aaron against Moses. 4. For the
sedition of the Spies who Murmured. were plagued. reconciled.
5. For the Conspiracy of the three Levites, Corah, Dathan and Abiram. 6. For
the indignation of the people at the former judgments; wherein Their
murmuring. Their reconciling Persons. Manner.

7. For want of water. 8. For wearisomness of the way.
3. Their stations or abode when they came near to Canaan, which has two
stories that concern 1. The People who were to inherit, considered as 1.
Conquerors of their Enemies. Chap. 22. 2. Encountered by Magic Arts, Balaam. 3.
Disordered with Idolatry and fornication. 4. Reconciled, and again mustered. 5.
Furnished with a new Prince. 6. Instructed about sacred things Necessary.
Voluntary.

2. The Inheritance it self, considered 1. In a part of it 1. Conquered. 2.
Disposed. Where by a digression their journeys are reckoned all together.

2. The whole, wherein are set down 1. The Bounds or Division of the Land. 2.
The Law, concerning the inheritance of the Priests. People.






. 5. Deuteronomy is a Repetition of the Law.
1. Preparation of the People to receive the Law by Moses 1. Rehearsal of Gods
blessings to them in peace. 2. Good success which they had in War. 3. Council.


2. Promulgation of the Law given to the people. 1. The propounding of it. 2.
The expounding of it, namely, the 1. Moral Law, generally. specially.
2. Ceremonial Law. 3. Judicial Law, as it was either Common to all. Singular
for Priests. People. War. Civil justice.





3. Confirmation of the Law after it was given -- By 1. Signs. 2. Promises and
Threatenings. 3. Renovation of the Covenant. 4. The Election of a new Captain.
5. Prophesies.


Moses.

Hitherto of the Law.

Now of the Prophets, which are either Historical, called the Anterior
Prophets. Doctrinal, called Hagyographa. Prophetical, called Posterior Prophets.


SECT. 9.
. 1. Of Prophets Historical. Joshua: Consider --
Joshua contains 1. His calling to the Government. 2. His acts in his
Government, 1. time of War; where note 1. The sending of the Spies. 2. Their
miraculous passage over Jordan, with the consequents. 3. The besieging and
winning of Jericho. 4. Winning of Ai. 5. Covenanting with the Gibeonites
ignorantly. 6. Victory over five Kings. 7. Battle with the remnant of the
Canaanites. 8. All repeated.
2. In time of Peace, 1. Division of the Land. 2. Dismission of the Trans-
Jordanians. 3. Celebration of the Parliament. 4. Death of Joshua.




. 2. Judges: Story of the Jews under the Government of the Judges.
Judges contains 1. The occasion of that Government. 2. Narration of the
Peoples state 1. Under Governors, Othniel, Ehud, Shamgar. Deborah. Gideon.
Abimelech. Jephtha. Samson.
2. Without Governors; wherein of their monstrous sins and Civil Wars.



. 3. Ruth, a Moabitish woman; of her Piety.
Ruth contains Her 1. Conversion. 2. Conversation. 3. Marriage, 1. Procured. 2.
Celebrated.



4. Hitherto of the state of the Jews under Judges: Now under Kings till the
Captivity.
1. As the Kingdom was united, in Books of Sam. where the Kings are by 1.
Election, 1 Samuel 2. Succession, 2 Samuel
2. As it was divided, in the Books of Kings, under Solomon, 1 Kings. Other
Kings, 2 Kings.
3. As it was in both states, more fully considered in the Books of Chronicles.
. 5. First Book of Samuel. Jews state under Kings Elect.
1 Samuel contains 1. Time of change of Government in Samuels days; whose birth
is described 2. Occasion of the change; viz. wickedness of the Sons of Eli,
which is Threatened. Punished.
Samuels Sons.
3. Story of the Kings. 1. Saul; of whose 1. Election, as he was Called.
Confirmed by 1. Inauguration. 2. Consent of the People. 3. Resignation of
Samuel.


2. Rejection, with the true causes of it.
2. David his Prosperity, His vocation to his Kingdom. Victory over Goliath.
Adversity, 1. His exile and banishment, 1. The cause of it. 2. The kinds of
it, viz. In his own Country. Out of it, amongst Philistims. Moabites.


2. His persecutions; wherein 1. The grievousness appears 1. By the diversity
of places whither he fled. 2. Flight to his enemies, with whom he lived.
2. The end of them.





6. Second Book of Samuel under the Successive Kings.
2 Samuel contains 1. The tidings of Saul's death. 2. The unlawful Successor of
Saul, Ishbosheth, whose Promotion. Dejection.
3. The true Successor (David) whose Inauguration. Government Good, 1. In
Religious things. 2. In War. 3. In Political things.
Bad, where his sins 1. Committed. 2. Confessed. 3. Punished with judgments
Internal. External. 1. Internal or domestic punishments, 1. Amnons incest. 2.
Absoloms sedition, The occasion. Beginning. Progress. Issue.

2. External and public, 1. The kinds of it, 1. Sedition of Ziba. 2. Famine.
2. Events of it, Good, as Thanksgiving. Prophecy.
Evil.









. 7. Kings two Books treat of the Kingdom as divided.
1 Kings contains 1. The increase of the Kingdom under Solomon, wherein 1. His
institution to be King. 2. Conservation in the Kingdom. 3. Administration of
it: Where his glorying in his Family. Buildings. Riches.


2. Decrease: 1. Occasion or causes, Sins of Solomon. Justice of God.
2. Beginners of it, 1. Authors of the division, Rehoboam and Jeroboam: 2.
Their Successors, whose reigns are handled Briefly. More largely in reign of
Ahab. ad finem.






. 8. Second Book of Kings; of the decrease of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah.
2 Kings contains 1. Their continuance of defection together. 1. Of the Kings
of Israel apart, Ahaziah. Joram. Jehu. Joash. Jehoahaz-Joas.
2. Of both Kingdoms together.
2. A special story of the defection of the Kingdoms of Judah, 1. Their decay.
2. Their repair. 3. Their final destruction.



. 9. First Chronicles.
1 Chronicles. contains 1. The beginning of the Kingdom of Israel, wherein 1.
Genealogy of the world from Adam to Jacob. 2. Particularly of the Nation of
Israelites in 12 Tribes.
2. The Administration of the Kingdom 1. Under Saul. 2. Under David, whose
Entrance Acts
are described.
1. David's entrance into his Kingdom, His inauguration. His followers. Care of
Religion. Confirmation in his Kingdom.
2. David's Acts, 1. In the progress of his reign, Good, for Religion, and Gods
service. War.
Evil.
2. Toward end of his reign, in his old age. 1. His courses again for
Religion. 2. His order for the Commonweal. 3. The Parliament a little before
his death, and events of it.





. 10. Second Chronicles.
2 Chronicles. contains 1. The increase of the Kingdom under Solomon, whose 1.
Virtues. 2. Buildings both Sacred. Civil.
3. Condition and death.
2. The decrease in the the reign of Rehoboam. 10, 11, 12. Abia. 13. Asa. 14,
15, 16. Josaphat. 17, 18, 19, 20 Joram. 21. Ahaziah. 22. Jo^^h. 23, 24.
Amaziah. 25. Uzziah. 26. Jotham. 27. Ahaz. 28. Hezekiah. 29, ad 33. Manasseh.
33. Amon. 33. Josiah. Jehoaz. Jehoiachim. Jechoniah. Zedochiah.



. 11. Ezra, of the return of the People from Babylon.
1. Of the manner of it. 2. Of the end of it; viz. Restoring of Religion and
Government. 2. Of the hindrance, 1. Raised by the Samaritans. 2. By the
Governors of the Land of Canaan.
2. Removed by 1. Cyrus. 2. Ezra, of whose Journey. Reformation which he
wrought.



. 12. Nehemiah treats of
1. The repair of the buildings, the 1. Causes of it. 2. Work it self, which
was Begun. Hindered. Finished.

2. Reformation, Political and Ecclesiastical.
. 13. Esther contains a story of a miraculous deliverance of the Jews.
1. The means of it; viz. Esther. 2. The manner of it, 1. The greatness of the
danger. 2. Degrees of the deliverance 1. The intercession of the Queen. 2.
Frustrating the advice of Haman. 3. Confirmation of the deliverance. 1.
Revoking the Decree. 2. Punishing adversaries. 3. Peace of the Jews.



Hitherto of the Books Legal and Historical.

Now of the Books Dogmatical or Sapiential, which concern either A singular
subject, as Job. A common subject, as David's Psalms. Solomon's Prove^bs.
Ecclesiastes. Canticles.




SECT. 10.
. 1. Of Prophets Dogmatical. Job contains
A Dialogue: 1. The occasion, his 1. Prosperity. 2. Adversity. 3. Sin.
2. The sorts, and so observe the speeches of The Disputants, Eliphaz. Job.
Bildad. Job. Zophar. Job. Eliphaz. Job. Bildad. Job. Zophar. Job. Eliphaz. Job.
Bildad. Job.
The Moderators, 1. Elihu. 2. God.


An Epilogue.
. 2. The Psalms are by the Hebrews divided into five Books.
1. From Psalm. 1. to the end of Psalm 41. concluded with Amen and Amen. 2. From
Psalm. 42. to the end of Psalm. 72. shut up with Amen and Amen. 3. From Psalm. 73.
to the end of Psalm. 89. closed with Amen and Amen. 4. From Psalm. 90. to the end
of Psalm. 106. ending with Amen, Halleluiah. 5. From Psalm. 107. to the end of
Psalm. 150. concluding with Halleluiah.
This division seems to arise from the peculiar close of these five Psalms.

Others divide them into two parts, some Directed from Man to God, as the
Praying and Thanksgiving Psalms. Directed from God to Man, as The Exhortatory
Consolatory Didactical Prophetical
Psalms.


In stead of a more exact and orderly method, the Reader may observe in the end
of this Chapter some particulars for his better understanding in reading the
Psalms.

. 3. Proverbs contains Rules of life,
1. General, about piety, wherein 1. What we must do. 2. What we must avoid.
2. Special, and so the life of man is informed by all sorts of Rules,
Political. Oeconomical. Moral.

. 4. Ecclesiastes treats
1. Of the vanity of all earthly things, proved by Solomon's observations in His
own estate. Conditions of all sorts of men.
2. Rules to be observed in this vain life of ours.
. 5. Canticles. Descriptions of the love 'twixt Christ and his Church,
In speeches 1. Twixt Christ and Church. 2. Church and Christ. 3. Church. 4.
Christ. 5. Church. 6. Church and Christ. 7. Church.


These are the Books Dogmatical: Now follows Prophets Four greater. Twelve
lesser.


SECT. 11.
. 1. Of Prophets Prophetical.
Isaiah contains Prophesies 1. Legal, 1. Reproving and correcting sins Of the
Jews. With comfort to the Elect.
2. Threatening 1. Enemies of Gods people, The particular Nations threatened. The
general uses of these threatenings.
2. Israelites. 3. Jews themselves, whose captivity is denounced with mixed
comforts in Christ.

2. Historical. 3. Evangelical, concerning their 1. Deliverance from, and
preservation in Captivity. 2. Kingdom of Christ, about which he makes eight
Sermons or Speeches 1. Of Christ. 2. Of God. 3. Of the prophets expounding 1.
Story of Christ. 2. Fruit of his Kingdom.
4. Of God Promising. Exhorting.
5. Of the Prophets Reproving hypocrisy. Exciting the Church.
6. Of Christ. 7. Of the Church. 8. Lastly of God.




. 2. Jeremiah contains
1. A Prologue concerning the Prophets calling. 2. Sermons concerning the 1.
Jews, either in Judea, in the reign of Josiah. Zedechiah. Jehoiachim. Zedechiah
again. Jehoiachim again. Zedechiah again.
Egypt.
2. Enemies of the Jews.
3. An Epilogue Historical.
. 3. Lamentations contain the mournings of this
Church. Prophet. Church. Prophet. Church.
. 4. Ezekiel contains
1. The Preface, which concerns 1. God, and his majesty. 2. The Prophet, and
his Fearfulness. Confirmation.

2. Prophesies themselves, which contain 1. Objurgation, or reproof of the
impiety of the Jews, with their judgments, in 17 Sermon. from 2. Comminations
against the enemies of the Jews, in eight Sermons, from 3. Exhortations and
encouragements to the Jews, to Repentance, and Hope of delivery,
in six Sermons. 4. Consolations in one continued Prophecy of their Spiritual
deliverance by Christ in visions.

. 5. Daniel contains
1. An History of things done in the Kingdoms both of the Babylonians and
Persians.
2. A Prophecy of things to be done, 1. Many calamities to be executed. 2.
Final deliverance and glory of the Elect.

. 6. Hosea is
1. Parabolical; and so the Prophecy is Propounded. Applied. Repeated.
2. Plain; and so is either a 1. Commination or invective, in three Sermons, 1.
In Chap. 2. In Chap. 3. In Chap.
2. Consolation.

. 7. Joel contains
1. A Commination of Famine. 2. An Exhortation to Repentance. 3. A Consolation
to penitents.
. 8. Amos contains
1. A Commination against 1. Enemies of Gods people. 2. Jews and Israelites,
and that in Plain words, against their Idolatry. Violence. Indignity, pride,
Inhumanity, luxury
In a threefold type.

2. A Consolation, from the 11 verse of the 9. Chap.
. 9. Obadiah
1. Does testify to 2. Dehorts to 3. Comforts
. 10. Jonah
Describes the two callings of Jonas; in the First, the Manner of it. Effect of
it, Prayer.
Second, His Sermons to the Ninevites, and their Repentance. The effect of
their Repentance in Jonah



. 11. Micah contains five Sermons.
1. Threatening against the whole Kingdom. 2. Threatening against the
Magistrates. 3. Consolations in God and the Messiah. 4. Commination. 5.
Consolation again.
. 12. Nahum.
Nahum threatens destruction to the Assyrians, which is 1. Propounded. 2. The
means showed. 3. The cause of their sins.


. 13. Habakkuk.
Habakkuk contains a Dialogue betwixt God and the Prophet. Prayer.


. 14. Zephany.
Zephany contains three Sermons, 1. A Commination. 2. An Exhortation. 3. A
mixture of both.


. 15. Haggai.
Haggai First, Exhorts to build the Temple. Secondly, comforts with Prophecy
of Christ's Kingdom.


. 16. Zachariah contains
1. Types and visions, 1. Hortatory, Generally to all the People. Specially
unto the Priests.
2. Monitory. 3. Consolatory.
2. Speeches and Sermons, 1. Doctrinal, of things present, about Gods service.
2. Prophetical, of things that concern Christ's Incarnation. Passion.


. 17. Malachy.
Malachy 1. Chides for 1. Perfidiousness in Gods service. 2. Pollution of
marriage, and blasphemy.
2. Comforts in the Promise of Christ. His forerunner.



SECT. 12.
. 1.
The New Testament contains Books 1. Historical; viz. Four Evangelists and
Acts. 2. Doctrinal, in Epistles of Paul, James, Peter, John, Jude. 3.
Prophetical, in the Revelation.


The Books for memories sake, are comprised in these verses, Mattheus, Marcus,
Lucas, Johannes and Acta. Roma. Corin. Galatus, Ephesi. Philip. Colosenses.
Thessalo. Timotheum, Titum, Philemon, Hebraeos. Jacobus, Petrus, Johannes,
Juda, Revelat.


Of Books Historical. Matthew speaks of Christ in his 1. Person, as of Birth.
Education.
2. Office, 1. In his preparation unto his Office in his Forerunner, John
Baptist. Himself, who was Baptized. Tempted.

2. Execution of his Office. 1. Prophetical in teaching, whose doctrine is 1.
Briefly propounded. 2. Largely expounded and confirmed; and so he 1. Teaches,
and confirms by Miracles of all sorts. 2. Reproves, and confuteth the
practice and doctrine of the Pharisees. 3. Foretells, and prophesies the
destruction Urbis and Orbis.

2. Sacerdotal, in his Passion and Sacrifice for the sins of the world. 3.
Regal, in respect of the beginning and manifestation of it.




. 2. Mark treats of
1. Christ's life, and herein of his Forerunner. 2. Saying and doings, 1. Before
his transfiguration, and so reports both his Oracles. Miracles.
2. In his transfiguration. 3. After it, and that Before he entered the City. In
his entrance, Disputation. Prediction.



2. Christ's death, where 1. Antecedents before it. 2. Manner of it. 3.
Consequents after it.

. 3. Luke treats of Christ's
1. Life 1. Private, wherein 1. His conception. 2. His birth and education.
2. Public, in preaching the Gospel, where his 1. Preparation to it. 2.
Performance of it, and that either Alone by Teaching. Doing.
With others, viz. his Apostles, whom he Calls and instructs. Sends.
Seventy Disciples.



2. Death: 1. Antecedents of it: where consider the things he did and spoke, 1.
In his journey to Jerusalem, where he taught of Inward worship of God, Prayer.
Faith. Repentance, in Causes moving to it. Hindering of it. Effects of it.

Outward worship, where 1. What we must avoid Abuse of riches. Scandal.
2. What we must do.

2. When he came to Jerusalem, how he was 1. Received. 2. Disputed. 3.
Prophesied.

2. Manner of his death. 3. Consequents after it.

. 4. John treats of Christ's
1. Person. 2. Office: which he performed in his journey to three Feasts: 1. Of
the Passover, 1. In Cana, from whence he sent out. 2. While he abode at the
Feast. 3. In his return by Samaria.
2. Of Pentecost, where 1. He cured the Palsy. 2. Fed the people.
3. Of Tabernacles, where note 1. His coming to Jerusalem. 2. His abode there,
his Disputation. Works. Sermon.
3. His departure thence.
4. To the Celebration of the true Passover, about his death. 1. What went
before it, 1. His deeds, 1. Entrance to the City. 2. Washing his Disciples
feet.
2. His speeches, 1. At supper time. 2. As they went to the garden 1. Monitory.
2. Consolatory 3. Supplicatory


2. The manner of it. 3. Consequents of it; viz. his appearance to his
disciples, Conversing in Judea. Fishing in Galilee.



. 5. Acts, A History of the Apostles.
1. A general of all, 1. Of their assembling. 2. Of their gifts. 3. Of their
sayings.
2. A special, 1. Peter, with John and others. 2. Stephen. 3. Philip. 4. Peter
alone, his 1. Miracles. 2. Doctrine, Propounded. Defended.
3. Imprisonments and deliverance.
5. Paul and his travels, 1. With Barnabas. 2. With Silas, of whose 1.
Departure, whereof the first Council at Jerusalem. 2. Abode 1. In Asia. 2. In
Grecia.
3. Return.
3. For the Ephesians, where 1. From whence he went. 2. By what place. 3.
Whither he came. 1. To Jerusalem, and what befell him there. 2. To Caesarea, and
what was done under Felix. Festus. Agrippa.
3. At Rome.




SECT. 13.
. 1. Of Books Doctrinal. Epistle to the Romans treats of
1. Justification. 2. Sanctification. 3. Predestination. 4. Good works.
. 2. I Corinthians.
1. He reproves for 1. Schisms and factions, and harkening to ambitious
Teachers. 2. Incest and fornication. 3. Going to Law.
2. He disputes about 1. Marriage. 2. Things indifferent. 3. Sacrament of
Supper. 4. Right use of Spiritual gifts. 5. Resurrection.
3. He concludes about Collections, and matters of Salvation.
. 3. II Corinthians.
He 1. Apologizeth for himself against diverse aspersions. 2. Exhorts them to
1. Holy life, and patience, and shunning needless society with the wicked. 2.
To avoid judging ill of him. 3. To mercy and liberality. 4. To sincere respect
of him and his Apostleship.
3. Concludes.


. 4. Galatians.
He 1. Reproves their backsliding. 2. Entreats of Justification. 3. Exhorts to
goods works.


. 5. Ephesians treats
1. Of matter of Faith. 2. Of Works.
. 6. Philippians.
1. A narration of his 1. Love to them. 2. Afflictions. 3. Desire of death.
2. He exhorts 1. To love and humility. 2. To wariness and progress, Assurance,
and Sanctity.

3. He concludes with Particular Exhortations. General Commendations.

. 7. Colossians
Treats of matters of Faith. Life.

. 8. I Thessalonians treats
1. Of their Conversion. 2. Of the means of it. 3. Of the fruits of it, his
Love to them, and Care for them.
4. Directions for their lives.
. 9. II Thessalonians.
1. He comforts. 2. He Prophesies. 3. He exhorts.
. 10. I Timothy.
1. He confuteth the Erroneous Doctors. 2. He exhorts about Prayer and
apparel. 3. Informs concerning the duty of Bishops and Deacons. 4.
Prophesies of the last and evil times. 5. Orders Church-Governors. 6. Taxes
several abuses.
. 11. II Timothy.
1. He exhorts him to perseverance 1. In the duties of his calling. 2. In
Christian warfare.
2. Prophesies. 3. Charge about Preaching, and so concludes.
. 12. Titus.
He treats of Ministers. Hearers.

. 13. Hebrews treats of
1. Christ, and so of his 1. Person, in His Divine Nature. His Humane Nature.
2. Office, 1. Prophet. 2. Priest.

2. Of the duties of Christians, and so of Faith. Holy life.

. 14. James treats
1. Of patience, right hearing the Word, and true Religion. 2. Of love, and
Justification by Works. 3. Of the tongue and wisdom. 4. Of contentions and
presumption. 5. Of oppression, and swearing, and prayer and admonition.
. 15. I Peter has in it matter of
1. Consolation. 2. Exhortation, from ver. 13. of the 1 Chap. ad 3.
Dehortation, from 8 ver. of 3 Chap.
And these again are handled, 1. Exhortation. 2. Consolation, from 12 ver. 3.
Dehortation implicitly, with the Conclusion.


. 16. II Peter
1. Exhorts to holiness. 2. Threatens wicked Teachers and Apostates. 3.
Prophesies of the day of Judgment.
. 17. First Epistle of St. John.
1. Of the benefits of Christ. 2. Of the office of Christians in Love. Faith.

SECT. 14. Of the Book Prophetical. Revelation contains
1. History of the state of the Churches then. 2. Mystery or Prophecy 1. Of
the World. 2. Of the Church, in he^ 1. Battles. 2. Victories. 3. Triumphs and
eternal Glory.


SECT. 15. Of heads or common places of observations for profitable things.
I Declared before (Sect. 4.) that in Reading of the Scripture, it were good
for our profiting to observe some special passages, where we find things
represented unto us, either more weighty in themselves, or more proper to our
selves, for our particular use and occasions; and to that purpose I shall now
compose some heads or common places for observation of such profitable things:
Some I know herein advise these four points; 1. That every Christian following
this direction, should make a little paper Book of a sheet or two, and write on
the top of every leaf, the title that he would observe in his reading. 2. That
he would observe such places as stare him in the face, that are so evident,
that the heart cannot look off them. 3. That he set down under each title,
only the Book, Chapter and Verse, and not the words, for that would tire him
in the end; only when he has done his quarter-task, or years task, then he
may write out the choicest things, as he thinks good. 4. That he look not at
the profit of this course the first week or month, but let him consider how
rich it will make him at the years end; surely after he has gathered them, he
would not sell his collections for a great price, if it were but for the good
they may do him in the evil day, when it shall come upon him: Of these I shall
give you the experience of a weak Christian, the unworthiest servant of Christ,
in the following Section and Paragraphs.

SECT. 16. Common places observed by one in his private Reading of the
Scriptures.
1. PLaces that in reading the Scriptures he found sensible comfort in. Exodus
14.13. -- 19.4, 5. -- 24.10, 11, 17. -- 34.6, 7, 8. Numb. 14.18. Deuteronomy. 5.29. --
10.15. 1 Samuel 30.6. 2 Samuel 12.13. 2 King. 20.5. 2 Chronicles. 12.12. -- 15.4. --
20.21, 22, 27, 28. Job 5.11, 17, 18.19. -- 33.25, 26. Prove. 3.12. Psalm. 27.13,
14. -- 31.7. -- 37.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 32, 33, 34. -- 57. throughout. --
119.103. -- 138.7, 8. -- 139.17. Isa. 29.19. -- 30.18, 19. -- 40.1, 2. -- 42.3.
-- 48.18. -- 49.2, 13, 14, 15, 16. -- 52 9. -- 54.7, 8, 9, 10. -- 55.7. --
57.15, 16, 18. Jer. 1.9. -- 31.3, 9, 20. Hosea 6.1, 2. -- 11.8. Mic. 7.18, 19,
20. Ma.. 5.11, 12. -- 10.26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Mark. 2.17. Luke 6.22, 23.
Romans 8.18, 31, 32. 2 Cor. 7.6. Ephesians. 5.8. Col. 1.13. -- 4.3. 2 Timothy 3.11. Heb.
10.35, 36, 37, 38. -- 12.5, 6, 7, 8. James 5.20. 1 John 3.12, 13.

2. Places that in reading he found rebuke of corruption in his nature or
practice. Numb. 14.11. 1 Samuel 12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 32.26. Psalm. 119.75. Isa. 56.11.
-- 57.17-59.11, 12. Jer. 6.13. Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. Hosea 7.10. Mark 7.21, 22, 23.
Luke 12.15. Romans 7.23, 24. Ephesians. 5.4. 1 Pet. 2.1. Rev. 2.5. -- 3.15, 16, 17,
19.

3. Places that directed him in his particular calling. Job 33.23, 24. Isa.
49.4, 5. -- 50.4. -- 52.11. -- 58.1. -- 62.1, 6, 7. Jer. 15.19. -- 23.22. --
48.10. Ezekiel. 3.1, 18, 19, 20, 21. -- 33.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. -- 34.10. Mal.
2.7. Mat. 10.16, 17, 18. Acts 20.20, 21, 23. 1 Cor. 1.5. -- 14.1, 12. 2 Cor.
4.5, 6, 7. -- 6.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. -- 12.15. Phil. 2.3. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17. 1 Timothy 1.4. -- 4.12.

4. Places containing sweet passages, which melted his heart. Genesis 22. v. 1. to
20. -- 24.31, 33, 50, 52. -- 33.10, 11. -- 43.14, ^6, 30. -- 44.13, 16, 31. --
45.3, 9, 14, 24, 26, 27, 28. -- 48.11, 12. -- 50. 10, 11. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Judges
7.15, 20, 22. Ruth 2.10. -- 3.10, 18. 1 Samuel 17.30. to the end. -- 18.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. -- 20.41, 42. -- 24. 16, 17, 18, 19. -- 25.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26, 30. Isa. 57.17, 18. Jer. 31.20.
Jonah 2.7. Mark 9.24. John 11.35.

5. Places that hold forth comforts against the burden of his daily
infirmities, inward temptations and afflictions of Spirit. Genesis 15.1. Exodus
34.6, 7. Psalm. 18.6. -- 23.4, 5, 6-34.18. -- 11.24. Hos. 6.1, 2. Mic. 7.19.
Luke 17.4. Joh. 17.20. Romans 6.14-16. 20. 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. 1 Timothy
1.15. Heb. 4.15, 16. 1 Pet. 5.10. 1 John 1.9. -- 2.1, 12-5.18.

6. Places that establish his heart against the fear of falling away. 1 Kings
6.13. Job 8.20. Psalm. 15.5. -- 16.8. -- 37.24, 27, 28, 31 -- 89.33, 34, 35. --
94.14. Isa. 54.10. Jer. 31.3. -- 33.20, 21, 25, 26 -- 32.39, 40, 41. Hosea
2.19.20. Luke 22.32. John 6.39. -- 13.1. -- 14.6. -- 17, 22, 23, 26. Romans 8.35,
39. -- 11.29. 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. -- 4.30. Phil. 1.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23,
24. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. Heb. 13.5. 1 Pet. 2.6. 1 John 3.9. -- 5.4.

7. Promises that comfort him against outward crosses. Genesis 41.43. Exodus 4.31.
-- 23.25. Judges 13.23. 2 Chronicles. 25.9. Psalm. 23.1, 2. -- 37.25. -- 119.165.
Pro. 1.33. -- 3.8, 10. Isa. 58.8. Dan. 6.16. Luke 21.18. John 16.33. Romans 1.17.
2 Cor. 4.17, 18. 2 Timothy 2.12. Heb. 13.5, 6. 1 Pet. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. --
4.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19. Rev. 2.10.

8. Places that hold forth his privileges in Christ, above all the wicked in
the world. Genesis 3.15. -- 7.1, 23. -- 12.3. -- 15.6. -- 26.4. -- 28.14. --
32.28. Exodus 19.4, 5, 6. Number. 23.21. -- 24.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. -- 33. 29. 1 Samuel 12.22. 2 Chronicles. 15.4. -- 16.9. Job 5.19, to 27. Psalm. 32.7. -- 33.18, 19.
-- 34.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc. Isa. 9.6. -- 40.31. -- 41. 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. --
53.11. -- 54.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Jer. 33.8. Lam. 3.32. Ezekiel. 11.19.
Dan. 6.23. Zech. 2.8. Mal. 4.2. Mat. 1.21. -- 10.30. -- 11.28. -- 28.20. Luke
11.13-19.10. -- 21.18. John 1.12, 16, 29. -- 10.28. -- 3.16, 17. -- 14.16, 17.
-- 14.16, 17. -- 17. 17, 19, 24. Acts 13.39. -- 27.34. Romans 4.5. -- 8.30, 33.
-- 10.4. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.19, 21. Gal. 3.13. -- 4.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 6,
7. -- 2.14.16. -- 3.25. Phil. 3.21. Col. 1.21. -- 3.4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23, 24. 1 Timothy 1.15. Tit. 2.14. Heb. 1.3. -- 9.12, 26. 1 John 1.7. -- 2.2. -- 3.1, 2, 5.
Rev. 1.5, 13.

9. Places hard to be understood, of which he desired and endeavored after
resolution, as (amongst the rest) all the Titles of the Psalms, especially of
these Psalms, -- 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 16, 22, 30, 34, 38, 39, 4^, 45, 46, 50,
53, 56, 57, 60, 72, 88, 90, 92, 119, 120, etc.

10. Other several heads has he noted in his private little Book, which only
I shall set down for others imitation: As -- 1. Places that hold forth
Experiences (or the word written in our hearts) as the best Commentary. 2.
Places that hold forth diverse points of Religion, that a Christian may
infallibly rest on, and live and dye in the assurance of them. 3. Places that
justify a precise respect of the least sin. 4. Places that show the godly have
suffered all sorts of crosses, reproaches and slanders. 5. Choice Sentences, or
memorable Sayings. 6. Promises of the Churches flourishing in the last times.


But above all, those which concern our own particular, I esteem most precious,
and of singular use.

SECT. 17. Of the use of these Collections.
THe use of them is diverse, according to the several heads: Now the first head
was, Places that in reading, he found sensible comfort and ravishing of heart
in? The use hereof is not only for present, but whiles he lives in any
distress, for then he may have recourse to these places, as to so many wells of
joy; and if in his grief, one, or two, or ten will not comfort him, yet it may
please God that some of them will have spirit and life in them; besides, it
cannot but marvellously establish his faith, when he remembers in how many
distinct places of Scripture the Lord was pleased to comfort his soul.

The second head was, Places that in reading, he found rebuke of corruption in
his nature or practice: The use hereof, is to open his eyes, and to let him see
the Anatomy of his corruptions, and plainly to perceive what things are in his
nature, that God has a quarrel against; so that now it is time, that as such a
one is guided by the finger of God to know his corruptions, so he should go to
the Spirit of God for mortification.

The third head was, Places that directed him in his particular calling: The
use hereof, is to consider the several Texts, as the crowing of Cocks, which
ring in his ears: When will thou arise? why tarriest thou so long? why stirrest
thou so slowly? See how the Sun rejoices as a Giant to run his race, why then
do not thou sharpen thy self to the work which God has laid on thee? it may
be thou meetest with many troubles, disgraces, oppositions, but what then? is
not this Gods command? is not this a service to the Lord Jesus? does not the
Lord assist? and is not he Play Master sufficient? it may thy labor is in vain,
thy work is without fruit, and what then? is not labor thy duty? and good
success Gods work? what have thou to do with thoughts about the blessing and
success of thy labors? look thou to the duty, view the Texts well, and obey
them, and leave the blessing of thy endeavors to the good will and pleasure of
God; lay aside all care of the event, and roll thy burden upon the Lord, who
will sustain thee: Psalm. 55.22.
Thus these Texts cry upon him to submit to Gods direction, and to depend
therein upon his help and assistance. This is the double duty we all owe,
First, To ask counsel at the word, and to follow the determination of it; for a
true heart is ever obediential, subjecting it self to the will of God, as the
rule of holiness, acknowledging his sovereignty, subscribing to his wisdom as
most absolute, and to his ways as most true, just and merciful. Secondly, To
put over all our businesses into Gods hands, and in a manner out of our own,
trusting in him for ability to the work, and for good success to come by them.

The fourth head was, Places containing passages that even melted his heart:
The use hereof, is to call such passages to remembrance in times of mourning,
only be sure that our affections prove spiritual, and not merely natural: I
make no question but David's longing after God, Psalm 42.1, 21. his panting
after the word, Psalm 119.140. his delight in the sweetness of it, Psalm.
119.103. his trembling at Gods presence, Psalm. 119.120. his grief for the
breach of his Law, Psalm 119.136. were spiritual affections; for they were
raised by spiritual objects, so it is good for us to see to our affections,
that they be raised by spiritual objects, and then they will prove singularly
useful; it may be indeed that when a Christian peruseth over again the same
Texts, he shall not have the like operation as before; all the godly find by
their own experience, that those instructions, reproofs and consolations, which
at some times awaken, wound and revive their spirits, at another time move them
nothing at all; sometimes the spiritual sense is benumbed, Job 42.5.
and they hear only by the hearing of the ear; but at other times, when those
senses are awakened, they taste, and see, and feel the same, and consequently
are affected, as Job was in that place, Job 42.5. so if at any time we find
these meltings stirred in us by a spiritual object, and that they are
answerable to Gods dealings with us, then we can rejoice or mourn seasonably,
when God calls us to either, Eccles. 7.14 I take this to be an holy and happy
use made of those places.

The fifth head was, Places that hold forth comforts against the burden of his
daily infirmities, inward temptations, and afflictions of spirit: The use
hereof, is (when such a particular temptation comes) to eye the promises, and
to betake the soul unto the Lord for succor promised: This is the voice of
Faith, Be of good courage, here is a word of comfort, and there is help enough
in heaven; the Devil may thrust sore at thee, but he shall not get the victory,
for God is with thee; no question, but for these sins the Lord bestows on thee
a pardon of course, only be vigilant and watchful at all times, in all places,
upon all occasions, against all sins, with all the degrees thereof, specially
against sin of constitution, calling, company, corrupt education: Indeed, this
is the property of faith, both to rest on the promises, and to keep waking, for
nothing is more wisely fearful then faith, nor more cautelous and circumspect
then holy fear.

The sixth head was, Places that establish his heart against the fear of
falling away: The use hereof is, in case of any such doubt, to learn and think
upon these precious places, that we may be settled in believing our
perseverance. This will encourage and quicken us in our Christian course,
stablish us in well-doing, and hearten us against the greatest difficulties:
Their objection, who say, The doctrine of assurance of not falling away, does
set open a door to all licentiousness, is most false; for the more assurance of
salvation in a man's soul, the more fear and trembling in a man's course; he who
is best assured, has most power of Gods Spirit, and the stronger the Spirit of
God is within, the more holiness and fruits of grace are without.

The seventh head is, Promises that comforted him against outward crosses: The
use hereof, is to live by faith in afflictions; for then is faith in these
promises the only stay and support of the heart: Psalm. 27.13. Psalm. 119 49, 50.
I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the
land of the living: -- This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has
quickened me: In daily and lighter trials, a man of mild and patient temper,
may hold up the head, but when one deep calls unto another, and the waves
flow over our head, when nature yields, and the heart faints, then to stand
fast, and be of good courage, is the only property of faith, which is grounded
upon the rich mercy of God, made over to us in these precious promises. I
cannot deny, but distrust many times wrings from a Christian such voices as
these, Were it any thing but this I could bear it; but now if in conscience of
his impotency, he will seek to Christ to make him able, and he will fasten
himself upon him by a true and lively says in these promises, he may find
strength enough through his might, whereby to bear that comfortably, which
otherwise he may find most intolerable. Faith drives a man out of himself, as
not able to bear the least cross as he ought, and through the power of God, it
enableth him to bear that best with which God is pleased to try him.

The eighth head is, Places that hold forth his privileges in Christ, above
all the wicked in the world: The use hereof is, 1. To believe and to rejoice in
them: All these privileges are mine, will a soul say, the Lord has given them
for my portion, how then should I glory in God, triumph over death, sin and
hell, through my Savior? 2. To live unto him who has bestowed them on the
soul: And now, Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13
O Israel (after all his kindeness) what does the Lord require of thee, but to
fear the Lord thy God, and to love him and serve him with all thy heart, and to
keep his Commandments? Oh (says the soul) how should I now think much of
Christ? and speak much of Christ? and converse much with Christ? and do much
for Christ? and suffer much for the Lord Jesus Christ? and if I cannot do much,
how should I desire and will to do much, which is accepted as if I did it? how
should I continually go to him, 2 Cor. 8.12.
to enable me to do more then of my self I can do? nay, how should I mourn and
lament for what I have not done, either through want of ability or will: This
is the use of such glorious privileges, to believe in Christ, and to live unto
Christ.

The ninth head is, Places hard to be understood, of which he desired and
endeavored after resolution: The use hereof, is specified in the very Title it
self; and the resolution of the hard Texts cited ( viz. those Titles of several
Psalms) was by industry found out thus.

PSALM. 3. The Title is, A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son.
In which three things are contained, 1. The Author thereof, David King of
Israel, who composed it. 2. The kind of the Psalm; which word [Psalm] is a
word generally applyable to all those spiritual Hymns, without particular
application to the Ceremonies of persons, time or manner of singing, as many
others are: It was usually delivered to the whole Quire, on the Sabbaths and
Festival days, to be sung by voice, and to be fitted to the instruments, used
to be played upon in the Temple. 3. The expression of the time, and occasion of
the composing thereof; (i.) when he fled from Absalom: the story is set down 2 Samuel 15. Many were the troubles wherewith this good King was afflicted,
especially after his sin in the matter of Vriah, but never any so grievous, as
to be driven out of his own Kingdom by his own Son, and his subjects to fall
away from him, and to follow his enemy, that sought his life and Throne.

Hereupon he makes his sorrowful complaint unto God in this Psalm, and appoints
it to be sung in the Church for his own comfort, and instruction to himself and
the whole Church in such times of calamities.

And to this his pathetical moan, he joins this word [Selah] as a note of the
attention of the mind, and stop or pause in the song.

Psalm. 3. v. 2. and 4. and 8.
For understanding the meaning and use of the word [Selah] note, that Selah is
an Hebrew word, and signifies as much as Amen, for ever, semper, in
sempiternum, in seculo, etc. (...), in aeternum.

Hierome observes, that the Jews used one of these three words in the end or
conclusion of their writings or sentences, or in the end of their prayers,
Amen, Selah or Salem, which signifies peace: And its noted to be a word to
express an affirmation, or giving assent to that which is prayed or said, as
Amen is, or else it imports a wish, vow or desire, that the thing spoken be
certain, or may be for ever, (i.) that it may be performed: And it is to be
noted, that it is usually placed, when some special thing, worthy attention or
observation, is spoken or delivered, or some desire to be performed, whether it
be in the end, or in any sentence of the Psalm, Prayer, etc. that by a little
stop or pause of the breath, the matter, worth or excellency of the thing may
better be considered: And you shall not find it in any part of the Scripture,
saving in the Psalms, and in the prayer of the Prophet Habakkuk, Hab. 3.3.
whereupon its observed by Drusius and others, to be a word of note, used in
those dities and music, to make a stop or stay, that the matter uttered may be
better minded of the hearers, either to affirm it by their assent, or to desire
the performance of what is sung by that intermission, which seems to be most
probable, because the Greek Translators of the Hebrew Bible, express the word
Selah, by the Greek word (...), which signifies a stop, or intermission, and so
comes to be used in the Psalmodie, and is rithmi Commutatio, a change of the
note, or vicissitudo canendi, or as some say, alterius sensus exordium.

PSALM. 4. To the chief Musician on Niginoth, a Psalm of David.
The meaning is this, The Kingly Prophet David composed this Psalm, and
delivered it to be sung and played in the Congregation, to him that was the
chief Overseer, Master, and set over the rest of that music or consort, upon
the instrument called Niginoth, which sounded by playing on with the hand: To
understand this the better, we may observe, that some instruments used in the
Jewish Temple, were (...) windy, such as sounded by breath, and motion of the
fingers; as Organs, that are blown with bellows, and all hollow instruments, as
Trumpets, Rams horns, Cornets, etc. such as the Priests and Levites used in the
holy Ordinances, from the Hebrew word Nechiloth, which signifies bored through
or hollow.

Others were pulsatilia, such as were played upon with the fingers only,
either by a quill or otherwise; as the Harp, Dulcimer, etc. and had strings;
and of this sort was the instrument in the Title of this Psalm, called
Niginoth; now to every one of these several kinds of instruments, there was
one who excelled therein, appointed Overseer, or chief of the consort, and to
direct those under him in the song, as there was of such as were the singers
also for the song: Hence it is, that the Psalm being committed to be sung to
the master of that Order, its said, To the chief Musician, or to him that
excels: A Psalm of David.

PSALM. 5. To the chief Musician upon Nehiloth, a Psalm of David.
The Title of this Psalm may be understood by that which is said in the Title
of the fourth Psalm, differing in nothing but in the name of the instrument,
which was one of those that were hollow, and sounded by breath, as the Hebrew
word shows, as before, etc. Some of the Hebrew Writers say, It was a Musical
instrument, whose sound was like the buzzing of Bees, or in regard of the
multitude of them, which are like an army for number, and for that the master
of that Quire was appointed to pray for all Israel, as for all the Armies of
the Israelites, against the Armies of the enemies, that came against them in
multitude and noise like a swarm of Bees; thereupon he gives the Title, Super
exercitus Psalmus Davidis, etc. but unproperly, the Title having no conformity
with the Substance of the Psalm, nor is it approved by our Interpreters, etc.
but the first followed.

PSALM. 6. To the chief Musician on Niginoth upon Sheminith, a Psalm of David.
The meaning of this Title may be understood by that which is said before in the
fourth Psalm, saving that here is added [upon Shemin^th] that is, it was played
with the eighth time, note or strain, and sung with a very clear and high
voice; we may better understand it by what is said, 1 Chronicles. 15.21. Mattithiah,
Eliphaleh, and others were set over the base and tenor, which is the Sheminith,
or the Eights, or Diapasan, as Musicians call it, so the meaning is; this Psalm
was to be ordered by the chief Musician of that consort, to be sung and played
upon the instrument Niginoth, with the highest and utmost strain of sound and
voice, or instrument of ten strings.

PSALM. 7. Shiggaion of David, which he sang unto the Lord, concerning the words
of Cush the Benjamite.
This was a Psalm of David, sung according to an ordinary song, the beginning
whereof was Shiggaion, for its usual with us also to make songs to be sung,
according to the tune of some others that were made before.

Tremelius and some others, from the Hebrew word, which signifies errare, etc.
titles it Ode erratica, a wandering sonnet, because it is mixed, and consists of
diverse forms and distinctions of voice, and sound in playing artificially,
joined to complete the music, as we see resembled in Prick-song.

And where it is said, Concerning the words of Cush, it shows the occasion of
the Psalm, namely, That when David was most unjustly slandered by his enemies,
and especially by Cush, etc. he makes his complaint unto God in this Psalm,
desiring him to revenge his innocence, etc. and to be delivered from the
persecution of Saul and his flatterers, such as this Cush was; [words] (i.)
Accusations, etc. who this Cush was, is doubtful. Hierom affirms it to be Saul,
and gives his reasons for it: Others (which I think is more probable) think it
to be some Courtier of Ethiopia, whom Saul entertained in his Court, and was
his special favorite, as if he had been of his family or stock (for Cush is the
name of, and taken for Ethiopia) etc. this man for hatred against David, and
flattery toward Saul, falsely accused him to Saul, and practiced all the
mischief he could against him.

PSALM. 8. To the chief Musician upon Gittith, a Psalm of David.
The Title of this Psalm is diversely given, some thus, To the chief Musician,
pro torcularibus, for wine-dressers; as if it was a prayer for fruitfulness of
that fruit, etc. Others, that it was composed by David in the City of Gath,
when he was banished; Others, that that kind of instrument was invented and
used there: That which is most probable and agreeable with the Scripture, is,
That Gittith was an instrument which Jeduthim and his posterity, being chief of
the third Classis, or Order of Musicians, used to play upon, the custody
whereof was committed to Obed-Edom the Gittite, and his family, that was of the
posterity of Jeduthim; who for himself and his brethren, for his time,
ministered and used them in the holy service, 1 Chronicles. 16.37, 38.

PSALM. 9. To the chief Musician on Muth-Labben, a Psalm of David.
Muth-Labben was the beginning of a tune, after which this Psalm was to be sung
by the Quire, which contains a Thanksgiving for his victory, and for the death
of Goliath, the Champion of the Philistines against Israel; therefore some read
the Title thus, Magistro Symphoniae de morte illius bellatoris (i.) Goliath,
etc. which typically is applied to Christ, as a song of joy of the Church and
Saints of God, for Christ's triumphant victory over the Tyranny of Satan, and
his Kingdom of sin and death: Some divide the words, and make Muth-Labben two
distinct words, and make the sense to be this, Victori, super mortem filii,
Psalmus David, as if David had made it for the death of his son, as Seldan;
which sense Austin mislikes, and yields his reasons for the former, arguing
from the substance of the Psalm, in that he mourned, and rejoiced not for his
sons death, therefore the first sense is best.

PSALM. 16. The Title is, Michtam of David (i.) A golden or excellent Psalm.
The meaning is, it is a Psalm made by David, to be sung after a certain tune,
named Michtam, well known among the Jews, which for the excellency, is compared
to Gold, the beginning of which tune was Michtam; or else it is taken for a
musical instrument of special esteem amongst them.

PSALM. 22. To the chief Musician on Aijeleth Shahar; (i.) The hind of the
morning.
Some take Aijeleth Shahar, to be the name of some common song, or to be the
beginning of some ordinary tune, according to which this Psalm was sung; that is
the Geneva note, which may be so: But Tremellius Lyra, and diverse, take it to
be otherwise, and better (as I think) who interpret those Hebrew words, in, or
at the dawning of the day, as you would say, between break of the day and
Sunrising; because at that time, the comfortable light or shine of the day
begins to break forth.

The meaning of the Title being this, David made this Psalm, and appointed it
to be sung in the Church by the Priests and Levites every morning, so soon as
the day brake out; at which time it was by the Law and Custom their duty to
exercise their Ministry in the Quire, and to sing Psalms, 1 Chronicles. 9.33. which
service the Lord would have to be done by the Church, that their faith and
expectation of Christ, might daily be renewed and had in memory; the prophecy
of whose Kingdom and sufferings are represented in this Psalm, looking (as the
day springs from on high) that Christ should visit them.

PSALM. 30. Title, A Psalm or song of David, at the dedication of the House of
David, which he composed to be sung at the dedication of his House.
Which Title shows the occasion of this song, and time when it was used,
which was at such time as he had built and finished his house of Cedar upon
Mount Sion, which many good Authors think probable, and follow.

Or else when he was returned to his house again in safety, after Absalom in
his rebellion had profaned it, and defiled it by his incestuous wickedness
with his Fathers Concubines; and so to purge it from all uncleanness, he
dedicates it to the Lord, praying him to sanctify and make it holy again, that
it might be blessed and acceptable to himself, 2 Samuel 16.22. which is the
opinion of learne^ Tremellius, and the matter of the Psalm serves to imply as
much; for it was a custom prescribed by the Law, Deuteronomy. 20.5. Deuteronomy. 20.5.
that whosoever had built a new house, he should dedicate it unto the Lord,
sever it from wickedness and sinful abuse, or (as you would say) make God the
Landlord thereof.

And this dedication imports three things:

1. That the Builder should devote it unto God, to testify that he would use
it to holiness, and not to profane or sinful uses.

2. To testify his thankfulness for the work finished.

3. To offer prayers and sacrifices, that God might continue and confer his
blessings upon them in it.

PSALM. 34. A Psalm of David, when he changed his behavior before Abimelech, and
he departed.
This Title shows the occasion of the Psalm, rather then the ceremony thereof:
The story is set down 1 Samuel 21.13. the sum is, David flying from Saul to
Achish, King of Gath, who here is called Abimelech, for his safety, but being
discovered by those about the King, and thereby in some danger, he changed his
behavior, mutavit gustum suum, some vultum, meaning that out of policy to free
himself, he fained a distemper, as if he had been mad before Abimelech, who
after sent him away, and so he escaped the danger he feared, and thereupon
makes this Psalm of Thanksgiving for his deliverance: And it is to be noted,
touching the name of the King, that here he is called Abimelech, which was a
common name to all the Kings of that Country, as Pharaoh was to the Egyptians,
Caesar to the Romans; and in Samuel he is called Achish King of Gath, which was
his more proper name.

PSALM. 38. Title, A Psalm of David to bring to remembrance.
A Psalm which David made, to be sung by the Quire upon the Sabbath, after the
Lord had afflicted him with sickness, and grievous chastisements, to put
himself (and others of Gods children in like case) in remembrance of his sin,
which caused them; (which some think was the matter of Vrias) and to admonish
him of Gods goodness, who had delivered him from those punishments, and
pardoned his sin.

Some apply this to the agonies of Christ, and his powerful victory over sin,
death, etc.

PSALM. 39. Title, To the chief Musician, even to Jeduthim, a Psalm of David.
[Magistro Symphoniae Jeduthim.]
This Psalm was composed by David, and appointed to be sung and played on
instruments to Jeduthim, even to Jeduthim (i.) To that excellent Musician, who
for the excellency of his skill, was the chief of his Order, and father to
those of his stock, which prophesied with a Harp, to give thanks and praise to
the Lord, as 1 Chronicles. 25.3.

PSALM. 42. Title, To the chief Musician, Maschil, for the sons of Corah.
A Psalm committed to the sons (i.) posterity of Corah, of whom it seems Heman
was chief, for the third Classis, or Order of those Musicians, to whom the holy
service belonged, 1 Chronicles. 25.5. All these were under the hand of the father;
viz. Heman, who sung in the house of the Lord with Cymbals, Psalteries and
Harps, etc. that it might not only be kept, but sung by them in the tune
beginning with the word Maschil, that both the fingers and hearers might be
instructed in the matter thereof, according to the signification of the word.

Some think the Psalm was made by the Sons of Corah, after his rebellion
against Moses; to whom after their repentance, etc. God gave the spirit of
prophecy, whereby they made diverse Psalms, whereof this was one, and therein
foretold things to come of Christ, etc. which conceit Augustine mislikes,
neither does it agree with the matter of the Psalm; besides, the Hebrew letter
Lamech, being prefixed to note the Dative case, shows it was made by David, for
them to act by their music, and not of them; and that David in his banishment,
to show his grief and zeal for the House and Temple, and to quicken his faith
and confidence in God for his comfort, made this Psalm for his own and the
Churches instruction in the like calamity, and delivered it to Heman and his
sons, to be used in the song.

PSALM. 45. Title, To the chief Musician, Shoshannim, for the sons of Corah,
Maschil, a song of loves.
Shoshannim was an instrument amongst the Jews, that had six strings, according
to the Lilly that has six leaves or stems, thereby called Hexachorda, upon
which instrument this Psalm was delivered by David to be sung to, and played to
by Corah and his posterity; it begins with the word Maschil (as before) (i.) To
give instruction to Gods people, touching the spiritual marriage and love
between Christ and his Church, whereof Solomon's marriage with Pharaohs
daughter, was a figure and type; and likewise to show the perfect love that
ought to be between the husband and the wife; hence called, A song of loves,
not unlike to Solomon's Canticles: And some put this difference between a Song
and a Psalm; that, where no instrument, but the voice only is; this, the
contrary; the Song is, when the instrument begins, and the voice follows; a
Psalm, when the voice or ditty begins, and the instrument follows.

PSALM. 46. Title, To him that excels upon Alamoth, or the chief Musician for
the sons of Corah upon Alamoth.
Some understand this Alamoth, to be the tune of a song; I take it otherwise
(after the best Expositions) to be meant of an instrument, not a tune, the
meaning being thus much, A Psalm committed by David to be sung, and to him that
was chief of the sons of Corah, to be played upon the instrument called
Alamoth; for 1 Chronicles. 15.10. it is expressly said, That Zachariah played with
Psalteries upon Alamoth, and then they played first upon that instrument, and
so then sung the Psalm or ditty.

PSALM. 50. Title, A Psalm of Asaph.
Some think it is so called, for that Asaph was the author of it, having the
gift of prophecy, which is but a weak reason, because all the rest were endued
with a prophetical spirit as well as he. Augustine and other learned Divines,
take it to be so called, not for that Asaph made it, but because it was
committed to him and his posterity to be the singers thereof, 1 Chronicles. 25.2.

PSALM. 53. Title, To the chief Musician upon Mahalath Maschil.
Hierome thinks Mahalath to signify a tune of the whole Quire, or Company of
singers, and that David committed it to be sung by the whole company of
Levites, etc. but others better take it to be an instrument, such as was made
to sound by breath and blowing, by reason of the hollowness thereof; the rest
is expounded before.

PSALM. 56. Title, To the chief Musician upon Jonath, Elem, Rechokim, Michtam of
David, when the Philistines took him in Gath.
The words of this Title in the original, have a double signification, and may
be interpreted either metaphorically, a dumb Dove, for so Jonath signifies, in
a far or strange Country; So Hierome: or more properly, for a soul-suffering
violence in a far Country; for howsoever usually the first word is
interpreted, Columba, a Dove, yet its taken also in the other sense properly,
and in its natural signification, for soul-suffering violence; in both which
senses David applies this Title to himself in his great distress: for David by
a metaphor, compares himself to dumb Doves in a far Country; because when he
was driven out of Judea, his own Country, by Saul that sought his life, and
from the worship of God, and forced to fly to Gath amongst the Philistines,
yet with patience, meekness and silence, escaping, he neither sought revenge,
though it was in his power, nor showed any impatience, but betook himself in
silence unto God, as if he had been dumb, and mourning like a Dove; and we may
apply this Psalm to Christ, of whom he was a type.

Or which is better approved by Iunius, he refers it (which sense the words
likewise bear) to the soul-suffering violence, enclosed by a band or multitude
of Philistines, enemies both to him and his God. Some read the words, To the
Master of the Harmony, which is all one in sense, as To him that excels, or
chief Musician, Michtam of David; (i.) the excellency of this Psalm is as
precious as gold.

PSALM. 57. Title, To the chief Musician, Altaschith Michtam of David, when he
fled from Saul in the cave, or into the cave.
The general notes on this Title intimate, that the words are either the
beginning of the song, Destroy not, or else words uttered by David in his
extremity, staying and bridling his passion, etc. Michtam of David] as if he
should say, This was the golden or excellent sonnet, which David composed and
delivered to the Levites to be sung, and after the tune of the Psalm beginning
with Altaschith, when he was in some wonderful fear and danger of death in the
cave of Adullam, or En-gedi; whither he was driven by Saul, and so compassed
about by his guard, that he saw nothing but death in the cave, or destruction
if he came out, and thereupon prays, that he would not destroy, (i.) suffer
him to be destroyed, which was the occasion of this song: See the story, 1 Samuel
22. and 24.

PSALM. 60. Title, To the chief Musician upon Shushan-Eduth, Michtam of David,
to teach when he strove with Aram, Naharim, and Aram Zobah, when Ioab returned
and smote of Edom in the valley of salt, twelve thousand.
Shushan-Eduth is either the name of some instrument to be played upon in
singing this Psalm, or the beginning of some song, so called according to the
tune wherewith David would have this Psalm sung; or Michtam (i.) an excellent
song which may be sung, either upon the instrument or tune Shushan-Eduth, or
that of Michtam.

Some Titles have it Magistro Symphoniae in hexacorda, and then it signifies an
instrument of six strings, upon which David would have this Psalm played, to
testify unto the whole Church his faith, and the benefit of his victory given
him by God, against the Aramites of Mesopotamia, and the other Aramites that
inhabited Zobah, for which cause the word in testimonium is put in that Title;
for further explication of the words, declaring the time and occasion of the
making this, see the story 2 Samuel 8. and 1 Chronicles. 18.

PSALM. 72. Title, A Psalm for Solomon, or of Solomon.
Not that Solomon made it, or was the writer thereof, but that it concerned
him, or was composed on his behalf by his Father David, when being ready to
dye, he commends his son Solomon, created King, to God, etc.

PSALM. 88. Title, A Psalm or Song for the sons of Corah, to the chief Musician
upon Mahalath Leannoth, Maschil of Heman the Ezrahite.
Heman and Ethan were brothers, endued with an excellent spirit of prophecy
and wisdom, wherein they were compared with Solomon, 1 Kings 4.31. Heman was
the author that composed and made this Psalm, and Ethan the next Psalm, and
committed them to be sung and played to the sons of Corah, to the chief of that
company, upon Mahalath-Leannoth, which was the beginning of a song, after which
he would have the Psalm sung, as some think, or else some instrument to which
he would have the tune of it played and sung; and for the excellency of the
matter contained therein, would have them preserved for a form of complaint
unto the Church, in any private or singular distress (as in this Psalm) or in
the time of affliction, or in persecution of Church or Commonwealth (as in the
next.)

And it is to be noted, that some skilful in the holy tongue, affirm the Hebrew
word Mahalath to be of diverse significations, signifying both a musical
instrument, or a Quire and company of Musicians, or infirmity; according to
every of which acceptions it may be taken in this place, and applied to the
instrument so called, to be sung by the whole company of the Levites, as well
by voice as playing, in times of affliction of that people or others.

PSALM. 90. Title, A prayer of Moses the man of God (i.) A psalm of prayer made
by Moses.
Its thought this psalm or prayer was made by Moses, for himself and the
people, at such time as the Spies came back from viewing the Land of Canaan,
murmuring and bringing an ill report thereof, for which the Lord threatened that
they should not enter into the Land of promise.

PSALM. 92 Title, A psalm or song for the Sabbath day.
This psalm was made to be sung and used in the service of God in the Assembly,
upon the Sabbath day, when the people met for the public exercises of the
Church.

Some Hebrew writers say, it was made by Moses, in celebration of the memory of
the Creation; there is no author thereof expressed in the Title.

This psalm for the Sabbath; and 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, Psalms, which the
Jews call their Halleluiah, or praises of God, were sung at the Passover, and
are the psalms or hymns which are mentioned in the Gospel, which were sung
during the celebration.

PSALM. 119.
In this 119 Psalm, we find no less then ten several names or appellations,
whereby David expresses Gods revealed will; sometimes he calls it Gods Law,
sometimes his Way, sometimes his Word, sometimes his Precepts, sometimes his
Commandments, sometimes his Judgments, sometimes his Statutes, sometimes his
Promises, sometimes his Righteousness, sometimes his Testimonies; but above
all, notable it is, that there is not one Verse (excepting one, viz. 122.) in
this long Psalm (containing according to the Hebrew Alphabet, two and twenty
Octonaries) where we may not find one or more of these ten words or names:
Hence we may gather, if David were so exact throughout the Psalm, that in every
division (according to the letters 22.) and in every subdivision (every Verse
beginning with the self same letter) he still makes mention of some one or more
of these, so many appellations: O then, how were his affections inkindled, how
was his love inflamed toward Gods holy Word!

PSALM. 120. The Title, A Song of Degrees.
The Title of this Psalm has more relation to the ceremony and manner of
singing, then to the matter and contents of the Psalm, and I do not find so
many different opinions touching the reason of the Title in any other, as in
this.

Some suppose this and the 14 others next following to be so called, for that
they were sung in some high and eminent place: Some refer it to the extension
or lifting up of the voice in singing, or rising of the tune, that they might
be better heard of the people; so Calvin: Some, that they were sung by the
Priests and Levites, after the form and melody of some known and esteemed song,
beginning with this Title: Some later Expositors conceive nothing to be meant
hereby, but the excellency of the Psalms above the rest, because those places
are accounted chiefest, whereunto we do ascend by degrees, therefore the word
is used in the plural number [degrees,] as being choice Epigrams, as one would
say, Most excellent Sonnets; because the Hebrews use to express the superlative
degree or excellency of a thing, by substantives of the plural number, as here,
A Song of degrees, (i.) an excellent Song; so the Canticles of Solomon, called
A Song of Songs, (i.) excellent; so the Lord is called The God of gods, Deuteronomy.
10.17. Deuteronomy. 10.17.
Lord of lords, Apoc. 19.16. Apoc. 19 16.
(i.) without all comparison, above all other gods or lords: Daniel called him
a Man of desires, Dan. 9.23. Dan. 9.23.
(i.) to be esteemed or desired above others; in this sense Iunius takes it:
Others think they were composed for Psalms of Thanksgiving, at the return of
the Jews from their captivity in Babylon; and in that Jerusalem was situated
amongst hills, whence soever they came, they must rise or ascend to come to it,
as they do that climb up an hill; these songs therefore were appointed to be
sung at every ascent and cleft, as the places they went up did arise, and for
this cause called Psalms of Degrees.

Carolus Siggonius de rep: Hebreorum (whose judgment is more to be approved,
as more agreeable to the truth) understands them to be so called, for that they
were sung by the Priests and Levites, upon the several stairs that went out of
the great Court or Porch where the people were, into the higher or inner part
of the Temple, whither none but the Priests might come; and in Nehemiah 9.4.
Neh. 9.4.
mention is made of the stairs whereon the Levites stood in the solemn feasts,
crying unto God, etc.

For Solomon in building the Temple of Jerusalem, made certain Terresies, 1 Chronicles. 9.11.
stairs or steps rising one above another, 2 Chronicles. 9.11. by which the Priests
and Levites went up from that outward and great open Court or room adjoining to
the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. 4.9.
(where the people prayed, brought and attended the Sacrifice, called, John
10.29. John 10.29.
Solomon's porch, or the Court of the people, because it was open to all the
people) into an higher room or place in the Temple, called The inner Court, or
Lords House, 2 Chronicles. 24.21. 2 Chro. 24.21
or Atrium Sacerdotale, because none but the Priests must enter thither: Now
upon every feast day, the Levites, or they of them appointed for the song, sung
these 15 Psalms, upon each stair one, being in number 15, as they went up into
that Court of the Temple, making a pause upon each stair, from whence they had
the Title of Psalms of Degrees.

This ceremony was used then as an outward means of preparation to the
worshipping of God, to admonish all people to do it with cheerful hearts,
renewed and lifted up to him by faith, from whence Cyprian observes, that in
the Church Liturgy of his time, the Deacon called upon the people to lift up
their hearts unto God, using this speech, Sursum corda.

Observations.
It may be observed, that in Titles many things seem strange, and hard unto us,
because we know not (nor do the latter Jews of these times themselves) the
particular instrument, form of singing, or the tunes used in specie, whether
they be the same that we use in these days, or some resemblance of ours, in
respect of the playing by the hand, or by breath; as Decem-chorda, an
instrument of ten strings, is a resemblance of the Lute we use, etc. Cymbals,
of our Cornets, etc. otherwise we know no more of theirs, then our songs, tunes
or instruments are known to other strange nations and tongues, to whom we and
our language is unknown and unheard of.

Again, where in some Titles its said to be sung after such a tune, it is no
more but as in our psalms it is said, This is to be sung after, or according to
such a psalm, because neither their nor our psalms have for every several psalm
a several tune, but the tune of one is or may be referred to another.

Thus much of such hard places in the Psalms, as the weak Christian spoken of,
desired and endeavored, after resolution in: For other difficult places of
Scripture, because they would too much enlarge this Book, I purposely omit
them. Thus much of Reading the Word.

CHAP. XV.
SECT. 1. Of preparatives to Fasting.
HItherto of duties ordinary; now follow the extraordinary, Fasting and
Feasting: but because the Book is swollen bigger then I had purposed it, and
that much of the extraordinary is contained in the ordinary duties, I shall
therefore deliver in few words what I have to say of these duties.

The first of these is Fasting, in which there is required something
Antecedent. Concomitant. Subsequent.


1. The Antecedent, or preparation thereto, consists in these particulars: --

1. Take but a moderate supper the night before; for if a man glut himself over
night, he will be more unfit for the duty of humiliation the next day.

2. Immediately after supper, all servile works of our calling laid aside,
begin the preparation, and continue so long as we can conveniently sit up, even
longer and later then on other days: From even to even shall ye celebrate your
Sabbath, Lev. 23.32.
says God; and therefore then set the time allotted apart for that holy work,
propounding to our selves the end of our intended Fast, resolving to keep it to
God according to his will, adding serious petitions to God in our prayers in
that behalf.

3. When we awake that night, let not our thoughts be upon worldly business,
much less upon any wicked thing, but let them be holy, such as may tend to the
furtherance of the holy actions to be done the next day.

4. Arise early the day of our Fast, this agrees well with a fasting day; 2 Samuel 12.16. Joel 1.13.
it is probable, that for this cause some lay on the ground, others in
sackcloath, in the nights of their fasts, not only to express, but to further
their humiliation, by keeping them from sleeping overmuch or over sweetly.

5. In the morning (after some renewing of our preparation, and prayer for Gods
spiritual grace to enable us to sanctify a Fast that day) apply we our selves
to the main work of the day, of which in the next Section.

SECT. 2. Of the duties required in Fasting.
IN the action of Fasting there are duties inward. outward.


1. The inward duties are general. more special.


1. The duties that more generally concern the nature of the day, are such as
these: --

1. In the true spiritual Fast, there must be fasting from sin, or the
forsaking of all our sins; for whiles we abstain from lawful things, we are
admonished much more to abstain from all things that are utterly unlawful at
all times: It is the Lords complaint, Behold, ye fast for strife and debate,
and smite with the fist of wickedness, ye shall not fast as ye do this day. It
is plain, Isa. 58.4.
the Lord will endure no Fast of those that go on still in their wickedness.

2. The word and prayer must be added: N^h. 1.4. N^h. 9.3.
I fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven, said Nehemiah: -- And they stood
up in their place, and read in the Book of the Law of the Lord their God, one
fourth part of the day, and another fourth part they confessed and worshipped
the Lord their God: But whereas prayer is a daily and ordinary exercise of the
Saints, it is manifest, that by Prayer coupled with Fasting, is understood a
special and peerless kind of Prayer, wherein two things are required: 1.
Fervency of desire; now we must not only pray, Joel 1.14. Jonah 3.8.
but cry unto the Lord; yea, as the Ninevites speak, We are to cry mightily
unto him: For the use of our outward abstinence, is but the wing of prayer,
wherewith it might more easily fly up to heaven. 2. In such a prayer there
should be an assurance of faith: The Lord has made a gracious promise in many
places to this Ordinance, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Isa. 58.8, 13. Joel 2.18, 19. and let
all the Fasts of the Church of Christ, both in the Old and New Testament, be
looked at, as Judges 20.23. Ezra 9.6. Esth. 4.16. Acts 13.2, 3. and it will
appear, that the end of their fasts (kept in any measure of truth and
sincerity) was a feast, and the issue of their mourning, great rejoicing; all
which may serve wonderfully to strengthen our faith in this holy performance.

Isa 58.6, 7.
3. Works of mercy must be added, Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to
loose the bands of wickedness, to deal the bread unto the hungry, to bring the
poor that are cast out, into thine house, and when thou see the naked, to
cover them? In all our fasts this must be observed, that the poor may have the
gain of our fasting; If their loins and bowels bless us, the Lord also will
bless us abundantly.

4. We must ever in these days of humiliation, renew our Covenant with the
Lord; and not only unfeinedly purpose, but faithfully promise amendment of
life; this making, renewing and keeping our Covenant, is the life and sum, and
the one most necessary thing in this excellent and extraordinary exercise of
fasting and prayer.

2. The particular duties, wherein we must seriously exercise our souls on such
a day, are these: --

1. In a right survey and full comprehension of all our vileness, iniquities,
transgressions and sins.

2. In a right apprehension of Gods dreadful wrath and flaming vengeance
against sin.

3. In a feeling sense of our own unspeakable, unconceiveable misery by reason
thereof.

4. In a vile and base conceit and esteem of our selves, abhorring our selves
in dust and ashes.

5. In an inward sorrow, renting of the heart, bleeding of the soul,
accompanied with an outward bewailing, with a plentiful and heart-piercing
confession of all our sins before Gods gracious throne.

6. In a resolute hatred, dislike and aversion in the will; in an impregnable
resolution and strong reasoning of the mind; in a constant endeavor and
watchful opposition against sin.

7. In an hearty grieving, that we cannot perform all these more heartily,
sincerely and soundly.

2. The outward duties consist especially in outward abstinence: As --

1. From full sleep, whence that exhortation in some sense, Watch unto prayer,
Col. 4.2. 1 Pet. 4.7.

2. From costly apparel, from ornaments, and better attire, Exodus 33.4, 5, 6.
Jonah 3.6.

3. From matrimonial Benevolence, from that society which God has sanctified
by his word to married persons, 1 Cor. 7.5. Joel 2.16.

4. From bodily labors and worldly business, Lev. 16.29, 31. -- 23.32. Joel
1.14. -- 2.15.

5. From food wholly; and yet this total abstinence from meat and drink is not
so strictly required, but that they whose health cannot bear it, may in case of
true necessity, take some little refreshing, lest otherwise they hazard or hurt
their health, and unfit themselves for the spiritual exercise and duty; indeed
we have no example of this case propounded in Scripture, yet we have a
sufficient ground for it, Hosea 6.6. Mat. 12.7.

6. From all carnal delights and pleasures of this life, Joel 2.16. David and
Daniel would. not anoint themselves at such a time, 1 Samuel 12.20. Dan. 10.3.
And all these outward duties are to be observed, 1. Partly as helps to our
humiliation, in renouncing the hindrances thereof. 2. Partly as signs of our
humiliation, whereby we acknowledge our selves unworthy of these delights. 3.
Partly as evidences of our repentance, in that by way of godly revenge, we
deprive our senses (which have all sinned) of their several delights.

SECT. 3. Of the Duties after Fasting.
When all is done and performed, observe these particulars: --

1. Take heed of inward pride, and resting in the performance: spiritual pride
is that worm that will breed in the best fruits of the Spirit, that poison which
the Devil (that hellish spider) will suck out of the best flowers in Gods
Garden; and if he can but prevail over us to be self conceited with our
inlargements, or to trust to that service we have done, he has what he looks
for, and deprives us of all the comfort of our humiliation: Labor therefore as
much as we can, to humble our selves with a through view of our failings in the
best of our performances; and for our inlargements, consider we the fountain of
them, which is not any (...) power, goodness, fatherly providence and bounty
toward us, Psalm. 16.5, 6. Mark 7.37. Romans 8.28. and this acknowledgement, if
it be effectual, will work affection in the heart, a sense of Gods goodness and
bounty toward us, causing us to love God, and to be obsequious toward God in
all the duties of Thankfulness.

2. Cheerfulness and alacrity of Spirit; as the Lord loves a cheerful given, so
a cheerful Thanksgiver, (...) thanks, comes of (...) to rejoice (...) must be
(...) with joy, Phil. 1.4. James 5.13. The Holy Ghost in many places has
joined them together: Psalm. 9.2. Psalm. 33.1.
I will be glad and rejoice in thee, I will sing praise unto thy name, O thou
most high: -- Rejoice in the Lord, O ye Righteous, for praise is comely for the
upright: -- It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, Psalm. 92.1, 4.
and to sing praises unto thy name, O most high; -- For thou Lord have made me
glad through thy work, I will triumph in the works of thy hands.

2. The outwatd duty, is to express our inward Thankfulness and Cheerfulness:
Our Thankfulness, by celebrating and praising the name of God, by extolling his
goodness, by recounting his mercies, and by exciting others to praise the Lord:
Our Cheerfulness, by making a joyful noise and singing unto God: Sing aloud
unto God our strength, Psalm. 82.1. Psalm. 100.1, 2.
make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob: -- Make a joyful noise unto the
Lord, all ye Lands, serve the Lord with gladness, come before his presence with
singing: To this purpose we may sing the Psalms in the end of this Book, or
some such other.

SECT. 3. Of the Duties after Thanksgiving.
THe Duty after, consists in these particulars: --

1. In referring the benefits and gifts received, to the glory of God the
giver, in the good of his Church.

John 15.8.
2. In seeking to glorify God, who has been so gracious unto us, by bringing
forth the fruits of a godly life: Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear
much fruit.

3. In honoring the Lord with our substance, and acknowledging him to be the
chief Lord of all we possess: Prove. 3.9.
Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruit of all thy
increase.

SECT. 4. Of Psalms suitable to this duty, translated by Mr. W. B.
Psalm 100.
to the tune, Have mercy, etc.
ALl men of mortal birth,
that dwell in all the earth,
2. O make a noise to God with joys,
and serve the Lord with mirth.
O come before his throne
with singing, every one;
3. For certainly the Lord most high,
even he is God alone.
He made us, and not we;
not we our selves, but he.
His folk, and flock, and pasture stock
he made us for to be:
4. With praise come to his gate,
and to his Courts relate
His land and fame, and bless his name:
his honor celebrate.
5. For God is good for ever,
his mercy fails never.
His truth does last all ages past,
and constant does persever.
Psalm 108. 1 part.
O God I fix my heart,
my glory bears a part,
And as my tongue, so shall my song
praise thee with musicks art.
2. Wake Harp and Psaltery,
right early wake will I:
3. Thy praises, Lord, will I record,
the people standing by.
I Will praise thee with my song,
the nations all among:
4. To heavens high, to clouds of sky,
his truth and mercies throng.
5. Exalted be thy name
above the heavens frame,
Let earth below the trumpet blow
of thy renowned fame.
Psalm 150.
PRaise, praise the Lord most high,
within his sanctuary,
In topmost tower of his great power,
with praise him magnify.
2. Praise him for acts renowned,
with excellency crowned;
According to his greatness, do
praise him with trumpet sound.
3. O praise him cheerfully,
with Harp and Psaltery:
4. And let the dance his praise advance,
and Timbrels melody.
Praise him with joint consents
of stringed instruments.
5. The Organs bring, loud Cymbals ring,
each one his praise presents.
6. High sounding Cymbals ring,
let every breathing thing
The praise record of this great Lord,
and Halleluiah sing.
Alleluiah, and again Alleluiah; Amen, Alleluiah.
Christian Reader,
IT is the desire of some precious men, That I should revise that Question
about joining with the wicked in the Supper of the Lord, page 260. For my own
part, I am fully satisfied, that the mind of God is clearly delivered in it;
and yet lest any may think that I am singular in this, I have lately cons^lted
with those Divines, to whom high (if not highest) respect is given in the
Controversies of this nature; viz. Mr. Rutherford, and Mr. Gelaspi, to whom I
may join the late Assembly of Divines convened at Westminster; and if you would
know their opinions, consult but the Authors, as I have cited them, where you
may find them at large. The Question is, Whether admitting of, or joining with
scandalous persons in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and not endeavoring to
keep them back whilst such, be sin in the admitters and joyners? and how may it
appear? It is answered affirmatively: -- 1. That it is sin: --

1. In the admitters, Mat. 7.6. See Rutherford, Divine right of Church
Government, page 254. and see Gelaspi, Aarons Rod blossoming, page 548, 549,
550, 551.

2. In the joyners, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. See Rutherford, Divine right of
Church Government, page 238, 240, 250, 268, 356, 357. and see Gelaspi, Aarons
Rod blossoming, page 424, 427, 428, 429, 339. 2. This appears to be sin: --

1. In the admitters, by these grounds.

1. Because of the command to keep unclean persons from holy things, Numb. 5.2.
-- 9.6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 23.19. See Rutherford, Divine right of Church Government,
page 241, 242. see Gelaspi, Aarons Rod blossoming, page 96, 97, 98.

2. Because of Christ's casting out the man that came without his wedding
garment, Mat. 22.11. see Gelaspi, Aarons Rod blossoming, page 510.

3. Because of the practice of the Apostles, who cast out the scandalous from
the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. see Ruth. Divine right of
Church Government, page 238, 240, 268, 346. Gelaspi, Aarons Rod blossoming,
page 239. and for 1 Timothy 1.20. see Rutherford, Divine right of
Church Government, page 354, 355. Gelaspi, Aarons Rod blossoming, page 189.

2. In the joyners, by these grounds:

1. Because they are forbidden expressly to join with such, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. Ruth.
p. 250, 360. Gelaspi, p. 281, 282.

2. Because scandalous persons ought to be censured, and so to be esteemed of
the joyners as heathens and publicans, Mat. 18.17. Ruth. p. 303, 306. 223, 233.
Gelasp. p. 295, 296, 351, 361, 364.

3. In both admitters and joyners, by these grounds:

1. Because God has forbidden us to eat with such, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
Ruth. p. 238, 240, 250, 268, 356, 357. Gelasp. p. 424, 427, 428, 429, 339.

2. Because by joining with such in the Lords Supper, their sin would become
ours, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. Gal. 5.9, 10. Ruth. p. 238, 239, 240, 339, 345, 349, 373.
Gelasp. p. 116, 117. 286.

3. Because the Ordinance of the Lords Supper is defiled thereby, which we
understand not simply in it self, but in some sort; (i.) It is defiled to them
who are scandalous, and to them who join with such whom they know to be
scandalous: And this appears: --

1. In that the Temple, which had a Sacramental signification of Christ, was
polluted by the coming of profane persons into it, Ezekiel. 23.38, 39. Ruth. p.
452, 453, 496. Gelasp. p. 546, 547.

2. In that the sacrifices of old were defiled by profane persons, Hag. 2.11,
12, 13, 14. Ruth. p. 272, 347, 348. Gelasp. p. 547.

3. In that the profane are as swine which trample the pearls under their
feet. Matthew. 7.6. Ruth. p. 254, 255, 638. Gelasp. p. 548, 549. It is confessed
that the word is a pearl, and yet the profane may hear the word, and in stead
of defiling it (if the Lord see good) be converted by it, Isa. 2.3, 4. -- 11.4,
5, 6, 7. but the Lords Supper is such a pearl, as they can make no use of it,
but pollute it to their own destruction; no more then dogs and swine can make
use of pearls to feed, but only to trample on them: The Lords Supper is such a
thing as is ordained only for those that have saving grace, and not for dogs.

I hope these two witnesses (if they be thoroughly perused) will satisfy the
scrupulous: But besides those two worthy Pillars, our own Assembly of Divines
affirm this truth; who grounding the suspension of scandalous sinners from the
Sacrament, though not yet cast out of the Church, they gave in these proofs: 1.
Because the Ordinance it self must not be profaned. 2. Because we are charged
to withdraw from those who walk disorderly. 3. Because of the great sin and
danger both to him that comes unworthily, and also to the whole Church: The
Scriptures from which the Assembly did prove all this, were Matthew. 7.6. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 11.27. to the end; compared with Jude, v. 23. 1 Timothy
5.22. see Gelaspi, Aarons Rod blossoming, page 339. I have no more to say, but
the Lord lead us into all truth, and give us grace to walk humbly and
obediently to every truth revealed: And as many as be perfect, Ph^l. 3.15, 16.
let them be thus minded; and if any be otherwise minded, God shall reveal it
in his due time: Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

Thine in Christ, ISAAC AMBROSE.
E musaeo meo, October. 1649.
Soli Deo Gloria.
THis Treatise (^a^led Med^^, or The Middle things) as a very useful Collection
in these times of so much straggling from sound Doctrine License to the Press,

Charles Herle.

ERRATA.
PAge 25. line 4. for divinius read divi^^^. p. 68. l. 17. for in r. of. p. 72.
l. 25. for fast r feast. p 124. l 3. betwixt the word [conclude, and hic and
ill^] put out the comm^ or colon [1] otherwise it spoils the sense p. ^36 l. ^.
for others r. our selves. p 140. l. ^. for i^ r. is. p. 141. l. 31. for as r.
us. p. 143. l. 2. for actual r. actually. ibid. for whistlers r. whispers. p
149. l. 26. for communitive, r. communicative. p. 151. l. 23. ins^^t [and]
provide. p. 159. l. 7. for find r. mind. p. 164. l. 28. for wrest r. rest. p
167. l. 14. insert [in] his book p. 171. l. 11. for of. r. in. p. 194 l.
antepne^lt for if r. is. p. 200. l. 27. in^er^ [and] to submit. p. 211. l. 18.
for the r. these. p. 224. l. 3. for and r. when. p. 219. l. 11. for joining r.
joy^ing. p. 252. l. 2^. insert [of] sense. p. 254. l. antepennit. for preser.
r. preserve p. 268. l. 3. for in r. of. p. 271. l. 7. for it is, r. its p. 280.
l. 3. for us of r. to. p. 294. l. 16. for throughout r. through.

London, Printed by John Field for Nathanaell Webb and William Grantham, at the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard, 1650.


