A Letter of advice to the LONDONERS to forewarn them of their near approaching
miseries, and to rouse them (if it be possible) out of their senslesle Security.
A Man would wonder (O ye Londoners) to see how amidst your greatest dangers
you are least circumspect and active in prevention thereof: you think you have
done well enough, and played the parts of good Commonwealths men, if you can
hinder the Kings Forces from doing execution upon you; and never think upon
them with any respect to your selves, till they advance within few miles of
your walls, that in the mean time while they are absent from you, they are
plotting and contriving all ways that possible can be to endamage you, and
work you into such a condition, that when they come next at you, they may the
easier make themselves Masters of your City. When they have gained to their
Party all the Western and Northern Counties, and disarmed or cut off all
those your friends that stand out against them (as you perceive they resolve to
do, and are like enough to effect unless you interpose) they will by that
means not only subdue half part of England, but thereby likewise half
conquer London it self: for as the Countries are not like to hold out, if the
Kings Forces possess themselves of London; so neither can London hold out if
provisions be cut off from coming thither. To me you seem to bear your
selves as if you had no war in your Land, or as if you thought the Cavahers
and desperate Roysters intended no evil toward you, or that the Design of
making you slaves were therefore laid down, because it is found so easy a
matter to compass, and you are so easy to admit it. What do you think of the
condition you now are in? Or, do you not think of it at all? Verily, a man
might swear you did not, you are so secure and quiet; so busy about your
trading, You see it is otherwise with the King and his Friends, you see how
active they are, that they set themselves wholly to this work, you see that
every week produces some notable exploit they have enterpriz'd to their real
advantage, besides what private succors and supplies each hour affords,
insomuch that they have made themselves in a short time, by their Policy and
laborious industry of a weak and contemptible Party, a strong power and
overawing army of Traitors: when in the mean time you by your slacknesse and
drowzy managing of your Affairs are much wasted, have lost much of your
strength, and are like to lose more, unless you look better about you then
you have done heretofore: Your eyes are altogether upon the Parliament, and you
do well; but can the Parliament sight for you? They are your Counsel and
directors; but it is you the People that are the strength and power of the
Kingdom: neither is it to be hoped that the Kings Forces shall ever be
vanquished by Words and Writings; it must be your Swords and valiant prowess
that must subdue them. Why, what would you have us do you will say? Or, what
can you do more then you have done? You have contributed freely out of your
Estates; and you have likewise sent away your servants to the Wartes; I applaud
you for it: but let me withal tell you, that if you do no more as the case
stands, you have done as much as nothing, for all this will not avail you; for
you see that the nature of the Country is such that the King can avoid your
Soldiers, and choose whether ever he will sight, but when he is sure to
conquer, where his Enemies are weak and unprovided, or that our soldiers come
on upon many disadvantages; so that unless your courage and resolution be the
greater, and ye set your selves more closely to your business, ye shall be
sure to have this War last long enongh, since his interest depends upon the
prolongation thereof, whereby he finds his Party to be increased, and you
impoverished and thereby unable to ssue out supplies to oppose your enemies:
and so wearied with the Charge, many of you will be willing to make peace;
which (the King being strong) must be expected to be upon such conditions as
shall leave the way easy to make you perfect Slaves, and himself absolute.
Well, you will say, what then must be done? Verily, I think it is to no purpose
to tell you; for you are so heavy a People, that you make nothing of good
Counsel; you are only well-aflected; but you want abilities to deal with
your cunning Adversaries, and all because you cannot find in your hearts to set
about it: there is little difference in men besides custom and exercise in
businesses, which principally makes one excel another: you do not set your
selves to contrive ways to circumvent them in their Policies, and to meet them
half way; you are behind hand still, as your Army is with the Kings: You spend
your time about telling and asking of news; and O how you are taken with some
forged Report of Sir Ralph Hoptons overthrow, or the Lord of Newcastles being
driven into York? of so much money taken in one place, so much Armcur, and so
many Horses in another? and your Enemies, since they find so small matters will
content you, busy your heads, and keep you from rising as one man, they will
be sure to furnish you. You are mere News-mongers, and when you have any, Oh
how you flutter about to tell it, because you would be thought to know
somewhat, as if the Wars were in Sweth-land or the Low Countries, and not in
your own Country, and ready to destroy you, as it has done many of your
friends already. And when you have a little victory, how you amplify it! Then
your Bells must ting, and Bonesires be made, when perhaps the loss was equal,
and the Victory doubtful, and you are little nearer a conclusion of your
Wars then you were before: you are most unmanly in your behaviors; when if
the King overthrowes you or your Friends, as at Cisseter, the business is
concealed; your Friends conceal it, because by declaring it they think you
would be dejected, and your Enemies conceal it, lest by hearing thereof you be
justly enraged and provoked to revenge: they are glad to keep your anger down,
and Iull your courages asleep, least by awakening thereof it devour them: you
are so far from casting about to succor and relieve your Friends abroad;
that you neglect your selves, and are not yet Masters of your own City, that
place designed for a recompense to the Cavaliers hard services and dangerous
hazards they now run; the hopes of pillaging thereof makes their labors and
wounds pleasant to them, and sweetens all difficulties and dangers they now
undergo in the Kings Service. Do you look for advice? it will be good that
you make it appear that you have first shook off that Lethargy that has
possessed you, for till then you are not capable of advice: if I thought you were
a wake I would advise you to do what? to stop your ears against the Siren
enchantments of such as you may be sure (by your former sufferings, and sorcing
you to these present shifts and 02 extremities) wish you not well; and to open
your ears to such your Brethren who hazard themselves and their Fortunes in
your behalf, who have lived amongst you, and of whose faith and sound
affection you have had so much experience: follow their advice, I am a stranger
to you, and think not much if they shall put you upon what for the present
shall be irksome to you, your sickness is so desperate that 'twill be well if
rough and chargeable means can cure you. Only let me tell you thus much, that
it is not your fasting and repenting that God requires at your hands, so much as
doing justice upon the wicked brood in the Land, whose prosession in former
times has been to oppress you, and is now to destroy you. God is not wanting
to you; neither can you make him more willing to assist you, then he has
already been; he has given you understanding to discern your Afflictions and
Afflictors, and power likewise to free your selves from both: but it is you that
are wanting to your selves, you want courage and endeavors; you have strength
to help your selves given you by God, and yet you lie still and cry God help
us. Well according as I hear you bear your selves hereaster, and either
amend, continue in the same sleepy state, or grow worse; you shall receive
further from me: For this time farewell.

Your Friend and Remembrancer. P. A.

Composed by a zealous Well-willer of the whole Kingdom and Parliament.


