FIVE TREATISES OF THE Philosophers Stone.

Two of Alphonso King of Portugal, as it was written with his own hand, and
taken out of his Closset: Translated out of the Portuguez into English. One of
John Sawtre a Monk, translated into English. Another written by Florianus
Raudorff, a German Philosopher, and translated out of the same Language, into
English. Also a Treatise of the names of the Philosophers Stone, by William
Gratacolle, translated into English.

To which is added the Smaragdine Table.

By the Pains and Care of H. P.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by John Collins, in
Little Britain, near the Church door, 1652.

To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, etc.
Right Honorable:
THough in these last ages Vice has been esteemed above Virtue, and men have
made it their business to advance their fortunes by wicked means; yet if we
look back to former ages, and the time of Hermes Trismegistus, who is said to
be Moses, and so called from his being hid amongst the Reeds in the waters; and
as he was called Hermes Trismegistus, he styles himself the thrice great
Interpreter, as having three parts of the Philosophy of the whole world (as may
appear in his Smaragdine Table following; out of which all modern
Philosophers grounded their discourses, and books:) thus he might style
himself, being allowed familiarity with his Creator. From him likewise we had
our first Record for the Creation of the world, and all things therein: we
shall find, and be satisfied in judgment, that true honor proceeded, and was
at first derived from Virtue; and what man yet ever lived, who was accounted or
esteemed so Virtuous, Wise, Good, and Rich, as those who had the true knowledge
of Natural Philosophy, and her secret operations, which from age to age, for
many ages, was by word of mouth delivered by one to another, whereby many
Shepherds, Heardsmen, Husbandmen, and others of like quality (by Gods
especial favor) became great Princes, Governors, and Rulers over the people
upon Earth, being thereby enabled to advance themselves to what Riches and
treasure they pleased, (as will appear by the ensuing Treatises,) without
robbing or taxing the people of their Countries under their Government in any
sort; who also by their Physical Medicine continued length of days, youth,
and strength; by which means those old men mentioned in the Old Testament, with
many other Philosophers, were not only so long preserved from the Grave, but
also thereby wrought many miracles, to the wonder of the world: as well they
might, having the power and dispose of the greatest Treasure, and highest
Secret that ever Almighty God revealed to mortal man. And being fully
satisfied of your Honors most Noble and Ingenious inclination and love to the
study of this most Divine and Mysterious Art, which can proceed from no other
then a right Noble and Virtuous disposition, and by a Divine instinct: Nor is a
man of any other temper fit for the study or knowledge thereof. And considering
of a person of Honor, fit for the presentation of these Treatises, well
weighing your Honors inclination, virtuous Disposition, and mature Judgment,
holding my self obliged to be serviceable to my power, to all faithful
students in this most sacred Art, have fixed upon your Honor, as most worthy
of the presentation not only of these my present endeavors, but also of such
others as I shall ere long produce concerning either this or any other subject;
not desiring Patronage, as is usual, (considering the Persons by whom these
Treatises were first written) but only Your Honors Noble acceptance of so
mean a present, from the hand of him that heartily wishes Your Honor all
felicity, both corporal and spiritual, temporal and perpetual; and in that
wish, I rest,

(My Lord) Your Honors most faithful servant, H. P.

To the Reader.
HErmes, the Father of Philosophers, (most plainly of any that ever writ)
discovered the matter of the Philosophers Stone, but not the manner of
compleatment thereof; and as he says, he came to the knowledge thereof by the
mercy and favor of the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, without the
direction, instruction, or information of any mortal man, and writ thereof to
posterity, fearing damnation if he should not have done the same; since which
time many hundred Philosophers have written of the same Science, (which is the
highest and greatest secret that ever Almighty God revealed to mortal man;)
but so obscurely, that it is impossible for any man to attain to this high and
mysterious Art, except he be Piously and Religiously inclined, and resolved to
live a serious and private life, free from all other employment or business in
the world: and such a man without doubt, by the mercy and favor of Almighty
God, and with the help of these following Authors, with some others of the
best of these latter times, and the Hieroglyphics now cutting and coming
forth in Print by the Printer hereof, living in Little-Brittaine, London, never
heretofore published; which make a full and clear demonstration to the sons of
wisdom of the whole work of the Philosophers Stone, from the beginning to
the ending, and gives a clearer light to the understanding of the Reader, than
all the books in the world; so that by the help of these, and such like Books,
with the Hieroglyphics, this Art doubtless may be attained unto with ten
times more ease, and less difficulty than otherwise. These only I have given
thee a taste of, until the others come forth, which will speedily be effected.
And note this, that scarce one of the ancient Philosophers ever writ fully of
this noble Science, but whatsoever one leaves out, may be found in another (if
you read many of the best Authors.) I have been a Student in this Art many
years, and being satisfied of the truth thereof, (having studied many of the
best Authors), thought fit for the good and benefit of the faithful Students
of this Art, to cause these to be published, being by some of my best friends
thereunto very much urged; and because the Students of this Art should not be
deceived by false Philosophers, and work as they do upon false matters; as
Salts, Alomes, Vitriols, Metals, Minerals, and the like: let them consider the
words of Geo: Ripley, an English Monk, who says: yet the matter of this
work, according to all the ancient Philosophers, is one only thing, containing
in it self all necessaries to the accomplishing of its own perfection.

And Henricus Cornelius Agrippa in the second Book of his Occult Philosophy, in
the 4. Chap. says, there is one thing by God created, the subject of all
wonderfulnesse, which is in earth, and in heaven; it is actually, animal,
vegetable, and mineral, found every where, known by few, by none expressed in
his proper name, but covered in numbers, figures, and riddles; without which
neither Alchymy, nor natural Magic, can attain their perfect end.

And in the Rosary of the Philosophers, it is written: but I advise that no man
intrude himself into this Science to search, except he know the beginning of
true nature, and her government, which being known, he needs not many things,
but one thing; nor does it require great charges, because the Stone is one, the
Medicine one, the Vessel one, the Government one, and the disposition one,
etc. And let this suffice, from your faithful unknown friend,

H. P.

The Smaragdine Table of Hermes Trismegistus, of Alchymy.
The words of the Secrets of Hermes, which were written in a Smaragdine Table,
and found between his hands in an obscure Vault, wherein his body lay buried.
IT is true without leasing, certain and most true, that which is beneath is
like that which is above, and that which is above is like that which is
beneath; to work the Miracles of one thing, and as all things have proceeded
from one, by the mediation of one; so all things have sprung from this one
thing by adaptation. His Father is the Sun, his Mother is the Moon, the Wind
bore it in her belly, the Earth is his Nurse, the Father of all the Telesme of
this world is here; his force and power is perfect, if it be turned into
Earth. Thou shall separate the Earth from the Fire, the thin from the thick,
and that gently with great discretion: It ascends from Earth into Heaven, and
again it descends into the Earth, and receives the power of the Superiors
and Inferiors: So shall thou have the Glory of the whole World, all obscurity
therefore shall fly away from thee. This is the mighty power of all power, for
it shall overcome every subtle thing, and pierce through every sollid thing, so
was the World created. Here shall be mavelous adaptations, whereof this is
the mean; therefore am I called Hermes Trismegistus, or the thrice great
Interpreter; having three parts of the Philosophy of the whole World: that
which I have spoken of the operation of the Sun is finished.

Here ends the Table of Hermes.
A Treatise written by Alphonso King of Portugal, concerning the Philosophers
Stone.
FAme brought to my knowledge, that in the Land of Egypt, there lived a
Learned man that foretold things to come: he judged by the Stars, and the
motions of the Heavens; those things which Time was to bring forth which were
by him before understood.

A desire of knowledge carried my affection, my pen, my tongue: with great
humility I prostrated the height of my Majesty, such power has passion upon
man: With entreaty and my special Letters unto him, I sent for him by my
Messengers, promising him with a sound affection, great reward both in goods
and money.

The wise man answered me with much courtesy: I know you are a great King, and
that neither presents, nor the Law of silver nor gold, nor any thing of great
value, but merely out of affection I will serve you: for I do not seek that
which is too much for me, and therefore I seek not after yours, but you.

I sent the best of my Ships, which being arrived at the port of Alexandria,
the Doctor Astrologer came aboard, and was brought to me, courteous with love,
for having known his great worth by understanding the motions of the Spears,
I always held him in that esteem and love which is due to a Learned man.

The Stone which is called the Philosophers he could make, he taught it me,
and we made it together: And afterward I made it alone, by which means my
Riches increased much; and seeing that I was able to do such a thing, and that
diverse ways, which always produced the same thing, I will propound unto you
the most easy, and therefore the most excellent and principal.

I had a Library of Books of the Works of Men of many Nations, but I in this
business did esteem neither the Caldeans, neither the Arabians, (though a
diligent people) nor the Egyptians, Assyrians, but those of the East, which
inhabit the Indies, and the Saracens did my work, and so well, that they have
honored our Western parts.

The present time makes me to know a sound and true judgment: because thou
should give credit or belief to it, do not conceive that I have lied in any
point. That which I look after, is not to bury in oblivion the great worth that
was in him my Master: but I will not give such an Empire to any man but to him
that is Learned.

Now to unriddle this mystery and to propose truths in ciphers, though they
are obscure, yet by them you may learn, and shall find they are no vain
things; and if thou come to understand this great Mystery, have it not in
thy ordinary conversation, but leave it in the same cipher of this impression,
if thou understandest how to explain it.

This Matter by wise men is called by diverse names: and this matter which to
the unwise seems to be something, to them is nothing, and its nature being
equally moist and dry that it will not give one without another; which is a
singular thing to have two such different natures meet together in one. The
dry is there in a supreme degree, the moist likewise calls for a supreme
Authority: the hot and cold fight there together, and are contained there
likewise in a supreme degree; and from that equality, comes the name of each
of these severally according to the quality: and though the moist be joined
with the dry, yet each of them retains its own name.

Our Hermes tells us that it is Heaven and Earth, but others call it Man and
Wife, and out of their marriage they make other Riddles, which serve for a light
to the infirm Globe, and from thence are called by some, Water or Earth,
others the cold which is enclosed in heat, so much the wise may understand.

The ancient Chaos, according to my judgment, was knit together by the four
Elements: This composition is the like, when the division comes to be made,
the Heaven and the Earth comes to be a fifth Essence of all, for this matter is
of that kind, that it composeth all things. In this matter are found united
the four Elements in equal parts, so that if one walk or move, the others do
the like, for by one the others are conducted, so much are they equal in their
duties one to another, and where can you hope to find a better thing amongst
all Animals, then that which is so much approved by all wise men?

Take the Learned Philosophers Mercury, and let it be purged from its
malignancy and foul quality, for it cannot be too clean; and see that the
weight be equal with twelve ounces of the said composition, and then put it
into a glass bottle, for no metal else is fit for it. And the form of the
glass must be of the form of the Sphere, with a long neck, and no thicker
then can be grasped with a large hand, and the length of the neck not above a
span, and no wider then the Egyptian seal may cover its mouth. This you must
put into an earthen pot, surrounded about with hot ashes, and be sure with a
careful hand to stop up the bottle. And then you must have an artificial
Furnace made of Clay, so broad and round as that you may fadome at the thickest
place. You must not put the pot in the bottom of the Furnace, but hang it or
set it in the middle, upon two irons, which must lie Diameter wise, or acrosse,
and the earthen pot must stand upon the very center and cross of the two
irons, that the fire may come alike to it in all parts, and then with coals
make a soft fire, but let not your patience be troubled to keep it always
alike. The fire must not come within a foot of the pot, and the surnace luted
up close about the pot, that so the soft fire may keep it always working, and
be not troubled to keep the fire still alike, for if it be the same at last
as at first, thou have done the work of an able man.

Two changes the Moon must pass by those Animals, which makes a month, or
the Sun that degree which is called Sextile, without rain, for the work
requires drought: and then you shall see a pattern of the work, of which you
must be very careful for unmarrying of it from his first matter which is all
one. That which time works helped by the Sun and other influences, when taking
leave of the Earth, and having drawn out the moistnes that runs in its
veins, it is so pleased with it, that it converts into sulphur that part which
was moist before; so that all is seen as mother Nature placed it.

This is the part of the Earth, Sulphur, Woman, hot and dry; for when it makes
its first change or trucke, that part is wanting which encompassed the
humidity; as Penelope made war in the absence of Ulysses in Italy, so this
Widow so pale and wan, hopes for the return of her banished Husband. By equal
weights, as first with Art mixed with Mercury, very pure, with this mixture you
may work securely in a glass made by the hands of a good Workman, for the
first and the last must be one or like; but if possibly thou can, the first
venture is the truest.

Do the following Work in such manner, that you keep the same fire that you
did before, which will be sufficient, and be sure your fire gives no flame, and
be sure also to watch it nights and days: and if you take that pain, you
shall be sure to find an excellent reward. Thou shall see the work in its
blackness, and that being changed, as it was first borne, which is not yet the
thing that mother Nature gave in her first degree, but shall turn to be so
liquid and pure that it shall be like to Ink, so distinct shall be the form
of this creature from its first being.

Have thou not seen the Prison which the Silkworm makes for it self, where it
dies? and out of that carcass dead in the Net it self made, in which no
corruption can come, but rises again in a form distinct from its first
being, then is brought forth and paints it self, with wings in a more ugly
shape: So our work begins to live with a new spirit, and new substance, from
whence must be continued the perseverance of the body, that so blood may be
gotten in it. Do not you then think of making a greater fire, for by that
means the blood and body will be destroyed. Then shall you see the most
excellent point of this Divine work: open the bottle and it will seem to be
ruined, for there will come from it a very stinking smell. In this degree is
certainly the greatest labor of this work: for if it be continued with the
same heat, it will certainly come to the highest degree of perfection. After
this color is past, you shall see many more different in their likeness and
appearance: the Argos, and the Iris in their splendour, that the following of
the liquid humor will cause to be of diverse colors, until it comes at last
to a certain whiteness, then augment a little the heat.

Friend, be not weary of your work, and let it not trouble your patience, for
this is the first point of getting your inheritance. When the Stone is come to
the whiteness, it is then fixed, and can never be disunited, though it should
burn 100. years, for the union is perfect. Keep, as I have told you, the
fire in one degree, that it may come to such a whiteness, as to be like the
purest snow, which is called the silver Elixir. But in regard that Gold is more
precious in esteem, let it alone in the bottle with the same fire, until the
Stone is come from its white into a Citron color: then increase the fire
another degree, and thou shall attain to a pure red. All being raised up will
show your work to be secure: the body of this being taken up, will be hard and
light, and in it you may take notice of the body of Diaphano, and the color of
a Rubie, as in my own hands my self has seen it; for which the great God is
by me praised. Then put this into an earthen vessel, covered with a cover of
the same, like a dish, and this so well joined or luted together, of the
bigness to hold three begadas, according to the bigness of the Stone, and put
it on a hot fire of flaming wood there to boil. Here the Stone will calcine
in 10. days of the Sun, or Sundays, etc. and being taken out of that pot, it
will be an impalpable and Divine powder. The first substance which does good to
all, from whence it has no quality in his Quintessence, but is applied to all,
and has power to do all, and very being of the thing that is applied to. Ente,
from the beginning of Natural causes: it is neither Gold, nor Silver, nor
other Mineral, nor subject to the form of any Vegetable, but has a
disposition to do good to all. If it be applied to Gold, from it, it takes
firmness, as to convert other things into that Metal. For if to man, by
famous works, it gives him health, what can be esteemed more precious? Under
this impalpable Gold, it happens that there is found a bright Earth, but very
black and glistering, which is not the best however, for that which is very
red, is fixed and stable, though it be mixed with all compositions, and so makes
no ingression, but his virtues are very admirable. But with equal weight thou
must unite it with its first principal matter, very pure, and join or mix
them together very carefully, if you would have it be brought to live: and
then, as I told you before, let it come to the moderate heat as at the first,
and in the like glass as I prescribed before, very close shut: and as thou
did with the fire at the first, so must thou do it now, and in very short
time thou shall see it become black, and of the other colors spoken of
before, until it comes to be red, and will presently turn into a stone. This
have I seen done in a short time: and he that knows it not, let him know
that he walks blindfold.

I have told you the work in plain words, and how I did it, and saw it
wrought, so I did it, and had the reward: and it is no fallacy, seeing that I
am a witness to it, for which I praise and bless God, which gave me
sufficient of knowledge, science, riches, honor, and state, which let me never
forget.

If thou would have a division of this into 100. parts, and so ad infinitum,
it must be done before it has firmentation or hardness, and then your work
will be certain. Take an earthen vessel covered, and in it put your
quicksilver, and when it begins to run over, drop in your Elixir, otherwise
you cannot keep it for running over. Of Gold one part being purged by
Aquafortis with four of quicksilver washed, and four of what is spoken of
before, joined with great Art, with one of your Elixir, and put it apart in a
crooked glass or retort, and let it feel a fire of coals ten days together,
until they be all mixed together. And if you will make a further progression,
put into an earthen pot 100. grains of quicksilver, and put it over a flaming
fire, and when the quicksilver begins to smoke and fly away in fume, cast in
one part of your Elixir, and then cover it. Then let it cool, and it shall
prove a very sovereign medicine: 100. parts of quicksilver, according to the
finenesse of it, this shall convert into Gold. But if you desire to make
experience and see the operation upon lead, you shall there find it as well:
neither does it stay there, for its ingression retains that faculty to turn
all metals into Gold: to every thing it is to be applied, and it converts
every thing into a well complectioned nature, half a grain of this taken into
the mouth makes the party strong; the weak and feeble, it makes so lusty, that
no man was ever more healthy, and time which is precious to all, brings those
that take it, sound to their Graves.

The best of Bests invites from his supreme dwelling place, the most
unfortunate of all, joining together two extremes, after which we shall see
him in his greatest dignity and Majesty, which now is most distant from it: say
nothing till thou see the water produce that which is afterward turned into
fire; but if thou see that play, then hide not what else thou know, for it
is worth full eight hundred years; for being come to that pass, then thou
shall know the worth of it. Then shall be accomplished the fatal time to see my
treasure and my self, and myself enclosed or contain my self: I shall not
be obscured, and thou shall remain with my gift that in this darkness thou
shall see such a light where a World shall be represented.

The second Treatise of Alphonso King of Portugal, concerning the Philosophers
Stone.
THe past work of the most pure stone, is so infinite in multiplying, that it
is never weary to give, and to give more, such a likeness has it to its
workmanship. But if you would know another way to separate the four Elements,
know that this following Treatise understood, will teach you to do it with more
brevity and security.

Two ounces of gold well refined with one of silver, very fine and pure, melted
in clay, and this mixture being filed very small, and with purged Mercury
ground until it be well incorporated one into another. Then put such a
quantity of common salt so well mixed, as that the body may be well
conglutinated.

Take a glass bottle, subtly to mix these, so that no unclean thing may come
to it (though never so little) and then upon a small fire so work it, as that
the Mercury may consume or vanish in its own fume. Then you may presume the
Gold will remain being a body that will endure the fervency of the fire.

Wash the matter of this mixture in pure fountain water, so that after many
washings, the water may remain many times clean, and retain its sweetness of
taste: then weigh the matter that remains, and if you find it heavier than it
was at first, grind it again with Salt enough, and put it to the fire again
as before.

Thus I tell you, you must do your work, and in a very soft fire: and when it
comes to be of its first weight, that which then remains, will be a matter
spungeous and subtle, and so well disposed and prepared, that you may use it in
any Physic.

And now you must make a preparation with sublimed Mercury, Copperas, and Salt
well washed: for our Physic and real conjunction gives it afterward his life,
grinding it with Salt very small. Then in a glass Bottle which has his
receiver, put it to make his distillation.

But know that within the receiving glass you must put water, and place the
bottle in a strong furnace, and make a fire of coals under it, and letting it
sees or boil softly, and it will turn quick, or living, and be much subject
to corruption, and with this, work securely and be not weary,

Nine of these with three of the first composition, joined and well mixed, and
ground together: and all these and the other put into a round glass, that has
a neck of a span or palm long, and then stop the mouth very close, for which
purpose the mouth must not be made wide but narrow.

Thus I tell you the glass must be, and of a bigness to hold the quantity of
three begadas, and according to the roundnesse of it, so have a place fitted to
put it in the fire, that there the matter may be well joined or masht together,
then will the tincture be made.

Forty begadas, then shall thou see the East adorned with the beams of the
sun, when this work shall be accomplished according to desire, to change the
present glass into another, which serves for the receiver of a Still, which
being close luted with lutum sapientiae, on hot water, which it must not touch.

The Fire must not be of any great heat but moderate, that it may work its
effect, distilling its water in a perfect manner, and then do the same work
over again; join the matter with great wisdom, with this his distilled
Water, join Mercury, of an equal weight with the first matter.

Note my words which I will tell thee, that now thou shall come to putrify it,
and after forty days put it into the Still, keeping the same order as before,
for the glass and the fire, take this distilled water, and in the place where
it falls, put in an equal weight of the first matter as aforesaid.

Do this work as at the first, for it must be thrice reiterated from time to
time, receiving the water that the fire will give to the very last. Think not
the time light, and though you pass the forty days and more, yet still keep
the water in a glass bottle.

Change it from the receiving glass into another, and put it upon hot ashes,
and then thou shall have, or draw out a lighter element in weight, called Air,
which you must subtily put into a bottle, and stop the mouth of it very close
with Hermes his seal, and its neck also; be careful that you let not forth
the air.

Put in or to the glass another receiver after, (having strongly luted it) and
make such a fire as that by his great heat the pot may distill; this Element
keep with carfulness, for it is the Element of Fire, and then, thanks be to
God, in this work thou have separated the four Elements.

After the division of this Chaos, thou must now think of joining them
together again: for if thou meanest to join and make that world which was
disunited, the only matter which is in the bottom of the glass must be
retained or kept and softened by grinding, and then the composition put into a
glass.

Let this glass be round bodied, and long neckt; which glass or bottle you
must fortify by luting, and set it upon the coals, that it may have the force
of the fire, in such a manner that it may rise ten degrees Titans Wife of the
beloved Bed; and in this manner it will be converted into a hard substance.

In another like glass put this with a quarter of its weight of the reserved
water, and then stop the mouth of it well, and put it in a brass furnace or
vessel, and put it upon hot ashes, and keep such a fire to it, as the matter
may become dry as it was before.

This being done, and the congealing and drying being past, as I have said, do
the like again, with its fourth or quarter part of that Royal water. The
infusion must be reitterated, and the fourth time ended of doing the same work,
know that thou have satisfied the drougth, or drouth, or thirst that this
substance had after that water.

Have thou not seen the earth when it wants rain, how barren it shows? no
fruit to be seen, but all looks like a fallow ground, and every thing like to
perish. But if the rain falls to refresh it, it makes it fruitful for
generation, or increase, and every seed that is sown in its proper time brings
forth its fruit.

And continuing disperseth its watery power into all plants and trees, and
makes the fruit appear on every bough: even so goes this matter preparing; the
Air which you kept in the bottle, you must give drink to five several times,
the tenth part of its quantity at a time, so that in all it must have half its
own weight, and always at every time be dried up.

Then on a Copper plate in a flaming fire try this matter, if it will consume
in smoke; for you must presume it to be of the nature of the Ganimedes to fly
up to Heaven, but if it flies not upwards, then it is not yet well done, but
you must give it more water, and try again whether or no it has his true
spirit.

Cause it to drink a quarter part of its weight that first it was of, which
will be the tenth part of the Air, and as you did it before, so do it again:
then prove it upon the Copper Plate, to try if it will evaporate and smoke:
then turn again to what you did before.

Then put the matter in sublimation, and when you shall see it all rise up:
that which rises not, but remains in the bottom, give it drink again
according as is aforesaid: prove it again upon the plate, and so continually
try it till it rises; and then you shall be sure that in the bottom will
remain a black earth like a dead body in the glass.

As the Ganimedes went up to Heaven, so thou shall see this matter exalted. It
shall be demanded from the God of the earth, by Jove, from whom it was stolen,
it having been left with Demogorgon, and shall be restored, and if thou
sublimate it, oftentimes grinding it until it come at last to be firm, it
will all remain in the bottom of the glass.

To this matter there wants ingression, because there wants the fourth Element,
therefore make this operation in a fire neither great nor little, but when thou
put it in its inflammation take the pot, and be sure that not one drop or
tittle of any foul thing comes to it before thou see infusion.

If then thou see it become like wax that it will rope, then thou have a vast
great Treasure, that thy estate shall be advanced to more than the riches of
Midas. 100. parts of Mercury put on the fire, and when it begins to fume away,
then temper it with one of this matter, and presume thou have brought it to the
perfect medicine.

And if another time thou do the same work, one part of this applied to 100
will turn likewise to the second medicine, and one part of this is a great
reward, being applied to 100 parts of Mercury hot, or any other metal being
melted, making it become Gold most high and sublime: For which the Lord be
praised.

FINIS.
The Book of John Sawtre a Monk, concerning the Philosophers Stone.
ALL things consisting of Natural bodies, as well perfect as unperfect, in the
beginning of Creation were compounded and made of four natures, and those
four natures be the four Elements, viz. Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, the
which God omnipotent did congelate, mingle, and married together in his mass
of Poyse: for in these four Elements is the Privity hid of Philosophers; and
when their natures be coming and reducted together into one, then they be
made another thing: whereupon it appears that all things universal and
variable be of the four Elements, engendered naturally and changed together:
whereupon Rasis says, Simple generation and natural permutation is the
operation of the Elements, but it is necessary that Elements be of one kind
and not diverse: for otherwise they have not action and passion together: for as
Aristotle says, There is no true generation, but of such as be convenient and
agreeing amongst themselves. Therefore do not search that thing of nature,
that is not of nature, or things not according to their nature; for the Elder
tree does not bring forth Pears, nor the Thorn tree Pomegranats, for we do
never gather grapes of Thorns, or figs of Thistles; for they offer no things
but such as are like themselves; nor do they bring forth other fruit then
their own. Therefore it is necessary that our medicine be taken chiefly of
such things as it consists in; but there be many men busying themselves and
meddling greatly and diversely therein, that now a days go about to get the
same medicine of dry stones, and diverse kinds of salts, as of Sal alkali, Sal.
gem. vitriol, Sal-armoniack, and allome, cicory, tutty, attramentum, saffron,
burnt brass, vitrioll Roman, verdegris, sulphur, auripigmentum, arsnick, and
such other unfruitful matters, whereas neither salts nor alloms, do go into,
or be compounded in our work; but the Philosophers named it salts and allomes
in stead of the Elements as Theophrastus says. But if thou desire to make the
Elixir wisely and perfectly, then learn to know the Mineral Roots, and make
of them thy work: for as Geber says, thou shall not find the term or end of
the thing in the veins of the earth; for sulphur and mercury which be the
roots mineral, and natural principles, that Nature does make the foundation
of her operations once, as in the mineralls and chambers of the Earth, be
water, viscous, and a stinking spirit running by the veins and bowels of the
Earth, and of them does spring a fume, which is the mother of all mettalls,
joined by a moist temperate heat, ascending and verberating again upon his
upper Earth, until that by temperate decoction in the term of 1000. years is
made a certain natural fixation, as more plainly it does appear, and so is
made metal, as appears in the books of Geber: Even so of Sol, (which is
our Sulphur reduced into Mercury, by Mercury) is made a water, thick, and
mixed with his proper Earth, by temperate decoction, and from it rises a fume
of the veins of this proper Earth, viz. of himself, which afterward is changed
into a water, most subtle, which is called Anima, Spiritus, and Tinctura, that
is, the Soul, the Spirit, and Tincture: and when the same water is reduced
upon the Earth from whence it came, and sprinkled upon his own veins, it
comes into a certain fixation, and is made the Elixir complete: and so Art
does work in a short time by the wit of man, more then Nature does work in
1000. years. But yet we do not make metal, but Nature does make it: we do
not change metals, but Nature does change them; but we be Natures helpers or
Ministers. Whereupon Medus in Turba Philosophorum, says, That although our
Stone being perfectly created in the Earth, does naturally contain in himself
tincture, yet by himself, he has no motion or moving to be Elixir, unless
thereto he be moved by Art. Therefore let us choose the natural and next
mineralls, according to the words of Aristotle, for Nature has procreated all
metalique bodies of a fume, Sulphur and Mercury: wherein thou shall find no
Philosopher disagreeing; therefore it behooves thee to know the principles of
this Art, and the principal Roots thereof; for he that does not know the
right beginning, shall never find the right end thereof: for Geber says in
the beginning of his Book, He that knows nor our beginning in himself, is
far from the attayning or understanding of this Science: for he has not the
true Root or ground whereon he should raise this Art, or Science, or Work:
also in another place he says; It behooves that our Art be found out by a
natural wit, and a subtle soul, searching forth the natural principles and
true foundations. But although that a man may know his principles, yet
nevertheless he cannot in this follow Nature in all things, as Geber
testifies. Son, of this Art of Alchymy, we do open to thee a great secret;
Many Artificers in this Art do greatly err, which do think to follow Nature
in all properties and differences.

Therefore these things thus shortly passed over, as is aforesaid, let us come
to that part of the work artificial; many men do write of the Stone, named
the Philosophers Stone, but how, or of what it is made, no Philosopher did
plainly and openly name, for in these points diverse men taught diverse things:
whereas the truth does consist in one thing only; but without doubt and
without all error, we say that this Stone (which is the root of our Art and
privity, or hidden secret of God: and whereof many wise men did treat, who did
of it make, and did knit many knots, and so deceived many men in making them
thereby fools) is none other thing but man and woman, Sol and Luna, hot and
cold, Sulphur and Mercury: and here stick down your stake, staying only and
leaving to search further for any other stone, or foolishly to consume thy
money, and to bring to thy soul heavy thoughts, or sadness: for what thou
sowest thou shall reap. And forasmuch as this Stone is divided into two parts,
we will speak a little of the first part Sol; and note, that without it, our
work cannot be done, as I well prove by authority of learned Philosophers. For
Aristotle says, of all things in this world, Sol is most: and it is the
firment of white and red, without which it is not done. Also Hermes says,
There is no true tincture but of our Brass, that is to say Sol: for all Sol is
brass, but all brass is not Sol: so all Sol is Sulphur, but contrary, for in
it is nothing of the corruption of Sulphur, but when it is made white in the
work, then it works the operation of white Sulphur, congealing and
converting Mercury into Sol, of the color named Obrison in Latin, therefore
use always the nobler member, that is to say Sol; for it is the kind of
kinds, and form of forms; for it is the first and last in metals, and it is
amongst them in their natures, as the Sun is amongst the Stars, but it does
concern thee to understand well how to choose in what noble member materiam
vel rem homogeneam amborum mundi Luminum: that is a thing of that kind which
is a kindred to both the lights in the world, that is to say Sol: for Sol is
homogeneam, and the spirit hid and covered in that noble member, without which
the work is not done. Wherefore Rasis says, Do not color it until his hid
spirit be drawn out, and made all spiritual; and therefore work thou nothing
but that which is very light, and of the most pure Sol; which does illuminate
and lighten all lights, and casts away all darkness of the night by his
power, viz. the superfluity of Mercury and other imperfect bodies, when that it
is cast upon them; wherefore Geber says in the Chapter of the Quintessence and
Projection of the Stone: this Sulpher, lightning and easting forth his beams,
and shining abroad of his most clear substance, does irradiate and gives
light not only in the day, but also in the darkness whereupon Pandulphus in
turba Philosophoru^, says, my Brethren know ye that there is no body more
precious or purer than Sol: for as the Rubie has in it self the effect of all
precious stones, so Sol has in it self the virtue of all stones and Metals
ductible; for it contains in it self all metals, and colors and
quickens them, when he is most noble of them and of all bodies, and the head
and the best of them: and consider this one point more, that Sol is equal in
the qualities and parts of it, and it is of a complete nature of the four
Elements, without any excess or defect, for by nature it has part of heat,
and part of coldness; part of dryness, and part of humidity; for it is not
corrupted, nor corruptible, by the Air, nor by the Water, nor by the infection
of the Earth, or by the force or violence of the Fire; yet it moysteneth,
rectifieth, and adorneth it, because his complexion is temperate, and his
nature direct and equal: therefore that Stone is best of all stones, that is
most concoct and nearest, or most akin to the fire.

The second part of our Stone is called Mercury, the which is himself, and of
the Philosophers is called a Stone, and yet is no Stone: Whereupon a certain
wise man, whereas he speaks of it, faith, this is a Stone, and yet no Stone,
without which, nature does never work any thing, which both does, and drinks
up the work, and of it does appear every color, whose name is Mercury or
Argent vive. Whereupon Rasis says of it, a work may be created so, that the
same work may overcome all Natures; it is friendly to all Mettles, and the
mean to join tinctures, for in it self it receives that which is of its
nature, and does vomit forth again that which is strange, or enemy to its
nature, for it is an uniforme substance in all his part. Therefore this Stone
is named of the Philosophers, Mineral vegitable, and Animal, and also
artificial, it is called Mineral, because it is engendered in the Mine, and is
mother of all Mettles, or else it is called mineral, because that when there
is projection made upon it, it is turned into Mettle, and it is called
vegitable, for of the juice of three Herbs mixed together in equal
proportions, that they stand in a moist fire forty days, there will be grown
forth thereof a Stone of the same color and virtue of the mineral, for the
Herbs be Mercury, Purcelane, called Portulaca Marina, which yields Milk,
and Celendine, it is also called animal or vital, because of himself,
without any other thing put into it, his Elements being separate and mixed
together in equal weight, and then set in a strong glass with a little hole
to take air at in the aforesaid fire, within three months there will engender
horrible Worms, whereof every one will slay one another, until that one only
will remain, which if the Master feed wisely, it will grow and wax to the
bigness of a Toad, whose form is terrible, and this Beast is by himself
Elixir upon Saturn and Jupiter, or it is called animal, because it is made of
a thing that has life, that is to say man: For in old Hedges it is found of
the putrefaction of man's dung, and ordinately heated with a subtle Vessel of
Glass, and therefore the Philosophers said our Stone is found in every man,
and that of the vilest thing, and of a most vile price: Wherefore Pithagoras
says, this Stone is animal, because it is apt to bring forth Children; also
he says it is cast in Dunghils, and therefore it is vile and rejected in the
eyes of the ignorant man. Also in the Book which is called Speculum Alchymiae,
it is said, this Stone is cast away in the street, and is found in dunghills*
the which contains in it self all the four Elements, and rules them: and
this Stone is artificial, for by man's wit it is knit together; for certain
men make Mercury of Lead in this manner: they melt Saturn six or seven times,
and every time they draw it with Sal armoniacke dissolved; afterward they take
of that Saturn three pounds, and of Vitriol one pound, and of Borax half a
pound, and then they do mingle altogether, and put it underneath the
Philosophers fire, by forty natural days, and then it is made Mercury, and
there is no difference between it and natural Mercury, but that it does not
go into our work, as natural Mercury does.

Know thou the clean from the unclean, for nothing gives that which it has
not; for the clean is of one essence void of alterations: the unclean thing is
diverse, and of contrary parts, and of a light or easy corruption, therefore
put in thy work no strange thing, nor let any thing go into our Stone (except
such as is sprung from it) neither in part nor yet in the whole; for if any
strange thing be put into it, it will by and by corrupt, nor will that be made
thereof which is expected. Therefore purge the yellow body by the adustion of
the fire, and then thou shall find it purged; and after that thou have it well
purged, beat it most strongly, and utterly, and make it into thin plates, and
after beat them into leaves, the thinnest that can be possible, as
Gold-beaters do, and then so keep them: but the white liquor has more
superfluities, which must of necessity be removed, for they be faeculentiae of
the Earth, which is the impediment of melting, and humidity fugitive, which is
the impediment of fixation.

The earthinesse feculentine is taken away thus; put it into a mortar of marble
or wood, and add to it as much common clean dry salt, and a little vinegar,
and stir them strongly about, and rub it very strongly with a pestle of wood
wisely, that there do appear nothing of the liquor, and that all the salt be
all black, then wash all the matter with clean hot water, until the salt be
resolved into water, and then power the same foul water away, and then put it
to the liquor of salt and vinegar, as thou did before; and do this
oftentimes, until the liquor be made as clean and shining as glass, or of
the color of Heaven. And last of all put it into a thick linen cloth, twice
or thrice doubled, and then strain it forth twice or thrice into a thick
vessel of glass, until it be dry; the proportion of the parts is such, for
there be twenty four hours in a natural day, to which add one, and then
there be twenty five, this is wisdom: for Geber says in his fourth Book,
and sixth Chapter, Study in thy work to overcome the quick silver in thy
commixtion. Also Rasis says, Bodies be of a great perfection; wherefore more
quick silver is necessary: and he says, that wise men hide nothing but the
weight and quantities, and this we may know because none do agree with other
in weight. Therefore there is a great error; for although the medicine be well
preparate and well mingled together, unless that there be quantities, thou
have destroyed all, as to the verity and final complement, and that shall thou
see in the trial, for when that the body transmuted, be put into cineration,
there it will be consumed late or soon, according as little or much it is
changed into equality of the proportions by right, according to reason it will
never be corrupted: therefore no man can pass through it, unless that he be
a wise man, that does all things according to reason, and true subtilety, and
natural wit.

Euclides being a wise man, counseled us that we should work but in Sol and
Mercury, which joined together does make the Philosophers Stone; whereupon
Rasis says, white and red do proceed of one Root, no body of any other kind
coming between or meddling of the kind of Sol; yet it being matter and form
absent, all the effect is deprived, quoniam ex materia and forma sit generatio
vera; that is to say, very true generation is made of form and matter,
therefore it behooveth thee to know, that no Stone, or precious stone, nor any
other thing besides this Stone is convenient, nor yet does agree to this work;
but thou had need to labor about the solution of the yellow body, reducing it
to his first matter: wherefore Rasis says, we truly do dissolve Gold, that it
may be reduced into his first nature, that is to say, Mercury: and when that
they be bruised asunder, then they have in themselves tincture abiding:
wherefore Rasis in the flowers of Socrates says, make the marriage, between
the Red husband and the White wife, and thou shall have the mastery. Also
Merlyn says in his Book:

Candida si rubeo mulier sic mixta marito
Mox amplectuntur complectaque concipiuntur
Per se solvuntur, per se quoque conficiuntur,
Et duo qui fuerant, unum quasi corpore fiunt.
And truly our dissolution is no other thing, but that the body be turned
again into moistness, and his quicksilver into his own nature be removed
again. Therefore unless our brass be broken and crushed asunder, and ruled
by himself until it be drawn from his thicknes, and that it be turned into a
thin spirit, this labor is in vain; whereupon it is said in the Book called
Speculum Alchymiae, that the first work of this work is the body reduced into
water; that is to Mercury, and that is that the Philosophers call solution,
which is the foundation of all the work, and it makes the body of more
liquefaction, and of a more hid and privy subtiliation, which said solution by
little and little is done by contritions, and light rosting: wherefore Rasis
says, the disposition of our Stone is, that it be put into his vessel, and be
sod diligently, until all do ascend and rise up and be dissolved. And it is
spoken in Specula Philosophorum, that the Philosophers Stone does arise from a
vile thing unto a more precious treasure: that is to be understood, that the
sperme of Sol is to be cast into the matrix of Mercury, by bodily copulation or
conjunction, and joining of them together. Also Pithagoras says, that when it
is put together with his like, and be mercurified, it is a young tree, bringing
forth fruit for the soul; the spirit and the tincture may from thenceforth be
drawn out of him by temperate heat: whereupon he says, you Artificers of
Alchymie, know you that their kinds cannot be truly transmuted unless that it
be reduced into his first matter: Also Geber says, all the whole thing may be
made only of Mercury, or Lune, for when that Sol is brought into his first
beginning by Mercury, then nature embraces his own proper nature, and then
there is in it an easiness of drawing forth his subtle substance: wherefore
Alfidius says, take things of their own minds, and exalt them to their Roots
and beginnings: Also the Book called Lumen Luminum says, that except that a
man do cast the red with the fairness away, he can by no means come to the
Sulphur, Lightning and Ruddiness. Also Rasis says in the seventh Chapter, he
that knows how to turn Sol into Luna, he knows also how to turn Sol into
Sol: wherefore Pandulphus in Turba Philosophorum says, he that has wisely
brought forth the venom out of Sol and his shadow, without which no coloring
venom is engendered, and he that goes about by any manner of ways to make
coloring venom without this, he loses his labor, and enjoys nothing but
sorrow for all his hopes.

The Vessel of our Stone is one wherein all the mastery is fulfilled, and it
is a Cucurbit or Gourd with a Limbeck round above and beneath, plain, without
any scapolis, not too high, whose bottom be round after the fashion of an
Egg, or of an urinall, with plain sides, that it being made thin it may
ascend and descend most freely and easily; and let the Vessel be of such
quantity, that the fourth part thereof may contain all the matter: and note
that it is not of any other mettle but Glass, clean, which is a body full of
light and shining every thing through it, and lacking poores, showing also the
colors in the work appearing, whereby the spirits passing may successively
vanish away; it must also be made right convenient and meet, wisely, that
nothing may enter in by it: whereupon Lucas says, let the Vessel be shut
strongly with Lutum sapientiae, that nothing may pass forth, nor enter into
it, for if his dew should pass forth, or some other strange humor should
enter in, all the work should thereby lose his effect: and although it is said
by the Philosophers very often, put it into his Vessel and shut it strongly,
yet suffices but once to put it in and shut it, and in that thou have
fulfilled all the mastery for that, that is more, is done of evil: Whereupon
Rasis says, keep it continually, wisely, shut and set it about with dew, ever
taking heed that this dew do not pass forth into a Fume: also in Speculum
Alchymiae, it is said, the Philosophers Stone must remain close shut in his
Vessel until it has drunk up his humidity, and that it be nourished
perfectly with the heat of the fire, till it be made white: Also it is said in
the Book called Beneloquium, even as there be in a natural Egg three things
(viz.) the Shell, the White, the Yolke; even so there be in the Philosophers
Stone three things, (viz.) the Vessel, the Glass, for the Egg shell, the
white liquor for the White of the Egg, and the yellow body for the Yolke of
the Egg; and there becomes a Bird of the yellow and white of the Egg, by a
little heat of the Mother, the Egge-shell still remaining whole until the
Chicken do come forth; even so by every manner of wise in the Philosophers
Stone, is made of the yellow body, and white Liquor by mediation of a temperate
heat of the mother the earthly substance Hermes bird, the vessel still
remaining whole, and never opened until his full perfection; keep therefore
the vessel diligently and wisely closed with Lutum sapientiae Philosophorum,
that the spirit do not pass forth. Also Rasis says, keep the vessels with his
tiolls and closures, that thou may be able and strong in the keeping of his
spirit: also in another place, shut thy vessel diligently, and do not in any
sort make have, nor cease from thy work; also take heed that the humiditie do
not pass out of the vessel, and thy work thereby perish; for Socrates says,
bruise them in most strong vinegar, and sees it until that it be thick, and
take heed that thy vinegar do not turn into a fume and perish or vanish.

Of the Fires.
THe Philosophers in their Books have chiefly put two fires, a dry, and a
moist; for the dry fire, they call it the common fire, of any manner of thing
combustible that will burn: but the moist fire they call the hot, venture
Equinus, which may be Englished, the Horse belly; but rather it is Horse dung,
wherein remaining moystness, there does remain heat, and the moystnesse once
consumed, it cease to be hot, and this heat does remain but in a little
quantity, or but five or six days, but this heat may be kept a longer time, by
sprinkling him with urine and salt oftentimes; for of this fire Pithagoras
says, the fire of the belly of a Horse has property not to destroy Oil, but
to augment it, by reason of his humidity, whereas other fires do destroy it
for their heat. Also Senior says, dig up a grave and lay the Wife with her
husband in the paunch or belly of a Horse, or rather in Horse dung, until they
be freely with their good wills married and conjoined together. Also Alphidanus
says, hide thy medicine in a moist horse dung, which is the wise man's fire,
for the fire of this dung is hot and moist, and obscure, having within it
humidity, and a holy light, and therefore there is none like to this in all the
world, but only the natural fire of a hot man's body; that is in health, and
this is the secret cause of the strife of the Sea, and not fully combust blood
of man, and the blood of the red wine is our fire; the Regiment of our fires is
such, that the medicine to white must be put into the moist fire, until the
full compliment of whiteness, and that the heat must be lent and continual
from the beginning, until the color of whiteness appearing in the vessel,
for the lent fire is the conservation of humidity; whereupon Pandolphus says,
Brethren, know that the body is dissolved with the spirit whereunto it is
mixed, by a most lent decoction, and so the body is thereby made spiritual
with the spirit: Also Astavus says, the lent fire does send forth the spirits
of life, the excessive fire does not make equal the Elements, but rather it
wastes the humidity and destroys all things: therefore Rasis says in his
high work, take heed in thy sublimation and liquefaction, lest that when you
set your fire on fire, the water also do ascend to the top of the vessel, for
if it be so, then it being cold it will stick there, and so thou can not make
thy Sulphur, nor open thy Elements, because it is necessary that every one of
them in their sphericall, or spiritual motion be very often thrust down and
lift up, for only the temperate fire is inspicive and perfective of mixtion:
Therefore Botulphus says, a lent fire which is called a clear fire, is the
greatest cause of true operation in the Elements. Also Rasis says, it is our
light fire, as in an Egg that is nourished, until the body be derived, and
the tincture drawn forth, for by light decoction the fire congealeth the
water, and draws forth the humidity of the corruptive part, and the
combustion of dryness is prevented. Also all the benefit of this work is in
the temperatenesse of the fire; therefore always take heed of a greater fire,
that thou come not before thy time to solution, for that brings to
desperation: wherefore Rasis says, take heed of the intention of the fire, for
if it be set on fire before the time, then it is made Red before the due time,
which does not profit, and that he may show thee the time of decoction, He
says, the solution of the body, and the congelation of the spirit must needs
be made with light decoction of the fire, and with moist putrification in forty
days. Also hear Hortulanus saying, know ye that in mingling them together, it
behooveth you to mingle the crude, quick, sincere, and right Elements together
upon a soft fire, and to take heed of the intention of the fire, until the
Elements be joined together. Bonellus says also, by a temperate heat the body
is made sweet and convenient.

Be of a constant mind in thy work, and do not labor in or upon diverse
matters or things, proving sometimes this matter, and sometimes another; for in
the multitude or diversity of things thy Art consists not, nor is finished, for
there is but one subject or medicine, one vessel, one regiment, and one
disposition thereof, for all the mastery does begin in one manner of fashion,
and ends in one manner of mantion; yet the Philosophers did put many works
and crafts thereof for the honor and hiding, and prolonging of this Art: as to
sees, to mingle together, to roast, to sublime, to grind, to break, or beat
assunder, to congeale, to ad^quate, or make even in quality, to putrify, to
make white, to make red; of which things yet there is but one Regiment, which
is but to decoct only. Therefore crush it assunder, and sees still that thou
be not weary: also Rasis says, sees without intermission. Do not have or
cease at any time from thy work, nor go about to practice or use the
sophistical bounds of thy works, but only intend to the compliment of this
work: also Rasis says, it is most sure for thee to apply thy work
diligently, nor do thou leave off thy work, being as it were a tree cut down
from the bows, be thou therefore steadfast, and of a long continual mind and
will in the Regiment. Shut most close thy vessel, and cease at no time, for
there is no generation of things but by a continual motion, exclusion of air,
and heat temperate. Study and mark also, when that you are in your work, all
the signs that shall appear in every decoction, and remember them, for they
be necessary for the workman, to the compliment and fulfilling of this work,
for it is necessary to continue the work, and moderate the fire; therefore all
these things disposed as aforesaid, put the vessel with the medicine in the
moist fire so, that half the vessel be in the fire and the other half
without, to this intent, that every day it may be looked upon, and within forty
days the overpart, or outside of the medicine, shall appear black like Tarr,
and that is a sign, that the yellow body is truly turned into Mercury:
therefore Bonellus says, where that you do see blackness appear to that
water, know ye that now the body is liquefied: and that truly is the same that
Rasis says, the disposition of our Stone is one, that it be put in his
vessel, and that it be thoroughly sodden, until all do rise and ascend
dissolved. Also in another place, continue upon him a temperate heat, until
that it be dissolved into water impalpable, and that all the tincture do go
forth into blackness, which is a sign of solution.

Also Lucas says, When thou see blacknes inure to that water in all things,
then know that the body is liquefied; for the Philosophers do call this
blacknes the first marriage, for that the man is joined to the woman, and it is
a sign of a perfect medicine and mixtion, but all the tincture is not drawn
forth all at once, but it goes forth by little and little every day until
that in a long time it be complete and finished; and that, that is dissolved
does ever go up to the topward, although that which is remaining beneath be
the more: whereupon Avicen says, that which is spiritual does ascend up into
the Vessel, and that which is thick and gross, remains in the Vessel
beneath: but this blacknes is named by the Philosophers with many and sundry
names; as the fire, the soul, the clouds, the crows head, oil, tincture,
redness, or shadow, Sol, brass, blacklead, black water, sulphur, and by many
other names: and that the blacknes does conjoyne together the spirit to the
body: wherefore Rosarius says, by the continuance of the fire in the Regiment
to the number of forty days, both shall be made a water permanent, the
blackness being covered; which said blackness, if it be governed as it ought
to be, it does not stay away above forty days of the color of blackness.
Also Pythagoras says, as long as the obscure blackness does appear, the
woman does rule, which is the first strength of our stone; for unless that
(...) be black, it cannot be white nor red. Also Avicen in the Chapter of
Humors says, heat in moistness does first make blackness, and his moistness
endures until the superfluity thereof be removed, and then it becomes
white. Also in our works, first they be made black, secondly white, and
thirdly by a greater intention and composition of fire, it behooves to be made
yellow: whereupon it is written in the Book called Multifary, in the sixth
Chapter in the first detection, which is called putrefaction when our Stone is
made black, that is to say black earth, by the drawing forth of his moistness,
wherein the whiteness is hid, and when the same whiteness is reversed upon
his blackness, and is fixed with his earth by easy rosting, then is made the
white, in which whiteness the redness is hid, and when it is well sodden, by
augmentation of the fire the same earth is then turned into redness, as after
it shall be taught.

Now again let us return to our black Stone, being strongly closed in his
Vessel, let it stand therefore continually in the moist fire until that the
white color do appear like unto the manner of most white Salt, and this
color according to the Philosophers, is called Sal Armoniack, without which
nothing can be made, or is profitable in our work: And so the intensive
whitenes appearing, the perfect marriage and copulation indissoluble of the
Stone is made: then is that of Hermes fully fulfilled, saying, That which is
above, is as that which is beneath is. That which is above is to obtain
Miracles of one thing: But Pithagoras says, when that you do see whitenes
coming above, then be you sure that redness is hid in that whiteness; but
before that the white do appear, many colors shall appear.

Therefore Diademes says, sees the man and vapor together, until that both
of them be congelate into dryness; for unless that it be made dry, diverse
colors will not appear, for it is ever black, as long as moystnesse does
rule, and then it sends forth diverse colors; for in diverse manners, and at
diverse times, it will be moved from color to color, until it come to a firm
whiteness: Also Zenon says, all kind of colors will appear in it until
the black humidity be dried up; but of such colors take you no great care for
they be no true colors; for it shall very often times be citrine, and very
often times redness will appear, and often times it will be dry, and also
liquid before whiteness, but the Spirit will never be fixed with the body, but
with white color. Astavus says, between the blackness and the white, there
shall appear all colors, even as many as can be named or thought of: from
diversity of which colors, diverse men gave it diverse names, and almost
innumerable names: for some did it on purpose to conceal and obscure the Art,
and some did it of envy: but in the Chapter of the appearing of diverse colors
in the medicine, there is a definition of his blacknes: for whereas the blacknes
and the white be extreme colors, and all other colors be mean colors,
therefore as often soever as any thing of the blacknes does descend, so often
another color and another does appear, until it be an extreme whiteness:
But for descending, and ascending Hermes says, it ascends from the Earth up to
Heaven, and descends again from the Heaven to the Earth and receives the
superior strength, and the inferior strength. And note, that if there appear
between the black and the white any yellow color, care not for them, for they
do not continue, nor are permanent, but they are slippery and passing away; for
there can be no permanent nor perfect Red, except that go before it. Rosarius
says, no man can come from the first to the third, but by the second; for it
appears that the white is to be looked for in the second, when that it is the
compliment of all the work, for afterward it will never be varied into any
other true permanent color but Red.

Now we have the white, therefore now it behooveth thee to make Red, for the
white medicine and the red do not differ between themselves in any essence, but
only in this point, that the red medicine has need of a greater subtiliation,
a longer digestion, and a hotter fire in his Regiment: And therefore forasmuch
as the end of the operation of the white is the beginning of the operation of
the Red: and forasmuch as that which is the compliment of the one, is the
beginning of the other: therefore unless that thou do first make white the
medicine, thou can never make true red. But now how it shall be made Red, we
will tell thee shortly. First the medicine to the Red must be put into our
moist fire, until the white color appear, as is aforesaid: afterward, let
the vessel be drawn out of the fire and put it in a pot of sifted ashes, and
warm water half full, and set your vessel of glass with the medicine in the
ashes unto the midst, and under the earthen pot make a dry temperate fire and
continual, but the heat of this dry fire must be greater by double at the
least, than was the heat of the moist fire, and by the benefit of this fire the
white medicine shall receive Red tincture; truly thou can not err if thou will continue the dry fire: whereupon Rosarius says, with a dry sire, and a
dry calcination roast the dry until that it be made like Cynaber. Whereto from
thenceforth put nothing, neither Oil, or vinegar, or any thing whatsoever it
be, until it be roasted to a compliment of Rednes; and of a truth, the more
Redder that the medicine is made, the more stronger it is, and of more power*
and that is more roasted will be more Redder, and that which is most roasted is
most precious, therefore with a dry fire, burn it without fear, until that
it be closed most redly: whereupon a Philosopher says, in continuing the Red,
sees the white until that it be clothed in purple, and beauty; but some have
it; continue the Red and the white until it be clothed in purple clothing:
do not cease, although the Red do a little slack to appear, for the fire being
augmented, as I said before, after white of the first colors appears a mean
Red when among these colors shall appear a yellow, but his color is not
continuing, for after that it be perfect, Red will not much tarry to appear,
which appearing, be thou certain that thy work is perfect: for Hermes says,
in Turba Philosophorum, between white color and Red, there appears only but
one color, viz. Citrine, which is yellow, but it varieth more or less: also
Maria says, when thou have true white, thou then afterward shall have a false
yellow, and afterward a perfect Red: And then thou shall have the glory of the
clearenesse of all the World.

The first manner of Multiplication of our Medicine.
ELixir is multiplied by two manner of ways; that is to say, by solution of
heat, and by solution of drying: by solution of heat is thus. Take the medicine
and put it into the vessel of glass, and bury it in our moist fire seven
days or more, until that the Medicine be dissolved into water without any
troublousnesse appearing in it. But the solution of drying is that that shall
take the vessel of glass with the medicine, and hang it in a brass pot
(having a straight mouth) in boiling, and let the mouth be close, that by the
vapor of the boiling vapor ascending, the medicine may be dissolved. And
note, that the same boiling water must not touch the vessel of glass with the
medicine, by the space of three fingers: and this solution is made strongly in
one day, or two, or three. After that the medicine is made and dissolved, take
it from the fire to cool, to fix, to congeale, to harden or dry, and so let it
be very often dissolved, for the oftener it be resolved, so much the more
perfect it is; whereupon Bonellus says, when that our brass is turned, and
very oftentimes reitterate, it is made better then it was before, and such a
solution is a subtiliation of the medicine, and his virtuous sublimation;
whereupon the oftener it is sublimate or subtiliated, so much oftener it gets
a greater Virtue, and a greater tincture, and colors more abundantly, and
the more it shall make perfect and convert, and turn the more; whereupon in
the fourth solution it shall get so much virtue and tincture, that one part
shall be able upon 1000. of Mercury cleansed, that it shall convert it into
Gold or Silver, better then that which is taken out of the Mines of the Earth:
Whereupon Rasis says, the multiplication of this goodness depends wholely
on the often reitteration of the sublimations and fixation of the perfect
medicine, for the oftener that the order of this compliment be reitterated, so
much more does increase the nourishment thereof, and the virtue and strength
thereof is augmented: for the oftener then was wont that thou shall sublimate
and dissolve the perfect medicine, so much the more oftener thou shall win and
gain at every time to cast one upon 1000. as if at first it fall upon 1000.
the second time it will convert 10000. the third time it will be cast upon, and
convert 100000. and the fourth time upon 1000000. the fifth time upon an
infinite: For Merodus says, know ye for certainty, that how much the more and
oftener our Stone is dissolved, so much the more is the spirit and body
conjoined together, and of this for every time the tincture is multiplied.

The second way of multiplication is another way; the medicine is multiplied by
fermentation, for the ferment to white is pure Silver, and the firment to red
is pure Gold: therefore cast one part of the medicine upon ten parts, or twenty
of the firment, and all such shall be medicine; and put it upon the fire in a
Vessel of Glass, and shut it well, so that no air may enter nor pass forth,
and let it be dissolved or sublimated so often as thou will; and as thou do
the first medicine, and one part of the second medicine shall receive as much
as one part of the first medicine. Whereupon Rasis says, now have we fully
made our medicine, hot and cold, dry and moist, equally temperate, whereof
whatsoever we do put to it shall be of the same complexion that it is put to;
therefore conjoyne or marry him that he may bring forth fruit like unto
himself: But yet do not conjoyne or marry it with any other thing to convert
it, but with it that it was in the beginning; whereupon it is written in
Speculum, this spiritual earth which is the Elixir, must be first in his own
body, from whence it was taken at the beginning of his solution, that is to
marry his earth, and it being so rectified and purified by his soul to
conjoyne it by conjunction of his body, from whence it had its beginning; also
it is said in the Book called Gemma salutaris, the white Work has need of a
white firmentation; whereby when he is white with his white firmentation, and
when he is made red in his red firment, for then that white earth is firment of
firment, for when it is joined to Luna, all is firment to cast upon Mercury,
and upon every body being unperfect mettle to make it Luna: And with the red
thereof must be joined Sol; and that is medicine upon Mercury, and Luna to make
it Sol. Also Rasis says, it behooveth that he be mingled with wite and red
quicksilver of his kind, and that it be contained and kept that it fly not
away; wherefore we bid that quicksilver be mingled with quicksilver, until
that one clear water be made of two quicksilvers, and not to make three
mixtures until every one of them be dissolved into water; but in their
conjunction put a little of the Work upon much of the body, as upon four, and
in a certain time it will be made in the nature of powder, which is of red or
white color, and this powder is Elixir complete. And truly the Elixir must
be of a simple powder; also Egidius says to 25 Stones of solution, put
solution, and to solution desiccation, and put all to the fire, and keep the
fume, and take heed that nothing fly from it, tarry and dwell nigh the
Vessel, and behold and observe the mavelous working, how it shall be removed
from color to color in less then an hour of a day, until that it comes
to the mark or prick, or butt of whiteness or redness, for it will soon
melt in the fire, and come all into the Air; for when the fume does fill the
fire, it will enter into the body, and the spirit will then be pulled together,
and the body will then be fixed, clear white or red: Then divide the fire,
suffering it to cool, and be cold: For and if one of these do fall upon 1000.
or Mercury, or any other body, it turns it into the best Gold or Silver,
according as his firment is prepared; wherefore it does appear, that he who
does not congeale quicksilver that will suffer the fire, and join it to pure
Silver, he desires no right way to the white work; and he who does not make a
red quicksilver that can sustain all fire, and join it to mere gold, he takes
not the right way to the Red work, for by solution and fermentation the work
or medicine may be multiplied into an infinite: and note that the Elixir gives
a very light fusion or melting even like wax: whereupon Rosarius says, our
medicine necessarily ought to be of a most subtle substance and pure
adherence, cleaving to Mercury of his nature, and of a most thin, and easy
liquefaction as water; also in the book which is named Omne datum optimum,
when the Elixir is well prepared, it ought to be melted upon a burning plate,
or upon a burning cole, even as wax melts, for that thou do in the white,
do it in the red, for the same is the operation of both, as well in the
multiplication, as in the projection. Geber the Philosopher does bear witness
in his fifth Book, and tenth Chapter, that there be three Orders of Medicines;
of the first Order is that which is cast upon imperfect bodies, and does not
take away the corruption, but imperfection, for it does give tincture, but that
tincture does go away in examination.

The medicine of the second Order, is that which is cast upon imperfect bodies,
and does give tincture to them in examination; for after the examination the
tincture does remain, but all the corruption of the bodies is not clear taken
away for ever by that medicine.

In the third Order, the medicine is that which is cast upon imperfect bodies,
and takes away all their imperfection and corruption, and from corrupt
Mineralls it brings them into incorruptible. But the two first of these
medicines being left off, we will speak something of the projection of this
medicine of the third degree.

The perfect medicine truly is cast 1000. or upon more, according as the
medicine is prepared or advanced by dissolution, sublimation, and
subtilliation; but because so little, that is, so little is cast upon so
little, by reason of the littlenes thereof, it should not be lift up before his
virtue be fulfilled. Therefore the Philosophers made their projection diversely,
wherefore this is the best way.

Let one part be cast upon a hundred of Mercury, and all is medicine, and it is
called the second medicine; and let every one part of this second medicine be
cast upon a hundred of Mercury, and all is medicine, and is called the third
medicine, and is made 1000. yet again, let every part of this third medicine
be cast upon 1000. of mercury, and it shall be medicine, and all shall be the
best Luna or Sol. And note that the third and the second may be so much
dissolved, and subtilliate, that it shall receive a greater virtue, and that it
may be multiplied in an infinite: after receive and make projection; first
multiply 10. into 10. and it will make 100. and 100. by 10. multiplied will be
1000. etc.

But how the projection ought to be made, shall be now taught. Put the body
upon the fire in a Crucible* also if it be a spirit tepescat, let it do like
lukewarm water, and cast the Elixir into it, as is aforesaid, moving it well,
and very soon when the Elixir is liquefied, and has mingled it self with the
body, or with the spirit, remove it from the fire, and thou shall have by the
grace of God, gold, and silver, according as the Elixir is prepared.

In short therefore, it appears by the premises, that our work does consist
in the body of Magnesia finished; that is, of Sulphur, the which is called
Sulphur of Sulphur, and Mercury, which is called Mercury of Mercury: Therefore
as it is aforesaid, with one thing, that is our Stone, with one part, that is
to say seething, and one disposition, that is to say, first, making of it
black; secondly, with making of it white; thirdly, with making of it red; and
fourthly, with making of projection, all the whole mastery is finished.

Of the other part of the false Alchymists, and they who do believe them by
their distillations, sublimations, calcinations, conjunctions, seperations,
congelations, preparations, dissolutions, manual contritions, and other
deceptions, saying, that it is by a similitude only called an Egg, and
teaching another sulphur from ours, and another Mercury from ours, and that it
may be drawn from some other thing, or effected by some other then our light
fire.

These be all either deceivers, or mightily abused.
For by what and how many soever names it be called, it is but one and the
same thing. Also Lucas says, Do not thou pass or regard for plurality of
compositions in nature, which the Philosophers diversely set down in their
Books; for certainly there is but one thing in all the World, wherein the
spirit we seek for is to be found of any profitable and comfortable use, with
which every body is colored: for in the Philosophers diversity of names, and
compositions, they but cover and hide their Science.

FINIS.
A Treatise of Florianus Raudorff, of the Stone, or Mercury of the Philosophers.
In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
A short Declaration of the Great Matter.
CHAP. 1.
KNow ye, that our Medicine is made of 3. things, viz. of a body, soul, and
spirit. There are 2. bodies, viz. Luna and Sol. Sol is a tincture, wherewith
imperfect bodies are tinged into Sol, and Luna tingeth Luna: for Nature
produces or brings forth only its like: as a man a man, a horse begets a
horse, etc.

Proved by Examples.
We told and named it with names, namely the bodies that serve to our work,
which of some are called Ferment: for as a little leaven leaveneth the whole
mass, so Luna and Sol turn Mercury as their meal, into their nature and
virtue.

CHAP. 2.
YOU may say, if Luna and Sol have a prefixed tincture, why do they not tinge
imperfect mettalls? Answer: A babe though borne a man, does not man's actions:
it must first be nourisht and bred to an age: so it is with mettalls also;
they cannot show their operation, unless they be first reduced from their
grosnes to a spiritualty, nourisht and fed in their tinctures, through heat and
moistness. For the spirit is of the same matter and nature with our medicine;
for we say, our medicine is of fire, Nature, and much subtiler, but of
themselves they cannot be subtle nor simple, for they must be helped with
subtle penetrating things.

Note, earth of it self may not be subtle, but must be made subtle, through
moist water, which is dissolving, and makes an ingresse for Sol, that she may
penetrate the earth, and with her heat she makes the earth subtle, and in
that way the earth must be made subtle, so long till it be as subtle as a
spirit, which then is the Mercury, more dissolving then common water, to
dissolve the said mettalls, and that through the heat of fire, to penetrate and
subtiliate the mettalls.

CHAP. 3.
IF you ask, why is Mercury called a better spirit then others, as there are
sulphur, orpiment, arsenici, salarmenic, all these are called spirits also: for
being set into the fire, they are carried away, and we know not what is become
of them; but this Mercury is much subtiler and clearer or penetrative, then the
other; and mettalls are turned in it, but the others burn them, and destroy
them, make mettalls more grosser then they were.

CHAP 4.
BUT Mercury is of such a subtle nature, that he turns mettalls into simples,
as himself is, and draws them unto him.

Note, no metal may be turned by any of the other four spirits, for if you
put any of them to our mettle, it turns to ashes or earth; but if you do it
to Mercury, it will be impalpable, therefore is it called argent vive.

CHAP. 5.
WE take nothing else to subtilize mettles, or make them penetrative, nor to
tinge other mettles; some call it argent vive, or a water, an acetum, a poison,
because it destroys imperfect bodies, and divides into several members and
forms, as you shall hear, and is called by several names.

CHAP. 6.
YOU may say, we do not speak true, that our medicine is made of two things,
of body and of spirit; it is right said, that all metals have one root and
original.

CHAP. 7.
WHY can it not be made of two compounded together? Answer, 1. They may be
made of all these together. 2. They must be reduced into a Mercury, which would
fall difficult by reason of man's life; therefore we take the next matter, which
are the two above said things, viz. the body and spirit: Some Philosophers say
in their Books, our medicine is made out of four things, and it is so, for in
mettles and their spirits are the four Elements; and others say true also,
saying, mettalls must be turned into argent vive: Herein many learned and wise
men do err, and lose themselves in this path.

CHAP. 8.
HAving spoken of the matter, of which our medicine is made or joined, or
generated; now we will speak of the form of the Vessels, in which it is made.

CHAP. 9.
Form of the Vessel.
IT is requisite that the Vessel be likened to the firmament, which encloseth
and encompasseth all. For our medicine is nothing else but a change of Elements
one into another, which is done by the motion of the firmament; and so it must
needs be round and circular.

CHAP. 10.
WE must speak also of the other or second Vessel, and that also must be
round; and must be less then the outward Vessel; two hand-breadth high,
called Cucurbite containing; on the Cucurbite you set an Alimbeck, through
which the vapors ascend to the nose of the Alimbeck, which must be well luted:
The Lute is made with meal, sifted ashes, white of an Egg, etc. or one part
of meal, one part of calx vive, tempered with the white of Eggs, which you
must lute withal quickly; lute it well, that no spirits may get away; which if
you lose any of them, will prejudice your Work mainely; therefore be cautious.

CHAP. 11.
Form of the Oven.
THis Oven must be round four hands high, and two broad, and one in
thickness, to keep in the heat the better. Having spoken of the form of the
Vessel and Oven: now we will declare how our medicine is generated and
nourished.

CHAP. 12.
How the matter is extracted, and cherished.
WE say that our matter is generated through the heat of fire, and through
the vapor of the water, and also of Mercury, and is nourished in this manner:
and to bring this matter into a just comparison, it is requisite to prick up
your ears, and to open your reason and understanding, that we may the better
understand the following Chapters.

CHAP. 13.
FIrst we will show the order of the work in the following Chapters.

1. The first is called Dissolution. 2. Separation. 3. Sublimation. 4.
Fixation, or Congelation. 5. Calcination. 6. Ingression.

CHAP. 14.
What is Dissolution?
IS the turning of a dry thing into a wet one; and you must know, that
dissolution belongs only unto bodies, as to Sol and Luna, which serve for
our Art: for a spirit needs not to be dissolved, being a liquid thing of it
self, but mettalls are gross and dry, and of a gross nature; therefore they
must be made more subtle; the reasons why they must be subtillized.

CHAP. 15.
THe first is, our medicine must needs be subtle, and mettalls cannot be made
subtle unless through dissolution, being reduced into a water, and ascend
through the Alimbeck, to be turned to water and spirit, as you shall hear.
When it is come to that, that all is ascended, and nothing stayed behind: and
the feces are reserved for a further use, as you shall hear hereafter.

CHAP. 16.
THe second reason: the body and spirit must be made indivisible, and be one;
for no gross thing mingleth with the spirit, unless the gross matter be
reduced to a subtility, as into Argent vive; then the one embraces the other
inseparably. For if Argent vive perceives a thing like to it self, then it
rejoices, and the dissolved body embraces the spirit, and suffers him not to
fly away, and makes it durable for the fire, and the spirit rejoices, because
he has found his fellow: therefore the one must be like the other, and are of
one nature.

CHAP. 17.
Of Dissolution, how to make it.
WE take leave of Sol and Luna, thinly beaten, very pure, which we put into a
good deal of Mercury, which is made pure also: then we put one after the other
into Mercury, in a pot, in a heat not too hot, that the Mercury fume not; when
we see that no gross thing is in it, and is melted or streameth together,
then you wrought well: but if there be any feces, or settlement, then you must
add more Mercury to it, and do as you did formerly: and this is the first
sign of dissolution, that all be streamy.

CHAP. 18.
The Prosecution of this Matter.
WE take all the matter thus dissolved, and set in Balneo Mariae; continue
the fire for a sennight, then let it cool: take the matter, press it through
a cloth, or skin; if all goes through, then it is well; if not, begin again
in the vessel with more Mercury, so long till it be dissolved: the
dissolution in Summer is better then in Winter, yet it matters not much.

CHAP. 19.
SEparation, is a dividing of a thing into its members, and a separation of the
pure from the impure: we take our dissolved matter, and put it into the smaller
vessel, which stands in the cucurbite, set the Alimbecke upon, well luted, and
set it in ashes; we make a continued fire for a sennight, one part of the
spirit sublimeth, which we call the spirit or water, and is the subtilest
part; the other part which is not yet subtle, sticks about the cucurbite,
and some of it is fallen to the bottom, which we call the air, and this part
we take warm and moist, and the third part remaining in the inner vessel, is
yet a grosser matter, which stays in the bottom; each of these parts we put
into a vessel apart, but the third matter we put more Mercury to, and proceed
as formerly, and always each reserved apart, and thus you must proceed: in the
inner vessel nothing remains but a black powder, which we call the black
earth, which is the dregs of the mettalls, which are an obstruction, why
mettalls cannot be united with the spirit; this powder is of no use.

CHAP. 20.
Allegation, or proof.
YOU may, whereas you have separated the four Elements, from the mettalls, or
divided them, and what is the fire then, which is one of the four Elements
also?

CHAP. 21.
ANswer: We say, that fire and air is of one nature, which are come open
together, and mixed together, and the one is turned to the other: but it were
hard to be understood, if you should not be instructed, that the dividing of
the Elements is brought to that, that they have their natural operation, as in
the whole, so in the parts.

CHAP. 22.
WE call that air, which remained in the bigger vessel, because it is more
hot then moist, cold, or dry: the same you must understand also of the other
Elements: if they be not sought in particular, they cannot properly be
understood, but are left thus.

Hence Plato says, we turned the moist into a siccity, and the dry thing we
made moist, and turned the body into water and air.

CHAP. 23.
WE say, that sublimation is arising from below upward, as we see the vapors
which fall on the ground and in the water, are exhaled again by the heat of
the sun, and the gross matter lies still below, as we have said at the
changing of the Elements: thus the matter must be subtiliated, which is not
subtle enough, all which must be done through heat and moistnes, namely
through fire and water.

CHAP. 24.
Prosecution of the matter.
KNow that we must take the thing, which remained in the greater vessel, and
put the same to other fresh Mercury, that it be well dissolved and subtilized;
then we set it in Balneum Mariae for three dais, as formerly: but we mention
not the quantity of Mercury, only we leave it to your discretion, as much as
you have need, that you may make it fusible, and it be clear like a spirit:
and note, that you take not too much of the Mercury, that it be not a sea: then
we set it again into subliming, as you did formerly, do it so often, till you
have brought it all through the Alimbecke, then it is very subtle, and one
thing, clear, pure, and fusible: then we put it again into the inner vessel,
and let it go once more through the Alimbeck, and see whether any thing be
left behind, to the same more Mercury must be added, till it become all one
thing, and yields no more sediment, and be separated from all its impurity and
superfluity.

CHAP. 25.
Declaration.
I Tell you, that we have made out of two, viz. of body and spirit, one only
thing, as a spirit, which is light, and the body is heavy, the spirit quickly
and easily flies upwards; but our work is, that the body, which was fixed is
now become volatile, and rises upward, the which is against his nature: Thus
we have made a spirit out of the body, and a body out of the spirit, one only
thing.

CHAP. 26.
Of Fixation, and Congealation.
HAving made a spirit out of the body, which is a thing volatile: now is it
requisite to be made fix, holding in the fire: for we turned the spirit into a
body, viz. we turned the dry into a moystness, and the moystness into a
dryness: now we must make it a thing fixed: and again to turn the spirit into
a body, and that which formerly rose up, to stay below: and thus have we done
according to the sayings of Philosophers, reducing each Element into its
contrary, then you will find what you seek after: namely, make the liquid
thing dry, and the dry thing to be liquid, out of a fix a volatile, and the
volatile to be fix: and this can be done only through Congelation; therefore
we will turn the spirit into a body.

CHAP. 27.
Coagulation, and Fixation.
HOw is it done? we take a little of the ferment, which is made of our
medicince, be it either Luna or Sol: and take but a little: as if you have 100
lb. of the medicine, take but 10 lb. of the ferment, which must be foliated;
and this ferment we amalgamize with the matter which you had before prepared,
the same we put into a glass Violl with a long neck, and set it in a pot of
ashes: all which being set in the fit place: then to the above said ferment 2
or 3 fingers, of the spirit, which is gone through the Alimbeck, then we put a
good fire to it for three days, then the dissolved body finds its like, then
they embrace one another, each keeps to its like: then the gross ferment
holds with the subtle ferment, attracteth the same, will not let it go, and
the dissolved body, which is now subtle, keeps the spirit, for they are of
an equal subtilty, like one to another, are become one thing, and the fire
never may separate them; therefore is it requisite through this means to make
the one like the other, and thus the firment, a biding place of the subtle
body, and the subtle body a staying place for the spirit, that it may not fly
away: then we make fire for a sennight, more or less, yet so long till we see
that our matter is congealed. The time of this congelation is either prolonged
or shortened, according to the vessels or Ovens condition, and of the fires
either continuance, or discontinuing.

CHAP. 28.
A further proceeding in this matter.
When you see that this matter is coagulated, then put of the abovesayd matter
so much to it, that it be two or three fingers high over it, as you know how it
must be done, and put the fire to it as you did formerly, till it be congealed
also, and proceed so long in it till all the matter be congealed. And know that
Philosophers for the generallity have concealed the Congelation in their books,
and none of them (as far as we can find) have disclosed it, only Larikalix,
who has composed it into many Chapters, and produced it in the German tongue,
without any alteration, which he revealed unto me without any reservation or
deceit.

CHAP. 29.
Calcination.
HAving treated of Congealation, and Fixation, now we come to the Calcination.
We take the known matter, and put it into an Urinall, and set a head upon it,
luting it well, set it in the Oven of ashes, make a continued great fire for a
sennight, then that which is not fix rises into the Alimbeck, which we call
Hermes his bird, and that which remains in the bottom of the glass, is like
ashes, or sifted earth, called the Philosophers Earth, out of which they make
their foundation, and out of it they make their increase or augmentation,
through heat and moystness: this earth is composed of four Elements, but are
not contrary one to another, for their contrariety is changed or reduced to an
agreement unto an uniforme nature: then we take the moist part, reserve it
apart to a further use, which afterward must be put to it, as you shall hear.
We take this earth or ashes, which is a very fixed thing, and put it into a
strong earthen pot, unto which we lute its lid, and set it in a calcining Oven,
that the fire may beat on it above and below, and that fire we continue for
three days, so that the pot is always red hot, we make of a stone a white
calx, and the things which are of water and earth-nature, are of fire's nature;
for every calx is of a fires nature, which is hot and dry.

CHAP. 30.
Subtiliation of the four Elements into the fifth essence.
WE have spoken of Calcination, in which we have brought things to the
highest subtility, namely, to fire's nature: now we must further subtiliate the
four Elements: we take a little quantity of this Calx, viz. if we have 100
pounds, we keep no more than the fourth part, the other we set into
dissolution, with a good deal of fresh mercury, even as we had done formerly,
and so follow from Chapter to Chapter; from time to time, as formerly has been
proceeded in.

CHAP 31.
Changing Fire into Water.
NOw my dearest, that you may change the fix into a volatile thing, that is
Fire into Water; know that that which was of sire's nature, is now become the
nature of water, and that which was fix is now become volatile, and being made
very subtle; then we take 1. p. of this water, and put it to the reserved
Calx, and we add as much of the water unto, that it go over it two or three
fingers breadth over the Calx, then we put fire under for three days long,
thus it congealeth sooner than at first; for Calx is hot and dry, and sucks in
the humidity greedily; this Congelation must be continued till it be quite
congealed: afterward we calcine it as formerly; being quite calcined, it is
called the quintessence, because it is of a more subtle nature than Fire, and
because of the transmutation formerly made.

CHAP. 32.
The Philosophers Examples.
ALL this being done, then our medicine is finished, and nothing but the
ingression is wanting, that the matter may have an ingresse into imperfect
mettalls.

Plato, and many other Philosophers, begun this work again with dissolving,
subliming, or subtiliating, congealing, calcining, as at first, and that
medicine which we call a ferment, transmutes Mercury into its nature, in which
it is dissolved and sublimed; Philophers say, our medicine transmutes
infinitely imperfect metals; and say that he which attaineth once to the
perfection of it, has no more need of it, to make any more; but they speak it
mystically in their expressions.

CHAP. 33.
How our medicine transmuteth mettalls into Sol and Luna.
KNowing that our medicine converteth imperfect mettalls into Sol and Luna,
according to the nature and form of the matter, out of which it is made;
therefore know, that we now at second time say, that this our medicine is of
that nature, that it transmuteth, converts, divides asunder like fire, and is
of a more subtle nature than fire, for it is of a nature of the quintessences,
as we said before, therefore it converts Mercury into its nature, seeing our
medicine is of a converting nature, as our body converts Mercury into its
nature, which is an imperfect body or metal, and the grossness of metal
it turns into ashes or powder; therefore our medicine is of a dividing,
separating nature, as you see fire does not turn all the world into its nature,
but only that which is of its nature, and the rest it turns to ashes.

CHAP. 34.
Reason why a Spirit is made of a Body.
WE showed by real reason, how a body is turned into a spirit, and again a
spirit is turned into a body, viz. out of a fixed this is made a volatile, and
of a volatile a fixed thing; the earth is turned to water and air, and the
air into fire, and the fire to an earth, the earth into a fire, and the fire
is turned to air, and the air is turned into water, and the water is become
an earth. Now the earth which was of fire's nature, is brought to the nature of
quintessence. Thus we have spoken of all the ways of transmuting, performed
through heat and moystnesse, and have made out of dry, a moist thing, and out
of the moist a dry one; otherwise natures, which are of several motions, and
of several mansions, could not be brought to one uniforme thing, if one should
be turned in the others nature.

CHAP. 35.
Accomplishment of Philosophers sayings.
WE having brought the matter to the abovesayd points, then have we done, and
wrought according to the Philosophers sayings, when they say in their Books:
Rising from the Earth into Heaven, and coming down from Heaven into the
Earth; to that sense, to make the body which is of earth, into a spirit, which
is a subtle thing in his nature, and then to reduce the spirit into a body,
which is a gross low thing, changing one Element into another, as earth into
water, water into air, air into fire; then fire is turned into water, and
water into fire, and that into a more subtle nature and quintessence. Having
thus done, then are you come to the glory of the world: be dutiful to God,
remember the poor.

CHAP. 36. Ingression.
TAke quick Sulphur, melt it in an earthen vessel, well glazed, being melted,
power it forth into a Lie made of Calx vive, and willow ashes: let all these
boil in a kettle gently, an oil swimmeth on the top, which take and keep,
having enough of it, we mingle it with sand; distill it through the Alimbeck,
so long till it become incombustible: with this oil we imbibe our medicine,
which will be like soap, then we distill by the Alimbeck, and receive the
fumes which come over, and put it on again three or four times, if it has
not enough, then put more of this Oil to it, being thus imbibed, then put fire
under, that the humors may come away, and the medicine be firm and fusible on
the body of the glass. Then we take Avis Hermetis, which we reserved formerly,
and put it to it by degrees, till all be made fix.

CHAP. 37.
Laus Deo.
ACcording to Avicen, it is impossible to convert metals, unless they be
reduced to their first matter. But by Arts help they are converted into other
metal: we know, that Artists do like Physicians, purging first the corrupted
matter, which is obstructive to man's health, then Cordials are ministered, which
restore health: so good Artists must proceed in like manner by converting of
metals: first Mercury and Sulphur in metals are purged, whereby they
strengthen the heavenly elementall parts in them, according to their desired
preparation of metals: then nature works further and not Art, but
instrumentally helps, and then is seen that she really makes Sol and Luna.
For as the heavenly elementall virtues work in natural vessels, even so do
the Artificial, being made uniforme, and as nature works through the heat of
fire and stars, the same Art effects by fire, if temperate and not excessive,
for the moving virtue in the matter; for the heavenly virtue in it, mingled at
first, inclinable to this or that, is furthered by Art; heavenly virtues are
communicative to their subjects, as is seen in natural created things, chiefly
in things generated by putrefaction, where the astrall influences are apparent,
according to the matters capacity. Artists do imitate herein, destroying one
form to beget another; and his proceedings are best, when they are according
unto nature: as by purging the Sulphur by digesting, subliming, and purging
Mercury vive, by an exact mixture with the metals matter, and thus out of
their virtues every metals form is produced.

The virtue of the converting Element must be predominant, and the parts of it
must appear in the Element converted: and being thus mingled with the
Elementated thing, then that Element will have that matter, which made it an
Element, and has the virtue of the other vert Element. This is that great
mystery in this Art.

Scito quod ejus principium est, siout finis.
FINIS.
The names of the Philosophers Stone, Collected by WILLIAM GRATACOLLE.
GOld, Sol, Sun, Brass of Philosophers, the body of Magnesia, a pure body,
clean, ferment of Elixir, Masculine, Argent vive fixed, Sulphur incombustible,
Sulphur red, fixed, the rubine stone, kybrik, a man, green vitrioll, burnt
brass, red earth: the water that is distilled from these things, is named of
the Philosophers, the tail of the Dragon, a pure wind, air, life, lightning,
the house, the afternoon light, virgins milk, sal armoniack, sal ni^e^, the
wind of the belly, white fume, red water of sulphur, tartar, saffron, water,
the white compound, stinking water, the filthiness of the dead blood, Argent
vive, a Cucurbite with his Alimbeck, the vessel of the Philosophers, a high
man with a Sallet, the belly of a man in the midst, but in the end it is called
the foot, or the feet, or on the which feet, or earth is calcined, roasted,
congealed, distilled, or made still and quiet: the shadow of the Sun, a dead
body, a crown overcomming a cloud, the bark of the Sea, Magnesia, black, a
Dragon which eats his tail, the dregs of the belly, earth found on the
dunghill putrified, or in horse dung, or in soft fire, Sulphur, Mercury,
secondly in number, and one in essence, name, in name, a stone, body, spirit,
and soul; it is called earth, fire, air, all things, because he contains in
him four Elements; it is called a man or beast, that has soul, life, body,
and spirit, and yet some Philosophers do not think the matter to have a soul.

But as it is a stone, it is called the water of Sulphur, the water of the
world, the spittle of Lune, the shadow of the Sun, a den, Sol, Elephas,
white Jayre, eyes of fishes, Beyia, Sulphur, vine sharp, water, milk, vinegar
of life, tears, joining water, Urine, the light of lights, a marvelous Father,
Father of Minerals, a fruitful tree, a living spirit, a fugitive servant,
certore of the earth, venom, most strong vinegar, white gum, everlasting
water, a woman, a feminine, a thing of vile price, Azot, menstruous, Brazill,
in nature Azot, water, the first matter, the beginning of the world; and mark
this, that Argent vive, Mercury, Azot, the full moon, Hypostasis, white lead,
or red, do all of them signify but one thing, our stone, our brass, our
water, Iron, Silver, Lime, whiteness, Jupiter, Vermilion white, after diverse
times and degr^es of operation.

And note, that the Philosophers washing is to bring again the whole soul
into his body, wherefore you may not understand thereby, the common white
washing is convenient to be done with vinegar, and salt, and such like.

Also note, that when blackness does appear, then it is called dispensation of
the man and woman between them, and that the body has gotten a spirit, which
is the tears of the virtues of the soul upon the body, and the body does
revive the action of the soul and spirit, and is made an Eagle and the mean
of natures.

And note, that white earth, white Sulphur, white fume, Auripigmentum Magnesia,
and Ethell, do signify all one thing.

Also the stone is called Chaos, a Dragon, a Serpent, a Toad, the green Lion,
the quintessence, our stone Lunare, Camelion, most vild black, blacker than
black, Virgins milk, radical humidity, unctuous moisture, liquor, seminall,
Salarmoniack, our Sulphur, Naptha, a soul, a Basilisk, Adder, Secundine,
Blood, Spearne, Metteline, hair, urine, poison, water of wise men, mineral
water, Antimony, stinking menstrues, Lead of Philosophers, Sal, Mercury, our
Gold, Lune, a bird, our ghost, dun Salt, Alome of Spain, attrament, dew of
heavenly grace, the stinking spirit, Borax, Mercury corporal, wine, dry water,
water metelline, an Egg, old water, perminent, Hermes bird, the less world,
Campher, water of life, Auripigment, a body cynaper, and almost with other
infinite names of pleasure.

The Secret of Secrets, and Stone of Philosophers.
IF thou desire to be so lucky, as that thou may obtain the blessing of
Philosophers, as God does live for ever, so let this verity live with thee.

The Philosophers do very properly say, it tarrieth in the shell, and
contains in himself both white and red, the one is called masculine, the
other feminine, Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral; there is no such other thing
found in this world, that has both power active, and passive in it, and also
has within him a substance, dead, and quick, spirit and soul, which to the
ignorant, the Philosophers do call it the most vile thing, it holds in him
the four Elements, contained in his skirts where he is found, and commonly of
all men, it may be bought for a small price, it does ascend by it self, he
waxes black, he descends and waxes white, increases and decreaseth by
himself.

It is a matter which the earth brings forth, and descends from heaven,
waxes pale and red, is born, is dead, rises again, and after lives for
ever: by many ways it comes to his end, but his proper decoction is upon a
fire, soft, mean, strong, it is augmented until they be sure it rests
quietly with red in the fire; this is according to the vow of all good
Philosophers, (called the Philosophers Stone) read and read again, and every
thing more clear thou shall never find, and if hereby thou understandest not
the matter, thou shall never otherwise know it, or learn this Art.

Hermes says, the Dragon is not dead, but with his Brother, and his sister,
not by one, but by both together: note these things, three heads and one body,
one nature, and one Mineral; and this is sufficient for them which have any
aptness of understanding in this Science: the Dragon is not mortified nor made
fixed, but with Sol and Luna, and by none other, as says Hortulanus by
mountains in bodies, in the plain of Mercury, and in these look for it, and
this water is created, and by concourse of these two, is called water permanent
of Philosophers.

Our sublimation is to sees the bodies with golden water, to dissolve, to
liquefie, and to sublime them; Our calcination is to putrify and digest by
four days, and to do no other ways, wherefore many be deceived in sublimation.

Thou may know that brass which is the Philosophers Gold, is their Gold,
and that is true, but thou have searched for greenness, thinking that brass
is a Leprous body, which he has for his greenness, wherefore I say unto thee,
that all that is perfect in brass, is that greenness only that is in him,
because that that greenness (by our mastry) is turned shortly into gold, and
of this thing we have experience, and if thou will prove it we will give thee a
rule.

Take therefore burnt brass, and perfectly rubified, and break and imboyle
him with drink seven times, as much as he is able to drink in all the ways
of rubifying and roasting him again, afterward make him to descend, and his
green color will be made red, as clear graynes, and thou may know that so
much redness will descend with him, that it will tinckt, Argent vive in some part
with the very color of gold, and all this we approved, for it does work very
great operations; yet thou can not prepare the Stone by any means with any
drink green and moist, which is seen to be borne in our Minerals. O blessed
greatness! which does engender all things, whereby thou may be informed that
no vegetable or fruit in budding will appear, except there be a green color;
wherefore Philosophers call it their bud, and likewise they call it the water
of purifying or putrefaction, and they say the truth heerin; for with his water
he is purified and washed from his blackness, and made white, and afterward he
is so made red, whereby thou may learn to know that no true tincture is
made, but of our brass; sees him therefore with his soul, till the spirit be
joined with his body, and be made one, and thou shall have thy desire. Wife men
have spoken of this in many names, but know thou right well, that it is but one
matter which does stick unto Argent vive, and to bodies, and thou shall have
the true signs; yet left thou should be deceived hereby thou may know
what Argent vive is to stick unto: Argent vive does stick to the bodies, which
is false; for they think that they do understand that Chapter of Gebar, of
Argent vive, wherein he says, when in searching in other things, he does not
find by our invention any matter to be more agreeable unto nature then Argent
vive of the bodies; for this place is to be understood of Argent vive
Philosophical, for that Argent vive only sticks and tarrieth in, and with
the bodies: and the old Philosophers could find no other matter, nor can those
which be Philosophers now invent any other matter which will abide with the
bodies, but Argent vive of the Philosophers; for common Argent vive does not
stick to the bodies, but the bodies do stick to that Argent vive, and this is
certain by experience; for if the Argent vive common be joined with any
bodies, the Argent vive abides in his proper nature, or flies away, and does
not turn the body into his proper nature, and therefore he does not cleave
unto the bodies; and for this cause many be deceived in working in common
Argent vive, for our Stone, that is to say, Argent vive accidental which does
advance himself far above Gold, and does overcome it, and he does kill, and he
does quicken; for thou must know that Argent vive, father of all mavelous
things of this our mastery is congealed, and is both spirit and body; and this
is that Argent vive which Gebar did speak of, the consideration of a very
matter which does make perfect, is the consideration of a chosen pure substance
of Argent vive, but chiefly out of whom the substance of Argent vive may be
drawn out is to be inquired of: and we making answer do say, that in them in
whom it is, out of them it may be drawn; therefore Son, consider well, and
see from whence that substance is, and take that and none other: if thou desire
to come to knowledge I say unto thee, for love of Christ that by no other means
we can it find; now the Philosophers never might find any other matter that
would continue in the fire, but that only which is unctuous, perfect, and
incombustible, and that matter, when it is prepared as it ought, will turn all
bodes Mineral which it touches rightly unto most perfect Sol complete and
above all bodies Lune.

Sees first with wind, and afterward without wind, until thou have drawn
out of thy subject or matter the venom (which is called the soul;) that is it
which thou seek, called the everlasting aquavitae for alldiseases, the whole
mastery is in the vapor. Avicen.

Let the body be put in a fire kindled for forty days by elementall heat; then
in that decoction of forty days, the body will rejoice with the soul, and the
soul will rejoice with the body and spirit, and the spirit will rejoice with
the body and soul, and they are made immortal and perpetual without
separation.

FINIS.

