AN ACCOUNT OF The Duke's Bagnio, AND OF The Duke's Mineral Bath: AND THE NEW
SPAW OF MINERAL DRINKING WATERS.
NEar the West End of Long-Acre, on the Left Hand going to St. Martins-lane,
adjoining to the High White House that is remarkable by reason of the Dutch
Bricks that appear in its Front, where these Words are written over the Door,
in large Golden Letters, WITHIN THIS PLACE IS THE DVKE'S BAGNIO AND BATH; is
lately erected that Noble Structure the DVKE'S BAGNIO: And on the other Side of
the Courtyard, there is a convenient Building, in which the DVKE'S MINERAL BATH
is made; near which, in the same Yard, is fixed a Conduit or Fountain, bearing
the Name of the NEW SPAW:

The BAGNIO is for Luster and Beauty, according to the Assertion of al
Travelers that have seen it, the finest in Europe, if not in the World. It Is
of an Oval Figure, covered with a large Cupola, which is supported by eight
Cylindrical Columns on Pillars. It Is paved with Black and White Marble, and its
Walls are covered with White Gally-tyles. It has convenient Rooms for Degrees of
Heat, Seats in the Walls, and a Marble Table in the middle. Belonging to it are
all necessary Accommodations; viz. A large Dressing Room, with several Boxes,
Scales and Weights, Cisterns for Washing in, Beds, Linen, and Servants of al
sorts.

The BATH is a large Cistern, holding about Twelve Tun of Water. It Is built
with Taris and Paris Plaster, covered with White Gally-tyles: There are Steps
down into it, and Seats in the Wall, as in the Baths at Bathe. Over it hang two
Iron Swings, for Weak and Timorous Persons to hold by, and to stretch the Body
upon. The Water in it is impregnated with several Mineral Principles, which
render it so strong, that some Gentlemen can float upon it without stirring. It
has a Current of fresh Water into it, and a Pipe to carry it off as fast as it
comes in. It Is kept to a moderate Degree of Heat, such as will provoke moderate
Sweat: It Is frequently emptied and cleansed; and any Person may have it fresh
that pleases. Belonging to it are Rooms for Dressing and Undressing, with
Beds, Gowns, Linen, Servants, etc. Six or Eight Persons may Bathe in it at once.

The NEW SPAW is a Mineral Water, pure, pleasant, and wholesome, prepared by
Art: For the convenience of retaining which, there is a large Stone Fountain or
Conduit in the Yard, with an Iron Door; round about it are tal Pallisadoes, etc.

The BAGNIO, BATH, and SPAW being thus briefly described, 'twil be necessary to
mention something of their Use and Virtues.

The Use of BAGNIOS is so well known in several Parts of the World, that they
are almost as much frequented as their Churches. 'Twould be tedious to relate,
how many Distempers, and what Inconveniences are thereby prevented, amongst
the Inhabitants of those Countries; Experience daily shows it, and Reason
evidently confirms it. 'Twould be impertinent here to Philosophise, and tell you
how Perspiration and Friction being improved, exceedingly promote Health, and
prevent Distempers: we only tell the Vulgar, It Is certainly so; let their
Experience disprove us, and we will beg their Pardon for our Confidence. For, this
we certainly declare, from what we know, both from the Dictates of Reason, and
the Infallibility of daily Experience, That wel-tempered Bagnios (as this
really is) are of extraordinary Use, not only in preventing several Maladies,
and in preserving in the Body a good Constitution; but likewise in curing
Colds, Rheumatisms, Pains, Surfeits gotten by immoderate Eating, Drinking, or
Motion: They refresh the Body after a wearisom Journey; they render a Man brisk
and vigorous; his Joints are made more nimble, his Limbs more supple: In fine,
No one thing can tend more to the promoting of Health, than the frequent Use of
Bagnios.

No less likewise may the Use of MINERAL BATHS be commended. What pleasure do
the Inhabitants of most Countries but Britain take in Bathing? For Pleasure
Nothing can surpass it; for Health and Profit Bathing is not inconsiderable.
How pleasant is it to float upon a Water where one cannot sink? to feel ones
Skin and Pores penetrated by the wholesome Mineral Particles that glide about
in, and fill the interspersed Cavities of those Waters? In the Blood there is
hereby excited a more Noble Ferment; the Limbs are strengthened, and the Nerves
fortified; the Skin whitened, and a more pleasant Air created in the Face, as
has been taken notice of in some Ladies; an hungry Appetite, and a good
Digestion made. This Bath is of admirable Use in the Palsy, Numbness,
Convulsions, Cramps: It gives speedy Ease in Pains of the Gout; it is useful in
the Scurvie and Dropsy; its removes the Causes of Barrenness, and other
Indispositions peculiar to Women: It Is good for Gross and Corpulent Persons, to
ease them of that Burden which they often complain of. It Is a certain Remedy
for the Rickets in Children. In fine, 'Twas the Opinion of an Eminent Fellow of
the College, who about Forty Years ago was about making Public Baths in London,
That if the Use of Baths was well known, and if convenient Baths were made for
all Persons to Bathe in that had Occasion, 'twould save above a thousand Lives
in a Year in this City. This he asserts in his Appeal to the College of
Physicians concerning Baths. I shall not mention how many Learned and Ingenious
Authors have wrote concerning the Extraordinary Benefits of Bathing.

The SPAW-WATER is a Diuretic-Water; it works with some Bodies by Stool, but
for most part by Urine. It dilutes the Blood, dissolves those Salts that are
fixed upon the Nerves: It is very successfully drank in the Scurvie, Yellow
Jaundice, Stone and Strangury, Melancholy and Affects of the Spleen, great
Surfeits, Heats, and Hectics, an ill Habit of Body, loss of Appetite,
Preternatural Vomitings, Pains in the Head and Stomach, Thirst and Bitterness
in the Mouth, Obstructions of all sorts, Sharpness of Urine, Difficulty of
making Water, Ulcers in the Reins and Bladder, Tumors of the Hemorrhoids, or
the Piles, Cholicks, Bloody Flux, Megrim, Giddiness, Bleedings, Affects of the
Womb, etc. In fine, These Waters answer the Intentions of Tunbridge-Waters, but
are far more refined and pure, being separated from all those gross and impure
Parts which abound in other Waters. The ordinary Dose is Two Quarts, sometimes
Three.

Thus we have given a short Account of these Three Useful Contrivances, which
are designed for Public Good, and have mentioned their Chief Virtues; all
which, and some more, have already been experienced by their Use: A further
Account, with Discourses on the Manner of their Working these Effects, are at
large discovered in a small Treatise, written by Dr. Haworth, entitled, A
Description of the Duke's Bagnio and Bath, etc. Sold by Samuel Smith at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Price of the Bagnio is 5 s. 6 d. And the same Price for the Bath. The
Waters are 6 d. the Quart.

Tuesdays and Frydays are the Days of Reception for Women, the other Days for
Men, both in the Bagnio and Bath. The Waters are delivered every Morning, to al
sorts of People.

FINIS.

