The Triple Presage OF HENRY ALSTED.
FIrst, From the year 1603. to the year 1642. The universal Orb shall find a
very great alteration; for in the space of those forty years, the seventh
Revolution of the Planets runs to end, (a) and the numbers in Daniel and the
Apocalypse do confirm the same; Thus says he, nor unadvisedly in his Speculum
Mundi, inserted in his Chronoligie between the pages 482. and 483. The like to
these he brings forth in his Encycl. published in folio, ( Anno 1630) page 46.
Because (says he) the seventh Revolution of the Planets does fall upon the
sixth Millenary, the universal and that indeed very great alteration of this
world is portended from the year, 1604. even to the year, 1642. For this
seventh Revolution being finished, the Planets do return to their Beginnings
from whence the end of the Kingdoms of the world is collected by men skillful
in Astronomy.

Observe here, that our Author took these things at the first (unless I be
greatly deceived) out of Tycho Brahe himself; whose name nevertheless he
purposely concealeth. Let us therefore (if it please you) hear Ticho speaking
in his own style; this seventh Restitution of the Trigons (which began Anno
1603) from the creation of the world into their former estate, obtains a
certain hidden consideration of Sabbatisme of Rest, and denounces something
peculiar above others, and of great moment, etc.

Secondly, From this year current 1603. to 1694. shall be a Protasis or
Preparation to the thousand Apocalyptick years, which being over past the war
of Gog and Magog shad begin, and this shall be concluded by that glorious
coming of the Lord to Judgment; which when it shall be, he only knows. We
know this only by the Scriptures, that a thousand years, and the War of Gog
and Magog, (as it is called) shall precede or go before the last Judgment.

Thirdly, In Anno 1642. (to wit in Feb. 1642. and 1643. shall happen the
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in Aries the Ram (a sign of siery
Triplicity) which portendeth the Revolution of some new Government or Empire.

These are the words of Alsted, or peradventure some other skillful in
Astrology, out of whom (as his custom was) he transcribed the same. For my
part I will not rashly interpose my small Judgment of the decrees of this
combination, much less foretell what sorrow thereby may be signified unto us
even now instant from above. I am no Caldean, neither know I the Celestial
Signs: Those that suppose God openly signifies his pleasure unto men by
Letters written in Heaven, or that the Changes of Commonwealths and Religions
are described in the most excellent Regiment of the celestial motions, may
reap this Harvest, take the charge upon them, and with my consent attribute
unto themselves the gift of Prophecy. Surely, I giving small credit, (which I
ingenuously confess) to Astronomantick doctrine, have determined wholly to
forbear all explication of Significations: Nevertheless I do wish that all
and every one whatsoever do expect that saving and most glorious day of our
Lord Christ's appearance to be warned by this most ominous Aspect, that they
awaking from security (wherein the greatest part of mankind under this last age
of the decayed world lies buried) would forthwith reform their Christian
lives, and so prepare themselves as if they were even now to entertain the
Lord Christ. And so much concerning these things.

And now I will somewhat more briefly touch the said meeting or conjunction
threatening most cruel and horrid wars, most vehement plagues, and other
poisoning diseases in the year enfuing.

Ecquid portendat terris Deus ille Deorum.
Norit, and oftendent tempore fata suo.
What it portends to mankind, God does know,
And in their time the firm decrees will show.
An Addition of the fiery Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the year 1642.
1643. which denounces many calamities to the World, or certain Regions
thereof.
PTolomy Cardan, etc. And all the Astrologers of the meaner sort do maintain,
that the most ponderous conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter portendeth terrible
wars, decays of Kingdoms, translations of Governments, mortal plagues, and the
most prodigious of prodigious things of that kind: (c) On the other side,
almost all our Divines as also many Astronomers of the best rank, do
exceedingly deride those things, only as melancholy dreams, and their great
volumnes, do judge mere hodgepodges of most frivolous toys (as the judgments
of Haly, the conjunctions of Albuma, and the Aphorisms of Cardanus, most
worthy to feel the fire, and be charmed with the smoke. I am not he that will
interpose my selle an Areopagite or a Palaemon, between so many and so great
men most courageously contending, neither is it my office to compound so great
controversies agitated with such fervor on either fide, since my nature has
always hitherto abhorred to foretell events from the Stars; I confess that
the supercelestiall Bodies according to their Aspects, and diverse Angles
beholding, do prevail over these subcelestiall bodies, I confess also that
the meeting of the superior Planets (which the Annalls of all Ages do
restifie) are accompanied for the most part with an Iliad of evils, and
consequently have much efficacy and portent: but that whatsoever it is, with
Ticho Brahe in the like matter, I suppose is placed out of man's knowledge and
determination; wherefore since my mind does waver in the balance, inclining
both ways: I am resolved to supersede or omit (if any thing should be
attributed to conjunctions) the most dire prediction whatsoever it be of the
effects of this presaging conjunction: I am not, as a little before I
signified, of their Tribe that do boldly pronounce things to come of the
Stars, or of those that feigning divine inspiration, would be accounted
Prophets by the credulous and superstitious common people, though by men that
have more wit and learning, they be esteemed Impostors: Briefly, here is no
need indeed of my Conjectures, (d) the Belgic Compilers of Prognostications, I
well know in their divinations from year to year by occasion hereof, do
interweave certain Prophecies, or rather fooleries, whereby they immodestly
cast no light blemish, as well on the Art as on themselves. The French Almanac
makers also (a Gods name) as so many Interpreters of Heaven, and the Stars
Chamber-fellowes, do set before your eyes, and as it were with the finger
show, in their yearly shootings forth, all the evils and more described in the
fatal Tables of Heaven. In the interim, I much marvel that both of them do
find those on whom they may put them; seeing (to speak as the case is) it
skilleth no more what those raw unlearned fellows shall judge of this unluckie
Aspect, or other placing of the Stars, then if the blind or bleer-eyed
should judge of colors, which they cannot readily discern. For such
Prognosticators use to heap together in one medley without election or
exquisite judgment, many and vain things out of many Astronomers futilitie or
foolish babbling. And so it comes to pass that scarce in many pages, can be
found one line that may altogether agree with truth and experience: (e)
Moreover, is there any credit to be given unto Soothsayers prophesying
public calamities, change of Kingdoms, deaths of great men, and destructions
of Cities, where for the most part they shamefully err in foretelling
Meteors, as rain, and other missile changes of the Air, etc. which the
Prognostications in great number every year published, may sufficiently prove,
foretelling the dispositions of every day, often contrary and most often false.

Whatsoever it be, if any contemner of Divine tokens through the insolency of
his wit, do babble that the meeting of Saturn and Jupiter, happens according
to the usual course of nature, and therefore signifies nothing; that Prophet
of Germany, thrice famous Luther, (not I, a man of no name) shall answer him,
saying, Because it seldom happens, though it, has natural causes, it
portendeth somewhat. The which very same also, one of the Nobles of Urania,
affirms in these words, What is annual and for the continual periods less
unaccustomed, that does the less trouble the rule of the worldly Occonomie,
then that which seldom happens. The which amongst other things (he goes on)
the conjunctions of Planets which seldom happen, do show by manifest
Indication of their effects. Moreover, the Sun that great Viceroy of Heaven,
and most bright lamp of the World, and the other luminary of this universe the
Moon do presignifie certain supernatural things; so often as they incurte
defects, or be in Eclipse, (f) from their appointed ministrics apparanly
deficient, which they plainly admit in their natural courses, of which thing
that man of (g) many tongues, and also great divine and sometimes the Miracle
of Preachers, now in the greatest delights with the Blessed was not ignorant.
Likewise, that most specious meteor and most beautiful Phanomenon or
appearance, Eccl. 43.11.12. Iris, or vulgarly called the Celestial Bow, (g)
though it be a natural thing, viz. an emphasis in the air from the
Sunbeams reflecting on a dewie Cloud, yet it does significantly express by
its azure Circle appearing in the Clouds, that Covenant which God most
merciful made with men after the Deluge; namely, that this world should be no
more destroyed by water. And also by another Cloudy Circle which is seen near
it, that which elsewhere S. Peter does Prophecy without doubt seems to be
signified, namely, that the world shall one day be consumed with sire, the
second Epist. 3.7.10.12. Let him that desires to read more of the malignity of
this conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, go to the Appendix of a Book lately
published in English touching the Comet in 1618.

Hitherto, we have delivered nothing but thunder, greatly to be feared even of
us English, for our late divarication from the even poyse of Piety, hence to
the superstition of the Gentiles, thence to the Cyclopean contempt of sacred
things: Hitherto I say, our book has again and again inculcated, (h) Woe,
woe, as that Prophet (and the same most unhappy) of Jerusalem, so that any one
appalled or affrighted may say of this Book, as some one of the name of Allant
while he lived, of the Church of Rome.

Bella sonat, sonat arma, minas sonat, omnia Martis.
War, arms, and threats, it founds, all things of Mars.
Wherefore lest the minds of mortal men with so many portents and so great
evils imminent, should be sore troubled; Take the Prophecy of Tycho Brahe of
the most happy and more then golden age that will follow a while after, which
may be a comfort in this age of the vilest mettle and dregs of ages,
especially to us in these most dangerous times.

The most comfortable Prophecy of Tycho Brabe, touching the most blessed age
even now at hand, which to gratify those that are greatly perplexed, I offer
for a Conclusion.
I Hold it worthy of observation, that even as the Trigonick Restitutions which
were exhibited in odd number, as the first, third, and fifth, were healthful
to the world so I may foretell this seventh (which began in 1603) especially
delighting in odd number to be of a certain great good and more happy estate:
neither also are these different from the most ancient prophesies of most wise
and divinely illuminated men, (k) who prophesied that before the universal
conflagration or burning of all things, a certain peaceable and concordant age
should for a time be one earth, wherein the tumultuos confusions of politic
administrations or governments, and variety of Religious should be transmuted
or changed, and adopted or fitted to a more conform Analogy of Gods will. The
which we may plainly gather out of the Prophets themselves, who foretold that a
certain golden age should sometime be on the earth, wherein men shall make
plough shares of their swords, and sithes of their spears; neither shall one
people bear arms against another, nor learn to fight any more; they shall
live under their Vines and figtrees and none shall fray them away. As Micheas
the Prophet has it, chap. 4. and Isa. chap. 11. does prophecy of the same in
this manner: The Wolf shall converse with the Lamb, the Leopard lie down by
the Goat, and a little Child shall lead a Calfe and a Lion coupled together,
and the Cow and Bear shall feed together, their young ones lying together, and
the Lion like the Ox shall feed of straw, and the sucking Infant playing upon
the nest the of Aspe, and when he is weaned, he shall put his hand into the
Cockatrices Den: There shall be no evil, or wickedness done in my holy
H^ll, because the earth shall be full of so great knowledge of the Lord, even
as the Sea is covered with waters: Then also those things which, I say 60. are
referred to the mystical Jerusalem, or the state of Christianity more perfect
then hitherto, where amongst other things it is said, For brass I (...) in
gold, for iron silver, for wood brass, for stones iron: and I will turn thy
oppression into peace, and thy exactions intorightousnesse; Cruelty shall not
then be heard in thy land, nor destruction or calamity within thy borders, thy
walls thou shall call health, and thy Gates praises. And what goes before and
follows, where at length he thus concluds. I the Lord will bring that to pass
in its time, There are also found more places, as well in the Prophets as in the
Apocalypse promising an unwonted and little hoped for felicity (of earthly
things, surely, so great as hitherto has been in no age of the world. That
therefore the truth of the prophecy may be fulfilled, which cannot deceive
(for they are altogether uttered by the truth-telling spirit of God) it is
certain that this will be before the universal destruction of things, What
then, if in this new passage of the Trigons, all those things have their event
allotted.

(l) All these things full of vigor, Tycho Brahe never to be named without a
new title of praise, a man also nobly learned in divine knowledge. There will
be happily some Novices and Tycho-carpers, to whom a man so great will seem
exceeding rash, yea, half a Heretic, and his prophetic words, an old Wives
dotage, and with one foot at the least to enter on the threshold of herefie;
They saying with S. Paul's Antagonists, Acts 17.19. May we not know what this
now Doctrine whereof thou speak is? And with the wrested words of Saint
Ierom, Whosoever thou art that maintainest new decrees, I pray thee why, after
four hundred years (a thousand and six hundred) do thou ondeavour to teach
us what we knew not before? Why, do thou publish what Peter and Paul would
not utter? the Christian world has subsisted to this day without that Doctrine
of yours, we being old, will hold that belief, wherein being children, we
were born.

To these I answer, that surely this Doctrine of the Millenary felicity is not
new, yesterday, or of a very late invention, but worthy of reverence for the
very ancientnesse thereof: forasmuch as it flourished a thousand and four or
five hundred years sithence, and almost in the very first beginnings of the
rising Church. And truly, (m) most holy and learned men, in the next Ages after
the birth of Christ, have taught things not only consonant or agreeable with
those of Brahe, but also some things somewhat hard, and more unpleasing to the
ears of common Divines, without any filth or stain of Heresy or of declining
from uprightness of belief, touching the Sabbatisme or time of rest to come
upon the earth: (n) Others have taught a double resurrection, first, a
particular resurrection of some faithful people, especially Martyrs and
Confessors; secondly, an universal resurrection, which the Catholic Church do
firmly believe as a principal Article of Christianity, and have judged it to
be between either of the golden Ages of 1000 years; read gentle Reader, and
perpend or diligently consider, Apoc. 5.10. and 20.4.5.6. where these things
(by my Interpretation) are written as in the beams of the Sun.

Neither is there any cause that the said Resurrection of some whom God
peculiarly segregated to receive such reward, may make any one doubtful,
seeing such particular Resurrection happened when Christ, the lover of
mankind, suffered, or (which by the sacred History seems unto me more likely
to betrue) when he rose again: At which time there arose together with him our
first Parents the holy Patriarchs and Matriarchs, (o) pious Kings, and divine
Prophets, that is to say Adam, Eve, Noah, Abraham with Sarah, Isaac, Jacob,
Job, Moses, David, or at least (as others are of opinion) John the Baptist,
Zachary, Elizabeth, Simeon, (o) Joseph the Husband of the blessed Virgin,
together with others that saw Christ in the flesh: (p) For seeing these were
known to Christ's Disciples, they could therefore the better testify of his
Resurrection.

Moreover, others of the elders and chief Doctors of the Church have taught
that Christ himself from the first Resurrection to the second shall remain on
the earth, and reign there 1000 years with his Saints and Elect in very great
peace, and with incredible felicity of all delights abounding every where.
That eloquent and fluent writer worthy to be compared with Cicero alone, the
most eloquent of Romulus his Nephews (according to the judgment of Heinsius in
his Oration, Pro Biblioth 3. page 29) may speak for all, The Son of the
highest and greatest God shall come to judge the living and the dead, He shall
converse with men 1000 years, and shall rule them with most upright government,
and then they shall be living in their bodies and not die, but through the
same 1000. years they shall beget an infinite multitude, and their Offspring
shall be holy and dear unto God. (p) And those that shall be raised from
beneath, shall be as Judges to the being. And after a few things inserted, he
adds, The Moon shall receive the luster of the Sun, and shall be no more
diminished, and the Sun shall be seven times brighter then now it is: And the
Earth shall open her fruitfulness, and shall of her own accord bring forth
most plentiful fruits; the rocks of the mountains shall sweat houey, wines
shall run down in rivers, and floods with milk shall abound. And presently
after, There shall be in all this time no bloody beasts, no birds of prey, but
all things shall be peaceable and pleasant. Lions and Calves shall stand
together at the stall; the Wolf shall not prey on the Lamb; the Dog shall
not hunt; Hawks and Eagles shall not hurt; Infants shall play with Serpents. To
conclude, then shall come to pass those things which the Poets declared to be
done in the goldentimes, Saturn reigning. Afterward he added to the former
things, thirteen Verses of Virgil. out of the fourth Eclogue, but their order
changed after this manner, 38.39.40.41.28.29.30.42.43.44.45.21.22. Therefore
men shall live a most peaceable and plentiful life, and shall likewise reign
with God. And the Kings of the Gentiles shall come from the borders of the
Earth with gifts and presents to adore and honor the great King, etc. This is
the doctrine of the holy Prophets, which we Christians do follow; this is
Christian wisdom. Such things Lactantius lib. 7. Div. Instit. does recite,
wherein some sayings at the first sight specious, but more deeply looked into,
except as the sayings of man (to use the words of Paul) I cannot approve.
Nevertheless with a grateful and benign affection I judge the Author to be
excused; for the great number of illustrious Writers both of the East and West
Churches, which before him seemed as it were to give their authority unto this
opinion.

(q) But why should I cite the Name or Words of Lactantius for confirmation of
this opinion; Papias the Bishop S. John's Disciple, Irenaus, and Iustine Martyr,
most near the Apostles times; and almost even with those, Tortullian, and
Hilary, and though more sparingly, Saint Augustine, and Ierom his Contemporary
(good God how great men) have with eloquent and openwords almost confirmed the
same opinion.

(r) Yea further this opinion of the Thousands, not only increases, but waxes
strong with the modern (to pass over the middle) Divines of greatest name,
namely Piscator a notable Commentator of the holy Bible, Coelius secundus a man
of great knowledge, Alph. Conradus, Matthias Cotterius, have fully yielded to
the same, though in certain small things here and there they vary amongst
themselves. And above all Advocates Card. Gallus, in his Clavis Prophetica, Mr.
Mede our Countryman (past all exception) in his Clavis Apoc. Mr. Archer of
the personal Reign of Christ published in English Anno 1641, and lastly that
Henry Alsted most conversant in the Apocalypse, most full of most deep senses,
and high mysteries in his truly golden work inscribed Diatribe of the thousand
Apocalyptick years (which is a little Book, but of great sedulity and
diligence) do manfully and solidly defend the same opinion. Forasmuch as he
taking away all scruple of doubting in this matter, as one who likes and has
a care of these divine secrets worthy to be known, translated the same most
worthy to be wished, out of the Latin into the English tongue.

Neither should it seem wonderful, that the most able part of the Ministers
of the holy word, otherwise very studious of the truth, in this most learned
age does not so suddenly assent, seeing the contrary opinion from the time of
Saint Ierom even to ours, for the most part has prevailed. For as in other
Arts of inferior degrees, so also in Divinity, many great men suffer
themselves very hardly to be moved from the opinions which at first they
learned. Notably and to the purpose says Tycho Brahe himself (s) Men
otherwise not unlearned, doeso religiously observe those things, which they
have received by inveterate authority of their Ancestors, that although plainly
and by themselves without a Monitor, they observe those things to be (...);
they account it a heinous offense and impute it to lightness to depart from
their opinion long approved, and by diuturnall use con^^^^^^: And therefore it
is now no more marvel that men do so contend in matter of Religion for their
Ancestors opinions, howsoever the holy Sereptures may openly enough sometimes
evince the contrary. (t) And agreeably to this elsewhere, Such is the nature of
mankind, that they may not presently desist from their long received and
approved opinions, though erroneous; but a commutation or change by little and
little, if not otherwise, may be made from darkness to light: even as we see
in the appearing morn those things which the light of the day not suddenly,
but by degrees does minister unto us, until the Sun it self risen drives
away all darkness. Some such thing also in matter of Religion appears to be
done, and it is to be hoped even as the morning does never suffer a Relapse
into nocturnall darkness, howsoever sometimes her progress is obscured by
thicker Clouds: So also that the truth it self, whether Theological or
Philosophical, shall not suffer a Retrocesse or going backwards; but
successively by little and little put forth it self out of the darkness
wherewith it is over-clouded. Thus far goes Tycho Brahe, whom we so often
before have very honorably mentioned. Lastly, in what year this new world and
halfe-heavenly condition of mortal men shall happen, and the Church militant,
if I may so speak, shall begin to triumph, it is a matter very disputable.
Some do assign one year, some another; yet they all agree in one full voice,
that it is near and even at our doors. Alsted the Standard Bearer of
millenaries in our age appoints the year of Grace, 1694. to be the first of
this most wished age. Others say it is most uncertain, whose judgment I hold
to be the most certain. I wish and wish again that this millenary Kingdom,
if God shall be so pleased, may happen in our days. I will close up this
pleasing contemplation (which has refreshed again, as I hope, Those whom the
terrifying premises dismayed) with the words of Saint John the Divine, or rather
of the holy Ghost guiding his pen;

Apoc. 20.6. Blessed is he that has part in the first Resurrection.
Grant, O Lord, that we may be partakers thereof.
FINIS.
The Annotations whereunto you are respectively directed by the Alphabeticall
Letter in this precedent Work.
(a) The great Revolutions, or (which is even as) the greatest Conjunctions of
Saturn and Jupiter, have happened almost in the years shown in this Table.

Revol. From the beginning of the world. Before Christ Notable Persons. 0 000
4000 Adam 1 800 3200 Enoch 2 1600 2400 Noah 3 2400 1600 Moses 4 3200 800 Elias
After 5 4000 Christ Jesus Chr. 6 4800 800 Char. Gr. 7 5600 1600 K. James.

(b) God speaks with men not only by the mouths of his holy Prophets, but
sometimes by the Elements composed into diverse Forms and Images for their
Terror.

(c) Our chief Antiquary has very well noted, that the Conjunctions and
Oppositions of Saturn and Jupiter have been mortal to us of England.

For mine own part, I have observed the English Sweat, or sweating sickness,
has gone thrice over all this Kingdom. First, in Anno 1485. a little after
the great Conjunction in Scorp. Again, but more mildely, yet accompanied with
a plague, in Anno 1518. after the opposition of Saturn and Jupiter in Scorpio
and Taurus. Lastly, in Anno 1551. when another Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter did execute her powers.

(d) The false Astrologers in their most frivolous Prognostications use to
prescribe indifferently to All borne even under a different Thema of Heaven, on
what day it is good or bad to cut a vein, purge the body with a medicine, draw
forth blood with Cupping Glasses, or leeches, travel into a strange Country,
shave the head or the beard, or pair their nails; Also wars, the death of
Princes, dearnesse of Victuals, and I know not what, with a shameless brow
they blush not to foretell.

(e) One to try the truth of this Art, forthwith in the beginning of the year
took his Calendar, and where the Author had set down rain he writ fair
weather, where calm, wind; where clear, cloudy: And at the end of the year,
having summed up the Predictions on either part, he found himself a better and
more certain Astrologer by many parts then the Almanac maker. I. H.

(f) Be advised by those delightful and also grave Sermons which are
studiously read almost of all men, made by the Bishop of Winchester, fol. 719.

(g) If there be any omen in Ecclipses, surely very much evil will be brought
by that horrid Eclipse of the Sun (and the greatest of all that we
Britains have seen in many ages) Aug. 2. 1654. For the whole Luminary about
ten of the Clock in the forenoone, the Moon being darkened, shall lie hid
half a quarter of an hour, whereby deep darkness shall possess London, and
the neighboring places, chiefly Kingstone, unless a gross circumsolar air
do bring it relief.

(h) Jesus the Brother of Ananias, a husbandman, seven years and a half
continually cried, Woe to Jerusalem; At length he added, woe also to me, and at
the same words, being stricken from a sling, he gave up the Ghost, Gesep. lib.
5. of the Destruction of Jerusalem, Chap. 44.

(i) The first Trigonick Restitution was finished in Enoch and the flourishing
estate of the Church. The third in Moses, and the deliverance of the people out
of the Bondage of Egypt. The fifth in Christ and the reparation of humane
salvation.

(k) The Ancient Patrons of this opinion, touching the future felicity of the
Church in this life, confirmed it out of Mar. 10.30. (see Maldenat in this
place) out of Matthew. 5.5. (D. Heart Conc. fol. 291) Chiefly out of the
Revelation 5.10. and 20. verse. 4.5.6. whereunto add 66 places which Alsted out
of V. and N. T. alleges in his Diatr. de mill annis Apocal.

(l) Note that Cerinthus and his followers, called Millenaries, were condemned
by that name of open heresy, because they most pleasantly dreamed, or
supposed, that this Earth should be not so much a paradise of spiritual
delights as a stews of most filthy voluptuousness, Eusebius. lib. 3. chap. 25.
Aug. of Heresy chap. 8. And the same opinion is held not only by the
circumcised Jews, but also by our rebaptized Anabaptists.

(m) Many Ecclesiastical men and Martyrs have said these things, Ierom lib. 4.
upon Jeremy.

(n) The first Resurrection seems to be due unto the Martys and Confessors as
their prerogatives, because they glorified Chirst before others here in their
bodies, nothing terrified with the cruel threats and torments of men; for it
is just (faith Tertul.) with God to exalt his servants when they are afflicted
in his name, Lib. 3. Contra Marc.

Many have many things of these first fruits of the Resurrection, Vir. Pineda.
Salian, Annals, tom. 6. fol. 422. 433. By. Bilson, fol. 217. and Will. Comm.
upon Genesis 256. Lorin. upon Acts 7. page 29. and abundantly D. Kellet in his
Miscellany part. 2. and here and there in page 12. and 240.

(o) Gerson is of opinion that Joseph then rose and appeared to his most
honored spouse, and comforted her, Barrards Evang. Hist. tom^ page 311.

(p) The Poets dream of the golden age arose from hence, because the Prophets
do so deliver and declate many things, as even finished: For Visious by Gods
Spirit were objected to their eyes, and they saw those things in their sight as
to be done and ended: when same had by little and little divulged their
prophesies, they thought that all those things were complete in the old times,
Lact.

(q) S. Ierom in his Book De virisillustrib. does recite a numerous Catalogue
of the ancient Fathers that were of this opinion.

(r) D. Hakwill in his Apology (edition the second) page 476. commends many
of his time, vehemently giving their suffrages to the Army of the foresaid
reverend Antiquity contending for the Millenary Kingdom.

(s) Tycho Brahe Astron. progymn. tom. page 541. and 512.

(t) Though the greater part of our fresh Divines, borne away with the violence
of the common torrent, think otherwise; nevertheless, it is nothing prejudic
all to this most divulged and most received opinion in the prime ages of the
Church.

FINIS.

