THE WONDER, OR, PROPOSITIONS FOR A SAFE AND WELL-GROVNDED PEACE.

Proposed by a Parliament man, full of Honor, Honesty, and Satisfaction, And
most worthy to be pursued, and Embraced by all Patriots and true-hearted
Englishmen.

anthropomorphized decorative flourish

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648.

The PREFACE.
HAving since the first beginning of this Parliament observed the differences
therein, both in their breeding and continuance; the people holding themselves
grieved with illegal pressures put upon them, both in the freedom of their
Persons, the propriety of their Goods, and the liberty of their Consciences;
and these wrought by particular men for sinister ends by their interests in
Court, to the disturbance of the quiet and peace of the Kingdom, as it stood
established by Law: These occasioned a desire by most men, not only to prevent
the like for the future, but also the punishing of such as were conceived to be
Authors, Procurers, or Supporters thereof, thereby to deter others from doing
the like hereafter. And this trench't upon both Courtiers, Lawyers, and
Divines. The means to reconcile and prevent which, as the times now are, has
incited me, being a Member of this present Parliament; and conceiving my self
in duty bound to tender my best advice for the speedy ending of this most
barbarous and unnatural War that is now raging amongst us, which can produce
no better effect, if not timely ended, then a general destruction of the
Nation, who are now become a Scorn and Contempt to all Neighbors, (who were
before looked upon with great honor and respect, yea, not without envy.)
Besides, the high wrath of Almighty God, by the courses held and observed in
the prosecution thereof: I profess by this advice, not to look upon my self,
but merely the good of my native Country; and that, which I conceive my self
bound to, both by the Oath of Allegiance, Supremacy, and the Protestation which
I took this Parliament. And this without respect of any party, futher then my
judgment shall lead me to. And I shall likewise give this testimony of my own
sincerity herein, that I being a Commoner of this Kingdom, and knowing no
where else to live but in England, and here, under a peaceable and free
Government. In all just things, shall adhere to the Commonwealth, and the
liberties of the Subject; yet no way hereby to detract from the King, what may
justly be due to the Regal Power, and which it can no way be abridged of,
whithout too much diminution: I have always conceived, and still do, that the
Regal Power ought to be limited by the Law; And if it be debarred of its due
course in the execution thereof, God defend, but the people upon general
complaints should have remedy therein, especially to prevent the like in
succeeding times, considering the Government we live in is a mixed Government,
by consent between the King and the People, as to my sense does manifestly
appear by the words of the Oath of Coronation; which being observed, the
people, as bound in Conscience, ought to yield the King all due Honor and
Obedience to His just Commands. Thus I have declared unto you, the opennesse of
my heart, herein leaving the following advise to your best judgments, with my
Prayers to God, to give such success therein, as I, in the Integrity of my
heart do desire.

A Ready way, as is conceived, to Compose the present differences as the times
now are.
By a Member of the House of Commons this present Parliament.
1. THat the King be immediately sent for to come to Hampton Court, without any
conditions or guard whatsoever, but according to His Majesty's own pleasure.

2. That the King, before His coming to Hampton, This is as much as the King
can do, or the people can require.
do Publish His Proclamation of free Pardon to all His Subjects of what
quality or condition soever, and for all faults whatsoever, against Himself,
His Crown and Dignity.

3. Without which He cannot administer Justice to His people.
That the King be forthwith restored to all His just Revenues and Regal Power,
which by Law is due to Him.

4. This in substance, being but the same Oath as He takes at his Coronation,
and iterated only to keep more fresh in memory: And being presidented by Magna
Charta which was confirmed 30 times at least: the first out of every succeeding
Parliament.
That His Majesty take a Corporal Oath not to Govern any way but according to
the known Laws of the Kingdom. And whosoever Sub-minister of His shall do
otherwise, to the prejudice of the Subject, either in point of liberty of their
persons, or propriety of their goods, He will grant them no pardon, but leave
them to the justice of the Law. And likewise to give His Royal Assent to an
Act of Parliament for His Successors to take the like Oath, the beginning of
every Parliament before both Houses, for the same.

5. That a Proclamation be published for the Disbanding of all Soldiers within
the Kingdom, and bringing in of their Arms within ten days after such
Proclamation upon pain of High Treason, against all Refusers and their
Abettors.

6. That the Church Government may stand as it is Established by Law, having
respect to tender Consciences until such time as it shall be altered by due
course of Law.

7. This being the motion of the Dutch Ambassadors, who came over to intercede
a peace between the King and His people.
That His Majesty will be pleased to promise the speedy convening of a
National Synod of forty Divines of His Majesty's own Subjects. And that the
Reformed Protestant Churches may be entreated to send some of their Divines,
such as themselves shall make choice of to assist therein, for Establishing and
Rectifying such an Unity and Conformity with all other Protestant Churches as
shall be by consent agreed upon, whereby to preserve Unity with them, both in
Doctrine and Discipline; which agreement His Majesty will Consent to have
confirmed by Act of Parliament.

8. This is as much as can be required for the peoples security both for the
present and future.
That His Majesty will be pleased to promise to give the Royal Assent to such
Bills to be made Laws, as shall be presented unto Him by both Houses, in a
full, free, and Legal Parliament, which shall no way entrench upon His
Majesty's Legal Prerogative, Honor, or Profit, but only such as tend to the
better Government, and ease of the Subjects, for the future.

9. This is presidented by Magna Charta, when it was first granted.
That His Majesty will be pleased to grant these for the present under His
Hand. And which He will confirm at His first coming to Liberty to some House
of His own.

10. And if these shall be refused to be done, either by King or Parliament,
the blame may justly be imputed to lie there: And are very necessary to precede
a Personal Treaty, wherein all Interests may be taken into consideration.

FINIS.

