Another great and bloody FIGHT IN THE NORTH, BETWEEN The Forces under the
command of James Duke of Hambleton, Lord General of the Scottish Army, and the
Parliaments Forces under the immediate conduct of Major Genesis Lambert, upon
Wednesday last near the Borders of Yorkshire.

WITH The particulars of the said Fight, and the number that were killed, and
Cullers taken, and the Scots resolution concerning Lieut. Genesis Cromwell. Also,
the E of Calender marched into Northumberland, with Deer Saundy Hambleton the
Scots famous Engineer; and their Resolution touching Colchester.

LIKEWISE, Sad and dangerous Tidings from Colchester, and the sallying out of
Sir Charles Lucas upon the Parliaments Forces, his digging of great Trenches to
swallow them up, and their resolution to maintain their Works to an inch of
ground.

London Printed for general satisfaction, 1648.

(...) swer them again, with the same which they meat to us; and I believe they
have paid for their sallying at a high rate: for we have killed about twenty of
the troop called the shavers, Sir Charles Lucas his Major, and diverse others of
eminency, the loss of whom they much lament, We have also killed their chief
Gunner, and our great Guns plays hard upon them, doing great execution. The
last night they made another sally, and thought to have surprised some of our
Guards, but by timely discovery were prevented, and made good their retreat
without loss.

Those who come out of the town say, they begin to eat horse flesh, whether
for need, or as a dainty, we know not: they are afraid of a storm, and in that
respect have provided whatever may defend themselves or offend us. They dig
deep holes in almost all the streets of this town, that so if we storm, our
horse should be useless; the high street is not pitied, for there they feed
their horses, giving them grass and nay upon stalls belonging to the shops.

It is further reported, that they have made two inner Works within the
walls, and have dug a deep trench under them, at least four yards deep, that in
ease our men should storm, their trenches should be the Gulf to swallow them:
in consideration whereof, it is conceived it will be very difficult work to
accomplish, and prejudicial for our Army to storm; but we doubt not but to
force them to conditions for surrender in a short time, or else become Master,
thereof by a famine in the town. The enemy maintains their quarters well, they
dispute every inch of ground, but in open places they are not so valiant. We
are put to exceeding hard duty for want of our own Soldiers.

When Caesar fought against Pompey in Greece, whose Army was not come to him,
only a numerous company unexperienced Roman gallants, Caesar got the better,
and gave this accyunt, he found the Generail with an Army, many of the
prisoners and dying Enemies, say that their plot was to bring in the King upon
the Parliament, not bp treaty but force, the means to effect it was by making
the Parliament odious, and chus to asperse them with reproaches from all sorts
of Pamphlets, whereby the people should be incensed against them, 2. To stir up
the people to p^tition acd mutiny. 3 Togather into arms, that then Cavaliers
who were to be confided in, carry on the work and not raw discontented country
men, who only long for peace. To weaken the Army by making them odious,
putting them upon action in all parts, that they appear formidable no where,
nor able to resist numerous risings. 5 To make most noise there where there was
least design to fright the Parliament with the Scots coming, when the
intention was to be strongest in the South. 6 To raise, if not destroy the
Parl. or force them to yield to the King.

Colchester July 29. 1648. There is a great Rumor amongst the Royalists in
London, that Major Genesis Lambert is totally routed, and that He has lost 17.
Foot Cullers, and 9 of Horse; which Report is false, some skirmishing has been
between them, and the Major General (as we hear) is retreated toward
Cleveland: for your further satisfaction, I refer you to the enclosed Letter.



Terrible News from the North, being a true Relation of another great Fight
between the English and the Scots near Yorkshire.
SIR,
DUke Hamilton is upon his march toward Bows and Stainmore, and thought to
have forced his way at Stainmore passage, but was presented; for Major General
Lambert having placed a very considerable party to secure the said Bridge and
passage, and a Briggade of the Scots coming up, thinking to pass the River,
found opposition, and the quarrel disputed for the space of two hours and had
not another Briggade of the Scots come up, we had been Masters of the day; but
seeing our selves over-powred, made an honorable retreat toward Barnard
Castle, which was six or seven miles distant from us, the enemy pursued about
three miles, but at a distant, they over-powr us exceedingly in Foot, and have
great numbers of horse. In this conflict we lost about 30. men, and brought off
about 20 which were wounded; the loss of the enemy is thought to be far more.

We are daily in action, and have hard duty, our numbers being not potent
enough. We expect Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell and his Forces daily, whom the Scots
say they will soundly cudgel, and are resolved to fight him, though he be
never so strong. ^ndeed, they have a very potent Army, besides, they expect
3000. from Major General Monro, and another Army from Scotland, to march by
the way of Berwick.

Thorney house is surrendered to Col. Charles Fairfax, by the Bees of
Pentefract. A Narrative of their proceedings, I have here inserted, viz.

Col. Fairfax his Letter to Col. Pauldin Governor of Thorney house for the
King.
Sir, I am engaged to make good my proffer. The Rendition of Thornhil house will
forfeit no Loyalty; though blood be precious, yet we cannot condescend to so
long a cessation as to expect any answer from Pontefract, but a speedy
surrender to.

C. Fairfax.
Thornhill 16 of July, 1648.
To the Governor of Thornhill Hall.
Sir, You may not expect any thing here but what you can win with your Sword,
until I receive further commands from my Superiors.

Yours, Thomas Paulden.

Sir, If God shall give you so compassionate a heart to pity the lives of so
many of your Soldiers, with diverse others that be now in your Garrison, we
shall become humble suitors unto the Parliament (whose former mercies some of
you have liberally tasted) that you may have the latitude of favor, whereof
your several conditions will admit you capable. But if our offer be now
rejected, you must expect a pursuance of our advantages with all extremity. And
be assured the blood of those that die in the slaughter, (a work we abhor, if
you did not enforce it) will be required at your hands, and of them that advise
you.

C. Fairfax.
Thornhill 18. July, 1648.
Sir, To infer your conclusion, that the blood spilt shall be required at our
hands, before you have proved that we ought not to defend, our right and the
Kings, with our blood, is very bad logic; your Rhetoric not so pregnant, as
may persuade us to assent to so dishonorable conditions, upon so small reason;
but in order to the tenderness we have of Christian blood, if you please to
appoint two of like condition with ours mentioned in my Letters to Sir Henry
Cholmley, and send us Hostages, we shall embrace a Parley. This is all can be
returned from,

Your servant, Thomas Palden.
July 18. 1648.
To Colonel Fairfax these present.
The Earl of Calendar Lieut. Genesis to Duke Hambleton is marched over Berwick
bridge into England, with a second Army consisting of about 8000. with whom
comes Dear Saundy Hambleton the famous Engineer the L. Lanerick is Governor
of the town of Berwick. We hear that they have fallen upon Col. Lilburns
quarters in Northumberland, took about 27. prisoners, 50. horse, and two
Cullers. It is said, that they intend to march directly for Colche^ter, etc.

Barnard Castle July 27. 1648.
FINIS.

