THE Angels Oath, Time is no longer.

The KINGDOMS of this WORLD, are become the KINGDOMS of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever,

Revel. 10. 6. and 11, 15. A PROPHECY FROM Mr. Mason's People AT
WATER-STRATFORD.

London, Printed for the Author, 1694.

The Testimony of Valentine Evans.
WOE to London! Woe to England! Thou art that Servant which has known thy
Masters Will, but has not done it; but now thou shall be beaten with many
stripes. Oh! how Mercifully has GOD dealt with thee, by warning thee with
Judgments, and wooing thee with Mercies; and thou have been favored highly in
this respect; for the Revelation of Jesus Christ has been given out to us, and
the Messenger of Christ's Kingdom has been sent to us, and his way is prepared.

I Witness, the Midnight-Cry was a Message from GOD. I declare, the Two
Witnesses was a Message from God. I declare likewise, in the Name of GOD, that
the gathering of us to this place, was the Holy Will and Command of God. A few
days after we were gathered, I Witness, the Person of the Blessed Son of GOD
appeared in this place to his Servant, but you have scoffed and despised, and
forged Lies, and called these things Delusions: But what will you do now the
Lord sends you word, by this fellow Servant, from the Oath of Jesus Christ,
That there is Time no longer.

A Word to you Wise Virgins, you that love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity;
you that have spoke or acted against these things, you are guilty with the
Foolish Virgins, and have exposed your selves to Wrath; but, Blessed be God,
you are not under the Law, but under Grace; but you must apply your selves to
the Blood of Christ, and repent for what you have said, thought, or done
against these things, for GOD is a great God, and you will Tremble for a time
for slighting these things, Isa. 35. 3, 4. strengthen ye the weak hands, and
comfort the feeble knees: say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong,
fear not: Behold, your God will come with Vengeance, even God with a
Recompense, he will come and save you; but it must be in his own way, and that
is in this place, which the Lord has called Zion, where the Lord has taken
possession in his Kingdom, Isa. 25. 9. And it shall be said in that day, Lo,
this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us; this is the Lord,
we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice in his salvation. Verse.
10. For in this Mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest: It is said so this
day, in this Mountain, blessed be God: Where the Body is, there the Eagles
shall be gathered together, Luke 17. 37. And now it is our Duty to look for the
breaking forth of these things visibly, with an immediate expectation.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with all you that love Him in
sincerity. Amen.

The Testimony of Thomas Harris.
I Bear Witness to you, in the Name of GOD, That this Servant that Writes to
you this Little Book, is one of the Anointed Ones that stood by the GOD of the
whole Earth, Zech. 4. 14. and by the Will and Appointment of GOD Almighty, this
Servant did bear Record to the Word of GOD, and to the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, for Two Years together, Rev. 1. 2. and now Blessed is he that has
read, and they that have heard the Words of the Prophecy of this Book: and I
declare, in the Name of GOD, that this Book that comes to you, is the open Book
out of Christ's Hand, Rev. 10. 2. and it is turned into Bitterness in the
Bowels of this Nation, Lamentations, Mournings, and Woe: And now the LORD comes
like a Refiner's Fire, and like Fuller's Soap: But now Blessed are all they
that put their Trust in CHRIST.

Revelations 10. 6. and 11. 15. Time is no longer. The kingdoms of this world
are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for
ever and ever.
IT is the Will and Pleasure of God, that his dealings to this poor miserable
Nation, should be given an Account of, for a Warning and Witness to all round
about, that they take heed, that they do not dally and triffle with the Word of
God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ; but Fear and Tremble before a Crowned
Solomon, and give Glory to him, for the hour of his Judgment is come. Worship
that God that has made the new Heavens and the new Earth. Thou shall break
them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel.
Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed ye judges of the earth. Serve
the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the son, lest he be angry,
and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little: blessed are
all they that put their trust in him, Psalm. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Now go, write it
before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to
come for ever and ever: That this is a rebellious people, lying children, that
will not hear the law of the Lord: Which say to the seers, See not; and to the
prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things,
prophesy deceits: Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the
holy one of Israel to cease from before us, Isa. 30. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Sad and woeful Accounts to be given up, what entertainment the Word of God, and
the Testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ met with, that was first given forth in
England; we witness, the Trumpet was sounded several Years of the Coming and
Kingdom of our Lord, but they all slumbered and slept; but they was told again
and again, how often that Word was commanded in the Scripture Watch, and that
the day was come, God commanded every one to it.

The Lord threatens to cut them down; for he had looked for Fruit Year after
Year, but found none; loath was he to strike, tryes them one Year more, but
swares, Time shall be no longer; but whilst the Mystery of God was finished,
the Lord was then proclaimed; He Is brought to the ancient of days: And there
was given him a Kingdom, and Glory, that all Nations, People, and Languages,
should serve him, Dan. 7. 13, 14.

The many Crowns was now set upon his head, Rev. 19. 12. He was proclaimed to
the ends of the Earth. Zions God now reigns. The Earth saw and trembled, the
Heavens were all on Flames of Fire, whilst dreadful Thundrings and Lightnings
proclaim our King; but here is none regard.

The Trumpets blew in the Ears of the dead; it was declared, That Christ was on
his great white Throne; he finds all old, but makes all new.

The Lord calls, bring in those poor Worms, let them bear witness in that day:
The deaf heard the words of the Book, and the Eyes of the blind were opened.

The Lord plants the Heavens, lays the Foundation of the Earth, calls Zion,
brings in the ends of the Earth. The Beast is given to the burning flame, he
lays hold on the Dragon, (that old Serpent) and binds him for 1000 Years. Thus
things went on, until the glorious Mystery of God was finished; and the voice
came from the Throne, out of the Temple of heaven, saying, It is done, Rev. 16.
17.

Often then it was declared, in the Name of God, It is done, It is fulfilled,
but they would not believe: Then was Philadelphia called in to bare witness
what she had seen done; she witnessed, that the Heavens were planted, and the
Foundations of the Earth laid; for she saw the new Heavens and the new Earth;
she witnesses the New Covenant for Zion, for she saw the new Jerusalem coming
down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. She
attests, in the Name of God, the hearing of that mighty Voice, The tabernacle
of God is with men. She must bear witness to the Words of the Prophecy of the
Book; and say as God says, There is no more sorrow, death, nor pain, for the
former things are past. He has sat on his throne, and made all new. And he
said unto me, Write, for these words are true and faithful. And he said unto
me, It is done. And this day is this Scripture fulfilled in your Ears. And he
has given the waters of life, and has replenished every sorrowful Soul that
has waited for him; they have Overcome, and are on the Sea of Glass, with the
Harps of God, and they sing the Song of Moses, and the Lamb. But the fearful,
and unbelieving, and the abominable, and the murderers, and whoremongers, and
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, have their part in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone: which is the second death, Rev. 21. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

The Lord commands the Witness to go on; another comes and says, I saw an angel
ascending from the east, having the seals of the living God: And he sealed the
servants of our God on their forehead, Rev. 7. 2, 3. Another Witness was
brought, that he has measured the temple, and the altar, and them that worship
therein. But the outward court is given unto the Gentiles* Rev. 11. 1, 2. He
has opened his Seals, sounded his Trumpets, poured out his Vials, and blessed
all his Churches. Thus the Witness went on from day to day, until all Accounts
was taken, and given in: Philadelphia sometimes trembling and quaking before
the Majesty of Heaven, often acknowledging what an awful solemn thing it was,
to bear witness to the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus Christ; other times
astonished and amazed, to think, that Mystery the Angels desire to pry into,
should ever be broken up among a few poor Worms, The Lord declares, That he
has finished the heavens, and the Earth, and all the hosts thereof; as in the
first Creation, All was done by his Word; so now it is again, not by Might, nor
by Power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts, Zech. 4. 6.

And the Witness of the two anointed ones, was the Witness of God himself: Now,
who durst have denied the sound of the seventh Angel, when God had called in a
Witness, that these Mysteries were finished, or that this was the Angel that
was to be sent, to show the things that must be done in a short time. When
Scripture Witness was brought in, that all these things are done, it was a very
improbable thing, that one, whose Unction from the Holy One, for the Work of
the Ministry, had been sealed for so many Years, with the Conversion of so many
Souls, should at last deceive the World, and delude poor Souls; but as for
those poor Creatures that bear witness to these things, they were not suspected
of that, being looked upon as not capable to delude or deceive others; but that
they were deluded themselves. It is possible, had it been things of another
nature, you might have brought them off, by telling them, that their bodily
Eyes had deceived them, and all their Senses were deluded: But if you come to
deal with them about the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus, you might as well
pull down the Sun, and darken the World, as ever prevail against it; for it is
the Testimony of that God which is infallible, therefore infinitely impossible
that ever any thing that is offered against it should stand; it will be the
utter undoing of all them that shall oppose it: for though these be never such
poor weak contemptable Creatures, yet what they witness to is the Word of God,
and Testimony of Jesus, and there is no more to be said. Evidence having been
given, That the mystery of God is finished; the mighty Angel he comes down with
a rainbow on his head, and a little book open in his hand, and swares by him
that lives for ever and ever, Time is no longer. Come away Philadelphia, and
own his Kingly Dignity and Honor; they had not been long dancing before the
Ark, ere the Lord appeared to his Servant, this he owns before many Witnesses,
warns them once more to get Oil, others to go home, and trim their Lamps, they
have no time to spare, they should have Watched, that God that has appeared in
this place, will quickly appear to you all; but what do these Wretches do, but
go and make all the have and speed they can, to turn these things into foolish
ridiculous Stories, to be cried up and down the Streets; and so far are they
from any fear or concern upon them, at such a wonderful time as this is, that
they make merry, and sport themselves at the Word of God, and Revelation of
Jesus. It would make a Christian's Heart tremble, to think what a God-daring
Generation the Earth groans under. And now the Lord comes, like a Lion, rends
and tears the very cauls of their hearts; they would take no Warning, till they
were dashed in pieces; but all the Wit and Art they have must be laid together,
to make the Word of God, and Revelation of Jesus, the Scorn and Derision of the
whole Nation, without any stop being put to these things, there was none to do
it. The Lord sought but for a Man to stand in the gap to make up the hedge,
that he should not destroy the Land, but he finds none, good and bad all give
in their Verdicts, that the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus Christ, was a
Delusion; and so here is an end of all these things, until God calls for
another Account.

But we do attest, in the Name of the Eternal God, That the sounding of the
quick and sudden Coming of our Lord and Savior, was the sound of the seventh
Angel, and God has given infallible Proof and Witness, for the Mystery of God
is finished, as he declared it to his Servants, and as it was declared when the
Trumpet first began to sound, so now all is done, and the solemn Oath of the
Eternal God is to be given to you, to deside all matters of Controversy, and
you shall know whose Words shall stand, His, or yours, Rev. 10. 5, 6, 7. And
the angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lifted up his
hand to heaven, And swear by him that lives for ever and ever, who created
heaven, and the things that therein are; and the earth, and the things that
therein are; and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should
be time no longer: But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he
shall sound, and the mystery of God be finished, as he has declared unto his
servants the prophets. The seventh Angel has sounded, and the Mystery of God
is finished, and there is time no longer, not a Moment, nor a Minute, for, The
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ,
and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11. 15. Blow ye the trumpet in Zion,
and sound an alarm in my holy mountain: let all the inhabitants of the earth
tremble: for the day of the Lord comes, it is nigh at hand, Joel 2. 1. A voice
from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that renders
recompense to his enemies, Isa. 66. 6.

And he says unto me, Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book, for
the time is at hand.

He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be
filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that
is holy, let him be holy still.

And behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every Man
according as his work shall be, Revel. 12. chap. 10, 11, 12.

YOU are to take notice, That the Rage and Tumult that has been in this
Nation, has been against the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him,
to show to his Servants; and this Blessed Servant of God, (that has been
trampled, as the Mire in the Streets, is that Angel spoke of in the
Revelations, that was sent to show Gods Servants the things that must be done
in a short time; therefore, there is no answer can be given to God for these
things, when his Word had expressly spoke of a Messenger that was to come; and
the day came, and the Messenger was sent; and this was Witnessed to them by a
certain number of Souls that God appointed to be Witnesses, that God had showed
the things that must be done in a short time, but they wilfully shut their
Eyes: God has worked a work, and a mavelous work, but they would not
Believe, though it was told them.

I further bear Witness, that the Woman in the Wilderness, has brought forth a
Man Child, that shall rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron; and though the Dragon
has raged and blasphemed, and this day thrown a third part of the Stars to the
Earth; yet all is in Vain, for the Child is caught up to God, and to his
Throne, Revel. 12. And our God has set up a kingdom which shall never be
destroyed; but it shall break and destroy all kingdoms, and it shall stand for
ever and ever. And all these things that have been here done in Spirit and in
Mystery, shall quickly be made visible and sensible things in the sight of all
the World.

THE Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his
servants the things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified
it by his angel unto his servant John: Who bare record of the word of God, and
of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw, Rev. 1. 1, 2.
I bear witness, That in the Year 1689, there came a Messenger from God, and
declared, That the Lord would have a Kingdom in this World, and the time draws
near, behold I come quickly, and surely I come quickly, Rev. 22. God will
deliver the creation from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty
of the sons of God, Romans 8. And there shall be no more sorrow, nor death, nor
pain, he will sit upon the throne, and make all new; the tabernacle of God
shall be with men; there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth, and Babylon
shall be thrown down; the Jews called; and the ends of the earth brought in;
and the Dragon chained.

God commands the Trumpet to be sounded, Repent quickly, or you will be in hell
quickly. When the showing time and fufilling Mystery was ended, one of
Philadelphia received this Word from God, He has sent his angel to show the
things that must be done in a short time: Now they are to be done. The Lord's
Servant also himself declared, That the hand of God had been strong upon him,
to write, the words that I have spoken shall be done, says the Lord. And now a
new course was speedily entered upon, The heavens are planted, and the
foundations of the earth laid, and now God says unto Zion, thou art my people,
Isa. 5. 6. In which time, we saw the new heaven, and the new earth, and heard
that mighty voice, The tabernacle of God is with man: And he that sits on the
throne, and says, Behold, I make all things new; And there is a rainbow round
about the throne, Rev. 4. 3. At this time, that Blessed Oath that has stood so
many 100 Years in Rev. 10. 6. is sworn in the heart of a poor Worm, to be a
Sign and a Witness to the Church of Philadelphia, that God remembers the Oath
which he swear to Abraham, that ancient Oath and Covenant which we so often
read of in the Word of God; And this shall be as the waters of Noah unto me:
the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but the covenant of his
peace shall never be removed, Isa. 54. 9, 10. And now the Rainbow appeared,
Temptations, Sins, and Sorrows, were all on a sudden removed and took away, and
I wrapped up into those Kingdom Joys, that I scarce knew what they were doing
here on Earth: But I can bear witness, That I saw the heavens planted, and the
foundations of the earth laid, and that God said to Zion, thou art my people,
Isa. 51. 16. At this time the Voices were heard, the Visions seen set down in
the Book of the Revelations, and Witness born to the keeping of these Sayings
of the Prophecy of that Book. The time that was taken up in the fulfilling of
these things continued near 2 Years, to my best Remembrance; but before all was
finished, a sign of Deliverance was given to the Church of Philadelphia: these
Words being sent to the Lord's Servant, that he having looked upon the Sorrows
of his poor lost Zion, Lifts up his hand to heaven, and swares by him that
lives for ever and ever, that there should be time no longer: And, Here now, O
Joshua the high priest, thou and thy fellows, ye are men wondered at: but
behold, I bring forth my servant the BRANCH, Zech. 3. 8. Established for ever
is his Word in Heaven; signified, sealed, and ratified upon Earth; but we knew
not what these things meant, until the Lord's Servant came with these Words
from God; Behold the Man, whose name is the BRANCH. See the Christ of God given
to you out of the Father's own hand; here is the visible, sensible, unvailed
Christ performed to you: And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the
air; and a great voice came out of the temple of heaven from the throne,
saying, It is done, Rev. 16. 17. Enter Philadelphia, in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; the Lord he declares the Revelation
(which is a Prophecy of a Prophecy) is fulfilled; The voices have been heard,
and the visions seen, and the words of the prophecy of the book have been kept
from that word, Rev. 1. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear, until
that Sentence was pronounced upon them, They shall reign for evermore, Rev. 22.
And then the mighty angel came down with a rainbow on his head; and the little
book open in his hand, and lift up his hand to heaven, and swear by him who
lives for ever and ever, who created the heaven, and the things that therein
are; and the earth, and the things that therein are; and the Sea, and the
things that therein are; that there should be time no longer. O joyful happy
day. And the Lord himself descended from Heaven with a Shout, and with the
Voice of the Archangel, and the Ark of his Testament was seen in his Temple,
and they were called to return thanks to God, and to sing with gladness for
Jacob; and the Lord appeared to his Servant, as a Zion's God, and then received
him to himself, on whom he had writ the Name of the City of his God; for the
new Jerusalem comes down out of heaven from God, Rev. 21. 2, 10, 11. I witness,
That this Oath continued with that strength and power upon me, that (like Fire)
it broke through all that was cast upon me, to damp it, till the same Words
were put into his Servants Mouth, according to that Scripture, Isa. 59. 21. and
then the Everlasting Covenant being pronounced, with the Oath of the Eternal
God, it was declared, in the Name of God, That the Lion of the Tribe of Judah
had prevailed, and they that had kept the Words of the Prophecy of this Book,
are all Conquerours in Him; and as we had derived all Guilt and Misery, Death
and Sorrow, in the first Adam; so now we are come to inherit all Grace, Glory,
and Comfort, which came by the New; we are come to the Blood of sprinkling, and
to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, Heb. 12. And that God that had set the
bounds to the old Adam, has took an Oath of the time, and he is cursed and
gone for ever; The Seed of the woman has broke the serpent's head. I heard a
loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the
kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, Rev. 12. 10. After these
things the Lord showed us, as there had been a dark and obscure Sign in the
Church of Philadelphia, a Rainbow, and a pouring down of the Spirit, for a
Covenant for Zion, Isa. 59. 21. so now there should be a bright and glorious
Sign, Isa. 66. 18, 19. And he will bring all Nations, and they shall see his
Glory, for he will set up a* Sign amongst them; and in this Mountain will the
Lord take away the Vail that is spread over all Nations, for he will swallow up
Death in Victory, Isa. 25. 7, 8. After these things God ordered it to be
declared, That the days of the voice of the seventh Angel was ended, he had
finished his course, and kept the Faith, and received the Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, had given him; and that the
Church of Philadelphia is that Stone spoke of, Zech. 3. 9. And that Stone shall
bear witness, for it has heard all the words of the Prophecy of that Book:
And, in the Name of God it was declared, That the Law of God was writ upon that
Stone, according to these Words, Jer. 31. 33. The day is come, says the Lord*
that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of
Judah, and I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts.

Object I. This means Zion.

Answer. This is Zion's Representative, this is that elect Seed that was to
inherit God's Holy Mountain, as you may see, Isa. 65. 9. Rev. 3. 12. I will
write upon them the name of the City of my God.

Object II. Where is this New Covenant?

Answer. I saw a mighty angel come down from heaven with a rainbow upon his
head; and the angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lift up
his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever, that time
should be no longer. I bear witness, in the presence of God, this Oath* has
been sworn and performed to the Church of Philadelphia, as Zion 's
representative, Isa. 59. 21. As for me, this is my covenant, says the Lord, My
spirit that is upon thee, and the words that I have put into thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the
Lord, from henceforth and for ever. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, Isa. 50. 1. I bear witness, That the
Angel of the Church of Philadelphia has the highest badge of Honor writ on
him, that ever was engraven on the Sons of Men; For he has writ on him the
name of God, and the name of the city of his God, which is new Jerusalem, which
comes out of heaven from God, Rev. 3. 12. and 21. 2, 10, 11. He writ on him his
new name, King of kings, and Lord of lords; for as he represented our Lord
Jesus in all his Offices of the Kingdom, during the time they were done in
Spirit and Mystery; so he shall do again, when they are done visibly and
sensibly in the Eyes of all the World; and as we have heard that mighty Voice,
saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen; so we shall see that other
angel come down from heaven, having great power, and the earth shall be
lightened with his glory, Rev. 18. He was that olivetree that stood on the
right-side of the bowl, that was on the top of the golden candlestick. He was
that anointed one that stood before the God of the whole earth, Zech. 4. 14. He
is that prophet that had power to smite the earth with all manner of plagues,
as often as he would, Rev. 11. 6. For the land is utterly emptied, and spoiled:
the Lord has spoken this word, Isa. 24. 3. but the dreadful Sentences of his
Judgments are now to be executed on a sinful God-daring Generation, that
scorned to take any Warning, till Himself should come and take Vengeance on
them. Yet blessed be his glorious Name; there is a Rainbow round about his
Throne, and when he shall bring a Cloud and cover the Earth, the Bow shall be
seen in the Cloud, and he will remember the Everlasting Covenant: Glory to the
Righteous, we have a full assurance of Faith, we shall see an innumerable
Company of all Kindreds, People, Tongues and Nations with white Robes, and
Palms in their hands, crying, Salvation to him that sits on the throne* and to
the lamb for ever and ever. And for all these things, Blessing, Glory, Wisdom,
Honor, and Might, be unto our God for ever and ever.

Laws, Statutes, and Judgments, to the Church of Philadelphia.
THAT that I am to Witness to you now, is that which was declared by the Lord's
Servant, whilst the Mystery of God was finished, and witnessed by the Church of
Philadelphia, was the Laws, Statutes, and Judgments of the Eternal God, that
stand fast for ever and ever, throughout all Generations. And when the Word
came forth in the Father's Season; He that sits on the throne says, behold, I
make all things new: The Lord pointed me to Witness to it, and write it down,
and gave it to his Servant; it is gone forth in Righteousness, and shall return
no more, till it has formed the new heaven, and the earth. You will say, How
should I know, that that Word was gone forth in Righteousness. Alas! I knew no
more than a stock, or a stone; but the Lord made me know that it was the Word
of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, and that I must bear witness to it; and I
could have no ease in my Conscience till I had done it; and again, when the
heavens were planted, and the foundations of the earth laid, and he said to
Zion, thou art my people. That Lord sent me to bear witness; I saw the new
heaven, and the new earth; and he had sworn in my heat, time should be no
longer: The day is come, he makes a new covenant with the house of Israel, Jer.
31. 31. These Mysteries were as far above the reach of such a poor Worm as I,
as the Heavens are above the Earth; for, when I was so wrapped up in the sight of
the new heavens, and the new earth, I could not forbear saying, as I went up
and down, I see a new heaven, and a new earth; it was as wonderful to me, when
I heard those Words, Rev. 21. as if I had never known there had been any such
Scripture: therefore God forbid that you should think there was any thing in
the Creature in these things; I did also, about this time, several times here
Voices, and they were those Voices in Revelations; and I knew when I heard it,
it was the Voice of God, differing from all other that ever I heard in all my
lifetime; and whenever I heard a Voice, or saw a Vision, or bore witness to
any of the Words of the Prophecy of that Book, I was so awed with it, that I
durst never entertain a thought ever any more against it; it became a perpetual
law in my Soul; and when the Blessing was pronounced upon the Church of
Philadelphia in a Ministerial way, the Lord sent me to bear witness to it, Rev.
1. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the word of the prophecy
of this book: and he had declared the Downfall of Babylon, and the chaining of
Satan; the Lord made us see it done in an Angelical way, and so bare witness to
it, according to these words, Rev. 20. 1. I saw an angel come down from heaven,
having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he
laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, called the devil and satan, and
bound him for a 1000 years. Rev. 18. I saw another angel come down from heaven,
and he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying* Babylon the great is fallen,
is fallen: Again, when the seventh Angel had poured out his Vial into the Air,
a great voice came out of the temple of heaven from the throne, saying, It is
done, enter Philadelphia, in the Name of the Father, Son, and HolyGhost, the
Lord sent me to bear Record to the Word of God, and to the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, That we are now entered into the Paradise, where there is no more
curse; but the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, are in it, and his servants
shall serve him; and they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their
foreheads; and there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither
the light of the son, for the Lord God gives them light; and they shall reign
for ever and ever. Some of these things I am forced to bear witness too, that
all the World may know, that the Words of the Kingdom are no cunning devised
Fables, when our Blessed Lord and* Savior came and wrought those Miracles that
never Man did, yet they would not believe; but said, He cast out devils by
Beelzebub, the prince of devils. What a dreadful Sentence he passed on them;
therefore, said he, All manner of sins and blasphemies shall be forgiven; but
the blasphemy of the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven. You must think, God
will stand up for his great Honor and Name; and call all nations together: Who
amongst them can declare this, Isa. 43. 9. Could all the Art in Heaven and
Earth have caused one of these Voices to have been heard, or Visions to be
seen, or one Word of the Prophecy of this Book to have been kept, without the
omnipotent power of God. Indeed, we might have seen these things with our
bodily Eyes, when they had been done to our outward Senses; but to see them
with Christ's seven Eyes which are upon the Stone, that can be attributed to
none but God Himself. Can you think (without a Commission from God) any under
the Copes of Heaven durst be so audacious, as to take his Sacred Name into
their Mouth, and come and witness, and affirm, before all the World, The
keeping of the sayings of the prophecy of this book, when such a dreadful
Sentence is passed on them, That shall add to these things, Rev. 22. 18. but so
great and vast are these Mysteries above the comprehension of Men and Angels,
no Word can utter, or Tongue express; what is here delivered, is but a short
account of some few particular things, to be a Testimony to you of the
fulfilling of the whole Book; but you must look to it, for what comes to you,
is the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus Christ.

Object. But we look for visible sensible things.

Answer. That we are bound in Conscience, because of this Word, every moment to
expect the great change that comes on the whole world: but yet, if the Word of
God, and Testimony of Jesus, be not as much assurance to me, as these visible
sensible things, how dare we think we shall see them, when he that takes away
from the words of the prophecy of this book, God takes his part out of the book
of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things that are written in this
book. He that testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Arise, and
trim your lamps, for he has witnessed and testified, All is done. You know, at
the first creation all was done by his word: God said, Let it be so, and it was
so, Genesis 1. Isa. 48. 13. Heb. 11. 3. Isa. 45. 12. Zech. 4. 6. Psalm. 33. 6, 9.
The reason why we saw the new heaven, and the new earth, was, That we might
bear witness to the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus Christ; this needs not
to be done when it appears to all the World: The Scripture says, When Christ
appears, we shall appear with him in glory; therefore that cannot be the time
when so great and wonderful a Controversy is to be desided. That the Eternal
Majesty of Heaven, that never did any thing in vain, should come with so many
Words, and such a solemn Oath, read Revel. 10. bear witness, that we do protest
to you, by the Eternal God, That we have seen that mighty angel come down from
heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head, and an open
book in his hand: and he has set his right foot upon the sea, and his left
foot upon the earth, Psalm. 2. 8. And he cries, as when a lion roars, Mat. 25.
6. And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, has lift
up his hand to heaven, and has sworn by him that lives for ever and ever, who
created heaven, and the things that therein are; the earth, and the things that
therein are; the sea, and the things that are therein; there shall be time no
longer: for the seventh angel has sounded, and the mystery of God is finished:
And by the God of Truth, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of
our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever. Amen.
Hallalujah.

Go forth, ye daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown
wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of his espousals, and in the day
of the gladness of his heart, Cant. 3. 11. Behold, the Bridegroom comes, Mat.
25.

The New SONG.
OUR JESUS this day is proclaimed,
In our Streets he is visibly Crowned,
And highly renowned.
Our JESUS this Day is proclaimed,
In our Streets he is visibly Crowned,
And highly renowned.
From the East from the West, from the North from the South,
Is the Language I hear in every Mouth,
That JESUS is King, let us joyfully sing,
Our JESUS is King, our JESUS is King.
That JESUS, etc.
All Glory, all Glory, all Glory alone,
To the Glory that sits on the glorious Throne.
All Glory, etc.
All Heavenly sweet Flowers be strewed in his ways,
Hallelujahs, Hosannahs, and Millions of Praises.
All Glory is due,
To the Holy and True,
Who sits on the Throne, and makes all New.
Come now to his Temple, ye lookers for JESUS,
His Honor advance, and his Praise in the Dance.
Come now to his Temple, etc.
Break forth into Singing, ye Mountains and Woods,
For Joy clap your hands, ye Fountains and Floods.
Let Him be adored by Angels and Men,
And Zion adorned with her Tabrets again.
Let Him, etc.
Come away to his Courts, ye longers for JESUS,
His Honor advance, and his Praise in the Dance.
Come away, etc.
Break forth into Singing, etc.
Let Him be adored, etc.
Come away to his Courts, ye Lovers of JESUS,
His Honor advance, his Praise in the Dance.
Come away, etc.
Break forth, etc.
Let Him be adored, etc.
The SONG of Moses the Servant of God, and the Lamb.
GREAT and Mavelous are thy Works,
Jehovah working Wonders;
It lightens when our Lord appears,
And when he speaks it thunders.
Most Just and True are all thy ways,
Thy Saints shall bless thee all their days;
Thou art our King, they gladly Sing,
Thy Subjects are before Thee.
Most Just and True, etc.
Had People known thy Glorious Name*
They would have gloried Thee:
For, Lord, thou art that Holy One,
And there is none besides Thee.
The Nations all shall flock and meet*
With bowed Faces at thy Feet,
Thy Judgments show thy Glory now;
Let all the World adore Thee.
The Nations all, etc.
Revelations 22. 16, 17.
I Jesus have sent mine angel, to testify unto you these things in the
churches. I am the root and offspring of David, and the bright and
morning star.

And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that hears, say, Come.
And let him that is athirst, Come. And whosoever will, let him take the water
of life freely.

The Everlasting Covenant produced: With the OATH of the Eternal God, Sworn by
Him that lives for ever and ever,
Time is no longer, Rev. 10. 5.
I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever and ever, Deuter. 32. 40
To the Church of Philadelphia.
THAT, that I am to bear witness to you, is concerning the Angels Oath, which
was to have a double fulfillment. First, For a Sign then to all the Church of
Philadelphia; several courses was gone upon in this Blessed Ministry. Last of
all, The Glorious Mystery of God was to be finished. This begun when our Lord
was proclaimed KING; and it was declared, Zion's-God now reigns: He is upon his
great white throne; and there was a rainbow round about the throne: This was
the time that this Oath came upon me, to be a Sign to the Church of
Philadelphia, that God remembers the* Everlasting Covenant, the Oath he swore
to Abraham that Oath and Covenant we so often read of in the Word of God; At
the end of time, times, and half a time, as it is in the last of Daniel. This
Oath came forth to All the Church of Philadelphia, Time shall be no longer. The
Lord brought forth his Servant the BRANCH. Old Adam's state is finished. After
this, The Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God* was given
to the Church of Philadelphia, upon the Word and Honor of the Eternal God.
Now, the certainty of our Lord's being at this time on his Throne, making every
thing New, and more particularly, of our being under the New Adam; because the
Righteous BRANCH was now brought forth to the house of David; and he is called,
The LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jer. 23. 6.

And the Church of Philadelphia first pertakes of the Grace and Glory which
comes by the New Adam; For he has writ on them the name of the city of his
God; from these things I was as much assured, that it was my duty to believe it
was as God said, (and to take this Righteous BRANCH which was now brought forth
amongst us, to make us all New, Soul and Body) as I was bound to keep any of
the Commands of God. And again, this was confirmed to us, when the Lord's
Servant came with these Words, Behold the man, whose name is the* BRANCH. The
Father's Day is come, which was hid from Men and Angels. I found these things
so strong and weighty, that I could not dally with them; for, if I would have
said, I did not believe, he had brought his first begotten again into the
World, because I did not see him with my bodily Eyes, my own Conscience would
have condemned me, for the Oath of God was writ in my Heart, which he had sworn
to Philadelphia, Time shall be no longer: and behold the man, whose name is the
BRANCH.

I knew in my Soul that this was the Word of God, that the Old Adam's State was
finished, which could be done only by the coming of the New. I must own it, in
the presence of God, that he hedged me up to these things, and put me to that
blessed straight, that I must cry out, in the Name of all Philadelphia, Be ye
lifted up ye everlasting doers, and the King of glory shall come in. And I
Witnessed to them, That the Christ of God was not only given to us out of the
Father's own hand, in his own season, but clossed with and received, as he was
offered in the Word, in sure and certain hopes, that as we have born the image
of the earthly, so now for ever bear we the image of the heavenly Adam. I
Witness, that God writ it with an Iron Pen, and the point of a Diamond on my
Heart. That I was finally, eternally, and everlastingly acquitted and absolved
from all the guilt of Sin and Sorrow which came by the first Adam, having
received and closed with the Righteous BRANCH, as he was given out of the
Father's own hand; for which infinite Grace and Mercy, I prostrate my self in
Dust and Ashes at his Feet, acknowledging his Love and Mercy to be absolute,
grounded wholly and eternally on the Merits of his Dear Son, and that there is
nothing in any Creature. I further Witness, That he enabled me to rely on the
Infallibility of his Word, Oath, and Testimony, which from that time stood in
full force, for the utter destruction of my Sins and Corruptions. I Witness,
That I came a miserable, distressed, tormented Wretch, out of the Old Adam's
State, so that I had longed many years for a Grave, not for any outward
Miseries, but constant wearyings and tirings out with a Body of Sin and Death;
And the man, whose name is the BRANCH, that was given out of the Father's own
hand, became almost glorious triumphant Conqueror over the Old Adam; and for
these things I bow my Knees to the Almighty, and shall sing Praise unto my
Zion's KING, now and ever. Amen.

I Witness, That I heard a great voice from the temple of heaven, from the
throne, saying, It is done: And then he came and writ on me his new name, King
of kings, and Lord of lords; and upon this called me to take of the water of
Life freely: And he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 22. 1. I Witness, I
had not only an outward Call in the Word, to take these waters of life, but
inward Illumination of his Spirit, according to these words, Rev. 22. 17. The
spirit, says, Come. All Glory to my Zion's JESUS, now and ever. And I took of
the water of life, and shall never thirst more, it is in my Belly a wellspring
to Eternal Life. All Glory to the Lord alone now and ever.

I Witness, That at the same time, he said unto me, Behold the man whose name
is the BRANCH. See the tree of life placed in the midst: put forth thy hand,
fear not, take, eat, and live for ever: and he gave me of the Tree, with these
words, John 6. 58. Not as your fathers eat manna, and are dead: he that eats
of this bread, shall live for ever. And for all these things, Blessing, and
Honor, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Power, be to our God now and ever. Amen.

And there is no more curse: but the throne of God, and the. Lamb shall be in
it; his servants shall serve him. And see his face, and his name shall be in
their foreheads. And there shall be no night there, they need no candle, nor
light of the sun; for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for
ever, Rev. 22. 3, 4, 5.

All Glory to the Lord alone, now and for ever. After these things, the Lord's
servant comes and tells you, God has performed his Oath, There is time no
longer. And the mighty angel comes down, clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow
on his head, his face shined as the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire. And
he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot on the sea,
and his left foot on the earth, And cried, as when a lion roareth: And he lift
up his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever, who
created heaven, and the things that therein are; the earth, and the things that
therein are; and the sea, and the things that therein are; that there should be
time no longer, Rev. 10. 1, 2, 3, 6.

I Witness, That on this same day, I had a strict Commission from God, to tell
you, with other things, That a sign of deliverance to the Church of
Philadelphia, signified, God's Oath to them. The Lord tells you, He has
performed his Oath, and there is time no longer; the Old Adam's state is
finished: And I do affirm, in the Name of the Eternal God, That this is the
Witness of Him that is Faithful and True; and that he does, has, and shall for
ever sway his Kingly Scepter in my Soul, and he has conquered the Old Adam.

And, once more, in the Name of the Lord, I do affirm, for the Honor of his
Word and Oath, That* he did come down, on this same day, with a rainbow on his
head, as a most glorious triumphant Conqueror over the Old Adam; and that he
did remove the iniquity of the land in one day, Zech. 3. 9. And the mountains
shall depart, and the hills be removed; but the covenant of his peace shall
never be removed, Isa. 54. 10.

I bear witness, That poor Zion which had lain so many 100 Years under the
Guilt of that Blood which they shed; and they have this day a fountain opened
for sin and uncleanness* Zech. 13. 1. he has opened the peoples graves, and
the dead bodies live again, Ezekiel. 37. 12. I Witness, That the Redeemer is come
to Zion, and has turned away ungodliness from Jacob, Isa. 5* 9. 20. Oh! with
what Adorations of Soul should we worship that God, that has remembered his
Covenant to a Thousand Generations; his Oath to Abraham, and his Seed for ever.
And the whole Creation shall now break forth into the high Praises of God,
because the Adoption is come, and it is delivered from the bondage of Sin and
Corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8. 21. But oh!
how much more should Philadelphia be night and day at this Work, who has been
so highly favored of God, to see these things with the seven Eyes that are
upon the Stone, before there was any visible appearance in the World; thou
elect Seed that was to Inherit God's Holy Mountain, on whom he has writ the
Names of the City of his God, the People that was to be born to praise him;
come and adore before his Feet, for thou shall again be Adorned with Tabrets,
and shall go forth in the Dance, Jer. 31. 4. for that God that has finished
the dark obscure Sign, appears in the bright and glorious Sign: You will say,
Was not the Sign finished before? Answ. It is more than two Years since the
Mystery of God began to be fulfilled; and the Lord appoints Witness from time
to time to be given in, that such and such things was fulfilled and done: And
we thought every Word to be the Last, and that no more was to be done for this
blessed Olive Tree, that had so long emptied the Oil through the Pipe into the
Candlestick. God shows him that he was to be removed and stand in another
place; and so he tells you he had but a very little more to say to you; and
after this declares, That the days of the voice of the seventh Angel are ended,
and the Lord receives him to himself. And then the dark hour comes on
Philadelphia, Thy Sons have fainted, they lie as a wild Bull in a Net, full of
the fury of the Lord, Isai. 51. 20. The Beast that ascended out of the
bottomless Pit is now permitted to make War, Overcome and Kill; alas, what was
we able to do! now it was God's infinite Mercy, and he alone that enabled us to
hold what we had received. My dear Friends, I drunk with you of this bitter
Cup; but it was most grief to me at the beginning of the Sickness of the Lord's
Servant, and it continued until God had ended his Sorrow: And then I was again
received into those Joys and Comforts that I was in before, and ordered to go
on Witnessing to things as I had long before. And many Ingravenings after this
time came upon my Soul, from which I was forced to conclude, that the Mystery
of God on both parts was not fully ended before; for as it was all along, first
we received the Word, then God writ-his Law upon it. It was Sworn, Time is no
longer; and this is the Witness to that Oath, and the Ingravenings of God that
is come upon it. I witness, That Zerubbabel, that laid the Foundation of this
House, his hands have finished it, Zech. 4. 9. and the Lord of Hosts has sent
him unto us, and now everlasting Crowns of Honor and Glory for ever shine upon
his Royal Princely Head, that has laid the top Stone in Glory; Grace, Grace,
Come away Philadelphia, down down upon your Face before him that sits upon the
Throne, Worship the Lamb, that only was found Worthy to open the Book to read
and look thereon; and every Creature in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth,
and such ar are in the Sea, heard I, saying, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory,
and Power be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever
and ever, Rev. 5. 13. And so God Almighty bless you, and turn you into a
Rainbow, for a Sign and Covenant unto Zion, and all the Churches; and make thee
a burning and shining Candlestick before the Throne of his Glory; to whom be
Glory and Dominion now and ever. Amen.

To the Church of Philadelphia.
I Bear witness this day, That Christ is the True and Faithful Witness; one
Word has not failed of all the good things that he has promised. I have
overcome only by the blood of the Lamb, and no other way have I entered the
gates into the city, but by the tree of life. I hate and detest all mine own
righteousness, I loath it as filthy rags, and menstrous clothes. I Witness to
you, as one of Zion's Representatives, That I have received the fine Linen,
clean and white, to be dressed up for the everlasting Bridegroom of my Soul. The
day, the day, the glorious day is come, That he has raised up to David a
righteous BRANCH; and this is the Name whereby he is called, The LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS. Holy, Holy, Glory, Glory; now must we contribute to that
Everlasting Hallelujah, which shall be sung to free Grace and Mercy to all
Eternity.

I Witness, That our honored Friend was the true Messenger and Forerunner of
the Coming and Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and what God has
promised to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, is this day performed; for
he has set before him that open door, which none can ever shut. I also
Witness, That there is such a thing, as entering in through the gate into the
city. Rev. 22. 14. At the gates are twelve angels, Rev. 21. 12. The walls of
the city have twelve foundations. Upon her head was a crown of twelve stars,
Rev. 12. 1. I Witness, That Christ is the door, and none can enter in but by
the tree of life. He that takes away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, is condemned already, his part is took out of the holy city, and of
the book of life, Rev. 22. 19.

And now for ever bless I God for the Doctrine of the Kingdom. O God, thy
Testimony, and the Laws of thy Mouth, have been more to me than thousands of
Gold and Silver. My Dear Philadelphia, Love the Word of God, and Testimony of
Jesus Christ; by which abundant entrance is ministered to us into the
Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Glory, Glory.

FINIS.
Another Witness.
I Do Testify, in the Name of Jesus Christ, King of kings, and Lord of lords,
That the Lord has remembered his Servant Jacob, and has declared and saved,
and has given to them the Land of Canaan, according to his Word, that he would
settle them after their old estate, and do better for them than at the
beginning, Ezekiel. 36. 11. and that the Adoption is come, and the Glory is come,
and the Devil is bound, and the Old Adams State is finished, and all is done,
Rev. 16. 17. And time is no longer: and the Lord himself descended from heaven
with the voice of the archangel; and I was Eyewitness of his Majesty; and for
this, Blessing, Glory, and Thanksgiving, be unto our God, and Zion's God; and
our King, and Zion's King, now and ever, now and ever; Glory, Glory, Glory to
the Holy and True, that sat on his Throne, and made us all New. I do also
Testify, That then we had a Personal Christ amongst us, and then Philadelphia
was called to Sing, and Dance, and Rejoice, because great was the Holy One of
Israel in the midst of us. I also do Testify, That this Blessed Servant, that
had The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to his
servants things which must shortly come to pass, Rev. 1. 1. He has seen the
Blessed Person of Christ in his Personal Glory; and this the Lord has made as
plain to me, as any of the great Mysteries, blessed be his Holy Name for ever
and ever. God shall have all the Glory for ever, and Christ shall have all the
Glory for ever, for there is nothing in any Creature; for, All Nations are
before him as nothing, and less than nothing and vanity.

I will tell you how the Lord was pleased to make it plain to me: which was,

First, He appeared in the Garment the Scripture said he should.

Secondly, Because he graciously promised, that his Servants should trust, and
not be afraid, Isa. 12. 2. and again, he would appear the second time without
Sin, to our Salvation.

Thirdly, There was so much Majesty seen in his Face, and yet so much Mercy,
that his Servant, according to his word, was enabled to trust, and not be
afraid.

I do also Testify, in the Name of Jesus Christ, King of kings, and Lord of
lords, That Mr. Mason was that faithful and wise Steward that is spoken of in
Luke 12. 42, 43, 44. And the Lord made him ruler over his household, to give
them their portion of meat in due season; and that this People that have
received the Revelation of Jesus Christ, is the household there spoken of; and
he did give us the portion of meat in due season; and that the Lord has
blessed him of a truth, and made him ruler over all that he has. I do
Testify, That the Lord has made him chief Officer in his Kingdom. All Glory
to the Lord alone, now and ever. Thine is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, now
and ever, now and ever. Amen.

Elizabeth Glover.

Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him:
even so, Amen, Rev. 1. 7.

