Another VICTORY IN LANCASHIRE Obtained against the SCOTS BY Major General
Harrison, and Colonel Lilburn.

WITH, The taking of Lievt. Genesis David Lesly, Maj. Genesis Middleton, and other
eminent Officers and Commanders, with six hundred private Soldiers, horse and
arms; and a List of the particulars.

Also, the Death of Maj. Genesis Massey and Duke Hamilton, and the Scots Kings
going with Hind the great ROBBER.

Together, with the manner of my Lord General Cromwels coming up, and noble
Reception by the City of London; and an account of the Scots prisoners which
marched through the City on Saturday last.

London: Printed by B. A. MDCLI.

A perfect RELATION Of his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELLS Reception by
the Nobility, Gent. and Citizens in and about the City of London, on Friday,
the 12 of Sept. 1651. being nine days after the glorious victory obtained by
his Excellency against the King of Scots and his Army at Worcester.
Friday the 12 of Sept. my Lord General drew near to the City of London and my
Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, Sheriffs, and Recorder met about 10 of the clock in
the forenoon at Guildhall in their Scarlet robes, and with a dozen coaches went
forth to meet his Excellency, a little beyond Acton, unto whom Mr. Recorder
made a congratulatory speech in behalf of the whole City, he was also met on
the way by many Lords, the Speaker of Parliament and Members of the Council of
State as allo many thousands of Citizens both horse and foot (yet the
Train-bands went not forth) which filled the ways and places best situate for
beholders four or five miles together. First, came his Lifeguard being a
Company of as gallant Gent. as you have seen mounted, heroic, and valiant;
after them a Troop of Col. Rows horse belonging to the City, next unto them a
great number of Commoners and Gent. of quality, then his Excellency and the
Speaker of Parliament came in a coach by themselves, and by estimation at least
three hundred coaches close after one another.

At Hide. Park corner near Knights-bridge stood to receive him the blew
Regiment of Volunteers lately raised, and from thence to Piccadilly was placed
Col. Bark steads Regiment of red-coats, the great guns were also drawn out of
St. Jameses, and about the time that his Excellency came to Charing-crosse they
went off one after another once over which they had no sooner done, but there
was a gallant volley of shot given by the soldiers that brake the air, and
with a mighty shout of the people ecchoed again to the earth, with order in the
manner aforesaid with great and small shot, and hallowing of the people was
observed and done four several times over.

As the General passed by, the people all along as he went put off their hats,
and had reciprocal respects returned from him again; his Excellency chose
rather to come in as privately as he could in a coach then openly on horseback,
to avoid the popularity and applauses of the people, desiring rather that the
good he does to this Commonwealth may be heard and felt then seen, that the
people should attribute or ascribe too much unto him, who desires to carry on
the work of the Lord in all meekness and humility.

The last night the Scots, Highlands, or Redshanks, about 4000 in number lay on
Hampstead heath, four miles from London, and this day they were with a guard
brought by Highgate on the backside of Islington to Kingsland, and from thence
to Milin-green, they were suffered to receive such charity as people would give
them, and had a cart load or two of biscuit carrying after them, which is better
food then heretofore they carried in their Oatrueal-bag. The next day being
Saturday they were brought in at Algate, and so marched through cheap side,
Fleet Street and the Strand, and likewise through Westminster. For the most
part they were very sturdy surley knaves, keep them under, and they may serve
for nasty stinking vassals, I leave to every indifferent person that has
beheld them to judge what a condition they had been in if such a generation as
this had prevailed and become their masters, or cut their throats, of which
they made themselves so sure many of them brought their wives and berns in with
them, yet were many of our Scotified Citizens so pitiful unto them, that as
they passed through the City they made them (though prisoners at mercy) masters
of more money and good white-bread then some of them ever see in their lives,
they marched this night into Tuttle fields, some Irish are amongst them, and
most of them are habited much after that fashion, the English that were at the
battle are severed out by themselves; they are not yet come, but are coming up.

The English Lords and Scots with other eminent Commanders, are carried to
Windsor and other places for security, till the Parliament take further order,
the Parliament has appointed Thursday the 2 of October. to be set apart as a day
of solemn thanksgiving to be observed over all the 3 Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland. It is not yet known of any certainty where the Scots
King is, if he be not already gotten away into the Isle of man, its thought he
lies sculking about in some private corners with Hind his guide. Major Genesis
Harrison, Col. Lilburn, Lievt. Gen, Fleetwood, and most of my Lord Generals
horse are active in gathering up of such as escaped at the fight and are
dispierced, the Maj. Genesis is advanced after a party of the enemies horse, with
whom were Middleton, and David Lesley, which went toward Lancashire. And you
are to observe this by the way, that much about the same time that my Lord Genesis
came to London, viz. on Friday about 5 of the clock, there came Letters which
advertized that Lievt. Genesis Lesley, Maj. Genesis Middleton with many other
officers of note, and about 600 private soldiers are taken prisoners at a town
called Middleton in Lancashire; it is also reported that D. Hambleton and
Massey (who were taken prisoners) are dead, but I leave the certainty thereof
to further relations.

We also understand that the town of Middleton (which proves fatal to him of
that name) is on the further part of all Lancashire toward the sea, and if the
enemy had had any-time to stay without being pursued, its likely they had some
hopes of getting over into the Isle of Man; these are those Scots which were at
Sandbatch about a week since, and killed 6 or 7 of the country people which
caused the rest to rise.

There is now taken a tall young Gentleman which there was some thoughts at
first to be the Scots King but it proves otherways, since the escape of this
party of Scots Northwards, we hear that Sir Will. Heart and others of quality are
taken; besides, those before spoken of, and near 20 that were taken prisoners
at their coming over Warrington-bridge, and carried to Chester, are already
tried by a Council of war, and have received (at the least) sentence to be shot
to death.

And truly there is great cause that we should bless God, and sing aloud of
his praises for the great and seasonable deliverance we have now had in making
bare his glorious arm against such as had lifted up their hands and decreed
amongst themselves against the lives and estates of us and our children. Let us
therefore be ever mindful of his works and the wondrous things which he has
done for us.

A List of Prisoners, Horse, and Arms taken.
LIeut. Genesis David Lesly. Maj. Genesis Middleton. Sir William Heart. Col. Hutrey.
Col. Flower. C. Montgomery. Cap. Middleton, M. Graham. M. Beckwith. C. Kieth.
Cap. Monro. Cap. Butlar. Cap. Mackey. Cap. Blaire. And many other Col. Maj. and
other chief Officers, which had escaped, and lost their men at the fight at
Worcester. 30 Lieutenants and Corners. 40 Quartermasters. 20 Corporals. 500 and
odd private soldiers. 600 Arms, and many Portmantels, and good Booty.
FINIS.

