THE ANSWER OF THE COMMONS, TO A PETITION, In the name of thousands
well-affected persons inhabiting the City of London, Westminster, Borough of
Southwarke, and Hamlets, and places adjacent.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

To the Right Honorable, the Commons of England, etc.
SHOWS.
(A) THat although we are as earnestly desirous of a safe and well grounded
Peace, and that a final end were put to all the troubles and miseries of the
Commonwealth, as any sort of men whatsoever: Yet considering upon what grounds
we engaged on your part in the late and present Wars, and how far (by our so
doing) we apprehend our selves concerned, Give us leave (before you conclude as
by the Treaty in hand) to acquaint you first with the ground and reason which
induced us to aid you against the King and His Adherents. Secondly, What our
Apprehensions are of this Treaty. Thirdly, What we expected from you, and do
still most earnestly desire.

(B) Be pleased therefore to understand that we had not engaged on your part,
but that we judged this Honorable House to be the Supreme Authority of
England, as chosen by, and representing the People; and entrusted with absolute
power for redress of Grievances, and provision for Safety: and that the King
was but at the most the chief public Officer of this Kingdom, and
accomptable to this House (the representative of the People, from whom all just
Authority is, or ought to be derived) for discharge of His Office: And if we
had not been confident hereof, we had been desperately mad to have taken up
Arms, or to have been aiding and assisting in maintaining a War against Him;
The Laws of the Land making it expressly a crime no less then Treason for any
to raise War against the King.

(C) But when we consider the manifold oppressions brought upon the Nation, by
the King, His Lords, and Bishops; and that this Honorable House declared their
deep sense thereof; and that (for continuance of that power which had so
opposed us) it was evident the King intended to raise Forces, and to make War;
and that if He did set up His Standard, it tended to the dissolution of the
Government: upon this, knowing the safety of the people to be above Law, and
that to judge thereof appertained to the Supreme Authority, and not to the
Supreme Magistrate, and being satisfied in our Consciences, that the public
safety and freedom was in imminent danger, we concluded we had not only a just
cause to maintain; but the Supreme Authority of the Nation, to justify,
defend, and indempnifie us in time to come, in what we should perform by
direction thereof; though against the known Law of the Land, on any inferior
Authority, though the highest.

(D) And as this our understanding was begotten in us by principles of right
reason, so were we confirmed herein by their own proceedings, as by your
condemning these Judges who in the case of Ship money had declared the King to
be Judge of safety; and by your d^^^ing Him to have a negative Voice in the
making of Laws; where you wholly exclude the King from having any share in the
Supreme Authority: Then by your casting the Bishops out of the House of Lords,
who by tradition also, had been accounted an essential part of the Supreme
Authority; And by your declaring to the Lords, that if they would not join
with you in sending the Militia, (which they long refused) you would settle it
without them, which you could not justly have done, and they had any (...) in
the Supreme Authority.

(E) These things we took for real Demonstration, that you undoubtedly knew
your selves to be the Supreme Authority; over weighing down in us all other
your indulgent expressions concerning the King and Lords. It being indeed
impossible for us to believe that it can consist either with the safety, or
freedom of the Nation, to be governed either by three or two Supreames,
especially where experience has proved them so apt to differ in their
judgments concerning Freedom or Safety, that the one has been known to
punish what the other has judged worthy of reward; when not only the freedom
of the people is directly opposite to the Prerogatives of the King and Lords,
but the open enemies of the one, have been declared friends by the other, as
the Scots were by the House of Lords.

(F) And when as most of the oppressions of the Commonwealth have in all times
been brought upon the people by the King and Lords, who nevertheless would be
so equal in the Supreme Authority, as that there should be no redress of
grievances, no provision for safety, but at their pleasure. For our parts, we
profess our selves so far from judging this to be consistent with Freedom or
Safety, that we know no great cause wherefore we assisted you in the late Wars,
but in hope to be delivered by you from so intolerable, so destructive a
bondage, so soon as you should (through Gods blessing upon the Armies raised
by you) be enabled.

(G) But to our exceeding grief, we have observed that no sooner God
vouchsafes you Victory, and blesses you with success, and thereby enableth
you to put us and the whole Nation into an absolute condition of Freedom and
Safety: but according as ye have been accustomed, passing by the ruin of a
Nation, and all the blood that has been spilt by the King and His Party, ye
betake your selves to a Treaty with Him, thereby puttitg Him that is but one
single person, and a public Officer of the Commonwealth, in competition with
the whole body of the people, whom ye represent; not considering that it is
impossible for you to erect any authority equal to your selves; and declared
to all the world that you will not alter the Ancient Government, from that of
King, Lords, and Commons: nor once mentioning (in case of difference) which of
them is Supreme, but leaving that point (which was the chiefest cause of all
our public differences, disturbances, Wars and miseries) as uncertain as ever.

(H) In so much as we who upon these grounds have laid out our selves every way
to the utmost of our abilities: and all others throughout the Land, Soldiers
and others who have done the like in defense of our Supreme Authority, and in
opposition to the King, cannot but deem our selves in the most dangerous
condition of all others, left without all plea of Indemnity, for what we have
done, as already many have found by loss of their lives and liberties, either
for things done or said against the King; the Law of the Land frequently taking
place, and precedence against and before your Authority, which we esteemed
Supreme, and against which no Law ought to be pleaded. Nor can we possibly
conceive how any that have any ways assisted you, can be exempt from the guilt
of murders and robbers, by the present Laws in force, if you persist to
disclaim the Supreme Authority, though their own conscience do acquit them,
as having opposed none but manifest Tyrants, Oppressors and their adherents.

(I) And whereas a Personal Treaty, or any Treaty with the King, has been
long time held forth as the only means of a safe and wel-grounded Peace; it
is well known to have been cried up principally by such as have been
disaffected unto you; and though you have contradicted it, yet it is believed
that you much fear the issue; as you have cause sufficient, except you see
greater alteration in the King and His party then is generally observed, there
having never yet been any Treaty with Him, but was accompanied with some
underhand dealing; and whilst the present force upon Him (though seeming
liberty) will in time to come be certainly be pleaded, against all that shall
or can be agreed upon: nay, what can you confide in if you consider how He has
been provoked; and what former Kings upon less provocation have done, after
Oaths, Laws, Charters, Bonds, Excommunications, and all ties of
Reconciliations, to the destruction of all those that had provoked and opposed
them: yea, when your selves so soon as he had signed those Bills in the
beginning of this Parliament, saw cause to tell them, That even about the time
of passing those Bills, some design or other was on foot, which if it had taken
effect would not only have rendered those Bills fruitless, but have reduced you
to a worse condition of confusion then that wherein the Parliament found you.

And if you consider what new Wars, risings, revolting, invasions, and
plottings have been since this last cry for a Personal Treaty, you will not
blame us if we wonder at your hasty proceedings thereunto: especially
considering the wonderful Victories which God has blessed the Army withal.

(K) We profess we cannot chose but stand amazed to consider the inevitable
danger we shall be in, though all things in the Propositions were agreed unto,
the Resolutions of the King and his party have been perpetually, violently, and
implacably prosecuted and manifested against us; and that with such scorn and
indignation, that it must be more then such ordinary bonds that must hold them.

And it is no less a wonder to us, that you can place your own security
therein, or that ever you can imagine to see a free Parliament any more in
England.

(L) The truth is (and we see we must either now speak or forever be silent,)
We have long expected things of another nature from you, and such as we are
confident would have given satisfaction to all serious people of all Parties.

1. That you would have made good the supreme of the people, in this
Honorable House, from all pretenses of negative Voices, either in King or
Lords.

2. That you would have made Laws for election of representatives yearly, and
of course without writ or summons.

3. That you would have set express times for their meeting, Continuance and
Dissolution: as not to exceed 40. or 50. days at the most, and to have fixed
an express time for the ending of this present Parliament.

4. That you would have exempted matters of Religion and Gods worship, from the
compulsive or restrictive power of any authority upon earth, and reserved to
the supreme authority an un-compulsive power only of appointing a way for the
public, whereby abundance of misery, persecution, and heart-burning would for
ever be avoided.

5. That you would have disclaimed in your selves and all future
Representatives, a power of pressing or forcing any sort of men to serve in
Wars, there being nothing more opposite to freedom, nor more unreasonable in
an authority empowered for raising moneys on all occasions, for which, and a
just cause, assistants need not be doubted: the other way serving rather to
maintain injustice and corrupt parties.

6. That you would have made both Kings, Queens, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords,
and all Persons, alike liable to every Law of the Land, made or to be made;
that so all persons even the Highest might fear and stand in awe, and neither
violate the public peace, nor private right of person or estate, (as has
been frequent) without being liable to account as other men.

7. That you would have freed all Commoners from the jurisdiction of the Lords
in all cases: and to have taken care that all trials should be only of twelve
sworn men, and no conviction but upon two or more sufficient known witnesses.

8. That you would have freed all men from being examined against themselves,
and from being questioned or punished for doing of that against which no Law
has been provided.

9. That you would have abreviated the proceedings in Law, mitigated and made
certain the charge thereof in all particulars.

10. That you would have freed all Trade and Merchandising from all
Monopolizing and Engrossing, by Companies or otherwise.

11. That you would have abolished Excise, and all kind of Taxes, except
Subsidies, the old and only just way of England.

12. That you would have laid open all late Enclosures of Fens, and other
Commons, or have enclosed them only or chiefly to the benefit of the poor.

13. That you would have considered the many thousands that are ruined by
perpetual imprisonment for debt, and provided to their enlargement.

14. That you would have ordered some effectual course to keep people from
begging and beggary, in so fruitful a Nation as through Gods blessing this is.

15. That you would have proportioned punishments more equal to offenses; that
so men's Lives and Estates might not be forfeited upon trivial and slight
occasions.

16. That you would have removed the tedious burden of Tithes, satisfying all
Impropriators, and providing a more equal way of maintenance for the public
Ministers.

17. That you would have raised a stock of Money out of those many confiscated
Estates you have had, for payment of those who contributed voluntarily above
their abilities, before you had provided for those that disbursed out of their
superfluities.

18. That you would have bound your selves and all future Parliaments from
abolishing propriety, levelling men's Estates, or making all things common.

19. That you would have declared what the duty or business of the Kingly
office is, and what not, and ascertained the Revenue, past increase or
diminution, that so there might never be more quarrel about the same.

20. That you would have rectified the election of public Officers for the
City of London, of every particular Company therein, restoring the Commonalty
thereof to their just Rights, most unjustly withold from them, to the
producing and maintaining of corrupt interest, opposite to common Freedom, and
exceedingly prejudicial to the made and manufactures of this Nation.

21. That you would have made full and ample reparations to all persons that
had been oppressed by sentences in high Commission, Star Chamber, and Council
Board, or by any kind of Monopolizers, or projectors, and that out of the
estates of those that were authors, actors or promoters of so intolerable
mischiefs, and that without much attendance.

22. That you would have abolished all Committees, and have conveyed all
businesses into the true method of the usual Trials of the Common wealth.

23. That you would not have followed the example of former tyrannous and
superstitious Parliaments, in making Orders, Ordinances or Laws, or in
appointing punishments concerning opinions of things supernatural, styling
some blasphemies, others heresies; when as you know your selves easily
mistaken, and that divine truths need no humane helps to support them: such
proceedings having been generally invented to divide the people amongst
themselves, and to affright men from that liberty of discourse by which
corruption and tyranny would be soon discovered.

24. That you would have declared what the business of the Lords was, and
ascertaine their condition, not derogating from the liberties of other men,
that so there might be an end of striving about the same.

25. That you would have done justice upon the capital authors, and promoters
of the former or late Wars, many of them being under your power: Considering
that mercy to the wicked, is cruelty to the innocent: and that all your lenity
does but make them the more insolent and presumptuous.

26. That you would have provided constant pay for the Army now under the
Command of the Lord General Fairfax, and given rules to all Judges, and all
other public Officers throughout the Land for their Indemnity, and for the
saving harmless all that have any ways assisted you, or that have said or
done any thing against the King, Queen, or any of His party since the beginning
of this Parliament, without which any of His party are in a better condition
then those who have served you; nothing being more frequent with them, then
their reviling of you and your friends.

The things and worthy Acts which have been done and atchived by this Army, and
their adherents (however ingratefully suffered to be scandalized as Sectaries,
and men of corrupt judgments) in defense of the just authority of this
honorable House, and of the common liberties of the Nation, and in opposition
to all kind of Tyranny and oppression, being so far from meeting an odious Act
of Oblivion, that they rather deserve a most honorable Act of perpetual
remembrance, to be as a pattern of public virtue, fidelity, and resolution to
all posterity.

27. That you would have laid to heart all the abundance of innocent blood that
has been spilt, and the infinite spoil and havoc that has been made of
peaceable harmless people, by express Commissions from the King; and
seriously to have considered whether the justice of God be likely to be
satisfied, or his yet continuing wrath appeased, by an Act of Oblivion.

These and the like we have long time hoped you would have minded, and have
made such an establishment for the general peace and contentfull satisfaction
of all sorts of people, as should have been to the happiness of all future
generations, and which we most earnestly desire you would set your selves
speedily to effect; whereby the almost dying honor of this most honorable
House, would be again revived, and the hearts of your Petitioners and all
other well-affected people, be fresh renewed unto you, the Freedom of the
Nation (now in perpetual hazard) would be firmly established, for which you
would once more be so strengthened with the love of the people, that you should
not need to cast your eyes any other ways (under God) for your security: but
if all this avails nothing, God be our Guide for man shows us not a way for
our preservation.

The Answer of the Commons, to a Petition, in the name of thousands welaffected
persons, etc.
(A) THis House is very well pleased with your desires of Peace, and hopes,
that (when you are satisfied, the ways by you propounded for obtaining it, are
not conducing to that end, but tending to the increase of such means, as may
make the War endless, and the troubles of this Kingdom infinite) your right
affections will follow right reason, and they therefore are willing to inform
you of those mistakes, which were the cause of those Propositions, which you
have framed in order to Peace.

And first, we cannot but take notice of what you say, that you engaged on our
part against the King; You know we raised Arms at first, and engaged such, as
assisted us for King and Parliament; and you know both we and you, took May
1641.
a Protestation to defend the Kings Person, Honor and Estate; and you know
both you and we are the Kings Subjects, and ought by the duty of our Allegiance
to adhere to Him and defend Him: and we cannot make War upon Him, nor on our
fellow Subjects (His adherents) without breach of our Allegiance; All which
might sufficiently inform you, that we have made no avowed War against the
King, but against His evil Counselors: and we believed, if we should have
told you, that we intended to make War against the King, you would not have
aided us at all, knowing it high Treason, (as you profess you do) which was
the reason the engagement was for King and Parliament.

Next we wish, that you would keep your selves within the bounds of obedience,
and not presume to anticipate our Councels, and prevent our proceedings, as you
do, by telling us, what you expect our resolutions to be, we are contented to
receive information of your grievances from you, but must not be schooled, or
Magistrated by you, although in the beginning, we gave way to some such
Petitions, in regard of the distempers of your minds, whereby the Lords and
many of our own Members, were overawed, yet this House cannot approve that
such courses are agreeable to Law or Reason.

(B) Where you say, that you had not engaged on the part of this House, but
that you judged this House the supreme authority of England, is very strange
to us; your selves, as we believe (as well as we) having according to the
common duty, and the Law of the Land, acknowledged before God, that the King is
the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, over all persons, and in all
causes, and bound our selves by Oath to defend that His Supremacy; and we
always call our selves His Commons, and His House of Commons, and make
Petitions to Him for His grace and favor, styling Him (as He is) our most
gracious Sovereign, and Liege Lord; and the experience of all times, and the
opinion of all men of sound judgment (Divines and Lawyers) being, that this
Kingdom is a Monarchy, and so acknowledged in many Acts of Parliament, and
this House was instituted by the Kings Predecessors; All Towns sending
Burgesses by their Grants: And you know you engaged for the Lords, as well as
for this House. We believe your mention of our Supremacy is but a pretense, and
that you mean to assume the power you say is in the people, and exclude this
House, as well as King and Lords. It is true, the Members of this House were
chosen by the people of the several Countries and Towns, that sent us to
represent their Petitions to the King, not themselves against the King; and our
consent to such things as the King shall pl ase to enact, is necessary; but you
omit that we are called by the Kings Writ, without which, we could not come
together, nor be sent; And we are not called to redress grievances, but to
present them: for you may very well know the course that all Parliaments, (at
least the House of Commons) have taken in this kind, which is to Petition the
King for redress, and after advice for provision of safety.

That which you say, that the King was at most, but the chief public Officer
of this Kingdom, is contrary to the professions of this House in this present
Parliament, diverse Acts of former Parliaments, and the known Law; and its a
title no age in this Kingdom ever heard of: Could you imagine, that the
Supreme Governor is but an Officer, there being no power to command Him, all
being His Subjects? Look into the Scripture; were the Kings there Officers to
any? and has the King of England less power, then God allowed the Kings of
his own people? or have the people of England greater power, then the people
of God had? Its true, Kings are Ministers of God, but Rulers of the people; and
there is nothing more absurd, then that he who is the Ruler of all, should be
entitled only an Officer to all; Its true, the function of a King is profitable
to all, and He watches for the good of all, but it no way agrees to His calling
to be an Officer in that sense; that is, to be subordinate to any, and cannot
stand with His Supremacy, which we have sworn to defend.

And against what you say; All the Laws of our Kingdom tell us, the King is
accountable to none but God only; and this has been so known a truth, as
this House thought none had been ignorant of it; and this House has never
pretended to any such power, Ed. 2. R.
though it has sometimes contributed to the ends of some Traiterous usurpers
against their lawful Kings, being overawed by terror of Armies, and thereby,
no lawful Parliaments; And you are exceedingly deceived, in that you say, that
all authority is derived from the people, for God gives the King His Authority;
and in the Scripture you find no authority derived from the people to their
Judges or Kings, that being from the Lord; and it pleases God to call himself
a King, and the Savior of the world to be typified by Kings, Psalm 82.
and the Scripture calls Kings, Gods; and if all power had been derived from the
people, those titles had been very incompatible to their Office; And if you
cannot find any proof of such a derivation in Scripture, its too dangerous a
precipice to put our selves on, by running into so grievous a sin as Rebellion,
upon imaginary stories; and we are very sorry that you had an ill ground in
taking up Arms, and a worse intention to turn them against your King; The Law
of the Land (as your selves express) making it Treason to raise War against
the King; and that being so without all exception, and no plea against it, you
may assure your selves, that this House had no such power as you mean, for
there would not have been such a Law for the King, and none for it, if it were
so; And therefore you see how you were deceived, and what need there is both of
Peace, and of an Act of Oblivion, in regard of His Majesty, and the pardon of
Almighty God, for the many evils you have fallen into by this mistake.

(C) You say you considered the manifold oppressions brought upon the Nation by
the King, His Lords, and Bishops; You very well know, that in the many
Remonstrances of this House to the King, we still protested, that though we
represented our grievances to Him, it was with no thought to cast any blemish
upon His Majesty, but that we knew they were the faults of His Ministers, and
we must have censured our selves, if we should have spoken evil of our
Sovereign, and must therefore blame this your expression of oppression by the
King; And to let you see your fault, look on the Ship Money, in whom was the
fault there? though we say it were an oppression; was it not in such as advised
the King, that by Law He might do it, and these were the sworn Judges?

You know the great assistance this House has had from the Lords this
Parliament, and therefore you do not well to charge the Lords with oppression
in general; if any Lords have done amiss, it is not the fault of others, nor
of their order or condition, and it has been a grievous crime among the
people, that whenever there was any offense committed by any person, they would
forthwith reproach all men of the same calling; a course as foolish, as
uncharitable, to accuse the Government for the persons faults: yet this
appeared to be the greatest cause of complaint against the Bishops, that some
of them had done amiss; and you must acknowledge that our engagement was to
remove such oppressions as were breaches of Law, not to fight against the Law
it self, nor to usurp a power over the people: And it seems you are
persuaded, that our Laws are oppression; and how then could this Parliament
proceed to judge any persons guilty of offenses against Laws, if the Laws
themselves were more criminal then the persons? And you would hereby make us
guilty of the blood taken for breach of Law, at your own importunity; for no
man can be punished by the Law, but for offending against the King, and you say
you fought to take away the King, and then there is no Malefactor; and so would
have us destroy men by that Law you say you fought to take away: And we assure
you, we know no better condition to restore the Kingdom unto, then to be
governed by the Laws established, whereby they are the freest people of the
world, and were so in all ages past; And when you profess the cause of your
assisting us was to destroy the Law, you make your selves more guilty of blood
then the Kings party, who say they fight for it.

In that you say that for the continuance of that power, that had oppressed you,
it was evident the King intended to make War; Its true, the King did raise
Forces, but this House never said, that it was to continue the power that
oppressed the people; for all the world knows, that in the matters complained of
as oppressions, He had clearly quitted them long before; And this House
declared, that, War tended to the dissolution of Government, in regard the Laws
(in time of hostility) have not their force, but that does not dissolve our
Allegiance to the King, nor destroy any of His rights.

You say, you know the safety of the people to be above all Law, but you are
very much deceived in the application of that sentence, which, though wisely
said by the Philosopher, is no Canonical Scripture, nor of any validity to
dispense with our obedience, where the word of God requires it; nor is that
saying understood by you; for that the safety of the people is the Supreme
Law, is a direction to the Princes, and Rulers of the people, and to Kings, not
to the people at all; for if the people should judge what is for the safety of
the people, the Governors were in vain, and you might as well say the Army
should lead the General, which your own experience knows to be monsterous;
and this House knows no Supreme Authority, but that of the King, which we
have sworn to defend, and there cannot be two Supreames in one Kingdom, as
your selves acknowledge, and it is impossible it should be, for Parliaments sit
not but at the Kings pleasure, and therefore they wonder you should imagine
such an authority in it; And so you see your selves deceived, both in the
authority and cause fancied; And we understand not, what you mean by acting
the highest which you might do; and if you intend thereby any violence to His
Majesty's Person, which we suspect you do, we abhor the thought of so horrid
an action, and wish you to repent for such thoughts, if they have entered into
your minds.

(D) As you were deceived in your grounds for right reason, flattering your
selves with your private opinions, so much more, in such as you take from the
proceedings of this House; for the Judges were not condemned by it for
declaring the King to be the Judge of safety, but for the consequence they
deduced from thence, which was to levy Ship Money, for you very well knew,
that there may be, as there have been, such sudden accidents, when it is
impossible to call a Parliament, whereby the safety of the Kingdom may be in
danger, and the time required for the King to provide the remedy lost; and this
your selves must needs acknowledge.

And we never denied the King a negative Voice, as you say, but we said, he
ought to consent to such good Laws, as His two Houses should present to Him;
but that is not to deny Him a negative Voice; And we must acknowledge there can
be no Law of force without His consent, and He must judge it good, or else He
is not bound to give His consent, for otherwise His condition were worse then a
Subject.

For taking away the Bishops votes out of the Lords House, you know there was
an Act with the consent of the King and Lords, without which it could not have
been done: and though upon your importunate Petition this House said, they
would settle the Militia without the Lords (doubting the violence then
threatened,) it does not follow they could have done it; But we believe that
thereby, and by your tumults, the Lords (that remained) were moved to join
with us, which otherwise they would not have done: But these proceedings ought
not to be drawn into example, nor the consequences of these actions expected
from us, no more then your threats, which caused many Members to depart, sit
silent, or consent to what you would have. If you account this House the
Supreme Authority, you ought no more to have threatened them, then such as now
sit, for they were as much trusted by their Countries, as those that remain,
and their Countries that sent them cannot in justice be bound by what is done,
when their Trustees are driven away; nor can a part remaining be the
representative body of the people.

(E) You mistake Demonstrations for Suppositions, and you extend the
expressions of this House to your own desires, to have them profess Supremacy
to the King and Lords beyond our meaning: So you do us injury, when you call
our expressions indulgent, that declare our judgment of the Right of the King,
and Lords, and say they are weighed down by those other proceedings of ours,
and so would brand us for double dealing, and imposture with the people: And we
wonder (since you know we pretend not to power to give an Oath, nor judge a
Crime, but transmit it to the Lords for their judgment) that you should
(against all example) imagine such a power in this House, which we never had,
nor can without horrid impiety assume; And all judgments and punishments acted
by the Lords, or this House, are done by power derived from the King, and in
His name, as your selves well know, and without which no obedience were due by
the people to them, or us: And we cannot execute, nor claim any more, then we
have by the known Law of the Land, and by the graunts of His Majesty, and
former Princes. And you would have such words, as were used by us in cases of
difference touching Privileges claimed by us, to out weigh such
determinations, as were made upon long consideration, for it falls out often,
that though we have claimed something as of right belonging to us, we have been
satisfied of the contrary upon debate.

Its indeed impossible as you say, that you should believe that it can consist
with safety or freedom, to be governed either by two or three Supreames; and
as impossible for you to believe, that England has been so governed, or that
there is any Supreme but the King, the denial whereof upon men's imaginations,
that it should not be so, (against all experience, and the fundamental
constitutions of the Kingdom) were too great folly and impudence; and you
ought not to conclude, what the right is by the present practice against all
Antiquity, there having been many things acted in these times of distemper,
which cannot be justified in quiet times.

(F) The Kings Supremacy has been always acknowledged; and the two Houses His
great Council; And by advice of the Lords, and request of the Commons such
Laws have been enacted by the Kings Predecessors, as we profess to fight for;
and by this Government this Kingdom enjoyed the greatest stability and
happiness that has been known: And the Argument you use, that the Negative
of the King and Lords hinders Reformation, may be used against all Governors,
when the people are unruly, who charge their Governors with oppression, and
say they must not be Judges of it, but the people; which is a state of
confusion, not lawful liberty: nor is this constitution a bondage, but the
peoples security, (which by such principles of corrupt reason as you propound)
would be destroyed, and violence and disorder established; And you thereby
discover your impatience to live under any Government but seek to live after
your own will, whereby you condemn the practice of all Christians in the best
times, and nullify the Rules of subjection God has prescribed.

(G) You must know, that the taking of Arms by the King, does not cancel the
obligation we have of Allegiance to His Majesty; And its a great error in you
to expect from us, that we should alter the Government, or injure Him; And as
its impossible for the Supreme Authority to erect a power equal to it self;
so that being acknowledged in the King, it were great presumption and
wickedness in us to seek to take it from Him, nor can we; And if we take from
Him what is not justly ours, by force, we gain no right by it, but guilt and
infamy; And we know, that its for the good of all, that the King have His
right, and it tends to the destruction of the whole people to keep it from Him.

And you see in the Divine Story, that when there was no King in Israel, Judges
17.6.
every man did what he pleased, and sithence the Scriptures have given such
titles to Kings, and expressed the necessity of their calling, and the people
esteem them the breath of their nostrils, and the public safety bound up in
that of their Kings, its a strange Apostasy in you against all duty, Oaths and
examples of Godly men in all ages, to vilify your Sovereign (to whom only
you have sworn Allegiance) with the terms of single person, public
Officer; and you forget, that there is no slavery equal to Faction, nor any
sure remedy for Faction, but Monarchy; You know, you are not the whole people,
and that more differ from you in this opinion, then join with you, and that
its more necessary you should be reconciled, then wasted by continual
divisions.

(H) While you hold your selves guilty of punishments, and would have our
Authority to be your indemnity; you betray your great folly, and disloyalty;
Can you with a good conscience break the Laws you are subject to? and if you
have committed murder, and Treason against the Laws, doubtless our Authority
cannot excuse you against God, nor the Law; and though force might secure you
from punishment, it cannot from guilt, nor the wrath of God, whom you have
offended, being persuaded as you are, that your actions were murder and treason
by the Law of the Land, and your consciences cannot acquit you from doing
actions against wicked persons, tyrants, and oppressors, they being not judged
so by the Law, and you may as well use that reason against us, if you like not
our procedings, as against His Majesty; And if you, and every man may with a
good conscience kill and destroy such as you judge oppressors, Laws are to no
purpose; and where God has not given the sword, its no less then Rebellion to
use it; and its a most profane, and more then heathenish barbarism, to
profess such a destructive Principle; Know this, that no man has power of the
life of another, but where the Law has given it, he stands and falls to his
own Master; and if you kill against the Law, be assured your consciences
cannot acquit you, for you have no right to the sword, and he dies (as
innocent) that dies by your hands in such cases.

(I) You say the Personal Treaty has been cried up most by such as have been
been disaffected to us; we should be sorry that such as were best affected to
us should be less desirous of peace then any, which it is impossible to have
without a Treaty; And we are sorry to see you manifest an affection tending to
the destruction of your Country, to dissuade us from a Treaty, and offer such
considerations of impossibilities to have a Peace; as are the present force
upon the King, and the Provocations used to him; and you make the fear of your
own guilt a cause to continue the War; as if Christians could never forget
offenses, nor wise Princes pardon, nor prefer what is best for their people,
which is Peace, but seek private revenge before public good; You would not
have a Treaty nor Peace with the King, because you have offended Him; and this
House believes, that some Malignant persons, that are void of all Christianity
and affection to their Country, have inserted these uncharitable and bloody
Principles; And as you bring forth the examples of former Kings breaking their
words, so you should remember likewise, there could never be rest to the
Kingdom in former dissentions, till Kings were restored; and as we know not
any underhand dealing by the King in former Treaties, which you talk of, so
that expression you mention, of designs on foot to make the Bills passed
fruitless, was never intended to reflect on the King, but on His Ministers;
And whiles you take notice of the risings and Victories, you might take notice,
that you cannot see when there will be an end of such risings; for you did not
expect them a year since, and what another year may produce, we cannot tell,
and we may fear, God will not bless us longer with Victories, if we be enemies
to Peace.

(K) Your standing amazed proceeds from your mistakes, and while you pretend
danger from the Kings Party as enraged against you, the expressions of your
passions against them appears more criminal, then what you charge them with,
and does not become such as profess to fight for Religion and Liberty.

(L) We give you our sense of the Particulars mentioned by you, which you say
would satisfy all serious people of all parties, and hope that will silence
you for the time to come.

1. We cannot pretend to the Supreme Authority of the people in this House, it
being in the King by Law and the constant submission of the people; we having
only their Petitionary power, as all Parliaments acknowledge; And to deny the
Negative of the King and Lords, were Robbery, when we take that is not due to
us; and Rebellion and disobedience so to usurp on our King the Father of our
Country; and a breach of our trust to the people, from whom we have no such
power, but only to consent to such things, as shall be ordained by
Common Council, that is, by the King with the advice of the Lords.

2, 3. Its out of our power, and not profitable for the Kingdom to have
Parliaments every year, as experience has taught us, and that is well provided
for by Bill already; And we shall be content to set a time for the end of this
Parliament, because it is against the fundamental constitutions of the
Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject to have it perpetual, or longer.

4. To exempt matters of Religion and Gods worship from coercive power, becomes
not a Christian State; and is contrary to all example.

5. That the Supreme Authority should not have power to press Subjects,
stands not with reason nor safety of the Kingdom.

6. To make all men alike, and destroy all civil subordination as the Article
tends to, is contrary to the Laws and safety of this Kingdom.

7. That the Commons should be freed from the jurisdiction of the Lords we
conceive is the Law established, and the trial by twelve men, the liberty of
the Commons: Only upon appeals by Writ of Error a cause may be adjudged in the
Lords House by the advice of the Judges and Kings Council.

8. The eighth is the Law already, that, etc.

9. We shall endeavor to establish it.

10. This shall be done as full as stands with the benefit of the Kingdom,

11. This likewise we desire to effect, so far as may stand with the
preservation of the Kingdom.

12. We shall take care to have the best use made of those grounds for the
public good.

13. This we shall likewise take care to provide for.

14. We think this fit to be done.

15. We shall consider of the defects herein if any be.

16. We know not a more equal way, then Tithe for the Ministers, and think
any other way would be worse, this being most agreeable to Scripture.

17. We think you have no cause to complain of this.

18. Though future Parliaments cannot be bound by the present, you need not
doubt, that any Parliament will abolish propriety, unless it be to satisfy
Tumults.

19. For the Kings Authority is sufficiently known, and His revenue must be
taken care of, but it may lawfully increase and cannot be diminished without
injustice and damage to the Kingdom.

20. This ought to be examined and reformed if there be cause.

21. We do not esteem all men oppressed, that were sentenced in Star Chamber,
High Commission, and Councell-Boord, but for such as have been, they ought to
be repaired according to Law and Justice.

22. All Committees shall be abolished, and matters left to ordinary
proceeding; for the Kingdom cannot be quiet, until it be done.

23. We shall not follow the examples of former ill Parliaments, and take you
heed you do not press us to it.

24. Its already answered.

25. We wonder you should confess your selves guilty of Treason, and cry for
severity upon those, that desire not mercy; and if we put them to death without
breach of any Law, they die innocent, and we shall be guilty of their blood.

26. Would you have all Taxes laid down and an Army kept up? and would you
have men punished for offenses, and your selves spared? you know the Judges are
sworn to do according to Law, and do you think they can acquit the guilty (as
you judge your selves to be) against their Conscience upon our direction? and
should we direct them against Law, and pretend zeal for Law? you see what
reason there is for an Act of Oblivion, and no doubt the History of these times
will be written, and posterity will judge, and if you have broken the Law, (as
you seem to confess it) all the pretenses in the world cannot alter the fact.

27. In the War no doubt many innocent persons have suffered by your hands, as
well as by the Kings; and selfe-justifications and boastings will not appease
the wrath of God; in the mean time there must be an end of War, and Gods and
the Kings mercy implored.

We know the happiness of Peace and the misery of War, and the people will
soon find (if we be a means to continue the War) whence their sufferings have
come; and we have just cause to fear, we shall find a greater loss of honor,
then yet we have discerned; and you that account your selves the people will
find more against you, then for you.

FINIS.

