ANOTHER FIGHT between the Two Armies of Scotch and English, upon an attempt to
take Appleby Castle.

More Scots come in from Carlisle and Barwick. And the Relieving of Major
General Lambert by Yorkshire.

Prince Charleses ship taken by Sir Michael Livesey. Captain Green taken
prisoner. All the Ordnance and Ammunition taken at Marget, near Sandwich. AND
A great Fight at the storming of Colchester at the Mill. With the particulars
of the fight.

WITH The Copy of a DECLARATION shot into Colchester, by Order from the Lord
General Fairfax.

July. 31 Printed for the general satisfaction of moderate men. MDCXLVIII.

Another fight between the two Armies of Scots and English, upon an attempt to
take Appleby Castle.
Noble Sir,
WE are now at Barnard Castle with our Forces, the Enemy continues (so far as
we understand) about Appleby, we have lately had some Troops of horse, and
some Companies of Foot come to us out of Yorkshire, which are some addition to
our number, but the Enemy increases much more, for besides the forces come to
them from Barwick, they have another great party come out of Scotland, by ^^e
way of Carlisle, so that without a greater ^ddition of Forces, we are not
likely to deal with their great body, but in case they come on before supplies
come to us, we are resolved to dispute our ground with them, and indeed do
not doubt of the blessing of God upon us, against that treacherous and
perfideous people. Appleby Castle still holds out against them, and are
resolved to hold it out to the last, they have done the enemy some mischief,
kill^d diverse of their men, the Enemy are active against it, offered the
Governor, Captain Atkinson, very good terms to deliver it up, but he is
resolved to be faithful, and keep it against them to the utmost. We hear the
Enemy intends to clear the Country as they go, and to that purpose, have sent
a party to Cockermouth Castle, to take in that, and likewise to the Isle which
was taken in by a party of ours, Commanded by Major White, presently after the
taking of Cockermouth, but we hope they will find our men better resolved
then we found theirs, for the keeping out of those places. We hear not yet
where the Lieutenant General is with his party, but only do understand by
common fame, that he is upon his march Northward, so that we do expect to hear
from him every day.

Barnard Castle July 25. 1648.
Sir,
WE have taken a Frigot of Prince Charleses by 12 Soldiers who passing along
near the harbor at Marget, espied a ship there alone, which they supposed
might be one of the revolted ships.

These Soldiers took with them two seamen, and with a small boat went
toward the ship, and called to know if she was one of the Parliaments ships,
and they had answer made from aboard no, they were enemies.

Captain Green the Commander of the ship called to the Gunner to make ready
to discharge upon them if they came near.

The 12 Soldiers with the two seamen (notwithstanding passed on to the ship,
and had no shot made against them.

For when they came near (diverse of the seamen belonging to the Frigot being a
shore) Captain Green when he saw the seamen in the boat with the Soldiers,
cried out to those in the ship, to forbear to oppose them, saying, They are
friends, they are friends let them come.

By this means they were boarded and seized on the Captain, with some others,
and took the ship with all therein,

They have taken Captain Greenes Commission from Prince Charles, To kill, and
slay, sink, and burn all that should oppose them, with other Commissions, and
diverse papers of concernment, which Sir Michael Livesey has sent up to the
Parliament.

We have taken all their Ordnance, Powder and Ammunition, with provisions, and
whatsoever was in the ship, and are putting her into a condition to serve the
Parliament.

The other seamen (I believe are weary of their design) in the other revolted
ships, and if they can get ashore, many of them will scarce be got aboard again.

Sandwich July 27. 1648.
SIR,
THe last night about 12 a clock we gave a very hot Alarm to the Town by
fiering round upon them, and in the mean time fired the Middle Mill under
their works, being the only water mill the Enemy had, and cut the slace to
divert the water, and turn it another way, that of the sluice took good
effects, so did the fire at first, but afterward went out, the Enemy took an
hot Alarm at first upon this business, thinking we had stormed, but when they
saw it was only an Alarm they fired very little, we had one man drowned, one
killed, and some others wounded.

Late at night also the General received a Letter from Sir John Wentworth and
Mr. Brewster: dated near Yarmouth the 24 July 9 at night, signifying that the
two Aldermen of the Town had been a board the ship where the Prince was, and
were sent back again to the Town, but what the agreement was they do not
yet know, so at present they keep out both sides, and further certified that
the ships were sailing toward Harrich.

From his Excellencies Tent near Colchester July 6. 1648. This enclosed was
shot with Arrows into the town last night before the storm.



A DECLARATION shot into Colchester by an Arrow.
THe Lord General Fairfax has sent several summons to the Town, in one of
which he offered that all private Soldiers, and persons of that rank, laying
down Arms, and engaging not to bear Arms any more against the Parliament,
should have liberty and passes to go beyond Sea, with Equipage befitting their
qualities, engaging not to return into this Kingdom without leave from the
Parliament, and all persons should have quarter, and be free from plunder or
violence of the Soldier This being rejected, and scornfully retorted by the
Lords, Norwich, Capel, and Sir Charles Lucas, The General yet offered to make
good the same conditions, to so many as would accept thereof, except those
three persons themselves, which has accordingly been performed with advantage
to all such as have come off.

He has lately summoned them again to surrender the Town, and the Officers to
render themselves to Mercy, and the rest only to the future obedience of the
Parliament: This also has been rejected with scorn. Nevertheless,
understanding that the Lords, Goring, Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas, and some
Officers of their council, have concealed these Overtures, both from the
Soldiers and Townsmen, and from many of the Officers, and that they have
given out, as if they had good conditions offered to themselves, if they would
render up the Soldiers, and perceiving that the Soldiers and Townsmen have
been deluded by them, and their chief agents, with daily expectation of relief,
while there is none at all toward them. The General is willing to make good
the same conditions, to so many as shall timely accept thereof, except the
Lords, Goring, Capell, and Lucas themselves, with the Lord Loughborough, Coll.
Far, Coll: Lawrence, and Cap. Lynn, and except all such Soldiers as have been
in the Army since the siege, and are gone into the Town.

T. FAIRFAX.
July 25. 1648.
FINIS.

