AMSTERDAM, AND HER Other Hollander Sisters put out to Sea, BY Van Trump, Van
Dunck, and Van Dumpe. OR, A true description of those so called Hoghens Mogens,
set out to the life; with the manners of their Quagmire Bog, and other special
varieties touching their unmannerly manners, and base Ingratitude to our
English Nation, from their shells of beggary to their now present pride.

Penned to give our Nation timely notice of their subtle frauds and delusions.

Though Van Trumpe fight,
And Grotius write
That the Trade of fishing is free:
Yet if Seldom or Blague
Should sail to the Hague,
The Hoghens must beg on their knee.
Ah! Gens nescia very. LONDON, Printed for Richard Harper, in Smithfield, near
the Hospital Gate. 1652.

The Hollander Anatomized.
OH for an expert Chyrurgion to dissect this Dutch Bloat-Herring! Or a skillful
Cheesemonger to open this Great Butter-box! For neither Hondius, nor Fischer,
nor any other Map-cutter is able sufficiently to do it; they are such
Camelions, and Water Rats, that it is hard to set them forth in their Natures,
or Colors; for a man can scarce tell where to have them sure either on Land or
Water; but where soever you see them, you must trust to your self; but to give
our Countrymen timely notice of them, that they may know for what
Horse-Leaches, Spunges, and Cormorants our Nation has so many years past
fought to defend and uphold, we will describe these Dutch Hares, Caterpillars,
and Sharkes, these Vipers, Vultures, and Bores into thirteen parts; of which
these so blown Bladders, the Dutch are made up off. We begin with their Head
first, and that is,

2. SCHISM.
OR in plain English a Gally-mophrey of all Religions; except only what is true
and pure: Their main Nest is Amsterdam, which has as many Sects as Chambers,
for they let out Lodgings to all people, and if they pay, they regard not how
they pray; so they can prey upon them: That this is so, take a view of some, as
Calvinists, Hugenots, Lutherans, Brownists, Anabaptists, Arminians, Socinians,
Pelagians, Papists, Jews, Swinglians, Remonstranten, Contra-Remonstranten,
with diverse others not fitting to be named, much less to be allowed; that they
account the best Religion which brings most gains to them for toleration, were
it the Turks Alchoran, that is their best God that brings the most Gold; if the
Cantore be full, let their Churches be empty, they have a thing called a
predioante maer sunder gist, heel veit up stautd, they have one called a
Preacher, but without money he is no Teacher. The next is,

3. Their REBELLION.
THere are three to whom they should show subjection, the Emperor, the King of
Spain, and the French; there are many Towns that do show over their Gates their
true Owners, as for the Emperor, the Eagle, U^recht, Newmighem, Teele,
Arneheam, Campen, Deventer and Swool, Emmerick and Wesel, so that if the
Emperor, and the other two Kings had their own feathers, the Dutch would
scarce have any for themselves: Queen Elizabeth spoke true and home to them,
that because they said they were Reformed Protestants, in their Petition to
her, she would relieve them, but indeed they were but Traitors and Rebels to
their Prince; the Provinces and Towns they have were got by English Valor, and
Scotch, and French, for they fight with other men's hearts, not with their own;
they have broke from the Spanish yoke, and slipped out of the Emperors Collar by
colloging with England and France, whom they profess to love, but it is for
their gains and their safety; they crave a Protector for fear of a fall, it is
not for honesty but in policy; the red Cross and white have kept their
Quagmire for them, for better their Country is not then a Reformed Bog. The
next is,

4. Their PRIDE.
FOr which they were humbled and brought low, yet now they can speak nothing in
their Titles but blasphemy, the Hogheuste Moegeuste Staten, the most high, and
most mighty States and Lords: Insolent and proud they are, for they will boast
of their Coat of Arms, though they be a pair of Pot-hooks, or two Hogsheads; if
they give a Lion, though black, or blew, or green, or white, without Head, or
Eyes, or Paws, they brag themselves to some Dukes, or Princes Descent, but this
pride swells most, when Rotterdam's or Breda's Beer, or new Megheus Mull, or
Brandt Wine puffs them up, for then they fear not hanging, strappadoing, or
damming: they are brag and proud of any thing, as of their blew bands, but more
of a clean shirt, but they are the most proud of a May Even, and of their
Ships, their fine Towns, and cleanly Wifes; the best and surest way to get any
thing of them, is, curb them, to threaten them, and to beat them, for then
they fear and love you; if you pray them, they are Tyrants and Peacocks, or
think you a Meacock. The next to be handled is,

5. That mad practice of Drunkenness.
THey have their Gesouten, as the Bore the Kindern maekt, their Vpsie Freezen,
their off Gesupen, their Mel floribus, with many other such forms of healths
and cuppings; they sit longest at it, when they have had their pickled
Herrings, it is a hard thing to find any of them sober at four or five in the
Afternoon; many practice by themselves rather then sit idle: Scarce a
Malefactor but will dye drunk, and their Preachers not only permit it but
persuade it, that they should dye the more valorously: Oh brand Wine! takes
away the fear of death, and they use Scripture for it as they go to the
Gallows, Give Wine to him that is ready to perish; they will come out of the
Guelly house as to Morris Dance, though to the Gibbet; the Maids and Women are
as free as the men, and usually choose their Husbands by their Cups; then they will
snick a snee, who at other times fear a Holly-wand; they will drink of all Waters,
and are indeed contrary to all other men for others are best and stoutest when
sober, these are then the only men when they are no men, and dare stand against
all when they cannot stand at all; if ever you conquer them let them be sober,
for then they are plain Cowards. And then follows next,

6. Their Cowardlinesse.
THey are like great Trees, hollow within, more sap then heart, they dare do
nothing single, but altogether as our Lions in Smithfield on Mondayes,
Wednesdayes, and Frydayes, Oxen or Sheep: they love not to stand only perdeiu,
except in drink; other Nations got them their Towns, and yet keep them for
them, scarce any of their own Nation Soldiers, and they never trusted upon any
notable design alone: Witness Trehay, and Todos los Sanctos, for they will
yield or run for it, and the Battle at Neuport, where all the Duch ran the
field, and left the English and Scotch to fight while they fled; lope, lope, is
their word, and their deed too; you must not fear them for their gross bulk,
they are like Drums, make a great sound, and set other together by the ears,
but do nothing themselves; if he runs not too far, you may see him come in when
all is done to pillage, not fight.

7. They want hearts, but have crafty heads.
BUt though they want hearts, yet they have crafty heads, dull to apprehend,
but subtle to execute, their covetous craftiness, and crafty covetousness do
exceed the Lombard Masters, though they be Jews; their whole trading is but
defrauding, you may live 20. years there, and yet never see any English Silver
or Gold, except your self changes it, and then you may bid it farewell for ever
seeing it again: their practice in the East and West Indies, and in the South
Seas is to decry and frustrate any other Nation, or Commodities to enhance
themselves and their own: when Wars was betwixt England and Spain, many of our
Colliers from Newcastle came short home, the Dunkerkers bore the fault, but
it is too much suspected the Hollander did the mischief; witness also their
planting in our Fens and Marshes, and their Herring fishing, full of subtilty,
deceit, and covetousness, like Spunges suck in, but part with nothing except
squeezed from them; the Nation has been the Horse-Leaches of Europe, and are
the very Mountebankes to cry up themselves, and despise all others. Next
follows,

8. Their Injustice and Ingratitude.
THey should be thankful at least to them who saved their Country, their
lives, Wives, and Children too: But to kill them and shoot bullets into their
breasts is unheard off, and unparalleld unjustice, this has been their
practice: As Vipers eat out their Mothers bowels, so do these; had England left
them, or let them lie open, they had not had a Sluice to shut up, for ere this
time their best Town to put into had been Dam or Scichterdam, for as for
Minichedam they could not have dared to hold it when the Spanyard had the power
of their Wives and their lives too; they deal with England as the Lawyer did
with two men about the Oyster, eat out the meat, and gave them the shell; we
may say of their Courtesy as it is in the Proverb, save a Thief from the
Gallows, and he will be the first to help to hang him.

9. Their busy meddling.
OR to use their own words, their interloping into the affairs of other
states, as though all other Nations were dying, and had made these their
Overseers; they are the only Medlars, and to be sure they are best when they be
rotten; at their first rising they could not say they kept correspondency with
other Princes, for none would own them, for then they were poor Petitioners,
thought now they would be Masters over all: at their first crawling and
spawning, they had only their Agenten, but now having sucked wealth and
strength by the forbearance and indulgence of their betters, timely to tutor
them, they send forth their Factors for Ambassadors; they have rumor'd the four
parts of the world with their pragmaticall Intelligencers, and they who had
scarce a home to hide their heads in, will not now be kept at home; they are
like cunning Mountebanks, who find out others diseases by tampering with their
distempered pulses, and having let them blood, care not how soon they die; if
they hear of an Ulcer in any State or Kingdom, they care not to cure it, but
to procure it; they are the very Glysters of the World, which if you let into
the bowels, they will not leave tumbling and rumbling, till you must be forced to
shite them out, and then you shall smell these busy bold intruders: their
Country is but a stinking house of Office, into which you may go, but if you
stay too long, you're sure to be stripped, or stifled. They are like Black-soap,
whick though laid under you, yet in short time by warmeth and heat, will froath
and foam above you; you cannot step into any Princes Court, though it should be
to the titular King of Scots, if he have any, or to the black Aranokin, or to
RUPERTS Starting holes, but these busy Wasps and Hornets called Hollanders,
will with their Braggadotia's, And how is it mine here, be found there, and tell
lies as big as Elephants, not to honor our Nation, but to ruin it, which they
have long gaped after, but as yet happily have missed. We must not let them
into our very tails, our Fens, Marshes, Creeks, or Harbors, though VAN TRUMP
aims at it for they stink where they go: in plain terms, they have meddled so
far, that we hope they can interveer no further.

10. Their Prophannesse.
THey pretend to their Beeden-Dagen, their Fast-daies, and Sabboath keeping,
but however, they will not forgo the keeping of their Carmishen, that is,
their drunken Fairs, though in Sermontime upon those very days: when they
meet; their zeal is more upon their Brand-wine, than upon their Doom of
Utrecht, or their neat Church of Tergo: they^l swear Godts Sacramenten, and by
10000. Tun of Divelen that Gods word is heel goodt, and seer Vraectick, yet
they must not they say, trust only unto that, or always be at prayers: in
their Cups, they neither fear damning. nor doubt it; if HENRICK VAN DUNNS, and
CORNELIUS VAN DER DOLTEN, and Captain JORIS SUNDER BROECKEN, with that
extravagant, Mine here Van de Boors Schancen, meet as they usually do, with the
stout Beer of the swaet perdt, or black Horse of Rotterdam; it is not four
Brigad's of Devils, nor four Regiments of Spaniards, whom they fear as bad as
Devils, nor yet a double Jury of their Elders, though they show a Geneva
Commission, can rouse or remove them; then Broders, ought Sistern, often Kindern,
often Diabolos are all alike, for Heaven there is so much holiness there, that
(they say) there is no hopes, nor need of their Company: for Hell, they know
most of their Country men live, and love to live in such low places, and
therefore they had rather be there with their acquaintance, and Ancestors, then
to strive to go thither where they doubt both acquaintance and entertainment.
Let their Preachers say what they will, these will do what they list; they are
hardly got to Church, and are glad when it is done, for as they go out, you shall
hear them usually swear and curse.

11. Their Time-serving.
FOr the advancement whereof, they have neither wanted opportunity or
Machivilian policy; they have been such Staten Heeren, that if some other
States had not been as wise as they have been subtle and knavish, we should
scarce have known what a clock it had been in England: how have they for many
years deluded the French, Italian, Genoways, Venetians, Wallons, Switzers,
Irish, Friezlanders, Highlanders, nay, have sucked advantages, and gulled even
the great Mogull, the Turks, Persians, Indians, Tartars, Muscovites, Russians,
Prussians, Polanders, Norwegians, Sweeds, Danes, Germans, Vandelopians, North
Indians, or South-landers, Guineans, Diabolands, Calecutians, nay, their old
enemies, the Spaniolos, and who sooner Cajold with the Portugals, then these
phlegmatic Dutch? who knows not that though King JAMES of England was their
Protector, yet the Isle of Rees, and other places of France, then in war with
England, were supplied with new vessels, and old Brand wine men from Euchuysen,
Vu^shing, and Rotterdam, yes, and were furnished with stout, gallant Ships,
called profanely, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? we protected them, and they
protected France our Enemies, and sent Ammunition to shoot Bullets into our
hearts, and yet were reputed Protestanten, and what cared they, so their Devils
nest (their Cantore) might be full, they have tampered about a Country called
the Pallatinate, they regard friends no better then foes, nay, Enemies better
then friends, if they can get moneys by them.

12. Their unnatural Cruelty.
Where they have either opportunity, or hearts to show it, they deal with
their best friends as they do with their Sallads when they are ripe, cut them
to pieces and devour them; witness that bloody and unparalleled Burchery of
the English at Amboyn in the East Indies, where their torments upon the brave
English did exceed those of Pizzarro, or any other Spaniard in the West Indies,
and cannot be equaled but by Devils or themselves; where they have not used it,
it has not been for want of Will, but Power; they are like Butchers, they buy
fat Oxen, not to keep them, but kill them: they know not what true valor is,
and to speak truly, no such Tyrants as Cowards, when they can get the Mastery:
I would have them dealt withal, as Stags, or such other Creatures cowardly of
nature, and yet revengefull, to follow with a pack of lusty barking and biting
hounds, good brass Cannon in our stout ships, they are at present on tip-toe,
if well set to, they will quickly alter that posture to the heel: they never
fight upon equality, and do not so properly slay as murder whom they suspect;
they love a Knife better then a Sword, and to stob privily, then to fight
openly; let England look well to them, for if they become Masters, it is sure we
shall be made slaves, or Butchered outright: they are to be kept like Horses,
not pamperd for fear of kicking, or casting their Masters: a good Bitt in
their mouths, and a whip in our hands is the only way to curb and awe such
pampered Jades: if you ride them, you may rule them; if they rule you, they will
be sure to ruin you: we need not fear their courage, but their cowardly
cruelty. One step further, and so I leave you.

13. Their Incivility,
OR indeed heathenish behavior: Queen ELIZABETH said, that there was not a
true bred Gentleman amongst them, but one, and that was Mine Here Van Dort: but
he is dead long ago, and surely died without Heirs or any kindred: for Boren
there are in every place, and Boreneke, and these the Kindern Maercht. You
cannot torment them worse, than to put off your hatt, or congy or Complement,
for they will only afford you a blockish nod, with lough mine here: one Complement
serves their whole Country, how is it mine here: belching, gaping, or farting is
their Country fashion at Dinner or Supper; they rise, piss, and come to fill
their bellies; washing their hands or their faces is rare, except they come
under a Barber, and that perhaps may be after a half years Voyage, and it is a
trouble to them, were it not for their Wives, they would smell as strong as
Jews; they will take all is given them, but for thanks you may have a fart: they
are silent amongst strangers, but it is for fear if they should speak they
should only be laughed at. ERASMUS their own Countryman sets them forth to
the life: I am weary of them, and I Will so leave them. Only this for Conclusion,
you may as well get a Wild Boar into a Dublet, as to make one of those Borish
Dutchmen to button his Dublet.

FINIS.

