AN ANIMADVERSION Upon the Late Lord Protectors DECLARATION, For the distressed
Churches of LESNA, etc.

TOGETHER With a seasonable Caution against the PETITION of the Kentish
Anabaptists, for too large a Toleration in Religion, and throwing down all
Established maintenance for the MINITSRY.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1659.

Vaticinium in Decretum OLIVERI Protectoris de Ecclesiis Polonicis Sublevandis.
QVi Lesnaea refers, miseris succurrere promptus,
Esto domi, Lupui iste tuos, hen! dovorat Agues,
Bt tu salvus eris, tulit haeo cum vulnera Christus?
Sic gemibundus queritur tremebundus de periculo Protectoris. Anglicus Vates.

Prophetical Verses, upon occasion of the Lord Protector's Declaration, for a
Collection for distressed Churches of Poland. 1658.
AH thou that pittiest Lesna 's sufferings,
Thine own Oppressors shelter with thy wings:
The same Wolf which abroad so ravenous is,
Worries thy Lambs, whilst they Protection miss:,
And can thou think thy felf secure, when he
Lies wounded that was Crucified for thee
Thus he complains with tears,
who full of fears
My Lord Protectors danger
on his heart bears.
An Animadversion upon the late Lord Protector's Declaration, for the
distressed Churches of Lesna.
A Good Admonition to Governors, whilst they have power in their hands, to
take special care for the oppressed; for God is the avenger of the oppressed:
Therefore King James gave his Son, Prince Henry, excellent advice in these
words, Although (said he) that the crime of Oppression, be not in the rank of
crimes that you should hold unpardonable, yet the over common use of it in this
Nation, as if it were a virtue, especially by the greatest rank of. Subjects in
the Land, requires the King to be a sharp censurer thereof. Be diligent
therefore to try, and awful to beat down the horns of proud oppressors; embrace
the quarrel of the poor and distressed, as your own particular, thinking it
your greatest honor to repress the Oppressors; care for the pleasure of none,
neither spare you any pains in your own Person, to see their wrongs redressed;
and remember the honorable style given to my Grandfather of Worthy Memory, in
being called, The poor man's King.

If King Charles had carefully kept to this wise advice, or Oliver the
Protector, they had both been more happy in themselves and their Families; but
when complaints of gross Oppressions could not be heard, when horrid designs
were laid for innocents lives and Estates, when abominable oppressions were
confirmed by Law in the Courts of Justice, when God, his Truth, his Ordinances,
his Ministers, and all that was dear to him, Psalm. 67.9.10.12.
was abused and oppressed, then God arose to Judgment to save all the meek of
the earth. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath
shall thou restrain; he shall cut off the spirit of Princes, he is terrible to
the Kings of the Earth.

God give the Parliament wise, careful, and ready hearts, in their day, to
break every yoke of oppression, and prevent the subtle practices of the spirit
of Antichrist, working amongst us under a disguise, which subtily seeks to
oppress many hundred families, whilst it cries against great oppression,
witness the late Petition of the Kentish Anabaptists, who so fast degenerate
into Popery, or what is worse, first grudging at Tithes, and now professing
against all established maintenance for the Ministry.

Forced Maintenance they call it, and they think its branded sufficiently with
this notion, because its forced: but what fault is there in that it is forced,
so long as it is just? If the Parliament force them to be just, and honest, and
sober, and peaceable, are these things evil because they are forced to it? If a
thief would steal, has he cause to complain of the Magistrate because he will
not let him? If a drunkard would be drunk but dare not, will we allow of his
complaint, that he must be sober whether he will or no? If mutinous tumultuous
spirits are disarmed and watched, shall the Magistrate be called a Tyrant
because he will not suffer them to rebel? What iniquity is there in forcing
their consciences to be good, just, honest, and not to spoil Gods Ministers of
what is their right?

But it is not their Right:

Nay, let it fall to the Ground then; But why not their Right? Has not the
Laws of the Land made the Tithes the right of the Ministry? Have not the holy
Vows of their forefathers consecrated the Tithes to God for the service of
the Ministry? its Gods Right, and the Ministers right by sacred Vows and just
Laws; and have they no right to them?

Have not their Landlords right to their Rent? Have not the Magistrates right
to their Tribute and Taxes? have not they themselves right to the Inheritance
that their Fathers left them? Why then have not the Ministers right to the
Tithes which are theirs by the same Law, and with like Approbation of Gods Word?

But it is a grievous burden to pay Tithes.

Nay, but they mistake in this also, its no burden at all; its no burden to a
man to pay another that which is justly his; nay it were a burden upon his
conscience not to pay it?

Is it a burden to an Executor to pay the Legacies of the Will of the
Deceased, that which he never purchased, never could call his? the Tithes are
your Fathers Legacies to the Ministry, they are Gods Legacies; that God that
gives you the nine parts, and the Minister the Tenth; and is it a burden to
pay Gods Legacies, and your fathers Legacies.

If you take away the Tenth, may not God justly take away the other nine? what
then have you got by your Covetousness? Look to it ye subtle Robbers of God
and his poor Church, that think your gain Godliness, look to it before hand;
when you have done your worst, and spoiled the Ministers of the Gospel, then
will God surely spoil you; and where is your gain?

Ye fools and blind, have you forgotten Korahs conspiracy, that invaded the
Priesthood and holy things of God, take heed it be not verified upon you; They
shall perish in the gainsaying of Korah. Oppression cries, and will be heard
in heaven against you for this.

Were this the way for the Parliament to do worthily, as ye say, to take away
the ancient Rights of God and his Ministers, and leave nothing in the room,
because it must not be forced; nay were not this the unworthiest act that ever
they committed? you come with the old sophistry of the Serpent; Ye shall be as
Gods, says the Devil to our first Parents; Subtle Tempers usher in their sin
with a fair mask, and Wine that intoxicateth; you shall do worthily, and
surmcunt all before you, the Lord rebuke that lying foul spirit: Here Is Ehuds
present before his Dagger, Zibahs flattering before his plunder, an abhorring
of Idols before the committing of sacrilege.

Alas, I see what strong Temptation, Governors are assaulted with, but the
Lord heartens them to be courageous and faithful, that they may not stain their
famous Works with that which is most ignominious in the latter end, but give
such a severe check as David did his kinsmen; What have I to do with you ye
Sons of Zerviah? And as our Lord Christ did his own dear Disciples, when his
Counsel was not good, Get thee behind me Satan, for thou art an offense unto
me.

The other part of their desire, for a tolleration of those that dissent in
matters of faith, is well spoke to by the Reverend Dr. Reynolds, in a late
Sermon before the Parliament, upon Phil. 3.15, 16. therefore I refer these men,
if they will be informed, to that work.

FINIS.

