LANCASHIRES Valley of ACHOR, IS Englands Door of Hope: Set wide open, in a
brief History, of the Wise, Good, and Powerful hand of Divine Providence,
Ordering and Managing the Militia of Lancashire; Not only to the Preservation,
but Exaltation of a Poor, and Praying people, in two Hundreds; Against, and
above a considerable Army, of Popish, and ill-affected persons in four
Hundreds: Wherein the strift of Piety and Providence, with impiety and humane
strength, in the weakness of means, unto graduall, and complete Victory, is
laid out; to advance Gods praise, and advantage Englands Faith.

By a well-wisher to the peace of the Land, and piety of the Church.

Isa. 8.9, 10. Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves,
and ye shall be broken in pieces. Tak council together, and it shall come to
naught, speak the word and it shall not stand, for God is with us. Psalm. 46.7,
11. The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah. The
Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah. Jer. 30.16, 17
Therefore all they that devour thee, shall be devoured, and all thine
adversaries, every one of them shall go into captivity and they that spoil thee
shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon th^e will I give for a prey. For I
will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, says the
Lord, because they called thee an outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom no man
seeks after. LONDON: Printed for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Parrot. 1643.

THE EPISTLE To the Reader.
Good Reader,
THou have a willing (though weak) Discovery of Gods foot steps in
Lancashire, according to best information. Some ornaments of the History were
laid aside for reserved Reasons. Gods Praise, and thy Profit were specially
intended. Pray that the means may be assisted to these ends: So shall thou
engage, to add, or alter, upon Information, what may honor God, and help
thee. I have performed what was proper to mine own profession, leaving the
Soldiers part, wherein men, and things were notable, to the Soldiers
performance.

LANCASHIRES Hour of sad Temptation, AND Joyful Issue.
GOds eternal Counsels about his Church, are in time turned into Promises,
Promises into Prayers, Prayers into Providence, and Providence into Praises.
Providence is the glass of Gods Attributes, and Promises, of the Saints grace,
Graces and Prayers: It is the wealth and wages of time present, the treasure
and encouragement of time future. The recording of providence is not the least
portion of Gods praise, of our duty, of posterities patrimony.

The free, and full, and joint trading of spiritual Merchants, in the precious
commodity of Prayers in these last years, (wherein sin in the enemies, and
grace in the Saints strove for victory) was sure to bring in with returns. Is
it not even so? Let Scotland speak, England, the City, the Parliament. And can
Lancashire say nothing? I am charged to bring in this Testimony, which I shall
do (God shining upon my way) orderly and clearly, according to best information.

The wise God (resolved to raise a double-glorious work in this forlorn
County, of ruin to the evil, and of rest to the good) forelaid a
double-foundation, of sin in the enemy, and humiliation in his people. That was
a Series of injustice, with the effects and attendants: This a course of
repentance in public Fasting and Prayer; both held parallel from first to last.

The much to-be-lamented Lord Strange (not of his native disposition (as is
hoped (if the height of the Sail did not overtop the Ship) ^ut through the
force of evil Councels, (the common calamity of great personages) was carried
down those st^ong streams of Arbitrary government, and advance of Popery.
Witness his Taxations as Lord Lieutenant, his Popish offi^ers, his injurious
i^ter^^ding in the election of K^ights, and^. The injured, petition the the^
exact and dreadful Court of Justice, enforce their P^tition by Declaration.
The wisdom of that just Court (at once to express their disrellish of these
doings, but hopes of that no^le person notwithstanding) do subst^act the power
of L^ncashir^, and cast in the power of Cheshire. But correction is grievous to
him that forsakes the way. When ^ust and moderate senten^^ prov^s the food of
corruption, it gathers sudden and great strength. He that formerly withdrew his
influence from the County, now denies it to the Kingdom, leaves the House of
Loras, ^reaks that honorable Union, increases the Dissension, joins with the
North against the South, receives Commission from the King to cross the
Parliament, seeks to su^ject and inslave them (the best amends the oppressed
must expect if strength prevail) who had given no cause, save only they
complained they were wronged, and sought redress. The spirit of the ^ommission
will not suffer it to rest: There must be a general Muster at Pr^ston, the
people must be thrust into a crowd, that they who desire, might securely rob
them of their Mag^zin, reposed (as their proper goods) in Liver-pool, Presto^,
W^rrin^ton. Herein the Lord himself, the Sheriff, the Commissione^s, had and
acted their several parts with success, little imagining that so close a
business should be told in Manch^ster. But J^bs messenger escapes to bring
tidings, though but sad. Now a Ray of divine Providence brake forth, in the
wise and peaceable way of securing Manchester Magazine; which was this; The
well-affected in M^n^hester and thereabouts, appear in the following Petition
to the Committee and Deputy Lieutenants.

To the Right Worshipful, they of the Committee, and the rest
Deputy Lieutenants, entrusted by the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the
Militia of the County Palatine of Lancaster.
WE, whose hands are hereto subscribed, apprehending eminent and imminent
danger concerning the Magazine here in Manchester, do humbly beseech your
Worships to give command (if in your judgem^nts you think fit) That the same
may be removed from the present place of fear, and placed where you may
confide. And upon intimution thereof, we are all unanimously concluded to be
ayding and assisting in the execution thereof; we humbly conceiving our proper
interests to be in it, not only as subjects, but also as having born our
proportioable parts of charge in procuring the same. And we shall ever pray,
etc.

This preventing Petition found this satisfying Answer.

WHereas there have been heretofore diverse great Leavies of Moneys laid upon
this County of Lancaster by the Lord Strange, late Lord Lieutenant of the said
County, and his Deputy Lieutenants; for their manner of disposing of which,
they have been pleased to give an account unto us, and have repayed several
Sums of money in some parts of this County, acknowledged by the account to be
in their hands th^n undisposed of; and by their said account did aver^, They
had bestowed 440 pounds in Powder, Match, and the like Ammunition, which they
delivered up in several Towns of this County, in other part of re-payment of
the said moneys so l^avied by them. And whereas the Sheriff of this County, and
some others, have lately seiz^d into their hands and possession the said
Powder, Match and Ammunition in the Towns of Preston and Leverpoole, and have
threatened and attempted to do the like in Manchester, without givi^g any
account, either by what Authority, or for what us^, they did and do the same:
We therefore tendering our own inter^st, and poss ssion of this small remainder
left at Manchester, have thought good to take it into our hands, for the
defense of the King, both Houses of Parliament, and this County of Lancaster.

Thus wisdom and honesty, in a way of manifest authority, got the leading of
subtlety and injustice; the Snare at last is broken, and a Seed of defense
happily sown. But if Manchester will not be cheated of their Magazine, they
shall be forcibly dispoiled; Forces are summoned to Bury for that end, but the
confluence of the well-affected to Manchester for defense, did them the favor
of disinission for that time: And lest this business should appear in its own
colors, it is colored over by a meeting of the Array at Wigan; the sleeping
Magazen is adjudged to travel, part to Bury, part to Ratchdale, and part to
lie in Manchester, upon an order from the King, published at Manchester Cross
to that purpose: Under this new color the Lord Strange returns with his Forces
to Bury, calls a second Muster; some of the Town of Manchester, and
thereabouts, (more forward in this than forecited) attend his Honor, think to
make all well by engaging themselves to buy so much Powder, and lay it in the
empty place, and to sweeten and sink all former bitter and clogging passages,
they invite him to a Banquet, upon condition that he come peaceably with his
own attendance; they unhappily forgetting, or not considering, that it was not
a little Powder that was sought, or the submission of a few fearful men, but a
Town, and not a Town only, but a County, nor that only, but the honorable
rule and government of it; things out of the teach of their arm, but hopefully
within the compass of his own power. According to this desire, (not according
to the condition) was the march for Manchester ordered; his Honor came
attended with many Horse, they entered the Town in an Hostile and insulting
manner, with cocked Pistols, and shouts, that the town was their own, their
own. The Sheriff read the Commission of Array, which evidenced a composition
for War, not for Peace. Some wise and well affected, (foreseeing what others
did not believe, till they sadly saw) had laid in some Musquetteers and Pikemen
against such a time, resolving to lie hid, if not forced out of Peace. But the
unconditioned carriage of these in-comers, beats the Drum, to bring our men in
sight, only to put them in remembrance of the conditions agreed on: They will
not remember, but forcibly ride upon our men, give them course language, strive
to disarm them, sorely wound one, and cruelly slay another; and had not God
mercifully sent water from heaven to quench this fire, and moved them to be the
Peace-keepers, which were not the peace-conluders, they that have since sought
our blood, had themselves been satisfied with blood. But blessed be God that
heaven and earth did concur to quiet this dangerous Commotion. Let Manchester
and the neighborhood never forget how their hands were blessed from blood,
whilst the hands of those that strove with them, were imbrued therein. By this
time the Array had gotten enough done; the unappeasable cry of blood is
against them, seconded by the bitter cry of some truly pious in the Town, who
were in extreme danger to be pulled in pieces, they and their houses, by the
part-taking and incensed Rascalitie, the admirers and adorers of greatness,
being feasted with the Crummes that fall from their Tables.

God fore-appointing the hour of Temptation, and resolving in a course of
ordinary (though to us unusual,) means, to show us his salvation, sent a man
before, a skillful and faithful Engineer, to be ready to concur with our
necessity, and desire, to take course for our own defense, which now will
admit neither dispute nor delay. This prepared and provided instrument is
entertained, falls to artificial and restless motion, till the Mud-wals at the
several passages were finished, when God gave an Alarm from the plundering,
disarming Array in Cheshire, Sept. 13. being Tuesday, to heighten the spirits
of the well-affected in the Town, above the opposition of the malcontent,
that the opposed stoopes might be set down, and the chains, coupling the
Works, completed, he well-knowing they had almost as much work to do, as time
to do it in. All this time that God was contriving our preservation in a way of
probable means, Satan in a contrary course was plotting our subjection or
desolation, and when the door of our defense was once shut, not before, (oh the
waking watchull providence of God!) but presently after the floodgates of our
opposition were opened; for it was about Friday night, Sept. 23. ere the Works
were finished, and the Lord appeared on Sabbath Day morning, and it was Friday
night, if not Saturday night, ere the defendants were anchored against winds
and waves.

Thus we are come to Manchester Seige, of which I will not give a full and
particular account, because it is already performed by several good hands;
only observe three things;

1. The time in which it fell out. 2. The several temptations in it, with
their Issues. 3. And some remarkable passages.
THe time when it began was September the five and twentieth, the Sabbath day,
about nine of the Clock, Churchtime. God was fo^ced, as sometimes Paul, Galath.
4.20. to change his voice, to awaken and enliven his sleepie and dead-hearted
people. Sabbath-dayes Alarums, of all Alarums, are never to be forgotten.
Several Battles have been fought, and several Assaults made in several
places on the Sabbath day; let England study the meaning: Our Savior tells us
there is an affliction in the time, Mat. 24.20. Pray that your flight be not on
the Sabbath day. God has a controversy with the people for their Sabbath
days services. Yet observe the breath of the enemy. Saul breathed threatenings
and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord: The enemies mocked at their
Sabbaths; Their breath blasteth holy persons, times, actions. The Episcopal
breath fetch him out of the Pulpit, scatters the people, suspend him, suspend
the place. This Seige-week was unskilfully joined with the National Fast-week;
for thus succors came into Manchester from all parts of the Kingdom, Armies of
Prayers, Legions of Angels. The enemies Lot, so warily cast, fell not unlike to
Hamans Lot, Esther 9.1. The enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them,
but it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that hated
them.

The several Temptations that straightned this Siege, with their present and
proper Issues, were,
The Temptation. 1. The unskilfulnesse of Commanders and Soldiers, being bred
and educated in a land of Peace, where no enemy was left (as sometimes in
Israel) to teach them war. They knew not to take advantage, or prevent
disadvantage: They were fit to hurt themselves, and one another, as they did.
And that very day the enemy appeared, hearts were down, because their number to
man their works was no greater.

The Issue. But when God put the work into their hands, he put in skill, Psalm.
144.1. If ever it were given a people in that hour how to do, both hands and
skill, now was the time. So that in a short time (even to admiration, men of
all callings were skillful, ready Fire-men. And on that five and twentieth of
September came in new and considerable Forces: whereupon the soldiers thanked
God and took courage.

The Temptation. 2. What the enemy cannot do by force, he will do by fraud, he
sets fire on poor houses, and rich barnes (any thing to advance the Catholic
Cause) hoping by the light of the fire, and darkness of the smoke, to see to
hit, and (...) be hid from shot. Fire is a cruel Lord, and dreadful object to
fresh and low water soldiers. The wind blows right to help the enemy, to
heat and blind the assaulted. And now fire to fire: a fierce assault, to a
flaming fire, will destroy all opposition.

The Issue. Faith, that sometimes quenched the violence of fire, did no less
now. It quenched the violence of fear in our soldiers, the zeal of the Work
consumed them, whilst the fire consumed the buildings. And though the fire
heated our men to strive for the Wall, and to give the more ready fire, yet the
smoke did not hide their enemies. And when the wind had blown so long against
us, that we might be sensible of a Turn, he that gathers the wind in his
fists apparently turned it to our advantage.

The Temptation. 3. They had a Town of advantage. Salford is open, affords
them entertainment and assistance, proves their stalking-horse, brings them
near, and gives them shelter; faceth us, and opens them a backdoor. God
complains of his evil neighbors, Jer. 12.14.

The Issue. They sought help by fire; God helped us by water. The rain poured
down, raised the water, and parted the Army, nearer neighbors then Manchester
and Salford. They fought from heaven, the Stars in their courses fought against
Sisera. The river Kishon swept them away, the ancient river, the river Kishon,
Judges 5.20, 21. Hither they came, to lay their dead in sight, and to let them
lie with shame. The Canonneer had much ado to Charge, and more ado to
Discharge. If they peeped out of the houses, they were unhoused.

The Temptation. 4. They had means of advantage, many roaring, thundering,
terrifying Canons, we had but one small Piece. We have heard the report of
them, and our hands waxed feeble.

The Issue. The Canons did but play, they did no work, no execution. They had
no Commission but to strike through houses, which could neither bleed nor weep:
Only one Lad stood in their way, who was out of his own way, and (as they say)
timely prepared by his wickedness for such a stroke. It was a wonder to see
when they came into an house, what haste they made out, as afraid there to
stay: and how strictly they kept their Lane, lest by turning aside, they should
harm any in the house. Surely the joint praises of Gods rejo^cing people; as
the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, Rev. 14.2. did
drown the noise, and remove the terror of the Canons.

The Temptation. 5. Though the enemies fire was quenched, and the force of
their Canons broken, yet we wanted fuel, Match failed, and Powder grew scarce.

The Issue. He that could find so many Soldiers when there was none, was not
to seek for one Match-maker in time of need. He finds a Common-Souldier, and
makes him to find Match.

Some Malignants houses contributed Powder, and some Marched to Manchester from
neighbor places, in the face of the enemy, who looked and fled; and again
looked and fled: They saw it, and so they marvelled, they were troubled and
hasted away, fear took hold upon them there, Psalm. 48.5, 6.

The Temptation. 6. Though we be supplied with Match and Powder, yet we shall
be overcome with waking, we want rest, and cannot find it.

The Issue. God gives his beloved rest. To that end he moves the Lord to found
for a Parley. Upon which, a Cessation of Arms is concluded, from five at Night
till seven in the Morning, that our men might rest, and be refreshed. And ere
this release came, God (that can nourish without meat) gave rest without sleep.
He held their eyes open, and created new spirits! They waked and watched from
strength to strength. They that wait upon the Lord shall change their strength,
as a man does his suit, to fit a new occasion, Isa. 40.31.

The Temptation. 7. This new bodily rest may serve to strengthen a restless
mind. It is now harvest time, our Corn, the livelihood and subsistence of our
families, is in the field, ripe and groaning for the sickle.

The Issue. Whilst the Siege lasted against Manchester, the heavens held a
simpathy with the well-affected in and about Manchester: God melted them into a
wet and weeping frame. There was little harvest weather that week: Which did
evidence, the work of Gods people, did not now lie in the Field, but in the
Town, in the Barn. It was not reaping work, but threashing work: Gods work was
to Inn the Corn, their work to Thresh it: He shall gather them as the sheaves
into the floor; Arise and thresh, Micah 4.12, 13.

The Temptation. 8. We are defending the Town, and the Cavalliers are
Plundering our houses, or at least we leave wife, children, and estate to their
mercy. What portion have we in Manchester? every man to his Tent.

The Issue. O peace, private spirit. The people in Nehemiahs time had a mind
to work, Nehem. 4.6. a strong mind; and therefore the discouragements of the
ill-affected could not weaken their hands. Manchester-work was public work;
and the spirit of the work did generally rest upon the people: Sometimes Foot,
sometimes Horse issued out, and drove in the Plunderers. Sometimes the Country
Spirit, guarded with Bills, and Staves, and ^ick-forks, rose to that height,
that it subjected horse and man, to the wonder of the Cavaliers. Some houses
were safe, others willing to suffer the less, to save the greater.

The Temptation. 9. Some, sensible of the danger of Neighbor-villages, that
had emptied all their defensive power into Manchester, made motion that their
lent assistance might be loosed for home, and neighbor defense, against the
wild and wandering Horse. This motion seemed reasonable, and by consequent,
the defense of the Town unreasonable.

The Issue. When this Reason came to be handled, it proved a shadow, and soon
vanished. Near home this motion felt heavy, but abroad, where greater matters
were in hand, it was found light. Private and particular interests are wrapped
up in the Public, not so much public, in private. Here the remembrance of
Parliamentary engagement, and an honorable esteem of the Public Faith did no
little avail.

The Temptation. 10. But after all, there is an uncertain blast of the spirit
of Faith and Co^rage in our Leaders, being in the infancy of the Work; and not
discerning (as afterward) that God had raised them up to be Saviors on mount
Zion. This was David's sin, when he had escaped so many dangers, and was now out
of pursuit, (for Saul sought no more after him, 1. Sam. 27.4.) yet he could not
believe his safet^e, but feared, (though he had long escaped, yet) he should at
last be taken, 1 Samuel 27.1. We may sooner be free from trouble, then believe we
are free. Troubles may come and go, but sin will stick fast.

The Issue. God kept up the Souldiering spirit, by Prayers and Psalms, mutual
encouragement, and the blast of the Silver Trumpets (the Ministers of God)
sounded by a Divine breath. When the Temptation was at highest, and their
spirits at the lowest, that very night something should have been done by man,
to have undone, in a few hours, all that God had been doing in a week (that
man might be humbled, and God the more magnified) the tide of our oppression
turned. They moved homewards, both sides were in despair, we would have
manifested ours, but God hid it; They hid theirs in the Night, but the Morning
brought it to light.

The remarkable Passages were these.
A Reverend and grave Divine, who had long been a blessing to the Town, and had
seen a resurrection of it from the Plague, nigh forty years before, was lifted
up from the gates of death, and raised in the Spirit to promote this Work.

A spirit of Piety and Devotion in Prayers and singing of Psalms rested
generally upon persons and families, yea Taverns and Innes, where it might not
put in the head formerly. As when David in his trouble went and dwelt with
Samuel at Najoth in Ramah, the Spirit of Prophecy came upon Saul's Messengers,
the first, second, and third time, and upon Saul himself. David's spirit rested
upon his enemies, when God will have him to rest. They say, The Parliament has
made many Converts; but here Papists and Atheists, and profane, made many
Converts, no better yet, then Parliament Converts. Many of them have proved
practical Arminians, practicing falling from Grace; so many of our Soldiers
and people have been worse since, then in the Siege.

A Gentleman employed in the Service (not so religious as were to be wished)
professed he had seen much of God, and hoped it would do him good so long as he
lived: Friends told him he wanted Armor; He answered, He saw Gods protection
was in stead of Armor.

September 30. reported, That the Cheshire Trained-Band brought into
Stock-port, under the command of Master Leigh of Adlington, had promised one
another not to go over Lancashire-Bridge. And his own Tenants Petitioned, They
might be excused from this Service.

Twelve men, the Butt of enemies before, and friends behind, were Shot-free
from both.

The greatest hurt they did was by fire, and that to one conceived to be too
good a friend of theirs. They lodged with him, in a place (if report lie not)
free for all manner of sin, A fair house called, the Lodge.
and before their departure paid a good round reckoning in smoke and ashes,
since which a cooler fire took down their lodging.

A neighbor in imminent danger, had emnient preservation; five of the Earls
Soldiers came to the house where he was, he seeing their approach, thought a
chamber was fitter then the house; four pursue him to his hiding place; three
of them drew their swords, swearing to slit out his heart; the fourth, having a
Musket, resolved to do the execution; God sends up the fifth, in the nick of
time, who in his coming up, moved the Musquet-man, and removed the mouth of
the discharging Musket to another White, one of their own company, whom God
gave in ransom for this man appointed to die.

Three neighbors returning from Manchester home, were pursued by a Troop of
Horse: one of them was taken and wounded by part of the Troop. Another part
continue their pursuit of the other two: one of them casts a shoe: yet by the
enemies missing the way once or twice, and casting a shoe also, and one telling
them they were a mile before, when the enemy was hard at their heels, they
escaped, and the taken and wounded was rescued by the Bill-men.

It was observed, That Christians nearer and further off, were united in one
argument of support; viz. That God had not mustered his precious servants, from
all adjacent parts, in Manchester, to shut them up into the hands of the enemy,
but rather to show them his salvation.

Thus we leave Manchester, compassed about with songs of deliverance, keeping
(I believe) a more waking gladsome Sabbath, October 2. the day after their
release, then of many years before, compassing the Throne of so great Grace
with high sounding praises, with the Soldiers, as they could, October 3. and
more solemnly October 6. when our Drums and Muskets, that had formerly sounded
terror to our enemies, kept silence in the Church, whilst the Saints sung the
Song of Moses, and when their time and turn came to utter their voice in the
open air, with a loud voice and one consent, clapping their hands apace, they
reported God fearful in praises, working wonders.

Though the Devil let pass the Monday Thanksgiving, which was more confused,
yet he was ill pleased, and labored to mar the mirth of
Thursday-Thanksgiving, which was intended to be more Orderly, and Solemn. An
Alarm was given October 5. that they were coming against the Town the second
time. This bred some disquiet, but served to awake unto, and to sweeten the
following day of Thanksgiving, which was kept without distraction, blessed be
God. This false Alarm repeated October 10. God advantaged to lay a Garrison in
the Town, which God intended to use for offense, as well as defense, as will
afterward appear.

About October the eleventh, some Powder coming from the South to Manchester,
was stayed by the Kings Forces, but some came safe from the North, from Hull,
the fourteenth of October. The two and twentieth day, store of Powder came in,
and the four and twentieth day some coming was stayed. The joy of this last
supply, was sadly tempered with the accidental, but mortal, wound of a
skillful and active Soldier.

When God had thus gloriously appeared in Salford-Hundred, the first and
forwardest Hundred, he went and displayed his Banner in Blackburne-Hundred,
that only other Hundred in the County, that appeared in the same Cause.

Blackburne-Hundred.
ABout November the seven and twentieth, the Array, with some three hundred
armed men (as is conceived) besides Club-men, possessed themselves of
Blackburne, whence they sent a party to disarme Whalley. This Alarm awaked the
Militia, to awake the people by precept. They being awaked were soon up, and
marched toward Blackburne, about two hundred armed men, some companies of
Club-men, and some Horsemen, but without Arms. The want of skill in Soldiers,
and skillful Captains to supply that want, caused a consultation on
Hinfield-Moore, which received Determination (not from the Discovery of hidden
skill, but from the resolute will of these stirring Soldiers) to dispossess
those forcible Tenants. They speed on with shouting, dividing themselves unto
the conduct of two chosen Captains, and come within sight of the Town about
eight of the clock, when the Queen of the night, that had shined upon their
March, did discover them to their enemies: who soon let fly from the Steeple,
which ordered one Captain and his company to the South Side of the Town, and
the other Captain with his company to the East End of the Town, where they
found, (though not so high, yet) as hot entertainment out of the Town, for the
space of two hours. But God that varieth his providence according to his
peoples occasions, and had maintained the passages of Manchester, (that a
rightful people might not (...)) did now open a difficult passage to let in
his friends, from whom the Array hasted, having disburdened themselves of their
Arms, and restored what they took from Wh^^ley. Now had God added an experience
of favorable providence, in a new kind, formerly in a way of Defense, now in
a way of Offense, declaring his All-sufficiencie and co^^ pleatnesse for War,
to those two united Hundreds, giving a Shield to Manchester, and a Sword to
Blackburne, hereby assuring them from heaven, That if they would cleave
together, and be mutually assistant in his Cause, they should be variously, but
suitably and completely assisted and saved, he would be their All-sufficient
God, their God indeed, and to purpose.

By this time the Most-High had lifted us aloft, that we might through
weakness of head, or neglect of our footing, have fallen dangerously, had not
God as carefully taken us down, as he lifted us up; which he did about the
sixteenth of December.

The Plundering Array issued out of Wigan, to provoke the anger, and stir up
the courage of the neighborhood, who to maintain their Protestation in their
own defense, resolved to be mutually encouraging and assistant: but
apprehending themselves too weak, requested two Captains out of Manchester,
with their companies, to Quarter with them for their security; which was
granted. This new strength was augmented by forces raised thereabouts. They wax
bold to face Wigan, and come off fair. They go to Plunder a Papists house
near Wigan. The enemy sends a party after them, and is advantaged by their
security; But leaving their Plunder, and taking to their Arms, they redeem
their liberty for this time.

The enemy has not thus done with them, he will be better provided for a
second encounter; he Warrants the adjacent parts to come in to his help:
Houghton Common.
Our Captains and Companies go to plunder another Papists house; the Enemy with
about a thousand horse and foot, makes after them, (as if they had chosen to
relieve their confederate Papists.) Our Forces will not fly, though but about
eighty Musquetteers, no not from strength, though as yet a door was open, but
having drawn their companies into a Close of ground upon the side of Houghton
Common. They confidently conflict with the enemy, to his great loss, toward
three hours; but lest they should escape, (as they were nigh to do) God fires
their Magazine, and cools their courage; they sound a Parley, have quarter
given them for their lives, but loose their Arms and Liberty; three Captains
and eightscore soldiers were shut up into the hand of the enemy, the first
and fowlest blow God gave us in this kind in the County; an humbling blow, and
lasting warning: To this day we halt of this blow though most of our Captains
and Soldiers be released, (blessed be God) and well it is if we carry not the
mark of this wound when it is healed.

Upon this sad occasion, God made a comfortable appearance, that he had not
saved Manchester to the intent they should sit still, nor had he placed a
Garrison there, to make their mountain to stand strong, but that they might be
ready for action at the beat of his Drum, which struck up, after a
reconciliation sought with him by fasting and prayer. The project was for
Leigh, Leigh.
our marching out (as they say) caused the Earl to retreat from his purposes
and beginnings against Bolton. The day of assault, the weeping heavens changed
their cheer for our encouragement, looked fair upon our enterprise, and
triumphant return. The doubt of falling first upon the town, or some malignant
houses, the clearing of Cho-Bent in the way, made it high Christmas Eve ere our
men could fall on, (an unfortunate time for us, as the Papists would judge) but
it quickened resolution, and speeded action. The Enemy suffered them to come
within half Musket shot ere they discharged, and then played desperately upon
our men, in a full Body, to the present lose of only one. Our men divided
themselves, that they might clasp hands at a distance, and compass the Town,
God intending to shut up the enemy into their enclosure; which done they parted
again, and marching up at several places, at the call of the Drum, met at the
Marketplace, to receive from the bounty of the God they had sought, the repair
of their lost Arms and the price of redemption for Captains and Souldies: This
Victory founded in humiliation, was completed in thanksgiving. It is not to be
passed by, what a change of Christmas was now made in the County and Kingdom,
such a change in the emptiness of great men's houses, in the places and
occasions of concourse, in mirth and provision, in idleness and recreation, as
expressed a people very sinful, and a God very angry, to imprint both which
there was much in the time, if much considered.

The like Christmas kept our Forces at Blackburne; The Militia having in the
Town four hundred armed men, and some Clubmen, the Array came against the
Town on Christmas Eve with five thousand, and three field Pieces, very early
in the morning, they shot off their pieces, with shouting, saying, Take heed
you Roundheads. God took heed for us, for we were not afraid of the noise, nor
hurt once by the eight pound Bullet, though directed against us eight and
twenty times. We called on them (in vain) to come within Musket shot. About
twelve a Clock they called a parley: The pretense was, if we would yield the
Town, and the Arms, and submit to the Earl of Darby, they would meditate with
him to supplicate the King to grant a Pardon. The intent was to carry their god
(the greatest Field-Piece) nearer the Town, he was too far off to do any
harm. We (Scot-like) knew not the meaning of a Pardon, professing our selves
to be for King and Parliament. When we would no Pardon, they labored to punish
us, having set up their Idol nearer, by the counsel (as they report) of four
or five Priests and Jesui^es, and other great Papists, whom they had at hand in
a tithe Barn: Till Sunsetting both sides played fiercely, but then taking
advantage of the darkness, they fled in fear, and overrun their great Pieces,
trusting more to the night for protection, than to their own courage or strengh.

The seventh and eight of February were devoted to God in Fasting and Prayer in
Manchester, to succeed our Forces that were upon their march. The first day was
spent, and gave strength to our men to march all night, Preston.
and to set upon Preston by break of day, the next mornidg, the second day of
fasting, when some of our men soon advantaged themselves by taking of
Rible-Bridge, and with unspeakable courage set upon the Town, well fortified
and manned, which God gave them in two hours, as a present return of prayers.
Such courage was raised in the Soldiers, that they dared to take hold of their
enemies Muskets put through the Loop-holes, as if the miracle of mercy had been
again revived, Psalm 91.19. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder. And when
the Pikes kept them off from the Mudwalls, yet by breaking through an house some
twenty entered the Town; which small number drew down a Troop of Horse to take
a Prey. But Moses, Aaron, and Hur being on the top of the hill, whilst Joshua
was fighting in the Valley; the Captain of the horse was killed, and the Troop
scattered. Then came up the rest of our men, killed the Major and some others,
chased the Enemy, and commanded the Town. Here Divine Providence took a noble
Captain off his feet before the dangerous discharge of a Bullet, he stood not
to fall, but fell to rise. We lost few men in this dangerous assault, took
store of prisoners and Arms, and came in the nick of time to relieve the
well-affected in Preston, and thereabouts, upon whom the Array were prepared to
impose an Oath and heavy Taxations. This prey God plucked out of the teeth of
the Lion, and paw of the Bear.

Haughton Tower.
It was not long after, that this glorious victory was clouded by a dark and
terrible blow at Haughton Tower, where the miscarriages of great and small in
the taking of Preston, did us more mischief, than all our enemies from the
entrance of our hostility, to that time; as sometimes Isreal's sin through
Balaams counsel, prevailed to punish them more, than War or Witchcraft.

Our men going down to take the Tower, and finding it prepared for entrance,
possessed themselves of it, till being burdened with the weight of their
swearing, drunkenness, plundering, and wilful waste at Preston, it
dispossessed them, by the help of Powder, to which their disorders laid a
Train, fired by their neglected Matches, or by that great Soldiers Idol,
Tobacco. However it was, sure it is, that the place so firmly united, chose
rather to be torn in pieces then to harbor the possessours. O that this
thundering Alarm might ever sound in the ears of our Swearing, Cursing,
Drunken, Tobacco-abusing Commanders and Soldiers, unto unfaigned Repentance.
For do they think that those upon whom the Tower fell, and slew them, were
sinners above the rest of the Army. Let Christ that asked a like question, Luke
13.4 5. give the Answer: I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish: In the day when the Lord visits, he will visit their sins
upon them, Exodus 32.34.

Though our sins thus clouded our Sun in the clear day, yet was not the
praise of Gods glorious goodness and power to be darkened, but to be held forth
two several days, to hold proportion with the time of our humiliation: which
(if I mistake not) was done.

The latter day of thanksgiving was at Manchester, the sixteenth of February,
the unhappy time that the Earl chose to recover his Prestor-losses, in the
gaining of poor and pious Bolton, which would have been a backdoor to
Manchester. The relation of that business stands thus:

Boltons first assault.
THe Earls Major General, with about one thousand Horse and Foot, Marched
toward Bolton, surprised their Scouts in the way, and discovered themselves to
be within a mile of the Town, about nine of the clock, little suspecting that
the Bolton Soldiers were that while at Prayer in the Church, nor the Soldiers
knowing what need they had by Prayer to prepare for Fight. Had they presently
come down upon the Town, they had taken them unprovided of Ammunition; But
fetching a compass, that they might come on in a more ominous way, by
Great-L^aver, the Bishops house, the Soldiers were furnished to resist. The
assault was fierce and threatening, the Outworks outed our men to entertain the
Enemy, who stayed not there, but followed to the Town, fired an house near the
Sentinel, wherein the wind served them to carry the smoke upon us; But God
presently commanded the wind to blow from another point, to darken and smother
the fire-kindlers.

Then the Enemy took an house that joined to the Mud-Wall, and had Windows
above it, which gave them advantage, to beat our men from the Wall, and a
Stable that opened into the Street, whence they shot the Major through the
Arm, and had Commission to kill his Horse, but to save him. This door they
opened to enter, but God so faced and feared them by our men, that they turned
their backs and shut the door, found passage out, and place for retreat.
Whilst the Fight lasted, the vapouring Horse prevented assistance, so that
they compassed the people of God a^out, yea, They compassed th m about, but in
the Name of the Lord they did destroy them, Psalm. 118.11. Whilst Gods people
at Manch^ster did Sing and Praise, the Lord set ambushments against their
enemies at Bolton; and, They were smitten, 2. Chron. 20.21, 22. Here the Canons
roared often, but still played childrens play, for they mortally bit but one
lad, r^ported to be of their own side.

Hither their witty malice brought a new-invented mischievous Instrument,
which received this description at Bolton; An head about a quarter of a yard
long, a staff of two yards long, or more, put into that head, twelve i^on
pikes round about, and one in the end to stab with; This fierce Weapon (to
double their scorn) they called, A Roundhead; But no weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper, Isaiah 54.17.

Lancaster.
THe report of our taking in of Preston flew to Lancaster, and prepared the
Town and Castle for our entrance. Thither was sent a company of Foot and a
Troop of Horse to take possession.

This new and enlarged possession, was enriched, honored, and secured by the
God of the sea, who had provided for our welcome, The ship laden with great
pieces.
and Warlike entertainment, a Dunkirke Ship, a man of War, that came from
Spain, furnished with 21 Pieces of big Brass and Iron Ordnance, fit to supply
the Castle, and fortify other Garrisons. Desire to see this Forreiner, and
care to secure this captivity, led some of note and worth into a teadious and
removing captivity; yet could not the enemy be thus satisfied, for the miss
of such a prize, they labor to destroy that by fire which God had sent by
water. But God that sent the Pieces, saved them; The most came whole and safe
to the Castle, before and after their Lodging was fired: But malice and envy
followed them.

The Earl attended with great strength, besets Lancaster, and sends this
Summons.

To the Major and Burgesses of the Town of Lancaster, these.
Gentlemen,
I Am come into these parts by His Majesty's special command, to free you from
the bondage of these declared Traitors, that now oppress you, and endeavor
your destruction, by bringing you into their own condition; I will not now
mention your former neglect of the Kings Service, nor I hope I need not tell
you what Forces I have, or might have upon occasion; nor how joyfully all the
Country in my March have joined themselves unto me. If you will submit the
Town and your Arms unto me, and likewise endeavor with me to reobtaine the
Castle, you shall have all fair usage from me: if not, expect from me, what
the Law of the Land and of War will inflict upon you. Thus expecting your
answer by ten of the Clock this day. I rest

March the 18 eight a clock Your friend Derby.

This Summons came first to the hands of our Commanders of the Castle, who gave
the Town leave to return this Answer.

Right Honorable,
WE received yours of this instant, and do return this Answer; That all our
Arms are under the command of Officers now within our Town for the King and
Parliament; so that we have not the disposal of them, and at their coming
they took and fortified the Castle, which was never in our command: and by
reason thereof, have our Town likewise at their pleasure; so that both the
Town and Castle are now at the disposal, and will be (by Gods blessing) kept
for his Majesty. And thus we humbly take our leave, and rest

Your Honors in all due respects.

THis Answer pleases not, they must expect the punishments of War, which they
found. They fiercely assault for an hour in vain, they turn their rage upon
houses, Lancaster (...) fired.
and by Commission on the sudden become ready firemen all of them. They fire
Houses and Barnes without the sentinel, in which they sacrificed their dead
bodies. Thus they heated and smoaked our valiant soldiers from their
Sentinel, and when they were entered the Town, Papist-like, they continue to
burn, and butcher, denying Quarter to our men, but rather cursedly quartering
them; from which cruelty (raging mad) the most of our Forces retired into the
Castle.

The account of this cowardly Conquest is thus given in from Lancaster; The
dwelling houses that were burned, were in number fourscore and ten, containing
three hundred Bays of building: The Barnes, Stables, Cow-houses, replenished
with Corn, Hay, and Cattle, that were burned, were eighty six, containing two
hundred and forty Bays of building, and one Malt-Kiln of four Bays of
building, with three hundred Windles of Malt therein. By all which it evidently
appears, that they displayed the Banner of the Skarlet colored Beast.

A miracle of mercy was wrought in midst of this undoing and heartbreaking
misery. They purposely and industriously gave fire to two houses of persons
well-affected to King and Parliamentt, but they would not take fire, no by no
means, though they renewed their endeavors several times in several places,
though the next houses were burnt down to the ground, God restrained the
remnant of their rage, he remembered his promise, Esaias 43.2. The flame shall not
kindle upon thee; faith quenched the violence of fire, this Shield quenched the
fiery darts of the Devil.

March 19. 2000. of our Forces marched out for the timely relief of Lancaster,
Preston recovered. Blackburn risled.
but how they were divided and diverted, walked and breathed too and fro,
whilst the Earl fires Lancaster, recovered Preston, and risled Blackburne; I
have no mind to inquire, but do sadly remember; and cannot easily forget how
these tidings affrighted our Commanders out of Lancaster Castle, and exposed
the Castle, so well appointed, to the will of the Enemy, had not the mighty
GOD, by the assistance of a minister, doubled the spirit of the hearty (though
headless) Soldiers, to maintain with utmost hazard so great a trust. Thus
GOD set our Sun back many degrees, but not in manifest favor, as to
Hezekiah; yet he brought us to himself in Fasting and Prayer the seven and
twentieth day of March, that we repenting he might repent.

This very night came a Messenger from Lancaster Castle, reporting the safety
of the Castle, the heartinesse of the soldiers, and their comfortable
provision.

Boltons second Assault.
THe Earl encouraged by so manifold success, hopes to gain all; he brings on
Boltons second hour of sore Temptation, yet in an unhappy season, March twenty
eight, the day before the National Fast; and immediately after the Fast, March
27. at Manchester, because of the Design in hand, and also when the Town was
well provided with Soldiers, and Bury also furnished for their succor. The
Enemy made no near approach till three of the Clock; so soon as they began
to draw into a Body upon the Moore, our Cannoneer drew his Cannon into a Croft
on the backside of the Town, and at the second shot killed two horses near a
mile off. Then a Messenger came to summon the Town to submission, but they
resolved not to change the tenure for King and Parliament. When Sun was set,
and it began to be dark, the Minister of the Town prayed with a company of
Soldiers, most of them Townsmen. The end of Prayer was the beginning of the
Fight, and where the Soldiers had even now prayed, they had a furious Assault:
The Enemy came on desperately, even to handblowes, and some of them leaped upon
the Works, where they found Cluo-law. The enemy retreated, and left ten men
dead. After this they made no assault till Bury Forces were come into the Town;
for this second time they were more favorable to leave an open passage to our
succor. Then they made an assault upon the South end of the Town; by the
advantage of the darkness they come close to the Mud-wall. Here they hoped to
prosper by fire, as at Lancaster, but the light discovering their nearness to
danger, they fled for safety. After this they marched toward the West, but
finding it a busy and warm corner, they hasted off, and came on no more. The
Enemy left upon the ground at this Assault three and twenty men. Bolton lost
not a man, nor had any hurt done save only one youth shot through the arm. O
admirable! In Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel, Psalm 76.1.
Many a time have the afflicted me (may Bolton now say) yet they have prevailed
against me, Psalm 129.1, 2.

It was the aggravation of Solomon's sin, and Gods anger, That GOD had
appeared unto him twice, 1 Kings 11.9. pray God it prove not Boltons case.

This Star appearing promised day to succeed our night, as it did in the
taking of Wigan, April 1. that impregnable piece, the Enemies pride and
presumption, our fear and despair; of which we sometimes said, It was not
possible to take it by assault, or not without much blood, though indeed the
sinfulness of the place did render it the weakest of all others.

Though our Horse made a retreating onset before our Foot came up, though two
Soldiers were slain with a Cannon Bullet in their marching up, yet so
venterous and daring was the stirring resolution of our Soldiers, that they
were suddenly engaged so far, that they must go on, or lose their lives.

They go on and enter, whil^st the Enemy opens a back door to go out, that
the Town might be free.

A bright beam of this shining victory was, This was the National Fast-week.
that God by a merciful recompense gave it into the hands of Bolton Soldiers,
who had been twice infested from Wigan, an evidence that Gods side will
prosper, be the disproportion what it will, poor Bolton shall abide a double
storm when GOD is with it; proud and powerful Wigan shall fall at once and
with ease, when GOD is departed from it.

This glorious victory found us not gracious enough, it was too much for us
well to manage; it was not so gloriously achieved as obscur^ly left; it was
turned into mourning by the too-impressive report of the Earls returning upon
us. The Town, that strong and advantageous Town, was left that ^ight.

But I love not to rake into, and gaze upon the infirmities of men taken at
advantage; in general I conceive the case was that of Barak, Judg^s 4.8, 9.
the work was undertaken in unbelief, so that though we g^t the day, yet we
lost the honor. Had we been soaring upon the wing of Faith, we had not
fallen so low in fear.

Warringtons first Assault.
IN great unpreparednesse, in debt for Wigan, in neglect of means of
reconciliation, in disorder and considence of our Soldiers, we assaulted
Warrington the fifth day of April, about four of the Clock, till the might took
us off. Thither we came to leave our dead, to distress the well-affected in
the Town, to shame our cou^age, and in all to suffer the punishment of former
miscarriages, wherein Cheshire deeply shared with us. Now we had the greatest
strength abroad, partly our own, and partly borrowed: But God delights not in
the strength of the horse, he takes not pleasure in the legs of a man; the
Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy,
Psalm. 147.10, 11. Wigan (thought impregnable) proved easy; Warrington (thought
easy) proved now impregnable: This seasonable check, chode us to duty, to
public thanksgiving for Wigan-mercy, the eleventh of April; to humiliation,
under Warrington-displeasure, the thirteenth of April. The day of thanksgiving
was made joyful by the in-coming of Ammunition; the day of humiliation was
delivered of that wonder, or confluence of wonders about Padiham.

The rise of Blackburne.
THe Earl, accompanied with 2000 (^s is judged) came to Rihchester over night,
to VVhalley by eight of the clock, to a Green not far from Padiham: Our side
had but two or three hundred Fire-men, and fourscore or a hundred Horse, so
that in means there was no possibility of safety. When we went out first to
meet them, there was not above an hundred Fire-men, yet such resolution God
gave them, above and against all sense and reason, that they would needs let
fly at them, and God suddenly turned them to flight: Our encouraged Soldiers
pursued them to Whalley (where their two or three shots of Powder (all they at
first had to accomplish so great a work) were well increased by their enemies
store) from thence to the Sands, thence to Lango Green, thence to Rible side,
called Salsbury Boat: The Horse and Foot took Rible, many of the Foot wading to
the chin. In all this Chase, being about five miles in length, they often
turned their faces, but as often turned their backs, and hasted away, till they
had quit the Hundred, and no more infested it.

Thus God remembered us in our low estate; he chose the w^ak things of the
world, to confound the things that are migh^y, that no flesh should glory in
his presence; O my soul, thou have trodden down strength, God has delivered
Sisera into he hand of a woman. H^ve they not sped? have they not divided the
prey? (they boasted in the morning what they would do, and directed their
Warrants to the Country to come in the day following, to compound with the
Earl for their lib^rty) So let all thine enemies perish, O God; but let them
that love thee be as the Sun when he goes forth in hi^ might, rising higher
and higher, till he come to a Noonday V^ctory.

Lancaster Voyage.
OUr desire to secure our Garrisons, to relieve Warrington, which we had
occasionally oppressed, and to improve those new Talents lent us by God, and
sent us by Sea, made us think upon a Voyage to Lancaster; the fairness of the
weather, and dryness of the way were strong encouragements. We began our March
the eight and twentieth day of April; the presence of God was fought for safe
Convoy; and so terrible was the presence that accompanied our March (what else
c^n it be imputed to?) that our Forces passed safely through Wigan (though the
enemy found his former nest after we had taken it) Prescot, Ormeskirk (where we
marred an intended Muster) and Preston (that recovered Preston) Whence (hearing
our friends in Lancashire were in some danger (though it was nothing but the
Earls hasting into Yorke-shire, and the rest of the Forces speeding to Hornby
Castle) we stretched our march to Lancaster.

In all this way, as we moved, so the enemy removed; we saw nothing remarkable
in them, but cruelty and cowardice: For some Troops of Horse meeting a poor boy
unarmed, which out-went his company, clave his head, and barbarously mangled
him: Also thereabouts the enemy after a sl^ight skirmish, overcame by flight.

Our arrive at Lancaster was welcomed with the safety of the Castle, the good
posture of the Garrison, their comfortable provision, and the well nigh
preparedness of the Carriage: And after we had refreshed our Army a few days
with the sight of Tburland Castle, and the report of our forraigners against
Hornby Castle, we advanced homeward the ninth day of May, and under the former
gracious Conduct came safe home, though laden with the weight of twelve whole
Pieces, and two broken ones (the rest fortifying the Castle) all which we
acknowledged in solemn thanksgiving in Manchester, the fixteenth of May.

Warrington Siege.
ALl this while the cry of oppressed Warrington importuned heaven, and
compassion wrought in us; and having this far-fetched terrifying assistance, we
entered upon a new and prosperous Voyage the twentieth day of May: The three and
twentieth of May was designed for Fasting and Prayer in Manchester, to meet
with the beginning of the enterprise against Warrington.

Whilst the duty was in performing, tidings came of the taking of Winwick
Church and Steeple, they on the Steeple standing on terms, till God sent a
deadly messenger out of a Fowling-Piece to one of them; also a strong Hall
possessed by professed Roman Catholics, and stored with Provision, as if it
had been purposely laid in, both for our supply and ease.

In this Warrington Siege, so good a friend was God to our faith, that the
greatest Piece was made unusefull, the second time it was in use; and without
the terror of those Idols, the living God gave us the Church and Steeple the
26 of May, with the loss of one man; and that strong Hold upon terru^^, May 28.

A Providence much to be observed in this Siege, was this: One night our men
were to work within half Musket shot of the Town; It was a great calm, that
they could not work, but the enemy would hear: When some went to work, others
went to prayers; and God raised a great wind, that took away the noise: a
Providence not altogether unlike what I have heard in Boston: The Chancellor
gave Organs to Boston; before they breath in that new world, the well-aff^cted
pray* after their prayers, a mighty wind forces its passage into the Church,
blows down the Organs, brake them, and stopped their brea^h.

That which ripened the enemies ruin, was their hard usage of prisoners, and
well-affected in the Town, their extreme cruelty in the Country, killing a
godly man and his wife in their own house; and their professed confidence and
pride in their strong Hold, appearing by their hanging out a Flag of Defiance
upon the highest Chimney.

At this time waited a Ship at Liverpoole, watching this friendly opportunity
to unburden it self for Cheshire, and to supply us with Powder, Liverpool
readily giving entertainment and assistance to it and us. Some recompense God
made to tired Warrington, in the shortness of the Siege, and security from
spoil, which we charitably made an Article of our Peace: This Return of
Prayers, called in our Vows in Manchester, June 1.

Lancaster succored.
ABout this time Lancaster, that had relieved us, called aloud for relief,
having been begirt twenty days, the report of our march raised the siege, and
strongly garrisoned Hornby and Thursland Castles; the rest of the Forces
marching into Westmerland, and thence into Yorke-shire, to join with the Queen
of Armies. Having relieved our Garrison, we marched toward the Castles; the
a^tempt upon one, was blessed to win both. Hornby Castle.
Three foot-Companies being d^awn out to view Horneby Castle, they fell upon an
Ambusca^o of the enemy within half Musket shot, they gave Fire upon the whole
Body of Horse and Foot; But GOD made all shotfree, a promising Providenc^.

This attempt was judged dangerous in the undertaking, and dishonorable in the
Issue, but encouraged by a weighty and seasonable word of a present Divine.

The Onset was led on, not altogether unlike that of David upon the Amalekites,
1 Samuel 30.11.

Our Scouts took a soldier that had escaped out of the Castle, who gave us
true information of the state of things, taught us rather to enter in by the
Window (a great Window at the end of the Hall) and undertook to lead the Forces
to this place of advantage.

The Companies drawn out for this Design, accommodated with scaling Ladders,
great Hammers, Ropes, Mattocks, and some combustible matter for the Gates, were
appointed to play on that side toward the Gates, to draw them from that side,
where the rest were to force their entrance. The fore Forces played upon the
Castle and Church, not without great danger of Iron and Stones, till they put
fire to the Gates, which smoaked them further off: The back-forces were as
busy at the Window, scaling and hammering; Which undaunted resolution to enter
by the Gates and Window, speeded the cry of the Enemy for Quarter, which was
speedily granted, the gates opened, and the Castle entered.

In this assault, for two hours space, we lost but two Common soldiers, a
third dangerously wounded, some other hurt with stones, but not mortally.

Thursland Castle.
THe next day Thursland Castle was delivered upon unkept conditions, which
would be a wonder here and elsewhere, did we not know the principle, No faith
is to be kept with Heretics.

By this time mercy has set, as a Crown upon the head of poor Lancashire,
the rich blessing of dying Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou, O Lancashire who
is like unto thee, O people! Saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy help, and who
is the sword of thy excellency, and thine Enemies shall be found liars unto
thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places. And I may revive Habakuks
Song, Hab. 3.12, 13, 14. Thou did march through the land in indignation, thou
did thresh the H^athen in anger, thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy
P^^pl^, even for salvation with thine Anointed; thou woundedst the h^ad out of
the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neeke. Selah.
Though did strike through with his staves, the head of his Villages; they came
out as a whirlwinde to scatter me, their rejoicing was as to devour the poor
secretly.

When God had thus rode through our County upon his Horses and Charets of
Salvation, the whole County triumphed in his praise, July 5. For our mouth was
enlarged over our Enemies, our heart did rejoice in his Salvation.

Having thus led the Reader over the several Beds of Flowers in this Garden of
Providence, I will gather and bind up a Posie of select and fragrant Flowers,
and sweetly conclude this comfortable History.
1. Our Nobles have been of our selves, and our Governors have proceeded out
of the midst of us, Jer. 30.20. Some of them the subject of earnest Prayers,
Public, Private, Ordinary, Extraordinary, for seven years space, if not for
ten.

2. Our Commanders and Leaders have had unparalelled preservation, we lost but
one man of note, but one Captain in all our conflicts, and him, through extreme
cruelty; he asked quarter, but all was on fire in Lancaster, and they would
give none, but sought rather cruelly to kill him; then to kill him, to kill him
by many rather then by one: God covered their heads in the day of battle,
Psalm. 140.7. He gave them the shield of his salvation, Psalm. 18.35.

3. Duties of humiliation and thanksgiving (which were cooped up in corners, as
deeds of darkness, by the Bishops, were now by the countenance of authority
brought into the open assembly, as the only way of success and prosperity, in
our just defense and offense.

4. Evident undeniable answers of Prayers, sometimes at present, sometimes soon
after.

5. Mercies denied at one time with strokes, have been granted at another time
with full-handed favors.

6. God has remembered us in our low estate, our highest Tide has followed our
lowest Ebb, Gods power has been perfected in our weakness, his beauty has
shined in our confusions.

7. God has shared his employments and successes in a kind of proportion,
amongst our Commanders and Soldiers, that all might have some, and none might
have all, that all might be humbled, and none discouraged; Herein has God
wisely wrought for their unity, mutual respects, assistance, encouragement and
honor.

8. Mercies and afflictions have counter-poized one another; In all this way of
providence mercies have been imbittered, and crosses sweetened; comfort and
humiliation have watched and waited on each other. Gods constant project has
been, to nourish grace, and subdue corruption at the same time* a work no
less happy then hard.

ALL I would say more, is to the County; much has been said of it, and of GOD
in it: Let me speak Samuels counsel, 1 Samuel 12.14. Only fear the Lord,
and serve him in truth, with all your heart, for consider how great things he
has done for you. Add Joshua's warning, Josh. 24.20. If ye forsake the Lord,
and serve strange gods, then will he turn and do you hurt, and consume you
after he has done you good. Which GOD forbid for his Christ's sake.

FINIS.

