THE ANCIENT LANDMARK SKREEN or BANK BETWIXT The Prince or Supreme
Magistrate, and the People of ENGLAND.

BY THE Right of Inheritance which the NOBILITY and BARONAGE of ENGLAND have TO
Sit in the House of PEERS IN PARLIAMENT.

March. 12th LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Daniel White at the seven Stars in
S. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

The ancient Land-marke, Skreen, or Bank, betwixt the Prince, or Supreme
Magistrate and the People etc.
IT should be confessed by all that have but Travailed the ordinary Roades and
paths of the book of God, and Scripture, that the Princes and heads of the
Tribes of the people of Israel, in and after the Theocraty, or time of Gods own
government of them, and in the Reign of the Kings, which he extraordinarily
blessed and appointed over them, were of their greatest and most eminent
Counsels and Sanhedrims.

And not to be denied by those that have been acquainted with the Greek and
Roman Histories.

That the Patricii of the one, and the wise and great men of the other, were
always made use of, and preferred in their Senates and Counsels, as men of
the greatest understanding and interest, attended by their own virtues,
education, and fitnes, as well as those of their Ancestors.

In Imitation and conformity whereof, and that conduct of reason and success
which had encouraged all the Civilized people and Nations of the earth, rather
to follow than desert such universally approved experiments.

Our no foolish English progenitors, did not think they should do themselves or
posterity any harm to tread the same steps, and embrace and make much of the
Truth in the old paths thereof.

And hence it was, that our over-warlike, and too much busied forefathers the
Saxons, in their Civil Wars and Discords, took it to be neither dangerous nor
useles, to make their Princes and Ealdermen, (which were the same with our
Earls and Barons, the later being the Genus, I. Brampton hist Joruall.
or foundation of the former) of their Counsels and Parliaments; as King Ina
did in Anno 711. (Now above nine hundred 40 and 7 years ago and then not
remarqued for any Novelty,) Seldom Tit. Honor Ca. 5 sect. 6, 632. Bid lib. 2.
Ca. 13.
in a Parliament or place where he made his Laws.

That Edwin, King of Northumberland, when he was persuaded to become a
Christian, consulted, cum principibus and Consiliariis suis, or with his
Ealdormen, as King Alfred expounded those words in Bid.

And Cynewlf, King of west-Saxe, Seldom Tit. Honor 701.
cum Caterva Satraparum, with the whole body of his Nobility.

That William the Conqueror. Math. Paris. 75.
Consilio Baronum suorum, restored our English Laws.

And Henry the first at his Coronation (says Matthew Paris) made Laws Consilio
Baronum suorum.

For Comes, or the title of an Earl, derived or branched out of the Baronage,
could not be so separate from the person of the Prince, in the interpretation
of the word, Ex vi termini, or the legal Custom, or appropriation of it, as
not to be with the King, or supreme Magistrate, in his great and public
Councels or Parliaments.

And by the longest Prescription, or use of any Laws or good Customs, which
we now have in the English Nation, from long before the Conquest, without any
interruption, until the year 1648. The Nobility and Barons of England may
claim and ought to enjoy it, as well as any other part of the people do all or
any part of their inheritances which they would be unwilling not to have called
their own, or not to be justified by an Immemoriall Prescription.

And therefore in the Grants and Letters Patents of Earls, of long or great
Antiquity; as in that of the Earldome of Hereford to Miles de Glocestria, by
Maud the Empress; She grants it with all liberties and customs as honorably
as any former Earl of that County enjoyed it.

And to Awbrey de Vere, of the Earldom of Oxford, by King Henry the Second, now
above 500 years past it was Ita libere and honorifice, as freely and
honorably, sicut aliquis Comitum Angliae, as any of the Earls of England most
honorably enjoyed it.

And if any would know, whether the privilege to them and their Heirs of
sitting in Parliament, Seldom Tit. Honor Cap. 5 704.
were one of their just inheritable liberties and Birthrights, the most
learned Seldom will tell them.

That in the great Parliament of Clarendon, held by King Henry the second in
the Tenth year of his Reign presentibus Comitibus and proceribus Angliae. The
Earls and Nobility being present.

The Avitae consuetudines, ancient Customs of their Forefathers, and noble
Progenitors, were, among other Customs, Recognized to be that Debent interesse
Judiciis Curiae Regis they ought to sit in Parliament.

And notes thereupon that to be a Baron, and to have right to sit with the rest
of the Barons in Counsels or Courts of Judgment were according to the Laws of
that time Synonimies.

And were no otherwise taken also to be in the succeeding ages, when as in the
23 year of Henry the second, as Hoveden reports, the determination of the
controversy between Alphonso, King of Castile, and Sanche King of Navarr,
submited to the Arbitrament of that English King, was determined Habitocum
Comitibus and Baronibus cum deliberatione consilii. by mature advice of his
Earls and Barons.

In the sixth year of King John, certain Laws were made communi consilio
Baronum suorum, by a Common Counsel, or Parliament held at Winchester.

William de Breose, a Baron, Math. Puis 303. edit. Londini.
being in that Kings reign demanded by the King to have his Children delivered
for Hostages, answered (as the Monk of St. Albans relates it,) Si ipsum in
aliquo offendi, paratus sum and ero domino meo and sine obsidibus satisfacere
secundum Judicium Curiae suae and Baronum parium meorum certo mihi assignato
die and loco; I am and shall be ready to satisfy the King my Lord without
Hostages, if in any thing I have offended him, according to the Judgment of his
Court and the Barons my Peers, if he shall assign me a certain day and place.

And the Modus tenendi Parliamentum, (which cannot be denied but to have been
exemplified under the great Seal of England, and sent by that King, into
Ireland, where our English Laws then began to be planted) says also
expressly that omnes and singuli Comites and Barons summoniri and venire
debent ad Parliamentum; All Earls and Barons ought to be summoned and come to
Parliament.

The restoration of Hugh de Vere, Earl of Oxford, to the Earldome of Oxford,
and all his fathers lands in 17. H. 3 by an investie ture of Cinxit eum gladie
comitatus Oxen. Girding him with the sword of the Earldome, did continue unto
him his Peerage or Privilege of sitting in Parliament enjoyed by his Ancestors.

After the battle of Evesham in 49. H. 3. the Earls, and Barons, and others,
which stood against the King, being by act of Parliament in Anno 50. H. 3.
disinherited, and the lands of many of them given away or sold, and the Dictum
de Kenilworth in 51. H. 3. admitting them to a composition. Wake Hastings,
Vescy, Gray, and Nevill, Barons, and Robert de Vere, Earl of Oxford; and many
other of the Nobility having compounded, did without any new grant of their
E^rldomes and Baronies, retain all their Parliament privileges.

Andrew de Astely, the Son and Heir of Sir Thomas de Asteley, a Baron, slain
at the Battle of Evesham, against the King was after his Fathers deathin 49 H.
3. summoned, as a Baron to Parliament, in several Parliaments in the reign of
King E. 1.

16 Richard the 2. 16 R. 2. Act. 15.
the King granting and restoring to Sir Aubrey de Vere, Uncle to Robert de
Vere, Duke of Ireland and Earl of Oxford in Parliament the Name, Title, Estate,
and Honor, of Earl of Oxford, which was forfeited by the attainder of the said
Duke, to hold to him and his heirs Males; caused him to be put as the words in
the record thereof in French bears it, en son lieu ovesque les Peers, in his
place with his Peers.

The claim in Parliment in xi. H. 6. Rot Parl. 11. R 2 m. 9. n. 32, 33, 34, 35.
of the Earl of Arundell to sit in Parliament where it was adjudged, that he
and his Heirs, Earls of Arundell, should have, locum and sedem, the place of
Earls of Arundell in Parliament as they had formerly.

And the like adjudged in Parliament in the Controversy betwixt William Earl
of Arundell, and the Earl of Devonshire in 27. H. 6. Parl. 27 H. 6. Art. 18.


All which with the privilege granted of old unto the English Nobility to kill
a Buck, or Deer, in any of the Kings Forests and Chases, in their going to the
Parliament, or to have no Wages for the Knights of the Shires which served in
Parliament, to be levied of such of their Lands as were parcel of their
Earldomes and Baronies.

The Act of Parliament of 14. E. 3. cap. 5 for redressing in Parliament the
delays in Judgments of other Courts, the Act of 31. H. 8. Cap, 10. giving the
Earls and Barons their place of Antienty in the Parliament and all the Acts of
Parliament which we have had from the first being and methodizing of our Laws
from the British times, until the latter end of 1648.

All our Restorations of ancient Barons and bringing them into Parliament by
virtue of Entailes of Earldomes and Baronies or otherwise, and all our Records
and Journalls of Parliament do plentifully show that they had an Inherirable
right to sit in those Assemblies.

And cannot be supposed to represent the Commons in Parliament (whose first
summoning thither either, by H. 1. or H. 3, was merely by the Kings writts or
Summons and not by any Act or order of Parliament.)

When as the Nobillity were ever a distinct Estate by themselves, and the
Commons did, after their calling or being summoned to Parliament, represent
only for their own estate and degree, agitate their Votes and business apart;
Elect their Knights of the Shire and Burgesses, to consent and represent for
them, send Messages, and desire Conferences with the Lords; stand bare, whilst
they sit coverd, and receive Bills from them. And that the Commons were never
authorized or accounted to represent for the Nobility by any Law, Record,
Constitution, legal Custom, or Usage of this Nation as yet to be found, or
extant; And that if the Lords had represented the Commons, or any other than
themselves, the Commons would have taken more care of themselves than to have
voted them dangerous or useless.

And howsoever that the later Letters Patents, or creation of Earls, 11. R. 2.
pat. 3. m. 15. Pat. 23. H. 6. part. 2 m. 20.
Viscounts and Barons, as that of Sir John Beauchamp Baron of Kidderminster,
the first which was created by Letters Patents in 11 R. 2. and of the Lord
Beaumont, in 23. H. 6. and the succeeding ages, have been so punctual and
careful as to grant in special words, to them and their Heirs Males, Sedem
locum and vocem in Parliamentis and publicis Comitiis and Conciliis, Place, and
Voice in Parliament.

Yet it was as much before, the right of the Baronage of England and upon that
account Ralph de Monthermer, who married Joane Countess of Gloucester, and
diverse others, in the right of their Wives, did sit in Parliament, as well as
enjoyed their Baronies.

And it is to be remembered That Sir Edward Cook, in his Institutes, Cooks
instit.
printed by Order of Parliament, says, that the Lords and Peers, are to have
their Writts or Summons, Ex debito Justitiae, Rushworth historical collections
240.
which was not denied the Earl of Bristoll upon his petition for his Writs or
Summons in 2 Carol.

That in the beginning of our late civil and unhappy wars there was no small
use made of an Argument to justify them, taken out of some words in Bracton
(which as to the superiority of the house of Peers over the King, was something
too much strained, and beyond his express words in other places) who was a
Lord Chief Justice, Bracton lib. 2. Cap. 16.36.
in the reign of King Henry the third, that Rex hahet superiorem Deum, Legem,
per quam factus est Rex and Curiam, seilicet Comites and Barons. The King has
his Superiors, God, the Law, and his Court of Earls and Barons.

That the Parliament, Exact Collection 846.528.
in their Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, in December 1641. did
allege that the Peers were the Kings great Council.

In which Parliament, they also declared but what can we the Commons do without
conjunction of the house of Lords.

That the trienniall Parliament ordained in, Anno 1641. To be called once in
every three years is to be holden by the King or Supreme Magistrate and Lords
and Commons.

And that the power thereby given to the people to make elections of the
members and to assemble in Parliament if the King or Supreme Magistrate should
omit or refuse to do it cannot be made use of or put in execution with any
safety to the people (who by the Act of Parliament for a trienniall Parliament
are only allowed and authorized to do it) or any Laws which shall be made in
such a Trienniall Parliament be valid or binding.

If it shall not be called and holden accord ing to the directions of that Act
of Parliament or pursue the very prescript form and allowance thereof.

That it was likewise enacted by the assent of the Lords and Commons in that
Parliment that that Parliment should not be dissolved or ad jorned unless it
should be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose, and that the
house of Peers should not at any time dureing that Parliament be adiourned
unless it be by themselves, and their own order, and that every thing, and
things whatsoever done, or to be done for the adiournement proroguing, or
dissolving of that Parliament contrary to the said Act should be utterly void
and of none effect.

That the house of Commons in their joint declaration with the Lords in
Parliament 9 August 1642. Ibid. 502.
Did allege the house of Peers to be the hereditary Counselors of the
Kingdom.

That Mr. Pym, in his Speech at Guild Hall London, 14 January 1642, printed by
Order of Parliament, affirmed that the Lords had an hereditary interest in
making Laws in this Kingdom.

That the Natinall Covenant, and Oath, enjoined the maintenance and defense of
the liberties and privileges of Parliment (the Judicative and better part
whereof, was the House Peers) and the Rights and Liberties of the Nobillity,
and every one in their several callings Rights, Liberties and Privileges.

That in April 1646. an Ordinance was made, and commanded to be read in
Churches, that the Parliament intended the Commonwealth should be governed by
King, or Supreme Magistrate, Lords, and Commons.

That the general Council of the Officers of the Army, Prinn's plea for the
Lords and house of Peers 45, 46.
in their Declaration made at Windsor, about January 1647. presented to the
Lords House, by Sir Hardresse Waller, did declare the hereditary legal Right
of the Lords, and their House in Parliament; and the Armies fixed resolution to
uphold and maintayn them and their Privileges with their Swords.

And that the late Lord Protector, John Lilburnes letter to the Speaker printed
in July 1648.
when he was Leivtenant General, protested to John Lilburne and others, at the
Lord Whartons house, that upon his Conscience, in the sight of God, the Lords
had as true a right to their Legislative and Jurisdictive power, as he had to
the Coat on his Back; and that he and the Army, would support the same.

That such of the Baronage of England, as in the late wars adhered to the
King, did afterward, by several Acts and orders of Parliament compound for it.

And that such as have not acted against the Parliament since the 30 day of
January 1648, or are not within the exceptions of the Act of Parliament for a
general pardon and oblivion, made in the latter end of the year 1651, are
included in that gener all pardon and Oblivion and to receive benifit by it.

That the Act, in Anno 1648, which after the death of the King was made to take
away the house and privilege of the Peers in Parliament, (who were neither
cited if the house of Commons had been empowered thereunto,) nor so much as
conferred with or heard, was only by a part of the house of Commons when many
of their members were kept and forced away, and the remainder could not reach
to the number of one hundred.

That the house of Lords, then sitting, did never give consent to their
dissolution, or unto that Act of that small remainder of the house of Commons
to take away their Peerage but protested against it, as an Act made against the
fundamental Laws, and invalid.

That the Parliament in 1653, did declare that they would be as tender of the
Rights and Properties of the people, as they would be of themselves and their
posterities. 13. July 1653


That by the humble Petition and advice of the Parliament, presented to the
late Lord Protector, and assented unto the 26. day of June, 1657 It was advised
that the ancient and undoubted liberties and privileges of Parl. which are
(there said to be) the birthright and Inheritance of the people, and wherein
every man is interessed, be preserved and mainteyned. And that he would not
break or interrupt the same, nor suffer them to be broken or interrupted.

That the Goths, Vandalls, and Tartars, the ruder sort of Nations (Savages
only excepted) the Swedes, Polonians Hungarians, Bohemians, whose Kings are
some of them wholly and others partly elective; the French, Spanish, Portuguez,
Itallians, Germans, Scots, Irish, Russians, Persians, Egyptians, Ethiopians,
and the major part of all the World, as well Heathen as Christian, Prinns plea
for the Lords and house of Peers 45.46.
as Mr. Prinne in a larger Plea for the Lords and House of Peers of England,
has learnedly, and abundantly proved, do admit their Nobility into all their
Assemblies, Conuentions of Estate, Parliaments, Dyets, and Counsels.

And that now to exclude our English Nobillity, whose Ancestors were so
principally instrumental in the disclaiming and annulling the Resignation and
Grant of the ill advised King John, Mat. Paris 237.245.270 Walsingham y podigm.
Neus triae pat. 60.
to hold the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Fee farm of the Pope and his
Chair, by the payment of 1000 Marks yearly Tribute Fought for and maintained
our English Laws and Liberties, built and endowed, at their own charges, many
of our Churches, procured many deafforrestations for the people and Charters
and Liberties for many of their Cities, and Towns, gave and distributed out of
their own Lands and Estates, great and large quantities of Land and Ground to
be held in Common, and were the Donors of much of the Copy hold Lands of the
Nation, which (being no Norman slavery, but a continuance of Charity and
Benevolence, since turned into a Custom) were not long ago a fourth part if
not half (the Commons, Wastes, and Forests excepted) of all the lands and
real estates of the Nation and to render them thereby to be as no part of the
People, but as mere Tituladoes, Shaddows, or aerie Notions, or as men of no
value, interest, or concernment, would be a strange kind of gratitude, as well
as an unparalleled violation of the Petition of Right, our no less then thirty
times confirmed Magna Charta, and the common Justice of the World; who by the
Rule and example of God himself in the case of Adam, in the very dawning and
Infancy of the World, was taught not to condemn any man, or Society, without a
Citation, and heareing what they can allege or plead for themselves, And make
this Nation which hitherto has justly claymed and enjoyed the precedence of
most of the Nations of the Earth, to be and appear in the eyes of the World,
less than the Republicke of Venice, who by their admission of their
Clarissimo's and Nobility into their Senate are the more esteemed for it.

And cause us in the not making use of or admitting our Nobility, in to our
assemblies and Parliaments to be looked upon in that particular as a Nation
having no Nobility, or as that Mountanous and beggarly people the Switzers, who
live and subsist only in being as mercenary and Hireling Soldiers to
Neighbor Princes, and are in that respect so undervalued, as they are taken to
be but as Fragments or broken pieces of a Commonwealth deformedly put together.

That it will be against the nature and end of a Commonwealth, to have a
principal estate and part of the people, put out of the lines of Communication
of it, and be only admitted to the Taxes and burdens thereof.

That many of no few of our Laws and Acts of Pvrliament yet unrepealed and not
altered, by any subiequent Act of Parliament, which do grant allow and confirm
the rights and privileges of our English Nobility, (whose Ancestors have not
only in one but many generations been the grand and stout Assertors, and
Maintainers, of our Magna Charta, and Laws and liberties of England, when the
Common people could not do it) are included in these Laws and liberties which
the now Lord Protector has lately sworn to observe and keep.

That two of the Ten Commandments given by the mouth of Almighty God himself
in Mount Sinai with thunder and Lightenings* when the Mount shoke for the dread
and Majesty thereof twice afterward written in Tables of Stone by his own hand
and many other of his precepts repeated in his book and holy writ do command
the preservation of every man's property.

And that the care of the rights, liberties, and properties of the Peers, and
Nobility of England, which neither were, nor are, nor can be proved, to be
inconsistent with the rights, liberties, and properties of the other part of
the people ought to be very much incumbent upon the hearts, and spirits of the
members of this Parliament, who come thither under an oath, (which the
Parliaments of the former ages sufficiently careful of the rights, and
liberties, not only of a part but of all the people) were not ordered to take)
to uphold and maintain the true reformed Protestant Religion in the purity
thereof as it is contained in the old, and new testament (which certainly
enjoynes the preservation of every man's property) and as members of Parliament
to endeavor as much as in them lies the preservation of the rights, and
liberties, of the people.

FINIS

