ANOTHER FIGHT AT COLCHESTER, AND The storming of the Town on Friday night
last, by the Parliaments Forces, and the success thereof.

TOGETHER, With the proceedings of His Majesty's loyal Subjects; in the
Coun^es of Northempton, Liecester, and Rutland, touching their raising of six
Regiments for the defense of King, Parliament, and Kingdom.

Likewise, a great Fight in Scotland, between Duke Hamiltons Forces commanded
by the Eatie of Calendar Lieutenant General, and the M^^qu^ff or A^gyles
Party, with the number sl^n and taken prisoners, the Lord Chancellours escape,
and hundreds fled to the Mountains.

Also, Duke Hamiltons Speech to the Estates of Scotland, concerning the
advancing with his Army into England.

LONDON. Printer for G W. 1648.

Two Fights, the one in the North of England near Carlie, the other in the West
of Scotland.
Right Honored:
MAjor Genesis Lambert, takes all opportunities to engage Langdale to fight, but
can by no meants faciliate the same, the Enemy still keeping off, and
retreating from our Van; But Major Genesis Lambert pursues, and upon the 13. 14
and 15. of this instant, drew up his Army, within 6. miles of Carlisle, and
faced the Town, our Trumpeters sounded a Challenge, but the enemy refused to
fight, and would not engage: whereupon a party of our horse advanced toward
them, and charged a body of Langdales, and after some dispute worsted them
killed 7. or 8. took 20. prisoners, and put the rest to flight, their main body
not all this while once moving toward us: The Major Genesis seeing no probability
of engaging the Enemy, after some consultation with his Offices, drew off his
Army, and marched as far as Perith, where (at present) they remain in an
excellent postute of Discipline. We expect action very suddenly.

From Scotland we hear, that the Marquess of Argile, the Lord Eglenton the
Lord Castles, and some others in the West of Scotland, are very active in
raising of an Army to oppose Duke Hamilton; but to blast the Bud, before it
comes to two much maturity, a party of the Hamiltonians commanded by the Earl
of Calendar, the Lieut. Genesis is advanced against them, and (as we hear) have
fallen upon the Earl of Castles quarters, killed some of his men, and took some
prisoners, but with great loss; for by a Messenger from Edinburgh, it is
intimated, that the Lord Exlinton, upon notice thereof, fell upon their Rear,
and after a very sharp encounter, worsted a party of the E. of Kalenders horse,
killed some, and took diverse prisoners; but the Hamiltonians over pouring them
with horse, it is feared, they will have the worst out, as appears by this
ensuing abstract.

Sir, Since the E. of Kalenders advance into the West of Scotland, the nearer
part of the West is come in, and so submit to the Levy, and by their extreme
cruelty to the Country as they go, they are forced to obedience. Argile and
the rest must upon necessity yeald, by reason they have no horse to withstand
them; all the men in many of his Towns have left their houses, and are fled
into the Woods and Mountains, to hide rather then to engage, 3500. Horse 6000.
Foot, 500. Dragoons of Hamiltons party are in a marching posture, besides the
Cavallering party about Barwick and Carlisle, which will be all one, and without
qustion ready to join.

The L. Lodian Chancellor of Scotland, the L. Car, the Lord Wariston, and
diverse others, are gone to the Navy of Argile, to assist him in the raising of
forces against the Royal party. The Ministers and 15. of the Committee about
Glasco that came with a Petition are imprisoned, and their houses plundered,
the Lord Elcoe in Fife his Tenants plundered for not rising, Belmorino his
Tenants plundered and 2 killed.

There remains little possibility of the Commissioners of the Parl. of England
to do any good by their longer stay; for all their friends are, or presently
will be withdrawn: If D. Hamitons party can make good their design by force,
they will never hearken to any other means; but if at this day there had been
bu^ 4 or 5000. Horse and Foot upon the b^rders, in all probability England
would not this year be troubled with an Army from Scotland; but the expectation
of them to make a diversion, has occasioned some honest people in the West to
draw together; but the Lord Calender with a great body of horse and foot, is
like utterly to destroy them; some have been imprisoned already, and this week
many hundreds plundered and utterly ruined, for refusing to join with them: the
Lord Wariston was plundered upon Saturday night last, and it is thought that
both he and the Lord Chancellor will be put out of their places, an
^imp^isoned ere long: when it was debated in the Parl. in answer to several
Petitions, which desired that there might be a Treaty with England before they
proceeded to their Levy; Duke Hamilton answered, that so many Horse were
raised already, that no such thing could be hearkened to before they had
brought their Horse into England to quarter them.

And thereupon he had an order to have a Randevouz upon the borders when he
thought fit which will be as soon as they have done their work here; who
having above 3000. horse already, though they have no foot besides the old
Army, yet they will soon both ruin all the considerable men, who dare oppose
them, and force the rest to rise in a very short time. The Parl. of Scotland
have passed an oath that all should subscribe; it is that they should obey, and
in their places execute all the Acts of this present Parl. the Committee came
from the Committee of Estates, to tender it this day to the L. Chancellor, but
he was first got away, and the L. Wariston is also out of the way, all his
goods having been taken away first: There is raised besides the old Army, above
40. new complete Troops, they have but a few foot as yet, but they rise a
pace; for they who refuse have good store of Soldiers upon them; the
Commissioners of the Kark did make an Act, That if any Minister should not warn
the people, and tell them of their hazard if they did engage, they should be
suspended; the Parl. did make an Act, That those Ministers that should approve
of the engagement, should have their stipend sure to them while they lived,
whether they did preach or n^: They have given power to the Committee of
Estates, to put any Officer or Minister of State out of his place, that shall
not obey the Orders, and they shall put others into their places and offices:
this is chiefly intended against the L. Chancellor, and the L. Wariston; they
have also made an Act, that they who will not obey the Act of Levy, their goods
shall be forfeited, and their persons secured.

Kendall in Westmerland 21. June 1648.
Sir

I Thought it fit in my last, to let the House know the readiness of the
County of Licester, and how forward they were for common safety; and now since
they have put themselves (by the advice and appearance of my Lord Gray, and
indeed whose interest does the business) into such a for^eidable posture; that I
think they maybe the pattern to the rest of the Counties of England, for they
have chosen their Officers, and formed their Regiments, viz. fix Regiments of
Horse and Dragoones, three hundred in each; the Foot are not as completed; my
Lord Gray is chosen Commander is chief, so that now there wants nothing but
power from the House, to enable my Lord Gray to give Commissions to the
Officers thus chosen by the Country; I can assure you they are all right men,
and when this is done, they will be in a marching posture will in 3. dai^s upon
their own charge, when they shall be commanded. We in Rutland and
Northamptonshire shall join with Leicester, in an Association upon the same way
and grounds as they do, and it is in some forwardness; I can assure you it is
so in Rutland, and the honest party in Northamptonshire are going about it, and
do not question but to ^ffect it; for both Presbyter and Independent join no^
cordially in that County, and indeed it is so in every place where I come? This
I thought fit to make known unto you, and to desire you and our friends to take
the first opportunity to effect this considerable work.

Market Harborough the 22. of June 1648.

Whereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled did upon the Twentieth
of May, 1642. for the preventing of the late War, pass these three Votes.

1 That it appears, that the King (seduced by wicked Council) intends to make
War against the Parliament, who in all their Consultations and Actions, have
proposed no other end unto themselves, but the care of the Kingdoms, and the
performance of all Duty and Loyalty to his Person. 2. That whenever the King
makes War upon the Parliament, it is a Breach of the Trust reposed in him by
his people, contrary to his Oath, and tending to the Dissolution of this
Government. 3 That whosoever shall seve or assist Him in such Wars are
Traitors, by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been of adjudged
by two Acts of Parliament, and ought to suffer as Traitors, in Richard. 2. 1
Hen. 4.

And whereas there ore now at this time diverse persons in Arms, who endeavor to
raise War against the Parliament; The Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, for better enforming of the Subjects of this Kingdom in their
Duty, do now at this time Declare, That it does appear, that diverse who have
assisted the King in the late war against the Parliament, is also divees others
do endeavor to seduce the people, and do a^tu^lly Levy War against the
Parliament.

That whosoever shall make war against the Parliament of England, or assist in
such war, are Traitors, by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. and have been
so adjudged by two Acts of Parliament, and ought to suffer as Traitors, 11 Ric.
2. 1 Hen. 4.

H: Elsyage, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

On F^^day last our Soldiers thinking they lay too long idle before so fli^ght
a Town (without Order) fell suddenly on the Enemy and began very fearsely ^o
Storm it, but the Enemy being better provided then they expected, galilantly
defended the place, whereupon our Soldiers seeing their was no good to be done
for present, made good their retreat with little or no loss at all.



FINIS.

