Another bloody FIGHT AT Colchester, on Tuesday night last, between his
Majesty's forces commanded by Genesis Lucas, and Col. Lunsford, and the
Parliaments forces; showing the manner of their sallying out of the town, and
falling upon their Guards, with the number killed and taken, and a dangerous
shot against the Lord Genesis Fairfax. Also, the resolution of Genesis Lucas and his
Forces rather to die like the Sons of Mars valiantly, than to yield the town
dishonorably, and their proceedings thereupon. With two other bloody Fights,
and diverse Colonels taken prisoners. Likewise, the L. Byrons proceedings in
Wales, and his Declaration for the King.

a finely dressed man on a horse holding a sword

Printed in the Year, 1648.

NEW PROPOSITIONS FROM The Colchesterian Shavers, to the Lord Genesis Fairfax,
upon the arrival of the sad intelligence of the routing the Scots Army in the
North; and their further resolution touching the town.
SIR,
Diverse of the Colchesterians have deserted their Lording Masters, and tendered
their service to the Lord General, but his Excellency would not accept thereof:
this Evening we sent them in their sad tidings of the defeating of the Scottish
army, who upon receipt thereof, immediately dispatched a Trumpeter to the Lord
General, with propositions for the surrendering of the Garrison, together with
all their arms and ammunition, except musket and sword, three Bandaleers of
powder, and a competent ptoportion of match and bullet, which if condescended
unto, Hostages should be sent forth, and articles agreed upon for the
surrender, but his Excellency rejected this message, being resolved to stand it
out, and to have most of them submit to mercy.

Whereupon the Trumpeter returned, and delivered his Excellences answer to the
Earl of Norwich, and Genesis Lucas, who upon reading thereof, began to grow into a
great agony, vowing revenge, and resolved rather to die like Sons of Mars in
the field, then to submit basely to the mercy of an enemy, and to surrender the
town upon dishonorable conditions: Therefore, to enlarge the Soldiers liberty,
General Lucas, and Col. Lunsford takes upon them to be their Redeemers, and
sallies forth with a considerable party of Horse and Foot upon six of our
Guards, about ten of the clock this Evening, thinking to surprise them all
unawares, but by our Eagle-ey'd sentinels they were discovered, and alarmed
the Guards, who soon were in a readiness to receive the Shavers, manning their
Works, and securing their Line, and upon the near approach of Genesis Lucas, we
gave them a volley, and fired six piece of Ordnance against them, being charged
with key-shot, which did great execution: they answered us again, and began to
advance toward our Turn pike, but finding the opposition too great, wheeled
about, a party of our horse and foot pursued them to the very sally-ports,
killed nine, and brought away seven prisoners, besides their great loss upon
the very first Onset, supposing them to amount to the number of 25. occasioned
by the execution of the small shot.

In this action we lost about eleven men, 7 slain, and four wounded.

The Inhabitants are in great distress, and so are most of the soldiers, yet
they remain both obstinate and insolent, and say, unless they may have good
conditions, they are resolved to sacrifice their lives to the last man, and to
maintain their Works, and dispute the town to the last drop of blood, but we
doubt not, but famine will soon force them to the worst of conditions, rather
then to hazard our Army by storm.

We have all things in readiness for a storm, our Mines are quite finished,
and our trenches so near the walls, that we annoy each other with stones, the
enemy has countermined us near the East gate, and took one of our Mines, and
five of the Pioneers: our Batteries are also quite finished, and the great Guns
planted and have made several Breaches in the walls, but they have made them
up again with wool-packs.

Col. Rains borough has made many a gallant shot against their great Mount
near St. Mary's Church, dismounted three piece of Canon, killed two Gunners,
and a Metrose.

His Excellency being advertized that the Mounts were all finished, and the
Ordnance planted, resolved to take a view of them which accordingly he did,
diverse Colonels and other Officers accompanying him to the said Fortification,
and upon his Excellencies going into one of the Forts near East Gate, the enemy
discharged a Drake with Case shot, which scattered Dirt upon him and his
attendants, hurt an Officer in the face by the rebcunding of a stone, but did
none of the rest any harm.

The Earl of Norwich, Lord Capel. Sir Charles Lucas, and the rest of the
Officers in the Town, sent a letter to the Lord Fairfax wherein they desire 20
days leave to address themselves to the Prince, and if things go not
suitable to their desires, then etc. This Letter was received by the General,
and answer was returned by a Trumpetter, though not according to the
expectation of the besieged. Hunger bites those in the town, and their desires
not being granted, if the old proverb be true, that hunger breaks stone walls,
some are of opinion, that men of that desparate condition will endeavor to
break the line once again, before they submit, but more danger is in
attempting a quick line (to hold out the proverb) then a dead wall; for the
General has fitted al things for a storm if occasion be, and is every minute
so well provided to receive the Enemy if they sally forth that if the
distresled condition of the besieged should put them upon any desperate design
is more probable they will be accessory to hasten their utter destruction then
that that any of them should deliver themselves by an escape.

A great Victory in Hereford-shire.
Letters out of Hereford-shire, say, that there was a late fight between a
party of horse for the Parliament commanded by Maj. Harley and a party for the
King commanded by Sir Henry Linging, in which its said Sir Henry Linging had
the better at the first but Maj. Harley having a reserve charged with great
gallantry, rescued some prisoners, took many other of the adverse party, and
diverse Officers; amongst whom it is said Sir Henry Lingen himself is one, and
ten Lieutenant colonels, Majors, and Captains.

By Letters from Stafford it is advertized, that Col. Stepkins formerly a
Commander in the Kings Army, had a design to have surprised the said Town and
Castle for the King, the place of Randezvouz was two miles distant from the
town, where a great number of Royalists were gathered in a head together, in
the night time, and intended to have put their design ia execution the next
morning; but by the revolting of two Gentlemen, who discovered the same to
Capt. Stone in the nick of time, the plot was discovered, and the Governor,
with a party of horse and foot, about two in the morning, marched to the said
place of Randezvouz, fell upon them in their quarters, killed Colonel Stepkins
and seven more, wounded many, and took diverse prisoners of quality, with the
loss of two men.

Other letters from Northampton shire say, that the Royalists in those parts
have been a long time complotting and associating themselves together, and have
had several randezvouzes near Stanford, and upon Friday last declared for the
King, but having intelligence of the great Overthrow in the North, soon
changed their resolutions, and dispersed themselves into several parts of the
County, so that all things now are in a peaceable condition.

Northampton 22 August 1648.
The further proceedings of the Lord Byron in Wales, and his Declaration to the
Welsh-men to rise for the King.
SIR,
THe Lord Byron is very active in these parts for the raising of Forces for the
King, he has set forth a Declaration to the Country, declaring the grounds and
reasons of his engagement, and his desires to free the subject from oppression,
and to reinvest his Royal Majesty in his just rights and privileges, to
maintain monarchical government, and to establish Religion, and the
fundamental laws of the kingdom, etc. and therefore desires their
assistance, for to engage with him therein. But as yet few makes their
appearance, and his numbers are but small.

Carnarvan 21 Aug. 1648.
FINIS.

