ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A DECLARATION OF THE Proceedings against the XI MEMBERS OF
The House of COMMONS: IMPEACHED Of High Crimes, and Mis-demeanors; By His
EXCELLENCY Sir THOMAS FAIREFAX, AND the ARMY under his Command.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed for Will. Armestrong, Anno Dom. 1647.

ANIMADVERSIONS Upon a DECLARATION OF The proceedings against the XI. Members
of the House of Commons, Impeached of high Crimes, and mis-demeanors; By his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his COMMAND.
IT is advice as good as old: Of all knaves take beed of a learned knave, (not
because he is an Academian, but a wicked one.) When Snakes would creep into
our bosoms, there is most need of vigilance; the Devil never does the Church
more mischeife, then when he appears like an Angel of light; And when
machivillions pretend the greatest good, to a State or kingdom, they then
practice most mischeife.

I can not but judge the Author of this Declaration to have a design
(notwithstanding his fair pretenses) to Tantilize a tormented Kingdom (under a
pretense of pleading for the upholding of Rights, Privileges, freedoms, and
common justice,) to strike at the very foundation, (and to blast the honor,
and reputation) of the Parliament, and to have a design to set the whole
Kingdom in a new combustion. I will give you some Animadversions, such as I
have plainly observed from the several parts thereof.

He taxes the proceedings of the Army to appear unjust.

1 By the generality, and incertainty of the Accusers, the Charge against them
being presented in the name of the whole Army, without the hands of any
particular persons to it, who will undertake (at their perils) to make it
good. Here is a fine expression of love to the Parliament is there not? mark
this design herein, which is to set the Parliament against the Army; And to
draw a slighting of the Charge until the whole Army come up. The Impeachment
is drawn up by the whole Council of War. The General, and Officers have
chosen a Committee of their own Members (whereof four are Colonels, and the
rest officers of note, well known, and of good Estates who by order from them
and in the name of the whole Army, delivered the Charge (signed by the
Generals own Secretary) to the House of Commons with their own hands,
undertaking to make it good against the said Members. This Gentleman would have
it thrown aside, to provoke the Army to come to force justice. O brave
Counselor!

2 By the uncertainty, and generality of the Charge it self, in mere general
and ambiguous terms; to which the parties accused, can give no answer, nor
make any defense. This he declares, to make the Kingdom to have low thoughts
of the House of Commons; as if they were not able to descerue those many
perticulars expressed in this Charge, because they voted the former to be
insufficient to suspend their (...). Members by Law. As if that vote made the
25th June, should judge what is brought in (in matter of so great concernment)
July 6 following? And if this advice tend to the honor of the Parliament let
any reasonable man judge.

3 By the multitude, and quallity of the parties impeached, no less then II.
at once, all men of approoved integrity, fidelity, and abillityes, who have
acted, and suffered much, for the Parliaments, and peoples Liberties: Ye may
see what spirit this Gentleman is of (her^n,) grant him this allegation, and he
will then reply upon the Parliament themselves, for impeaching so many, and of
such quallity, (as are expressed in their propositions to the King) all at once.
And it is well known that the Archbishop of Canterbury, that dyed a Traitor,
was once, an honest private Preacher, the Earl of Straford acted well when he
sat in the House of Commons in a former Parliament, and made diverse excellent
speeches, which condemned his own actions afterward: And Sir John Hotham, was
voted by both Houses of Parliament to act well at Hull, for which he suffered
the reproaches of the Kings Proclamation, to be called a Traitor, for the
service he did for the Parliament and Kingdom, and yet they all became
(afterward) so great enemies to the Parliament and peace of the Kingdom, that
they all lost their heads as Traitors against the Kingdom. And in that very
Committee (where the Gentleman who wrote the Declaration is so eminent) many
gallant men, (in diverse Counties) who have done much good service for the
Parliament, have had very strict usage, and by their subcommittees, some cast
into prison, others persecuted to the great prejudice of their lives, though no
Charge at all has appeared against them, nay the very oath of the Committee is
(sometimes) strangely put to exact a Charge against a man's self. Oh but to
take so many out of the House at once, he says will weaken the Presbiterian
party. A fine business to have parties to carry on designs in the House. Does
not this tend to their reputations.

4 By their violence to have them suspended the House before any real,
particular Charge, or proofs, produced against them. Does this give a good
Character of the proceedings of Parliament to traduce them by anticipation of
their proceedings, as if they were resolved to do nothing against their
Members but what violence shall force; notwithstanding the representations of
so many able, honest, faithful Gentlemen, brought in as a Charge by way of
impeachment from the whole Army against them. Though the crimes be high, and
witnesses ready to make it good, were the matter put into a way of trial.

5 By their unjust, and unreasonable demands, after the votes of the House June
25 ( against their II. Members suspention, upon what had appeared in the papers
then received from the Army. Here he would (to the dishonor of the House)
have the Members hound up to the same opinion which they had before the
particulars came from the Army; that because the major part of them thought
well of these Members then, that therefore (let proof be brought of never so
high crimes and misdemeanors against them yet) no legal trial should be now
permitted against those, of whom they have had so good an opinion, and from
hence he makes a most dangerous motion to all Counties and Burroughes; (to the
great hazard of the Parliaments sitting in peace) to stir them up to a
violent petitioning of the House against the Army, protesting against them;
Whereas he cannot be ignorant that many Counties make their addresses to the
Parliament by the Army.

6 By their apparent false suggestions, wherewith they abuse, both the accused
Members, and the House. Here is a great affront put upon the Army indeed; But
where lies this falsity, he says that in their manifesto June 27. They
declared to have their particulars and proofs ready to deliver in; That the
House ordered them to bring it in Friday July 4. at which time, a longer day
was craved. If this gentleman would but deal clearly herein, he would blush
at this folly of his. That although the officers of the Army had so much
business to do, about the treaty, and yet they were able to dispatch it, in
two days after the time set, which was all the time desired (the Lords day only
excepted) by which time it was drawn up, and engrossed brought to London and
delivered to the House of Commons, and yet he is so impudent as to give them
the lie, for saying that it was ready.

If he and other Lawyers would make so short a work of what they do, after
Papers delivered into their hands, it would save the Kingdom many thousand
pounds a year, nay, he may remember that himself, (and the rest) that
prosecuted the Archbishops, had him suspended the House long before the
particular Charge was brought in, nay to go yet further, what particular
Charge was there, either against him or Straford before an order was passed
(after suspention) for the bringing in of witnesses, which took up much time,
to complete it.

And yet the Army has sent a particular one, and a home one too, against these
Members, as plainly appears to those who have impartial ears to hear it.

And although he would have the House to endanger themselves and the whole
Kingdom, in opposing the Army in the protection of these Members, from
Justice, and likewise engage the Counties and Buroughs, that chose them
herein. And the Charge against them, is for such high and great crimes, as are
therein expressed, yet he says all that is therein, is below expectation, And is
this man (think you) a friend to the II Members, or does he not rather throw
in a bone among us.

And his finding fault with the want of hands; (it being signed by the
Generals Secretary; and delivered by those Honorable Commissioners;) is all
one as to clash with an Order of Parliament, signed by John Bowne, or Henry
Elsynge, Cleric. delivered by Commissioners from the Houses.

7. Their Mercinary Pamphleters, for shame man peace; have not you, and your
faction used this Trade so long, to cherish the Malignant humors of the Church
and Kingdom, that ye are all sick of the Gangrena, The Army never went about
to make a Monopoly to themselves of the Presses, as those who sought to destroy
them did, The Army give not Pensions to 80. or 100. Clerks to help them, They
give not annuities to Mercenary Scribes, to spoil Ink and Paper, to abuse the
Kingdom; and bring faction, and Tyranny into the Church and Kingdom; But he
says that the Impeached Members are traduced grossly, because the Houses have
acquitted them by their Votes. But (under favor) they were not acquitted by
both Houses, neither has any thing of it been presented to the Lords, they
being Members of the House of Commons, nor have the Commons acquitted them upon
the Particular Charge, or since it was presented, or the House knew what was
therein contained. Nor did that acquitall go further then upon what appeared to
their sense then; way being still left open to receive what is since or shall
be delivered; and to judge according to the same.

FINIS.

