MOST WELCOME NEWS FROM YORK BEING A true and perfect Relation of what has
happened in York, since his Majesty's last DECLARATION. The Parliaments
Resolution, concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and
Commons which have absented themselves from the said Houses, and are now at
York attending on his Majesty. Likewise the Grounds and Reasons why they are
enforced to take Arms, With the several Reasons to prove that every man is
bound to uphold the Parliament against all Opposers whatsoever.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons that this be printed and published.

John Brown Cler. parl. H. Elsing Cler. parl.



June 23, Printed for William Arding, 1642.

The Reason why the Subject is bound to obey the Command of the Parliament,
Voted,
That if in case of necessity, if his Majesty shall deny his assent, the
Ordinance agreed on by both Houses of Parliament, does obliege the People, and
ought to be obeyed, being warranted by the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

Both Houses of Parliament has took into their serious consideration the
Occasion and Reason why the Members of the said Houses should absent themselves
upon their summoning in, Whereupon they has drawn up a ^harge against them, and
are resolved that they shall pay 100. l. a man, and to be examined by the
Committee before the next sitting.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this be printed and
published,

John Brown Cler Parl. Hen, Elsing Cler. Parl D. Com.


WELCOME NEWS FROM YORK:
Worthy Sir,
I Cannot without the fearful and terrible stain of ingratitude forget your
abundance of love, expressed unto me when you were resident with us here in the
North.

It was your desire, and your courtesy to me, and my great necessity have
engaged me to certify you of all Passages which have bin worth any observation
since your departure from us.

The common fear is of wars, and that fear is so far published throughout the
whole County, that we must hope little less can ens^^.

His Majesty will not give leave to any conditions, but what he has himself
first proposed.

Some Lords do encourage his Resolutions, but the others stand as Neutrals
rather endeavoring to persuade him, then to encourage his Resolution in the
violent way of war.

We hear that my Lord Pagets absence from the House, which was beyond
expectation, has much discontented the House, but here his intentions are
found to be so faithful, that we hope they will have no ground to question
his fidelity and trust.

There came lately to York many Cavaleers from London, who offered to maintain
His Majssties Resolution of setting up His Standard, from which some well
disposed Lords of His Majesty's Counsel, did of late did of late dissure him.
These Cavaleers at a place called Grimston within 12. miles of York, upon the
16. of June did gather a head, being in number above threescore, and in the
space of three hours by their fain insinuation had gathered unto them a great
multitude more, in this Confusion they passed toward York City, and at their
first coming they did present their service unto His Majesty, as men willing
to continue this miserable distraction, their whole intents complying with his
Majesty's Resolution of setting up his Standard.

Upon their first proffer, his Majesty was much moved and heavy, desired to
have some time for respite for their Entertainment, but did the next morning
being the 17. of JUNE entertain most of them, which has given them most
strange and mighty Encouragement.

I will give you for your better satisfaction some of their Names, which have
bin the main Agents in this cause, but ere long I hope they will be apprehended.

Colonel Williams Capt, Draper. Capt. Early. Capt. Stichborn, Lieutenant
Gilbert, Sergeant Major Smith, and some others, Thus I rest,

York June 18. 1642. Your most obliged Friend, EDWARD ANDREWS.

SInce the peace of this Kingdom has bin disturbed, those dangerous Agents of
Rome has practiced many desperate Attempts against this Nation; Whereby they
have endeavored the subversion of our Liberties and persons, And since all
these now within these few days there arose a strange and most wicked danger
in Darby Town, where by the motion and instigation of one Master John Hamson a
Catholic, strange things have happened, for after that he and his adherents
had endeavored to spoil one Mr. James his house, when their intentions did
not take such success as they expected, they entered the same James his house,
and not finding him at home, seized upon his wife; whom after they had
ravished, they gagged in a most terrible manner: and after this mischief they
plundered the house, and told her that this was but the beginning of what they
did intend to act.

This slept for a season, and within a small space they intended to fire the
Town, but by the information of Mistress James his wife, their fartqer mischief
was prevented, and all their Designs countermanded.

Thus the Actors were discovered, and all things now brought to light, which
they intended should have bin brought to a greater light.

By virtue of an Order this day made in the House of Commons June 17. the
Officers and Keformadoes listed by the Adventurers for Ireland, are hereby
required to take notice, that they are on tuesday next (at 9. a clock in the
morning) to hear a Sermon, and take the Protestation at St. Laurence Church
near Guild Hall London, and then to enter into pay at Guild Hall aforesaid.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl.

A Command from the High Court of Parliament, to the Justices of Peace near
adjoining to the Northern Roads.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That a strict
search and Examination be made by the Justices of peace Mayor, Bailiffs,
Constables, and other his Majesty's Officers, inhabiting, or near adjoining to
all the Northern Roads, for the stopping and staying of all Arms, Ammunition,
Powder, Light-horses, or horses for service in the Wars, and great Saddles
that are, or shall be carried toward the North parts of England, but by the
privity and direction of one, or both Houses of Parliament; And that the said
Officers shall stay them accordingly, and speedily give information thereof
unto one of the Houses of Parliament.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament. That this shall be printed and published.

Io. Brown, Cler. Parl.


