Anglia Rediviva: A POEM ON HIS MAJESTY'S Most joyful Reception INTO ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne for Charles Adams, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Talbot in Fleetstreet, 1660.

Anglia Rediviva, A Poem on his MAIESTEIS most joyful Reception into England.
ALL, that despairing, and despaired of men,
When suddenly restored to Health again,
Feel at the welcome change; All, that we know
Of overwhelming Ravishments, that grow
In the swift passing through the high extremes
Of cold despair, into the quickening beams
Of full enjoyment, scarce makes up the sum
Of England's joy to see her Prince at home.
As, of the Heavenly Bodies we infer
Their magnitude from their Eclipse; And here
Below we by the shadows measure heights;
So must we calculate the ruinous streights,
We were reduced unto, before we guess
At the Elevation of our Happiness.
Torn by the fury of Phanatick winds
Up by the roots, poor Britainy now finds
Her self turned Floating Island: But her shore
No sooner kis't his Royal feet, and wore
Their fair impression, when her wavering cea'st,
And she became firm land again; so blessed
Upon that sacred touch, that she grew sound
All on the sudden, closing every wound,
That bled so long: This healing touch revived
Her drooping state, and promised a long-lived
Felicity, which nothing else could bring,
For her Kings-Evill was to want her King.
And all her children (Monsters she not ownes,
Though such there be, that with unnatural frowns,
Or false smiles greet the Triumph of this Day)
With full consent of Hearts and tongues do pay
Their Prayers, and Loyal duty on their knee.
First unto God, then to his Majesty.
Hark, how the mouths of Canons learn to speak
Love and Allegiance; Better so to break
The willing air with loud and loyal sounds,
Then be the Instruments of death, and wounds.
To make our joys appear, we Bonfires light,
As Emblemes of our Love; A flame more bright,
That burns, yet lessens not within our heart.
Bells ring, to show the Church must have a part
In this Days Jubilee; and that we own,
As a main point of our Religion,
Our duty to the King. No Sex, nor Age,
But throngs to act their Parts, as on a Stage,
Of Homage to their Prince: They rend the skies
With such a volley of loud shouts, and cries,
As if they meant the Inhabitants above
Should Hearers be, and witness of their love.
But let the pressing Multitude give room;
Behold, the noble General is come
With low obeisance Majesty to greet,
And lay himself down at the Royal feet.
This, this is he, whom kinder stars have sent
Of all our joys to be the Instrument;
He, whom the Heavens reserved for such a season
To rescue England, and disarme black Treason.
O, may that horrid Monster never be found
To raise his head again on English ground;
Down in his native Dungeon let him rore
For e're, and wallow in his own foul gore.
Long live our George, that has this Dragon slain,
To crush the breed, should any yet remain.
What this Knight was that aftertimes may see,
I Will draw his Picture for Posterity,
He is all Inside; Nothing of bark, or shell:
Made up of solid greatness; scorns to excel
In a gay formal outside: One, that can
Seem little, and be great within. A Man
Only by his high actions understood,
Born for his Country, and his Sovereigns good.
He does the work, whilst others say fine things;
And all our Hopes to an enjoyment brings:
Cares not with gilded promises to please,
But silently contrives our happiness.
Some hope, some fear, some censure, and some rail,
He minds them not, but still drives home the Nail.
Not the mistrust of unbelieving friends,
Nor force of open foes obstruct the ends
Nobly prefixed unto his generous mind;
He cuts his way through all, makes every wind
Serve his well laid Design, until he bring
To this distracted Realm Peace, and the King.
Him the succeeding Ages will admire
More then the present can: Great heights require
Some distance to be sully seen: When we
Lie blended in forgotten Dust, shall he
Stand a fair Precedent of Loyalty.
From this loved subject I must part: My eye
Calls me away, struck with a glorious train
Of Nobles, hasting to revive again
Their tarnish't Luster at the brighter Ray
Of Majesty: see, how they humbly lay
Themselves before him, so to rise the higher;
They were of smoke, they are now pillars of fire.
You, that are stars of the first Magnitude,
Have dearly learned to understand your good:
Nor raise, nor cherish by your influence
Vapors (though on a sanctified pretense)
That reek from corrupt, ill-affected minds;
Raised up, they soon convert to blustering winds,
Into black clouds condense, and last of all
On your own heads in storms, and thunder fall.
All your tanscending luster of the Crown
You hold, as Planets theirs do of the Sun.
Well may you shine in fair Conjunction,
But are eclips 't in Opposition.
Next comes the House of Commons, the other Leg,
On which the Nation stands: These do not beg
(Like those, who last sat there) their Sovereign
To part with, but to take his Rights again.
Nor, like those State-Phanaticks, will they mould
New Governments, but rest upon the old;
And in an equal temper keep alive
Our Liberty, and his Prerogative.
All terms and Articles are banished hence:
They Are for our Enemies, but not our Prince.
I know you are too generous to bring
Into the Nation, a fettered King,
And so to change by a false courtesy
His Banishment into Captivity.
Have not our Laws already marked the Bounds
Twixt Him, and us? O, do not lay the grounds
Of fresh debate, least you unravell all,
And we to our late Anarchy do fall.
But what fresh joy is this, that now appears
So bright, so loud unto my eyes and ears?
O it is the famous City come to see
With open hands, large heart, and bended knee
Their long-mist Sovereign; whom to restore
Their's none have acted, none have suffered more.
You, (when the raging sword had quite hewn down
Both Law, and Lawgivers; laid flat the Crown,
And brought the sacred Head -- Here I must leave,
Or the sad memory will quite bereave
This day of all his joy) it was you, that dared
Stand in the breach; unarmed, and unprepared,
Meeting the violence of an armed force,
An English heart to you was foot and horse:
Your stout opposing brought them to that sense,
That they were starved into Obedience.
If naked loyalty our ruin stop,
What may we not from your Militia hope?
Still may your Arms the Person guard, your Purse
The Royal splendour feed; You cannot disburse
On higher interest, nor make a venture
In which more Glory, and more Profit center.
So Earth lends Heaven some vapors, which again
Are gratefully returned in fruitful rain.
The World knows not a Monarch, like our own,
So seasoned, so prepared for a Throne:
Nature has done her best, Fortune her worst,
And both to fit him for us. They are cursed
Beyond all punishment of Law, that dare
Advance a sullen Thought against the Prayer
Poured forth by the whole Nation this Day,
That long may He Command, and we Obey.
And now (Most Glorious Prince) in name of all,
That Throng to Solemnize this Festival,
Give your poor Subject leave humbly to impart
The fervent motions of his Loyal heart.
More flourishing than May I wish your Reign
(The Month, that gave you first, and now again
Restores you to us); And that Heaven a Bride
As fruitful too may suddenly provide.
That you Outlive the Oldest, and out do
The best of former Kings; That you may know
No sorrows, but what are already past,
To give your present Joy the higher Taste.
FINIS.

