Another great and BLOODY FIGHT IN IRELAND BETWEEN The Princes Forces and the
Parliaments, at the strong and impregnable Garrison of Droghedah; with the
particulars thereof, the number killed and taken prisoners, and the re-taking
of the Town with all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition.

ALSO, A great Victory obtained by the Lord Inchiquin, against the Rebellious
Army in that Nation, upon their refusing to fight for Charles the second; with
the manner of the said Fight, and his routing and dispiersing 5000 horse and
foot, commanded by Genesis ONEAL.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed for G. W. Aug. 21. 1649.

Another great and bloody FIGHT IN IRELAND Between The Princes forces, and the
Parliaments; with the particulars thereof, the number killed and taken
prisoners; and a great Victory obtained by the Lord Inchiquin against Genesis
Oneal.
SIR,
BY an Express yesterday from the Lord Governor Cromwell, we hear, that he is
got safely into the Harbou^ at Dublin, and has landed two or three Regiments
of the foot, the horse being also craning out of the ships as fast as possible
they can: its said, that his Lordship (at his landing) were entertained with a
great volley from the great Guns in the City. And a little before his presence
Col. Jones sent forth a party of horse and foot to take in Droghedah; who upon
summoning thereof, the Lord Moor returned a very peremptory answer, and
disputed the place with great resolutenesse and gallantry, insomuch, that many
many of them were slain upon the place; but at last, the conflict grew so hot
and sharp, that the enemy began to article and at last obtained conditions to
march away with sword and pistol, upon the surrender of the town with all the
Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition. This action cost us not very dear, our loss
being esteemed about 70, whereof 30 slain, the rest wounded: of the enemies
about 200.

We hear that the Lord Inchiquin has randezvou'd in Muster about 4000 horse
and foot, who sending a Letter to Genesis Oneal, to know whether he would covenant
for the declared King of Scotland, etc. received answer, that he would not
engage against the Parl. of England: whereupon he advanced with his horse and
foot, fell upon them in their quarters, dissipated part of the foot, killed
many, and took diverse prisoners, forcing the rest to the Bogs and Woods, in
which conflict, they give out, that above 1000 fell under the power of their
sword.

During which action, Sir Charles Coot lay not idle in Londonderry, but
opportunely foreseeing his advantage, sallyed out, and fell upon Sir Charles
Stuarts quarters, killed many, took diverse prisoners, and raised the siege,
with the loss of 40 men.

The news is confirmed from Dublin, Ormond has paid dear of his bowzing,
Taff, Preston, and he being met together, thought they could destroy the Parl*
power, by drinking healths to their destruction, when its in so many words a
Bull, whereas Lieu. Genesis Jones came soberly upon them, and made them run
several ways: It Is said, that in their have they fell upon Ballyshanon, have
taken it, and are rallyed, being about twelve thousand within twelve miles of
Dublin and fallen to their old way of disputing passe^: which when lost, they
run to the next: they increase by the coming of forces to them, and say, if
they recover not their reputation before Michaelmas, they shall not keep Ireland
from a total reducement within a year.

Bristol 18. Aug. 1649.
By Letters from the Hague thus: since the late brow given to Ormond by Lieut.
Genesis Jones, we hear that they are rebodying about Kilkeny and Muster, and that
in the said Engagement thirteen thousand of the Princes forces escaped, who are
gathering together, and randezvouzing in several places; but the raising of
the siege, and defeating that potent power is joyfully rescented by many.

It is likewise reported, that the Princes retinue lately sat in Council,
whose result was, That new propositions should be sent to the Parl. of
Scotland, viz. 1 That his declared Majesty would wive his assent, for the
settling of Religion, according to the solemn League and Covenans.

2 That he would wholly apply his Ear to the Council and Advice of the Estates
conveened, provided, that respect might be had to the tender Consciences of
those who have adhered to or assisted him.

But this will hardly be; for he must either become a perfect Covenanter, or
else a despised Prince.

Many of the Royal party have caused proclamation to be made for Charles the
II, for the raising of Volantiers, but few appears in that engagement,

Hague 9. Augusti, 1649.
The Scots Resolution touching their King.
FIrst, that prevailing party of Sectaries of England, who have broken the
Covenant, and despised the Oath of God, corrupted the truth, subverted the
fundamental Government, by King and Parliament, and taken away the life; look
upon us with an evil eye, as upon those who stand in the way of their
monstrous and new-singled devices, in Religion and Government, and though there
were no cause to fear any thing for that party, but the Gangrene and infection
of those many damnable and abominahle errors, which have taken hold on them,
yet our vicinity unto and daily to commerce with that nation, may justly make
us afraid that the Lord may give up many in this land unto a spirit of
delusion, to believe lies, because they have not received the love of truth.

Secondly, Neither is the Malignant party so far broken and brought low, as
that they have abandoned all hopes of carrying on their former designs against
the Covenant, and work of Reformation, besides many of them in this Kingdom who
are as Foxes tide in chains, keeping in evil nature, and waiting opportunity
to break their cords, and again to prey upon the Lords people. That the
standing Armies in Ireland, under the command of the Marq. of Ormond, the Lord
Inchiqueen, the Lord of Airds, and George Munroe, who forgetting the horrible
cruelty that was exercised by the Irish and English Nations in that Land, have
entered into a Peace and association with them, that they may the more easily
carry on the old design of the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant party, and the
Lord of Airds, and George Munroe, have by treachery and oppression, brought the
Province of Ulster, and Garrisons therein, under their power and command, and
have redacted our Countrymen, and such as adhere unto the Covenant and cause
of God in that Province unto many miseries and straits, and are like to banish
the Ministers of the Gospel, and to overturn these fair beginnings of the
work of God, which were unto many a branch of hope, that the Lord meant to
make Ireland a pleasant Land.

Thirdly, But which is more grievous unto us then all these, our King
notwithstanding of the Lords hand, against his fathers opposition to the work
of God, and bearing down all those in the three Kingdoms, by which it is come
to pass, that his Majesty has hitherto refused to grant the just and
necessary desires of this Kirk and Kingdom, which were tendered unto him from
the Commissioners of both for securing of Religion, the liberties of the
Subject, his May. Government, and the peace of the Kingdom; and it is much to
be feared that those wicked Councillors may so far prevail upon him in his
tender years, as to engage him in a War for ouerturning (if it be possible) of
the Work of God, and bearing down all those in the three Kingdoms that adhere
thereto, which if he shall do, cannot but bring great wrath from the Lord upon
himself and his Throne, and must be the cause of many new and great miseries
and calamities to these Lands.

And albeit the Lands be involved in many difficulties and compassed about with
great and imminent dangers; yet there is hope and ground of consolation
concerning this thing; the Lord is in the midst of us, and we are called by his
name, our ears hear the joyful sound of the Gospel, add our eyes see our
Teachers. We behold the arm of the Lord stretched out daily in working
salvation for his people, and answering their desires upon their enemies, by
terrible things inrighte onsnesse, although we be few in number, yet the Lord
of Hosts is with us, and in the power of his strength we shall be able to
prevail; although our land be filled with sin, yet we have not been forsaken
of the Lord our God, but he has always had compassion upon us, and delivered
us in all our distress; although some of understanding fall, it is bot to try,
and to purge, and to make white even to the end, because it is yet for a time
appointed although many cleave to us by flatteries, yet there be a remnant who
keep their integrity, and the Lord shall do good to those that be good; but
such as turn aside to crooked ways, shall be led forth with the workers of
iniquity.

The Lords people in England and Ireland, who adhere to the cause and covenant,
may be perplexed, but shall not despair, they may be persecuted but shall not
be forsaken; they may be cast down but shall not be destroyed; and although
uniformity and the work of Reformation in these hands seem not only to be
retarded, but almost pluekt up by the roots, and the foundation thereof razed;
yet the seed which the Lord has sown there, shall again take root downward,
and bear fruit upward, the zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this.

A. KER.

FINIS.

