The Triumph of a good Conscience. OR A SERMON Preached upon the 2. of the
Revel. the latter part of the 10 verse.

Wherein the nature of Faithfulness is in part opened, and the doctrine of
perseverance confirmed, and some cases of Conscience cleared.

By Paul Amiraut, Minister of the Gospel at East Dearham, in the County of
Norfolk.

Matthew. 25.23. Well done good and profitable servant, thou have been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord.

Augustine. Quod minimum minimum est, sed in minimo fidelem esse magnum est.

Homerus. (...)
(...).
(...)
London, Printed by Thomas Pain. 1648.

To my worthy esteemed friend Mr. Laurence Brinley, Citizen and Merchant of the
City of London.
Worthy Sir,
I Cannot perform so much as I promised, but by performing more. I undertook
upon your request to present you a Copy of this Sermon in writing, and
accordingly I set pen to paper, but my great distractions came so fast upon me,
that in stead of writing I fell to scribbling, so that if J had offered you my
written copy, J should have exhibited unto you unknown mysteries in the
letter, though I speak but plain things for the matter. So that I saw, I could
not make this Sermon fit for private use, but by exposing it to public view.
And so lodging in a Printers house, I did address my self to the press, and
that which others make their choice, I made my refuge, therefore if any blame
me for sitting in the Printers stock, let him take this for an Apology. And
since I am cast into this dilemma, that either I must be a fool in print, or be
guilty of the breach of promise, let the most censorious critics know, that I
esteem that folly wisdom, that does exempt me from the guilt of
unfaithfullnesse, which in this short discourse I have stigmatized with the
black brand of Hell. But if there be no remedy, but this short treatise must
be marked out for censure and reproach, I pass not for it, for it shall run
but the same fate with the Author, and perhaps for no other cause, but for that
I desire to be acquainted with the subject I treat of: And truly I expect to
have this Sermon censured by some for the Authors sake, and by others I expect
to have the Author censured for the Sermons sake. However I desire to be no
worse dealt witha, l then Salomons Temple was by Nebuzardan, who though he
destroyed it, yet he took the gold. So if men will but own the subject of this
Sermon, and realize it in their practice, let them make me an Anatomy of
reproach. I have prepared my back and shoulders to bear it. But as for you
worthy Sir, I doubt not, but you will own this discourse with all faults,
since you have so often urged me to own my promise, and I am glad it shall
lodge in the bosom of him, who in these staggering and declining times, has
made his breast the Sanctuary of this grace of faithfulness, in adhering to
Gospel principles, which will be your Crown, and your rejoicing in the day of
the Lord Jesus, in whose hand I leave you, who will be your Iacin and your
Boaz, your strength and establishment, resting

Yours in all Gospel services, Paul Amiraut.

The Triumph of a good Conscience etc.
Reve. chap. 2. ver. 10 Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee
a Crown of life.


IT is a good saying of an ancient writer directing his speech to godly
Christians, Fear not O faithful soul, those outward evils which thou shall
suffer, for thy keeper sleeps not, which preserves thee: But be afraid of
sin and inward evils, for thy keeper sleeps not, which observes thee. So
in this verse the Church of Smyrna is bidden not to fear those outward evils
which she should suffer, though the Devil should cast some of them into prison
etc. but here in my text, she is bidden implicitly to fear the inward evil of
Apostacy, and explicitly exhorted unto perseverance. Be thou faithful unto
the death.

The words naturally branch themselves into two parts, a precept and a promise.

1. The precept, Be thou faithful unto death.

2. The promise, and I shall give thee a Crown of life. But I shall only speak
something of the first.

The thing that is now to be explained, is the word faithful, which though it
admit of an ample description, and takes in many ingredients, yet being
confined to the straights of time, (...) is the severe moderator of these
exercises, I shall only open the main thing that denominates a man to be
faithful; and that is the covenant keeping grace, whereby a man keeps touch
with God in performing those vows and promises, he has made unto him, in the
6. of Hosea verse the 7. They like men have transgressed the Covenant, they
have dealt treacherously against me: to transgres the covenant is made there an
act of treachery, and unfaithfulness, therefore by the Law of contraries, to
keep the covenant is an act of faithfulness: it is the same with obedience in
regard of the matter, but it differs from it in regard of the manner,
for obedience has relation to the command, as it is Gods word, but
faithfulness has relation to the command, as we have made it ours, by entering
into Covenant and promise to perform it: Now a faithful Christian often
breaks Gods word, but never goes so far, as to break his own, as shall be made
good in the prosecution of this doctrine.

faithfulness if it be of the right Stamp will hold out unto death. For
confirmation whereof, take a view of these Scriptures, Prove. 10.25. Job 27.
ver. 5. 1 John 2.19. 1 John 3.9. These Scriptures show the (...) of the
doctrine, proving that it is so, and now we shall produce reasons to show the
(...) of the doctrine, and to give an account that it is so.

Phil. 3.13.14.15. so the 1 of Chron. the 12. they that in the 33. are said not
to be of a double heart are said in the 38. verse to be of a perfect heart. Now
faithfulness is therefore called perfection, because those that are faithful,
are furnished with such things as accompany salvation, and they that are such
cannot fall away, but must needs stand complete in all the will of God. In the
6. of the Heb. the 5. and 8. verses you may read of some that went very far,
and yet the Apostle supposes, that they might fall away, but in the 9. verse
he is otherwise persuaded of the faithful Hebrews, because they were
furnished with such things as did accompany salvation: they had such gifts, as
would not leave them half way to heaven, as Orpha left her mother in Law
Naomi, but would stick to them, till they were housed in the blessed mansions
of eternity; so that all Apostates and Retrogades, and all those that are
turned the Devils proselytes, casting off their faith, to make up their
fortunes, have notwitstanding their glittering shows, and dazeling
excellencies, wanted those things that accompany salvation, which a faithful
Christan, and one that has attained to a true Evangelicall perfection cannot
be without.

Maronaan wine, Simile.
which though it be mingled with other liquour, and drinks, yet it keeps its
sweetness and its strength, without any abatement. Faithful men in Scripture
are described by this, that they have renounced the hidden things of
dishonesty, 2. Cor. 4.2. showing that there is no root nor principle of
Apostasy to be found in such, now if there be no hidden root of apostasy
within, there can never be any appearance of Apostasy without. But that place
of Isay is very full chap. 11. ver. 5. where faithfulness is called the girdle
of the reins, it is called a girdle, Simile.
because as a girdle ties our clothes fast unto us, that they may not hang
loose; so a faithful Christian girds the commands of God close about his
Soul, to prevent all looseness, and Libertinisme in his life and
conversation, and it is called the girdle of the reins, because, as the
reins, in the body purge out the bad blood, that it may not infect the liver,
so faithfulness, though it cannot prevent all sin, yet it is continually
purging of it, that it may not infect the heart, and by that means these
hidden things of dishonesty are kept out, which might engage us to Apostasy and
falling away, see Psalm. 18. ver. 23. It is impossible to poison the Sea,
because the Sea does ever work out what ever is offensive unto it. Simile.
So it is impossible that a faithful man should be corrupted, because
faithfulness does always purge out what ever is destructive unto it.

Psalm. 125. ver. 11. They are as an house builded upon the Rock, which no
winds or waves are able to overturne. Mat. 7. ver. 24. Chosen ones, whom it is
impossible for to seduce Mat. 24. ver. 24. They are Christ's sheep, whom no man
shall pluck out of his Fathers hand. John 10. ver. 29. They are kept by the
power of God to salvation. 2. Pet. 1.5. Though they fall they shall not be cast
away: for the Lord holds them up with his hand,. Surely it is impossible that
a people of so many promises should perish, yes say some, for they may unpeople
them selves by sin, and the Lord may unpromise them in a way of judgment:
Simile.
Not so say I, for the promises not only prepare salvation for us, but prepare
us for salvation too in a way of holiness and obedience: see Jeremy, 31. ver.
32. and 32. ver. 40. like some tradesmen that do not only do those works
that belong to their trade, but frame and fashion those very tools, by which
they work: so here not only happiness, but holiness, (which is the tool by
which it is wrought) flows from the belly of the promise. So much by way of
confirmation.


Here I might say some thing by way of Confutation, for this truth meets with
much contradiction abroad, of those that deny perseverance to be essential to
this grace of faithfulness: and allow of no other perseverance, but that
which comes by hap-hazard, affirming that Gods faithful ones may fall into
such sins, as may cause an utter extinction of grace in them. But I shall
have some thing to say to these anon, in answer to an objection.

For the present, observe what a glorious change Christ has wrought in death.

For in it self, it is the prologue and preface and the beginning of that
doleful and fiery tragedy, which shall be acted in hell, but here in my text
it is the non ultra, the Hercules Pillar, and the end of all the labors, and
sufferings of the Saints of God here upon earth. There is no more required of
them but to lengthen out their active and passive obedience to the hour of
death, then their race is at an end, and their endless happiness takes place.
In it self it is the beginning of those woes, that shall persevere unto all
eternity. But here in my text it is the Colophon: the last draught, and the
Crown of that perseverance, that must help us to a Crown of life. Which may
minister abundance of comfort to faithful Christians in these stormy and
tempestuous times: We have seen of late the King of terrors ride abroad in
triumph, and death enter in at our windows in a sulphurous fiery attire, and
we may plainly perceive that the fiery Comet still hangs over our heads, our
sins and distractions still soliciting God to trade with us in a bargain of
blood: Now these that know not what change Christ has wrought in death, may be
filled with terror, to see the Cypress tree planted before their doors. But
faithful Christians have no cause to fear death: For why should they be
afraid of that, which puts an end to all their labors and sufferings, that
strips them of their rags, to cloth them with robes, that brings them glad
tidings of the consumption of their sins and of the consummation of their
graces, setting a garland of glory, upon their heads which will not wither unto
all eternity.

Ob. But some will say, we fear not much a natural death, such a death, as
causes a fair dissolution by the mutiny of Malignant humors from within, but
it is terrible to have our earthly Tabernacle pulled down violently by
Malignant persons from without, and to be tormented to death in a way of
cruelty by brutish men skillfull to destroy. I answer that if faithful
Christians knew their strength, and did well understand their privileges, they
would as cheerfully upon Christ's call open their bosoms to a violent death,
as to a natural death: for this is the death that Christ calls a Baptism.
Matt. 20.23. Now Baptism should not be grievous to a Christian,
seeing it is a sign and seal of the Covenant, no more should any persecution
and Martyrdom inflicted for the cause of Christ, be grievous unto us, for the
experience of Gods love ever runs in that channel. Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Hence
it is remarkable, that both under the old and new Testament, there were but two
Sacraments, and the first of these is a kind of an afflicting Sacrament, as
Circumcision in the one, which drew blood, and caused much smart, and pain and
soreness in the body, though indeed the Passover was a mere refreshing
Sacrament.

So Baptism is somewhat afflicting too, especially in the Eastern parts and
hot climats of the world, where the party baptized was dipped over head and
ears in water, though the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a mere refreshing
Ordinance:
but this shows that God convayes the sense of his love as well in a way of
affliction, as in a way of consolation, and this I desire may be observed; That
as some afflictions are Sacraments, so all afflictions are Sacramental to
believers. Therefore let it never trouble us if we be exposed to persecution or
Martyrdom, so long as we can match a good heart to a good cause. For as Austin
says well, though death in it self be the punishment of sin, it is now
through the wonderful power of Christ made an inlet unto glory. To suffer for
Christ says Bradford, is to go to Heaven on horseback. And the same Austin
further showing the difference of that death,
that is now imposed upon Martyrs from that death, which was first threatened
upon man in paradise, does sweetly run upon this descant: Once it was said
unto man, if thou sinnest thou shall die, but now it is said to the Martyr, if
thou do not die, thou shall sin: then it was said unto man, if thou
breakest the Commandment thou shall die the death, but now it is said to the
Martyr, if thou refusest to suffer death for a good cause, thou shall break the
Commandment. That which was once a matter of terror, to affright men from
sinning at all, is now the matter of our comfort, because it translates us into
such an estate, where we shall sin no more. Then death came in by sinning:
But now holiness is perfected by dying. Ob. But it will be said, that those
things are bitter to the flesh, and therefore it is an hard matter willingly to
stoop to such hot services. I answer.

Be it so, yet there is enough in the grace of faithfulness to carry us
through: This grace will make us ready, and therefore called the girdle of the
soul, Ephe. 6.14. Now when a man has once put on his girdle, he has then
made himself ready for his work. Hence the latin, accingi ad opus, and that
of Christ, Gird up the loins of your minds, are expressions importing a
readiness to go about our task. Now when once a man has made himself
ready for a business, though very harsh and unpleasing in it self; yet when
his spirit is leavened and raised, and so a sutablenesse wrought betwixt it,
and his spirit, then the maine stream of his desires and affection is carried
after it, and it would be a trouble and vexation unto him to be taken of from
it. See this in the Apostle Paul, Acts 21. v. 1^

Being dissuaded from going up to Jerusalem; by many of the Saints, because
they understood, by the Prophet Agabus the hard measure, that he should meet
withal there, he grew into some passion, and set himself with might and maine
to resist this temptation of the right hand, wherewith he was assaulted, saying,
what mean you to weep and break my heart, for I am ready not to be bound
only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. As if he
should say, will you take me of from that business, that I have made my self
ready for? O this is a bitter vexation to me, and if you had devised how to
grieve my spirit, you could hardly have done it to better purpose, then by
assaulting me with such a tentation: since therefore this is the property of
faithfulness to make us ready for any service that Christ shall expose us
unto, fear not the weakness of the flesh to grasple with a suffering
condition, for faithfulness will put sugar enough into the bitterest cup, to
make it sweet and pleasant unto thy taste. Indeed if thou be unsound and
unfaithful, such times as these may speak terror unto thee. Simile.
An unsound leg will ache in a storm, and an evil conscience will ache in
shaking times, in the 33. Esa. v. 14. The sinners of Sion are afraid,
Fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites, who among us shall dwell with the
devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Why, what is
the matter? The things threatened in that chapter, were temporal judgments,
the lesser furniture of mount Ebal, and yet behold they cry out of eternal
judgments, as (...) the full weight of mount Ebal was ready to fall upon them?
what should be the reason of it, surely it lies in this, that when God sends
temporal judgments,
a bad conscience will step in, and eeke out the judgments by stretching them
upon the tenter hooks of eternity, that is, whilst we are afflicted with the
sense of the present judgment, a bad conscience will then bestirre it self,
and let us see the succession of those woes, which shall continue in hell for
ever, and whilst we are delivered to the hand-killing, Conscience will deliver
us to the hand writing, and this will minister cause enough for such an
Outcry. Who among us. etc.

But the righteous may be as bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. ver. 1. especially being
assured by Gods word which cannot lie, Romans 8. ver. 37. that in all these
things he shall be more then a conqueror,
through Christ that loved him. We read of two sorts of conquerours in the 11.
of the Heb. from the 33. verse etc. one that conquered in a way of violence,
and these were but conquerours, an other sort from the 37. ver. etc. who
conquered in a way of patience, and these though they seemed to be but a ragged
regiment in comparison of the former, yet they were not only conquerours, but
more then conquerours, because they gave great odds, (to wit) their lives,
estates, liberty, ease, etc. and yet conquered. Therefore let faithful
Christians comfort one another with such things.

Ob. I but some poor souls will say, true these are great comforts, but they
belong only to such as are faithful, but I fear I am not faithful: therefore
I dare not peep into this Arc, nor house my self in this Rock. This Objection
makes a bridge to carry us over to an use of examination.

Use of Examination.
And therefore, that we may come to that use, I answer.

1. That this fear of thine is no bad sign, if other things be answerable,
for faithfulness is a self-suspecting grace: We see in the 26. of Mat. the
22. ver. when our Savior Christ told his Disciples that one of them should
betray him, the faithful Disciples, and those that were clear from hatching
such a damnable plot, suspected themselves first, as appears by that question
they propounded to Christ, Master is it I etc. But Judas which was the Traitor
indeed did lagg behind, and would not seem to suspect himself till for shame
he could not hold out no longer, and then he comes in faintly and propounds the
same question that the rest did ver. 25. Master is it I, therefore thou art not
any whit the less faithful, for suspecting thy unfaithfullnesse.

But because a base dissembling Hypocrite may come in though limping and make a
show of self-suspicion, therefore a faithful Christian in this outstrips an
unsound and fork'd tongued hypocrite, that he does not only suspect himself,
but he desires to be thoroughly searched and ransackd to the bottom Psalm. 26.
verse 1.2. This is the mere, and the doole stone that parts the sincere
Christian and the Hypocrite, Simile.
For unsound hearts as unsound legs desire to be hid; and though they may
submit to some kind of search and examination, yet it is with them as it was
with Rachel, when her Father Laban came to search for his Idols in her tents,
she had laid the Idols under her, and sat upon them, and though she gave him
leave to search in her tent, yet when he offered to search under her, where the
Idols were, she told him she could not sit up, because it was with her after
the manner of Women. So in Hypocrites there is ever something, which is either
erroneous in their judgment, or vicious in their practice which they cannot
endure should be ransacked, let a man search there, and they will tell you,
that they are are as other men are, and so with the Harlot they wipe their
mouth, and say they have committed no iniquity. But an upright Christian like a
faithful Steward rejoices, when the day of Audit comes, he is content God
shall reckon with him like an enemy, but he resolves to pay like a friend.

And yet the trial of faithfulness is very strict, a man that will be
conscience proof in this trial must arm himself to give a strict account
for small things, as well as for great, when we try our servants for their
work, we try them in great matters, but when we try them for their truth we try
them in small matters, if we find them purloyning but a small piece of money, we
conclude presently, that they that are unfaithful in so small a thing, would
likewise prove unfaithful in a greater; so they that despise any of Gods
ways, or allow themselves in the practice of any sin, though never so small,
crack their credit in point of faithfulness, according to that of Luke 16. v.
10. He that is faithful in the least, he is all so faitfull in much, and he
that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much.

Ob. But some will say, shall every little sin foil us, in this Trial, and
give us the Denomination of unfaithful persons.

I answer that in this trial we must nor make use of a pair of Compass to
examine the quantity of the offense, but of a touchstone to examine the
quality of the offense. The least quantity of leaven, is able to turn a
Passover into pollution, so the least sin defiles us, if it be an act of
unfaithfullnesse, whereas otherwise sin though it be great in regard of the
bulk; will not pollute us, if there be not a tang of unfaithfullnesse in it.

Now then to join issue with men's hearts and conscences, you must remember,
what I told you in the description of this grace, that faithfulness is to
keep touch with God in performing our Covenant, therefore if the sin be of
that nature, as that thou have brook the Covenant, the leprosy, sticks to thy
forehead, and thou art unclean, but if the Covenant be not broken by thy
sin, it is no fretting leprosy what ever the sin be, and after thou have
bin shut up a while in the Closet of repentance, and godly sorrow, thou will
clear thy self as a fountain does, that casts out her mudd. 2. cor. chap. 7.
ver. 11. For behold this self same thing, that ye sorrowed after a good sort,
what carfulness it wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your selves; yea,
what indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what vehement desire; yea, what zeal;
yea, what revenge: in all things ye have approved your selves to be clear in
this matter. It is true every sin in it self is a breath of the Covenant.
But every man breaks not the Covenant, by committing of sin. Circumstances
may alter the nature of sin, so that a sin being clothed with these
Circumstances, shall be no breach of the Covenant, though in a Mathematical
consideration, abstracted from such circumstances, it would certainly prove so.
Know therefore, that promises and Covenants are not broken by sins of
infirmity, but only by sins of presumption. Psalm. 19.12, 13. There are two
sorts of sins mentioned: Some which David desires might be pardoned, and
those are his secret sins, or sins of infirmity: Others that David desires
to be kept from, and those are presumptuous sins, and he gives this as a
reason, that if they should prevail, he should be guilty of that great
offense, which is no other, but the breach of the Covenant. A man is not
counted a promise breaker, that is disabled by sickness or weakness to break
his word, Simele.
but he that is set a work by some hidden principle of dishonestie to violate
his promise, So infirmities are in the nature of soul sicknesses, they are
sins turned into diseases, therefore they pronounce not a man unfaithful: But
presumptuous sins are the fruits of corrupt principles and these defile us. Now
that you may know the difference betwixt these, I will make use of a Scripture
allusion, which (as I suppose) will be of much use to facilitate this point for
your understanding and judgment.

In the 9th. of Joshua, you read there the story of the Gibeonites. And we find
that they were a parcel of those accursed nations, which by Gods special
command were devoted to destruction. Yet notwithstanding, by a trick they had
they escaped. So sins of infirmity are a parcel of that accursed mass of
sin, which ought to be destroyed and cut off by mortification. But yet they are
such sins as do escape many times. So that a Christian shall be troubled
with them all his life long, but yet with the same success that the Gibeonites
had, the same thing befalling their sins, that befell the Gibeonites.

As first, they had a mean office put upon them, they were made hewers of
wood, and drawers of water. So sins of infirmity are sins in office, and
their office is to set the pump of godly sorrow and humiliation agoing. This I
confess they do as it were against the hare, and as the Apostle says of the
Creatures, that they are subject to vanity, not of their own will, but by
reason of him, that has subjected them in hope. Romans 8.20.
So with some alteration I may say, that these sins execute not this office
of themselves, but by the power of God, who can work by contraries, and who
hereby outshoots the Devil in his own bow. For he found the way to draw pride
out of Gods graces, and the Lord to requite him, will draw humiliation out of
those sins, whereof he is the author. Thus he suffered Ezekiah to fall, that
he might know what was in his heart, and so be humbled. 2. Chron. 32.31.

To open this a little further, I lay this for a ground, that Jesus Christ
might as easily have bestowed perfect sanctification upon us, the first moment
of our conversion,
as he does then perfect justification. And whereas there are two things in
sin, the guilt and the filth, whereof the one is offensive to us, the other
is offensive to God, it should seem that perfect sanctification which removes
the latter, should rather have been wrought by Christ, then perfect
justification, which removes the former, because Gods glory ought more to be
sought after, then man's good. Some great reasons sure there must be for this,
among which I suppose this to be one of the chief. That Gods justice might
still keep a Court, as well as his mercy: which could not have been, if all
sin had been abolished. For where there is no transgression, there can be no
court of justice erected. Hence it is that all the prayers of the Saints, begin
with confessions, and self accusations for sin, which are as so many
arraignments in the Court of Gods justice, after which an appeal lies fair in
the Court of Gods mercy. Now had sin been quite abolished, the Court of
justice like Ianus temple in the time of peace had been quite shut up. And God
by granting a privilege should have extinguished those rents and revenues that
come in to him by virtue of that Court. Which those poor Publicans, these
sins of infirmity bring in. So then those sins that are not as a prick in
the flesh to humble us, are no sins of infirmity, but sins of presumption.

2. The Gibeonites after their escape, complied not with those nations whereof
they were a parcel, but were rather a means to help to destroy them, Josh.
10. So sins of infirmity do not uphold other sins, but rather help to
mortify them. Peter's denial of his master did wholly destroy his carnal
confidence. So the messenger of Satan where with Paul was buffeted, being
according to Interpreters, some lust or other stirring within him, was a means
to pull down that exaltation, which might have been occasioned by those divine
raptures and revelations which he enjoyed. There is never a sin of infirmity,
but is a means to keep out a worse sin, into which the Saints of God would
have fallen, if they had not been troubled with that infirmity. I appeal to
the experiences of Christians for the confirmation of this truth. May not a
Christian say, O if I had not been troubled with a dead heart, I should have
been troubled with a proud heart. And let me mind you here of a strange
parradox, the more sins of infirmity a Christian is troubled withal, the
fewer sins he has. Mistake me not, I do not say, but that one that has
fewer sins of infirmity, is freer from sin, then he that has more. But
you may conceive my meaning by this Comparison. The more ruins of houses the
fewer houses, because if these ruins were not, we should have houses built in
their complete fabric. So the more sins of infirmity, the fewer sins,
because if these infirmities were not, we should have sin in its complete
posture, and in its full perfection. whereas sins of infirmity are but the
ruins or relikes and remainders of sin.

And I might add this, that the more sins of infirmity, the more graces, not
but that a man that has fewer of those sins has more grace. But it is true in
this sense. A sin of infirmity is not a total sin, but a defect of the
contrary grace arising from the imperfection of it. As pride in the Saints ir
not a complete pride, but is only a defect in their humility. So their
unbelief is not a complete unbelief, but it is only a weak and an imperfect
faith, so that as we say of smoke, that it is contrary unto fire, yet it is a
sign of fire, so may we say, that these sins though contrary to grace, yet
they are a sign of grace, for they are but a defect of it. And in this sense
we may say, that the more sins of infirmity, the more grace.

Now sins of presumption are of another nature. They come within the compass
of the statute of maintenance, they are so far from pulling down other
sins, as they do rather uphold them, one sin of presumption making way for
another. Hence presumptuous sinners are said to pull down sin with cart-ropes,
and iniquity with cords of vanity. Esaias 5.18. And Moses tells us, that
presumptuous sinners ad drunkensse to thirst, and rebellion to transgression.
Deuteronomy. 29.19. As we say of the snow, Simele.
that if it do not melt it lies for more, so sins of presumption are sins
which melt not in a way of repentance, therefore they make way for other sins.

Again sins of presumption are not mere defects of grace, but they are such
sins as do wholly exclude the contrary grace, pride if it be a sin of
infirmity, wholly excludes humility, etc.

3. The Gibeonites gave occasion to the greatest victory that ever was
obtained. Josh. 10. A victory wherein the stars of heaven fought for them, and
the Sun and Moon stood still till they had avenged themselves of their enemies,
the like whereof was never done before, nor likely to be hereafter. So sins
of infirmity give us occasion to judge our selves, which judgment is after
turned into a spiritual victory, Matt. 12.20. A victory exceeding great and
glorious, wherein if the host of heaven did not fight for us,
if the blessed Angels did not carry us in their hands, that we might tread
upon Dragons, and trample upon Scorpions, yea, if Christ the Sun of
righteousness did not stand still, and abide constant to us in his promises of
support and assistance. Yea, if he did not stay the Moon too, that is, our
fickle and inconstant hearts, that we might not wholly fall from him, O what
would become of us. How soon would Satan Cacus like draw us backward into his
denn, and take the advantage of the biasse of our corruptions to roll us into
the bottomless pit. For by this means Satan has abundance of advantage over
us, because he has a strong party and faction in us. Grace as a reverend
Divine has observed, is but as a spark, and corruption as much smoke, and
moisture damping it. Grace is but as a Candle, and that in a socket among huge
and boistrous winds. Therefore for God to bring forth judgment into victory,
this is victory indeed.

Chrysostom speaking of Enochs translation professes, that he wonders at
nothing so much as this,
that Enoch with a body of flesh passing through the air, which is the Devils
territory (and therefore he is called the Prince of the air) yet he should
pass unmolested, the Devil not throwing so much as a stone at the mud-wall of
his body, though he was his greatest enemy at that time, even when he came
jossling by, and confronted him as it were in the place of his own dominion, So
it is a thing that may carry us to the highest pitch of admiration, to see a
Christian pass through the hoasts of the Devils temptations, with not only a
body of dust, which he may feed upon as a Serpent. For dust is the Serpents
meat, but with a body of sin too, which he may command as a Captain to fight
under his hellish standard, and yet to Come forth as Christ did out of Bozrah,
having his garment stained with the blood of his enemies, Esaias 63.17. etc. His
small and scarce appearing grace being like unto Ionathans arrows, which never
returned empty, from the blood of the slain, and the fast of the mighty, 2 Samuel 1.22. This is worth an Io paan. and an Io triamphe. Well may a Christian
say in this case with the Apostle. O death, where is thy sting? O Hell, where
is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law. But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.

But sins of presumption do not make way for such victories, but on the
contrary, presumptuous sinners lie down at Satan's feet as his bond slaves, they
are said to be overcome of sin, and to be taken Captives by Satan at his
pleasure.

You therefore that pretend your sins are sins of infirmity, see whether
you can show the trophies and monuments of such spiritual victories as these
are, else you have some cause to suspect your selves. It will not be sufficient
in this case to allege your forsaking of gross sins, as drunkenness,
adultery, etc. this does not argue victory, for these sins must not be
subdued in a way of victory, but they must be escaped in a way of flight. And
therefore you have that expression of Peter concerning some Apostates, that had
escaped the pollutions of the world, and afterward proved guilty of a Relaps,
Simele.
2 Pet. 2.22. If an house were much infected with the plague, though they were
enemies, an Army of Soldiers would hardly compass it about, and lay sledge to
it to subdue it, but they would rather fly from it, and keep a distance from
it. So such infections and pestiferous slnnes as these must be the object of
our flight and not of our victories. Neither can we be said to have escaped
them, by refraining from those sins, unless also we avoid those occasions
and appearances of evil, that bring us near them, because they that flee from
any thing; must not come as near as they can, but must keep at as great a
distance as they can. For men to refrain from drunkenness, and yet follow
tippling, to profess to hate pride, and yet delight in strange apparel, to
refrain from the act of uncleanenesse, and yet to practice dalliance, to
abhor Idolatry, and to observe superstious Ceremonies, is to come so near
those gross sins, as it cannot be said of us, that we have escaped them. And
yet when we have thus escaped them, we are not thereby in a capacity to be
crowned as spiritual Conquerors. For the Apostates spoken of in that place of
Peter had gone thus far, and yet afterward made it appear by their
Apostacy, that they never knew what it is to conquer sin.

But the subduing of our spiritual corruptions, as our unbelief, our
spiritual pride, vain glory, love of the world, etc. These are the victories,
whereby we must try our selves, and unless we find that our sins have made a
spiritual conquest of them it is to be feared our sins are not sins of
infirmity but sins of presumption.

4. The children of Israel by reason of these Gibeonites, could the better
intend their higher employments, because they did their drudgery work for
them, so whiles these sins of infirmity do keep the soul low in a way of
humiliation, and as it were help forward this submissive work, Christians that
by are the better enabled to walk strictly and exactly in all the ways of
God. Those that in the 7. of the Romans complain so much of the body of death,
which they carry about them in the person of the Apostle Paul, are such as
walk not according to to the flesh, but according to the spirit. Romans 8.1. If
a man have a disease in his body, that he is sensible of, if it be but a
weakness or infirmity, and not a reigning disease, he will be very exact in
observing the rules of his Physician, Simile.
set the most luscious meat before him, if the eating of it should endanger the
breking out of his disease, he will not dare to taste of it, and he will be very
charie, how he mistimes himself, he will have a special care not to do any
thing that may give a vent to his trouble.

It is true notwithstanding all the care he can take, his trouble will now and
then break out, but yet this is no supersedeas to his care, but rather a
whetstone of his diligence. Indeed he that is sick of a burning fever, and
such like diseases, that have the upperhand of nature, these do make us
careless of those things that belong to our health, and cause us to pitch upon
such things as do feed our disease, rather then upon such things as strengthen
nature. So here, if thy sins be such as hinder thy exactness, and cause thee
to make provision for thy lusts, they are sins of presumption, but if they be
such sins as are an occasion to further thy exactness, and increase thy care
to walk after the ways of God: if thou dare not neglect thy communion with
God in prayer, nor omit any duty, nor walk excentrically to the rule of Gods
word, it is but an infirmity, such a sin as may very well stand and comply
with the state of grace.

It is remarkable, that the infirmities of the Saints have been chiefly
discovered about those graces for which they have been most commended.
As Abraham is chiefly commended for his faith, yet those infirmities of his
recorded in Scripture, as his carnal knowledge of Hagar, his equivocating
concerning nis wife Sarah, were nothing else but acts of unbeleefe. So Job is
chiefly commended for his patience, yet all his infirmities we can read of were
nothing else but acts of impatience, what does this intimate unto us, but that
the sight of their infirmities, have taken advantage to study the contrary
grace so much the more, and advanced to so high a pitch in the practice of it,
that they did deserve rather to be commended for those graces: then to be
condemned for the contrary infirmities. And if it be thus with us, it is a good
sign. If thou be addicted to pride, and the sight of it makes thee to
strive so much the more to be humble, and to attain to so much of humility,
that thou deservest to be commended for it, rather then to be condemned for thy
pride; Thou shall never stand indicted as a presumptuous sinner, though thy
sins may break out now and then. And the like I may say of thy inclination to
uncleanness, etc.

Fifthly and lastly, The Gibeonites were enemies to the Israelites, and yet
carried the matter so, that they made them believe that they came from far.
So a sin of infirmity is so near grace, that as Jacob and Esau strugled both
in one womb, so do they conflict and grasple together in one soul, yea in one
and the self-same faculty of the soul.

There is never a sin of infirmity but it is confronted by the contrary
grace, and that in the same subject, yet Satan puts such lies upon these sins
of infirmity many times, that they make us believe, that there is a mighty
distance betwixt us and grace, and to call the truth of our conversion into
question: Thus David in the 77. Psalm. falling into a misprision of his estate,
and crying out as one that was cast out of Gods favor, Simele.
in the 20. ver. charge his infirmity with all. Sin though but of infirmity
will prove as a Thief in our candle, it dimmes our light, and steals away our
love, neither can I see how a constant and never interrupted assurance, may
comply with such a measure of sanctification, as is yet imperfect, whatever
some may pretend to the contrary.

Now sins of presumption are quite contrary to this, for though they are at a
great distance from grace, insomuch that he that is under the Dominion of those
sins, cannot justly claim the privilege of a child of God, yet Satan put
such lies upon these sins, that they make us believe, that true grace and they
may very well stand together, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 30. ver. 12,
There is a generation that is pure in their own eyes, though they be not
cleansed from their wickedness. Thus the presumtuous sinner in the 29. of
Deuteronomy. verse. 19. will needs claim a right in Garizim the mountain of
blessing, when as notwithstanding he is bound to make his residence in mount
Ebal the mountain of curses, speaking peace to himself, when yet he walks in
the stubbornness of his heart, and the expression which the Holy Ghost adds is
worth the observing, it is said of him that he adds drunkenesse to thirst.
That is he does as a drunkard, Simele.
that is in love with drunkenesse and loath to pick a quarrel with it, finding
it to be loathsome and overcharging nature, he does therefore feed upon salt
meats, that may provok thirst, that so his excess in drinking may be the more
pleasing to his Pallat, and he through the abhorrency of nature may not be
drawn to forsake it.

So a presumptuous sinner persuades himself of an interest in Christ's death,
not as one that flees thither for refuge, from the fury of the avenger of
blood, but as one that is loath to pick a quarrel against sin, which he
knows is terrible to the conscience, and therefore might through the sting of
a self-accusing spirit be imbittered unto him, therefore he is desirous to
persuade himself, that because Christ died for sinners, his sins will break
no square, as if Christ did therefore come into the world to make sin less
dangerous then it was before, and not rather to give us grace to subdue sins,
and to bring us to a greater measure of loathing and detestation of it, as
receiving a greater and more bloody tincture of guilt from his death, then ever
it could have had from the Law. Heb. 10.28, 29.

Thus you see the differences betwixt sins of infirmity and sins of
presumption, in which as I have eschewed the one extreme, which is to
strenghten the hands of the wicked, so have I labored to avoid the other
extreme in making the heart of Gods people sadd, whom the Lord has not made
sadd.

Therefore come on you bruised reeds and smoking flax, which are so oppressed
with the sense of sin, that you despise the consolations of the almighty,
come and view your self in this glass, and you shall see what little cause
you have to be dejected, it is indeed a bitter thing to sin against God, but
yet so long as your sins have not worse qualities then these aforementioned,
you have cause to lift up your heads and own your evidences. If your sins be
so far kept under, as they are forced to officiate, and help forward the
work of humiliation: If they do join with grace in the destruction of other
sins (for it is not unusual for grace to call out a sin of infirmity to
perfect mortification.) If they give occasion to those spiritual victoryes,
which discover so much of the glorious power of God in the soul, If they
hinder not but rather further our exactness, and lastly if they be such near
neighbors to grace, as that grace and they may stand together in one subject.
Comfort thy self whatever the bulk of thy sin be, thou have not yet broke the
Covenant, and so long as Christ is the great Chancellor of Heaven and carries
a Chancery in his bosom, thou shall never take the foil. Indeed if thy sins
bear the Eare-marke of Presumption, I dear not open this City of refuge unto
thee, for God himself has locked thee out: so long thou continuest in that
condition, Deuteronomy. 29. ver. 19.

But yet for further satisfaction: It will not be amiss to consider, what to
judge of those enormious sins of the Saints which are upon record, Lots
incest David's adultery and murder and the like, did they not break the
Covenant in committing of them. To this I answer.

That to break the Covenant is a sin unto death, it is a spiritual adultery, a
forsaking of God, that we may go a whoring after the Creature, and into such
sins the Saints of God cannot fall, because the seed of God remains in them,
therefore they cannot thus sin unto death.

I confess these sins have a great deal of horror in them, they are
Sea-marks from which we must flee, as their virtuous actions are land marks, to
which we must desire to approach in a way of imitation.

Nay if any one shall say that they did lie dead for a time without either the
sense or use of grace, I will not much gain say him.

But this I confidently affirm that they were not radically dead, that is they
were not so dead, but that there was a principle and root of life left in
them. I may compare their condition to Christ's condition, when he was dead:
they will run parallel in these particulars.

Though Christ was dead, yet that Hypostatical union betwixt his Godhead and
Manhood were not dissolved, but his divine nature was as really united to his
man hood at his death as it was when he was alive; now for as much as the
Godhead is a quickening spirit, nay life it self, and the author and giver of
life, it must needs follow that there was still a root of life left in him,
therefore he could not be radically dead. So by those sins which the Saints
committed, the mystical union, which was betwixt Christ and their souls was
not dissolved, whereby he as their head, and they as his members. Impossible it
is that a man thus united unto Christ, should be quite cast of from Christ. For
then Christ himself must be maimed by the loss of a member.

See what full description Christ himself gives of that union John 17. ver,
23. I in them, and thou in me. where we see that this mystical union is
compared to that essential union which is betwixt him and his father, and
therefore as that cannot be dissolved, no more can this. and I am persuaded
that if the Patrons of the Apostasy of the Saints had felt the virtue and
efficacy of this union, they would never have broached such an error. Now
forasmuch as this Christ which is in them, and so nearly joined to them is a
quickening spirit, it is impossible that they should so fall but that still
there is a Root of life left in them.

2. Though Christ dyed, yet he saw no corruption, that is he did not rot in his
grave. So the Saints though they sin and ungrievously, yet they never go so far
as to rot in their sin, they are never brought so low, as that their root should
become rottenesse, as the Scripture phrase is. Rottenness arises from hence,
when the outward adventicious heat draws out the inward and radical moisture,
and makes it run into the outward parts. So then a man rots away in sinnne,
when the moisture of his inward mind and affection is so drawn away from God,
as that it is wholly set upon outward things. Now a Child of God can never fall
thus low. For to be carnally minded is death, Romans 8. ver. 6. whereas a belever
as I proved before cannot sin unto death. I think no child of God drunk so
deep of the puddle of Epicurisme and sensuallity as Solomon did: yet look into
Ecclesiastes 2. ver. 3. which is his recantation Sermon, and there you shall
find him profess, that though he gave himself to wine, yet he acquainted his
heart with wisdom: as if he should say, although I gave my self to pleasure
yet I resolved to keep wisdom and the fear of God in my heart, and to
govern my affairs by the same, and to use it as a bridle to check me in those
abominations.

As the Ethiopian Judges leave the upper seat of judgment empty for God. So
Solomon when he was at the lowest ebb, reserved the highest seat of his heart
and affections for God. Indeed that Seat was empty, it was not adorned with
his presence as before it was (the more was the pity) but yet it was reserved
for God, free from the encroachments of earthly vanities.

3. The death that Christ died was the death of the Cross, and one reason why
Christ chose this death, as Divines affirm, was because this death did wound
his body, but did not mangle it. So Christians when they fall into sins,
their graces are wounded but not mangled, that is, they are weakened, but
not-made useless.

A man would have thought that the grace of self-denial had been wholly
destroyed in the sons of Zebedee, by that fit of ambition mentioned Mat. 20.
verse 23. but yet we find, it retained its full proportion, though it was
wounded by that sting of that contrary distemper, which they fell into, but
notwithstanding when Christ called for this grace: It immediately came forth
ready to act her part, they expected to sit at his right hand, and Christ asked
them, whether they were able to drink of that Cup, that he drunk of, and to be
baptized with the baptism that he was baptized with. And it appears by their
answer, how ready they were to stoop to that hot piece of service. They were
not so ambitious to wear a Crown: but they were as wiling to kiss the stake,
not not so desirous to reign, as they were wiling to burn, which shows that
though their grace was wounded yet not mangled by their sin.

4. As Christ did raise himself by his own power. So they were active in their
recovery; not merely passive, as they were at their conversion, when there was
nothing in them to close with grace, but in this recovery there was something
left in them whereby they were not mere patients, bue agents in their
recovery. As Peter wept himself alive again, and David repented himself alive
again, and Solomon preached himself alive again. Thus we see what to judge of
those gross sins of the Saints.

But some men will object and say, that this doctrine of perseverance, should
be rather extermined then determined in the Pulpit, because it may nourish
spiritual Idleness and presumption. For if men be taught, that having grace,
they cannot loose it, why should they fear to commit any sin? And why may
they not grow careless, and throw the plough into the hedge to make holy day?

I answer, If true grace will give way to such wantonness: at her peril,
considering that it is the keeper of every faithful soul and not the soul the
keeper of it, and therefore Christians are said to be under the dominon of
grace, Romans 6. so that no such thing can happen except grace it self should
prove ungratious. Simele.
If there were such a fire as could not be quenched, would it therefore never
resist his contrary? So because grace is of that strength as it can never
perish, nor be wholly extinguished, shall it therefore cease to resist sin?
yeas sure it will resist it not only by counterfightings but by
counterlustings, Gal 5.24. The flesh cannot so much as put forth a desire to
sin, but the spirit will put forth a counter desire to suppress that. It is
true, sometime corruption seems to get the advantage in the run, but grace will
have the advantage again in the turn. And though a Christian may fall very
low, yet we may say of that grace, in whose custody he is, as David says of
God himself Ps. 139.7, 8. Whether shall I fly from thy presence, etc. So may
we say, whether shall a Christian fly from such a keeper. If to heaven I am
sure we cannot then fly from it, for thither is grace bound, and it has a
Commission to bring us thither. If to hell grace will find us out there too,
and be sure to bring us back. If we should straggle and stray and have our
heart too far carried away from God this grace shall lead us to God again, and
her right hand shall hold us up. If darkness of desertion cover us, grace
will help us at a dead lift, and turn our darkness into light. And by this it
appears that the doctrine of perseverances gives no way to licentiousnes and
carnal liberty.

And whereas the patrons of the Apostacy of the Saints charge this doctrine
with this inconvenience, that it opens a door to spiritual idleness and
security, this imputation may justly be retorted upon them. For you know a
Christian has much ado to get grace, it will cost him hot water, many heart
breaking and bitter pangs, before Jesus Christ be framed and fashioned in him:
Now if people be taught, that men have no sooner gotten grace, but they are in
danger to loose it again: will not this enervate and emasculate end overthrow
all godly endeavors? What heart can a man have to take any great pains for
that, and to be at a great charge to purchase that, which he is not sure to
hold? In all conveyances there is a tenendum, as well as an habendum, it is
conveyed to us, not only to have but to hold, else we would hardly lay out any
money about such purchase. So take away perpetuity and perseverance from grace,
and what heart can we have to take any pains about it? This is one
inconvenience that will follow from this error.

Besides this opinion is most uncomfortable, for it keeps the people in
perpetual suspense: It makes the graces of Christians to be like Merchants
goods that hang upon rops, even upon the sandic ropes of our weak and frail
endeavors. And whereas Christ has made an exceeding rich will, yet it seems
by this opinion, that he has made it so loose, that no man can certainly prove
the will, nor be assured, whether the will belong to him or no. Again how can
grace that may be mortal, soundly comfort an immortal soul. At least by this
doctrine we cannot be soundly comforted till we have persevered, which cannot
be till after death, at which time men shall be either above or beneath
comfort. Thus much for this use.

Other uses were omitted for want of time, but shall be added if this find
acceptance, wherein I shall endeavor to discover the nature of Apostasy, which
sin seems now to be calculated for the Meridian of England.

Imprimatur, Edmond Calamy.

FINIS.

