An Account of the Late Actions at Sea, BETWEEN THE Saint Alban's and Happy
Return, Two of Their Majesty's Men of War, and Twenty Four Sail of French
Ships, With their Convoy of 36 Guns, near the Port of Cherbourg; with an
Account of the Sinking the Convoy, and taking Twenty Sail of Merchant Men. 18.
Febr. 1690/1.
In a Letter from a Merchant at Plymouth.
LICENSED, Feb. 17. J. F. According to Order.

SIR,
ON Wednesday last a Dutch Privateer of Friezland, called the Prince, of
Eighteen Guns and Twelve Peteraroes, brought in here a French Prize, which she
took out of a Fleet of Twenty Four Sail of Merchantmen, Bound for Havre de
Grace to Nantce, Bourdeaux, and several other Ports about Vshant, they Sailed
out of the Port of Havre de Grace, on Monday last. The Captain of the Privateer
says, That just as he came away he saw the Saint Albans, and the Happy Return,
Two of Their Majesty's Men of War, falling in with the said Fleet. And
Yesterday Arrived here a Fly-Boat of Two Hundred and Fifty Tuns, and Thirty
Five Men, Taken by the Happy Return: They give an Account, That the Saint
Alban's was Engaged about Two hours with the French Convoy, a Man of War of
Thirty Six Guns; That a short time after the Saint Alban's had Shot down her
Mainmast, and brought her on Board; the Man of War ran a Shore, and there
Stranded a little after; having between five and six Foot of Water in the hold,
but most of the Seamen were Saved: That at the same time that the Saint Alban's
was Engaged with the Man of War, the Happy Return fell in among the
Merchantmen, that they did not doubt but they had Taken most of them.

P. S. Just now a Vessel is come in here from the Fleet, and brings an account,
That Their Majesty's Ships had Taken Eighteen Sail more, there being but Four
Ships of the whole Fleet escaping. The Ships in general are from an Hundred to
Three Hundred Tun Burden; and notwithstanding they had no Loading but Ballast,
(they going to fetch Wines, Brandies, etc.) yet the Masters of the Vessels,
Merchants, Factors, and between Five or Six Hundred Seamen, that were on Board
the Fleet and Convoy, are of no small Value, and will prove very advantageous
to Their Majesty's Service; for by the Exchange of these Prisoners, we may have
as many English Seamen as will Man out Four of Their Majesty's Fourth Rate Men
of War, being intermixed with some Land-Men; besides the Twenty Sail of Ships,
with their Furniture, etc. cannot be Valued at less than One Hundred Thousand
Livres.

LONDON, Printed for R. Hayhurst in Little-Brittain, 1691.


