Anglia Liberata, OR, THE RIGHTS Of the People of ENGLAND, MAINTAINED AGAINST
the Pretenses of the SCOTTISH King, As they are set forth in an ANSWER TO THE
LORDS AMBASSADORS PROPOSITIONS of ENGLAND. Which ANSWER was delivered into the
Great Assembly of the United Provinces at the Hague, by one MAC-DONNEL, who
entitles himself Resident for his Majesty, etc. June 28/18 1651: And is here
published according to the Dutch Copy. WHERETO IS ADDED A TRANSLATION OF
CERTAIN Animadversions upon the Answer of Mac-Donnel.

Written by an ingenious Dutchman. AS ALSO AN ADDITIONAL REPLY To all the
pretended Arguments, Insinuations and Slanders, set forth in the said SCOTTISH
ANSWER Written a while since by a private Pen, and now presented to the PUBLIC.

London, Printed by T. Newcomb for Richard Lowns, at the White Lion in Paul's
Churchyard near the West end, 1651.

The Publisher to the READER.
THou have here first, the Answer of Mac-Donnel (whom in the Dutch they call
Mac-Dowel) to the Propositions of our English Ambassadors, as it was delivered
by him, in the Great Assembly of the United Provinces; which having been
published beyond Sea in Dutch, and translated since into an English Print, is
here presented to a more public view, with a few Correctives added thereunto
to prevent the poison. And therefore in the second place, thou have also a
Transcript of certain ANIMADVERSIONS upon Mac-Donnel's Answer, written by an
honest Dutchman in his own Language, and now translated into English.

Those ANIMADVERSIONS are indeed very pithy, pertinent, and ingenious; but
because they are only the Hints of Things, and not Discourses so drawn at full,
as to convince such as are not easily persuaded of the Truth of matters in
Controversy; therefore it was thought fit in the third place, to bring up the
Rear with an Additional Reply; partly to discuss the main points more fully;
and partly, to touch upon many other particulars of Mac-Donnels Answer, wholly
neglected by the Dutch Animadvertor.

The truth is, these Papers have lain by for some time, by reason of the late
disturbances, they having been all ready prepared for the Press before, except
the latter part of the fourth Chapter of the Additional Reply, which was lickt
up, upon the close of this last grand determination of Affairs at Worcester.
Perhaps, some expressions therein touching the Power of the Sword, at the first
sight, may not please all; but that all may be pleased, let them know, the
Rights of the people are no way wronged, as long as the Sword is asserted, and
acknowledged to be in the hands of the Parliament; who by the Law of the Sword
have so nobly over-turned the Law of the Prerogative, and recovered the good
old Laws, Liberties, and Privileges of the people. And whereas it is here
indevoured to prove our English Relation to the old Treaties made withour
Neighbors of Holland; know the intent is not in any wise to court that Nation
to maintain Amity, but only to refell the futility of those Arguments of the
Royal Party, who pretend to prove, that by virtue of those Treaties, the Dutch
are tied still to the late Kings Family, as if they stood radicated in full
force, in the person of the present young Pretender.

If there be any fault then in the Author of the Additionall Reply, it is only
his presumption, that a private Pen should meddle with matters of a public
Import: But the henest Dutch man having shown him the way, he could not choose
but follow him, and lay hold upon this opportunity, thoroughly to canvasse the
princpall Points, Parts, and Pretenses, that pass up and down by Tradition, to
support the cause and interest of the Common Enemy.

Perhaps they may at present seem as dead to some, having been Thunder struck
by the late fatal blow at Worcester, and therefore this Piece by way of Reply,
may be supposed now also to be of the less use and consideration. But let such
consider, that though the Cause, and many of its grand Abettors be laid flat,
yet as long as so many Pretenders of the Family are in being, they will be
always upon every opportunity, reviving and setting on foot the same pretenses;
so that if we subdue these by Reason, as well as their Persons and Partisans by
Force, they will be the less able to drive on future designs, and draw Parties,
either here or abroad, to the disquiet of England.

AN ANSWER TO THE PROPOSITIONS MADE BY THE ENGLISH AMBASSADORS (as they style
themselves) the 30/20 of March, In the great Assembly of the High and Mighty
Lords, the States General of the United Provinces.

AS ALSO, To their Memorials of the 27/17 of April, and 20/10 of May 1651.
respectively.

And likewise, To the 36. Articles of the desired Treaty.

As it was delivered by the Honorable Sir William Macdowel Knight, Resident for
his Majesty of Great Britain, after his return to Holland, in the said Great
Assembly, June 28/18 1651.

Prove. 24. verse 21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with them that are given to change.

For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them?

HAGH, Printed by Samuel Brown, English Bookseller, 1651.

AN ANSWER TO the Propositions.
THe said pretended Ambassadors have offered, and withal required a strict
Confederacy and Holy League (as they term it) betwixt the Commonwealth of
England, and the United Provinces, alleging to that end, I. The ancient and
successive Contracts, and mutual Friendship betwixt both. II. The advancement
of Trade and Traffic. III. A Conformity in the Reformation of Religion. IV.
The like Success and Blessings upon both. V. An answerable change in the
condition of both States; as likewise, in the restored Liberty of the People.
Hinc inde.


Which specious motives, and inducements, viewed aright, and laid in a just
balance, will appear (by their favors) to have no warrantable ground: For
the clearing of which, the High and Mighty States are desired to look back, and
consider:

I: That formerly, all Contracts, have been made, betwixt the successive Kings
of England, their lawful Heirs, and the High and Mighty State General, and
not with England, as is alleged: Not to look further back, the Sovereignty of
these Countries was offered to Queen Elizabeth, of happy memory, in the year
1585, which she in wisdom thought fit to decline; but, withal, assisted the
States, with 5000. Foot, and 1000 Horse, as likewise advanced to their
Lordships before the year 1596 in the space of eleven years, eleven hundred
thousand pounds Sterling, according to the calculation of her Majesty's
Counselors, and high Treasurer for the time.

Her Royal Successors, James and Charles, of Immortal memory, in the years
1608, 1614, 1635, respectively, have not only assisted these States in their
great straits, in a very considerable way, but also engaged with their
Lordships, offensive and defensive, and that without the least communication
had with the people of England concerning it. And, if a ratification of such an
alliance, should be concluded with a factious Commonalty here, and that they
might at pleasure disturb the Republic, and turn matters upside down, what an
Anarchy and woeful confusion would ensue, as now alas, we see too plainly
follows in England? Truly, if that people had been so inclined, and governed,
as they now are, (by those who Regni causa have violated the rights; and to
make purchase of the Lords Vineyards, have murdered him, and oppose with their
utmost power and malice, the enthronement of his lawful Heir their undoubted
Sovereign) the Low Countries should not have obtained such real friendship
and advantage from them.

Besides that, the now prevailing Party is not the hundredth part of the people
in England, in comparison of those, both of the Clergy, Nobility, Gentry, and
Commons, who cordially adhere to the Kings just interest, and passionatly groan
to be delivered from the continued oppressions of those cruel Taskmasters,
whose little finger lies heavier upon them, then all their Kings whole loins:

And an eminent Member of the late House of Commons, (formerly a sufferer) in
his Memento affirms, that there is in the three Kingdoms, ten thousand to one,
who firmly and affectionatly cleave to his Majesty.

In Kingdoms and Republics (as Politicians speak) it is the very same people
now, as those that lived an hundred years ago; as likewise that it is the same
ship, although all the planks be renewed; but if the Keel be destroyed, and the
form of Government and Fundamental Laws be utterly abolished, non idem
populus, nec eadem navis, it is not the same people, nor the same ship.

Moreover, by all proofs it is sufficiently known, that the Predecessors of the
now prevailing Party in England, were then so mean and inconsiderable among the
people, that they were thought utterly incapable of having the least hand in
the former favors shown to these States.

II. Trade and Traffic (which they call (the Common interest of a State) are
Juris Gentium, common to all Nations; consequently, not to be carried on by
Monopolies, and damage of a third party especially the eldest, and sometime
the most considerable allye of this Estate. Amicitias (faith Polybius) it a
institui par est, ne qua vetustior amicitia, and societas violetur.

It is remarked by most of the Authors of the Netherlands History, that their
Lordships Predecessors upon a time, being more moved by the Impositions of the
Duke of Alva, of the 10. and 100. penny respective, then for the violence
offered to Religion, (and therefore compared to the Gargasens, who proferred
their swine before their Savior) were the more severely punished by God.

And shall the High and Mighty States now hazard their religious and high
esteem in the savor of those, who in regard of Commerce, enlarging of their
limits and usurped power, are big with such monstrous mysteries: and of whom it
was said long before their troubles.

Gens tacit is praegnaus arcanis ardua tentans.

Who derive their power and authority merely from themselves, as formerly has
been said, in the dominion of the Chaldeans over the Jews, and of Cinna and
Carbo amongst the Romans, who in the time of Sylla made themselves Consuls
without any Court election; Violenta imperia (says one to Caesar) sunt magis
acerba quam diuturna. The rather because no Nation under the Sun is so subject
to a change as England, even while they lived under their lawful Sovereigns.
The Earl of Warwick (called the Titular King) in eleven days, Edward the
fourth in twenty, Henry the seventh in one day, (as a Caesar veni, vidi, vici)
brought the English successively to their obedience.

Commerce and Traffic are plausible pretenses, but often accompanied with
great jealousies, especially betwixt neighboring Republiques; the which like
Twins struggling for the primogeniture, are in a continual emulation for profit
and pre-eminence. And therefore compared to an Alluvie, where the increase of
one is the decrease of the other. Insomuch, that grave and judicious Statesmen
have judged it would he more safe, and profitable to these States, that England
continued a Monarchy, then to be tumbled into a Commonwealth, confirmed by a
Prognostication of a person of credit with them, living at London, given out
the 16 of October last, alleging and applying with much confidence, against
the United Provinces, Ierem. 51. verse. 13.

III. Concerning the pretended conformity in Religion in the third place,
which, under the blessed and glorious Government of Kings, as a Palladium and
Lamp, did outshine all other Nations, is alas, now become a Pandora, out of
which, tanquam ex equo Trojano, do issue so many monstrous Sects, Heresies and
Blasphemies, and is consequently so deformed, (as being utterly destitute of
Discipline, and differing in most points of Doctrine) that it is nothing like
the Religion here professed, nor indeed Religion it self.

A good Religion, as an upright and lively faith, issues forth into good Works;
insomuch that in the Primitive Church, the Christians were discerned from the
Infidels only by their holy life, according to the proverb, Christiani non
sunt Cassiani; but alas, how many not only Cassii, but also Albii, and Nigri,
are now adays to be seen, witness, besides the Treaties entitled; Defensio
pro Carolo Rege, Vindiciae pro capite Regis Angliae, Elenchus motuum, Master.
Prinns Memento, Theatrum Tragicum, Vox Veritatis, and others, two Declarations
also of the 18. of January, 1648. (long before that lamentable Catastrophe) by
diverse Preachers and learned Divines, in and about London, subscribed by 126 of
them, mourning over, and complaining of horrible and scandalous abuses; as in
the Church, so in the Civil, or rather Military Government, and strongly
refuting their flattering of themselves in their continued success, which may
next be considered of.

IV. For as Solomon says, That there be just men, to whom it happens,
sometime, according to the work of the wicked: So again, there be wicked men,
to whom it happens according the work of the righteous.

Successes often are a punishment, as sometimes given for a blessing, where
only those are to be valued, whose principal aim appears to be, the true
advancement of Gods revealed will in his word; which, as it strictly commands
obedience to Kings, and those in authority under them, so it does severely
punish sedition and rebellion against them, not sparing the curse of
condemnation to those, who comply with, and adhere unto them. Neither has the
great Turk come far short of (that undoubted blessing) good success, the now
prevailing party justify their cause, and measure its righteousness by,
though they may seem to disavow him.

Finally, the resemblance made from the manner of the recovered liberty of both
States (to use the expression of a great personage) is not more different then
Mike and Ink, both in regard of the ancient condition of the people on both
sides, and the way of attaining to it.

The Law Country men, (especially the Batavi) have been reputed by all ancient
Writers, for a free people, neither subject to the Romans, (whom they did
acknowledge only Civilli, as Tacitus says) nor to any Directors, Counts and
Governors, which were constituted by themselves.

The English have more then a thousand years been governed by Kings, all sprung
from the same Royal Stock, to whom they have successively sworn Obedience and
Loyalty.

The King of Spain, after a war of almost eighty years, has in two solemn
Treaties (the one before the twelve years Truce, and the other in the late
concluded peace) acknowledged the United Provinces to be a Free State, and that
privative. Whereupon his Catholic Majesty for himself and his Successors,
has disclaimed all Pretenses of Sovereignty here.

Whereas Charles the first, that blessed Martyr (whose innocent blood (like that
of Abels, cries loud to the highest Heaven for vengeance against those who now
sit upon his Throne) not only was, but was ever by them acknowledged for their
lawful Sovereign, instead of disclaiming his Royalty over them, (as must be
if the resemblance stand complete) was both divested of his power, deprived of
his life, and his Princely Successor (so far as in them lies) kept back and
disenabled from the exercise of his undeniable power over them, whereof let
them find an absolute parallel from the Creation until now.

In Israel King Ahab did tyrannize, and (as a man sold unto sin) above others
provoked Gods wrath against him. In Rome there was Nero, more like a Monster
then a Man. Amongst the Christans, Christiernus in Denmark, Wencelaus in
Bohemia, (who was likewise Emperor) behaved themselves so wickedly, that it
was said of them, that they had east off humane nature; Not much unlike to them
was Richard the third, called the Tyrant of England, yet none of all these was
ever condemned to die by the sentence of their subjects: Insomuch that it is
observed, that the Israelites after they had deserted their King Rehoboam
(although an oppressor) never enjoyed a happy hour, but were infested with
continual wars, both civil and foreign, til at last they were utterly
destroyed, and carried captives into Babylon.

Of Nero it was said, primum damnati Principis exemplum, I add postremum, non
mactati tamen, as in this case. The Confederate Provinces were first forced in
their Religion, their persons and goods seized, and 100000. of them killed; The
prevailing party in England, (after those insolent and high affronts done to
his Majesty, ere his constrained removal from his Court at White Hall,) took up
Arms, gave out Commissions, levied men, according to his Majesty's last true
and undeniable words) and seized upon the Regalia, before He once put himself
into a posture of defense.

In the Low Countries their liberty was More Majorum, fully restored to them
without prejudice to any man.

In England Religion and Liberty are shamefully trampled under foot, and the
House of Commons so dismembered, and its privileges violated, that the eighth
part of ten, were beyond all parallel cast out, as the Declaration and
Protestation of the secluded members, Feb. 13. 1648. does testify.

The proceedings of the High and Mighty States, are approved and justified by
all the World; on the contrary, those of the English condemned and abhorred,
and by themselves confessed as irregular and unwarranntable; a most pregnant
proof and probatio probata, of their wrong, as is contained in the said
Declaration of the Ministers.

The which premises the High and Mighty States being pleased to take into
serious consideration, according to their accustomed wisdom and justice, and
calling to mind those diverse Treaties betwixt the Kings Royal Predecessors,
and their Lordships, (in his Majesty's person yet firmly standing.) And seeing
likewise diverse of their Lordships resolved for a punctual observation of a
neutrality, since the year 1642. betwixt the late King, his Majesty's Father
of blessed memory, and his Parliament, the which by the partial confederacy
with the one party, now labored for, will in all appearance be violated and
infringed.

Therefore their Lordships are earnestly entreated not to hearken to the said
Propositions, as being prejudicial to the King my gracious Masters interests,
and dangerous to this State; likewise that the acknowledging them for a free
Republic, (which possibly the condition of the times, and benefit of Trade,
has occasioned,) be not drawn into a further consequence, much less an
occasion given thereby, (forge^ting Joseph's sufferings,) that the afflicted be
yet more afflicted, their Liberty retarded, and their calamity lengthened.

His Majesty's affairs (God be praised) are yet in a very good and hopeful
condition, far better then some of his Royal Predecessors, who have
notwithstanding run through all difficulties, and became considerable to their
friends, as formidable to their enemies.

King Robert the Bruce, about three hundred years ago, being likewise by the
Rebellion of his subjects, and the disloyalty of the Baliol and Cumming, and
their adherents, fiercely assailed by King Edward of England, who at once was
possessed, of most of the Towns, and strengths in Scotland, kept a Parliament
in Saint Andrews, took his Queen prisoner, killed four of his brethren, amongst
whom were those duo fulmina belli, defaced or removed all the Monuments, and
Registers of that Kingdom, was constrained with one or two servants to hide
himself among the Hills; yet notwithstanding all this, in a short time after,
recovered his whole Kingdom was Crowned with Honor, and Glory, and forced his
insolent Enemy in confusion to fly from Sterling to Dumbarr, and thence in a
Fisher-boat, ( Xerxes like) escaped narrowly with his life. I say Sterling,
Invictum, and fatale Scotorum propugnaculum: Of which it is said: Hic latium
remorata est Scotia cursum.

His Majesty's Royal Grand Father, Henry the fourth, King of France and
Navarre, (yet of fresh memory) was in a lower condition, and had less power to
resist those of the League and the powerful King of Spain; yet at last became
victorious, in the overthrow of his enemies, to the great advantage, and very
considerable succor of the Netherlands.

The distressed condition of the Predecessors of the High and Mighty States
General, whom after so many changes the Almighty God has (to the admiration of
the whole World) brought into a safe Haven, (however Sirius a Spanish Writer
jesting with those of Holland and their confederates, did say, What can the
Hollanders do against the King of Spain? as, now, some scoffingly ask, how can
the Scots stand against the powerful English?) Is an eminent, and visible
example, that it is all one, with the Lord, to help with few or with many, and
that when all strength, and humane hopes do fail, he will arise Gloriously, for
the deliverance of the righteous, crowning them in the end, with honor and good
success.

I. Shall we then look upon the present successes, and prosperity of that party,
as alone unchangeable, for the which such strange grounds are by them
pretended, as are no where found, being so Diametrically opposite, according to
the Declaration of the said Divines, in, and about London. TO I. Gods holy
word. II. The instinct of nature. III. Natural reason. IV. The Laws of all
Nations. V. The constitutions particularly of the Kingdom of England (who
above all other people most obsequiously, and affectionately regard and
reverence their Kings) as in those maxims of their Law. Rex non moritur, Rex
nulli facit injuriam, etc. VI. The Judgment of all Casuists. VII. Their Oaths
of Fealty, Supremacy, and Allegiance, repeated particularly at the admission of
every Member into the House of Commons, their Protestation, their Covenant,
their Solemn League and Covenant, and an hundred Declarations (besides the
Pulique Faith of the Kingdom of England, solemnly given to the Commissioners of
the Kingdom of Scotland, upon their receiving his Majesty at New Castle) in
all which, they professed to the world, that they would maintain and preserve,
with their lives, and Estates, the Kings Person, Honor, Rights, and Royal
Posterity.


II. Or, shall we rest satisfied in the Sophistry of those Sectaries? who out
of Christ's answer to the subtle question of the Herodians and Pharisees, (if it
were lawful to give tribute to Caesar,) answered, ostendite mihi numisma, cujus
habet imaginem? infer, that fide implicita, the party now in England, is to
be acknowledged, without any further enquiry, or examination, since our
Saviors answer speaks nothing for their advantage. But on the contrary, his
commanding Tribute to be given to Caesar (whom the Jews formerly acknowledged
to be their King) confirms, and establishes lawful power, and consequently
condemns sedition and rebellion; else David should have submitted unto, and
acquiessed in the usurped power of Absalom, who was possessed of all the land,
even unto Jordan, and carried away all Israel after him, and Solomon in the
power of Adonijah, Iehoiada in Athalia's, and the Machabees in the power of
Antiochus Epiphanes the grand enemy of the Jews, yea the Estates of the United
Provinces should have then obeyed the force of the Duke of Alva, who by the
emblem of his Statue formerly set up in Antwerp, did signify that he had
invested himself with the absolute power. It is well said, by one of the
Ancients, Omnis potestas est a Deo; sed acquisitio potestatis, furto, raepina,
incendio, aut perduellione, non est a Deo, sed ab hominum affectibus and
Satanae malitia.

III. Or, may we suffer our selves to be abused by the examples and presidents,
which the said Sectaries alledg of the Kings, Edward the second, and Richard
the second, who, by reason of their incapacity, were forced to resign their
Crowns, the one to his son, the other to his Competitor King Henry the fourth,
but neither of them to an inconsiderable, small remainder of an house of
Commons, or the People. Only in a full Parliament both their resignations were
confirmed, and neither executed, but were always afterward honorably
entertained; yea, one Roger Mortimer (which is worth the observing) the chief
Author and actor in deposing of Edward the second, and Crowning his son Edward
the third in his fathers place, (according to which President his Majesty,
Charles the second, ought by these to have been Crowned) was by a Parliament
four years after, together with his fellow-murtherers, condemned as a Traitor,
and enemy to the King and Kingdom, because he killed the said deposed King in
Berkley Castle.

Besides, the now prevailing Party, by Solemn Protestations, did publish and
declare to all the world, that they did not intend to follow those accursed
Presidents, although they should suffer never so much by the King and his
Party: Exact. Collect. p. 69.

IV. Should we not rather deeply apprehend, and with fear look upon those
exemplary punishments inflicted upon perjury, and Covenant Breaking in Gods
holy word, as may be seen (to omit others, in the person of Saul, who together
with his posterity, as also the whole Kingdom of Israel, was so severely
punished because he destroyed the Gibeonits, against the Covenant made with
Joshua, above 200 years before, notwithstanding they procured the same
deceitfully. As likewise in the History of England, and other Kingdoms, many
pregnant examples to that purpose might be alleged; particularly that of
William Thorpe, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench in that Realm, who for taking
a bribe of 80 pounds Sterling, was put to death, and all his goods confiscated
to the Kings use, in regard that in so doing he violated the Oath of a Judge as
the words run, Quod Sacramentum Domini Regis, quod erga populum habuit
custodiendum, fregit malitiose, falso and rebelliter. Parl. 23. Edw. 3d.

An Answer to their Memorials..
THe Memorials I pass over, as monstrous, and which by inevitable consequence,
not only tend to cut off all Treaties and alliances betwixt the Kings Majesty
and this State, and all commerce with his loyal and faithful Subjects, but
likewise in some cases to the not suffering of them to dwell or reside in these
parts.

A demand which is against the band of common society amongst men, the
Sovereignty of the united Provinces, and Liberty of the same, which have ever
been a Sanctuary for honest men, and a receptacle of all Nations whatsoever: In
a word such, quale victor victo dare, non socius socium rogare solet. The
cruelty of Tiberius, Nero, Domitian, and others has for the most part been
confined within the walls of Rome, or the borders of Italy, without persecuting
their opposers, in a strange land as an, omnibus umbra locis adero.

Concerning the thirty six Articles of the Treaty.
The thirty six Articles evidently bend, I. TO hinder his Majesty's Just Right,
and Restitution to his hereditary Crown, and Kingdom of England. II. To involve
the High and Mighty States General in a Labyrinth and great inconveniences,
who at present have no enemy. III. To encourage and strengthen the Kings
irreconcilable enemies, and Rebels, as the 4, 5, 6, and 31 Articles do import.
IV. Against the forementioned resolutions of the High and Mighty States, in the
year 1642, concerning the keeping a Neutrality betwixt his Majesty's Father of
blessed memory, and his Parliament of England, namely those of the 1 of
November, and 30 of December 1642 and the 6 of November 1648. V. Against a
Declaration and Protestation of the Noble and Mighty States of Holland and
West-Friesland, dated the 6 of November 1649 to the same purpose. VI. Against
all former Treaties, and Alliances betwixt his Majesty's Royal Predecessors
and this State.


As amongst others, that of the 14 of February 1593 (likewise consisting of 36
Articles) betwixt King Henry the 7 of England, his Heirs and Successors, made
in his name, and by his Authority (as the words of the said Treaty do bear) and
Philip Arch Duke of Austria, and Duke of Burgundy, which bind and obliege to
this very day, diverse of the United Provinces, and the chief Members and Towns
thereof, to assist the said King Henry the 7 and his Heirs (which
unquestionably pleads for my Master, Charles the second, he being the sixth
from him in descent in linea recta) and to afford them all favor and friendly
assistance, as well by Sea as by Land, and prohibiteth any Treaty and Alliance
to be made with the Rebels, and the Enemies of one another.

Whose undoubted right, according to Gods sacred word, the Laws, and the
Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom of England as, ( Rex non moritur,
etc.) is firmly radicated in his Majesty's Person, however he by violence be
kept from it.

Non unquam perdidit ordo Mutato sua Jura loco. In so much that the ancient
Romans by the light of nature did refuse to enter into any Alliance with Nabis
the Usurper of Lacedaemon, but continued the same with the Just and lawful
King Pelopides. Amicitia and societas nobis nulla tecum est says Tit: Quintius
in the behalf of the Roman Empire, apud Livium lib. 34.) Sed cum Pelopide Rege
Lacedaemoniorum justo and ligitimo facta est.

Finally against the renewed Treaty in the year 1550. December 15. made at Bins
in Henegow (called the Perpetual Treaty) betwixt the tutors of Mary Q of
Scotland, in her minority, and Queen Mary of Hungary, Regent for Charles the
fifth in the Low Countries, renewed again in solenni forma (word by word) at
Edinburgh 1594. betwixt King James the sixth and the High and Mighty States,
after the Baptism of the Late Prince Henry, his Majesty's son, celebrated at
Sterling.

In the which it is promised and agreed upon, inviolably to maintain and
preserve mutual friendship one with another, for all ages to come, and as
far as in them lay, to prevent, and hinder any damage that may befall either
of them, that they shall Trafique in safety and security, and likewise, that
they shall assist each other with Ships, and all sort of Ammunition, as may be
seen at length in the Treaty it self, inserted by Peter Borr in his 30 book.

But how opposite this is to their 4, 5, and 31 Articles propounded to your
Lordships, appears clearly out of the words there contained, where they not
only deny to the King and his Subjects, privative, all favor, friendship, and
provision of War, but likewise endeavor to obliege your Lordships, De facto,
to infest and make war upon them, as having now no other Enemies (as they
themselves give out) but Scotland.

But expecting better things of the High and Mighty States, and a Religious
observation of all Treaties, Resolutions, Protestations, and Declarations; Your
Lordships are entreated not to give ear to the said Propositions, and
Memorials, as also that the said 36 Articles perishing in their birth, may not
be taken into any further Consideration.

The Lord will reward every one according to his works, and I wish that he may
ever bless the High and Mighty States with his Fatherly Protection, and keep
them from contracting any League and Alliance, which may be attended with
Dishonor and Damage unto them.

THE END.
ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A CERTAIN SCOTTISH ANSWER, SET FORTH AGAINST The
Propositions and Memorandums OF THE English Ambassadors, etc. SERVING For a
right Information of the plainer Sort.

ROMANS 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers: For there is no
Power but of GOD, and the powers which are, are ordained of GOD.

PROVE. 24.21. Fear the King, [that is to say] All Magistrates.

Written and printed first in Dutch by a Gentleman of Holland, and now
translated into English.

London, Reprinted 1651.

Animadversions Upon a certain Scottish Answer, put forth against the
Propositions and Memorandums of the English Ambassadors, etc.
THe Answerer has this expression in the Title of his Answer, [By the English
Ambassadors, as they style themselves] just as if no body else did acknowledge
them for such. Such an untruth appearing presently in the Front, makes every
one guess the House is alike furnished within. Not they themselves, but the K
of Spain, the K. of Portugal, the State of Venice, the Duke of Florence, the
Republic of Genua, do thus acknowledge them. And the Answerer himself knows
very well, that the supreme power of this Place has done the same.

From the Text, Fear God and the King, the Answerer would fain infer, that
they ought both to be feared in one and the same degree, taxing thereby this
very State as much as the English, We must fear God more then men. The King is
a man: the Scots themselves did understand it so, when as in the late troubles
they persecuted their King by war, and at last delivered him up unto the
English for money; as the said King himself professes in the 23 Chapter of his
printed Book of Meditations.

In the beginning of the Discourse the Answerer alleges, That the ancient
Contracts and Friendships were not made between England and this State, but
between the Kings of England and this State. And wherefore says he not,
between the Kings of England and Spain respectively? but that he is convinced
that State, that is to say, the Representatives of the Countries, and the
People, are A Dutch phrase.
the Bride for whom is danced, The King or Prince is for the peoples sake, not
the people for the Kings sake.

The King of Denmark said likewise in the beginning: He and his Predecessors
had contracted with the Duke of Burgundy, with the King of Spain, not with the
States; he knew no States, and denied any treaty with them. But his Majesty
has been better informed since, having of his own accord often desired a
Treaty with these States, as other Kings and Potentates have done, who thereby
do and must acknowledge, that a King or Prince does and ought to do all in
dealing, treating, or transacting, propopulo, pro salute populi: For the
people, for the weal of the people (which is the supreme Law) not for
himself. That the name of the King or Prince is used therein, no otherwise but
Nomine procuratorio, vel tutorio, as a Trustee, or Guardian. So their Lordships
the Sta^es understood it also, when on May 2. last past, they presented unto
the English Ambassadors, the ancient Treaty of 1495. made in the Names of the
King of England, and the Archduke of Austria. King James of Scotland implied as
much when he sought in Anno 1594. to renew the old Treaty (with the States
General) formerly made in the name of Queen Mary of Scotland, 1541, which
agrees in every respect with the practice of all other Princes.

The Answerer says, That the States in Anno 1584, did offer the Sovereignty of
these Countries to Q. Elizabeth. To what purpose he utters this, I cannot
imagine; For, it will not follow thence, that this State cannot be allowed to
treat with the State of England, though there be no King; since the said Queen,
and the Kings after her treated with us, even after we had cast off our King,
as the English have now done theirs:

If this State made offer of the Sovereignty to Q. Elizabeth, doubtless it was
on certain conditions; which if she or her Successors had not kept, we should
not have scrupled to have recovered the same into our hands again, even as the
English have don. Among the Barbarians and Savages it is confessed indeed, that
their Kings will be bound to no Laws, (though oft-times they fare accordingly:
For, how many have there been even in our times, of Turkish and other Heathen
Emperors and Kings made away?) But among Christians no King or Prince was ever
heard of, but he must swear to maintain the Laws. If any Prince prove perjured
and break them, so soon as the breach is made, the people are freed from their
obedience.

The supply both of men and money which the Queen sent for our relief, came
from the people themselves, and out of the peoples purse; the people did
consent unto it, and grant it. Untrue therefore it is, which the Answerer
affirms, that the said succor and assistance was sent without the
cooperation or consent of the people of England.

If the people of England had any Monarch at this instant, to whom they had
given up the power of Treating, then our addresses of Treaty should be made to
him; but there being no such thing, and we not able to subsist without the
friendship of England, therefore we must treat with England as it is now
governed.

And truly the late Summers proceedings and attempt in this Country, (when our
own Freedom ran greatest hazard) may well awake us to circumspection, and cause
us to rejoice that England is no Monarchy now, but a Free State, of the same
constitution with ours, and to wish that thus it may continue; For, all the
dependants and kindred of the young Prince of Orange, maintain still, we ought,
must, and are bound both by the merits of the House of Nassau, and for our own
subsistence sake, to take the young Prince again for our Head, General and
Governor: And were the King of Scotland master of England, he would maintain it
as strongly as any, and seek to force the child upon us.

As for the favors and assistances that King James and Charles afforded us,
they do not merit naming; we had more hurt then good by them. And King Charles
never kept touch with us, as is well known. If in those times the people or
Parliament had been in Government, as now they are, they would have better
managed the Revenews of England (which Kings waste, or play away) to procure
our effectual liberty, such as now both England and we enjoy, but not after
the method that Leicester intended.

The Answerer says, that the prevailing party make not up the hundredth part of
the people of England. Why truly then the Ninety-nine Royalists that suffer one
Parliamenteer to domineer it over them, must be very notable Cowards.

I am sure there were seven or eight Royalists at the hague made a shift to
dispatch one Dorislaus, and at Madrid only five or six did murder Ascham; but
an hundred to be overcome and kept under by one, how is it possible? This Tale
has for these many years been pined to our sleeves; yet still the
Parliamenteers get the better, and keep the better.

Englands greatest Power, the flower of the Parliaments Forces, is now in
Scotland; I marvel the ninety-nine to one are so tame and quiet still in
England; as nowhere to show themselves.

The comparison of England with a ship, does hold as good a proportion as the
ninety-nine to one. The English people and Nation is and abides the same it
was; the individuals decay, the species remains. A Ship and a People fit as
well as a Cat and a Duck; but I conceive the Answerer means the Trees whereof
the ship is built: for they do propagate and multiply according to their kind,
like men, and that is more suitable to the opinion of some soothing
Court-Parasites, such as our Answerer proves himself, that subjects are no
otherwise then trees: others compare them to beasts, as if a Prince were so
much better then the subjects, as another man is better then a beast: that is
to say, The beasts are beasts to men, but the subjects are their Princes
beasts; A beastly opinion.

The entercourses of Commerce, says the Answerer, are common to all Nations;
Why then the King of Scotland does very ill in stopping and molesting the free
and common commerce of all Nations from the Sillies, Iersie, Ireland, Dunkerk,
etc. to so great prejudice of the Seamen, that the damage in this kind can no
longer be endured. The English have the same aim with us, for clearing of the
sea. I cannot tell what he means by his Gargazens Trade. Navigation is the life
of this State: Religion and Trade do not destroy one another, as it seems he
would infer; and how does he talk of Religion? He himself is professedly
against the Episcopal way (which all the Royalists and the Princess Royal,
and the Queen of Bohemia are still addicted to) and holds with the
Presbyterians; with whom our own people (for matter of Excommunication and
Discipline) do not agree. He says farther, Violent Governments are not
lasting: By that rule, no Monarchical Government should be lasting; for their
Sword only does support them. He says England is subject to great
alterations, yea, more than any Country under the Sun. He means under Kingly
Government: But by and by he sowes jealousies, by saying, that England
continuing a Commonwealth, it is like to increase mightily in Trade and
Navigation, and that the increase of Trade in England, will make ours to decay
in Holland. These assertions do mightily thwart one another. First, he says;
There is 100 Royalists to one Parliamentier; then, England is extremely
subjects to changes and alterations; within the space of 11 or 20 days, it has
been lost and won; and then presently after he says, England continuing a
Republique, will make our Trade decay. Ergo his mind and fear prompts him,
that the English Republique may well endure somewhat more then 11 or 20 days.
These Passages of his contradicting each other, are an Argument of a short
memory, or that he goes about to abuse us with flim flam tales. For, how does
it appear that our Trade shall be spoiled by the English? They send and offer
us real assistance and protection against the manifold depredations we suffer
by others.

If both these Republics were well united, yet the number of Monarchies round
about them, will find work enough for both to maintain their Negotiations
jointly: How much less then is England alone like to get all the Trade to
themselves? The English may be struggling a good while yet, before a secure
settling; they will not want enemies at home and abroad, to make attempts upon
them; as the Answerer himself confesses.

The Prognostic of October 16 which he speaks of, is an insinuation of the
same nature with those Victories, successes, and advantages which he daily
forged, and printed here last Summer, which by the Blow at Dunbar evaporated
all immediately. Those that tell us of Almanacks and Prognostics, show they
have but few and slender Reasons left them to produce. I could reply to him out
of Spinrock's Gospel.

Religion, says he, was wont to shine forth under the Kingly Government. How
comes this Answerer to praise the Kings Religion, when as himself as well as
the rest of his Scots Countrymen, have not only made the first insurrection
against the Kings Religion; but entered into a Covenant and raised war, and at
last sold the King for money (according to the Kings own published profession;
Principally against the Kings Religion, or against the innovation thereof at
least. And what the King said further of the Scots Religion, and consequently
of the Answerers Religion, you may read at large in the 14 and 16 Chapters of
his printed Book. It is well known what harsh and bitter Sermons and Books were
made but lately at Breda and the Hague, against the Reformed Religon, whom they
still hatefully termed Calvinists. Are there in England diverse Sects? there are
here also not a few, God mend it; and even as the Governors here would gladly
see it otherwise, so likewise those in England; in the mean time, we are
assured, that in England diverse books are forbidden, and were burnt by the
Hangman, which here pass up and down yet every where.

The Ambassadors have in the Name and behalf of the whole English Government,
declared the Conformity of their Religion with ours. They tolerate some others;
and so do we; only we allow more and greater toleration then they: Neither we
nor they approve of a Spanish Inquisition.

They do not allow the Church an absolute power of Excommunication; no more do
we; and the Scottish Kirk also was fain to remit it now themselves. So that the
Presbyterians rage and roaring against Sects and Sectaries is groundless; for
between themselves and the Independents (so named) there is not difference in
the main of Religion, or profession, besides Discipline; but it should seem the
Presbyterian Boutefeus, aim at a Papal Power, to administer the Jus Clavium at
pleasure, as the Scots have: But their young King has already taught them
another Lesson; disapproving thereby also the English Presbyterians, It were
much to be wished indeed, that all men were of one mind; that there were but
one Religion: Our Answerer I believe knows as little how to advise or compass
it, as others. Nay, he himself refusing to go to the same Church where the King
went, during his abode here, and the Queen of Bohemia and the Princess Royal,
and all the Royalists, does thereby sufficiently evidence, that there are sects
and divisions, as well between his party and the Kings, as there is between the
English and the Presbyterians. That which he mentions of the good life of his
Royal Christians, I profess, I understand not: If by a good life he means, a
merry, joviall life, (dum vixit, vixit been) I yield, that at Court they live
more merry and frollick then elsewhere; and thence it is, that at London they
have put down all the Play Houses, and such like places and practices of
profane and scandalous recreation. That otherwise the life and fruitful
Conversation of the Royalists should be more holy and exemplary, then that of
the English Independents, as they call them, I never heard of before. Were they
not the Kings evil Counselors, his flatterers, and seducers (whom I return to
the Answerer for his Albii, Cassii, Nigri) that made as well the Presbyterians,
as the rest, complain so much against him from time to time?

And I pray, were not the Presbyterians the first and the only men, that took
the King to task? The Answerer himself was one of them, and of those
Covenanters, that supplanted the King, for his maintaining the Episcopal
Hierarchy: And when the Presbyterians afterward went about to introduce the
Presbyterian Hierarchy (changing only the Name, and maintaining the
Substance) then said the others whom he calls Independents, Soft my Masters; we
have freed our selves from the Bishops Yoke; shall we put our necks under the
Presbyterians? The Answerer alleges some other books which make for him. How
many other blew books might easily be produced against the same, and to his
prejudice?

The King himself complains in his book chapter 15. and 21. how much hurt these
books did him; so that I know not why the Answerer so highly esteems these blew
books, and that publicly in print too now, as well as in the General
Assembly; odiously checking the Sovereign Government here, for having begun to
treat with the English; and presumptuously spreading the same abroad among the
Commons; as though the Magistrates were regardless of their Office; and as if
he intended to incense and raise the Commons against the Governors* contemning
the public O^dinances in this behalf. As for the Successes; the Answerer knows
well enough that several other Kings, Republics, Princes and Potentates had
beforehand acknowledged the Republic of England and honored the same with
their Ambassies, and Credentials: And England also sent first unto this State,
before this State sent to England. We have not looked upon the successes, but
upon the Example of others.

The Answerer says, that the English th^mselves do disavow the great Turk:
Again, the Gentleman throws it beyond my reach, or he knows not what he avers
himself. I never heard of any such Disavowing; but this I know well on the
contrary, that all Christian Potentates, acknowledge the Turk for what He is,
and accordingly honor him with their Ambassies: The Answerer's King himself,
scrupled not to send to the Turk; no more does the English Republic. Men,
Laws, Governments, must every where be taken and used as they are. As long as
the Answerer and his King are forced to let the Government remain as it is, so
they must give us leave to do the same.

The Answerer says, that there is as much difference between the English
Government and Liberty, and that of ours, as there is between Milk and Ink,
according to the saying of one Salmasius, calling him a great Personage. Sure
the Answerer knows well that Salmasius his Book, where he had this crotchet, is
publicly declared a Libell and scandalous here. Do great Personages use to
write Libells?

Furthermore, He says, That the Batavians or Hollanders, have been a Free
Nation from all ages, and under the subjection of none. Certainly he is a
dreaming; or else he has the art to make white black, and black white, at
pleasure: or, Milk and Ink is all one to him. What, has not Holland been under
Earls above eight hundred years? And lastly, under the House of Burgundy,
Austria, and Spain? Indeed the Earls were tied to Laws, and so were the Kings
of England; if he say, an Earl is no King; I answer, England is divided in more
then fifty Counties, or Earldomes; so France is divided into many
principalities and Counties. He that gets the command over them, soon gets a
Title, King, Prince, Earl, or Lord; it comes all to one, if they have no
Superiors. But all of them are bound to their Oaths, and the Laws. Neither in
France, nor in Spain, nor anywhere else, are Kings allowed an unlimited power.
The Examples in France are too fresh to rehearse them.

The Kings of Spain have been Earls of Holland, and acknowledged no superiors;
now being freed from Spain, there is none appearing that pretend any right to
Holland. Nevertheless he was bound to the laws by an oath.

So that King of England was Earl of Essexshire, Sussex, Yorkshire, and of all
the rest, compendiously called King of England, Scotland, Ireland, but bound to
the Laws.

They of Holland perceiving their King had infringed the Laws, thereupon they
opposed him, and fought themselves free; Been and feliciter (says the King of
Spains Ambassador Count Pigneranda) pro liberate pugnastis; ea vobis debetur.
The English in like manner perceived their King had trespassed against the
laws, and falsified his oath, whereupon they opposed him til they fought
themselves into the same condition of Freedom.

I could say somewhat more here: That the King of England out-did Spain. He of
Spain had sworn to the Roman Religion, and conceived himself bound to protect
it according to his Oath: but the King of England being sworn to the Protestant
Religion, is charged to have acted against it, innovated it, and had he gotten
the mastery, would have changed it.

That this Assertion (owned as well by the Scots as the English) is most true,
appears by the Covenant, first made by the Scots, and afterward embraced also
by the English: Look upon Chapt. 14. of the Kings Book, see what he says there
himself of the Covenant: Again, the Covenant very expressly showed, that the
King had an intent to alter Religion and Laws. The Answerer himself was a
Covenanter and Parliamenteer, and blew as fiercely and zealously as any against
the Kings design of Innovation, as they termed it. The second and third
Article of the Covenant speaks very plain. And there have been a thousand books
written both by the Scots and English Presbyterians on that subject. Nay, the
Scots themselves have even since the late Kings death, excommunicated all that
had and did adhere to the King (calling them Engagers) and declared them Given
over to the Devil. And for this cause they put poor Montrosse to death, and
refused him Absolution. And what afterward the King himself, and Hamilton,
Middleton, Lauderdale, and others of this party, have suffered, is notorious to
all the world. Also, how this King was fain to do penance, and to confess the
blood guiltiness of his Father's House. How ever, all the difference betwixt
the Kings of England, and Spain, was only this; that He of England did more,
and He of Spain, less against the Religion that each of them was sworn to.

It is well known, that the Scots were the first, that made a Covenant, and
thereupon took up arms, even as the Nobility heretofore in the Netherlands,
made a League or Union, and took up arms to defend it. The Scots having cleared
their own Land of all the Royal designs and adherents, were not content
therewith, but proceeded to assist the English, who were as eager to be rid of
the same encumbrances. Which being effected, and the King brought to this pass,
that he saw no remedy left him, then he betook himself to the Scots at last,
his own Country men, as confiding more in them. Why did not the Scots then take
him home along with them? They said, it was not expedient; the King might
easily put Scotland into new broils, as the English found afterward among
themselves; for then broke first out those differences betwixt Presbyterians
and Independents; the former would have a new Hierarchy introduced, like that
of the Scots; the later would have the Reformed Religion maintained, as it now
stands among them, only they would bear with tender consciences, and some
others, as we do likewise here.

The King of Spain has given up his Right, and acknowledged this a Free State:
had the King of England done the like, or would this King content himself yet
with the Scottish Crown, as his Forefathers did, the war would soon be at an
end. And herein Philip showed himself more reasonable and righteous, then
Charles, whom nevertheless he styles, that Blessed Martyr, so highly wronged
and persecuted, not remembering, at least concealing, that they were the Scots,
who began this violent dealing with him. But none of this concerns us, not can
we help it. If the Scots will begin troubles and war, and the Neighbor Kings
and Potentates, will wink at it, what is that to us?

What is farther said by the Answerer, about the Kings death, concerns not us
of Holland at all. If a King wageth war with his subjects, he must needs
resolve to run the hazard. Kings and Princes are flesh and blood, and mortal as
well as others. As much might have been done in a Charge by the Sword of a
private soldier, as was afterward by the hand of the Executioner. The Quality
or Majesty of a King or Prince, is of no consideration to the steel or lead of
the meanest soldier, and nostro sequitur de vulnere sanguis. Majestate nihil
contemtius, nec infirmius, si sint qui contemnant. A living Dog is better then
a dead Lion. A Pesant, owner of some Land, is better then a King, without
Land. He that will not submit himself to the Discretion of a Conqueror,
should not run the hazard of being conquered. The Conquering party saw no
other Expedient, no farther trust given; even during the Kings restraint, there
was faction upon faction, division upon division, insurrection upon
insurrection raised. The meanest creature, the poorest worm seeks for
self-preservation. How much more a Man? If there had been any means left under
Heaven, whereby a firm confidence could have been recovered, it is very
probable, the Prevailing party would have yielded to it. But to put all their
Fortunes, Reputation, Freedom, Life, and Being, upon a new hazard again, no
Reason could advise them.

Now, as to the matter of deposing, and destroying of Kings, it is so common,
both in England and Scotland, that I admire, why the Answerer makes it so
strange and prodigious. But all these things are so largely set forth in
printed Boooks and Pamphlets, that the Answerer has little reason to make a
wonder of it. Omnia jam vulgata.

To make an alliance with England were unnecessary if our Commerce and
Liberties were not in danger. We are bound to look to their preservation. The
Depredations are unsupportable! We do not afflict the afflicted; but those whom
he calls the afflicted, afflict us.

As for the affliction of Joseph, we know not what it means, unless he make
Joseph a Cavalier; and under that notion the Scots themselves were the first
that persecuted him. And that party in Scotland which the Answerer himself does
esteem the honester, viz. the kirk party, they abhor the Royalists, calling
them Malignants. The English Ambassadors have declared here in their first
Proposition, they came not out of necessity, but to show, they were willing to
choose this State for their best friends. They have not desired to engage us
against the Scots. But it is well known both to them and us, what practices and
mighty endeavors, the Royal party has used these many years to engage this
State against the Parliament, now the Commonwealth of England. What partial
proceedings were there a foot? All that came from the King, had audience at
pleasure; the Parliament none. The Statesmen of war, were (though mostly
besides the States knowledge) employed in the service of the King and his
Party, as if they had been his own. What would have been the issue think you,
if they had engaged us to make war against the Parliament, but to sacrifice our
Power, our Treasure, our Freedom, for the inslaving both the Parliament and
our Selves? Is it forgotten already, what past here among us last Summer? Had
Amsterdam, and the Bank of Amsterdam, been but surprised once, nay, had but one
man continued alive, we should have been in a case sad and bad enough.

After that this danger was over, and we had called the Grand Assembly
together, for the settlement of our Freedom, they acknowledged the
Commonwealth of England, and resolved to send an Ambassador to them; the
Parliament showed themselves so honorable and civil, that they prevented us,
concurring with our own desires, of settling both these Republics, in a
posture against all that should at any time attempt ought against them. They
considered who was their present Enemy, and how near the King of Scots was
allied to him, that by his late practices disclosed so much of his Designs
against Holland, Amsterdam, and the whole State. Also what special
correspondence there past between these two, to reduce both Republics to a
plenary Subjection. Afterward when the English had gotten the start of their
Adversary, by the great Victory at Dunbar: Then it is to be observed, that they
came out of a cordially zeal and affection to deliver us likewise, and to
further the settlement of our State, and by an union with them, render us
secure at home, and feared abroad. How, and by whom the effect thereof has
been protracted hitherto, is well known; namely, by those who still are
Preaching to us, that we should submit our selves under the young Prince of
Orange; that is to say, under the sister of the King of Scotland, the
Guardianess of him, whom they would fain force upon us for our Head and
Guardian.

The following both Scripture and profane Allegations and Histories registered
by the Answerer, are to no purpose, being a thousand times refuted. Gods holy
Word, the instinct of Nature, right reason, the Laws, the Judgments of the
Casuists, the Oaths, Covenants, and all these are things the Parliament allege
for themselves, with more reason and advantage, then the Royalists. Those
sayings, Rex non moritur, and Rex nulli facit injuriam, are known to be rank
flatteries, and neither in England, nor in any other Kingdom allowed of. I
wonder how this man durst avert such things in the face of this Republic.

As also, that he durst call that a Sophis^^e, which the States of Holland had
made use of, to induce the rest of the Provinces to the Acknowledgment of the
English Republic, viz to give unto Caesar, (that is, the present Possessor or
Incumbent) that which is Cesars. Why did he not first make known this subtle
solution of that Sophism to Spain, Portugal, Venice, Florence, Genua? ( France
would fain come on too.) Did they understand the Date Caesari thus? we had more
reason for it.

As for those other allegations, taken out of several Sermons, I shall direct
him to infinite other Sermons, that were and are daily made in the behalf of
the Parliament. The Answerers, and others wresting of the Scriptures, like a
Nose of wax to serve their turns, is a kind of Profanation.

The Memorandums he calls Monstrous things. A bold expression. They contain the
very words, set down in the Treaty of Anno 1495. and consequently the States
own words, delivered unto the English Ambassadors, May 2 last, which are not
monstrous, but grounded on very weighty Reason. For, we do plainly find, that
for diverse years now all along, the English and Scots Malignants, do not only
seek to imbroil us in war, but labor likewise daily here to reduce us again
under the subjection or Guardianship of the young Prince of Orange, that needs
a Guardian himself: So that it seems Lex Julia de ambitu, lies asleep.
Otherwise this State ought to rid themselves of those strangers, that seek to
obtrude a new Domination upon us. And the English deserve our thanks, for
having reached forth their helping hand thus unto us.

In the Rear now our Answerer falls upon the thirty six Articles, and says,
That the same do prejudice or hinder his Kings Right to the Crown of England.
All the Kings and Potentates, which acknowledge England a Republic, do in
effect the same thing: But indeed neither any of those Kings and Potentates,
nor we our selves, but the Kings ow^ evil Counselors, or Proceedings, are the
cause of all this. When the Anserer, the rest of his partners, the Scots and
Covenanters, have hurried their Wagon into precipices of ruin, it is past our
redress. To enter into alliance against those that go about to ruin our
Commerce, and bereave us of our Freedom, as much as in them lies, is both
necessary and commendable. If some will needs live under a King, let them; as
for our parts, we are resolved by Gods help, to maintain our Freedom.

A League with England will not bring us into a Labyrinth, nor make us subjects
of Depradation and Slavery; but free and secure us from both.

The Resolutions of Neutrality, which he mentions, are limited with
conditions; in case the Scots, Irish, and other Pirates, perform Neutrality to
us also.

All the former alliances are between the Nations; so their Lord ships the
States understand it; so also do all the Kings and Potentates understand it,
that Treat here with the States upon the ancient Treaties, as made in those
times under the name of the Duke of Burgundy, and Austria. The Answerer himself
implies as much above, where he takes the Treaty with Duke Philip, Anno 1495.
as made with their Lordships the States; and so likewise the renewed Treaty with
Scotland, in Anno 1594. which Queen Mary had made, as Governess in the
Netherlands, and the King of Scotland notwithstanding renewed it with their
Lordships Non populi propter Regem sed Rex propter populu^. Kings and Princes
enter into Treaties, as Representers of the People, for the peoples sake. This
Kings forefathers were contented with the Crown of Scotland. It grieves the
Scots to see themselves involved in war about a quarrel that does not concern
them; but only for the Kings sake, who by Pr. Rupert, and by other Pyratical
ships and other ways, plaguing and provoking the English, did force them at
last, to fall with an Army into Scotland, for to prevent that Kings falling
into England. Even so did the great Gustave of Sweden; he came with an Army
into Prussia, and forced the King of Poland his Cosen, to relinquish his
pretensions to the Crown of Sweden.

To conclude, the English well knowing, that the Scots joined with English
Fugitives, and Malignants, seek nothing but on the one side to engage us
against the parliament, or to make us still subject to their depradations; and
on the other side, to bring us again under the subjection of the Prince of
Orange: Therefore they very lovingly came and invited us to mutual union, to
prevent both the one and the other.

This, in effect, is the Sum and Truth of the Business.

AN ADDITIONALL REPLY TO All the pretended Arguments, falls Insinuations and
Slanders, set forth in the Printed Answer OF MACK-DONNELL the Scottish RESIDENT,
To the Propositions of the Ambassadors of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND;
Presented at the Hague, March 30/20. 1651:
CHAP. I. The Necessity, Nature, and several Forms of Ambassy, stated.
IT being impossible to preserve Intercourse and Amity betwixt Nations, for
their mutual weal and safety, without the intervention of such a person, or
persons, that may represent the sense of either, so as to beget a right
understanding betwixt them: And because if the Supremacy be delegated or
invested in one single Person (whether a King, Duke, or Emperor) it were for
many reasons most inconvenient that he should quit his Charge at home to treat
personally abroad in forain Parts; Or if the Supremacy be entrusted in the
hands of diverse Persons, it were absurd to imagine they should all undertake a
Voyage upon the like occasion: Therefore it must needs be obvious to every man's
reason, how great a necessity lies upon the Nations of the world, to make
choice of some intermedial Person or Persons, to be commissionated with full
Power, and sent abroad with such Iustructions, as may enable them, on the
behalf of their respective Countries, to confer and debate with forain States
and Princes, of such matters as tend to mutual Commerce and Communication.
Without such a course as this, says Petrus Aerodius (an old Author) no League
can be made, nor any thing determined touching Peace or War; Enmities would
prove immortal; Murders, Violence, and Treachery, would perpetually alarm the
world with new Combustions. Hence it is, that in regard of the necessary use of
such Ministers, and in regard they represent the Majesty of the State that
sends; them, a kind of sanctity has been annexed to their Persons; they have
in all Ages and Nations been had in special Veneration, indulged with large
Privileges and Immunities, even among the Heathen, and secured from the reach
of violation, by as high a reverence as they paid to their very Gods and
Temples, as may be seen in an Epistle of King Philip the Macedonian, to the
people of Athens. A Legate or Ambassador is

Sanctum populis per saecula nomen:

As for the several Forms of Ambassy, or Ambassadors, though they pass by
diverse names, yet they are specifically one and the same Office or Function,
having all the same reason, aim, or end; which is, to transact affairs abroad,
for the good of the Commonwealth, according to the directions of those that
send them. In ancient time, a Legate or Ambassador, many times passed under the
name of an Orator; according to that of Virgil 11. Aeneid.

Jamque Oratores aderant ex urbe Latina.

And he usually retained this name, either from the nature of his imploiment,
in case he were sent to desire or deprecate any matter, or else from his
Eloquence, which is the prime requisite and glory of an Ambassador. The other
usual name of old, was that which the Pope still retains, viz. the Nuntio,
which in English is a Messenger, according to that of Livy, lib. 34. Rhodios
Nuntios in Orb terrarum arbitria belli pacisque agere, which was spoken in
contempt of the Rhodians, or rather indignation, that so inconsiderable a
people should be so busy and meddling; for, those usually they called
Messengers, that were sent from such as either were not acknowledged Supreme in
power, or were but an inferior Nation, or who came with small pomp about
matters of the lesser concernment; or for the delivery of some dispatches,
about which they made no long stay.

But those old titles being antiquated, we have new a succession of new ones,
which are thus divided, according to the pesent custom of Nations, viz. the
Agent, or Ambassador in ordinary, and the Ambassador extraordinary: both which,
are one and the same in effect, differing only in pomp and splendour, but equal
in privilege. The Agent or Ambassador in ordinary, is usually a person eminent
for prudence; one that undertakes and performs the Ambassy with less outward
ostentation; who if he be Commissionated to reside with any Prince or
Republic, is then called a Resident. But this R^sident being for the most part
as a Spy, to pry into the Affairs of those to whom he is sent, it were far
better if that custom of Residence were rather exploded, then continued any
longer, it tending more to the prejudice, then the benefit of Nations. But of
all others, the Resident ought to be avoided, and not admitted in new and
unsettled states and Commonweals, if they mean to be safe, or preserve their
reputation. For this cause it was, and in this case, that of old, Ambassadors
had a retinue assigned them by the State where they resided, under pretense of
honor and respect to their Ambassy, but really to keep an eye over them; and
so strictly, that they could not so much as drink, or do any other necessary,
but with the privity of these Attendants. Procop. l. 1. de Bello Goth. It was
the same reason also, wherefore our Henry 7. cared so little for their company
here in England, at the beginning of his unsettled Government: And questionless,
it was in him a most notable point of Prudence; in all parallel cases most
worthy of imitation. Now he whom we call the extraordinary Ambassador, is (for
the most part) a Person of some higher rank and interest in the Commonwealth,
and therefore a far greater stipend and retinue is assigned him, to uphold a
Majestic Port, answerable to his own Quality, and for the honor of his
Nation. The former (according to the common acception) are styled ordinary
Ambassadors, Agents, and Residents; the later Extraordinary, sent usually upon
eminent and extraordinary occasions. Thus you see all the difference betwixt
them is only extrinsecal and formal, in respect of Ceremony; but de Jure,
according to the nature and end of the thing, they have the same intrinsecal
value, and an equal right to the same immunities and privileges. An example of
the former we have in the late Agencies of those two Learned, but unfortunate
Gentlemen, Doctor Dorisla, and Master Anthony Ashcam, the one most barbarously
assassinated in Holland, the other in Spain. And of the later, in the late
solemn Ambassy into Holland, performed by two Honorable persons, the one being
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, but both of the Parliamentary or
Senatorian Order. Now if you would know the reason why we have thus briefly
discussed the Point of Ambassy under the several Forms, it is partly for Method
sake, as an Introduction to the other Chapters which follow; but especially to
let both the Dutch and Spaniard understand, that the English have as much
reason to expect justice and satisfaction for the butcheries of their two
Agents, as if they had appeared in as glorious and solemn an Equipage, as the
greatest Ambassadors in the world. And truly, their expectations might be the
more heightened in this particular to hear from the Spaniard, in regard the
matter has been so plainly laid open by a Doctor of their own, of no mean rank
and abilities, by name Don Augustine de Hierro, Knight of the Order of
Calatrava, and Fiscal (or Attorney General) of the Council Royal, in a Charge
by him exhibited against the Murderers of Master Ashcam; in which Charge, he
thus determins it: That whether the person sent lately by the Parliament of
England, was an Ambassador, an Agent, or Resident, as the Murderers term him,
or most properly an Master Ashcam was verus Legaius.
Orator, ( for, he came (says he) to deprecate Peace.) Or, whether he were all
these, or any of these, it matters not; for, any of these may style him a
Legate, and make him deserv that title; and the same security is due unto all
those titles, the same Privilege, the same Immunity. And therefore, since the
same Doctor has also very clearly proved, that the Church cannot give
sanctuary to the Murderers of the meanest of Public Ministers, (who are all
equal in point of indemnity) the more highly it reflects upon Spain, that the
Rights of Ambassadors should receive so high a violation, and yet that there
should have been so long a delay of justice (upon an unjustifiable pretense)
against Master Ascham's Murderers.

CHAP. II. That All Supreme Powers in possession (Jure vel Injuria) have a
Right to send Agents or Ambassadors, to negotiate with Forain States and
Princes.
BEcause, upon perusal of the Printed Answerer, set forth by that Scot, who
entitles himself the Lord Mac Donnel, and Resident of the King of Great
Britain; it appears he will not vouchsafe our late Ambassadors at the Hague, to
wear the style of English Ambassadors, but in his Title page disdainfully calls
them the English Ambassadors [as they style themselves.] And in the beginning
of his pretended Answer, nicknames them Ab-Legats in the Diminutive, and calls
them pretended Ambassadors, as if they merited not the title of true Legates or
Ambassadors; it cannot be amiss therefore, to show this Scot, and all the world,
upon what frail terms, both his Lordship and the Residentship must needs stand,
having so aerie a foundation to support them, as his Master's Kingship of Great
Britain; for we suppose it will be a hard matter for him to prove his
Residentship, till his young Master can make good the Kingship; it being a
Maxim received by all Civilians and Statesmen, that the Right of Ambassy in all
Countries, as do all the other Rights of Supremacy, ever follow such as are in
possession. Hugo Grotius (lib. 2. de Jur. bell. cap. 18.) is very positive to
this purpose, where he tells you, Reges qui bello solenni victi, regnoque exuti
sunt, cum alis Regni bonis and jus Legandi perdiderunt, that is, Kings who
submit their Fortunes to the trial of a set-war, and then are driven out of
the kingdom by force of arms, as they forfeit all other right of sovereignty,
so also they lose the very right of Ambassy. The reason to me is evident,
because the chief end of Ambassies (for the most part) is to make Contracts;
and it is absurd to imagine, that one man will contract with another, when it is
not in the power of that other to make good the Contract, because there is a
third Power in possession, which will hinder him from the performance. Now, all
States and Princes measure the points of Ambassy and Negotiation by convenience
and Reason of State. They consider not what right or wrong is done to a
Brother-Prince, in his title, in the great Revolu^ions of Government, but how
to frame themselves after the motion of the Great Wheel, as may tend most to
the security of their own titles, and advantage of their own estates: For, if
in stead of receiving Ambassies and Addresses from Forain Powers, they should
first require satisfaction touching the rights of those which send, then the
whole time of Princes would be spent in admitting mutual appeals to and from
one another, to no purpose; since if that were admitted, there would be no end
of dispute in the world touching titles; which were they all ravelled to their
Originals, would puzzle the ablest head-pieces under Heaven to prove their
equity and innocence in the Cradle. Very suitable hereunto is that passage of
Cardinal D'Ossat in one of his Epistles, who tells you, That Princes, when
Ambassadors are addressed to them, never inform themselves of the rights and
titles of those Princes from whom they are sent; But whether they have
possession of the Forces and Power of those places from whence the Ambassadors
are employed. For, it would be an endless task, and require an infallible true
History of the world (which is not to be made by man) if all the Ambassadors,
before their Receptions, should be obliged first to prove clearly to the world,
the just right by which their masters derive those Titles and Jurisdictions,
which they assume to themselves.

Thus far it seems by reason of State, that the right of Ambassy unquestionably
follows such only as are in possession; let us confirm it farther (as briefly
as may be) by testimonies of Writers, with the practices of States and princes,
both ancient and modern, who never used to inquire who they were that sent, but
whether the senders of an Embassage were invested with a Power to command the
places from whence they sent: In this case, they always treat with the Power,
but never dispute it, well knowing few of their own Dominions have had an
unquestionable beginning, Respectu primae Causae omnia Imperia legitima esse
concedo, sed si quer as de causis intermediis, etc. All Governments (says
Bodin, l. 1. c. 6.) are lawful in respect of the first cause, viz. God; but if
we regard secondary causes, most Governments have had their foundation upon
Force and Violence: which must needs be granted, considering how from time to
time the Sword has given Law to all the world. Whereupon, the Civilians,
weighing, that the course of Government has run altogether in this Channel,
have proportioned their Maxims more suitable to the necessities and public
conveniences of mankind, then satisfactory to the reasons of private and
particular men; because, will they, nill they, such must be concluded within
the rules of submission, to what form of Government soever shall be erected by
those that carry the Sword. For, in this case, if a Parliament, or Senate, that
has the Sword, shall resolve one way, and those that are un-armed, resolve
another, then there can be no Government at all, but all will be left at
random, to a continued succession of discontents contests, and confusions,
which must needs end in the ruin of the unarmed party. Wherefore, it is a Rule
with them, That the ancient Majesty of a Kingdom or Commonweal, continues no
longer, if it be changed either by a greater Power, or by consent of the
People: where you see, Force and Power are put in equal balance with popular
consent, in relation to Government. And as if it were the best pedigree of
Supremacy, they define the Supreme Authority to be that which holds claim from
God and the Sword; and therefore is as it were the Author of its own Original,
without dependence on any other; so that (say that) every Commonwealth, be it
never so small, which acknowledges no Superior, but God and the Sword, has a
right of Majesty, or Political Supremacy. So says Besoldus, de Juribus Majest.
cap. 1. Arnisaeus, de Majest. cap. 1. and Cammonus de Majest. Disput. 1. These.
70.75. etc. with many others.

Seeing therefore, that an uncontrolable Power of the sword, in plenary
possession of any Nation, instates him or them whose Sword it is, with all the
rights of Majesty, much more then may they be claimed by the Parliament of
England, to whom God has given a commanding Sword, which they lawfully hold in
the behalf, and by consent of the people. And therefore questionless, no State,
or Prince, where he sees such an established Power, can in reason question
those rights, or pretend ground not to own the Power, as in all other rights,
so more especially in the right of Ambassy, which is one of the fairest Flowers
in the Garland of Majesty. For, (as it has been observed by the Oracle of our
Laws, 4. Instit. c. 26.) they, and none but they, who enjoy the rights of
Majesty, or Supremacy, have a right of Ambassy. It must be from a Sovereign, to
a Sovereign Power and Authority.

Thus far now, our Assertion stands unquestionable; therefore, for
illustration, it must needs be much more clear, if we consider, that the
benefit of Ambassy has been often allowed, even to such as were not solely
Supreme, nor in the plenary possession of any Nation. Thus in a Nation divided
by Civil War, where the Supreme Power is in Controversy, both the Parties are
allowed an equal right of Ambassy, by Hugo Grotius, l. 2. c. 18. Thus in a
popular division at Syracusa, the one Party within the City sent an Embassage
to the other Party without, under the command of Andronodorus. The like was
done by Caius Manlius, one of Catiline's Fellows, to Q. Martins; and by Brutus
and Cassius to Lepidus and Antony, Livius, l. 14. Salust Catil. who give them
that were sent the name of Legates, which were the same that we now call Agents
and Ambassadors. Also, according to this Rule, during the late Contest here
betwixt King and Parliament, it was, that the Hollander made no scruple to
entertain Agents equally from both the Parties. Nor has this Privilege been
allowed those only, who in National sidings, have had some tolerable pretense
to a formal Authority; but has been indulged also to mere Outlaws, such as
the Montaneers in the Alps, the Assassins of old, the Pickeroons in France, the
Banditi in Italy, the Tories in Ireland, and the Mosse-Troopers in the Marches
between England and Scotland. Q. Curtius, lib. 7. tells us of twenty thousand
such Fellows, that were got into a Body to make Head against Alexander the
Great, and it came to a Fight, in which Alexander himself being wounded in the
Forlorn, it came to a Parley. Itaque postero die miserunt Legatos ad Regem.
Whereupon, the next day they sent Ambassadors to the King, who received them
with all Ceremony, and caused them to sit in his presence. This were the more
to be admired, but that we find Caesar himself, lib. 3. bell. civ. giving the
like honor to those Fugitives, that lurked in the Straits and Passes of the
Pyrenaean Mountains, and affirming it lawful. Yet questionless, these instances
are not to be drawn into custom, but may be imitated and approved, only upon
the like occasional accidents, and emergents of necessity.

How ever, in regard some have openly in Print endeavored to abridge us in
England of our right and interest in this particular, it is requisite we should
draw the Lines of Ambassy, in its utmost Extent and Latitude, that our
Inferences and Inductions may arise the more easy: For, if they who upon the
occasion of a National Rupture, can (at the most) lay claim to no more but the
name of a Party, have been, and are admitted into a participation of this right
by States and Princes: and if so be, that an irregular number of Outlaws, and
Renegade's, formed into a formidable Body, have been received likewise into the
same Privilege by the greatest Monarchs, then a minori ad majus, the Argument
must needs hold good as to those in England, who are actually, and justly
invested with the Supreme Power, and settled in the Noblest form. If scattered
Recollections of Fugitives, Malcontents, and frighted Remnants, have assumed
this honor to themselves much more may this Noble Nation of England, who
though she grew old, crooked, and deformed, under the pressures and oppressions
of successive Tyrants, yet having shaken them off, baffled them beyond
recovery, and settled her self in the condition of a Sovereign Free State, seems
now to renew her Age again like the Eagle, under the sweet Influences of
Liberty. She is now her self, in full possession of her own; therefore let the
world know in this case she understands, that Possession is more then eleven
points of the Law. For, why was it, that the late King of England (as one
observes) having sworn a League with the King of Spain, expressly also as he was
King of Portugal, did notwithstanding receive diverse Ambassadors from the new
King of Portugal, yet was not judged, either in England or Spain, to have
broken his former Oath and League? Why was it (I say) but only to show that
Contracts and Oaths made betwixt Political persons, are made in a Political
sense, viz. with a tacit condition of holding their Possessions? These being
gone, their Public Relations and Concernments immediately expire. How came it to
pass that the Spaniard being driven out of the United Provinces, and they by
him declared Rebels, that yet they assuming to themselves a right of Ambassy,
had their Ambassadors so readily received by Henry of France, and Elizabeth of
England, but that both those Princes well understood the lawfulness of the
action, and that they had Jure Gentium, a right so to send, the Spaniard being
dispossessed there? It was the same reason too, that moved the Hollander to
entertain Agents and Ambassadors from this State; before the death of the
Tyrant, for that part which we then possessed; and since his death, for the
whole now in possession; in this acknowledging possession a sufficient ground
for us to send, as for themselves to receive our Ambassadors. The
acknowledgements given us likewise by the Ambassadors and Agents of Spain,
Portugal, Venice, Florence, and Genoa, do declare the same.

How then comes it to pass, that the name of a King of Great Britain, has
been so rife among the Provinces, when they know the young Scot, is so far
from having a Foot in the Noblest part of Britain, England, that he is in a
manner outed too in Scotland? What face too, (but that a Scot can face any
thing) had this Scot, to deny our Ambassadors the name of English
Ambassadors, and dubbe himself with a Title including a Right to England,
where, his Master is never like to take the Air again, if (he have his due)
unless it be upon a Scaffold? But well may he own the Title, when some of the
Dutch have been so forward to give it; yea, and under that name, do more then
give him Audience in their great Assembly.

Though they have many Bodies of Supremacy in the Netherlands, yet we can
acknowledge but one Supreme in England, which is the Parliament; who being
seated with full Power in the Peoples Right, can admit of no Competitor, nor
permit any other Nation to impose one upon them, or dispute their Title; but
have reason to expect the same acknowledgements, that ever have been given to
all Supreme Powers in possession, according to the Custom of Nations; which if
any Nation shall deny, or take occasion to prevaricate in this point, they may
in time understand, that England, established in this new Form, stands fully
possessed, not only by Right of War, but also according to the Right of Nature,
and the ancient Laws and Customs of the Nation, being eminently adorned with
all the Rights and Privileges of the People; And that she may now have as
great abilities as ever, to assert her own Independency upon other Powers, and
make her self as considerable, either in enmity, or friendship, as the proudest
of her enemies.

CHAP. III. That Contracts and Alliances made betwixt States and Princes, do
not relate singly and personally to themselves; but are made Jure Populi, in
the behalf, and for the benefit of the People.
Where as it has been alleged by the Resident of the King of Scots, that the
ancient and successive Contracts and Friendships betwixt England and the United
Provinces, were made between them and the successive Kings of England, and not
with England otherwise considered; whereby he seems to affirm, that the validity
of such Contracts depends upon, and expires with the persons of the Kings of
England, or with the Kingly Government, excluding the interest of the People
from being Principal in them; therefore it cannot be inexpedient in that point,
to manifest the ignorance of this Scot, with the absurdity of his Pretense,
which so highly reflects upon the Majesty and main Concernments of the People.

For, without question, it is to be understood, that as all the acts of
Government ought to tend; so Governors themselves, (by what names on titles
soever they be called) are erected and intended only for the behalf and benefit
of the people. Even Kings themselves (notwithstanding all their flourishes) can
arrogate nothing to their Persons or Families, separate from the Peoples
Interest: For, a King is no more but a Creature of the People, by them created
for their good; He is their servant, for which they give him a Salary, or
Revenue, adorning him with splendid Titles of Majesty, and with all the
Immunities, Privileges, and Prerogatives of Government, which are no way
inherent in his own Person or Family, but Ornaments bestowed upon him, as the
Peoples Livery, in reward of his service.

The truth of this very evidently appears in the Coronation-solemnities of
Kings, which all the world over are the same in substance; and here in England
the custom was thus. First, the agreement was made between the people and him
that was to be entertained as their King: he was made acquainted with the work
and service of the Commonwealth, which was to regulate himself and his Charge
according to such Laws, (that is, such Rules and Direction) as were or should
be appointed by the people; and for the true performance of this an Oath was
given him. Then the peoples consent being asked, and had (which in old time
here was wont to be demanded thrice) he was immediately taken into the service,
and his Livery given him, viz. The Royal Robes, the Sword, the Ring, the
Scepter, and the Crown. This has been the manner of admission in England, most
solemnly performed in receiving all the Kings and Queens from the days of
Edward the Confessor, and long before: So that you see the relation wherein a
King stands to the Commonwealth, or Kingdom, is the same with that of a Servant
to his Master; only here is the difference betwixt Kings and private Servants,
That those public honorary Servants having great honor conferred upon them by
the service, are necessitated to maintain a large retinue, and hold many in
pension and employment, for which purpose they are allowed an extraordinary
proportion of wages for their pains and expense in the performance of their
duty, with a surplusage of Subsidies or Supplies (many times) upon emergent
occasions of necessity.

This will further appear if we consider, that Kings hold not the possession
of a Kingdom by the same right as private men do their patrimonies. But yet it
is not meant, as if Kings might not have possessions as other men have; for
that is allowable, and has been known here in England, as may be seen in the
time of Henry the fourth, who from the Title of Duke of Lancaster, arriving to
that of a King, enjoyed still an inheritance in his own rights, as Duke of
Lancaster, distinct from that of the Crown; and fearing the return of Lex
talionis upon himself and Family, that as he had dispossessed others of the
Kingdom, so his heirs might in time be dispossessed again, therefore out of a
prudent forecast he so ordered the matter, as to keep the Revenues of his
Duchy entire, and settled them in such a way, as might preserve them distinct
from those of the Crown, that in case any new Turn should happen, his posterity
might (if they lost the Kingship) know where to lay claim unto their ancient
Patrimony. So then, we do not deny but Kings may have possessions of their
own, as well as other men, by inheritance or purchase; but those which they
hold in the right of the Kingdom, or Kingship are none of their own: The
Patrimony of the Public Exchequer is one thing, that of the Prince another,
Henry the fourth held the Duchy of Lancaster, as he was Henry, but the
revenues of the Crown as he was the King, or public servant of the Kingdom,
not out of any peculiar propriety that he had in them. Nor can it in reason be
imagined, that Kings should have any thing of Propri^ty in what concerns the
Kingdom, seeing in the first place the Regal dignity is no more but a
Function, or Office, and he himself is but supremus officiarius, the highest
Officer of the Kingdom, and you known, an Officer has no right to what he is
entrusted with for the benefit of another. Besides, we know, that if any man be
invested with a Propriety, he has a power to alienate or sell away his right;
but Kings have no such power as to alienate any part of the public Revenue.
Kings that have endeavored it in England, have been restrained; and not only
in that, but even in their immoderate expenses, by Parliament. Nor is it so
only in England, but many laws have been made and renewed against it in
Poland, Hungary, Scotland, France, Spain, and the Empire; for we read what
Wenceslaus the Emperor, Malcolm of scotland, and Henry the sixth of France,
suffered by attempting it, and what miseries they brought thereby upon
themselves and the people. Innumerable testimonies might be produced against
this power of Alienation in Kings, but that of Grotius, lib. 2. de Jur. bell. c.
6. may the better pass instead of all the rest, in regard he is in most other
particulars a little too rank of the Royalist. Patrimonium populi, cujus
fructus destinati sunt, ad sustentanda reipub. aut regia dignitatis onera, a
regibus alienari, nec in totum, nec in partem potest. The patrimony of the
people (says he) whose revenues are appointed to ease the burdens of the
Commonwealth, and support the Recall dignity, cannot be alienated by Kings,
either whole, or in part. Number and in hoc jus majus fructuario non habent. For
in this, (viz. the peoples public Patrimony) they have no more then the right
of an Vsu-fructuary, who indeed receives the rents and profits, but has no
propriety in the lands.

Seeing now it appears that a King is no more but (...), the Ordinance of man,
(a creature of man's making, as is to be inferred from the words of St. Peter;)
seeing he is but a servant to the people, bargains with them to do their work
according to Laws (or Directions) and to that end wears their Livery, and
receives wages from them; seeing also that the right and propriety of the
Kingdom remains in the people, not in him; and that the most which can be made
of him, is but an Officer, or an Vsu-fructuary, one that has no right in what
he possesses, save only to receive the Profi^s, or Revenues, in lieu of
service to be done for some other, viz. the Community; then it may plainly be
inferred, that the ends of Kingly Government, and consequently all the acts of
it, do in no wise relate to the Person, Kingship, or Family of any King, but
are terminated jure populi, in the right or behalf, and for the benefit of the
people.

Thus far our Assertion stands undeniable; and therefore for application of it
to the present matter in question between us the Scottish Resident, let us
consider, that if Kings are not for themselves, but for the people, if they be
Kings publico jure, in the peoples right, not in any particular personal
qualification of their own, then it merrily follows, That as the Office, so all
the Acts of Government, and consequently the making Peace or War, the
allaying of enmities, the making Contracts and Alliances with foreign States and
Princes, are founded and concluded in the right of the people. It is they which
treat, contract, and confederate, only they agree that he shall transact and
sign it: The power is originally, really, and fundamentally in themselves; it
is but Ministerially in the King, as a Public servant; it is for the public
benefit, not his own private, that he is entrusted to make a Contract; so that
whether you consider the public relation he stands in, without which he can be
no king, nor contract, nor do any other act of Government. Or whether you
consider the public end and scope of the Contract, it must needs follow, that
his own particular, or the interest of his Family, cannot be separatly or
singly concerned in the business, though it run in his name, seeing all is done
by the right, and for the good of the Community.

But our Scotch Resident alleges out of Grotius, l, 2. c. 16. That a league
made with a King holds firm to him, though he be driven by his subjects out of
the Kingdom: For the right of the Kingdom remains with him, though he have lost
the possession, according to that of Lucan -- Non unquam perdidit ordo
Mutato sua jura loco. --


To this I answer in the first place; that if you consider what is said before,
it must be granted that the right and propriety of a Kingdom remains in the
people always, be the King in or out of possession. Secondly, it is much to be
wondered that Grotius should so far forget himself, as in this place to set
down a position quite contrary to what he affirms in another, viz. c. 18. in
that instance before cited, where he says, That Kings, who submit their
fortunes to the trial of a set-warre, and then are driven out by force of
Arms, do not only lose the right of Ambassy, but all other rights of
Sovereignty. And if so, then without question also a King loses all claim or
pretense to any Foreign Contracts or Alliances made with him, in the behalf of
the Kingdom while he stood possessed: For by the same reason that he loses or
forfeits one right, he loses all.

Besides, in another place ( viz lib. 1. cap. 18.) he enumerates no less then
seven or eight casts, wherein a King may forfeit, and be justly driven out of
his Kingly interest and Kingdom; As in case a King assume more to himself then
of right belongs to him: Or in case he infringe those laws that he was sworn
to: Or incroach upon the Senaticall part and right of the people: Or if he
relinquish the Helm of government: Or give over the protection of the people:
Or make war against them: Or behave himself as a Tyrant or public enemy of
the Nation. In all these Cases, Grotius grants, that a King may justly be
deprived; and not any of these, but might be verified upon the late King of
England, and his Son the Young Pretender; who not only lost all Right, as
being the Son of such a Father; but by tracing him actually in the same steps
of enmity, has made the forfeiture complete, both for himself and the whole
family: whereby, as he loses all other interests, so without question, his
interest in all those foreign leagues and contracts, that were made with his
Father while he was in possession.

But to return where we left; the rights and acts of Government (as we have
proved) being properly the interest and acts of the Community or People, and
relate no farther to the King, than as a delegated Person, a Deputy or Trustee,
to treat and transact in their behalf; then, without question, when this
Officer the King, shall either for maladministration, or treachery in his
trust, be put to death, or banished, with his whole family, the Treaties,
Contracts, and Alliances, made in his name with any Forain State, must needs
continue in full force and power, to all intents and purposes, as long as the
People and Community are in being, whose Contracts they are. To this accords
that of Grotius likewise, l. 2. c. 15. Si cum Rege contractum sit, non statim
personale erit censendum foedus, i.e. If a League be made with a King, it must
not be presently looked upon as a personal League. For, as he says in the same
place, after Pedius and Vlpian, plerumque persona pacto inseritur, non ut
personable pactum fiat, sedut demonstretur cum quo pactum est. The person of
the Prince is usually mentioned in the League, not that the League should
become personal, but only to show with whom it was made. But it may be
objected, that the League with Holland, extends not only to the King, but to
his Successors also. It Is true, it does hold, as to the succession; that is, as
long as the succession holds; for, Leagues must hold to the persons of Princes
and their successors, as all other Political Compacts between them do, viz.
with a tacit condition of holding their possessions. If the King of Scots can
with the peoples consent, make good his succession in England, then he may lay
claim to the Treaties made betwixt England and Holland; but in the mean time,
He and his Family being driven out for their Tyranny, all the Right to those
Contracts is to be exercised by another Succession and Form of Government, that
is established in the Right, and by Authority of the people.

Nor can this Alteration of Government any whit alter the Case, it being a
right naturally inherent in all Nations, to alter their respective Governments
(upon occasion) into what form they please. As long as the people remain the
same specifical (I do not mean the same individual) people of England, that
they were when the right of Treaty was used, and the Treaty with Holland made
and ratified by the King in their behalf, so long the effects of the Treaty or
Treaties are in force, to the same ends and purposes that they were at first
intended: Seneca says, by way of comparison, Manet idem flumen, aqua
transmissa est, the River remains the same, though the water pass away; and
Aristotle 3. lib. Pol c. 2. traceth him in the same quaint way of allusion,
likening the People to a River which retains its old name, and is said to be
the same that it was long since, though a continued succession of new waters
do flow in the Channel; so the People that is now, is the same in specie, that
it was an hundred or perhaps a thousand years since, and is so called and
reputed; except it lose the name and estimate of a Nation, by being captivated
and carried away from their Country, as the Jews were all in time from
Jerusalem, and the Holy Land; or inslaved in their own Country by some Forain
Power, that holds them in Vassalage, as the Olynthians were under Philip, the
Thebans under his son Alexander, the Capuans under the Romans; or as the old
Britains were under the Saxons, the Saxons under the Danes, and afterward
under the Tyranny of the Norman Conqueror: When their National Power and
Authority is once extinct, they no longer retain their former interest,
privilege, or dignity. But none of these exceptions (blessed be God) can be
verified upon the people of England, who are seated pleno Jure, in their own
fortunate Island, and established now in a greater measure of Honor, Power,
and Freedom, then ever we enjoyed for many hundred years before; Foelices
nimium, bone si sua norint. And therefore, of necessity, they must be accounted
specifically the same Nation or people, that they were, when the Treaties were
made and concluded betwixt England and the Netherlands, though they be not the
very same Individual People and Government. No matter (says Grotius, l. 2. c.
9.) how the Nation be governed, whether by a King, or by many, or by the
multitude: For, the people of Rome remained the same still, in the various
changes of Government, under Kings, Consuls, and Emperors. When the former is
extinct, a new form ever succeeds, with power to govern, act, and transact, in
and for the behalf of the people; who being still the same, not tied to Forms,
nor altered by Time, overlook all Circumstances, and lay hold upon the
Substantials of their Interest and Government, as they stand qualified, and
related, both at home and abroad. And truly, it is very pleasant to observe in
this particular, how even Princes themselves acknowledge as much in their
Practices toward each other in the changes of Government: For, the Duke of
Burgoin having concluded amity with England in the person of Henry the 6. no
sooner was Henry dispossessed, and Edward the 4. invested, but he immediately
renues the same League with England in the person of Edward: Afterward, Edward
happening to be driven out, it was so brought about by Burgoin, that the Truce
formerly concluded betwixt him and King Edward, should in all things be
ratified and confirmed, the King's name only changed to Henry. At length,
Edward made shift to recover all again, and then Henry was once more dethroned;
which was no sooner done, but Burgoin sent again a solemn Embassage, to renew
the Treaty, and establish a firm League with England in the person of Edward?
It is to be observed likewise that during all these Changes, Ambassadors went
to and fro, and all Forain Contracts and Alliances were kept entire, without
the least question, on either side; which may serve to inform us of these two
particulars; That in National quarrels about Title to Government, Princes use
not to dispute who is in the right, or wrong, but apply themselves (without
farther scruple) to the parties in possession. And secondly, that however the
Governors of a Country may be changed, yet all the points of Alliance and
Contract, being centred in the right and benefit of the people, continue
unchangeable and entire under every alteration. It were endless to reckon up
all the examples that might be derived from the practices of States and Princes
to confirm this particular; we might show you how the matter of Government
being in dispute betwixt Queen Mary and her son James, (or rather his
Guardians) though Mary were dethroned, and her Sons Guardians got the better,
yet the amity betwixt us and Scotland continued firm, notwithstanding the
deposition of the person of Mary: But because the Scottish Resident seems to
grant that Leagues may hold entire in State-Ruptures, though a particular
Prince be laid aside, but not so, if the frame of Government be altered;
therefore he may be pleased to consider, that in the various revolutions of the
Florentin Government, when the whole frame was changed, yet most of their old
Alliances and Contracts were renewed still, and retained in full force and
vigor, as well with the States and Princes of Italy, as those of other
Nations. And as for the Hollanders, though of late they boggled with us in the
main, yet they would gladly have renewed so much of the old Treaties with the
people of England, as might have served their own turns, and not have engaged
them too far; the reason why they kept off, seems not to have been from any
strength of Argument used by this Statizing Pretender; but they had a stronger
Argument of their own, whose Premises and Conclusion lay a long time in
Scotland, from whence every Post they expected a resolution.

I shall close all with the testimony of that Learned Spanish Doctor Don
Augustine de Hierro, Attorney General of the Council Royal in Spain, etc.
produced by him in his late Charge against the Murderers of Master Ashcam;
where insisting upon the point of Friendship betwixt England and Spain, he
proceeds thus: That England (says he) should be our Friend in statu quo nunc,
and that Peace should be continued with her, proceeds from right; For, Peace
is not only made with the King, but with the Kingdom also, and though the first
expires, the last remains. For, put case, that Peace be concluded with a
Country, without including the King, either b^ carelessness, or some other
accident, yet the Peace stands good; For, so the Polish Magistrates answered
the Emperor Ferdinand the second. Faltando el Ray, se conservan con el Reyno,
i. e. the King failing, yet Peace is to be conserved with the kingdom. So Bodin
holds, and urges a pregnant example to this purpose, lib. de repub. cap. 4.
fol. 63. where he alleges the Answer which the Ambassadors of France, made to
Edw. the 4. King of England, desiring aid from France against some rising
subjects of his, that had driven him out of possession, and this desire he
pressed by virtue of the League between them; Which Answer was, that the King
of France could not help him, in regard the confederations betwixt France and
England, were made betwixt the Kings and Kingdoms, so that though King Edward
was dispossessed thereof, yet the league and amity remained still with the kingd.
and with the King Regnant. Just so, the Peace 'twixt the Kings and Kingdoms of
Spain and England, though Charles Stuart the King be wanting, yet it may be
kept entire with the Kingdom: And his Majesty himself insinuates so much unto
us, continuing still his Ambassador in England; For, when a Peace is
established 'twixt Kings and Kingdoms, People, Persons and Vassals, though the
King fail, and the Kingdom receive a differing Form of Government, yet the
Peace holds good still, because it aimed principally at the people and persons
of both Nations; and upon these terms the Peace was renewed 'twixt Spain and
England, in the year 1630. as the French Mercury relates it.

The Result of all then, out of the foregoing reasons, testimonies, and
examples, will be undeniably this; that Contracts made betwixt States and
Princes, do not relate singly and personally to themselves, but are made Jure
Populi, in the behalf, and for the good of the Community. Though Governors and
their Families may fail, yet their Treaties are as eternal, as the peoples
interest, which is their moving cause, and their ultimate end.

And therefore, as to our particular, it must undeniably follow, that those
former Treaties made betwixt our Kings and the United Provinces, belong to us
now of right, if we please to claim, or renew them, having been ratified at
first, in respect only to the people of England. No King can lay any claim of
this nature, but as he is an Officer of the people; For, that relation being
once extinct, there remains no Foundation for any future pretenses.

CHAP. IV.
THE two former Chapters, being as the two Hinges, whereupon hangs the main of
the Controversy; and having therein vindicated the principal points of the
peoples interest in England, our design in the next place is, briefly to refute
all the petty falsehoods and insinuations, which lie scattered here and there,
in the pretended Answer of our Scottish Pretender.

That which occurs in the first place, is this; where he tells the States of
the United Provinces, that the Predecessors of the present Governors in
England, were very inconsiderable in those days when the Treaties were made;
and that they had neither part nor participation, in any of the favors and
friendship afforded to the Netherlands: This he says, by all circumstances may
strongly be presumed. A very strong presumption indeed, it must needs be, till
he can name those Circumstances. The Parliaments of England, which were the
Predecessors of our present Governors, were not so considerable indeed, as
now they are, and will be, we shall easily grant; because their glory and
freedom was eclypsed by those unbounded Prerogatives, which Kings and their
House of Peers, did usurp unto themselves, over the Commons, who naturally,
really, and properly, were to be esteemed the Parliament; because they only
sat, and represented the people in their rights; whereas the Lords sat only
in their own rights, or rather by virtue of that pretended right, which Kings
(forgetting whose servants they are, and for what end they were made) had
arrogated unto themselves, in and over the people: This was the reason, why the
Commons of England became more inconsiderable then by right they ought to have
been. Yet take them in their most inconsiderable state, or in the lowest ebb of
their Fortunes, and we never see them so low, but we find them admitted as
partners in enacting of Laws, and reputed as principal in granting Subsidies,
and other Supplies, for the necessities and support of the Crown, insomuch that
no Aid-monies could be required of the people, but by the Commons consent. In
Queen Elizabeth's time, they were brought low enough, as appears by her strange
proceeding against Wentworth, that was one of their Members; which (perhaps)
had not been so tamely taken from a Prince, that had less influence upon their
affections: yet, as low as they were, the ancient Treaties betwixt Elizabeth
and those Provinces, were not made and renewed; nor were the favors and
supplies, both of men and money, afforded unto that State, but in the behalf of
the Community, out of the Purses of the Commons, in whose name and right they
were granted: so that we leave the world to judge, how nearly those Treaties
did concern the the Commons; and whether they being the undeniable Predecessors
of the present Governors in England, did not both partake, and participate,
yea, and were the Principal Party concerned in those tokens of favor and
friendship, which were then sont unto the Low Country Provinces?

But to fright them from our friendship, he tells them a strange Tale, How big
we are grown with monstrous mysteries of enlarging our Trade and Power. It Is
more then probable, that England, in this new form, will improve its self fat
beyond its wonted wealth and interest; forasmuch as for these many hundred
years, it has continued laboring and struggling under the yoke of a Tyrant, so
that it could not possibly arive to such a height and measure of happiness, as
it may now attain in a condition of Liberty. But why should Englands happiness
be counted an eye-fore to the Netherlands, as our Scot would have it? Surely
the world is wide enough for them both; and questionless, if England shall
thrive (as the enemies of it fear) in this new form the Dutch will then see it
much more concerned them (both in honor and interest) to have settled with us
in the relation of a friend, then remain in a state of neutrality. It Is but a
crude supposition, that they shall lose any thing by our Amity; but very
probable they may lose much without it. Yet in another place he alleges to the
States, that their Lordships having no enemy at present, will by uniting with
us, involve themselves in a labyrinth. But their Lordships may be pleased
rather to consider, it were a strange Wild-goose-chace, to be led about by the
way of Scotland, to settle an interest for themselves in England, upon the
uncertain favor of a subtle Tyrant and his followers, who in times past at
Court here were wont to dart the name of Rebel as freely at them, as they do
now against us; being men of opposite principles to Freedom, such as hated the
very name of the United Provinces; And if the States please to remember the
carriage of King James, they will find that he himself was of the same humor
and opinion, and the first that set an edge upon the tongues of the Courtiers.
In vain therefore does this Resident tell them, that their Lordships have no
Enemy at present: For, however, our English Fugitives and Desperado's (for
present ends) may seem to court them; yet if they had a while since regained
possession in England, and should the young Prince of Orange have lived to see
it, it would have appeared to purpose, that they are the very worst of all
their enemies. How much more secure then had it been for their Lordships to
have embraced the late offer of England in its present establishment, as a sure
friend, then to depend upon the good will of a deceitful Enemy. And whereas it
is insinuated, that a League with us would draw enmities upon them elsewhere,
they having no enemy at present; it will concern them to remember, what a
friend they have of the French, who only gives fair words, but hates them
mortally in heart, as appears by the continual depredations made upon them at
Sea, by those of the French Nation. Also, it were worthy consideration, upon
what ticklish terms they stand with Denmark and Sweden; and in manifest
discontent (especially) with Portugal. Not any of these will, or can, be more
a friend or enemy, for the sake of the King of Scotland: they are all swayed by
their own interest, and accordingly measure both their love and hate, not out
of respect to any single Person or Family: Therefore it will concern the States
more rationally to weigh what advantages they might have reap't by an union
with England; which had it been concluded upon such terms as were offered,
would have rendered them so considerable in the eyes of the world, that not any
of all the Friendly Pretenders round about, but would have been the more
inclined to continue their Pretenses, and the less apt to break them. Most
absurd therefore is that affirmation of the Scottish Resident, in saying, The
States may promise themselves more profit, repute, and security in Commerce,
England abiding a Kingdom, then being transformed into a Republic: For, as a
Kingdom, the actions both of James and Charles will tell them, Kings were no
cordial friends, nor indeed can they be; whereas being in the form of a
Republic the Provinces (had they embraced our offers) might have been admitted
into a nearer union and complication of interests, then ever they can hope for
from a Monarchy.

He tells us farther, there is a wide difference betwixt the Hollanders and us,
in the manner of acquiring our Freedom, The Hollanders (says he) were a free
people time out of mind but we in England have been under Sovereign Kings for a
thousand years, and were bound to them by oaths. Besides, he says, the K. of
Spain after a tedious war of 80. years, has declared the Provinces free,
etc. But the case is otherwise with us in England. To this we say, If the
Hollanders have of old been a free people, so have we been in England, and both
they and we in the same manner. They were of old under Earls or Princes, but
such as were limited by the laws. Auctoritas Principum er at plurimis pro
liberate legibus repetitis definita, says the Author de Statu Belgii 1650. So
were we in England under Princes called Kings, but such only as were limited by
laws. It was a Political Kingship, not Despotick or Tyrannick, as may be seen
in all our Lawbooks. Let one or two old instances serve for all. Bracton l. 2.
c. 16. Fletal. 1 c. 17. say, that the King of England has the Law and the
Parliament for his superiors; and therefore if the King have the reins loose,
and be without a Bridle, they ought to bridle him: For (as Bracton says again,
l. 3. c. 9.) The King can do nothing but what the Law permits him. Thus only,
and with this limitation implied, we we sworn to our Kings, as the Hollanders
were first to their Earls, and afterward to the King of Spain; but finding the
Spaniard to oppress them contrary to Law and Liberty, therefore they conceived
themselves acquitted of their former Oaths. Et Philippi, simul and omnium
Principum Imperium ejuravere, and (as our former Author says) bound themselves
by a new Oath to abjure the Government not only of Philip, but of all Princes
for ever; which course exactly parallels our case here in England: all the
difference now then, is only in a circumstance of Time; We have not had 80
years War to make good our Freedom; but (alas) this alters not the verity of
the thing: For, as the Freedom of the provinces (being really free from the
very first moment wherein they drove out Philip) did not depend upon the
Spaniards acknowledgement; so neither does ours upon the acknowledgement and
declaration of Charles, or any future Pretender of the Family. Yet
notwithstanding this, the Resident says, our case, in reference to the
recovery of our Freedom, is no more like to the Hollanders, then Milk is like
Ink. But for illustration, take this farther; were they oppressed in matter of
Religion? So were we; tied up to strange forms and innovations. Were they
crucified with an Inquisition? So were we with a High Commission. Were they
squeezed with Impositions? So were we; such as Ship Money, Privy-seals, Coat
and Conduct, Monopolies, and a thousand other devices. Besides, the Priests
proclaimed at Court in their Sermons, that All was the Kings, no man had any
propriety in what he possessed: so that the less credit is to be given to the
Declaration of those pious Ministers (as they are called) against the
Parliament, whose partial testimony is so much applauded by the Resident of
Scotland. Did Philip of Spain endeavor (through his Agent D'Alva) to settle
his Tyrannies over the Provinces by force of Arms? so did the late Tyrant
Charles in England, first plot a war, and then set up his Standard, and put the
Parliament upon the Defensive, as appears by the whole Series of his Councels
and Actions; whereto more credit is to be given, than to his Posthume Book of
Meditations, which the Resident has quoted with more affection than discretion.

Lastly, are our Proceedings in England distasted by some of our neighbors,
through the malice and mis-representation of our English Fugitives? So were
those of the Hollanders, through the malicious subtilty of the Spanish Agents
and Ministers, who labored to incense all Christendom and draw the world about
their ears, till Forain Princes came to have a right understanding of the
business: So that you see Master Resident might have spared his Milk and Ink
too; for, nec Ovum ovo similius; one Egg cannot more exactly resemble another,
than the case of England, in all particulars, does that of Holland, in the
manner of acquiring our Liberties and Freedoms.

Now he rails at our judging and beheading the late King, and banishing his
Family, calling it abominable violence, and such as the like was never heard of
since the beginning of the world. Therefore, to rectify the ignorance and
malice of himself, and his deluded party in this particular, some few Instances
and Examples shall be here inserted, to show, it is no new thing, that Kings
have been, and may be deprived or punished with death, for their crimes in
Government. We read of Amon King of Judah, that was slain by a part of the
people, because he walked not in the way of the Lord; and though another part
of the people were angry at it, and avenged his death upon those that did it;
yet without question, the execution was just, according to the Law of God,
which was (without respect of persons) that the Idolater should die the death;
and no doubt, the punishment had been inflicted by a Judicial Process, had not
so great a party of the people been addicted to his ways, and opposed it: which
opposition of their, is usually the cause, in all cases of this nature, why
Kings are not to be attached, as well as other M^^efactors, by an ordinary
course of Justice.

Consider Ahab likewise, who though he were taken off himself by divine Justice
in the battle at Ramoth-Gilead, and so escaped punishment by man for his
idolatry and cruelty; yet it was executed afterward to the full by John, upon
his Queen and the whole Family, who were utterly rooted out, and a blessing
annexed to him and his heirs that performed the execution. But some may say,
this fact was extraordinary, being done by immediate command from God, and so
not fit for ordinary imitation. Yet, for Answer, it is sufficient, I say, that
it had a Legal ground, viz. the ground of Gods ordinary judgment, which
commanded, that all offenders of the same nature, should die the death. Gods
extraordinary command, being superadded to his ordinary Law, does (as to us)
rather confirm then weaken the equity and justice of such a proceeding. In like
manner we read, that the whole people took Amaziah King of Judah, and slew him
for his idolatry: whether they did it by a way of Judicial process, or not, is
not material, but done it was: and if it were done without process, then much
more are they to he justified, that have the courage to imitate such noble acts
of Justice, by a solemn and serious proceeding. The like had been executed upon
Joas, the father of Amaziah, by a part of the people, for his Murder and
Apostasy. Profane stories, both ancient and modern, are full likewise to the
purpose. Romultes, the first King of Rome, was for his tyranny cut in pieces by
the Senate; and Tarquin (their last King) was with his whole family, cashiered,
the form of Government changed, by the same power, and upon the same occasion.
Many years after, Nero the Roman Emperor, was sentenced to death by the
Senate; which was not primum damnati Principis exemplum, as the Resident
alleges out of Suetonius. The Senate being afterward in time cowed down by
Heliogabalus their Emperor, so that they could not take the ordinary course
with him, used means by corrupting the soldiery, (upon whose strength he
depended) to put him to death.

The two famous changes made in the Royal line of France, depend upon two such
noble pieces of Justice; executed upon their Kings; the first upon Childerick,
the third King of France, who being judicially deposed by the Nobility and
Clergy in Parliament, the succession was then cut off from the family of
Pharamond, and confirmed to the race of Pepin, till Charles of Lorrain, the last
of Pepin's race, was in the like manner chastised by Parliament, and the Crown
translated to the successors of Hugh Capet, who hold the same to this day;
though two of them likewise, viz. Lewis the third, and Charles le Gross, have
been judicially proceeded against in Parliament. And though the people were so
tender toward them, as not to put them to death; yet they were buried alive,
being mued up within the melancholy walls of some Monastery, or else closely
confined within the Castle of Orleans.

In Spain too we read of Suintila, Don Alonson, the eleventh, and Don Pedro,
judicially proceeded against; the first by the fourth National Council of
Toleao; the second by public Act of the Estates of the Realm in the Town of
Validolid; the third, by the Estates of Castile, all for their Tyrannical
Government.

The like proceeding also was had against Don Sancho the second of Portugal:
also against Henry of Poland, that was King of France: Henry of Swethland:
Christiern of Denmark, and Wenceslaus of Bohemia: as also Edward the second,
and Richard the second of England.

These last are mentioned by the Resident himself; but that which he mainly
insists upon, is, that neither Christiern, Wenceslaus, Edward, nor Richard,
were beheaded upon a Scaffold, as was the late Tyrant Charles.

However, it is sufficient they were judged more worthy of a Scaffold, than the
Throne: and therefore it must needs be more honorable (after the late Heroic
Example of England) that the Judgments of God should be executed in public
before all the world, than that they should be stiffled in a Dungeon, or the
Majesty of them be less'ned by paltry private Assassinations, or poisonings,
acted upon Royal Tyrants and Offenders.

Even the practice of Scotland it self, will furnish us with Examples enough of
this nature; where no less than fifty of their Kings have been punished with
death; and the greatest part of them by a solemn Judicial Proceeding: as it is
set forth by Buchanan, their own Historian, who affirms it to be, More Majorum,
according to the custom of their Ancestors: So that of all other men in the
world, this Scot Resident, has the least reason to wonder at our Capital
Proceeding against a Tyrant, as a thing never heard of before in the world,
since it has been (from all Antiquity) the common practice of his own Country.

Whereas, he farther alleges, the Parliment's manifold reiterated Oaths, and
their Covenants, with above an hundred Parlimentary Declarations and
Protestations, to protect the King's Person and Posterity, etc. This must be
understood, with that tacit Supposition, which is naturally included in all
those Oaths and Protestations, viz. That he do not by any enormous crimes and
continued Acts of Tyranny, divest himself of his Kingly capacity. And in the
Covenant it self, as much as this comes to is implied by undeniable
consequence, the whole scope of it being qualified with this special clause [In
the preservation of Religion and Liberty] to show, that if the King should
proceed so far, as to render himself an irreconcilable enemy to both, the
Covenant did no longer oblige the Covenanters, in any relation to him; or his
Posterity.

But he says, The Laws of England favor Kings above the Laws of all other
Nations; and for this he alleges the parasiticall maxims used by Courtiers,
Rex non moritur, Rex nulli facit injuriam: Whereto let us oppose others out of
our old Laws more rational and sound; Non debet esse rege major quisquam in
exhibitione Juris; minimus autem esse debet in judicio suscipiendo, si peccat.
Rex habet superiores, Legem; per quam factus est Rex, and Curiam suam, etc.
Nihil aliud potest Rex, nisi id solum quod de Jure potest, say Bracton and
Fleta. and whereas he is up again with his pious Divines in and about London,
whose Declaration he much boasts of in the behalf of the late Tyrant and his
Cause; In Answer to this, he must give us leave to reply in such a sense as out
own experiences have taught us; that those whom he calls Divines, were the
greatest Carnalists, Formalists, and Fanatics, that ever appeared in any
Nation; Court parasites, Trumpets of Tyranny; the only Patrons and Promoters
of Slavery, both Spiritual and Tempporall. They were such (as most of the same
Tribe ever have been and are) men ignorant in the more necessary and solid
parts of Learning (both Sacred and Civil) who make a Trade and Traffic of
certain Set-forms, and maxims of Divinity; wherein being Traveled, as in a
Road, they cannot out of their old way, but immediately they lose themselves
and their senses. If a Truth (though never so bright and glorious) come to
clash with any of those trading notions which they call Orthodox, then
immediately like the men of Ephesus, they grow stark mad, and can sing no other
Tune to all the world, but Great is their Diana. Therefore, In those high and
weighty Controversies which arise concerning the Rights and Concernments of
Commonweals and Kingdoms (where their motions are eccentricall) little regard
is to be had to their frigid Conceptions, where in they are wont, even in Luce
meridiana, toto coelo err are; and in this particular it might be made good
(contrary to their Affirmations and Invectives) even as clear as the Sun,
According to the holy word of God; the Instinct of Nature; Right Reason; The
Laws of all Nations, and particularly of England; That Parliaments, or other
Supreme Assemblies, have a Power of Jurisdiction (both coercive and punitive)
over their Kings, and of altering Forms of Government, according to the
Public exigents and Conveniences of their respective Nations, In the meantime
this Scot may do well, since he often quotes William Prynn, to consult that
great Scotiser; in his Book entitled, The Sovereign power of Parliaments; as
also his own Countriman Rutherford in his Lex, Rex: who will give him another
Account, than the raw Pulpiteers of London. Next, he affirms, that the saying
of our Savior which commands the paying of Tribute to Caesar, confirms and
establishes Lawful Power. Herein we agree with him; For, though the means
whereby that Power of the Caesar's was gained were unlawful, and the manner of
its Acquisition unjust; yet it being once established beyond the control of
any Public Power, and having all Authority seated within it self, it
immediately became lawful by way of dispensation, having a right to the
dispensing of Justice, and to the exercise of all Acts of Jurisdiction
concerning private and particular Persons. But then (says he) should David have
acquiessed in the usurped power of Absalom, and Solomon in the power of
Adonijah; Jehoiada in Athalia's, and the Machabees in the power of Antiochus
Epiphanes. Alas, the case of these is far different; for neither Absalom, nor
Adonijah, were ever seated in a plenary possession, nor had they been
acknowledged Supreme, as were the Caesar's; nor had the Jews made any
recognition of Antiochus his Authority, nor did he ever bring them under a
total Subjugation, as afterward did the Roman power, to whom they then paid a
final submission, though they refused it before to Antiochus: As for that of
Athaliah, we find she had a submission paid for no less than 6 years, though
her power were usurped; and one main reason why the people denied it afterward
was, because she had agrieved the whole Nation with her practices of Idolatry
and Tyranny: for which cause, she was lawfully deposed and put to death in a
full Assembly of the Princes and People. 2. Kings 11. after which, they reduced
the Government into its former course of succession. Thus much we thought fit
to answer, as to this particular: But what has this Scottish Resident to do to
introduce these Instances of Absalom, Adonijah, and Athaliah, as Arguments
against us in England? They touch not the matter at all, there being as vast a
disproportion betwixt them and us, as betwixt light and darkness; for they were
single Usurpers over the People; but here in England the People have recovered
their own Rights, by ridding away an old Tyrannical Usurpation.

He compares also the Religion that was under Kings in England, with the
present, and says that in the Kings time it shone as a Lamp, more clear then
in any other Nation: But that now it is nothing like the religion professed in
Holland, nor indeed Religion it self. What the state or religion was in the
Kings time, I suppose we need not now dispute, it having been long since
condemned, not only by our Presbyterians themselves, but in the Judgment also
of Forain reformed Churches, as a profane medley of superstitious Innovations.
And as to the present, though we glory not in an external pretended National
Uniformity (the great Diana of the Clergy, and wherein they place all religion,
because it makes for their profit) yet it bears a proportionable conformity to
the mind of Christ, and the tenor fo his Gospel, which teaches us to gather
Believers into Congregations by the power of the Word, and not force men
promiscuously into a pretended Church-relation by the power of the sword, or
commands and constitutions of any worldly Power. This, together with a prudent
Toleration of different opinions, is the present state of Religion in England;
so that whosoever takes a view of the practices of both Nations, will easily
grant a conformity of profession betwixt us, and our neighbors of the United
Provinces.

He alleges farther, It would be more safe and profitable for the States, that
England should continue a Monarchy, than become a Republic, for that the
increase of England in a free State would be the decrease of the other. See
here, O ye people of England, what a Confession here is out of the mouth of the
Common Enemy, of the possibility of that increase, both in wealth and honor,
which our Nation may expect in the settled Form of a Free State, or
Commonwealth. And if so, then by consequence it follows, that all this stir for
a Royal Family, and Monarchy, is not out of any respect to the increase of the
public weal, but only to satisfy the ambition of a single Tyrant and his
Followers. And rather than not be so satisfied, he here (by the mouth of his
Orator, Mac-Donnel) offers up the future interest and glory of England, as a
prey unto the Dutch, in hope to allure them unto his party, for the restoring
of him into a Tyranny: so that you see clearly, it is a thirst of Dominion and
Revenge, not the people's benefit, that transports him in all his undertakings.
It is here acknowledged by himself, that his own restitution will be a means to
keep England from growing richer and greater; the fear whereof, he uses as an
argument to provoke the jealousy and emulation of Holland. The inference
therefore is natural and easy, out of his own mouth; that the interest of
himself, and family, is inconsistent with the increase, and interest of the
English Nation:

In the next place, he endeavors to darken the glory of God in our many
wondrous successes; saying, they are no good argument to justify a cause,
because the Turk has had as great successes as any. But what ever this Babbler
says, we cannot be so ignorant of the good hand of God upon us, as to let
those glorious works of Providence, whereby he has pleaded the Cause of this
Parliament and Commonwealth, pass under the common title of Fortune de la
guerre; The Lord having carried on this mavelous work for time and place, with
a concurrence of such remarkable circumstances, that the very enemies have at
length acknowledged it to be digitus Dei, as did D. Hamilton (before his death)
and others, who saw the stretched out arm of God in the late defeat at
Worcester. We justify not our cause by successes; but only behold them as the
effects of Gods mercy and goodness, owning us in a just engagement, against the
enemies of himself and people. The Turks design was to propagate Tyranny in
Christendom; ours to pull it down. His, only to increase his own Dominion; ours,
to exalt the Dominion of Jesus Christ. What he did, was by main strength,
multitudes, and help of human policy. What we have done, has been by a
despised remnant, inconsiderable, both for knowledge and number, against all the
wise and mighty men of this generation, who to their power and wisdom, have had
so many great advantages from time to time, that the decision of every success,
in our behalf, has been so manifestly written with the finger of God, that all
must confess, it could be no other hand but his that did it: witness the great
advantage the Enemy had of us at Naisby; the miraculous sally at Dublin, with
the many glorious defeats that followed in Ireland; the great deliverances
wrought in 1648, when by a small army divided into two handfuls, we with one
part quieted South Wales, and vanquished Hamiltons galiant army; and with the
other part, suppressed the many numerous Insurrections in Kent, Essex, etc.
Witness also that glorious deliverance (beyond all reason) given last year at
Dunbar, when by a poor handful of sick men, wearied out with watchings, hunger,
and incessant marches in tedious weather, and at length impounded within a
narrow neck of Land, surrounded by the sea, they did notwithstanding (in the
strength of God) defeat the numerous Scottish Army, it being accommodated with
all necessaries and advantages, and one of the best accomplished armies, that
ever appeared in Scotland. Add to-these (omitting many other) the late
memorable defeat at Worcester, attended with a series of many other wondrous
successes: and it is so much the more observable, in regard of that miraculous
power of God upon the heasts of the people, fastening them to the Government, in
a most notable time of trial, to the shameful confutation of this shameless
Resident, who had the impudence to affirm, that not the hundredth part, or (as
he says a little after) not the thousandth part of the people, but do
cordially adhere to the Royal Interest, and passionatly groan to be delivered
from the prevailing party in England, as he is pleased to call the Parliament:
whereas, all the time of the Scot's King being among us (which was about 28
days) courting and wooding the people with all manner of insinuations,
entreaties, and pretenses, he was not owned by any considerable number of his
old friends, or his new-reconciled Enemies of the Presbyterian party. From all
which particulars, (what ever other men may deem) we cannot but see the hand of
God reached out unto us, for the upholding of this Government, in a peculiar
manner, contrary to all the expectations and reasonings os worldly wisdom.
Since the drying up of the red sea, with the wonders that were wrought in
Egypt, and in the Wilderness, never have there been more glorious appearances
of Gods presence, than among his people in England: And therefore, none but a
profane heart will presume so much to detract from the glory of these
dispensations, as to rank them among the ordinary passages of a permissive, or
Turkish Providence.

The last that we shall take notice of, is one of the principal arguments that
he uses to hold the Dutch to his young Master's party; hinting unto them by
way of insinuation, that no Nation is so subject to change as England; that the
Earl of Warwick in 11 days, Edw. 4. in 20, and Hen. 7. in 1 day, successively
subdued the English Nation. It Is true, England has received many a sudden
change, but never such a change as now. Heretofore, the poor people toiled
themselves, in shifting one Tyrant out of the saddle to set up another; but now
they have driven out, not only the Tyrant, but Tyranny it self, and cashiered
not only a single King, but all Kings for ever. It is an easy matter for
particulars to supplant one another in Government, because the interest stands
deposited in a single hand; but when the whole frame of Government is altered
from what it was, and the interest of State lies diffused in the hands of the
people, it is almost impossible to alter it again, without such a tract of
time, as may produce new dispositions and opportunities for the effecting a new
alteration. Besides, it is very rarely observed in the whole course of History,
that ever Kingly Government was suddenly restored in any Country, after it had
been once cashiered by the people.

As for Robert Bruce, his recovery of all Scotland, 300 years ago, out of the
hands of the English; you know it could not be effected as long as Edw. 1.
lived; but advantages being taken the infirmities, debaucheries, and civil
broils of Edw. 2. the Scots made a shift to shake off the yoke; wherein they
were more beholding to that Prince's vanity, than the valor and virtue of
their own Nation. And whereas he calls Sterlin the unconquered, and fatal
Bulwark of Scotland, and tells us, that there they stopped the current of the
Roman Victories; yet their own Historian Buchanan confesses, that both Edw. 1.
and 2. were possessed of Sterlin by force of arms: and both their and our
Historians will be able to relate in time to come how that the Commonwealth of
England has done more than Rome, and made another Conquest, not only of
Sterlin, but far beyond it; which I dare be bold to second with this Omen: That
as Scotland's happiness will be promoted by a subjection to England; so now it
is the design of God, for the better carrying on of his great work, and the
good of that people, to bring them into an universal submission to the Laws and
Government of the English Nation.

-- Nec sit Terris Vltima Thule.
FINIS.

