Animadversions UPON THOSE NOTES Which the late OBSERVATOR has published upon
the seven Doctrines and Positions which the KING by way Recapitulation (he
says) lays open so Offensive.

London, Printed in the year 1642.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON those Notes which the late Observator has published upon
the seven Doctrines and Positions which the King by way of Recapitulation (he
says) lies open so offensive.
POSITION I.
THat the Parliament has an absolute indisputable power of declaring Law: so
that all the right of the King and People depends upon their pleasure.

To this the Observator says.
It has been answered, That this power must rest in them, or in the King, or
in some inferior Court, or else all suits will be endless and it cannot rest
more safely then in Parliament.

ANIMADVERSION I.
THe Observator has contracted his Majesty's words, but has kept the sense in
more general terms, and seems (though but faintly) to justify the Position,
by approving (I know not whose answer) That this Power can rest no where more
safely, then in Parliament. He means the Parliament without the King; If he
had allowed the King his place in Parliament, I now understanding man will
easily subscribe, That the King in Parliament or the Parliament with him, have
an absolute undisputable power, both to make and declare Law; and to end all
Suites of what kind soever, determinable by humane law within the Kingdom. And
here is the most safe resting of this Power (and here it has ever rested) and
not in the King alone (who claims not that Power, but is willing to govern
his subjects according to the known Laws) and much less in a any inferior
Court. But that such an absolute undisputable Power of declaring Law, as has
lately been assumed by the Mayor part of the present sitting Parliament, shoud
be resting in them, is neither necessary for the ending of suites, nor can be,
either for King or subject. If they may declare that for a Law, a fundamental
Law, which never yet was Enacted, or had any being; and deny the plain
undoubted Laws that have been Enacted, or frustrate them by some unheard of
interpretation, (as if such interpretation had been some mental (or rather
Parliamentall) reservation laid up within the Parliament walls, to be
produced upon emergent occasions, by their successors) they will have so full
an Arbitrary power, that the right and safety of King and people must wholly
depend upon their Votes. Which power can never be safe either for King or
People, nor can they produce one president that may warrant such presidents.
That the second Position.

POSITION II.
THat Parliaments are bound to no Presidents.

OBSERVE. Statutes are not binding to them, why should then Presidents? Yet
there is no obligation stronger then the Honor and Justice of a Parliament.

ANIMADVERSION II.
IF Statuts be not binding to them, there is no reason that presidents should
be. And he says true, Statutes are not binding to them, that is de facto, they
are not (for they in some things go directly against them) but de iure, they
are; that is, they ought to be binding to them till they be repealed by the
same power they were made, that is, by Bill orderly passed both Houses, and
ratyfied by his Majesty's Royal assent. And unless they can show better
reason then their bare Assertion: Presidents (as they are the best warrant so)
they are, and ought to be the limits and buonds of their proceedings. He might
have said as truly, That Oaths are not binding to them: and therefore neither
Statutes nor Presidents. But the Observator tells us (Page 44.) That the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegance are not endangered by making the Kingdom, and not
the King, the proper subject of power. And he yields reason for it. For (says
he) he that ascribes more to the whole Universality, then to the King, yet
ascribes to the King a true Supremacy of Power and Honor above all
particulars. I wonder what he means by a true Supremacy of Power and Honor
above all perticulars. Surely, he means nothing but priority of place, and
height of Title; for he is allowed little power over some particulars, namely,
over the Members of either house, and whom else they please to exempt (as they
did Sergeant Major Skippon for his power and commands. But this distinction
helps them: The Members of either House are sharers in that Supremacy which
is in the Universality and above his; and by the power of that Supremacy they
can exempt whom they please from the power of this, inferior (pardon the
phrase, absurdities cannot be expressed without a Soclecisme) Supremacy. Uery
good: But in good sober sadness, does the Observator think this distinction
was thought on by the Framers and enjoyners of that Oath, or that the Members
of the House, at their entering the House did take their Oath to the King, as to
the Supreme over all, with exeption of themselves, or reservation of an higher
Supremacy to themselves, when they should be entered? It is hardly credible; Nor
do all (that desire to tender all due honor to the Parliament) believe that
they are so the Universality, or the Kingdom, as the Observator presumes. They
are trusted by the Universality and Kingdom, and we pray, that they may
discharge that trust, not knowing, but that a multitude of men subject (every
one of them) to error, may fail in their Judgment, and being not exempted
from the Common condition of the sinful Sons of Adam, may possibly, not
rightly discharge the trust committed to them, as well, as the King, who is
blasted with foul failings, and errors, and judgment. Me thinks, men that
so much detest Popery, should not borrow the grounds of their reasoning from
them: and I shall as soon believe the Counsel of Trent, telling us that thy
are the Universal Church, and therefore cannot possibly err, as that the
Parliament is the Universal unerring and unpervertibly just body of the
Kingdom. And surely, the Spirit of declaring must needs reside in a strangely
large measure in them, who have power* thus to declare not only Law, but
Oaths too; a greater, then which the Popes flatterers never gave him; and
hardly ever any Pope assumed so great: Quote constringam mutantem Protea nodo?
How shall these men be bound to do right, who so easily unty the knots of
these sacred books of Law and Oaths? why, yes; There is a bond that will do
it; The obligation of the Justice, and honor of a Parliament. But can any man
be sure* that they whom neither Law, Custom, and Presidents of their
Ancestors, nor Oaths can bind, will be always held in by the obligation of
Justice and Honor? Is it not possible, that they may (in time) find a power
in themselves of declaring that obligation void as well as have done the
other? The same obligation of Justice and Honor, is as strong upon Kings, (and
has ever been held more powerful and obstructiue in them, then in any state
managed by a community; and yet they dare not trust his Majesty, though so
obliged. The Observatour then must pardon me, if I desire, they may rather be
held in, (and hold themselves so to be) by the old obligations of Law.
Presidents, and Oaths, rather then that the Kings liege-people should be put
wholly to conside to that single oblation of the Justice, and Honor of a
Parliament.

POSITION III.
THat they are Parliaments, and may Judge of public necessity without the
King, and dispose of any thing.

OBSERVATOVR.
They may not desert the King, but being deserted by the King, when the
Kingdom is in destresse, they may judge of that distress, and relieve it, and
are to be accounted by Virtue of representation as the whole body of the State.

ANIMADVERSION III.
HIs Majesty sets down this Position in more words, but these are much to the
same purpose, and upon these the inference which his Majesty makes follows
undeniably, That then the life and liberty of the Subject, and all good Laws
made for the security of them, may be disposed of, and repealed by the Major
part of both Houses, at any time present, and by any ways and means procured
so to be: And his Majesty shall have no power to protect them. They see
nothing, that see not the misery, which may follow upon such a vast
transcendency of arbitrary power, if it were invested in the Parliament, which
(I dare boldly say) was never claimed by any Parliament, though in conjunction
with (the head of it) the King. Every (the meanest) Subject has such a right
and propriety in his goods, that without law, they cannot be taken from him,
though to be employed for the public good. And though the safety of the
people, be the highest law and that do (many times) give a power above other
laws, and against them, to the supreme magistracy in a state, to dispose of
private men's estates, yet the unchangable rule of Justice, must have place,
even in that highest law, and that requires a compensation to be made to those,
whose states or goods are so disposed of; and never gives power to uphold the
public good with private injury. Nor can it be imagined, that a State upheld,
by such helps, should not be able to make a just compensation to those, by
whom it was upheld. But let us hear our Observatour. They may not (says he)
desert the King. Gramercy, for that; I am glad to hear they have yet any
obligation upon them to tie them to the King. Yet I know not well, what he
means by deserting the King: if he mean it in that sense which he does the
Kings deserting of them, which (out of question) is his not assenting to
whatsoever they shall think fit; Then in reason, they should not, by their
disallowing all his Proposals, have driven him to dissent from their, and so to
have disserted them. Well; But being deserted by the King, when the Kingdom is
in distress, they may judge of that distress, and relieve it. All their power
then is upon supposition of the Kings deserting them. So that if it appear,
that his Majesty has not deserted them (as many good men believe he has not,
in the redress of any real grieveance,) then they have no such power. And
however, they claim this power only when the Kingdom is in distress: but
how, if the Kingdom be not in distress, or (at least) that distress be only
or principally caused by their claiming of that power which cannot consist with
the Honor and Royal Estate of his Majesty, which all men (by their late
Protestation) are bound to defend. If it be so, that we may easily discern how
far they may stretch this power, which they claim only in order to
distress; and that they may make as much use of it, as the Pope does of his
power, in temporalls; In ordine ad spiritualia. He claims no more, (though
some have said, he has right to more;) and the Parliament will need no more,
to do as much as he takes upon him to do with Christian Princes and States.
But they must have a right to their power in this case of distress, whence
have they that? why, they have it as the whole body of the State, and that they
are, and must be so accounted, by virtue of representation very good. But let
us consider his words a little more.

There is no understanding man, but must and will acknowledge (unless he
wilfully derogate from them,) that the Parliament represents the body of the
State, for those ends, for which they convene, as an Ambassador does the
Prince that sends him, in the manage of that business for which he is sent;
But this is not an absolute representation to all intents and purposes,
besides, whom do they represent; The body (says he) of the State. Be it so:
but it is only the body, without the head. And if they were not by
representation only, but really, the whole body of the people (if it were
possible, they should convene together) they are all but an assembly of
Subjects, of men to be governed, not to rule, to be commanded, not to command
their Head and Sovereign: and then there can be no virtue of representation
that can advance them to the power, which the Observatour ascribes to them,
when such power was never in the whole body, which is represented. No, never
such power in the whole body? I know the Observatours stomach will rise here.
Did not the Peoples consent, at first make Kings and conveigh power into their
hands? Truly Sir, not solely; but grant it, what then? Marry, he says then it
is a principle in nature. Quicquid efficit tale est magis tale; In English, If
the People make a King, they are more King themselves, or if they give power,
they have more power: and may resume and exercise that power when they please.
Excellent learning, and well applied, I believe he learned this piece from
Suarez the Jesuit. But the Observatour, may know; that that rule admits many
limitations: and surely, it holds only In causis totalibus, which the People
are not in the constitution of Kings. But suppose their consent, did at first
give power to Kings; when their consent is given for them and their Successors
to a King and his Heirs, can the succeeding People cut off the entaile, and
retract the consent their Ancestors have given? By what right? with what
justice? I know not, but the People may contract for them and their Successors
in the conveighance of Sovereign power (if ever they had it in their hands to
give) as any man may in the conveighance of his lands or goods: and that such
conveighance may be as binding to Successors in the one as in the other: and
then I am sure they cannot have power at all times, and in all succeeding ages
to resume what they have so given. Our Kings right (so far as it is derived
from the People) is of this kind. And if he had no other grounds for his
claim of Sovereignty, (as it is most certain, that he has) such a consent
once granted, were sufficient to bind the People that it cannot ever be
lawful for them by a major part of them (coming in with their Nolumus hunc
regnare super nos) to deprive him of that right. But surely, they would never
make so absolute a grant of their power to Princes as to divest themselves of
it. Good Sir, show me that proviso in their grant. But it seems to you
unnatural they should: I do not wonder it should seem so to you, who make it
agreeable to the Clearest beams of humane reason, and the strongest
inclinations of nature, (and by consequence, as you would persuade the world,
justifiable;) For every private man to defend himself by force if assaulted
though by the force of Magistrate, or his own Father, and though he be not
without all confidence by flight etc. I wish whilst you have such recourse to
nature, you would not forget Christianity, which teaches subjection and
obedience, and gives no liberty; (either to private men, or the mayor part of
the communalty) of resistance, but says, they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. And if the Observator be a Gentleman, he should tender
how he has recourse to nature in point of right, least he give occasion to
some Wat Tyler's Chaplain, to preach again upon that text.

When Adam dolue and Eve span,
Who was then a Gentleman.
He may find a goodly Sermon upon the text, set down by John Stow in Richard
the second, and such Doctrine delivered upon it, the use, of which would shake
his title to his inheritance, and the name of Gentleman.

POSITION IV.
That no Member of the Parliament ought to be troubled for Treason, etc.
without leave.

OBSERVATOVR.
This is intended of suspicions only; and when leave may seasonably be had*
And when competent accusers appear not in the impeachment.

ANMADVERSION IV.
HIs Majesty has said so much of this and so little of it has been answered,
(or indeed is answerable,) that I shall not need to say muach. Only I observe
the modesty of this Observatour; that he does not absolutely say, they are not
to be troubled for those crimes; but not upon suspicion only, etc. I know not
what he may call suspicions, but I believe, the best evidences, may easily be
held for bare suspicions, if they may not have liberty to speak out; and that
they cannot have, unless the accuser be first in safe custody, and brought to
trial where they may legally be produced, And, I believe, few wise men will
think it reasonable, that the grounds of suspicion of Treason, should
encessarily be opened before trial.

POSITION V.
THat the Sovereign Power resides in both Houses of Parliament: The King
having no negative Voice.

OBSERVATOVR.
This power is not claimed as ordinary, nor to any purpose; but to save the
Kingdom from ruin, and in case, where the Kingdom is so seduced, as that he
prefers dangerous men, and persecutes his loyal Subjects.

ANIMADVERSION V.
HIs Majesty infers upon this Position. That himself must be Subject to their
Commands. This sounds, but harshly in the ears of loyal Subjects; That any
posture wherein they can be put, can raise Subjects to a capacity of
Sovereignty, and reduce, their Sovereign to become their Subject. But he
comforts us here, and tells us, this power is not claimed as ordinary nor to any
purpose, etc. This is but poor comfort, it is not but it may be in good time,
if they please. He does not say, they shall not hereafter, or cannot claim it
as ordinary, and to other purposes then that he names. So that there may be
other causes, that may make them claim this power, as well as this. But
indeed, they need no more, if it be in their power to declare that to be the
case of the King and Kingdom when they please. But they will never do it, but
where there is a just cause for it; and the truth leads them to it. Truly, I
believe honorably of the Iustine and Wisdom of Parliaments; but I do
believe, that they are not either infallible, or that they cannot possibly do
amiss. And the Observatour must bring better arguments; (and I fear, he
cannot bring so good to make me believe otherwise,) then ever yet were brought
for the infallibility of a general Council. But I have said enough for the
present of the residence of Sovereign power in the Parliament, and the ground
of their claim to it, by the virtue of representation in my third
Animadversion. J shall here only give the Reader a brief gloss upon the
language here used by the Observatour. To save the Kingdom from ruin, (that
is, from Monrachy or being goverued by the King. The King is seduced,) that is,
he is persuaded (by his own understanding, and other evil Counselors,) not
to part with Sovereignty, nor to become a Subject to his Subjects. He prefers
dangerous men, (that is, such as would have him still to be their King
prosecutes his loyal Subjects,) that is, such as would rule him, and the
people at their pleasure.

POSITION VI.
THat the levying of forces against the personal commands of the King, (though
accompanied with his presence) is not levying of war against the King: but
war against his authority, not Person, is war against the King.

OBSERVATOVR.
If this were not so, The Parliament seeing a seduced King, ruinating himself,
and the Kingdom, could not save both, but stand and look on.

ANIMADVERSION VI.
I Thought this Position so strangly Paradoxall, and so apparently contrary to
reason and common sense, that no man would have appeared in defense of it. Yet
this Observator never blushes, nor blinkes at it, but affirms it stoutly. But
for all that I shall believe very slowly, That the Kings person can at any time
be without his Authority: Or that they may destroy the Kings Person, to
preserve the King. My Faith is not strong enough to believe these sublime
points, and mysteries of State: I shall subscribe thus far, That war
against the Kings Authority, (though in the absence of his Person) is war
against the King: But that the King and his person should be in two places,
will never (I fear) down with me. But however I Will see his reason: What Is
that? Why else the Parliament seeing a seduced King running himself and his
Kingdom could not save both, but must stand and look on. Surely this reason
is full of weight, and ready to burst, it is big with probability. I supose the
Reader understands his language here, by my former gloss; But if we should
take the words as they sound the reason would seem as strange, as that which
is brought to confirm. The King running himself and his Kingdom, a mad King,
or an Idiot (he means) and then 'twas fit the Parliament appointed him a
guardian. Ruining himself and his Kingdom. Is it possible; That the King
should ruin himself and his Kingdom. What? The King alone? Is he alone able
to do it without the people? It is hardly credible? If he have the people on
his side, and a pevailing Major party, I think the Observator (standing to his
own Principles) will not deny that he has Sovereign power with him, and
that it is unnatural to think the Community should destroy it self. But the
Community (he will say) is to be looked at in Parliament. Well, But good Sir,
may not the people withdraw the power of reprentation, which they granted to
the Parliament; was their grant so absolute, and so irrevocable, that they
dispossessed themselves wholly of taking or exercising that power, their own
proper persons? Remember your principles about the conveying of Sovereign
power into the hands of Kings; and if you can show no better Cards for their
power of representation, then the Peoples revocable consent, (and I would feign
know why it should be more revocable from Kings then men) you will find their
tenure in it very tickle.

POSITION VII.
THat according to some Parliamente they may depose Kings.

OBSRVATOR.
It Is denied that any King was deposed by a free Parliament, fairly elected.

ANIMADVERSION VII.
I Like this note better then all the rest, and am wholly of his mind: That
never any free Parliament, fairly elected, deposed any King: and I hope
(whatsoever his principles seems to insinuate) they do not believe they have
power to do it, and pray that they may never attempt, (at least, not to be
able to depose the King, or destroy Monarchy.

The Authors Protestation.
HAving finished these sudden Animadversions: I do protest in the presence of
Almighty God, with my life, power, and estate to maintain and defend so far
as lawfvlly I may, the true Reformed Protestant Religion. His Majesty's Person
Honor and Royal Estate, The just Liberties of the Subject, and the power and
privileges of Parliament (so far as I shall be able to know or understand
them) and to do all other things contained in the late Protestation. And this
I do sincerely, and from my heart, believe my self to be under the guilt of
Perjury if I fail in any one thing here protested. And therefore shall never
hold my self absolved by observing one, if I violate it in any other part. I
shall ever defend his Majesty's Person, Honor, and Royal Estate, as my sole
Sovereign, and the Parliament (next under him) in the highest capacity of
Subjects as the Supreme Judicatory, the great Counnell and Body Representative
of this Kingdom. And I pray, that all those that do cot join with me, may
either speedily be converted or confounded.

Faxit Deus.
FINJS.
ANIMADVERSIONS ANIMADVERTED.
Or a Reply to the late Animadversions upon those Notes which a late Observator
published upon the seven Doctrines and Positions which the King by way of
Recapitulation lays open so offensive.
THe Animadversor has attackt the Observator, just like a weak and degenerous
enemy, that durst not encounter his adversary in open field, but lodges
himself in some obscure and ignoble passage, to attempt at least upon his
Arriere-guard, not being able to pierce into his main body. The ingenious
peruser of both, I doubt not, may discern that the Observator in the conclusion
of his Treatise only recapitulated seven Refults out of His Majesty's papers,
in contradiction to his Antecedent disquisition, and the Parliaments
proceedings, that so one might compend ously view the subject of his discourse,
and as it were by an Index find out the consutation of His Majesty's positions,
by the foregoing Arguments of the book, which the Animadversor very
cautelously is pleased never to take notice of in the whole Discourse.

1. In the first position, the Animadversor grants the Observators Arguments
for the declarative power of Parliament in respect of the safe residence of
that power in the bosom of the Jutelary Assembly; But with this restriction,
That he should have allowed he King his place in Parliament, and not have named
a Parliament without him. But how could the Observator without affronting
impudence speak otherwise? seeing His Majesty in present is pleased actually
to have his residence out of Parliament, and will not allow himself a place in
it; but instead of concurrence with it, seeks the remotest distances from it.
The better therefore to see how the King and Parliament are in parts we will
first negatively and then positively open the present Controversy betwixt
them, which is the cause of their disjunction. Which in the first place is not
this which most men conceive. That when His Majesty shall agree, and the
Parliament likewise agree, for establishing some new Law or interpreting some
old, which may be for the particular commodity of some conditions of men
only, in the commonwealth; Whether then the King ought to declare this or
that to be Law exclusively of the Parliament, or the Parliament do the same
exclusively of the King: But positively it is this, When there is visibly a
danger ready to confound the whole commonwealth, and consequently all
particular commodities and persons, Whether the State if then convened, may not
lawfully of it self provide for its preservation, especially if the King either
see not the danger, or seeing it will not provide for it in such manner as may
give best security to Himself and Commonwealth: When therefore such a
Question shall justly arise betwixt King and Commonwealth (which collectively
is that we call a Parliament) it being of public interest of State, and so De
jure publico, it cannot fall under the examination of any inferior judicature
(with which those so known voted Laws, the Animadversor speaks of, are to be
found). For that is furnished only with rules of particular (not universal)
justice, for the decision of particular differences betwixt this or that man,
for this or that thing. Which rules being too narrow for so capacious a
subject, we must recurre to those that the original Laws of Nature and Policy
hold out to us, which must needs be superior to the other. The chiefest rule of
that is, Ne quovismodo periclitetur respublica, That by all means public
safety be secured: And every State must principally endeavor to hold fast and
sure our public sociable Incorporations one with another, from public
distresses, calamities, and destructions, which may arise from our selves or
other foreign Kingdoms; And whilst that is done according as Natures Laws and
Policy prescribes in Universal justice, then may well in the mean time proceed
to make or revise Laws of Particular justice, which is of particular things,
whereby we may commutatively increase our fortunes and estates one by another,
or by foreign commerce. But if those that sit at the head of the Commonwealth
shall let loose the holm of it, and so let it float at all hazards, or else
unadvisedly steer it directly toward rocks and shelves, It self is bound by
those original Laws (which surely may be some means) to save it self from a
wrack: And how the King is not invaded or wronged by having himself and his
Kingdom preserved from imminent danger, and how it is possible a King may ruin
his Kingdom, follow in its just place. In the mean time from these premises we
prove that the Parliaments method is most excellent; For in the first place it
endeavors to secure the being of the Commonwealth now floating at hazard; And
afterward to apply its self to quicken particular Laws for our well-being. Now
therefore the fundamental Law which the Animadversor so hotly calls for, and
the Parliaments squares by is not such a one as (some say) was never known
before it was broken; Nor (as he says) lies mentally or parliamentally in the
walls of the Parliament House to be produced upon any emergent occasion: But is
such a one as is coucht radically in Nature it self, (and so becomes the very
pin of law and society) and is written and enacted irrepealably in her Magna
Charta, which we are not beholden to any sublunary power for, but belongs to us
as we are living and sociable creatures. And no known act of particular Justice
or right to this or that petty thing, can clash with this, but must in equity
vail to it, as to its superintendent. For what can those particular Acts of
Law, which are to increase our private and domestic profit advantage us? when
it is doubtful in so great dangers whether we may enjoy our lives at all, or
no. It is therefore notoriously calumnious and inconsequent which the
Animadversor from hence affirms, That the Parliament affects an arbitrary
power, or the particular rights in ordinary course of Justice, as also the
safety of King and people must at all times totally depend on their Votes
exclusively of the King: Which in the following Position comes to be more fully
disproved: Which power we confess with him can never be safe either for King
or people, nor is Presidentable.

2. Positi. Parliaments are not bound to presidents (says the Observator)
because not to Statutes; viz. Absolutely; For the cause both of the one and the
other is not permanent: And it is true therefore which the Animadversor says,
that they are durable, till they be repealed, which had been to good purpose
had he ever denied it. For he rightly attributes no more power to Statutes then
to other particular Laws (which (as is proved in the first Position, and
further shall be in this) cannot in his case stand in equity, nor act beyond
their power, and that contrary to the Legislative intent, viz. to be a
violation of some more sovereign good introduceable, or some extreme and
general evil avoidable; which evil otherwise might swallow not only Statutes
but all other sanctions what ever. And thus in respect of the effect, they may
be said in some sort to Repeal themselves: For really in such a case they
become mortified, and can do no more for us. For the Parliaments case and
controversy (which the Animadversor still forgets to be of preserving the
whole Kingdom, and so, De jure publico) is of so transcendent a nature, "That
de facto it may not, and de jure it ought not to be restrained by petty and
mortified Statutes or Laws, in acting so much good for us. But how should
Presidents (as the Animadversor says) be best warrants? or how should they be
in the like degree limiting or binding that Oaths are? I beseech ye consider
the consequence, Such or such a Parliament did not, or durst not do this or
that; therefore may no Parliament do it? Some Parliaments (not comparable to
the Worthies of this) have omitted some good out of supinenesse, some out of
difficulty, to avoid a greater evil, which might be valuable with the good
desired; some perhaps has done ill, which the integrity and worth of this
abhors to think of; so that neither King nor Parliament have reason to plead so
strongly for coherence to Presidents. But both have better rules if they will
not decline them, which are, To direct all by the interest of State, (which is
never accusable of Injustice) And by Equity, which we may call a general Law:
And, though it be variable according to the subject matter and circumstances,
yet it is that only, which will not let summum jus, be summa injuria, which is
the supremest right that can be done us. And it remains to be wished that the
Animadversor would have shown us in this main business, wherein the Parliament
has gone cross, either to public interest of State, or Equity. To say (as
the Animadversor does) that this single and extraordinary case excludes the
King from Supremacy (even above particulars) and divests him to the naked
priority only of Place and Title, is that which blasts it self, unless the
Animadversor be able to prove the Kings exercise of his former power totally
intercepted, and the more now then in other Parliaments of the like
circumstances, or that he is ruined by having his Kingdom preserved. But
Sergeant Major Skippon (who is a particular) was not permitted, to obey the
Kings summons of him, therefore the King (says the Animadversor) is denied a
power even above particulars. But we answer that his case reports to that of
the Parliaments, and must stand or fall with the equity of that. In the mean
time he is so employed, that he could not have been in any more redounding to
His Majesty's solid happiness, which (rightly understood) would have produced
rather an excuse then an accusation. For the Parliaments discharging of their
trust (which the Animadversor fears so much) It is so notorious to all
uncorrupted and unbiast judgments, that we have reason to pray, that those who
so advisedly elected them, in a time of less danger to the Kingdom, then this
present is, be not more disloyal to them, then they are to their chusers. What
they have actually effected with the Kings concurrence, the Animadversor I
hope, will not except against; and what they desire further to effect (wherein
they so humbly and patiently have attended his Majesty's concurrence) is only
for the happier continuation of that other to us, and is to be reputed good or
ill, in order to that. Where then is the evil for which the Parliament must be
so scourged by all sort of hands? why did we engage them so studiously to wipe
off that Rust, which began to eat so deep into the letter of our laws, and all
our possessions? and to make new purchases for us of all our estates? if now
being assembled they cannot discern what and where those laws are to be found,
by the luster and power of which they should act all this for us. We have
blessings plentifully in store for his Majesty, but desire he would not reduce
the ultimate resolution and reserch of Law (our blessing) to be in his own
bosom, more then in that of the Parliaments, lest when God in his anger shall
deprive us of so great a blessing as is his life and government, that die with
him. I shall not multiply on the Animadversors Arguments; Of the possibility of
the Parliaments erring, and not rightly discharging their trusts: all which
might be more powerfully urged on one man confiding in his own singularity. He
might have known them to have been unanswerably refuted, and killed before their
birth. But since he will have the Parliament "so great practicians of Popish
policy, in respect of some infallibility, which he says, and they never
arrogated; save only a probability of less erring in that question betwixt
his Majesty and themselves; let me, I say, nakedly recite what the learned and
yet unanswered Divine in this matter (which the Animadversor so triumphs in)
has urged against the Papists, whom it most concerns, so to leave the Reader
to assume what shall seem most deducible to himself; His words are these.
Chilling. c. 2 p. 49.
* He that would usurp an absolute tyranny and lordship over any people, need
not put himself to the trouble and difficulty of abrogating his Laws, made to
maintain the common liberty; for he may frustrate their intent and compass his
design as well, if he can get the power and authority to interpret them as he
pleases, and have his interpretations stand for laws. I shall not need to
recapitulate the condition of our Laws before the Parliament, nor yet what
interpretations they received; Which interpretations were held so Authentic,
that they made the Law but a nose of wax, to wring some times this way, for
Ship Money, and for the lawfulness of it, as to make the King likewise the
sole Judge and redresser of all public dangers, sometimes another way for
legal monopolies, etc. Let the world then judge who arrogate most
infallibility, or have more made use of Papists or Popish policy.

3 The Observator says that the Parliament deserted by the King in the whole
Kingdoms distress may relieve it and the King. Here is asserted the public
Interest of State, which can fall under no notion of any inferior Court to
examine. But the Animadversor draws this consequence from thence; That then
every man's estate may be wrested from his propriety and possession: Quam urceus
exit. Here he does most palpably discover the looseness of his Logic and
cause, and how little he holds to his premises, and state of the Controversy
betwixt King and Parliament, which I so often noted before; and showed the case
to be De jure publico, and so political.

Commutative therefore and Distributive Justice being of inferior matters, have
their inferior Courts, and the apparent letter of the Law to decide, and power
to actuate what is rightly decided. But this controversy being De jure
publico, of a public right, it falls under the notion of another sort of
Justice, whereas particular proprieties and possessions, fall under those two
inferior sorts of Justice, as has been proved in the conclusion of the first
Position, which together with this show the sandinesse and incoherence of the
Animadversors consequence. Here therefore we will only note, that even in a
common distress (which is less then a public) without a Vote of Parliament,
or expecting any other dispensation of Right, a particular propriety may be
destroyed by a Community to preserve it self: As when the Sea breaks in upon a
County, a bank may be made of and on this or that man's ground whether he please
or no; And when our Neighbor Vcalcyons house blazes, frequently we see some
houses plucked down (where the fire actually broke not out) lest it should
consume the whole street. And equity (before Poesy) that in respect of the
propinquitie of the danger, we are supposed to be even in the danger it self;
and that the house so plucked down, is not supposed so much to be dilapidated
as burnt.

Tuns tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. But I wonder by what Act or
Declaration the Parliament has denied a compensation to the sufferer in that
kind, as the Question now stands? If all men did not know that the Parliament
has so provided for the indemnity of those at Hull, perhaps the Animadversor
might have gained the credit of some modesty in averring, That the Parliament
upholds public good with private misery. With the like grace also, and with
sufficient confidence does he tell us; That if there be a great distress in
the Kingdom, it is caused by the Parliaments claiming that power which cannot
consist with the Royal estate of his Majesty.

It Is prodigious to all honest understandings, That the near engagements of
war with the Scotts twice merely upon misunderstandings; That the design of
strangling the Parliament as soon as it was borne (for proof of which the
Parliament presumes to have had too much sufficiency) That having the bloudiest
and true Papisticall war in Ireland raised against our Nation, and that
against the Parliament especially (in the walls of whose house they have
already endangered the a breach, Jam perlucente ruina.) That even now among our
selves we see some, who with more alacrity are ready to employ themselves
against that sacred Assembly, than against those unchristian Rebels, and yet
that all this should be too little to evince the Realitie (as the Animadversor
says) of a distressed Kingdom; and who is yet more transcendent, That all
this should be caused by the Parliament, which aims at nothing but the
extirpation of the Parliament root and branch, and of which some part of it (
viz. the Scotch troubles) had being long before the Parliament had any; and
then I pray, how could it be the cause of it? How the King is head and we the
body, and how the King cannot be insulted over by having his Kingdom and Self
preserved from ruin, is proved at large by the Observer, beyond the capacity
of any his animadversions. Whether the people may revoke all they actually have
transacted to their King, is a Question very impertinently inserted by the
Animadversor, in respect of any thing that the Observator has in the
Parliaments case; which is such, That when the King shall have endeavored his
utmost, he will find, that he shall not be able to preserve the Kingdom in
extremity of distress, without the assistance of the Kingdom it self.
However this the Observator denies, that the people could make such a
conveyance of power to their Kings, as might prove destructive of humanity: So
that much of the Animadvertors Divinity might have been husbanded for an aptor
occasion. Neverthelsse, St Paul in the 13. of the Romans, tells us not what
power is the highest, but that that power which is the highest ought to be
obeyed. Again, St Paul speaks first of a few particular dispersed men, and
those again in a primitive condition; who had no means to provide for their
preservation. Moreover, its very observable that St Paul in the 3. verse speaks
of a Ruler, as our Law speaks of our King, viz. That he is not a terror to
good, but to evil works: The Law likewise says, The King can do no
injustice. The interpretation of the one must square with the other, and that
must be according to the distinction of Fact and Right. For according to Fact,
St Paul's Ruler may be a torror to good, and a cherishing to evil works; but
by Right he ought not to be so. Our Law says, Our King rather ought not in
Right, than that de Facto he cannot do injustice; For we know there have been
both unjust Kings, and ill Rulers. But least there should be such, Scripture it
self, as well as our Parliament, does endeavor to bind them from exercising
ill. As Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 18, 19, 20. The King shall have a book to learn to
keep the Law, and to do according to it, least his heart be lifted up above
his brethren. And Ezech. 46.18. The Prince may not take of the peoples
inheritance by oppression, and thrust them out of it, but shall be content with
his own possession, least other men be scattered from their possessions.
Wherein then has the Parliament denied the King that due which St Paul allows
his Ruler? Who he says (as is very observable through the whole Chapter) that
he may be a Minister to us only for good: And to keep the Parliament even
with St Paul, What else does it hazard it self for, but for refusing to favor
the King in an uncircumscribed power of doing ill? Which faculty he vindicates
to himself irrestrainably, And that by virtue of some Right and enlargement of
Law and Religion, even to do all manner of ill, if so be he shall ever be
pleased so to do. Moreover, St Paul has not, nor could any where repeal the
laws of nature, so that if the Parliament in its case has neither declined
them, nor our own Original Contracts, nor the present interest of State, nor
St Paul, Then I hope, it has kept it self consonantly to Law and Religion.

Out of all this (with what follows in the sixth Position) we may easily
answer "to the Animadversors Objection of Resistance. For out of those
premises it appears, That in the King there are two things only; First, His
Person; Secondly, His office, authority, or as St Paul calls it, his Power.
For his person, we hold it always inviolable: For his power or office, because
St Paul says, it respects us only for good, us very reasonable that we apply
our selves in obedience to that, for our own sakes as well as for his. But the
Court Parasites they are not content with this distribution, but add to the
person and power or office of a Prince, that which they call, The will or
pleasure of a Prince; or rather they marry the power or office of a Prince to
his Will: And so by that subtle conjunction they proving them all one (Quia
omnis potestas est voluntatis) then they ask us the Question, Whether we are
not equally bound to obey the one in all latitudes as well as the other? As if
we had contracted for the evil as well as the good, and that, as it should
seem best to the Prince we contracted with. But to that we clearlier answer,
That because the will lies under an indifferency of commanding the ill, as well
as the good, we may lawfully embrace that part and power only of his will
which is to good, (as St Paul says) which indeed is the very essence of his
power, and makes him a King: and we may reject the other, which makes him a
bloody Tyrant: Yet not so as to violate his person in any case, (no more than
David would King Saul) but preservatively to thrust as far from us as we are
able, all other bloud-suckers, who are forward to execute on us his ruining
commands; because in such a case he contracts his own ruin as well as ours,
and is supposed to be in a distemper, and in stead of a wholesome potion to
call for poison, which I think, no good or honest Physician would obey, but
rather resist those that would obey him. Wherefore in these considerations, it
is not here as the Animadversor says of the Parliament; Nolumus hunc regnare
super nos; but, Nolumus hos destruere nos. But of this in the sixth Position.
And for this has been asserted, I know I quote our own Gracious Prince, who
has been pleased thus to indoctrinate us in his several Protestations, of
venturing his own life to preserve us in the fruition of our due liberties of
Subjects; which we are sure we cannot enjoy from him, if by that Protestation
he intended to force upon us a duty and allegiance of embracing all those
tormentors whom he should send to us at any time, on any occasion (lawful or
not lawful) to spoil us either of our lives or subsistence; If so be so much
evil should possibly hereafter enter into his Majesty's sacred thoughts and
will. Of which therefore seeing there is never a known Law of the Land, and
that it has no analogy with the true Protestant Religion, and our own just
liberties of Subjects, we will presume that his Majesty abhorres the thought
of chaining us to such a slavery for his own part, both in Fact and Right;
though alas he cannot promise us that all his Successors shall do the like.
Wherefore the Animadversor does plainly abuse his Majesty in this Argument,
and does desperately corrupt his present cause. Thus we see what evils we may
thrust from us, and how we are bound to preserve the Kings power or office,
together with his person, as much as our own. But the Animadversor, together
with his Tribe, preach another kind of doctrine, from whence they know how to
raise better uses for their ends, than the King can do any; And that is, That
instead of opposing the worst of those evils which a Kings bare pleasure may
be that we should suffer by the hands of other persons, that we should I say,
simply betake our selves to flight, leaving all that we have in this world, but
our lives, to the Kings disposal, and to be transferred to those whom he shall
think better worthy of them than our selves. But in the Parliaments case it
has been observed, that as it is impossible (in a manner) for a whole Kingdom
to fly, so surely cannot that be required of it: This ease is not as David's (a
particular man's) was, who being in the right yet in danger, fled indeed, but it
was from one place to stand better on his guard in another.

4 No Member of Parliament ought to be troubled for Treason upon suspicion
only; especially, I say, in such a case, whereof not only the whole House,
but the whole Kingdom knows it self to be a like culpable. And that the
accused were in safe custody, is not to be doubted of by the Animadversor, if
the engagement of a whole Kingdom can give security which is sufficient
enough for five men, for ought the Amimadversor has to the contrary.

5. Because the Parliament to save a whole Kingdom once from ruin, has used
some power which is communicable to a whole Kingdom in such an extraordinary
case; Therefore it may (says the Animadversor) usurp it in ordinary cases;
because it may declare the danger what it will at pleasure, and it is not
infallible. As this consequence of the Animadversor is the same with that of
the third Position, so may the answer of that be applied to this, to which I
shall refer the Reader. This only will I add, That there is no need to create
an Infallibility in the Parliament to discern matters of Fact within every
man's cognizance; but to afford it only a probability of less erring or being
less deceived rather than a particular Individual; And that it is common
interest joined with its indirectnesse and integrity (of which the
extraordinary exact choosing of the Members at the beginning, it is an
extraordinary proof) may be a forcible Improbabilitie of its ever usurping
such a power in ordinary cases, which as it cannot be serviceable any way to us
(because ordinary cases have their most convenient courses certainly regulated)
so can it not be but extremely dangerous to themselves alone, and no ways
advantageous; Because in such cases we participate all of us of the like
conveniences. This Position the Animadversor is pleased to conclude with a
Ridle; That the ruin which the Parliament intends to save the Kingdom from,
is to save it from Monarchy. -- Risum teneatis amici? Are we so overgrowne with
that government, which our Laws are locked and cabenetted in, in such manner,
that the wounding of the one is the bleeding of the other? Or is it true which
the Bishops have so long pulpited at Court, that the raising of their power
must be the Eclipse of the other? although we know, and all the world with us,
That Monarchy was of a more extended latitude and absoluteness before
Christianity was professed by any Monarch, than ever it was since: Or more
coherently to the Animadversors own words; Can there be no abuses or Cobwebs
in Church or Commonwealth, but they must needs be spun out of the bowels of
Monarchy? so that the reforming and sweeping away of the one, must needs be the
sweeping away of the other? For our own parts, we will not make them so much
Son and Father, although the Animadversor be pleased to do his Majesty this
good service. What then, the too too true ruin of the Kingdom is conceived to
be, is set down in the third Position; And what Connection there is in making
Monarchy the same with that, let the refined'st and the rudest Logic collect.

6.7. Whether levying of Forces against the personal Commands of the King,
though accompanied with his presence, be to war against the King, is largely
discourst by the Observator beyond any force of reason which the Animadversor
has used to enforce the contrary. His Majesty acknowledged much of this to
the Scotts, whose preparations were in all respects like ours, and which his
Majesty found to be Non tam contra quam praeter authoritatem Regis. after he
had pressed the Animadversors arguments as warmely, as now he does against other
of his good Subjects, though yet suffering under the great calamity of his
Royal displeasure. But to say little of that which is so notorious to us all
of this Kingdom; Let us look over to France, and there we may see those who
were as much Protestants as we, that levied arms against their Kings commands,
accompanied with his presence, and yet our King never thought them the worse
Christians or Subjects for that, and therefore made himself a partizan with
them in their very cause; so clearly was the piety and lawfulness of such an
act at that time reconciled to his Majesty's conscience and understanding. All
which the Animadversor must needs confess, unless he will own the present
Declarations of the Rochelers, who with execrations of us say (upon the event
of their war) that the Duke of Buckingham's design was to destroy and eat
them up; and that they had preserved their liberties and Religion from any
adulterate mixture of Popery, had they never seen him.

But according to the Animadversor, It is impossible a King should ruin his
Kingdom, because he shall always have the Major part with him. But modern
miseries show us the contrary, witness the near depopulated Principalities of
Germany. But to answer the Argument with like reason, I say, that after a King
shall have destroyed the Minor part of his Kingdom with his Major, why may he
not then, by some differences in the Major part, be a cause even to bring that
to destruction too? But without supposing such a Fate, why may he not,
Nero-like, for pleasure sake, desire that all the heads of the Major part stood
but upon one neck, that so he might chop them off at a blow? Seeing then such a
King may ruin his Kingdom, (by lamentable distresses and depopulations) and if
a Parliament has the power to hinder it, it does that which it is bound to
do, and which is neither against the person, or genuine authority of the King
unless we can apprehend a Kings authority without a Kingdom (which is the
object it extends to and acts in, and which we have proved he may destroy) and
with out which the Animadversor must needs reduce such a King to a barer Title,
than he said our Parliament would reduce our King to.

FINIS.

