AN ANNIVERSARY ODE, UPON The Kings Birth day. May 29. Written for this Year
1654. being his 24 Year.

To his Majesty.

HAGUE, Printed for Samuel Brown, 1654.

An Anniversarie Ode, Upon the Kings Birthday, May 29. Written for this Year
1654. being his 24. Year.
To his Majesty.
(I)
THe day ennobled by your royal Birth
Is now again returned,
But not so bright as when to her our fumes first burned,
A smile so pleasant dimples not the Earth,
Nor cast the flowers such fragor forth:
Nor shines the Sun so clear, but hides his Rays as if he mournd.
(II)
The winged Chorus warbles not a Song
With sweetness crowned and Art,
But lame and wrinkled, such as wants the chiefest part.
Sweet Philomela's throat is yet unstrung:
Nor do the Nymphs yet dance along
The Plains, but sigh, alas they want the master of their sport.
(III)
And that is you, Great Sir, their joints are numb
Less them your eyes inflame.
The Birds delight to sing no accent but your Name,
And daring not, are either hoarse or dumb.
The Sun wants light too til you come,
For it is you must make our day, and not his sickly beam.
(IV)
Arise Great Planet then in your own Sphere,
And our Devotions daign
To celebrat your rise. Their powrs each quire shall strain
For acclamations to salute your ear.
The Sun shall put on looks most clear
Not with you to vie luster, but show how much yours his stain.
(V)
Nymphs to your name shall measure many a round,
Upon the flowery green;
And earth, by influence of your eyes, be gay again,
And every where with fragrant Roses crowned,
Which now droop on their stalks frost bound,
And being your flowers, care by no eyes but yours to be seen.
(VI)
Soon, with good Omens, dawne that happy day
Wherein your royal seat
Glad we shall with your sacred luster see repleat.
Then to the Pomp each eye glad tears shall pay,
Prayers each pious heart, and say
Long may dread CHARLES, your Presence make your Britain truly great.
(VII)
Till that day comes to the joy of Earth and Heaven,
(For come it surely will,
If Justice has her sword, and equal Balance still;
Or if to Muses to see ought it is given)
Think these dire foggs which shall be driven
Fore you, but sent to try how the^ your virtue can dispel.
(VIII)
^ffliction is the best of Schools, and gives
Luster to happiness.
You are a mine of Gold, think each year of distress
Another heat, by which Jove only drives
You to refine, till he atchives
Your worth fit for the height he means you, then his little less.
(IX)
As does the Sun by an Eclipse indear
Himself in our esteem:
So shall you brighter rise with a triumphant beam
After so many and so dark a year.
And long shine in your Native Sphere,
Whilst farthest seas shall hardly bound your power, or stars your fame
(X)
Good by its want is known: then dearly may
Your People after wars
Prize you and peace like Jems long lost, and double cares
With duty their late error to repay.
Be their joy many a geniall day,
The^ late, with Palms and Laurels crowned, afce^d the Throne of stars.
FINIS.

