A PROUD AND BLASPHEMOVS CAHLLENGE Given out in denuntiation of war, by
Amurath the great Turk, against all Christendom.
Coming with an Army of 1600000, men.

Emperor of Constantinople.


Emperor of Rome.


WE alone the only Monarch of the world, a great and mighty God on earth, an
Invincible Caesar, King of all Kings, from the East unto the West, Sultan of
Babylon, Sovereign of the most noble families of Persia, and Armenia,
tryumphant victor of Jerusalem, Lord posselsor of the crucified God, subverter,
and sworn enemy of the Christians, and of all them that call upon the name of
Christ.

We denounce unto thee the Emperor of Rome, and to all Nations taking part
with thee, unto the great Bishop also, all the Cardinals and Bishops, to all
your sons and subjects, we earnestly (I say) by our Crown and Empire,
denounce unto you open war.

We give you to understand that our purpose is, with the power of thirteen
Kingdoms, and sixteen hundred thousand of men, horse and foot, with our
Turks, and Turkish arms, yea, with all our strength and power (such as neither
thou, nor any of thine has ever yet either seen or heard of, much less had
any proof of) to besiedge you in your chief and metropolitan Cities; and
with fire and sword to persecute you, and all yours, and whosoever shall give
you help, to burn, destroy, and kill, and with the most exquisit torments we
can devise to torture unto death, and slight such Christian captives, as shall
fall into our hands, because we hear that you fall out amongst your selves,
therefore we will regulate you.

We will keep you as slaves, and use you like dogs in continual misery,
impaile your fairest sons, and daughters upon stakes, and to the future
shame, and reproach of you and yours, we will after a most bloody, and cruel
manner, rip open your women with child, and trample their children under our
feet; for we are resolved to bring into our subj^ction you which cannot rule
quietly in small Countries, and by a strong hand and force of Arms to keep
your Kingdoms from you; as also to oppress, root up, and destroy, your Sees,
together with the golden Scepter of Rome, and we will prove whether your
crucified Jesus will help you, and do for you as yours persuade you. Beleove
him still and trust in him, and see how he has helped his messengers which
have put their confidence in him; for we neither beeleve, neither can we endure
to hear of such incomprehensible things, that he can help which is dead so
many worlds of years ago, which could not help himself, nor deliver his own
Country and Inheritance, from our power, over which we have a long time reigned.

These things, oh ye poor and miserable of the world, we thought good to
signify unto you that you with your Princes and Counselors may know what you
have to do, and to look for.

Given in our most mighty, and Imperial City of Constantinople, which our
Ancestors by force of arms took from yours, and having slain, and taken
prisoners all their Citizens, reserved such of their wives and children as they
pleased, unto their lust, to your perpetual infamy and shame.


