AN ACCOUNT Of the Magnificent Public ENTRY, WHICH His Majesty of
Great Britain Made into the HAGUE, On the 5th of February, s. n.
As it was Communicated in a Person of Quality's Letter, who was present at the
Time of that Great Performance.
Licensed January 31. 1690/1
HIS Majesty of Great Britain having, as you have been already informed,
surprised the States and people of the Hague with his suedain Arrival into that
place, which prevented not only the Burghers from appearing in their Arms, but
the Lords of that Country from performing the great Testimony of their
Rejoicing, at his coming among them, by playing their Fireworks, and making
other public Demonstrations of his safe and happy Arrival; they besought the
King, though much against his Inclination, as coming to do Business in their
Country, To permit that a Day might be prefixed, and his Majesty be graciously
pleased to do them the honor, to make his public Entrance into the Hague;
which he yielded to, and ordered to be performed on the 5th of February, S. N.
Which began at three of the Clock that Afternoon: Which was carried on, and
contained that Variety and Greatness of Splendor, as to exceed any thing of
that Nature these many Ages.

There were erected three very Costly Triumphal Arches, imbellished with Gold,
Rich Carvings and Curiosity of Fantasies in Painting: That before the Palace
very Regular and Noble, larger than any of the Gates of London, and not unlike,
in Form, to that of Temple Bar, and had the King's Effigies on Horse back,
Gilded, and set upon the Top, the whole painted in Frisco; and had a great
Portar and two smaller ones on each side: The others were in different Forms,
with diverse Latin Devices or Motto's under them, relating to the King and
this present Occasion.

The King went out of the Back-Gate of the Palace, and fetching a Round in his
Coach, with his Attendants, came into the further end of the Hague, riding
quite through the Town, passed through all the Triumphal Arches, the Streets
being lined with the States soldiers, and crowded with innumerable Throngs of
People; And made their Cavalcade in this like Order.

There preceeded a Party of the King's Horse-Guards, with Trumpets and
Kettle-Drums: After them a Body of Switzers, not much unlike our Yeomen of the
Guard: And were followed by his Majesty's Footmen in excellent Order; Then came
one of the King's Coaches, with six Horses, carrying his Grace the Duke of
Ormond, with some other English Noblemen therein: Which was succeeded by
another of His Majesty's Coaches, filled with the Nobility: in the third, which
was extraordinary Rich, rode his Majesty, and the Here Overkirk, with many
Pages on both Sides: After which came the Coach of his Grace the Duke of
Norfolk, with Pages and Footmen, in very rich Liveries: And was followed by
that of the Earl of Devonshire and Earl of Dorset, twelve Footmen running by
the Side of their Horses, with four Pages: And the Lord Dursley, His Majesty's
Envoy Extraordinary to the States General, in his Coach; With that of Mr.
Johnson, the King's Envoy Extraordinay at the Court of the Elector of
Brandenburgh, closed the Rear; which making some Interval. There were a great
many Coaches of the Nobles, Lords and States of that Country, with a great
Appearance of the Ministers of Foreign Princes, Allies there, made a Noble
Cavalcade. The Burghers, being in the Nature of our Trained Bands, marched in
all their Gaiety, and made a Handsome Appearance; And when the King entered the
Palace, were drawn up, and made several good Vollies; and many great Guns,
brought thither on this Occasion, proclaimed aloud the Rejoicing for this
Inesteemable Benefit of the King's Presence. When it came to be dark, the
Fireworks, which were very Curious and Divertising, began to Play. In short,
the Night concluded with Ringing of Bells, Boon-fires and Illuminations, with
Candles set behind Transparent Painted Devices and Pictures, in diverse of the
Windows in the Streets of the Town. The Duke of Brandenburgh was just then
arrived, and the Elector of Bavaria expected in two days: And all concluded
with the greatest Order and Regularity imaginable.

Before the Court there is the Effigies of our King on Horseback, richly
Embellished all over with Gold, and on each side the Arch are Eight Statues of
Copper above the Pedestal of the King's Horse, and there is wrote, POPVLI SALVS.

And round about the Cornish is wrote, Pio, Foelici, Inclit^ Gulielmo Tertio,
Triumphanti, Patria Patri; Gubernatori P. C. J. P. Restauratori Belgii
Faederati; Liberatori Angliae; servatori Scotiae, Pacificatori Hiberniae,
reduci.

The Substance whereof in English is thus: To the Pious, Happy, Triumphing,
William III Father of his Country; Restorer of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands; Deliverer of England; Preserver of Scotland; Pacifier of Ireland,
returned hither.

And there is Painted a Sword weighing down Three Crowns, with this Motto,
PRAEMIA NON AEQUANT.

The Rewards do not equal his Merits.

And there are above One Hundred Motto's beside, suitable to the Pictures.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew
Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesty's, 1691.


