ANDREWS RESOLUTION TO RETURN unto GOD BY REPENTANCE.

Directed unto all the Elect Children of God which truly repent, perfectly
guiding them in the right way therein.

Right godly to read, as delightful to hear, but most profitable to be
practiced.

Newly published by John Andrews Minister and Preacher of Gods Word.

Being first seen and allowed.

LONDON, Printed for William Whitwood, at the sign of the Golden Bell in
Duck-Lane, near Smith-field. 1673.

The Author to the Reader.
IF thou do read or hear this work,
Only see thou do this,
Have care to mend thy evil ways,
Now past and done a miss.
All those that still presume in sin,
Not minding to amend,
D^yly this Book will wtiness be
Revengeful in the end.
Each day repent, oh still repent
With speed, I humbly pray,
Even for his Sons sake, Jesus Christ,
So sin is washed away.
The Book to the Reader.
IF that my lines could speak with voice,
Oh then most loud still should they cry,
He tha might hear them would rejoice,
No doubt to buy me presently.
A great^r Book of price more dear,
N^w may thou have, yet not contain
Directions right, as I have here,
Repentance truly for to gain.
Each line does guide thee to repent,
With phrase most plain unto thine ears;
Esteem it well, do not relent,
Sweet is the fruit Repentance bears.
To the High and Mighty King of Kings Rev. 17. 14
, Prince of Peace Ep* 2 14
, Conqueror of Death Heb ^ 1^
, Hell Hos 13. 14
, and Sin Hos 10. 8
, the great Judge of the World Gen 18 28
, and Bishop of my Soul 1 Pet. 2. 9
, Christ Jesu my Savior Luke 2. 1^.
.
O Gracious and most high God Psa. 113 5
, most holy Esaias 6. 3
, most strong Psalm. 99. 9
, most mighty Genesis 17
most merciful ^sa. 145. 9
, most righteous Esaias 42 6
, and most beautiful Savior Can 5 10
, I the Son of thy handmaid Ps. 86. 16
, whom thou have created, Genesis 1. 26, 27
and redeemed Ephesians. 1. 7 1 Cor 1. 30
, ^a^e in all dutiful affection assigned my, ^elf, and my dearest love into
thine hands (...) my humble Petition, which I dedi^red unto thee, O sweet J^su,
thou light ^f my soul Esaias 9. 19; 20
, and to the uttermost of my; ^ower (by thine assistance) have made it ^y daily
prayer, and true copy of my ^ya^est affection unto thee, O Lord my God Psa. 98
9. Psalm 8. 1 Psalm 18 1
, in the which, through my conti^^ul exercising thereof, I know my sigh^g for
my sins is not hid from thee Psalm 38
, nor ^^y tears, which cry from the bottom of My ^eart, for thy crimson
priceless drops of ^ood, that trickled down thy azure veins ^^. 22 44
, (...) wash away my scarlet sins Es. 1. 18
, unknown to ^ee,

And now again, O my sovereign delight Sol. s^ng 1, 7, etc Mat. 12. 41
, in token of my humblest devotion, and dearest Love, which I owe unto thy most
sacred self, I am here imboldned (although far u^worthy) to dedicate this other
Mite unto thee (entitu^ed Andrews Resolution) which I cast into thy treasury
Luke 21. 1
, not of superfluity, but mere penury, desiring thee, O my Savior 1 Timothy 4, 20
, from the tender bowels of my heart, Acts 5. 31
that through the multitude of thy mercies Psalm. 5. 7
, thou will guide me therein. Mat. 1. 21
And I most humbly beseech thee, 2 Sa. 22. 3
that thou will vouchsafe to entertain and receive me, that I may be wholly
thine, and thou coequal with God the Father, may be wholly mine, that after
my ended miseries, thou will crown me with endless mercies: unto this (sweet
Jesus) I most humbly beseech thee to say Amen.

And so Amen, thy earnest, though most unworthy late repentant sinner, John
Andrews, Preacher of the Word, desires with all humility daily to come unto
thee.

Sero sed serio.
Andrews Resolution.
First, what Repentance is.
THere is no Doctrine in the Church of God more necessary, than the Doctrine of
Repentance, and amendment of life; neither does the Holy Ghost so much labor
in all the Scripture, as he does to b^at Repentance into men's leads 2 Kin. 17,
13 Eze. 18. 21, 22. 23 Act, 11 18 Pet. 3. 9 Hos. 14. ^ Pet 18. 11 Jer. 25. 5
Jer. 36. 3 Ma 3. 2, 6, 8 Mar. 4. 17 Luke 3. 2 Luke 24. 4 Acts 2. 38 Acts 17 30


It was not only the only Sermon which S. John Baptist preached to prepare the
way for Christ Mat 3 2, 6, 8
, but ^^so it was the first that ever was made, it was Preached by God himself
to our first Parents in Parad^se Gen 3 17
; and ever since both the Prophets, Apostles, and many of Gods faithful
Ministers have Preached Repentance unto the people 2 Kin. 17 13 Esaias 1. 16
.

Yet notwithstanding many are so wedded unto sin Joh. 8. 3 Romans 6. 20
, and they are become so godless, so graceless, so rooted and fully resolved to
live therein, that the most part little understand the Doctrine of Repentance
Romans 2
, and less practice the duty. Many presume to describe it, though few know it:
many can talk of it Mat. 72
, but few Psalm. 1. 19
walk in it; many speak of it, but few feel it; and many think they have caught
it when they have b^t the shadow of it: Rev. 3. 10
because it is so ^^^^pery that few can hold it, and so secret that many cannot
find it: it is ^id from the world and revealed unto non^ but the Elect chi^dren
of God Lu 12, 32
.

It is a work that no men with their fine beats and deep devices can
compre^^nd: for the conversion of a si^ner is supernatural, and whosoever does,
o^ has not felt in himself what repentance is, shall be ^amned Lu. 1^. 5
, therefore ^e that has ears to hear, Esaias 59 2
let him hea^, Nahu. 1. 2.
and he that has eyes to see, let him see what Repentance if, and withal,
bring this present of the hilosophers with him, Pla^^, Aristotle's, T^eophrastes.
Nosce t^ipsum knew thy self; it is the first thing to be done in repentance,
and the beginning of all grace.

Repentance is a work of grace, arising of a Ephesians 2. 8 1 Cor. 7. 8, 9
godly sorrow, from a true faith, and knowledge of a man's own spiritual estate:
Jer. 4. 1
It is a constant Joel 2. 13
turning of a man in his whole life, from all his sins unto God, it is an
hear^y sorrow for sin, with amendment of life, having a godly Resolution to sin
no more Joh. 5. 14 John. 8. 11 Eze. 33. 15 Rom, 12 5 Romans 5. 1
.

It is a most necessary thing for mankind; it is the very supersedeas and
discharge of sin, and the cause of unity between God and man. There is no other
means to make peace between Christ and us, but Repentance: No other to discharge
sin, Joh. 3. 5 Ge. 50 17, 18 2 P. 1. 3. 9
nor course to avoid ^ell, but Repentance; neither any way to win Heaven, but
repentance and therefore Repentance is most necessary,

What wounded body would not seek a salve: much more what wounded soul slain
with sin, Esa. 1. 16 Ez. 33. 5 Luke 13. 5*
would not seek repentance, seeing it is the only salve to cure the soul?

It is an Eybod of purity, and a defiled man may not wear it. The dignity of it
is great, and honorable; and the Lord will not bestow it upon an unworthy
person. It is a magnificent guest, Joh 14. 1 and 23
and will not come into a polluted Tabernacle. It is an holy Saint, and will
not dwell in the Synagogue of Satan.

It is not to be bought with silver or gold, nor to be had from the gifts of
Ring^, Popes, or Potentates, it is a thing of inestima^le bal^e, Heb. 1. 6
it shows the atonement between the Savior and the Sinner, and being gotten
by Faith Gal. 3 14
, Prayer Jam. 5. 18
, and hearing the Word of God Romans 10, 17
, It brings thee unto Christ. Act. 5. 11 2 Ti. 2. 25, 26 Joh. 12. 40
It is libra Donatio, a gift absolute without consideration, which God ever
bestows upon his friends, upon those that love him. It is called the Spirit
of Burning, therefore with speed frepent, that repentance may burn thy sins, 1
These. 5 Esaias 4. 4
est the fire of Hell bnrn thy soul, Esaias 4. 4

The true Essence or Nature of thy Repentance, only consists in turning from
all thy sins unto God Eze. 18 30. 31. 32 jer. 18. 11 2 Ki. 17. 13 Esaias 55. 7
Eze. 33. 11 Jer. 14. 1
: and therefore it is not altogether deri^ed of the word Poenitentia, because
the Divines say, it does not comprehend Totum Terminum a quo and ad quem, from
what and to whom thou must return.

But this is the true repentance which the Latin interpret by this word
Resipiscentia, or Conversio, which is not only the changing of the mind, but it
is Recessus a malo a forsaking of evil, Accessus ad bonum and return unto that
which is good To. 12. 9 Gal. 4. 18 1 These. 5. 16 Acts 26, 28
: Revertimini usque ad me, return as far as unto me. If thou will repeat truly,
thou must withal have both a purpose in mind, and an inclination in will, and
endeavor in life, wholly to forsake all thy sins for ever and turn unto God.

To repent, confideth but of two syllables: yet unto the wicked it is too hard
to be learned and so unay to be practiced, that like as the Camelion can change
himself into all colors saving white, so would they change themselves from all
goodness, to follow evil, rather then to return unto the Lord by repentance.

To conclude this point, thou shall no sooner repent, but Genesis 54, 17, 18 Deuteronomy.
4. 29 1 Kin. 8. 33 Job. 11. 14, 15 Eze. 3. 28
Heaven shall be confirmed unto thee, habendum and tenendum, for ever and ever.

Secondly; God is the author of Repentance.
Repentance is libera donatio, a gift absoluts, without consideration; and it
comes freely from God, who is the very efficient and principal Author or Donor
thereof Jer. 31. 18 Lam. 5. 21 2 Ti 25. 26 Acts 5. 21 Joh. 12. 40
. It is therefore to be held the more precious and to be desired with the more
hope; yea: to be thy Summum Bonum for it obtains Salvation, unto all those
which truly repent and turn unto God. And he that turns unto God by
repentance, must first of all be turned by God; and so says Jeremiah, Jer. 31.
19
Surely after I was converted I repented, and after I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the
reproach of my youth And our Savior Christ says, John. 6. 44
no man can come unto me except my Father draw him Therefore says S. Paul
Instruct them with meekness: 2 Timothy 1. 25
proving if God will at any time give them Repentance, that they may b^ saved,

For God is good Ps. 11. 8. Jer. 33. 11 Mat. 19 16 Psalm 105. Ez. chapter 18. To.
10. 2 Ps. 10. 15 Psalm. 91. 15 Ps 145. 18
and merciful unto all those that turn unto him by repentance; he is full of
pity, and has no pleasure at all that the wicked should die: But is rich unto
all that call upon him for mercy; and has promised to hear thy petitions, if
thou truly repent.

Furthermore, if thou had repentance in thine Esaias 48. 8, 9
own power, and might repent when thou would; yet it were but a folly;
yea it were a Deuteronomy. 29. 20
mere madness to presume in sin because thon have a remedy. But now seeing thy
repentance is in the hand of God, and that none can repent without his espocial
Grace it were a double and a trebble folly to Deuteronomy. 30 3, 4
d^lay thy repentance from day to day or to seek it from any other but from
God. 2 Chr. 7. 14 ^ 1 Cor. 11


Thirdly, of Examination.
BEfore thou confess thy sins unto God, 2 Cor, 13. 5
thou must take heed to examine thy self, that thereby thou may know them
both in greatness and danger: for until thou know thy sins, that thy
conscience may be convicted by them, thou can never humbly and heartily
confess them.

Far let any repentant sinner ask his conscience what was the first cause of
his conversion, and surely he will say, that when he began to repent, he did
first search Ps. 77. 6
himself: and finding his ways dangerous, and his cause fearful, did thereupon
resolve to take a new course; It is the beginning of all grace, to search, try,
and examine thy self; It is also a means to prevent Gods Judgment: if thou do
not search thy self, then God will search thee with his 1 Pe 1. 7 and 4. 11
fiery crosses and terror of his punishments.

But if thou truly examine thy self first to be guilty of Adams sin Psalm 51. 5
1 Es^. 4. 30 Genesis 8. 21
.

Secondly, prone by nature to all evil Romans 23
.

Thirdly, subject to the curse of Gods wrath Wisd. 14. Psalm. 54. 6 Psa. 14. 4
Pro. 15. 8, 9. 29 Esa. 1. 15
.

Thus in the guiltiness of Adams sin sin has his beginning; in the original,
his continuance; and in actual, his full perfection.

So answerable thereunto is the wrath of God; it beginning by leaving thee by
nature unto the flavery of Satan; it is continued by death, and accomplished by
damnation.

Now these three rules I leave to thy careful consideration, assuring thee from
God thou can never be saved unless Luke 13. 5 2 Cor. 13. 5
thou repent, nor nev^r repent, except that thou search, try, and examine thy
self.

Thus if thou will repent truly, thou must search and look into thy self, to
see in what a miserable case thou art; as I have said before: and thou shall
find that by Ephesians. 2. 3
Nature, thou art the child of wrath, out of y^ favor of God, not only
wretched and accursed by the Law, a bondslave unto Satan but finally subject to
Death, Hell, and Damnation.

Thus if thou would know if thou art in the right way of repentance or no.
thou shall find, if thou consider in thy self whether thou have ever any need
of Gods pardon for thy sin; or of Christ his i blood to salve and cure thy
soul: Mat 26. 28
or was thy heart ever wounded or grieved for thy sin, Heb. 10. 13 18
so that thy soul were even sick with the stink thereof? 1 Pet. 1. 2 1 John 1. 7


Or did thou ever hunger and thirst after God in Christ? and with ^^ghs,
groans, and Jam 4 9 Luke 6. 21
tears, beg for his mercy upon thy 1 Ki. 8 54 Dan. 6. 10
knees (as for life and death) If thou have not felt, nor done these things in
some measure, surely thy case is very fearful and dangerous: thou art not yet
in the way of Repentance therefore as yet the mercies of God belong not unto
thee.

Fourthly, of Contrition.
Contrition is a fear and inward sorrow of conscience, Augustinus de
poenitentia.
perceiving that God is angry with sin and is sorry that it has ^^nned. And to
speak more largely of it, thou may know this, that Contrition also
comphrehendeth first the Job. 11. 13, and 19
knowledge of God, requiring obedience; and discommending disobedience; and not
to remit sin without full and perfect satisfaction, eit^er in respect of
obedience it self, or else in respect of punishment.

Secondly, 2 Cor. 13. 5
the discussing and examining of thy nature, Lu. 2. 29 Acts 20. 20
thy thoughts will, affections, and all thy actions and deeds according to the
square and rule of Gods Laws in every point; for as S. Augustine says,
Peccatum puniendum est aut a te aut a Deo: si puniturate, tunc punitur sine te;
si vero a tenon punitur, tecum punietur. Sin must needs be punished, either of
God, or of thy self, if by thy self, then sin is punished without thee, if of
God then thou and thy sin must be punished together. Therefore if thou would
repent with a true contrition, that thereby thou may reap a most plentiful
harvest, thou must sow in Gods field the Mat. 13. 8
seeds of Repentance, and oftentimes water then with the tears of thy humble
Contrition: Jam. 4. 9, 10
so shall thou gather the true fruits of everlasting joy and felicity Mat. 5. 4
Luke 6. 21
. For as the deeper the wound, the more diligent the cure: so let thy
repentance bring forth as much sorrow, as sin gave the delight.

And as S. Ambrose says, Expectat lacrymas nostras Deus, ut profundat pietatem
suam; God looks for thy tears in thy contrition, that he may pour down his
grace upon thy amendment. Ps. 4. 6. 6
Laudatum est cor Penitentiae lacrymis; Thou must wash thy heart in a troubled
Pool of Joh. 15. 2
Bethesda, in the true tears of repentance. having an inward sorrow wrought by
the holy Ghost, for thy sins before committed, against so good and gracious a
God? joined ^oth with a perfect faith, Psalm 19. 10, 12
to be forgiven for Christ his sake, and also from hencefortb with a full and
de^erminate purpose to amend and lead (...) new life,

Fifthly, of Confession.
SAint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Psalms.
that nothing pleases God more than Confession, if it be joined with true
Contrition; and that it is a part of Humiliation, ever joined with true
Repentance, because they cannot be truly humble and repent, who confess not
their sins unto God: neither will be give them pardon; for God covers when men
uncover 1 John 1. 9
and acknowledge; he justifies when men condemn themselves, and fly unto him
for mercy. If any plead unto God, Non est factum, and deny his deeds and debts
of sin: there is no reason why he should have the Acquittance of Grace.
Therefore, says Solomon, He that hides his sins shall not Prove. 28
prosper, but he that confesses them and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

If thou confess them effectually, it will cause thee to weep like Joh. 20. 15
Mary Magdalen, wraffle with God, like Genesis 32. 24
Jacob; and pour forth floods of tears like Ezeckia. Thou Eze. 12. 3
must confess them in this, or such like manner, First, thou must put up an
indictment against thy self, and accuse thee before God wherein thou must
acknowledge both thy particular and unknown sins generally without any excuse,
extenuation, or defense, inbiding the least of them. An example thou may find
in David; Psa. 51. 3
I know my iniquity is ever before me.

Secondly, thou must with ^rief of heart (as a Judge upon the Bench) give
sentence against thy self, acknowledging thy unworthyness, by reason of thy
sin, to have deserved everlasting damnation; as the Lu. 15. 21
Prodigal child did, who said, Father I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee; Or the poor Publican, who standing far off, would not so much as cast up
his eyes to Heaven, but smote his breast, Luke 28. 13
crying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

Thou must also accuse thy sins, thy very conscience must witness against them,
and thy heart convince them; thou must accuse them, 1. as strangers dejected,
2. as adversaries convicted, and 3. as enemies professed.

In so doing, said Augustine, when thou accusest thy self by confessing thy
sins unto God, thou preventest thereby the Devil of his purpose, so that he
cannot accuse thee at ^he day of Judgment, For says he Jer. 29. 13, 14
thou plottest out all thy sins by repentance. Where there is no accuser there
is no crime produced for the Judge to condemn; For that which is not has no
punishment: forgiven sins are not; ergo, forgiven sins have no punishment: And
so says the Author to the Hebrews, Leo.
10. 18. Leo says that those sins shall never be condemned which are purged
before with John 1. 9
confession and repentance. Neither is Jesus Christ any longer ^hy Judge to
condemn (...), but thy Advocate to plead for thee, if thou accuse thy self by
confession.

Therefore confess thy sins unto God without any accuse or Ecc. 5. 7. 1 These. 3.
delay. For it is another manner of thing to ^epent, than many take it for. It
is ^ot every a sob or sigh that brings re^entance: God is merciful, etc, And
thus ^^ghtly da^^ them over, as though Gods mercy were to be gained in a
^oment. Let no man deceive himself; it will cost thee many a prayer, and many a
tear in thy confession, before thou can have pardon for thy ^^ns,

If thou did feel the smart of sin but 1 Cor 12. 7 Acts 2. 37
prick in thy wounded conscience, thou would never give God any rest; but
like David, cry unto God Psa. 51. 9
again and again, until thou have found some comfortable persuasion of Gods
mercy in Christ, for the forgiveness of thy sins.

Until thou do thus, thou shall never find any quietness in thy conscience,
no^ any sound comfort of Gods Spirit in thee.

David could 2 Sa. 12. 13*
never repent until God sent Nathan unto him to reprove him for his sin; but so
soon as he saw his sin, and that it was not only committed against 2 Sa. 12. 9
Uri^h, but also against God, it presently so bounds his conscience, killed his
poor heart, and so grieved his soul, that he cried out in his conscience,
Against thee etc.

As if he would have said, Psalm. 51
Oh my God, it grieves me exceedingly, and wounds my very soul, that ever I was
so vile a sinner as to sin against thee, O my most gracious and merciful God.

Therefore the only way to repent, is, from the bottom of thy heart, in thy
conscience to grieve for thy sin, especially for that it is against God, and
causes thee to break his Laws; ^or if thou could be sorry for thy sin,
because it is against God, more than ^or g fear of punishment, it were a good
sign that thou were in the ready way of repentance.

Wherefore if there were no shame ^or punishment, no Hell nor damnation, yet
thou ought to repent, because thou have sinned against so Ps. 136 10
good and gracious a God, who has ^ Cor. 2. 30
^reated and redeemed thee.

Sixthly, Faith is the ground or root of Repentance.
FAith may be added unto repentance not as a part, but as the ground Heb. 11. 1
or root thereof; for it cannot be, that the root and the fruit should be does
one thing: and without faith there can never I any true repentance, therefore
they are still joined together:

To clear this doubt, thou must consider three things: 1. the order of nature;
2. the time; 3. the manifestation of them both

In order of nature, says goes before repentance: in manifestation of them,
repentance is first; in time they are both joined together.

By order of nature, first a man's conscience must in some sort be settled,
touching his reconciliation with God in Christ before he can truly repent.

As S. Ambrose says, No man can rightly repent, unless he hope for pardon. So
that remission of sins is believed, then upon that comes Repentance.

By manifestation, repentance goes before faith, for it is sooner descryed
than faith.

Regeneration is like the sap of a tree, hid within thee bark; when as
repentance is like the bud, that speedily shows it self.

If we respect ye time, neither of them are one before the other but are
begotten both in an instant. So soon as there is fire, so soon it is hot: and
so soon as a man is Joh. 3. 3 4, 5, etc.
regenerate so soon he repents: for he that believes, instantly repents.
Therefore none can truly repent, except he believes, that he is Gods. And none
can have belief Pet. 19
but he that has this grace, and faith in him.

Fur^hermore, none repent, unless they hate sin, and faith causes a man to
hate sin Now none can hate sin, except he be sanctified, and none can be
sanctified, without he be justified, and this cannot be without faith Romans 3.
4, 25, 26 27, 28
, faith comprehends justification.

Again the inward or instrumental cause of repentance, is faith which may be
called the mother of repentance, because it brings it forth as the word is the
begetter; and so may have the name of a Father: for he that is without faith is
dead. No life without faith, no repentance without life: and therefore neither
the Pharisees Prayer Lu. 18. 11
, the harlots vow Pro. 7. 14
, y^ Traitors kiss Lu 22. 48 Mat. 26. 18
, the Sacrifice of Cain Mat. 14. 44 Genesis 4. 5.
, the fast of Jezabel 1 Kin. 21. 9,
, y^ oblation of An^anias, Acts 5. 2
nor the tears of Esaux, Genesis 37. 38
could ^e accepted of God, because they were not truly dedoted from a lively
faith.

Lastly, the efficient or principal working cause of faith in thy repentance,
is Joh. 12. 4 Acts 5. 21 2 Timothy 2. 25 16
God, whereby, by faith, every true believer receives Christ for 1 Jo. 3. 16
Mat. 2. 1 Luk, 2. 6, 7 John 6. 35 Joh. 25. 26 Joh. 20. 29 John 3. 16 2 Cor. 5.
15. Romans 5. 5 1 Timothy 2. 6 1 Pet. 3. 18 1 Cor. 15. 1 Mat. 28. 6 Mat. 16. 6 Joh.
20. 27
himself, as given for him, born for him, dying for him, and rose again for
him: for he died for his sins, and rose again for his justification. And to
conclude, repentance separated from faith in Christ, is no true repentance. And
thus much concerning Faith.

Lstly, the time when to repent.
MAn has no time of repentance certain, no term Acts 9. 4
of years, but term of life, Ecc. 9 10
and that is most uncertain.

T^ough God called Saul d twice, Samuel, thrice 1 Sa. 3. 4
, his Spouse four times Cant. 5. 2
the Ninivites 40. days Jon. 34 Deuteronomy. 8, 2
, and the Jews forty years; yet he gives us no time to repent, but to repent
now.

The time of repentance is the time present without delay, as the holy Ghost
teaches: This day if you will hear his voice, harden Psa. 95. 8
not your hearts: for there is but one acceptable time, which being neglected,
is as a Bird escaped out of the hand, or a shaft shot out of a bow, not to be
recalled. At what time (says the Lord.) The Lord limits no time, if a man
repent truly. The time; of repentance is double; 1. it must be done presently
without delay; 2. continually, every day. It must be done Ecc. 5. 7 1 These 5. 9
speedily without delay: for who knows whether this be the acceptable time,
which if thou neglect when God calls thee in the youth, or in thy health; it
may be he will not call thee hereafter in thy age or sickness; and the longer
thou do defer thy repentance, the harder it will be for thee to repent.
Therefore if thou have suffered the bud of thy youth to be blasted, thy flower
to fade, thy leaves to dry up, and thy boughs to wither, yet keep life in the
Joh. 25. 1
root, let the whole become fuel for m Hell fire.

Be not like those which begin not (...) live until they be ready to die and
^hen after a foes desert, Ps. 54. 6 Wis 14. 9 Psalm. 14. 4
come to ^rave of God a friends entertainment. Nor think to snatch up Heaven in
a moment, which the best can ^carce attain unto in many years: ^r jump from Lu.
16. 19
Dives diet to Laza^us crown; that is, from the service ^f Satan, to the solace
Lu. 16. 22
of Saints. O beloved heaven, is to to be gained ^o easily.

The thief indeed may be saved on Luke 23. 42, 43
the Cross; and mercy found at last, ^ut late repentance is seldom or never
true repentance. For if a man repent he can sin no more, then he ^eaves not
sin, but sin leaves him.

Oh therefore if thou would be from from this doubt, avoid the certainty
repent whilst thou art in good health, Ephesians. 5. 15
take time whilst it is offered thee, for time and tide staieth for no man.
Common experience ^ee^eth (...) that time is pre^ious, short and ^^revocable,
which can never be redeemed, and withal consider, he that is not ready to
repent to day, will be less ready to morrow: it may be God has appointed this
day to be the end of thy life. Oh therefore always so live, that thou be ever
prepared to die. If thou do defer thy repentance until it be to late O I
then thou would give a thousand worlds for one days repentance or an hours
contrition. Record therefore a decree in thy heart, to keep all thy sins in
perpetual exile and never admit them again in thy court: But turn O turn from
sin to sanctity, from Babylon to Jerusalem, from Bethavan to Bethel, from Sodom
to Sion, and from Belial to God, so let not the Sun of thy pleasure be the day
of thy lives end, nor night of thy death come before the great work of thy
repentance be begun.

Oh repent, repent therefore that thou and I, and all the elect children of
God, may have all our sins freely forgiven us, and be with Christ Jesus
Savior, who has so dearly bought us: To whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be all Rev. 19. 1
Honor, Power, Glory, and Dominion, both now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

