THE ANSWER AND RESOLVTION Of the Lord Fairefax, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir
Henry Cholmly, and the rest of the Committee of the LORDS and COMMONS now
resident at YORK.

Sent to His Majesty by the Earl of Newport, who came in His Majesty's name,
to confine them as prisoners in their Lodgings, on the third of June, 1642.

Likewise Exceeding True News from York.

Whereunto is annexed a Declaration of the LORDS and COMMONS concerning the
said Members.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament that this be printed and
published.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for I. Horton. June 11. 1642.

Exceeding True News from York.
SUch are the Troubles of the times so many distractions and dissentions; That
the Palace of the King is not exempt from those troubles, such is the fate of
greatness, he that sits above is more observed with envy then with love, each
envious dart is flung it Majesty, and each malignant Spirit vents his
Spleen-fomenting Plots to work the downfall of his Sovereign Lord, and like
a cunning Politician whispers such charms into his Princes ears, as poisons
all his quiet and content, disturbes the Kingdom, fomenting of fears between
the King and Subject, creates a Jealousy and an unjust suspect where truest
Loyalty has its abode. This is the practice of the Romish Crew, and this we
find each day to be the lamentable effects of their wicked and pernicious
Councels, which has made a separation betwixt his Majesty and the honorable
Houses of Parliament, they have most pernitiously practiced to cause his
Majesty to levy war against his Parliament, likewise they have endeavored to
make a separation, and by their cunning Plots to divide and disunite that joint
Assembly, witness the Lord Keeper, the Lord Say, the Lord Savill, the Lord
Rich and diverse others which were Members of that great Assembly, they have
maliciously endeavored to cross the Proceedings in Parliament, concerning the
Militia, they knowing that if the Kingdom should once be put into a posture of
defense, they could not have so fit an opportunity to perfect their diobolicall
Designs, they likewise have caused these dangerous and fearful Horse-ridings
in Yorkshire to the great terror of the Parliament, to the discomfort of all
his Majesty's loving Subjects, Let but a serious Judgment really consider the
dangerous consequence of these great meetings, both to his Majesty and the
general Kingdom, besides, what can we expect more dreadful, more dangerous
to the peace of the Kingdom, then to have the Lord Fairefax and those other
Officers of the Trained Bands of the County of York displaced and others put
in their places as information is given to the House, can there be any thing of
greater horror, likewise Sir John Hothams Ancient imprisoned at York, the
reason is not yet known, but greatly feared to be because he is one of Sir
John Hothams party; and if so, it is Voted to be an Act of Hostillity against
the Parliament.

Likewise these daily provisions of Ammunition, of Ordinance, of Sadies and the
like, must needs portend some great danger, and we have just cause to fear
some dismal and fatal effect (if God by his divine providence prevent it not)
will follow these dangerous designs, God I beseech him turn all things to the
best, but as yet our fears are certain though the event be uncertain.

The Committee of the Parliament here resident, were by his Majesty confined to
their Lodgings this day, and commanded not to go into the Field: they answered
to the Earl of Newport, (who brought his Majesty's command) that it was
against the liberty of the Subject, against the Law of the Land, and not a
small breach of the Privileges of Parliament, that Members, thereof, (sent
down to keep the peace of the Kingdom) and Freeholders of the County should
be so illegally imprisoned, at such a time; which the Freeholders did much
distaste: Nevertheless, the Committee would obey, except the occurrences of
the day should require their presence in obedience to the command of
Parliament, and then they answered, they must not deceive so great a trust
committed to them. etc. this their undanted resolution and noble confidence
does a little encourage us, only we must confide in the Lord in whose power it
is in his good time and pleasure, when he shall see it most convenient for his
own glory and our good, doubtless he will bring them and all their secret
Stratagems to light and laugh at them and their determinations, for it is he that
exalts the humble, and brjngeth the mighty low, it is our God which can make
the Councels of the wise foolishness, therefore let us pray to him, trust in
him, and then doubtless we shall receive comfort from him, which that we may
do, let every man turn from his wicked ways, and repent him o^ his sins,
and turn to the Lord our God, for who knows whether the Lord of Hosts will
repent him of his wrath, and turn this destruction from us.

Die Iovis, 1642.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, do declare, that they are
resolved to maintain those Lords and Gentlemen, Committees of both Houses of
Parliament, residing at York, in those things they have done, and shall
further do in obedience of their Commands for the preserving of the peace of
the Kingdom, etc.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration shall be forth with Printed and published.

John Brown Clerie. Parl.

FINIS.

