ANIMADVERTIONS Upon the KINGS ANSWER, Read at the Common Hall, Ianu: 13. 1642.
Published as a Caveat to the Commonwealth, Jan. 24.
IN this great contention now producted into mutual Hostility; such has been
the the Serpentine policy of the Fomenters thereof, that it has bin carried
about with such cunning and deceit (taking vantage upon every occasion to
render the rationality of the Kingdom (the Judgment, Votes, and Ordinances of
Parliament) contemptible and destructive to the Commonwealth) that their way
is as the way of a Serpent upon a rock beyond delineation; yet in part we may
observe their subtility (tanquam anguis in herba) clad in royal Rethorick, vel
rectus venit and tortuosus, vel Leonem agit and savit, vel draconem agit and
fallit, Sometimes in menacing Proclamations, sometimes in gracious and
persuasive pardons, etc. Thus royalty is abused and made a stalking, horse to
pernicious ends, as to the grief of each loyal Subject, to the Primitive
constitution or royality of this Kingdom, consistant of of three co-ordinates,
a King, and two Houses of Parliament meeting in one Centure of power, as the
three Essentialls in the Deity indivisible, yet distinct) may be observed in
His Majesty's Answer to the City Petition; for whereas his Highness is humbly
supplicated for the safety of this City and Kingdom, to return to the
Parliament, the Basis of the peoples safety and foundadation of regality,
wherein those many prosperous bypast years His Majesty has been invested, but
instead of speaking comfortable words unto His people of Personal unity with
His royalty, nothing but contempt is virtually cast upon the very foundation of
His Office, ascribing (in His apprehension) all Love, Duty, and loyalty
thereto, and to His Person, to none other, but to the inveterate enemies of
both, according to the Kingdoms judgment and their own practice, which does
strike at the very essence of the Kingly Office, contract betwixt King and
people, to divert it to an Arbitrary usurpation, which is no less tyrannical,
than wilful, wherewith if the City would side, they should not want renewed
marks of his favor. For at first observe, He greets them with His good opinion
of it, That He does not entertain any mis-apprehension of the love and loyally
thereof; whereof the greatest part he conceives is full; But what part is this?
is it not the same the Wisdom of the State (which is best sensible of its own
enormities) adjudgeth its enemies If so, his Majesty in his bosom hugs a
Serpent for his safety, which I believe; He desires (as He conceives) to be the
greatest part, therein pursuing His own ruin; but I hope the Lord will
strengthen the hands of the lesser, and prosper their work, that they may
vindicate His Highness, and the Kingdoms safety from that serpentine brood,
who hatch Cockatrice eggs, and weave the spiders web; he that eats of
their eggs (oh the infelicity of His Majesty's appetite!) dies, and that
which is crushed, breaks forth into a Viper, their works are the works of
iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands, etc. they have made them
crooked paths, whosoever goes therein, shall not know Peace.

And whereas his Majesty pretends He was driven from His Parliament by Tumults,
Contrived by some principle Members of the City, etc.

This often recited PLEA is much to be admired to come from His Majesty, for
it is not unknown that the morrow after the greatest of those Tumults, he went
to London with an ordinary retinue, which if common reason may judge, argues
His Majesty was not so sore terrified and affrighted with fear of his safety
as this Answer imports; unless madness be ascribed to his Majesty, to expose
his person indefensible upon the exorbitant fury of a multitude, against whose
person he pretends they were maliciously invected, and most traitorously bent;
but it is manifest to the contrary, for they went in a petitionary way (no Law
being to hinder or prevent Petitioners) and if any extraordinary resort were
for any other end, it was not in the least for the offense of the Kings person,
(as is pretended) but merely for a loyal presentation of their lives and
persons in the defense of the two Houses of Parliament then greatly endangered,
oppressed and possessed with great fears and jealousies; this was the worst
end, (however unhappily misconstrued) that they had: Therefore His Majesty's
Accusation of some principle Members, who are (he says) well known since,
etc. Vanishes into nothing, or rather a mere cavil, to wheell about the now
affected unhappy design. To proceed His Majesty in His Answer goes on thus.

But His Majesty desires His good Subjects of London seriously to consider what
confidence His Majesty can have of security there, whilst the Laws of the Land
are so notoriously despised and trampled under foot, and the wholesome
government of that City (heretofore so famous over all the world) is now
submitted to the Arbitrary power of a few desperate persons of no reputation,
but for malice and disloyalty to Him, etc.

Observe in the former clause lie commended the City for Love, Duty, and
Loyalty, etc. to him, and in the very sequel condemns them of malice and
disloyalty to him, (which gross contradiction, I wonder his Council did not
see before it was sealed up) for probation whereof; observe, His Majesty asks
what security he can have here, whilst the Laws of the Land are so notoriously
despised and trampled under foot, and the government submitted to an arbitrary
power of a few desperate persons, for malice and disloyalty to him, and yet
before of that City (by whom those persons were elected to their Offices, even
the Lord Major principally aimed at) he says, He does not entertain any
mis-apprehension of their love and loyalty to him. Therefore if these first
words of his Majesty may stand absolute, how is the government thereof
committed or submitted to them for malice and disloyalty to him, if committed
(or submitted as he styles it) to those persons by them, who are full of love,
duty, and loyalty to him: And whereas He Titles it Arbitrary; how can that be
Arbitrary either in institution or execution, which has the free choice and
consent of the Major part in both, according to the rationality of the Kingdom,
and property of the City? and does act and move ad motum primi mobilis,
subjecting to the rationality of the Kingdom, the Laws and Ordinances of
Parliament? Now arbitrary government to this is absolutely repugnant, for the
one admits of the Peoples choice and consent, the other denies both, and
compells without either.

And further, His Majesty proceeds to possess the world with an apprehension
of their malice and disloyalty, by taking up arms against his consent and
express commands, the making of collection, etc.

It Is true, it is against his personal Commands, as withdrawn voluntarily from
the station of highest power, for according to the fundamental constitution of
this Monarchy (being a triunall mixture of three Estates in one sublime power)
in it can be no subordination or division, but a triple unity limited within
the circumferance of Royal power, or else in the intervalls of Parliament, or
when a King demiseth, with them the triplicity cease, and with him the office
dies, I mean if it admit of essential division or personal concommitance, so
that there may be a personal absence or demise from it, and yet the Regality
remain absolute; therefore the King (one of this triple unity of State)
personally absenting and rejecting the other two, cannot sensu deviso command
Regally, but Arbitrarily, and those his commands in this absolute disjunction,
are directly opposite and destructive to the other two estates; therefore in
this sense, as He is a KING, his consent and commands before mentioned, are
none at all, but merely personal and irregall, for regal commandes are
tempered and compounded of the reason and judgment of the whole Kingdom, not
of the will of one man; so then the Army raised by the Authority of Parliament
is not against the Kings consent or command Regal; for Regal consent,
command, and authority, is the inseparable adjunct of this triunity; the King
and two Houses of Parliament. And whereas therein the King says; That all
possible means Treason and malice could suggest to them, have been used to take
away. His life from Him, and to have destroyed His Royal Issue. Hence observe,
how odious and contemptible He would make the other two estates (contrary to
His many Protestations and Declarations) that the hearts of people might in the
highest measure be enraged against the faithful members and Authority thereof,
to their and its utter dissolution and destruction. Whence His Majesty should
have this horrible mis-conception, I know not; surely His Counsel found not
this Diabolical clause within the confines of their Declarations, Ordinances,
Votes, Remonstrances, and Petitions, nor yet read it in the secret characters
of their hearts; but if the litrature of the heart by the outward actions and
Indices of the mind, their many Declarations and Petitions, etc. may be read,
I am sure envy it self, nor the quintecense of malice can possibly and justly
tax that Honorable Assembly of such nefarious guilt, to kill the King, and
destroy His Royal Issue; oh monstrous Treason, and impious imputation not to
be thought of a Parliament! and never I believe laid to their charge before,
for tho it reflect more nearly upon the Army, yet though it transpenetrates on
them, have they not, and do they not still labor with all the wisdom and
policy they can to rescue His Person, from His pernicious, pestilent, and
desperate seducers, that His Throne might be established in righteousness an
judgment (the very life of Kingly glory) on Him and His Posterity generation
after generation?

And whereas he says, What hope His Majesty can have of safety there, Whilst
Alderman Pennington, etc. commit such outrages in oppressing, robbing,
according to their own discretion, etc.

His Mai^sty may understand, that what they do is not Arbitrary and at their
own discretion, but by Authority and Ordinance of Parliament, executing Justice
and Judgment (forceable compulsion upon obstinate resistance) on such as are
able and shall not contrary to their Protestation, defend and supply with their
fortunes, the unresistable necessities of the State; so that what they do in
pursuance of the Ordinance of Parliament, is not to be ascribed to their
discretion, as actions absolute and irrelative to the Regallity of the Kingdom,
and so merely Arbitrary, but in submission and obedience to the Legislative
power of the Land, which has not only instituted and authorized the thing and
them to it, but the means, order and manner of its accomplishment: therefore
their actions are of obedience and not of arbitrary discretion, and so their
exaction of legal mulcts is no robberry, no more then the execution of the
hangmans office is murder, and the Tax it self, which his Majesty asks, if
it be so defend the Subjects liberty and right? To wit, to take the twentieth
part? is conducent thereto, in regard it is done for the general defense of
the liberty and property; of the subject, which cannot be without extraordinary
expense; therefore in case of iminent necessity, and actual hostility, (the
Judgment of the state finding it conducent to its safty, which is the end to
all politic constitution) the means of effecting and defending the same,
which must trangresse the bonds of ordinary supply, is no more repugnant and
destructive to the liberty and property of our goods, etc. then the liberty and
property it self is to them.

But if it be objected (as in diverse scandalous Pamphlets is expressed) that
those judgments, votes and ordinances of these two estates, does destroy the
other namely the King, and that they are the cause of our calamities, which
till they be buried in oblivion will not cease, and therein all property and
liberty of subject is smothered and destroyed.

For resolution, let those that would have the King personally the absolute
supreme head and power of the Land, without Parliament and its inseparable
adjunct the judgments, votes and ordinances thereof, know, that therein they
make that head an empty scull, or at best a politic head without reason; for
deprive the politic head of the Kingdom of its votes, judgments, etc. The
reason of the Kingdom, and it remains irrational, and the government thereof
vanishes into mere madness, fitter for Bedlam then a Commonwealth; if this
seem haish, let them further know, that as much as in them lies, they labor
to make that head as blind as Bartimeus: For as the reason of man is the eye of
his soul, so the Votes and Judgment of the two Houses are the two eyes of
that head; so that those that would extinguish their Votes, etc. (though they
extend to the twentieth part) I tell them plainly that therein they pluck the
Kings eves out, and they say a blind man swallows many a fly, yea some as bigg
as foreign Ministers: and be sure whilst those Flies buze about his Majesty,
we shall hear nothing but hum drum, which noise threatens greater damage to the
true Regality of the King and the liberty of the subject, then the twentieth
part, or the Judgment and Ordinances of the state. Whereas his Majesty
promises the City to return unto them with his Royal, and without his Martial
attendance, provided they shall supprese all force and violence unlawfully
raised there, and shall apprehend and committ to safe custody the persons of
those men, etc.

This is like Sampsons firebrarnds to the Philistims corn, an absol^^^
invitation to a bloody and direful insurrection, and yet a little (...) he
says, His desires is to be with them, that the Trade, Wealth and (...) thereof
may be revived: But first they must stand up in opposition and destruction of
the State, power, and Authority Leg slative of the Kingdom, and
present-con^usion and desolation of the City, veiled under the terms of
defending themselves, and suppressing any force, etc. and (...) apprehend and
commit to safe custody the 4 Men: all which is as much (...) say, He does not
intend to recide in the City (as well as he loves it) (...) it be destroyed;
for let any rational man judge, how it is possible bu^ the City must be
sweltred in its own blood, the streets filled with dea^ bodies, and their
houses plundered and fired, if such a prevalent insurrection should be, as His
Majesty would engage the Citizens into suppress^ the Militia and Parliamentary
power thereof by force; Is this the Trad^ Protect^on and glory he would bring
to the City? this much deviat^ from that of David, when he cried out, Lo, I
have sinned an^ dealt wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? let thy
hand I pr^^ thee, be upon me and my fathers house, but not on the people that
they should perish. And for the apprehension of the 4 Men, the manner of it is
altogether repugnant to His several expresses and Protestations, God so (...)
with Me and Mine, as all my thoughts and intentions are for the observ^tion and
preservation of the Laws of the Land; is this the observation (...) the Laws,
that affords not them that for their obedience to the Parl^^ment, which every
man may claim for his right, due Process and tryal^ if this import the
infringement of justice, what confidence does his (...) verall Protestations
give us of the common right and property of (...) goods? But to proceed, His
Majesty gives them only this warnin, Th^^ whosoever shall contribute or take up
Arms under the Earl of Essex etc. (...) shall deny them the benefit of His
protection, and shall not only signify to (...) His Foreign Ministers, That
such person shall receive (...) advantage by ^^ing His Subject, etc. Hence may
be observed, That His former Answer^ Protestations and Declarations were
slender fidutiaries for the people trust; for that which formerly was contested
and protested against [(...) God so deal with me and mine, and We are confident
no sober hon^^^ man in our kingdoms can believe that We are so despetate or
senseless (...) entertain such designs] is now openly menaced; therefore what
(...) the sober honest man think of all his former expresses in that kind?
(...) itus acta probat: he may conclude, the ordinance of Militia not
incon^^stent with the kingdoms safety, the fears of Foreign force not causl^^^
and thus threatened his adherents to the Parliament most safe.

FINIS.

