An ancient and true PROPHECY Of all those TRANSACTIONS that have already
happened: Also what is to come: Of the Event of the great Actions in being:
What Government we are to expect.

In which is contained, excellent Cautions to the Sons of Men.

Written in Verse, in the latter end of the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH, and found
in Sir ROBERT COTTON'S LIBRARY.

LONDON, Printed for R. Page, living in Barbican, in Three Pigeon-Court, MDCLIX.

An Ancient Prophecy.
NOw I will show you, by what Pedigree
That Government, to you derived shall be;
Which will, at last, these British Islands bless
With inward Peace, and outward happiness.
It was of late, a brief Presage of his,
Who, often, has truth foretold: And, it is this.
When, here, a Scot shall think his Throne to set,
Above the Circle of a British King;
He shall a datelesse Parliament beget,
From whence a dreadful Armed brood shall spring.
That off spring shall beget a wild confusion;
Confusion, shall an Anarchy beget;
That Anarchy shall bring forth, in conclusion,
A Creature, which you have no name for, yet:
That Creature, shall conceive a sickly State,
Which will an Aristocracie produce:
The many headed Beast, not liking that,
To raise Democracy, shall rather choose.
And, then Democracie's production shall
A Moon calfe be; which some a Mole do call.
A false Conception of imperfect nature,
And, of a shapelesse, and a brutish feature.
All these Descents, shall Live and Reign together;
So acting for a while, that few shall know
Which of them gets the Sov'raignty; or whether
There be among them, a Supreme, or no.
When they with jarrs and janglings have defaced
Your triple-building, and themselves nigh worn,
Into contempt; they, of one cup shall taste;
And, into their first elements return:
Fire of them, shall subdue the other five;
And, then those five, shall by a doubtful strife,
Each others death so happily contrive,
That, they shall die, to live a better life:
And, out of their corruption, rise there shall
A true Supreme, acknowledged by all.
In which the power of all the five shall be
With Unity made visible in three.
Prince, People, Parliament, with Priests and Peers,
Shall be, a while, your emulous Grandees;
Make a confused Pentarchy some years,
And, leave off their distinct claims, by degrees:
And, then, shall Righteousness ascend the Throne;
Then, love, and truth, and peace re enter shall:
Then faith, and reason, shall agree in one;
And, all the Virtues to their counsel call.
Then, timely out of all these shall arise,
That Kingdom, and that happy Government,
Which is the scope of all those Prophecies,
That future Truths obscurely represent:
But how this will be done, few men shall see;
For, wrought in Clouds and Darkness, it will be:
And, ere it comes to pass, in public view,
Most of these following signs will first ensue.
A King, shall willingly himself unking;
And, thereby grow far greater then before.
The Priests, their Priesthood, to contempt shall bring;
And Piety shall thereby thrive the more.
A Parliament, it self shall overthrow;
And thereby, shall a better being gain;
The Peers, by setting of themselves below,
A more innobling honor shall obtain:
The People for a time shall be enslaved;
And, that shall make them for the future free.
By private loss, the public shall be saved;
An Army shall by yielding Victor be:
The Citie's wealth, Her poverty shall Cause:
The Law's corruption, shall reform the Laws:
And, Bullocks, of the largest Northren breed,
Shall fatted be, where now scarce sheep can feed.
You may perhaps deride what is here recited,
As, heretofore you other Truths have slighted.
But, part of this Presage you have beheld,
Already in obscurity, fulfilled:
The rest shall in the time appointed come;
And, sooner, than will pleasing be to some.
The last nine signs, or symptoms, of the ten,
Which must precede it, shall appear to men
Of all conditions; But, our Author says,
The first, is but in Hope, not yet in Faith;
And may be, or not be; for, so, or so,
That King, shall have his lot, as he shall do.
If all his sins, he heartily repent,
God, will remit, even all his punishment;
And, him, unto his Kingdoms, back restore,
With greater honor than he had before.
If he remain impenitent, like Saul,
God, from the Throne, shall cast both him, and all
His whole Descent; and, leave him not a man
To fill it, though he had a Jonathan.
If Ahab like, his mourning has respects
To temporary losses and effects;
Like Ahab's, then, it therewithal shall carry,
Some benefit, which is but temporary.
A real penitence, though somewhat late,
The rigor of his doom may much abate;
By leaving him a part of what he had,
When he a forfeiture of all has made:
Or else, by rooting out those, who in sin
With him, have actually partakers been;
And, planting in their steads, a Branch of his,
Whose Innocence no way questioned is.
For, this has often, with good success been done.
In Ages past; not, in this Isle alone,
But, in most other Kingdoms: And, if you
Will in GOD's Chronicles, but take a view,
Of his proceedings; you, in them will see,
For what it is, that Princes changed be:
Why some lose but a part; why some lose all;
Why, for a time; why, some for ever fall;
Why, some shall but for three descents remain;
And, how they might have had a longer reign:
When War, when Pestilence, when Death, will come
Upon a Land; when GOD will take it from
That land again; and, how, they may foreknow,
When, he will bring a total overthrow.
They, who have learned to contemplate aright
Those old records, may gain a true foresight
Of many things, whereby to regulate
Enormities, both in the Church, and State;
Things to themselves pertaining; to their Friends,
Their Foes, their Policies, their Fates, their Ends:
And, if it were not so; what, are to you,
The stories of the Kingdoms of the Jew,
Or of their Friends and Foes, more usual than
Those, which concern the Realms of Powhatan?
Or, so available, as those relations,
Which memorize the deeds of your own Nations?
But all this is but words; there must be deeds,
Ere to perfection any thing proceeds:
You must not everlastingly be stating
The Question; or, be seven years more debating:
For, ere that time, things will too late be done;
Which many fear, will come to pass too soon.
Expect you, some third persons, should between
The King and you, at this time intervene
To make atonement? Pray, who should they be?
Who, wishes you so well? who does not see,
That, all, 'twixt whom, and you, there be relations,
Them qualifying for such mediations,
May get more, by your woe, then by your weal?
Who knows not, how with Friends most Friends now deal?
And, who perceives not, that those Mediators
Have interests, and many weighty matters
Pertaining to themselves, which they will begin
On such a fair occasion, to hedge in?
And, whereby peradventure they may bring
Great disadvantages, upon the King,
Or, on the Kingdoms: and, perhaps on both,
Which to endanger, wisemen would be loath?
What then can be effected? or by whom
May your desires, now feiseable become?
Since, there is no way open for ^ccesse,
Nor any means admitted for address?
The Parliament, conceives it self abused,
In that, their offers have been often refused;
And, seems resolved that they will never more
Send Messages in vain, as heretofore:
And though the King, were now as penitent,
As David and Manasseh, with intent,
Unfainedly to satisfy, and do
What ever justice does oblige him to;
What ever, you in reason could require,
To answer, at the full your own desire;
Or, whatsoever affections mortified.
A contrite heart, or conscience rectified,
Should urge him to: yet, now, there is no way,
Whereby, this, may be manifest, you say.
Despair not, Friends: mind what I said before;
True penitence, will find, or make a door:
Though, it be Treason voted, now to bring
Or, carry Message, to or from the King:
Although his person be retained in ward;
Attended always, with an armed Guard:
Although strong walls, have round enclosed him:
Though rocks, far stronger, have surrounded them;
Yea, though the raging and the roaring Seas,
Have also, like a mote, incircled these:
Through all these difficulties, I could find
Conveyances, if thereto he had mind,
To publish his repentance; and prevail.
If to perform his part, he should not fail.
Yea, find him means, without an obligation
To any Party, or to any Nation,
Or any, but himself; to make his peace,
With honor: and his Kingdoms to possess.
Now, let him neither heed, nor hearken to
What other men do say, or what they do;
For whatsoever they shall act, or prattle,
(Will be to him, but fruitless title tattle)
But, let him sit down by himself alone;
And set down (as, he reads, it has been done
By King Manasseh) most unfain'd confessions
Of all his known offenses, and transgressions;
Acknowledge GOD's just dealing in afflicting;
His Providence, and mercy, in correcting
So like a Father, and, for his attending
So long time, for repentance and amending.
Let him express a resolute intent,
To leave to GOD's dispose, the government
Which he has managed ill, and to resign
Himself and his, to providence divine,
With full assurance, of obtaining place,
In his free love, and alsufficient grace.
This done; let him, subscribe the same, and spread it,
Before the LORD; let him with such tears read it,
As may declare, it was his act and deed:
Then, seal it, with a Heart, which much does bleed;
And, with a Lion rampant, so reverst,
That, none may fear, his rage or bloody thirst.
Upon which acts, by means of your relation,
And, by that spirit of communication,
Whereby, most secret actions, are made known,
(When to good purposes they may be shown)
Even at that point of time, they, who have bin
His opposites, will feel, some creeping in,
First, hopes; then Good opinions; and, at last,
That which will blot out all Offenses past;
And make them kill their fat calf; dance and sing;
That, they, have found again their long-lost King.
Oh! that I could behold that happy day
Of Paenitence; and, that behold I may
Both Parliament and People meet therein
So truly; that, their unrepentant sin
May not, when God has re inthroned him,
Prolong their woes, or bring new plagues on them.
But, who am I, that, either you, or he,
Should on my word rely, or take from me
Those things which I have said? know. I am that
Which is your GENIUS called. If, you ask what
A GENIUS is, I will define the same,
According to the nature and the name.
So called it is, because it does incline
With an affection truly Genuine,
To draw to good, and to withdraw from ill,
Those Persons, both in action and in will,
Town om it does relate; and from disgraces,
And spoil, to keep such Persons, and such places.
A GENIUS, is an incorporeall creature,
Consisting of an intellectual nature;
Which at the self-same time, a being had.
With that, for whose well being it was made.
And, may be called, that Angel, which designeth,
Advises, moves, draws, and inclines
To happiness; and, naturally restrains
From harm, that creature, whereto it pertains:
And, this I am to you. Then, have a care,
My counsels now, with good respect to hear:
For, they, to whom their GENIUS represents,
That, which to safety tends, and harm prevents;
If, then, they shall his good advice neglect,
And, pass it by, with wilful disrespect;
They shall deservedly, be left to those
Ill Angels, whose direction, they have chose:
And, what will then succeed, they shall perceive
When it is too late, their evil choice to leave.
Then looking back, he fixed his eyes on me,
And, said, my Secretary thou shall be
To Register, and publish to these Nations,
What counsels, warnings, and what exhortations
God has vouchsafed them; that, what ere betide,
His Grace, or Justice may be glorified.
This being said, my FANCY rose, and drew
A Curtain; wherewith, quite beyond my view,
This Apparition vanished. And, I took
My Pen, to put in writing, what was spoke,
And publish it to others, that it may
Prevent (if possible) your evil day:
For, till amendment, or destruction come,
The Beasts would preach should men continue dumb:
Yea, what their Genius, now to them does speak,
If they should slight it, Stones would silence break,
To rouse them from their slumbers; or, to tell
Succeeding - Ages, how and why they fell.
FINIS.

