A MEANS TO Reconcile the present distempers of these Times, as things now are.

Set out By a Member of this present Parliament.

Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis.
Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.
Vivitur ex rapto, non hospes ab hospite tutus:
Nec socer a genero fratrum quoque gratia rara est.
Nulla fides pietasque viris qui Castra sequuntur.
Venalesque manus ibi fas, ubi maxima merces.
Nulla salus bello, pacem nunc poscimus omnes.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

The Preface.
THere was lately set out in Print, a Paper, Entitled, The Wonder, Or,
Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace. I must confess, that the
Preface and the Propositions came from me, though not the Title: The meannesse
thereof I desire may not be looked upon, to the prejudice of the matter, but the
Zeal of the Author to the quiet and peace of his Native Country: For, the
Bloodshed, Rapine, and Destruction, which now rages amongst us, must daily by
the Continuance thereof, not only make the Cure more desperate, but likewise
declare the wrath of God to be more heavy upon us. For if Tully a Heathen
Orator pleading a Cause for his Clyent could say, Iugulare Civem ne Iure bonus
quisquam vult, mavult enim commemorare secum possit perdere pepercisci, quam
cum parcere potuisset perdidisse: Much more cause have we that are Christians
to avoid this needless shedding of so much of our own native blood, as is
daily in every corner of the Kingdom shed amongst us, to the unspeakable grief
of all good men: So that it may be said as Saint Paul once said to the
Corinthians, I hear there are Contentions among you. Is there not a wise man
among you, but that you must go to strife one with another? The speedy ending
of these Distractions (which I conceive may be easily and soon ended) if every
man would lay aside his own particular, and only look to the safeguard of
the ship wherein we are all Imbarkt, and in the preservation whereof all our
lives and fortunes do consist. This by the persuasions of some friends has
induced me to publish such Reasons for the more clear manifestation and
Inducement of the former Propositions, my self (knowing my own Integrity)
makes me no way ashamed to own them. I am unwilling to impute blame to any
party, but rather that things past, may be past over, with the most candor and
least bitterness, though my own sufferings have been as much and as causeles, as
most men's have been. Only thus much I may justly say for my self, as the
Mag-pye did in the Poet, when she was stripped of all her feathers, being asked
the question how she came to be so naked? made Answer, Quid fuerim, quid sumque
vide, meritumque requiri, Invenies nocuisse fidem: This is all my end, only
desiring God to give such success to this endeavor by so weak a means as may
tend most to his glory, the good and peace of this our native Country, my
self being always ready to serve the Commonwealth with the uttermost of my
endeavors in the ways of Peace and Truth.

Hen: Anderson.

The PREFACE.
HAving since the first beginning of this Parliament observed the differences
therein, both in their breeding and continuance; the people holding themselves
grieved with illegal pressures put upon them, both in the freedom of their
Persons, the propriety of their Goods, and the liberty of their Consciences;
and these wrought by particular men for sinister ends by their interests in
Court, to the disturbance of the quiet and peace of the Kingdom, as it stood
established by Law: These occasioned a desire by most men, not only to prevent
the like for the future, but also the punishing of such as were conceived to be
Authors, Procurers, or Supporters thereof, thereby to deter others from doing
the like hereafter: And this trench't upon both Courtiers, Lawyers, and
Divines. The means to reconcile and prevent which, as the times now are, has
incited me, being a Member of this present Parliament; and conceiving my self
in duty bound to tender my best advice for the speedy ending of this most
barbarous and unnatural War that is now raging amongst us, which can produce
no better effect, if not timely ended, then a general destruction of the
Nation, who are now become a Scorn and Contempt to all Neighbors, (who were
before looked upon with great honor and respect, yea, not without envy.)
Besides, the high wrath of Almighty God, by the courses held and observed in
the prosecution thereof: I profess by this advice, not to look upon my self,
but merely the good of my native Country; and that, which I conceive my self
bound to, both by the Oath of Allegiance, Supremacy, and the Protestation which
I took this Parliament. And this without respect of any party, further then my
judgment shall lead me to. And I shall likewise give this testimony of my own
sincerity herein, that I being a Commoner of this Kingdom, and knowing no
where else to live but in England, and here, under a peaceable and free
Government. In all just things, shall adhere to the Commonwealth, and the
liberties of the Subject; yet no way hereby to detract from the King, what may
justly be due to the Regal Power, and which it can no way be abridged of,
without too much diminution: I have always conceived, and still do, that the
Regal Power ought to be limited by the Law: And if it be debarred of its due
course in the execution thereof, God defend, but the people upon general
complaints should have remedy therein, especially to prevent the like in
succeeding times, considering the Government we live in is a mixed Government,
by consent between the King and the People, as to my sense does manifestly
appear by the words of the Oath of Coronation; which being observed, the
people, as bound in Conscience, ought to yield the King all due Honor and
Obedience to His just Commands. Thus I have declared unto you, the opennesse of
my heart, herein, leaving the following advise to your best judgments, with my
Prayers to God to give such success therein, as I, in the Integrity of my
heart do desire.

A ready way (as is conceived) to compose the present Differences, as the Times
now are. With the Reasons inducing thereunto.
By a Members of the House of Commons this present Parliament.
1. THat the King be immediately sent for to come to Hampton Court, without any
Conditions or Guard whatsoever, but according to His Majesty's own pleasure.

That the King being under restraint, and not at his free liberty, can do no
Act which can bind him either by the Law of the Kingdom, or Civil Law; both
which laws do make void all Acts whatsoever which shall be done either per
minas or dures of Imprisonment, so that necessarily he must be at his free
liberty without any restraint or tie but his own free disposition before he
be in a Capacity to grant or confirm any thing, which cannot possibly be
whilst there is any restraint, upon his person, or Arms afoot to enforce a
nonperformance.

That no Treaty or Capitulation can be had between a King and his people, but
the people must have their desires from the King by way of Entreatie and
request: Which in all just things the King ought to deny. And this appears and
is manifest by the preambles of the Acts of Parliament of this Kingdom, Which
for the most part are declared to be granted at the humble Desire and request
of the People.

2. That the King, before His coming to Hampton, do Publish His Proclamation
of free pardon to all His Subjects of what quality or condition soever, and for
all faults whatsoever, against Himself, His Crown and Dignity.

That the publishing of his Proclamation of free Pardon shows his Mercy to all
his People, which is a particular, which the Kings have as Incident to the
regal Authority, and ought by them to be afforded in Justice to the people,
but only where Necessity or needful Severitie inforces the contrary for the
Example of others in the future.

This will take away from the People all their just fear of being prosecuted
according to the strictnes of the Law for their Crimes which they have
committed against the King, his Crown and Dignity.

It is in his own free power to grant a pardon either general or special for
all things concerning himself, Which pardon shall close the hands of all
Judges and Sub-ministers in any Court of Justice to proceed against any
Delinquent so pardoned for any fore-past Crime.

The King can grant no more then what concerns himself, the people must
necessarily concur in the granting of any thing that may concern themselves.
And this can no way be done but by an Act of Parliament in a free and legal
Parliament by consent of the three Estates of the Kingdom lawfully Assembled,
King, Lords, and Commons, wherein the King does consent for himself, the Lords
for themselves, and the Commons by their Representative body by them Authorized
by a free and unawed or constrained Election of their Deputies; which they
shall appoint to consent for them: And such Act shall conclude all men, because
all men do consent therein by themselves or their lawful Deputies.

3. That the King be forthwith restored to all His just Revenues and Regal
Power, which by Law is due to Him.

Without His revenue be restored unto Him, He cannot subsist, much less
maintain the Royal Dignity which His Ancestors has flourished in; to the
great dishonor of the Nation, to have a King not able to maintain His State
and Dignity without the oppression of His People; and without which he cannot
manage the affairs of the Kingdom incident to his Office: For it is an old
Adage, Indigentem operare bonaest Impossible; And for a King to live by
perpetual begging, is to make Him and His Government hateful to His People.

If the King be abridg'd of the Power of the Sword, he shall have no means to
compel or force Obedience to His just Commands, nor maintain His People from
the oppression of greater men: But every man will do what seems good to Himself
against His Inferior; for only fear of punishment makes bad men fear to
offend: And take away the Power of the Militia from the King, (which is
inseparable from the Crown) and neither ever has, nor can be taken away from
the Crown, then you take away the Kings Coercive Power to enforce Obedience to
the due execution of His Laws, or the means to suppress any Rebellion,
Riots, Routs, or other misdemeanors whatsoever.

4. That His Majesty take a Corporal Oath not to Govern any way but according
to the known Laws of the Kingdom. And whatsoever Sub-minister of His shall do
otherwise, to the prejudice of the Subject, either in point of liberty of their
persons, or propriety of their goods, He will grant them no pardon, but leave
them to the justice of the Law. And likewise to give His Royal Assent to an
Act of Parliament for His Successors to take the like Oath, the beginning of
every Parliament before both Houses, for the same.

That this Oath is no more but the same that Kings do take at their Coronation,
and therefore no prejudice can ensue to the King by the often taking thereof.

That it is a securing of the people for the true performance thereof, by often
taking of it; and by so doing, it shall the better be kept in memory, both by
the King and the States of the Kingdom.

It will keep in awe all Judges and other officers of the Kingdom, when they
shall find themselves incapable of having any pardon for such offenses, and the
King made incapable from granting any such Pardon, as a person who by the Law
can do no wrong to his people; but it must be His Ministers, who by this shall
be in perpetual fear of doing injustice to the Subject.

It shall take from the King and His Successors all causes of discontent or
grievance which may justly grow between the King and His People in the point of
extending the Prerogative beyond its due bound.

It will be a means to procure a hearty and willing Obedience from the people
to the Kings, their desires when they govern no way but according to the Law.

This manner of way is presidented in the Iteration of the Oath by Magna
Charta, which was confirmed thirty times at least, by several Acts of
Parliament: which one Act might have served for a Law, if it had not been
thought fit by our Ancestors to be often regranted for the more firm
observance thereof.

That the taking from the King His Power of pardoning in these Causes, is no
more then the taking away His Power to pardon a wilful murder, which He
cannot pardon, as the Law now is.

That in case of blood, the next of kin may bring an Appeal for their
Ancestors death, which the Party cannot be let of by any pardon whatsoever.

5. That a Proclamation be published for the Disbanding of all Soldiers within
the Kingdom, and bringing in of their Arms within ten days after such
Proclamation upon pain of High Treason, against all Refusers and their
Abettors.

There can be no cause to keep an Army afoot to the oppression of the People,
when there is no enemy to oppose, as there cannot be, when the King is
established in His Government.

That the Kingdom is so impoverished and wasted by the late wars, that it is
not able to bear the charge of an Army any longer.

That the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom are so ruined in their estates
already, that there is no possibility that it can be recovered in a long time,
neither will they be any way able either to contribute to the public
necessities, or well able to pay their debts.

This is most effectual for the disbanding of all Armies without delay; and
may by such a Proclamation be more speedily and easily effected.

6. That the Church Government may stand as it is Established by Law, having
respect to tender Consciences, until such time as it shall be altered by due
course of Law.

7. That His Majesty will be pleased to promise the speedy convening of a
National Synod of forty Divines of His Majesty's own Subjects. And that the
Reformed Protestant Churches may be entreated to send some of their Divines,
such as themselves shall make choice of to assist therein, for Establishing and
Rectifying such an Unity and Conformity with all other Protestant Churches as
shall be by consent agreed upon, whereby to preserve Unity with them, both in
Doctrine and Discipline; which agreement His Majesty will Consent to have
confirmed by Act of Parliament.

That no unity can be preserved either in Church or State, wherein there is no
set form of outward Government prescribed.

That the Government being established by Law, ought, and must be observed till
it be altered by Law: And that Obedience is to be given to it, whilst it is a
Law; And that the Magistrate ought to enforce Obedience to it.

That it will avoid all disturbance in the Commonwealth, concerning difference
of Opinions in point of Religion; a thing most necessary to be prevented.

That if there be any thing in the Church Government now established, either
Superstitious or Superfluous, which tender Consciences may take offense at, and
may well be forborne; It will be necessary for the public Peace and quiet of
the Kingdom, to forbear the strict execution of the Law for the present in
such particulars.

That for the framing of Conformity with all other Protestant Reformed
Churches, whereby the Papists and Sectarists may have no advantage to scandal
our Religion, either in respect of diversity of Opinions, or outward Ceremony:
A National Synod may be conveened in this Kingdom, of Divines and learned men,
whereby not only the tenets of our Religion should be expressed in terminis,
but likewise the outward form of Discipline to be used in the Church.

That it will be much for the Honor of the King and our Nation, that the Kings
of England should take upon them the Protection and Defense of all the
Protestant Reformed Churches, and likewise to be the Head thereof.

As the Kings of Spain make themselves the Head of the Catholic League, and
to this purpose that the Reformed Protestant Churches may be invited to send
their Divines to this Synod, that Agreement may be had with them in every point
concerning either Doctrine or manners in the outward Discipline: And such
Agreement to be established here by Act of Parliament; which all men shall
Conform upon a penalty.

This may be a just Reason to prohibit all private Conventicles and meetings,
wherein private Opinions are broached amongst the people, who thereby are drawn
into Public Factions, and do raise Sedition and Tumults for Religion, to the
disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom.

8. That His Majesty will be pleased to promise to give the Royal Assent to
such Bills to be made Laws, as shall be presented unto Him by both Houses, in a
full, free, and Legal Parliament, which shall no way entrench upon His
Majesty's Legal Prerogative, Honor, or Profit, but only such as tend to the
better Government, and ease of the Subjects, for the future.

This is but just for the King, to grant what the people shall desire, not
trenching upon His own due Rights.

This granted, secures all men for whatsoever bypast, that a free Parliament
shall think fit to do.

The King can do no more but for what concerns Himself.

9. That His Majesty will be pleased to grant these for the present under His
Hand. And which He will confirm at His first coming to Liberty to some House
of His own.

More, the King cannot do, by reason of His Imprisonment, and may befit He
should promise to do, for the present quiet and Peace of the Kingdom, as now
things are, at His first coming to Liberty.

10. And if these shall be refused to be done, either by King or Parliament,
the blame may justly be imputed to lie there: And are very necessary to preced
a Personal Treaty, wherein all Interests may be taken into consideration.

Si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti;
Si non, his utere mecum.

HEN: ANDERSON.

FINIS.

