THE ANATOMY OF Dr. Gauden's Idolized Nonsense and Blasphemy, IN HIS Pretended
Analysis, or setting forth the true Sense OF THE COVENANT; That is to say, Of
that SACRED COVENANT taken by the Parliament, the Commissioners of Scotland,
and the Assembly, September 11. 1643.

Cyprian ad Cornelium. Atque haec Frater, vere est dementia, non cogitare, nec
scire, quod mendacia non diu fallant.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCLX.

THE ANATOMY OF Dr. Gauden's idolized Nonsense and Blasphemy, IN His pretended
Analysis of the Covenant.
FOr the the better understanding of this business, the Readers both of that
Book and this, must know, That the late Long Parliament, (I mean, both the
honorable Houses) drew up, took, and ordered others to take, two several
Covenants, in one year. The first was taken in or about the beginning of June
1643. entitled, See more of this near the end of this Book.
The Vow and Covenant appointed by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, to be taken by every man, in the Cities of London, Westminster, and
the Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and throughout the whole Kingdom. The other
was that Solemn League and Covenant, which the same Parliament, the
Commissioners of the Kingdom and Church of Scotland, and the Assembly of
Divines, took at Westminster, the 11 day of September, in the same year, and
appointed it to be taken by both Kingdoms.

Now, you are to take notice, that it is only the last (the far better of the
two) which this affected Master of Words, (and of little else, for ought
appears by this and sundry other things by him written Witness his tears,
sighs, etc. of the Church of England. His Sermon at Paul's, as it was printed,
etc.
) has opposed, instead of explaining; and, against which, he has lately
thrown out among his deluded Admirers, a new flatulent Piece (as Jupiter did
his Log among the Frogs) which he calls, Analysis, or, The loosing of St.
Peter's bands, setting forth the true sense (if you will believe him) and
solution (that is, the dissolution, if he can effect it) of the Covenant, so
far as it relates to the Government of the Church by Episcopacy. To which Title
of his, (as an inlet to his Discourse, as well as warrantie for the Title) he
has subjoyned part of Acts 16.26. The foundations of the prison were shaken,
the doors opened, and every ones bands were loosed. Thus he rehearses that
Text.

Before I fall to unripping of that Pasquil it self, I must a little consider
the Title of it, in which he presents us with a piece of his Nonsense; if
not Blasphemy, to boot. Non sense, first: For, what Oedipus can unriddle those
first words in it, ( The loosing of St. Peter 's bands) so as (according to his
undertaking) to make sense of them? Was St. Peter bound in this Covenant? Or:
did he impose it upon others? If neither, why does this Wordy Doctor call his
Book, The loosing of St. Peter 's bands? If this be not his meaning, what sense
can there be of that his vapouring flourish?

And why St. Peter's bands? Oh, he has a Text for it, Act. 16.26. as ye saw
but now. But, in alleging it, he will rather pare off part of Gods own words,
(which run thus, The foundations of the prison were shaken, and immediately all
the doors were opened, etc.) than not carry on his own affected Cadencies in
his style. But this is but one of his Peccadillo's.

Now, what intends he, by this loosing of St. Peter's bands; and by that, in
Acts 16.26? He tells you: The setting forth the true sense and solution of the
Covenant, etc. by John Gauden, D. D. Very good. It is then John Gauden that
has loosed St. Peter's bands, that has shaken the foundations of the prison,
opened all the doors, and loosed every ones bands that were in it. If this be
not Blasphemy, (as he applies it) then, O most glorious John! Why do not his
zealous Adorers say of him, as sometimes the Barbarians of Paul, That he is a
God? Why send they not for one of the Priests of Jupiter (I will not say, some
old, high Episcopalian) to bring Oxen and Garlands, to sacrifice unto him, with
the people?

How beit, dic sodes, Doctor. Was it St. Peter indeed, that was in Prison? Were
they his bands that you have loosed? I verily were they, by your telling. And
therefore, though the Text be far from saying any such matter, yet if Doctor
John Gauden say it, it must be believed without gainsaying, though he prove it
not. Nevertheless, if we may be so bold, as to consult the verse next going
before, we might (if we durst) tell him, Act. 16.25.
that we find only Paul and Silas; but no St. Peter there: unless he will say
(which he may as well say, as what he does; for, it is not his manner to prove
ought) that Paul and Silas is Greek for St. Peter; and St. Peter is English for
Paul and Silas; and so, they are all one.

But perhaps St. Peter (in this man's intention) denotes his Successors at Rome;
with whom this charitable Doctor professes (elsewhere In his tears, sighs,
etc. of the Church of England. ^ag. 314.
) a desire to hold not only all inward, but all actual Communion in all
Doctrines and Duties of Faith and Worship agreeable to the Word of God, (as if
that Romish Crew performed any such Duties, without so much mixture of
will worship and superstition, as has not, from the same Word of God, procured
a strait charge to all Gods people, to come out of her, not so much in regard
of place, as Communion, which is doomed as a partaking of her sins.) And, if
this be his meaning, Rev. 18.4.
his Charity has so far transported him, as to loosen what God has laid on
those pretended Successors, and all their Locusts; by upholding Communion with
Popery, which the Covenaut engages all to extirpate. If this be his meaning,
let him speak out.

If he mean otherwise, he is grossly mistaken. Indeed, we find St. Peter to be
cast into Prison at Jerusalem, by Herod, where he had chains put upon his
hands, Act. 12. which, by means of the incessant prayers of the Church to God
for him, an Angel went and unloosed; opened the prison doors, and so brought
him out. But, good Sir, were you that Angel? If so, let your Title stand. I
will have no further difference with you about it.

But, Paul and Silas, whose imprisonment is mentioned in your alleged Text,
Act. 16. were imprisoned at Philippi, far distant from St. Peter's prison. And
even there, we read of no bands upon them, but only that their feet were made
fast in the stocks. And, for ought appears, they were not out of the stocks,
when the bands of every one else were loosed: but they continued therein, till
the Jailer himself came in, and took them thence. But, be that so, or so; we
will not contend about it.

Whose bands then were loosed? The bands of the Jayl birds, who had been cast
in before: namely, Thieves, and perhaps Murderers, and other Rogues and
Malefactors: for they are the usual Guests in such places. Now, if any such
have taken the Solemn League and Covenant, and are thereupon troubled in
Conscience, so as not to dare to set up the old Hierarchy again, with some
small refining, let them repair to Dr. John to loose them of that band; and he
will do it. But, for the greater encouragement of such men and others that are
for that Lordly Episcopacy, and would gladly read his Book, to be satisfied in
Conscience therein, I could wish the Title might be altered, and put into the
words of Martin Mar-prelate, in answer to Dr. J. Bridges that had pleaded for
such Bishops and their Trinkets; (only changeing the Name) that the Title of
the Book might run thus: O read Dr. John Gauden, for it is a worthy Work.

Which, how worthy it is, we shall now further enquire, by looking into the
Book it self. In prosecution whereof, I shall industriously avoid the waste of
so much time, and paper, as would be taken only up in pursuing all his
out-leaps and extravagancies; and use all possible brevity in opening some of
the principal only, for the undeceiving of such as dote upon this (...), Acts
8.10.
or great one, as if he were the great power of God.

The main scope of my present endeavor is this: namely, to make it manifest,
that this Doctor, under pretense of giving that sober sense of the Covenant,
whereof he believes it to be capable before God, before all good Christians,
and in a man's own well-informed Conscience, (which he promises, page 3, 4. and
to do it with freedom from passion and prejudice (page 5.) he directly
labors to decry, vilify, and blaspheme the Covenant it self, and to make it
odious, as that which was sinfully taken at first, and of necessity to be cast
off, and abhorred by all that have entered into it. For more distinct proceeding
therein, I shall endeavor to make out these four Propositions.

1. That he himself does admit the Covenant, to be, in some sense, lawful and
good.

2. That, therein, all sober Christians, who understand themselves, agree with
him.

3. That all this notwithstanding, he endeavors to vilify, make odious, and
to destroy the Covenant it self.

4. That, maugre all his calumnies, and malicious aspersions, the Covenant,
(even as to the point of extirpating that hierarchical Prelacy lately laid
aside,) is to be constantly and conscienciously observed and kept, in the right
sense thereof, by all that have taken it, as they will avoid destruction here,
and damnation hereafter.

I. PROPOSITION. That the Doctor himself does admit the Covenant to be, in some
sense, lawful and good.
1. HIs own words before alleged (where he says he has endeavored to give
that sober sense of the Covenant, whereof he believes it to be only capable
before God, before all good Christians, and in a man's own well-informed
Conscience) is evidence enough (against him, at least,) that the Covenant is
lawful and good. How else could he give a sober sense of it, which he believes
would hold water, before God, all good men, and a well informed Conscience?

2. He tells us (page 14.) that he will look upon the Covenant (with the best
aspect, considered in Conscience) in the softest sense that can be made of it;
namely, as a voluntary Vow, or Religious Bond, by some spontaneously taken, in
order to declare their sense of duty to God, the King, the Church, their
Country, and the reformed Religion, to make themselves more strictly sensible
of the sacred and civil obligations respectively due to them, that so they
might be more ready to discharge them in their places and callings, etc. --
(And is not this lawful, and good?) He after adds, that he believes that
very few took it in any sense, against Primitive, Reformed, and Regular
Episcopacy, so reduced to an efficacious conjunction with Presbytery, as the
most reverend Primate of Armagh proposed in his Reduction of Episcopacy. Now,
if such a Reduction be necessary, the Covenant in this sense cannot be
unlawful, but good.

3. In page the 20. he says, The most strict and severe Covenanter cannot but
be satisfied and absolved in point of Conscience, if first he has and still
does, in his place and calling, seasonably advise, humbly petition, and
lawfully endeavor to reform what is truly amiss in the Church Government by
Bishops. Secondly, If he use the like means to restore and preserve what he
finds good and useful in Episcopacy. -- They then that do not thus, cannot be
satisfied or absolved in point of Conscience: therefore to do this, by virtue
of the Covenant, is lawful and good.

4. In his voluminous Book of Tears and Sighs, etc. page 448. he reckons up
sundry evils, defects and dangers incident to Episcopacy, as namely, pride,
ambition, secular height, and idle pomp, a supercilious despiciency and Lordly
Tyrannizing over other Ministers, and the flocks of Christ under their
inspection; arrogating a power to do all things imperiously, and alone, without
any regard either to that charitable satisfaction which was anciently given to
Christian people; or, to that fraternal Counsel and concurrence which might and
ought in reason to be had, from learned and grave Presbyters, etc. -- Is not
all this enough to prove from his own Pen, That such a Covenant, for
extirpating such an Episcopacy, is lawfully and good?

Indeed, he would (in the same breath) fain extenuate this his unripping of the
late Hierarchy, by saying, that this arises not from the function or
employment, but from the persons of Bishops, (which he brings in, by a
parenthesis:) but, when he had undertaken to enumerate the evils, defects and
dangers incident to Episcopacy it self, of late in use, How can these be
separated from that Function? And if they arise from the persons of Bishops; do
they not arise from the employment of Episcopacy? for, how else could they be
incident to Episcopacy? That parenthesis then, is but a piece of contradictory
nonsense, which can no way infringe the inference I have here made of it, to
confirm, from the Author himself, the first point here undertaken.

II. PROPSITION. Herein all sober Christians who understand themselves, agree
with him.
HE is pleased indeed, (page 6.) from Sir L.B. (at whose motion Page 3.
he wrote and published that pamphlet) to say, that Sir L. B. (a fit Patron for
such a Proctor) told him, that many sober and honest men, are by their once
taking the Covenant, so scared from all complyings with any Church Government,
under any name of Bishops, or notion of Episcopacy, never so reformed and
regulated; that they fear, by looking back to the Primitive; Catholic, and
Universal Government of this, and all other ancient Churches, to be turned into
pillars of Apostasy, as Lots wife was, into a pillar of Salt.

If the Knight told him so, in these words, we must needs admire the
metamorphosis of a Cutler turned Knight, that has arrived already at such
herds of good words, and flocks of figures: and, that he, who heretofore took
the Covenant, and pretended to be a zealous propugner of it, and of all that
had taken it, should now, (in hope to get into some place to help maintain his
Knighthood) leave all those of his former party, and run over to such a flashy
Advocate for Episcopacy, and a mortal enemy to all Covenanters, to assoyle the
doubts of sober honest men that had entered into that Covenant.

But, if that Knight did so inform him, it is be doubted, whether he did it,
for want of ignorance, or of stedfastness in that Covenant of God, and out of a
desire of procuring (by that his story to the Doctor, and his motion for his
resolution of this business, in point of Conscience) some plausible Apology for
his own intended Apostasy. However he did it, let that K. take this to him as
the forerunner of that reward which he must exspect from that God whose
Covenant he has thus occasioned to be despised, That all the reproaches and
blasphemies that are or shall be belched out against the Covenant, (occasioned
by reading that scurrilous Satyr of Dr. John Gauden) will one day be put to
the account of Sir L. B. as the principal occasion of it, and instigator to it;
if God give him not timely repentance, and stop the current of those railing
Shimei's, who are glad of this opportunity to set their mouths against heaven,
and to let their tongues walk through the earth Psa 73.9.
.

But, to leave this digression. I come to make good the second point; which I
enlarge thus; That the admitting of some Church Governors, under the name of
Bishops, reformed and regulated according to the Primitive Catholicue and
Apostolic Institution, for the Government of this Church, is not against, but
very consistent with, and agreeable to the late Solemn League and Covenant, and
the true intention of it, allowable by God and all good men that rightly
understand themselves and the Covenant. And, thus far, they concur with the
Doctor.

To make this out briefly, take notice

1. That the Covenant, Art. 2. as to this point, runs thus: That we shall
sincerely, really, and constantly (through the grace of God) endeavor the
extirpation of Popery and Prelacy (that is, Church government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy.)
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found
contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of godliness; lest we partake in other
men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues; and, that the
Lord may be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms.

This expressly relates to the Prelacy or Episcopacy then in being and use in
England (which was far from Apostolic and Primitive, as this Doctor, in his
words before cited out of his Book of Tears, etc. has clearly confessed:) and
to the extirpating of whatsoever in it savoured of Superstition, Tyranny,
Schism, Profaneness, Sinfulness, or was otherwise contrary to sound Doctrine, or
the power of godliness. If there be any other Episcopacy; truly Apostolic and
Primitive, free from all these evils, and agreeable to sound Doctrine, and the
power of godliness, It is so far from the sense and intention of this Covenant,
to extirpate it, that it plainly includes rather a binding of all Covenanters
to endeavor, by all lawful and fit ways and means, to procure it.

2. That herein, by the Doctors own allegations, all sober honest men that
rightly understand themselves, and the true meaning of the Covenant, concur
with him.

Himself says, (page 22.) that the Covenant is no way in Conscience to be
stretched against a right and regular Episcopacy, no more than Physique given
to cure a disease, should like unmortified Quick silver, be applied to kill the
man. And this, he knows, was the sense of the most learned men in the Assembly.
And this, (he says, page 23.) He has often heard Mr. Marshal This may put him
in mind, that hereupon, himself took the Covenant, which he now so much
vilisieth.
, and others affirm (who had a great hand in penning and promoting the
Covenant) and they owned it to some Foraign Divines, That the Covenant was
levelled at the (Despoticum, Tyrannicum regimen) mis-government, not the
Government by Episcopacy.

To which, he adds, This is at present, the sense and hopes of the most
learned and godly Presbyterians, whom I have lately spoken with in London and
elsewhere, etc. And a little after, he beseeches God, that by his Majesty's
piety and wisdom, (all those materials which were good in that ancient, noble,
and venerable fabric of Episcopacy) may be speedily and resolutely settled in
its best constitution: wherein, to take counsel, is Kingly, and Christian.

But whereas, he there (page 23.) says, that this was also the sense of those,
who with himself, had as much right to sit among them (that is, in the
Assembly) as any others, but were not permitted, either by popular faction and
tumult, or by other shufflings and reasons of State; which took care to exclude
or deter all the excellent Bishops of the Church, and the most able of
Episcopal Divines, for fear there should have been any just plea for moderate
Episcopacy, against the then Magistry of Presbytery: To this I must give this
Answer:

1. That I willingly accept of that part of this speech, that this (to wit,
what was before by him spoken, and by me alleged, touching the right
Episcopacy) was the sense of himself, and of those that by his telling, had
right to fit in the Assembly, to make out my present assertion of the
concurrence of able men herein.

2. That which he here affirms either of himself, or any others having right
to sit in the Assembly of Divines called by Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament, dated June 12. 1643. that they were not permitted, either by
popular faction and tumult, or by other shufflings, etc. to fit, etc. is a very
great slander. For,

1. Touching himself, who (not now only, but heretofore) has complained, that
he having as much right to sit among the Divines in the Assembly as any others,
was not permitted to sit there. If he mean that he had as much right as any
others, who were not at all chosen to sit there, I admit what he says, to be
true. But, if he intend to insinuate that he was chosen, and yet not permitted
to sit, this is a loud untruth; for he being then (as I remember) Parson of the
Deanery of Bocking in Essex (which albeit it be reputed to be worth 4 or 500 l.
per an. yet he, to his shame, and the little honor of those that employ him,
is non-resident from it, and preaches at the Temple:) was not chosen to be one
of the Assembly. For, in Essex were chosen Mr. Stephen Marshal of
Finchingfield, Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, then of Cogshal, and Mr. Matthew Newcomen
of Dedham. But this Doctor was chosen neither there, nor any where else, as by
the Ordinance it self is obvious to every eye that will peruse it. And had it
been otherwise, he had not been permitted, (as I can tell him in his ear) to
have been absent from the Assembly.

And why should he so much complain, and bewail his not being permitted to sit
in that Assembly, which he so much vilifieth, and calls, A sifted Sequatious
Assembly Tears. etc p. 213.
; a Scot-English Assembly which were as the grand Inquest, the Promoters or
Apparitors to the Long Parliamen Page 334.
: Rabbis sitting in Moses Chair Ibid.
? And then, taking it for granted, that the Assembly were the Annotators on the
Bible (which is altogether untrue) he charge them so, as if they were
Chaplains at once serving the Lord, their Bellies and the times, as partaking
of the Table of the lord, and the Table of Devils Ibid page 334.
. I forbear to foul more paper with the rest of his Billinsgate Rhetoric
bestowed on that Assembly.

But now, mark the inference. He is angry that he, having right, was not
permitted to sit in that Assembly. Therefore, his anger, must needs be for
this, that he could not be a Sequatious Assembly-man, one of the Grand Inquest,
a Promoter and Apparitor of the Long Parliament, a Chaplain at once serving the
Lord, his Belly, and the times, and a Partaker of the Table of Devils, as well
as of the Lord. O what pity is it that he fate not! Surely, I have so much
charity for him, (if I may judge of the tree by this fruit) as to believe, and
profess, that if the Assembly had been such as he describes it, he had better
right to fit in it, then any that sat there.

Indeed, his last mentioned expression of the Assembly as being Chaplains at
once serving the Lord, their Bellies, and the Times, arose from his Bilious
Passion at the Annotators for not finding a knot in a Bulrush; and that from
some Textst, hey did not brand that for Sacrilege, which he had done; whether
those Texts, condemn it, or not. But I must not further make an Excursion upon
this: but leave him to D. B. upon whom he has bestowed 10 whole leaves in
Folio in that his scoulding Tears, etc. of his Mother See p 685 etc.
, in nothing but raving, railing, belying the Doctor, without affording one
line in a serious, solid, sober confuting of either that Doctors Definition of
Sacrilege, any Text of Scripture, or other Arguments or Reasons for his
opinion; or, to disprove the same.

But, you will say, what is that to me? I confess, this is a digression,
therefore I will say no more, but only advise Dr. John to spend half the time
(if he can spare no more) in perusing D. B. his second Edition of that Tract of
Sacrilege, (which D. J. G. cannot but have seen) that he has trifled away in
railing upon D. B. and, to confute that Book, if he can; because, as I hear, he
has promised so to do. This, if he will once perform, like a Scholar, and a
Divine; then, whereas D. G. has in his Sighs page 664.
, etc. said (most gravely) that D. B. by his late purchase will give the world
cause in after-ages, to look as narrowly to him, and his posterity, how they
thrive, as the Roman Soldiers did to the Jews Guts and Excrements, when they
searched for the Gold which they had swallowed, as Josephus De excid. Hieros.
tells us. I dare undertake, that then, if D. G. will either desire to be the
Groom of D. B. his Stool, or to be at the charge thereof, he shall have all
that comes from him and his, without purloyning, or the least diminution.

2. But, as to what he says of others, having right to sit, that they were not
permitted, either by popular faction and tumult, or by other shufflings and
reasons of State, which took care to exclude or deter all the excellent
Bishops, and the most able of Episcopal Divines, etc. is a most gross and
malicious untruth.

For, among those that were chosen, and summoned to sit in that Assembly, what
say you to Dr. Richard Love, Dr. Raph. Brownrig Bishop of Exceter; D. Samuel
Ward, Dr. John Harris, Dr. Robert Saunderson, Mr. Robert Cross, James
Archbishop of Armagh, D. Matthias Styles, Dr. Featly, Dr. Christopher Pashly,
Dr. John Hacket, Dr. Thomas Westfield Bishop of Bristol, Dr. Henry Hammon, Dr.
Rich. Oldsworth, and many more? Where can you pick out three Bishops, more
excellent for learning and piety? or, other Episcopal Divines, more able? of
122 Divines chosen to sit, there were 24 that never appeared. And even in the
Assembly, some protested against the extirpation of Primitive Episcopacy, of
which Mr. Herbert Palmer was one. And Dr. Burges was suspended from sitting
there, by the House of Commons, for declaring and protesting against the first
draught of the Covenant, brought into the Assembly, for that (among other
things) there was required an extirpation of Prelacy indefinitely and
absolutely, without either limitation, or explication.

As for those that came not, who excluded, or deterred them? they were all
summoned, as appears by the Books of the Assembly. What hindered them? was it
not either because they liked not the Election, or the Persons chosen to sit
with them; or, that they being for the late King, durst not to sit, either for
fear of molestation by the Parliament, or displeasure of the King?

For the manner of Election, it was no other for kind (although more Solemn and
warrantable) than that antecedaneous choice, which the Lords had made of sundry
Lords, Bishops and other Divines, to consult at the Deans House of Westminster,
touching reformation in matters of Religion; at which none then boggled, but
all readily joined in it.

For the persons chosen to sit with them, they were all of them reputed to be
able and pious, far beyond many that sat in the usual Convocations, wherein
sometimes Laymen (as Chancellors and Registers Witness the Chancellor and
Register of Lincoln, chosen at once to sit in Convocation in the last Kings
reign: Which two, a great Prelatical Doctor that knew them well, called Simeon
and Levi; the Devil and his Damme: upon occasion of that their Election.
) were admitted, as well as some members of both Houses of Parliament, in the
late Assembly. So that if this offended them who now refused to sit in it, the
offense was rather taken, then given.

And as for any fear of trouble from the Parliament, or of displeasure of his
then Majesty, it was but a pannick fear, without ground. For, being called by
the Parliament, the Parliament was bound to protect them. Yea, had they not
been so chosen, yet if they had continued sober, quiet and peaceable, they
needed not to have feared the Parliament. Witness that quiet, sober, prudent
Dr. Juckson, Bishop of London, who lived quietly, and without all danger of
violence or imprisonment, in the Parliament-Quarters; yet was he a man known to
be firm to the King, in the greatest divisions and differences between the King
and Parliament: so might all these have done, carrying themselves as he did.

And, as for the Kings displeasure, there could be as little fear of that. For,
he never was displeased with the Bishop of Londons abode here; but highly
respected and honored him, to the last. It is true, he never sat in the
Assembly, because not chosen a Member of it. Yet the Prince Elector Palatine
sat there, without offense to his Majesty. And albeit his Majesty at first
disliked the calling and sitting of that Assembly; yet afterward, he liked and
approved of what they had done, as appears by the Message he sent to both
Houses of Parliament, October. 11. 1648. wherein (among other things) he was
pleased to express himself touching the Assembly, thus: As to that part of the
Proposition for the calling and sitting of the Assembly of Divines, His Majesty
says, That he will by Act of Parliament confirm the calling and sitting of the
said Assembly since the first of July 1643. And that they shall have such
powers as are mentioned in the said Ordinance. And that they shall continue
their meeting and sitting, and be dissolved in such manner as both Houses of
Parliament shall direct.

But enough of this second point. It is sufficient that the Doctor in the midst
of all his revilings and slanders, has acknowledged so many to concur in the
ture sense of the Covenant.

III. PROPOSITION. That notwithstanding all that he has spoken touching the
true sense of the Covenant, and so great a concurrence in it, he endeavors
to vilify, make odious, and to destroy the Covenant it self, as his main
design.
IN the entrance to his Answers and Solutions, for satisfying of all sober and
honest men's Consciences, to take off their shyness of all manner of Episcopacy,
he begins thus, page 6. To prevent which sad metamorphosis (that is, in turning
Covenanters into pillars of Apostacies) in City and Country, my Answer and
Resolution in point of Conscience, so far as it relates to Episcopacy, is this.
But, in the Margent, he calls his Answers, oblique. And they are oblique
indeed: for, he begins them, thus:

First, he boasts, that he can shrewdly batter the Covenant, by urging the
defectiveness and invalidity of it, to bind, either in conscience, or in any
other Judicatory; because, without the Kings consent. Without this, it binds no
more then the Vow of a Servant, Son, Daughter or Wife, could bind them without,
yea against the declared consent of their Master, Father or Husband, under
whose protection they were, page 6. Here, see his good will in this Battering
Ram.

To prove this, he cites in his Margent, Numb. 30.2. which makes against him,
as I shall after demonstrate. Mean while, take notice, that his instances of
Servants and Sons, is a Tale of a Tub: there is no such thing. That Chapter
mentions only Daughters (in their Fathers house, in their youth) and Wives
that are under Husbands, when the Vow is made. Nor are their Vows void, for
want of a declared consent (as he talks:) but, they are valid, if Father or
Husband, bearing them made, holds his peace, verse. 4. and verse. 7. Who will
trust such a false man, that thus dares to falfifie an express Text of
Scripture?

And whereas he cites in the Margent, Number. 30.2. to prove the invalidity of
Vows of Servants, Sons, Daughters, Wives, as aforesaid; that second verse
expressly makes against what he here alleged it for. His intention is to prove
the Covenant invalid, because taken by men, without the Royal consent. To prove
that, he produces this Text. But, the Text speaks only of a Vow made by a
man: and tells us, that all such Vows are binding. If a MAN vow a vow unto the
Lord, and swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his
word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth. Here is
not the least hint of any Exception, no not so much as of a Son, under his
Father: but, all men that vow, are by God held unto it, whether the chief
Governor consent, or not: It is only the vow of a woman, in minority, or
Matrimony, which may be made void, as is manifest in the subsequent verses;
but, not in that.

As for his Echo, and retorting the Violence and Noise of the times, and the
Midwifery of tumults and Armies, upon the Covenant: His further urging the
Novelty and partiality of it. Page 7. The sad and Tragique Effects, which he
maliciously imputes to the Covenant it self; the bafflings and annulling of it
by Counter and gross Engagements, after it had served as one of the great Rocks
for the late Kings Shipwreck: these are all such nototious untruths, that
nothing but impudence it self raised to its Meridian, would dare to avouch, or
own. I therefore pass through this mire, without answering this wise Doctor
according to his scurrilous folly.

But, as to his sixth Oblique Answer, page 8. wherein, he says, It is very
considerable how the Covenant (if interpreted against all Episcopacy) must
needs grate sore upon, and pierce to the very quick, those former lawful Oaths
(where he takes it for granted that the Covenant is not lawful) not only that
of Allegiance and Supremacy, and Canonical Obedience; but, that of the King at
his Coronation. And, he after adds, that there cannot be any Superfetation of
such a contradictory Vow and Covenant, without apparent perjury. I must here
make bold to tell him, first, supposing the Covenant to be against all
Episcopacy, what is that to the Oaths of Supremacy and Aliegiance to his
Majesty? Can no man be true to Kings, but he that is for Bishops? Verily, this
very Doctor herein contradicts and confutes this absurd Assertion, at page 25.
where he says, Doubtless the sense of the Covenant has lately quickened many
men's Consciences in the Allegiance to the King, so to bring him (as David) home
with infinite joy and triumph. Who acted most in re-introducing the secluded
Members, in procuring a free Parliament, and in bringing home his present
Majesty, (whom God bless and preserve) but Covenanteers? Nor is there any
syllable in the Covenant contrary to, but altogether consistent with, and
inciting to the most vigorous performance of those two Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance. To charge therefore the Covenant as contradictory to the former
Oaths; and, as tending to apparent perjury, is such manifest blasphemy against
so sacred an Oath of God, as cannot but be abhorred of all sober Christians.

Touching the Oath of Canonical Obedience to Bishops: it is true, they took
upon them to impose such a tyrannical Yoke upon too many of their brethren.
But, quo jure? and how far were such Oaths Obligatory? This was never found
practiced by Apostolic and Primitive Bishops; nor warranted by any Law of this
Land: but only derived from the Canon Law, which here is limited by our
Statute Laws; none of which do appoint or approve any such Oath. Nor can it be
expected, that if Episcopacy should be reduced to the Primitive Institution,
such tyranny will ever be again endured. And as for that Oath, what does it
require, but obedience in omnibus licitis and honestis; which, our late
Episcopacy least cared for? The Laws tie all men to things lawful and honest.
And, if so, then the same Doctor has furnished me with an Argument (strong
enough to retort upon the Author of it) against that Canonical Oath, which
himself urges against the Covenant, page 15. (inverting only the name of the
Covenant, into that of this Oath:) They are not the bare words of the Oath of
Canonical Obedience, which as Charms, can bind any man's Conscience to or
against any thing; but it is the force of Truth, Reason, Justice, Religion and
Duty to God and man, our selves or others, which morally and really obliges
men, either by Gods general or particular Precepts; which are as Iron and
Adamantine Bands on every man's soul, to choose good and do it, to hate evil, and
eschew it, long before any of these withes or cords of man's combining or tying,
are put upon them. By which he argues the needlesness of the Covenant; and so
do I, of the unwarranted Oath of Canonical Obedience. And if this Oath should
be extended to obey such Bishops as Wren, Pierce, and others, in all they of
late enjoined, there is much more cause to conclude against it, then against
the Covenant (though it should be extended to extirpation of all Episcopacy) in
the words of this Doctor, page 8. It is therein of no bond or validity, as to
any good man's Conscience. And so farewell such an Oath.

And touching the Kings Oath, there is nothing obliging him further then to
preserve that Government; so far as it is agreeable to, and warranted by the
holy Scripture, and Primitive Institution: so far he condescended at the Isle
of Wight. And who requires more? And yet, even this also may be changed, by
his Royal Assent to the Counsel and Desire of the two Houses of Parliament; as
this Doctor does more then tacitly admit, page 18. Cannot the Legislative
Power change Government by Bishops, as well as abrogate other Laws? This is to
charge some with perjury, which he dares not to name: to fright others with a
Scarecrow, or man of Clouts; and, to condemn all the Churches of Christ that
have laid Episcopacy aside.

His next Quarrel at the Covenant, (if it abjure all Episcopacy) is this, That
it runs us upon a great Rock, not only of Novelty, but of Schism; and dasheth
us, both in opinion and practice, against the Judgment and Custom of the
Catholic Church, in all places and ages (till of latter years He means till
Calvin. See his Dendrology in his sighs, tears, etc:
) from the Apostles days. This he often harps upon in a Magisterial
Traditionary way. But, once prove that our abolished Episcopacy was of so
ancient and universal Observation; Et eris mihi Magnus Apollo. Whoever will but
read the judgment of Doctor John Reynolds concerning Episcopacy, expressed in
a Letter to Sir Francis Knolls, in the year 1598. and Dr. Vshers Tract, called,
The Reduction of Episcopacy, proposed in the year 1641. will soon find this
man's bold Assertion to dwindle into a vapor.

In the eighth place, Page 10.
under color of propounding the Loyal and Religious sense of it; he dasheth it
with unlawfulness to be taken at all: For, when he would have men to retire to
the sober sense wherein alone it might lawfully be taken, he adds an Alloy;
If it had been imposed by due Authority. This shows his denial of the
lawfulness of it. And so, in stead of satisfying a scrupulous Conscience how to
take the Covenant a right, he cunningly deterreth from the taking of it at all:
is not this Juggling? By due Authority, he means Supreme Authority, as is
clear by his next Answer; in examining whereof, I shall endeavor to lay open
the weakness and falsehood of this suggestion.

Ninthly, Page 0.
he tells you, It were easy to level to the ground all those fair, but
fallacious pretenses drawn to fortify the Covenant, from Scripture-examples,
wherein the Jews sometimes solemnly renewed their Covenant with God: But, it
was that express Covenant which God himself had first made with them in Horeb
and Mount Sinai, punctually prescribed by God to Moses, and by Moses (as their
Supreme Governor or King) imposed upon them. This, they sometimes renewed,
after they had broken it by their Apostasy to false and strange gods. But this
was not the case of the Church or people of England, nor was there any need of
such covenanting, any more then there was any Moses, or Hezekiah, or Josiah, or
any chief Governor commanding it.

As the Hatlot is forward to call her Whore, first, with whom she unjusty
quarrelleth; so this Deceiver cries out upon the fallaciousness of the
Covenant, because he seeks fallaciously to take off all men from it. In this
reviling of his, there are falsehoods enough. I will instance in some.

First, it is false that there was no Covenant, but of Gods own prescribing;
and, secondly, that he prescribed but one. I shall, for brevity, discover the
falsehood of both these together. If none, but of his prescribing, what means
that of this Doctors own quoting before, Number. 30.2. which was spontaneous?
What, that of Joshua, and the Princes of the Congregation, with the cheating
Gibeonites? Josh. 9.15. And, what that (to omit sundry other) of the children
of Israel and the children of Judah (after the Babylonish Captivity) who joined
themselves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, never to be forgotten? Jer.
50.5. These were all several Covenants, of different kinds; none of them
prescribed, yet all of them allowed (and the breach of them punished) by God.
To this, may be added, what the University of Oxford, in their Reasons against
the Covenant by general consent in Convocation, June 1. 1647. Sect. 2. page 2,
3. says for it self, that they are unsatisfied, because the Covenant is
imposed, which is repugnant to the nature of a Covenant; which being a
contract, implies a voluntary mutual consent of the Contractors.

It is also false, that the Covenant on Mount Sinai was imposed by Moses (as
the Supreme Governor or King) on the people. For Moses was no more their
Supreme Governor or King, then Samuel, to whom the people impetuously cried
for a King, to judge them like all the Nations 1 Samuel 8.5.
, when the Lord himself was their King 1 Samuel 12 12.
.

Nor did Moses, but God himself impose that Covenant in Horeb, as their Supreme
Governor, if Moses may be believed. For he tells us, that The Lord talked with
them face to face, in the Mount, out of the midst of the fire. Moses, only
stood between the Lord and them, at that time, to show them the word of the
Lord. Deuteronomy. 5.4 5.


And albeit there was but one Legal Covenant, yet what was the Circumcision,
and the Passover; and many more made, or lawful to be made, (and sundry of them
to be renewed also; as, the Passover, and other Festivals) by such solemn
prescribing?

And whereas he blesses God (as they that bless an idol Esaias 66.3.
) that Apostasy to false and strange gods, was not the case of the Church or
people of England, so as to take rise from thence, to enter into this Covenant:
I desire him to tell me, what meant the falling off of sundry Bishops to too
much Popery both in Doctrine (witness all their Arminian Tenets, which the
learned Bannes, and other Dominican Papists disclaim, and confute:) and also in
the general practice in Cathedrals, and elsewhere, the setting up of Altars,
Tapers, Candles, etc. (devised by man's fancies:) Injuct. 3.
which last (among other things) is in the Queens Injunctions, affirmed to tend
to Idolatry and Superstition; which of all other offenses, God Almighty does
most detest and abhor, for that the same diminish most his honor and glory.

The like may be said of the late Church-Musique, Anthemes, etc. sung with so
much curiosity, quavering, tautologies, etc. that the hearers cannot understand
any part of the matter which is sung. A thing which not only the judicious
Hooker censured and condemned; but the late Queen Elizabeth provided against,
Injunct. 49. by enjoining only modest and distinct songs to be so used in all
parts of the Common Prayers in the Church, that it may be as plainly
understood, as if it were read without singing. And even where Music, at the
beginning, or ending of Common Prayer, was permitted, it was further provided,
that if an Hymn were sung, care should be taken that it might be so done, as to
be understood and perceived. And where this is not so done, see the censure of
the Homily of the place and time of Prayer, part 2. where such chaunting and
playing upon Organs, are said to have displeased God so sore, and filthily
defiled his holy House, and his place of Prayer, that for it he justly
destroyed many Nations.

To say nothing of the many thousands of Popish families in England, and the
swarms of Priests, Jesuits and other Emissaries of the Pope, that at all times
creep in, not only into Widows houses, but into Noble-mens and Princes Houses,
to seduce, and draw more and more men and women off from the truth to
Superstition and Idolatry every day. Page 11.
There is therefore cause enough to make such a Covenant. But, where he adds,
That this Covenant was but the petty composition of a few Politic men, very
mean Subjects some of them, either as Lawyers, or Ministers, a great part of
whom, he, and others knew to be no very great Clerks or Statesmen; and fitter
for a Country Cure, then to contrive and compose Solemn Leagues and Covenants,
etc. adding, that their beads, rather then their hearts, and their
State-correspondencies more then their Consciences, brought forth this
Covenant. I shall not retort, that there be not none who know him to be such an
one himself: but only, desire all, to pity and pray for him. This railing vein
is so incorporated into his proud felleous heart, that there is no hope of
curing it, but by slighting such palpable scornings, and praying for the
scorner, that the Lord may either heal, or rebuke him Zech. 3.2.
.

Lastly, He confidently (I will not say, not for want of ignorance) a voucheth,
that there is no precept or pattern for any such in all the New Testament, nor
in all succeeding ages; and that we never read, nor heard of any Covenanting
Christians (until the Holy League (meaning that of bloody Papists to destroy
the Hugonotes, as they termed the Protestants) in France) except that of
Baptism -- this is the New and Evangelical Covenant of all true Christians:
this (he says) we break by wilful and presumptuous sins; and renew by true
repentance and worthy participation of the Lords Supper. Then he proceeds,
saying; How vastly different from this sacred Covenant, Page 12.
this late piece of Policy more then Piety is, etc. he leaves to all sober
minded Christians to judge.

To which I answer, That if there were no precept, nor pattern in the New
Testament, it is sufficient if there be any in the Old; if not Levitical, or
merely Typical: unless this Doctor be turned Antinomian. For, all Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. This is meant of the
Old, as well as New Testament. For, whatsoever things were written aforetime,
were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures, might have hope, Romans 15.4.

2. What means he by this Covenant? Is it his meaning, that there is no
precept nor pattern for Covenanting against our English Episcopacy? (there is
not any for it, say I.) Nor is it much material, that he has found none
against it, for we can find no such Episcopacy in the New Testament; nor,
warranted by it; notwithstanding all his common talk in this Book, and
elsewhere. But this Gentleman must be pleased to look upon this Covenant, not
only as against his adored Episcopacy, but in the full Latitude, as being
extended against Popery, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever is
contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of godliness in our selves as well as
others: And, for the Preservation and Reformation of Religion against the
Common Enemies, as likewise to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person
and Authority, to discover all Incendiaries, Hinderers of the Reformation of
Religion (beware, Doctor) Dividers between the King and his People, or one of
the Kingdoms from the other; to endeavor the continuance of the happy Union
and Peace between them; to assist and defend all that have taken it, in the
maintaining and pursuance thereof; to be unfainedly humbled for our own sins,
and for the sins of these Kingdoms, and to endeavor for our selves and all
others under our charge, in all duties to God and man, to amend our lives, and
each one to go before another in the example of a real Reformation. This is the
sum of that Covenant (which each man promises to observe, in and according to
their several places and callings only) that this man so much sets at
naught, spurneth at, and does what he can to cause all men to throw off and
abominate, merely upon that one single clause of extirpating the late
Hierarchy, if so intended, as, for the future, to keep out all such Episcopacy
as he would have to be retroduced, although he never particularly describes,
nor sets forth what that is.

And now, I might leave it to all sober Christians to judge, whether this
Covenant (taken in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts,
with a true intention to perform the same, as all that take it shall answer at
that great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed,) be a piece
of Policy more then of Piety; And how little it differs from that sacred
Covenant of Baptism, wherein every man stipulateth, and Covenanteth to deny all
ungodliness and wordly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world Tit. 2.12.
?

What other in effect and substance is our present folemn League and Covenant?
And dares this Seraphical Doctor to say, that this could not be lawfully taken,
for want of due Authority to impose it? does not God require as much? has not
he imposed all these things upon all Christians? are not they all called upon
by God himself to Vow all these unto God, and to pay them too? What then can it
be less then deso rate madness, to throw off such a Covenant?

And is there no precept or pattern to warrant such a Covenant in the New
testament? what is the meaning of that, spoken to men under the
Baptismal-covenant before; Give your selves unto God, as those that are alive
from the dead? Romans 6.13. What is it to contend earnestly for the faith which
was once delivered to the Saints Jude 3.
, in nothing terrified by the adversaries Phil. 1.28
? Are not these precepts (together with that in Tit. 2.12. before mentioned)
warrant enough to Vow and Covenant, again and again, to do all this? And as for
Paterns, what says our Doctor to that of the Macedonians, namely, their giving
themselves first to the Lord; and then, unto Paul, by the will of God 2 Cor. 8.5
? Nay, what says he to Paul himself, joining with those four men that had a
vow upon them Act. 21.23
; whom Paul (by advice of James and all the Elders that were present Verse. 18.
took, and the next day purifying himself with them, entered into the Temple, to
signify the accomplishment of the days of purification Verse. 26.
? If it be said this was a Ceremonial Covenant: I reply, If Paul himself held
it lawful (even when those vows were to be at an end) for avoiding of scandal
among weak brethren, or malicious persecuting Jews, to enter such a Vow (which
he had upon him after his conversion, Acts 18.10.) without any imposition of
God or man, even under the Gospel: then much more would he allow such a
Covenant as this, being altogether Evangelical.

But whereas he will allow but one Covenant, to wit, Baptism, in the Gospel;
and this being broken by wilful and presumptuous sins, is renewed by true
repentance, and worthy participation of the Lords Supper: there are in this
almost as many gross errors, as words.

For, first, Is not the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, a Gospel Covenant, as
well as Baptism? Did ever any intelligent Divine either deny this, or affirm it
to be a renewing of the other, and not a Covenant in it self? Secondly, Do true
Christians, truly entered into the Baptismal Covenant, break it by wilful and
presumptuous sins? I had thought that he that is born of God, does not (so)
sin, for that his seed remains in him: yea, that he cannot (so) sin, because
he is born of God 1 John 3.9.
: and that, though he does what he hates; yet, not allowing it, nor wilfully
and presumptuously, but out of weakness, (being led into captivity) doing what
he would not, it is no more he that does it, but sin that dwells in him Romans
7.16, 17.
. Thirdly, Does Repentance take off wilful and presumptuous sins? In the Law
there was no Sacrifice appointed for such sins: yea, God made a Law, that he
that sinned presumptuously, should die the death (...)
. And in the Gospel, if we believe the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, we
are taught, that if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice (no not of Christ himself) for
sin, but a fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries Heb. 10.26, 27.
. Fourthly, Does Repentance renew our Covenant made in Baptism? Surely, no more
then it renews the remission of our sins: which, not Repentance, but Christ,
in Baptism, bestows upon us once for all Act. 2.38.
: For he, by one offering, has perfected for ever them that are sanctified
Heb. 10.14.
. Repentance recovereth the sense of Gods favor and pardon, but does not give
a new remission. Again, fifthly, The Lords Supper does not renew our Baptismal
Covenant as to remission of sin, but strengthens us, on Christ's part, to
perform our Covenant in Baptism; and renews our Vows on our part, to perform
it better: therefore it is called, The Communion of the body and blood of
Christ, whereby, we being many, are made one bread, and one body, because we
are thereby partakers of that one bread 1 Cor. 10 16, 17.
; of which he that eats, shall live for ever Joh. 6.51
. By this means, We grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even
Christ Ephesians. 4.15.
. Sixthly, The Lords Supper is not to be renewed, or taken again and again, for
renewing our Baptismal Covenant, because broken by wilful and presumptuous
sins; but, for the renewing of our thankful remembrance of his death 1 Cor
11.26.
; for our more full Communion with him, by partaking of him 1 Cor. 10
, and increase in him, till we come to a perfect man, to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ Ephesians. 4.14.
.

I have insisted on this the longer, because these few words savor strongly of
Arminianism, and Popery. I shall make amends by brevity in the rest. Whereas he
tells us, page 13. that there is neither Law of God or man, requiring, imposing
or comprobating any such Covenant; and that it appears at best, to be but a
matter of Will Worship of humane and private invention, void of public and
plenary injunction, esteemed by many to be but as a stratagem of State, a flag
of Faction, an Engine framed on purpose to batter down Episcopacy, and to seize
their Estates, and all the Patrimony of the Church, to the great enriching of
some Sacrilegious Protestants, etc. and, to the great joy of the Romish Party
and Jesuits, etc. who are thought by many wise men to have been, if not the
Sires, yet the Sibs to that Covenant. This, and much more, is so full of
railing, that no wise man will hold it other then folly to bestow a Line in
Answer to it. If this be not Blasphemy, I know not what is. As for his frequent
prating of Sacrilege, here, in his Sermons, in his long, tedious Ink-horn,
Tears, Sighs, etc. I know none so like unto Doeg, as this false vainglorious
man, whose tongue (and pen) devise mischief, like a sharp Rasor, working
deceitfully: loving evil more then good, and lying rather then to speak
righteousness. For this point, I again refer him to Doctor Burges, whose Book
making it out that it is no Sacrilege nor Sin to buy such Lands, still lies
unanswered: and yet men go on with their clamours and railings, as if nothing
had been offered to stop their mouths who can swallow Church Lands formerly
alienated, without the least regret.

But whereas he says, page 24. This Age is the first Parent of that Prodigy,
wherein Orthodox and reformed Christians, either Presbyters or People, did
persecute godly Bishops (of the same Faith and Profession) yea, and Episcopacy
it self, though never so regular and reformed: I must crave leave to say, That
however Godly Bishops have heretofore been persecuted unto death, in diverse
former ages of the Church; yet neither were they persecuted by Orthodox and
reformed Christians, but by enemies to the Truth and Godliness. Nor did any
Orthodox and reformed Christians, either Presbyters or People, persecute any
godly Bishops of this age. This therefore is a mere calumny and slander. It is
true, that some Orthodox and reformed Christians, did exhibit and prosecute
Archbishop Laud, Bishop Wren, and Bishop Pierce, two (if not all of them) being
charged with no less than High Treason: the first whereof being found guilty,
was executed Jan. 10. 1644. The other two never answered the Articles exhibited
against them unto this day, nor vindicated themselves of those Aspersions cast
upon them, for being the prime and most active, and officious Instruments of
Laud, to set the Church on fire; by means whereof, all the rest of the Bishops
sped the worse.

How godly these were, I know not; but this Doctor has been the Proctor, and
Advocate of Laud Sighs, etc. page 628.
, and Doctor Wren page 634.
, highly applauding them in opposition to the charge of the House of Commons
against them: and that he might lick clean him that was a known Papist, (his
hand being in) he bestows a Vindication or Apology, even for the late Bishop
of Gloucester, Doctor Goodman page 637
also; only he could find nothing to say for Bishop Pierce, though he so
devoutly thanked God that he had put down all the Lectures in his Diocese.

There were, no doubt, some of those Bishops which he also commends, that
were learned and pious. But let him name one of those (unless such as were
trapann'd by Williams, and other Capritious Pragmaticks, to have their hands in
that high and unparliamentary Petition and Protestation to the late King and
House of Peers, in Dec. 1641.) that were ever in the least persecuted, and not
rather honored (if learned and indeed godly) by Orthodox and reformed
Christians, whether Presbyters or People. If any of them suffered with the
rest, in the abolishing of such Prelacy, they may thank those other ruffling,
Ceremonious, violent Ringleaders before named; and not blame others who could
not help it, nor longer endure the slavery and persecution which those
Amaziah-like Priests Amos.
, and Tyrants, had exercised over them. I now proceed to my last Proposition,
which is this.

IIII. PROPOSITION. That, maugre all this man's calumnies, and malicious
aspersions, the Covenant, (even as to the point of that Hierarchical Episcopacy
lately laid aside,) is to be constantly and conscienciously observed and kept,
in the right sense thereof, by all that have taken it, as they will avoid
destruction here, and damnation hereafter.
DVrus sermo, you will say: this is an hard saying. But, not more hard then
true. I shall make it out, thus.

1. If it were a Covenant made between man and man, God will require
performance, or severely punish the breach of it. We see this in the breach of
the Covenant made by Joshua and the Princes of Israel: Josh. 9.15. Although
they obtained it by a wile, and by a lie. By a wile, in coming in old shoes
and clouted, and old garments upon them, and all the bread of their provision,
was dry and moldy, ver. 5. By a lie, several times repeated, in saying, they
came from a far; yea, a very far country, verse. 6. etc. whereas after the
Covenant made, their lying appeared, and they were discovered, at the end of
three days, to be their neighbors, and that they dwelt among them. All the
Congregation of Israel, would hereupon have smitten and destroyed them, they
being such as by Gods command were to have been destroyed by Joshua Verse. 24.
, and had now so basely cheated Joshua, and all Israel. This the Princes would
not suffer; whereupon all the Congregation murmured against the Princes: But
all the Princes said to all the Congregation, We have sworn unto them by the
Lord God of Israel; now therefore we may not touch them, ver. 18, 19. This
quieted the people for the present, and for a long time after. Howbeit Saul, in
an humor of envy or malice, many hundred years after slew the Gibeonites, which
then he found in Israel. But Gods anger was so kindled at this, that he smote
all the Land with a famine, for three years together, even toward the latter
end of David's reign. And when David enquired of the Lord, the cause of this
sore Plague, The Lord answered, It is for Saul, and his bloody house, because
he slew the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.1. To appease this wrath, seven of Saul's
sons, were demanded, and hanged before the Lord, ver. 9. -- And after that, the
Lord was entreated for the Land, ver. 14.

Now, if God were so severe for the breach of such a deceitfully obtained
Covenant between man and man, when they that procured it, were so base and
false as our Doctor would make the late Covenant contrivers, and destined to
destruction by God himself by that very hand which made that League with them:
How sinful and dangerous must it needs be, for men, upon any pretense
whatsoever, to depart from, or wilfully to break any Covenant made with God
himself! Here was no prescribing of the League by God, nor force upon Joshua or
Israel: Yet God would not put up the breach of it, even upon the posterity of a
treacherous Crew that had merely cheated all his people at once.

2. There is no Covenant made between man and man, but it is the Oath of God,
and his Covenant. So, that Oath and Covenant made between the King and his
Subjects, is called, The Oath of God, Eccles. 8.2. thus the Oath and Covenant
of Zedekiah, made with the King of Babylon, (an Idolater, and an enemy of God
and all his people) is by God himself called, Mine Oath, and my Covenant, Ezekiel.
17.19. And upon this account it was, that Joshua and the Princes of Israel,
swearing by the Name of the Lord God, they durst not to touch the Gibeonites.
Therefore all such Covenants are irrevocable, and indispensable. If any man
shall break them, he is sure to be ruined. Witness Zedekiah, though a King, and
though forced by the King of Babylon, who had conquered Judah, laid aside the
rightful King thereof, Jehojakim, and set up Mattaniah (Uncle to Jehojahim)
whom he called Zedekiah 2 Kin. 2^.27.
, and made him swear by God, to be a Tributary to him; yet, rebelled against
him, 2 Chronicles. 36.13. His rebellion was, his sending Ambassadors into Egypt,
that they might give him Horses, and much people, to arm himself to throw off
the yoke of the King of Babylon to whom he had sworn to be subject, Ezekiel.
17.15. Now, much might have been said for this. That Nebuchadnezzar was an
enemy, a great Tyrant over the people of God, who were Abraham's seed, and that
were not to be in bondage to any man. And the Covenant was imposed on him by
force, etc.

But, all this notwithstanding, mark how God takes this breach of such a forced
Covenant as this: Shall he break the Covenant, and be delivered? Nay, now he
that cared not for his Oath, makes God himself to swear his ruin: As I live,
says the Lord God, surely in the place where the King dwells, that made him
King, whose Oath he despised, and whose Covenant he brake, even with him, in
the midst of Babylon he shall die. Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty Army,
and great company, make for him in the war, by casting up mounts, and building
forts to cut off many persons. Seeing he despised the Oath by breaking the
Covenant, (when lo, he had given his hand) and has done all these things, he
shall not escape. Therefore thus says the Lord God, (again) As I live, surely
mine Oath that he has destised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it I
will recompense upon his own head. And I will spread my not upon him, and he
shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead
with him there for his trespass that he has trespassed against ME. And all his
fugitives (such as first counseled him to break that Covenant) and all his
bands. (that adhered to him in that war) shall fall by the Sword; and they that
remain, shall be scattered abroad toward all winds. And ye shall know that I
the Lord have spoken it: Verse. 16.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

By this it is clear as the Sun, that God will never put up the wilful breach
of any Covenant, but dreadfully punish it, even upon Kings themselves; and will
extend his wrath not only upon themselves, but upon all that counsel them to
it, (Take heed, Doctor) and join with them in it. Of how much sorer punishment
then suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who shall dare to trample under
feet any Covenant made with God himself, in what manner soever, as an unholy
thing?

Nor will this end with temporal plagues in this life; but in Hell hereafter,
although the Vow and Oath were but voluntary, and not imposed. For the breach
of such an Oath, Vow, or Covenant, is a sin; and the wages of sin is death Romans
6.23
; not only natural, but eternal, if not repented of. That this is a sin,
appears plainly by Gods own Declaration, Deuteronomy. 23.21. When thou shall vow a vow
unto the Lord thy God, thoushalt not slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will
surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee; to wit, not to pay it;
yea, to be slack to pay it. And that this is meant of even a voluntary vow,
appears in verse. 22. But if thou shall forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in
thee. Wherefore, he adds, verse. 23. That which is gone out of thy lips, thou
shall keep and perform; even a free will offering, according as thou have vowed
unto the Lord thy God, which thou have promised with thy mouth. Can there be a
clearer proof?

Take one more, that by two or three witnesses, every word may be established.
It is that of the Preacher, Eccles. 5.4, 5. When thou vowest a vow unto God,
defer not to pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools, (which, with God, are
wicked men, Psalm 73.3.) Pay that which thou have vowed. Better is it that thou
should not vow, then that thou should vow, and not pay. This therefore
makes it out, that it is a sin not to perform a voluntary vow. Now, lest, after
a vow, the Covenanter should not think to evade his vow, by pleading, that he
did it rashly, and it was an error in him so to do; it is added, by way of
anticipation, verse. 6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither
say thou before the Angel, that it was an error. Wherefore should God be angry
at thy voice, (that is, wherefore should thou anger him by so speaking?) and
destroy the work of thy hands? It being now plain that this is a sin, it cannot
be denied, that a wilful continued breach of a voluntary Vow and Covenant, if
not duly repented of, will certainly end in Hell.

If it be said, These instances are of particular and private persons: what is
this, to prove the like sinfulness and danger of the breach, or throwing off of
a National Oath, League, and Covenant, not imposed by due, or Supreme Authority?

To this I Answer:

1. The Obligation of an Oath or Covenant, consists not in the Paucity or
multitude of those that enter into it, but in the making use of God in it; and
his declaration thereupon. This was a tie upon all Israel; the swearing to the
perfidious Gibeonites, by the Lord God of Israel, as we have showed before.
Hence that of Solomon, Eccles. 8.2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings
commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God. Where this comes, the Oath
and Covenant is indissolubly binding. If we once lift up our hand to the most
high God, he will be sure to lift up his hand against us, if we Vow, and not
pay; be we few, or many.

2. Nor will the imposing, or not imposing of it by Supreme Authority alter the
Case. For, it is observable, that in all such National Vows and Covenants,
neither the Supreme Magistrates imposition, or so much as consent, is at all
recorded in Scripture, or mentioned; which shows that there is no necessity of
either. It is God, not Kings, that makes the Covenant obligatory. Take an
instance or two.

The one is of all Israel, in the Wilderness. When they were set upon by King
Arad the Canaanite, who (at first worsted them) and took some of them
prisoners; Israel vowed a vow to the Lord, and said, If thou will indeed
deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their Cities Number
21.2
. Here is no word, or hint of Moses (their Supreme Governor, as this Doctor
unadvisedly calls him:) yet the Vow and Covenant was binding. For God took
notice of it, and by his acting confirmed it. The Lord hearkened to the voice
of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites, and they utterly destroyed them,
and their Cities ver. 3.

The other is of Judah, and part of Israel (many hundred years after) in the
days of Asa; who being by him gathered together at Jerusalem, to make an
offering to the Lord, they entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul, That whosoever would
not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or
great, whether man or woman; and they swore unto the Lord with a loud voice. --
And all Judah rejoiced at the oath, -- and be was found of them, and the Lord
gave them rest round about, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13, etc. Here was a National
Covenant, and a Divine acceptance of it. Yet no word, or syllable of Asa, as
imposing, or confirming of it. Which is evidence enough, that the imposing, or
consenting of a King, is not of the essence of a Legitimate Covenant: It is
enough that God owns it, and commands performance. Nor can any one instance be
given, throughout the whole Book of God, that any Oath, Vow, or Covenant, to
which the King, or Supreme Magistrate, would not, or did nor consent, was upon
that reason or ground made null and void: or, that any King ever went about to
vacate, and adnul any Covenant made with God without the consent of the King.
It is then no other but blaspheming the Gods, to term the late Parliament
bungling Reformers, for doing Church-work without the Master Builders, Kings
and Bishops; if he refer it to the Covenant. If he does not so, then this is
but a piece of railing Nonsense, pulled in by head and ears, to vent his gaul
upon his betters.

Do not all Parliaments advise and consult with whom they think meet, even in
matters of Religion and Ecclesiastical affairs as well as Civil, and Vote and
pass them before they offer them to the King? did they not so, in this? And did
not his then Majesty take them into consideration, and condescend to so much,
as they gave him time to consider of? without declaring against the rest, but
only suspending consent, till his Conscience might be better satisfied?

Nay, even that which was never offered to his Majesty at all, (being no way
contrary or contradictory to the Oaths of Supremacy, and Allegiance) was never
opposed, or contradicted by him. Witness the Protestation of May 5. 1641. taken
by both Houses of Parliament: and afterward, by the House of Commons alone,
imposed on all the Kingdom, without so much as asking his Majesty's consent:
which was never controuled, or disallowed by the King, albeit he was then in
Person residing at White Hall, and could not be ignorant of what was done
therein.

And, what ails the man to make such a noise about the imposing of the Solemn
League and Covenant, without the then King, who was then absent! Did not both
Ezra, and Nehemiah also draw all the people into a solemn Covenant with God
Ezra. 10.3 Neh. 9.38.
, without special Commissions (unless for reparing the Temple) from the Persian
Monarch, then their Sovereign; albeit they were not free Subjects, but Vassals,
and one of them the menial servant of Artaxerxes, then by Conquest Supreme
Governor of Judah?

Nor did his late Majesty ever command the renouncing of the said Solemn League
and Covenant taken by both Kingdoms, Sept. 11. 1643. albeit he published a
Proclamation, Jun. 21. in the 19th year of his Reign, viz. An. 1643. against
that other Vow and Covenant, which was about that time, taken by the Lords and
Commons, and by them appointed to be taken by every man in the Cities of
London, Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, and throughout the whole Kingdom:
the administering and taking of which (by such as had not taken it) were by that
Proclamation, for the reasons therein contained, forbidden.

But, albeit this were lately (by an enemy to the other Solemn League and
Covenant) without warrant, reprinted, and scattered up and down as if it had
been an interdicting and prohibiting those that had taken it, to perform it;
and to give some countenance to that railing Pamphlet of the Doctor here laid
open in his colors; in hope that Ignorant ones would surely thereupon cast off
that Covenant of God: yet that was but a mere cheat and gullery, of which it
behooves all honest men and sober Christians to take notice, and beware.

Nor are Oaths and Covenants once solemnly taken, to be cast off and disclaimed
upon any pretense whatsoever, be there never so many defects and failings in
the imposing or taking of them, unless the matter of them be sinful, as that of
those Jews that bound themselves under an Oath of Execration, or curse, not to
eat or drink till they had killed Paul Act. 23.14
. This I have said enough unto already; yet do repeat it, because since the
writing of the premises, I have met with a Book entitled, The Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance which have been laid aside for many years, etc. which
tells us Page 5.
, That though there be many infirmities and miscarriages committed in the
making and taking of public Oaths; and although the things they oblige unto,
be against the interest of the people; and though the breach and violation
thereof, has the countenance of fair and specious intents and ends, seemingly
conducing unto the public good of the people; yet neither all nor any of
these pretentions, does either make void the obligations of those Oaths, nor
deliver the people from the great guilt of the sin which is committed in the
violation thereof, nor secure them from the dreadful judgment of God. Who is
the Author hereof, I know not; but I am confident that the Doctor and he aim
both at one mark: which makes me to allege him.

It is true, there is another Book lately reprinted, bearing this Title;
Reasons of the present Judgment of the University of Oxford concerning the
Solemn League and Covenant, etc. approved by general consent in a full
Convocation, June 1. 1647. in which Book many Reasons are alleged why those
who were then Masters, Scholars, Officers, and other Members of that
University, could not take that Covenant, and another Negative Oath. But that
no way concerns the present Case, for their Reasons tend only to their own
justification for their not taking of the Covenant and Oath then tendered to
them, not, to fall upon others who had already taken it. Therefore there is no
need to add any Answers thereunto, although he that caused it to be reprinted,
pretends to do it, for the satisfaction of others; which cannot in any sense,
reach those who have taken the Covenant already.

And now, good Mr. Doctor, think more seriously in cold blood, of your high
presumption, in casting so much dirt upon that Covenant which his present
gracious Majesty has so highly honored; of which, perhaps, you may one day be
required to render an account, if men have any zeal for his Majesty's honor. I
forbear Particulars, in this: but you may do well to lay to heart particularly,
what becomes you herein.

Nor has this Kingdom only entered into a Solemn League and Covenant
themselves: but, they have approved, even in Parliament, what others have done
in like cases abroad. When the Kingdom of Scotland (even without their King)
entered into a Solemn League and Covenant among themselves, (before their
joining with England in this) and were threatened to be chastised, for that, and
other things, by a puissant Army; yet afterward, upon a through debate thereof
in the Parliament of England, it was declared by King and Parliament, That our
Brethren of Scotland had done nothing but what became Loyal and obedient
Subjects; and were thereupon, by Act of Parliament, publicly righted in all
the Churches of this Kingdom, where they had been defamed.

Yea, See the Exhortation for (...) the Covenant, ordered by the House of
Commons to be printed, Feb. 9. 1643.
the same Exhortation (out of which the precedent Paragraph is extracted)
tells us, That neither this Doctrine nor Practice has been (formerly) deemed
seditious, or unwarrantable by the (former) Princes that have sat upon the
(English) Throne, but justified and defended by Queen Elizabeth of blessed
memory, with the expense of much Treasure and Noble Blood, in the united
Provinces of the Netherlands, combined, not only without, but against the
unjust violence of Philip (the second) of Spain (first and chiefly in matters
of Religion) King James (of like blessed memory) followed her steps, so far as
to approve their union, and to enter into League with them as free States;
which was after continued by his last Majesty, who both by his Expedition for
relief of Rochel in France, and by his strict confederacy (and Alliance) with
the the late Prince of Orange, notwithstanding all the importunity of Spain to
the contrary, did set to his seal, That all that had been done by his Royal
Ancestors, in maintenance of those who had so engaged and combined themselves,
was just and warrantable.

Thus, Mr. Doctor, I have given you some patterns of Covenanting Christians,
beside the Holy League in France, the two Houses of Parliament (whom you take
pleasure, every where to bespatter, as if they were Fools and Rebels) in
England, and our Brethren in Scotland. I forbear to mention Germany, the
Cantons, the Albigenses, and others, because I have said enough already to show
the fowlness of your Pen, and the falsehood of him that held it, in saying,
there is no pattern of such a Covenant in any ages of the Church, and that we
never read nor heard of any Covenanting Christians (until the Ligue Saint in
France) except those who in Baptism were sprinkled with the blood of Christ,
and so entered into that Covenant, etc. page 11.

I have now taken my walk through your gaudy Field: but have gathered little
fruit. I therefore forbear further progress; unless to take a view of Her whom
you call Your dear Mother the Church of England, page 5. I pray, who, and what
is She? Which Question I ask not, as if I were of opinion that there is none
such: but, to know of you whom you take Her to be. I have read of one Mother of
us all Gal. 4.26.
I know no more Mothers, although I know more Churches. I have read in the
Articles of Religion, established in 13 Eliz. cap. 12. Art. 19.
That the visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in the
which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly administered,
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

But, you are not so rude an Understander, nor so uncritical a Speaker. By the
Church of England, you plainly and charitably mean that part of mankind in this
Polity or Nation which having been called, baptized, and instructed, by lawful
Ministers in the Mysteries and Duties of the Gospel, makes a joint and public
Profession of the Christian Faith, and Reformed Religion, in the name, and as
the sense of the whole Nation, etc. Thus you, in your Tears, Sighs, etc. of the
Church of England, page 24. Then, all mankind in this Polity and Nation,
making such a Profession, is your Dear Mother. Are not you then, Terrae Filius,
Sir? St. Paul tells us, Jerusalem which is above, is the Mother of us all. But
you tell us, Your Mother is (not Jerusalem, ^u^) England, which is below, and
not free. Much joy may you have of her. I can own her as a Church, but not as a
Mother. I have read of no Mothers in the New Testament, in relation to
Churches, but only Jerusalem (not Earthly, but Celestial:) and Babylon, the
great Whore, the Mother of Harlots Rev. 17.1, 5.
. If the Doctor have found out a third, much good may she do him. Now I see
what makes him so excentrick and extravagant: namely, his sucking too much of
his Mothers Milk, when she had eaten too much poisonous meat of Arminianism,
Socinianism, and Popery.

And now, Sir, I shall for this time take my leave of you, with this close:
that whereas you (page 25.) vant, that, in two days you finished those Answers
and Solutions; truly, Sir, I think so too: and do believe, that whoever shall
carefully compare those Answers and Solutions with this Reply, (which cost more
time) will be of the same opinion: and, that the spirit of perverseness, pride,
and time-serving ambition, did dictate them unto you.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Had almost forgotten your high Commendation of Dr. Ushers Model of reformed
Episcopacy, in his Reduction: which, for my part, I dislike not. Only I must
take occasion hence to tell you; or rather others, that since the reprinting of
that Reduction of Episcopacy into the form of a Synodical Government (which
little Piece was truly Dr. Ushers child) there has a Bastard appeared, which
is called, The Bishop of Armagh's Direction concerning the Liturgy, and
Episcopal Government, said to be written at the request of the House of
Commons, in the year 1642. Which is a mere fiction, and a lie. For so Dr.
Bernard in his Book entitled, The judgment of the Archbishop of Armagh, etc.
assures us, page 160, That in An. 1640. There was a Book printed, entitled
The Bishop of Armaghs judgment to the House of Parliament, concerning the
Liturgy, and Episcopal Government. And in An. 164^. another Book entitled Vox
Hibernia, being some pretended Notes of his at a Public Fast. Both these at
his Petition, were suppressed by Order from the House of Lords and Commons,
Feb. 11. 1641. And now revived, to thrust out the other, which is his
Legitimate issue.

FINIS.

