THE ANSWER OF THE COMMISSIONERS of the NAVY, To a scandalous Pamphlet,
published by Mr ANDREWS, BURRELL.

Printed by WILL. BENTLEY, Anno Dom. MDCXLVI.

To the Right Honorable the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
SOme days past, there came to the hands of us the Commissioners of the Navy,
a Pamphlet, published in print by Andrews Burrell, concerning the Navy, (a
business then depending before the Honorable Committee of the Admiralty.) We
much wondered at the boldness in the manner of subscribing, and at the
Scandals, through the whole body of the Pamphlet; he daring to direct it unto
your Honors; and therein scandalizing the Navie-royall of the kingdom, and all
the Officers of the same; as Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and Rear-Admirals,
Commissioners, Collectors, Trinity-house, and others; yea, and beyond this,
some of your Members, and in truth, the honor of both Houses of Parliament.

We are confident those aspersions and brainsick Notions, so plainly
discovering his discontentednesse, and self ends, and so apparently tending to
the destruction of the Royal Navy, will not get the least credit with your
Honors: But, lest this Pamphlet should work such ill effect abroad, that after
your Honors happy government, protection, and defense of this Kingdom, in
these Civil Broils, by the Navy Royal, as with Walls and Bulworks, from all
foreign Invasion; your Honors proceedings should upon this man's writing be
calumniated, by the disaffected party here at home; and your Royal Navy,
(formerly so formidable) become contemptible to foreign States and Princes:
and we knowing that the great affairs of State will not afford time unto your
Honors, to take a particular examination of this business, to the discovery
of the folly, and desperate malice of this Gentl. and we being entrusted by
your Honors in the government and care of the Navy Royal, have thought it
not the least part of our duties, to make bold, by our Answer unto this
Pamphlet, to present unto your Honors the true state of the Navy, to discover
the destructive effects so much aimed at, and desired to the Navy in the
Pamphlet, to stop the mouths of Enemies and ill-affected, to satisfy the
well-affected, and to vindicate the honor of the Parliament, whose provident
and prudent care for preservation of the Navy, and guarding of the Seas, in
these times of danger, we shall make appear to exceed all former Ages.

Master Burrell, in the beginning of his Preface, begins to tell a Story, That
he was forced out of his Country, for his affection to the Parliament, and of
his taking the Covenant, and of being pressed every Lords day to discover what
he knew to be advantageous or hurtful to the Parliament; when indeed and in
truth, the one was, because he would contribute little or nothing to the
Parliament, having lived here a long time obscurely; and the other, because for
his private advantage and advance of his Fortunes, he would be an Officer of
the Navy: But at last, being rowsed up (as he says) by Churchmen, he
complained to the Right Honorable the Lord Say, the Navy was sluggish, and
did sail so sluggishly, that it could not perform those Services which the
Parliament expected; and to that purpose presented a paper to his Lordship,
entitled, Observations upon the Navy, by Andrews Burrell: which paper he
presented to the Earl of Warwick, and from his Lordship it was sent to be
disputed before us the Commissioners of the Navy, with whom (says he) it died.

Answer. Now may it please the honorable Houses of Parliament, That it is
true, we received an Order from the Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, as
also from the Honorable Committee of the Navy, to send for Master Burrell, to
hear his opinion concerning the reducing of the Navy into a better posture, as
he pretended, for sailing: We likewise sent for all the Master Shipwrights of
England, Captain Batten being present with us. Being come together, we demanded
of Master Burrell, in what manner he would do this great work: His Answer was,
He would cut them down to one Tire of Ordnance, by which means they should sail
a great deal better. We demanded of him, What he would do to add quality to
them; for in cutting them down, without doing something under water, would be
to small purpose: His Answer was, That he would keep that private to himself.
We desired him to give it in writing how he would perform this Service, if he
did make a trial of one of the old Ships, in regard it would be a great charge
to the State; which he promised to do, but never came near the Office more, nor
ever heard we more of him, till now, that he has set out this Scandalous
Libell. And indeed what he propounded to us, which was to cut down the first,
second, and third Rate-Ships, and to bring them to one Tire of Ordnance, is so
ridiculous, and will so disable the Navy, that it will make them, in case of
foreign invasion in capable either to offend the Enemy, or defend themselves;
all other Princes Ships of the first, second, and third Rate, having two or
three Tire of Ordnance. Besides, as they are now built, having great Floors,
and great Breadths, if they should be cut down, they would be so unruly Ships
in the Sea, that in a Sea-gate they would roll so much, that no man would be
able to ply the Ordnance, or stand upon the Deck. Besides, if they should meet
with a Storm, be in danger to roll their Masts by the Board, as appeared by the
Rainbow, and Vantguard, which were built in 86. little more or less: after
this Model proved so defective Ships in the Sea, that they were forced to
bring on another Deck upon them: The Victory, in 87, was cut down for a
trial, at the instance of Sir John Hawkings, from three Decks and an half, to
one Tire of great Ordnance; which being done, the Queen commanded, in 88, that
he should go Commander of her, because he was the Projector; but when he came
up to the King of Spains Ships with two Tire and three Tire of Ordnance, they
tore his Ship, and killed his men so fast that he was not able to endure the
Spaniards broad Sides, but was forced to leave them; So that when the Ship came
home, the Queens Majesty understanding how much the Ship was disabled by
cutting down her Decks, gave Order for her Decks to be built again; and ever
after she carried two Tire of Ordnance fore and aft. And indeed the Ships of
the Navy, of the first and second Rate, are the best built Ships in the World,
both for defense and offense, carrying two Tire of Ordnance; and if not laden
with Victuals, but kept light and clean, will sail as well as any Ships of
their burden and force that do belong to any Christian Prince, having been a
terror to their Enemies; witness Anno 88. for if there had not been such Ships
at that time, but such reformed Ships as Master Burrell endeavors to have,
the Spanish Armado doubtless had overrun them, and with their strength of
Ordnance, having two and three Tire, would have been too hot for their coming
near them: yet such was the strength of our Ships, most of them having two Tire
of Ordnance, and well manned, that (by the blessing of God) we gave them the
overthrow: And ever since the Navy has been preserved and built in a better
posture then in those days, and more serviceable for the honor and
preservation of the Kingdom. And because your Honors may be satisfied, how
necessary great Ships are with two Tire of Ordnance, for the defense of this
Kingdom, we shall only instance in two Ships which are yet lively in our
memory. In Anno 1640. Don Antonio de Kendo came into the Downs, with a Fleet of
Ships from Spain, and having rid there some time, the Admiral Van Trump, with
six of the best Ships in Holland, attended the motion of Don Antonio his Ship;
the rest of his Fleet, consisting of eighty Sail, attended the rest of the
Spanish Fleet: Don Antonio when he had refreshed his men, and fitted himself,
weighed Anchor out of the Downs; the Admiral of Holland did the like with six
Ships; and coming without the Goodwyn-Sands, the Admiral of Holland came up
with the Admiral of Spain, as far as his transome; but received such
entertainment, that he durst never more come up with him, nor any of the Ships
in his company, notwithstanding the Admiral of Spain stayed for them with his
Topsails down, and main yard a cross; such great force had this great Ship
with two Tire and an half of Ordnance, that the Hollanders durst not deal with
her. The Admiral of Portugal, being another great Ship of that Fleet with two
Tire of Ordnance, fought with sixteen States Men of War almost a whole day, yet
never could take her, and being offered any quarter that they would demand,
scorned it: At last, when the Hollanders saw they could not take her, two of
their Men of War desperately ran aboard of her, with two Fireships, where they
all burned together, until they were consumed. And indeed, if they had not
used that Stratagem, they had never destroyed her. By this, your Honors may
perceive the great difference between Ships of two Tire of Ordnance, and one
Tire, as Master Burrell would have them.

In the next place he makes a long Narration of the Sally- Fleet, where Captain
Rainsborow was Commander, and says, He finds in his Iournall these words, (We
did give them chase all day, and at night we lost them:) which great deficiency
(says he) renders the Navy to be in a contemptible condition.

Ans. Now let any Seaman judge, whether Captain Rainshorow's Fleet could be in
a fit condition, to chase light and clean Vessels that came out of Sally that
night, when he had been two Months from England, and grown foul, and four
Months Victuals in: Besides, those small Vessels which he chased, were (when he
first saw them) two Leagues from him, which was a long chase to fetch up, and
would hold a good Sailor chasing all day: Besides, if the Men of War had
contemned them, (as Master Burrell says,) why did they run from them, and
would not fight? For by their running away, it is evident they were not
contemned, but feared: And yet he confesses, that Fleet performed better
Service, then Englands Navy did in 44 years before.

In the next place, (because we will touch only what concerns our selves)
Master Burrell discovers where the fault has been, That the Navy has not
been reformed, and how the Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, has been
misled by the Officers of the Navy, and the Brethren of the Trinity-house, who
should have advised his Lordship to make choice of nimble Ships for Warlike
Service: and that if the Brethren of the Trinity-house were so knowing as they
seem, and so well affected as they ought, they should have sent forth for their
own Adventure, one Ship and one Pinace, that should have sailed as nimbly as
the Queens Ship: Such an example (says he) peradventure would have moved the
dull Officers, to hearken to the reducing of part of the Navy into a
serviceable posture for these times, and to make choice of better Ships, which
they have hired at dearer Rates.

For Answer thereunto, We wonder much at the boldness of this sickbrained man,
that he should question the judgment of that noble Earl to be misled by us, as
if his Lordship were not a Seaman himself, to discern what is fit to be done,
for the making of fit and nimble Ships for Service, better then Master Burrell,
who scarce ever saw salt water, and consequently never saw Service. And for the
affection of the Trinity-house, we are confident, that diverse of that
Corporation, have set out many Ships and Pinaces, for the Public, in these
distracted times, to their great loss and hinderance, as some of the Members
of the honorable House of Commons can witness: but never heard that Master
Burrell, nor his Associates, set out any Ship or Pinace, in defense of the
Parliament of England, since these Wars began. And for the reducing of the
Navy into such a posture as Master Burrell would have it; we hope never to be
guilty of so great a disservice to this Kingdom: And although Master Burrell
says, we have made bad choice of Ships, and at dear rates, to serve the State;
we shall make it appear to the honorable Houses, that they have been the best
Merchants Ships in this Kingdom, and taken up at no other rates, then has been
given long before we came in Office, in the most peaceable times.

In Folio 4, Master Burrell quarrels with the Trinity-house, and talks of Toles
and fair Immunities coming in by the industrious Seamen, and chalks them out
their duty to take care for the common Seamen, and not to suffer thousands of
them in discontent to run out of the Kingdom.

Ans. As for the Toles and Immunities, which the Trinity-house receive, they
receive it with one hand, and pay it with the other, to the widow and
fatherless of that Corporation, and to such as have received wounds and hurts,
in the Parliaments and Merchants Service; for which they have two pence a
voyage out of every common Seaman, and no more if the voyage be three years
long; yet the malice of Master Burrell would make the world believe, the
Trinity-house receives much, when indeed their whole comings in (since these
distracted times) does not releeve half the poor belonging to that Corporation.
And for the common Seamen, they need not be discontented, having had an
Augmentation of four shillings in a Month more then ever any King or Queen in
England gave them, besides other Immunities granted them by the Parliament:
Neither do we believe that any are gone over, except such as are Malignants and
Enemies to the State, which are better out of the Kingdom, then in it.

In the next place, he roves by way of Multiplication, in which, it seems, he
is not skillful, for instead of 500, he says, the Officers of the Navy sent
out their Prest-masters into Suffolk and Essex, to press 900 Seamen, and out
of the River of Thames, 200 Watermen; but at the day of their appearing, of
all that number, there appeared at Chatham but 224, whereof 124 were Watermen:
and then makes his Inference, as if there were a scarcity and unwillingnesse in
Seamen, and Watermen, to the Service of the Parliament.

To which we Answer, That we did send out Prest-masters to the foresaid places
for 500 men, and not for 900, (as Master Burrell falsely says) to the end we
might not make a scarcity of men in this City for the Merchant-Ships, in regard
we were to set out a Fleet of 6000 men, whereas in time past our predecessors
for such Fleets, never pressed less then 2000 men in the Country: yet such was
the willingness of the Seamen and Watermen, to serve the Parliament, that
the Ships are all manned long since, and at Sea; and we writ our Letters down
to the Prest-masters to stay their hand; and of those that were pressed, came
to Chatham (as appears under the Clerk of the Checks hand) 358 men, besides
Watermen. By this the honorable Houses of Parliament may perceive the malice
of this Gentleman, who not only strives to blast your faithful Servants, but
as much as in him lies, seeks to bring the honorable Houses in a dislike with
the common Seamen, that so some rigid courses may be taken against those that
hitherto have done them faithful Service.

In the next place, he falls foul of the Ship that carried over the Queens
Majesty, and inserts some words in Captain Battens Letter to the Parliament in
these words; If my life and all the Kingdom had lain at Stake, I could not
prevent her going over, for (says he) the Ship that carried her, sails two
foot for my one. Then he makes his inference, and would have Captain Batten
speak in his own language, as if he would have said (says he) that other
Nations can make nimble Ships, but England is grown dull, and must be contented
with sluggish and unserviceable Ships. Then he further adds, that if the
Parliament had spent every year a million of Pounds, they that have wasted one
million in three years, would not of themselves have endeavored to build or
purchase one Ship or Pinace fo nimble as the Queens Ship.

Ans. By this your Honors may perceive, he still hammers upon one Anvill, that
is, as much as in him lies, to disparage the Navie-Royall, and to infuse into
Strangers minds how unserviceable they are, that so he might blast the honor
and reputation of the whole Navy, which has been and is both famous and
terrible to all Nations; and only for this cause, that so great a Ship as the
Saint Andrew, being foul at that time, could not fetch up a clean tallowed
Frigate, new come out of Port, having the advantage of the wind, and being a
special Sailor, and fitted for that purpose to carry away the Queen. And for
the spending of so much money, we know it is far short of that Sum; yet thus
much we dare aver, that if these times be compared with precedent times when
such Fleets have been set forth, the honorable Houses will find by the
Accounts, that never more frugality was used, then since the Parliament had the
Navy in their hands.

In the next place he says, he was unexpectedly nominated a Commissioner for
the Sale of Prizes and Prize-goods, and says, he would have attended the
Service faithfully; but at his entrance into that trust, he was unfitly opposed
in the Sale of a nimble Pinace, which by a strong hand was estranged from the
Parliament, without Candlelight: and being so opposed, he was much
discouraged, because he knew himself best able to serve the Parliament; and
thereupon desisted, and came no more amongst them.

Answer. That it is true, he was nominated a Commissioner for Prizes, and
Prize-goods, but not unexpectedly, for he expected 300. l. per annum, but after
he had sat two or three days with us, and heard that we were to receive
nothing but our labor for our pains: truly he then very unfitly left us, and
never sat more amongst us. And for being opposed in the sale of a nimble
Pinace, which by a strong hand was estranged from the Parliament; we wonder
that all this time he has not discovered it; that so those persons may be
punished according to their demerits: and therefore we humbly desire the
honorable houses of Parliament, to cause this business to be examined; and
that Master Burrell do discover what Pinace that was, and who it was that
estranged her from the Parliament.

In the next place, Master Burrell says, That before and since that time some
nimble Ships and many Pinaces have been taken, but most of them by disasters;
and if those Ships and Pinaces had been contrived into Men of War, and set out
in the room of those sluggish Ships which he complains of, the Parliament would
have been much better served, with the saving half of that vast charge which
has been spent at Sea; yet says he, it is certain the best of those Ships and
Pinaces, have been estranged from the Parliament, which makes the abuse the
greater, and therefore makes a quere to examine what price was paid the
Parliament for Plunkets Ship.

Ans. It seems now Master Burrell will confess that some nimble Ships and
Pinaces have been taken by the Parliament Ships, but yet to eclipse the taking
of them, he says, Most of them were taken by disasters, which we confess to
be true; for it was a disaster befell them that were taken. And as for those
ships that were taken, they that were good Sailors, and fit to be made men of
War were fitted and equipped, and are now in the service of the Parliament to
the number of seven good Ships, and sixteen Frigates, and not estranged from
the Parliament, as Master Burrell sets forth, and doubtless will save charges,
in regard the Parliament pays not freight, though not half the charge, as
Master Burrell says: And as for Captain Plunkets Ship, if Master Burrell had
inquired of Master Morris Thomson, amongst other things he would have told him
that she was stranded about Arundell by five Statesmen of war, and seized on
by Sir William Wallers army, and condemned in the Admiraltie as Prize to Master
Thompson and others for losses received by the Dunkirkers, so that as we
conceive nothing was due to the Parliament; yet we humbly desire the honorable
Houses, to examine Master Burrell, because he says, It is certain that the
best of those Ships and Pinaces were estranged, that he may declare in whose
hands those Ships and Pinaces are, that so the Parliament may be righted, and
the offenders receive condign punishment.

In the next place in his old ridiculous strain, he falls a praising of
Plunkets Ship for failing, although he never saw her sail, and dispraising of
the great new Frigate before he knows what she will be, as he does all the rest
of the Navy: Then he falls to telling of a story, and says, he believes that
all the Ships in the Navy in three years have not taken so many Prizes, as
Plunkets Ship has taken in these two years, and that some of those Prizes were
very rich, but by estranging that Ship of Plunkets, the Parliament has lost
all those Prizes.

Ans. Your Honors may perceive what Master Burrells intentions are by his
language; that is, still to dishonor the Royal Navy, calling them sluggish,
and praising of Flunkets Frigate for a nimble Saylor, when there is twenty
sail of Frigates and Ships now in the Parliament service, that fail as well,
and many of them better. And whereas he falsely says, that Plunkets Ship has
taken more Prizes in two years, then the Parliament Ships have taken in three;
we shall refer your Honors to the Collectours for Prizes, and Prize-goods;
and they will tell your Honors that the Parliament Ships have taken a hundred
and ten Merchant Ships, and thirty nine Men of War have been taken and sunk,
which had his Majesty's Commission; besides many Spaniards, French, and Dutch
that have been delivered back at the earnnest request of the Ambassadors. And
we never heard of more then six Ships taken by Captain Plunckets Frigate, and
most of them being Merchant Ships.

In the next place, he begins a large discourse, that in November last, he
understood that there was three Frigates to be built for the State, and that he
was designed to build one; and was showed a paper from a principal
Ship-wright, which be had received from the Officers of the Navy, directing
him how he should build one of the Frigates, that when she was built, she would
never do any good service: but says Mr. Burrell, that which troubled the
Ship-wright most, was the price; for (says he) if they give a slight price,
they must expect slight Frigates. Then (says Master Burrell) I took the paper
into consideration, and I acquainted the Ship-wright with my dislike of it, and
told him I would move the Lords of the Admiraltie so to order the business,
that those Ship-wrights that did build them, should build without direction
from the Officers of the Navy: and that they should have an indifferent price
for them, which was that which Mr. Burrell aimed at, because he would build
one: Then he sets forth the manner and form of his Petition to the Lords of
Admiralty in two sides of paper, and tells their Lordships of ten Whelps built
by the direction of Sir John Pennington; and rakes up the ashes of his dead
body, and says, the builders were so misled by him, that all those vessels
proved sluggish. Then he lays down positive rules and directions, how the
Frigates should be built, as punctually, as Archimedes the Mathematician, but
still has a care of his interest, and desires that the Builders might not be
disheartened in the price of them. Then he propounds 300l. to be deposited, that
is to say, to each builder an 100 l. and the Frigates to sail into Downs, and
from thence to the Isle of Wight, and then round about the Island, and so to
Ports-mouth; and that Frigate that comes in there first, to be reputed the
best Frigate for service, and that the Ship-wright that built her, should have
the 300 l. for his service. Then (says he) before I offered these propositions
to their Lordships: I conferred with Master Pet, and Master Castle, whether
they were willing to build two of the Frigates, upon the forementioned terms,
or not, and if they would build each of them one, be would build the third: So
when I found (says he) Master Pet and Master Castle to like my propositions, I
presented them to the Honorable Earl of Warwick, and Lord Say, and proved
before their Lordships, that if the Frigates were built, according to the
directions of the Officers of the Navy, the Frigates would prove unserviceable
to the State: But (says Master Burrell) this took no effect. Soon after came
forth other directions worse then the first, That one of the intended Frigates
should be built 70 Tons bigger then the other two, whereas by my propositions
they should be all of equal burden: And secondly, Master Pet Junior, should
build the bigger, and Master Pet senior the two lesser Frigates, by which
subtle plot (says he) all emulation was laid aside.

For answer to the needful, of what Master Burrell has falsely suggested: In
the first place, your Honors may perceive what Master Burrell drives at: the
first is a good price, not for the good of the Kingdom, but for his own ends:
because (says he) I was designed by their Lordships to build one. In the next
place, he would brand the Commissioners of the Navy, in giving directions for
the building of unserviceable Frigates, when indeed they gave no directions for
them, but gave the Master Ship-wright order, to draw out their own dimensions,
which accordingly they did, which we have ready to produce under their hands:
And if the ten Whelps built many years since proved deficient, it does not
follow these Frigates now a building, should prove no better Saylors. But
Master Burrell in that strikes at the Commissioners of the Navy, wounding us
through Sir John Penningtons sides, as if these Frigates would be
unserviceable, because he falsely suggests, we gave directions therein: And for
his propositions to try their Sailing round about the I Will of Wight to
Portsmouth is so ridiculous that we need not trouble our selves about it, for
all Seamen know that there can be no trial of Ships in that place, the tides
running counter, and one Ship may be in the tide, and the other out, which may
make great difference, and indeed lies more in the skill of the Pilot then in
the Ship, in observing the setting of the tides, and consequently to take the
advantage of it; by which your Honors may perceive how Master Burrell will
undertake to tell your Honors, that which he understands not. And for his
proposition to the Lords to build those Frigates by the great, their Honors
utterly refused it, knowing it a dishonor to the Parliament to build Ships out
of his Majesty's yard, having the best Ship-wrights in the Kingdom to perform
that service; and one, who had given such testimony of his Art and skill in
building of a Frigate, for the right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, that a
better Saylor is not in England, nor Dunkirk: but the Lords told Master
Burrell, if he would build one to try his skill, he should have his Majesty's
yard at Portsmouth, to build in, with timber, plancks and materials needful;
which Master Burrell refused to do, and says, it was a dishonor cast upon
him, and for no other cause, but that he could not build one by the great, that
so he might get two or three hundred pound by the Parliament: And if the other
Shipwrights are discontended (as Master Burrell says) because they did not
build them by the great (as we believe they are not) yet we marvel that Master
Burrell should suggest, that Mr. Pet the builder, acts against his affection,
or desires, being the King and Parliaments servant; unless he would bring the
Parliament in dislike with the Ship-wrights, and so to bring them under a
Cloud, as he has endeavored to eclipse the Trinity-house. And as for the
subtle plot (as Master Burrell calls it) in causing Master Pet Junior, to
build the great Frigate and Master Pet senior to build the two lesser; it is
false and untrue, for Master Pet Junior, builds one of the small ones, and
Master Pet senior, builds the other small one; and this we did to the end they
might use the utmost of their skill to try who could build the best Saylor. And
because we had experience of the good performance of Master Pet senior, in
building the Constant Warwick, he was appointed to build the great Frigate
likewise: By all which your Honors may perceive, how he has falsely traduced
the Commissioners of the Navy, the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the
Trinitie-house; the principal men of the Corporation of the Ship-wrights; and
all he drives at, is by his unjust aspersions to bring the Parliament and them
at ods, that so he might accomplish his own ends. And thus we hope, we have
given your Honors satisfaction in the building of the Frigates.

In the next place, being the month of May, he still sings his old tune, in
dispraising Englands Navy, which Master Burrell would have as weak as his
brain; and tells strange Stories of the mungrell Dunkirk, the contemptible
Irish, and the insulting Dutch, that they will not honor the Parliaments Ships
nor acknowledge them Master of the Seas: And then by way of Inference, brings
in his Majesty's horses as fat as himself; how they were tired being led down
to Barwick with empty saddles, and then compares the dead with the living, in
these words; As these Royal horses were clogged with too much flesh, even so
the Royal Navy is clogged with too many men; too much victuals, too many
pieces of Ordnance, to much timber, and too much plank; and then ads further to
make the Royal Navy more contemptible, he says, the Ship-wrights were
commanded to make the Ships now in the Navy, Ships for shaw, as well as for
service, and to carry many pieces of Ordnance never to be used, but at Feasts,
Salutations, and Landings. The example (says Master Burrell) is lively in the
Royall-Soveraign, an admirable Ship for costly Buildings, and cost in keeping;
and which ads to the miracle, the Royal Ship (says he) is never to be used
for the Kingdoms good; And that the Navy for swift sailing in Queen Elisabeths
days, was famous, and far exceeding those times.

To which we answer; As for the honor of the Narrow-Seas, it has been kept in
as much honor and reputation as ever; witness the right Honorable the Earl
of Warwick, who has commanded all Ships, where ever his Honor came, to render
due obedience: and Captain Owen in the Guardland, commanding a Squadron of
four or five Ships under the right Honorable Earl of Warwick, was sent out
by his Lordship to seek out the Kings Men of War. and all other that
transported Arms or Ammunition, to his Majesty's Quarters, and being in the
Channel, came in amongst sixty sail of Hollanders, whereof five or six Men of
War; and did not only make them all strike, but sent Captain Gilson in the
Warwick Frigate, who took out of the midst of the Fleet the Tiger of Roterdam,
and brought her away in despite of all those Men of War, and sent her to
London: The next was Captain Batten, who being alone in the
Constant-Reformation off of Beachy, met with the Vice Admiral of Holland and
four great Ships more; and although they suffered him to shoot diverse shot at
them, before they would strike, yet when they saw his resolution, they lowered
their topsails, and did homage. Captain Ellis in the Providence, and Captain
Thomas in the Warwick Frigate, commanded White the Vice Admiral, and three
more, to strike in Torbay, which they did accordingly, though with some shot
before they did their duty. And for the Royal horses being tired in being led
down to Barwick, it is not so with the Royal Ships, for they are never weary
with sailing: And for too many Men, Ordnance and victuals, we know other
Princes Ships that carry more, and yet not of their burden: And as for Timber
and Plank, we shall refer that to the judgment of the best Seamen, and
Ship-wrights in the Kingdom. But we wonder much at the impudence of this Gent.
who dare fay, the Royal Ships of the Navy were built for show, and carry many
pieces of Ordnance never to be used, but at Feasts, Salutations, and Landings;
when there is not one piece of Ordnance in any Ship of the Navy, but is both
useful and serviceable for a defensive and offenfive War: And to bring the
Navy into a more contemptible condition, he makes the Royall-Soveraign, (the
best Man of War in Christendom) to be incapable of doing service for the
Kingdoms good. When Captain Rainsborow, whom Master Burrell confesses in his
time, was the most eminent Commander in this Kingdom, had the trial of her in
the channel of England, and at his return reported to his Majesty, that he
never set his foot in a better conditioned Ship in all his life, And as for her
Force, she is not inferior to the greatest Ship in Christendom. And for the
Ships in Queen Elisabeths days, so famous for Sailing; this Kingdom was never
better furnished with good Saylors and Ships for defense, then at this present,
far exceeding those times. By these and the precedent Articles, your Honors
may perceive how under a specious show of a well-affected man to the State, he
covertly by his Calumnies, seeks to bring the Navy into a contemptible
Condition; not only in the opinion of this Nation, but also of Strangers; that
so they may be encouraged to attempt that, which they never hitherto durst put
in practice.

In the next place, Master Burrell propounds how the Royal Navy with a little
charge, may be reduced into a serviceable postare, and into such a Warlike
posture, as will enable the Parliament to recover and maintain the Soveraigntie
of the Seas, as in the Reign of Queen Elisabeth of happy memory.

Answer. It is strange that Master Burrell should know more, then all the
Ship-wrights in the Kingdom being a man that many years has had no practice,
and consequently less experience. And as for the little charge in reducing the
Navy, the cost that will be spent in cutting down one of the first and second
Rate-Ships and finishing them, will build the hull of a ship of the fourth Rate
that shall carry thirty pieces of Ordnance, that will do more service then they
will do when they are cut down to one Tire of Ordnance; for the reasons given
in our first Article. And as for the Sovereignty of the Seas, it is true, that
since these distracted times, the Hollanders have been very insolent in wearing
their Flags, as they have formerly done: But such has been the valor and
courage of our Commanders, that as often as they have been met withal, they
have been compelled to do their duty.

In folio 9. Master Burrell says, that when the Royal Navy shall be reduced
into a serviceable posture, the Parliament may save a fourth part of that vast
charge, which has been spent at Sea, since these distracted times.

To which we answer, We do not know what Master Burrell calls reducing the
Navy, but we conceive it is rather a destruction of the Navy, to cut down the
first, second and third Rate-Ships, which are walls of Brass to defend this
Kingdom: And as for saving a fourth part of the charge, that has been spent at
Sea since these distracted times, we are yet to learn; although we have
constantly followed Marine affairs these thirty years, and upwards, how ever we
desire that Master Burrell will give reasons how the fourth part of the charge
may be saved, and such Fleets maintained at Sea, as have been set forth these
four years past, without dimunition of the strength and glory of the Navy.

We come now to Master Burrells last quere, where he desires the Honorable
House of Commons to examine what the Kings party would have attempted, that
they have not freely effected; have they not (says he) been supplied from
beyond Seas with Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, and imported and exported
eminent Traitors? and have not both Irish, and Turks, landed in this Kingdom,
and carried away Men, Women and Children?

Answer. Although it be true that this quere belongs not wholly to us to answer
our Office being no other then to act by the Parliament, and Committee of Lords
and Commons of the Admiralties Order to equip, victual and Manne the Ships,
destinated for the Guard of the Sea; as also to inform their Lordships of the
repair of Ships Docks and Houses in his Majesty's several yards, etc. We
thought it our duty to give an answer in the just vindication of those Noble
Lords and Commons of the Commit of the Admiraltie, who sit at the Helm; that
there has been as much care taken to prevent the landing of Irish, the
transportation and importing of Traitors, The bringing in of Ammunition, as the
wit of man could invent; and truly if Dunkirk being a small Town, in one year
took from the Hollanders, notwithstanding the great Fleets they yearly set out,
80 Sail of Ships: how much more might the Kings men of War, being assisted by
the French, Hollanders, and Dunkirkers, who seemed to be the Parliaments
friends, carry in Arms, Traitors and Ammunition, into the Kings Quarters? yet
they paid dear for it; For although some escaped yet many were taken, witness
a States Man of War, going into Scarborough with Powder and Arms; The King
of Denmarks Ship bound in for Newcastle, laden with Arms, and diverse French
men, and Hollanders bound into Bristoll, Falmouth, Dartmouth, Scarborough, and
Newcastle, with Arms and other provisions, which the Collectors for
Prize-goods can certify, one and other, to the number of 110. Sail, besides
many Ships with his Majesty's Commission. And as for the Turks landing in
Cornwall, they landed in his Majesty's Quarters and not in the Parliaments; and
if Posts and Intelligence might have gone along that Coast, they might have
been prevented, the Parliament Ships being at the seige of Plymouth, in
defending that Town, but never heard of it until too late, and that from his
Majesty's Quarters. And thus we hope, we have answered Master Burrells false
aspersions and calumnies, cast upon the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons
of the Admiralty, the Commissioners of the navy; the Master, Wardens, and
Assistants of the Trinity-house, with the principal members of the corporation
of Ship-wrights, and all for his own ends, to get into employment.

The ANSWER of the COMMISSIONERS of the NAVY, to the General Charge,
entitled ENGLANDS OUTGAURD, or ENGLANDS ROYAL NAVY, surveyed and lamented by
ANDREWS BURRELL Gentleman, sometimes servant in the Navy.
IN the first place, Master Burrell says, that there is not one Ship in the
Navy that has taken any one of the Kings Men of War, since these Wars
began; and that the greatest Commanders which the Parliament has sent forth;
as Admiralls, Vice-Admiralls, and Rear-Admiralls, are so far from subduing
any of the Kings Men of War, that there is not any one of them that have shot
one shot in anger, since these distracted Wars began, though many hundred
thousands of pounds have been spent in guarding the Seas.

Ans. That is false, and scandalous against that noble Lord, and worthy
Gentlemen that have commanded the Parliament Ships; for we shall make it
appear, that since these Wars began, the Parliament have taken and sunk 39
Ships and Pinaces, Men of War, who had his Majesty's Commissions: the names of
the Ships, with their Captains that took them, for better satisfaction, we have
here under inserted.

Viz. Captain Batten, in the Saint George, took the Bonaventure, Admiral of
Ireland; the Swallow, Vice Admiral; and the Robert-Frigate: Captain Swanley,
in the Leopard, took the Globe, Admiral of Bristoll; the Providence,
Vice Admiral; Discovery, Rear-Admirall; and the Henrietta Pinnace Regis:
Captain Smith, in the Swallow, took the Fellowship, and Hart-Frigate: Captain
Pecket, in the May-flower, took the Providence Regis: Captain Thomas, in the
eighth Whelp, took the May-flower, Admiral of Falmouth, and chased on shore
her Vice Admiral and Rear-Admirall at Breast; also he sunk a Frigate of Sir
Nicholas Crispes: Captain Thomas, Captain Ellison, and Captain Whitty, being
all in company, took one Man of War: Captain Ellison, in the Providence, sunk a
Man of War of Foy, and also the Fortune of Dunkirk: Captain Stansby, in the
Providence, and Captain Rue, in the Robert, took Brown Bushell's Frigate,
called the Cavendish: Captain Pet, in the Mari-rose, took the Roebuck-Frigate
of Dunkirk: Captain Coppin, in the Greyhound, took the Constant, Captain
Skinner Commander of her: Captain Clark, in the Josline, took the Swan-Frigate,
etc. Captain Haddock, in the John, took a States Man of War laden with powper
Regis: going to Scarborough; and also the Salvator: Captain Beddall, in the
Hector, took the Black-horse, and Captain, Denton's Ship, and two Men of War of
Scarborough; and likewise an Ostend Man of War, bound for Scarborough: Captain
Gattensby, in the Prosperous, took a Danish Man of War laden with Arms: Captain
Stansby, in the Providence, took the Jennet, a Dunkirk Man of War: Captain
Gilson, in the Constant Warwick, took the Royalist: Captain Cox, in the
Royalist, took a Dogger-Boat of four Guns: Captain Pilgrim, in the Sampson,
took a Dogger-Boat: The Irish Squadron, took the Welcome-Pink, Increase:
Tryall-Pink, Charles Trough, Peter-Frigate, and the William and John; Captain
Wodward, in the Roebuck, took a Dunkirk-Frigate of Falmouth; which Frigate is
now in the Service, as most of the rest are.

Besides at least 110 Merchant-Ships, trading in and out of those Ports in
defection to the Parliament with Ammunition. Money, and Goods, that have been
taken and made Prize by the Parliament-Ships, to a large Sum; and many that
have been restored to well-affected persons; and diverse that on the earnest
request of the Spanish French, and Dutch Ambassadors, that have been delivered
back unto them.

By which it does appear that some shot have been made in anger, and not only
at Sea but it is well known to the Parliament, that the Navy has not had the
least share in preserving of Plymouth, the Isle of Wight, Hampton. Portsmouth,
Weymouth, Lyme, Hull, Wales, and Ireland, and diverse other places which
otherwise had been in the hands of the Kings Forces at this time: Neither must
we omit the great service done in the Downs, in Anno 1642, where, by the wisdom
and valor of the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick, Admiral in the
James, Captain William Batten, Vice Admiral in the Saint George, and a mixture
of Seamen, Commanders of the best of his Majesty's Ships, then in the Downs;
At which time there was a Message sent from his Majesty, by the hands of Sir
John Pennington and Master Villiers, directed to the Earl of Warwick, therein
requiring the delivery up of the Fleet into the hands of Sir John Pennington,
appointed by his Majesty to be Admiral: This Message being spread amongst the
Commanders and Seamen in the Fleet, it invited the greater part of the
Gentlemen, who commanded diverse of those Ships, then present, to submit unto
his Majesty's Message, and to stand upon their guard, refusing all commands,
the Earl of Warwick laid upon them in obedience to the Parliament. The names of
the Captains and Ships on either side, are hereafter expressed.

Commanders that submitted to His Majesty's Message.
Sir John Mince, Rear-Admirall in the Victory. Captain Fog. in the Reformation.
Captain Slingsby, in the Guard-land. Captain Burley, in the Anthelope. Captain
Wake, in the Expedition. Captain Fox, in the Lion. Captain Hill, in the tenth
Whelp.
Commanders who continued in obedience to KING and PARLIAMENT.
The Right Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick, Admiral in the James. Captain
Batten, Vice Admiral in the Saint George. Captain Thomas Trenchfield, in the
Unicorn. Captain George Hatch, in the Mary. Captain Richard Swanley, --
Charles. Captain Brian Harrison, -- Vauntguard. Captain Richard Owen, --
Entrance. Captain Henry Bethell -- Mari-rose. Captain Martin, -- Martin.
Captain Thomas Ashley -- Sampson.
But it pleased God, that by the integrity of the Seamen (who faithfully stood
to that Noble Lord,) the Commanders of such Ships that revolted from the
Parliament, were quickly suppressed and reduced to his Lordships obedience, who
placed other Captains in their room: which was a very great Service; and indeed
(under God) the protection of the Parliament and Kingdom: for had his Majesty
been possessed of that Fleet, he would thereby have been Master of the Seas,
and blockt up the City of London in their Relief and Trade: By which all men
may see, that the many hundred thousands of pounds, which (Master Burrell
says) has been spent, is not wasted in vain, as he maliciously suggesteth.

In the second place, Master Burrell says; The Officers of the Navy have been
advised how they may make part of the Navy able to subdue the Kings Men of
War, with the saving of one 4th part of that vast charge which has been spent
at Sea: but in opposition to any good advice, they will not be moved to reduce
one of the old Ships for a trial; and though the Kingdom perish, they will
persist in deluding the State, commending and supporting the Title of a Royal
Navy, when in truth it is unserviceable, I believe I may safely say,
contemptible, in the esteem of Strangers.

Ans. We cannot but wonder at the imbecility of this man, who contrary to the
opinion of the ablest Seamen and Ship-wrights of this Kingdom, would cut down
the best Ships in the Navy, and make them nimble Frigates; as if the three
Frigates now building, and near twenty more now in the Service, were not (by
Gods assistance) able to subdue half a dozen which are left untaken of his
Majesty's Men of War, and the most of them of so small force, that they are not
considerable, if any of the Parliaments Frigates meet with them. And for saving
of one 4th part of the charge, we believe, if he bring the Navy into such a
posture as he pretends, from Ships to Frigates, he may very well save one 4th
part of the charge, both in men, Victuals, and Ordnance: But we desire to know
of this Dull Carpenter, how he will do this without disabling the Navy: And
for supporting the Title of a Rovall Navy, we dare presume to aver and
maintain, and that in despite of Malignants, and all Enemies to the King and
Parliament, That no Prince in Christendom has so many brave Ships for a
defensive and offensive War, as the Kingdom of England has at this present;
having of the first rank 4 Ships, that carry from 50 to 80 pieces of Ordnance,
12 Ships of the second rank that carry from 44 to 50 pieces of Ordnance, 9
Ships of the third rank that carry from 36 to 44 pieces of Ordnance, and of the
fourth rate, 3 Ships which carry from 24 to 32, 2 Ships of the fifth rate
carrying from 16 to 20 pieces of Ordnance, 3 of the sixth rate carrying from 10
to 16 pieces of Ordnance, besides 20 Ships and Frigates which the Parliament
has bought and taken. And if these Ships appear contemptible in the eyes of
Strangers, we shall refer it to the judgment of any moderate man: As also
whether it be fit, that Master Burrell should publish to all Strangers, That
the Navy of this Kingdom is in an unserviceable condition; when it does appear
to all men, that it was never better managed, nor in a better posture, then now
it is.

In the next place, Master Burrell says; The Officers of the Navy do know
that the Navy has not performed any good Service for the Kingdom, since these
distracted Wars began; yet such is their plotting, that they will continue it
in an unserviceable condition.

Ans. The Officers of the Navy do know, that the Navy has performed many
good Services for the Kingdom, as it is set forth in our Answer to the first
Article: And our plotting has never been otherwise, then for upholding and
maintaining the honor of the Navy.

In the fourth place, Master Burrell says; That the Officers of the Navy
being thus resolved to accomplish their own ends, they suffer the Royal Navy
to lie rotting at Chatham and Portsmouth, at a dear rate, a rate that exceeds
all former Presidents; and that they hire the worst of Merchant-Ships and
Colliers, to serve in their room: and that he is hold to say, they are more
sluggish then any Ships in the Navy; and some of those Ships are belonging to
the Officers of the Navy, and some to Parliamentmen.

Ans. To which we Answer, That it is false; for the Ships of the Navy were
never better repaired, upheld, and maintained, then since they were in the
hands of the Parliament, as by our particular Answer hereafter shall appear:
And as for their lying in Harbor, and Merchant-Ships take up to serve in their
room, it will appear that there has been yearly employed at Sea, as many of
the Ships of the Navy, as was held in the wisdom of the Parliament fit, for
the number of men assigned for the yearly guard of the three Kingdoms: which
men, had they been employed in the Ships of the Navy, most of them being great
Ships, would have contracted a vast charge, and not have spread sufficiently to
guard the three Kingdoms: For example; There has been employed yearly from 60
to 70 Sails; viz, upon the Coast of Ireland and Lancashire, 25 Ships; for the
guard of Severn and Wales, 5; for the guard of the Channel of England, 15
Ships; for the guard of Guernsey, and those Islands, 3; for the Downs to attend
Convoys, 8; and for the guarding of the North Coast, and Kingdom of Scotland,
12 Ships. By which it will appear, there is a necessity of hiring
Merchant-Ships, in regard the Navy consisted but of 32 Ships when we came in
Office; and the hiring of Merchant-Ships is no other then what has been usual
in all times of War, time out of mind: And if the whole Navy should be yearly
employed; besides the vast charge it would contract, it would be too great an
adventure for the Kingdom to undergo: for if the Fleet should by casualty of
Weather, or by accident of War, miscarry, there would be no reserve left to
make another Fleet, and so the whole Kingdom exposed to danger; whereas if six
or eight of the greatest Ships be left in Harbor, with the assistance of
thirty or forty of the Merchant-Ships, (which may be always had in the River
of Thames,) they will make a sufficient Fleet to encounter any Force that shall
come against them: Besides, the Merchant-Ships do cost the Kingdom nothing near
the charge that the great Ships of the Navy stand in; and yet they run the
adventure of their Ships; Ordnance, and Ammunition: If in case the great Ships
of the Navy be employed in the room of Merchants, the State bears the
adventure, which in case of loss of a second Rate-Ship, will amount to 25000
pounds. We say not this to discourage the Parliament from building of more
nimble Frigates, which may lessen the hiring of Merchant-Ships, if there should
be the like occasion; but to let your Honors know, there has been nothing
lost in taking up Merchant-Ships, in the room of the great Ships of the Navy.
And further, if all the Navy should be constantly employed yearly at Sea, they
would be so out of repair in two or three years, that the Sea would be left
unguarded by them, and so be forced to hire all Merchant-Ships. And as for such
Ships Master Burrell says belong to Parliament Men, and the Officers of the
Navy; we refer you to our Answer to Master Burrells particulars.

In his fifth Article, Master Burrell affirms, That those Captains that have
been most valiant, have been discouraged; and those that have deserved
punishment, preferred to places of trust; and in particular, Captain Man, with
others.

Ans. In Answer to this charge; because we will not reiterate things twice, as
in some things we are forced to do, in regard of Master Burrells wandering
progress; we shall herein refer our selves to his particular charge, wherein
we doubt not but to give your Honors satisfaction.

In the next place, he makes a long discourse of Services done by Captain Man
and Captain Gilson, in two nimble Frigates, against Mucknell in a great Ship;
and makes his inference, That if two nimble Frigates can destroy so great a
Ship as Mucknells, with 42 pieces of Ordnance, there is no Ship in the World
able to encounter a Ship of the second rank, being fortified with 20
Demi-canon, every shot weighing 32 pounds.

Ans. For Answer thereunto: It is false that those 2 Frigates, although
accompanied with another good Ship of 20 pieces of Ordnance, all three having
62 Guns, and manned with 280 men, yet did destroy Mucknells Ship, she not being
of the force of a third rate Ship in the Navy; But rather foiled them all, and
forced them to leave her; by which means, the next day, she went for Silly,
where in going in (for want of a good Pilot) she was cast away: Whereby it does
appear, that Master Burrells Observation is grounded upon a false Principle;
For if a Merchant-Ship was able to defend her self from three Frigates, armed
with whole Culverin and Demi-culverin, and not with small Ordnance, (as Master
Burrell says,) much more might she have done against one Ship with one Tire of
Ordnance: But on the contrary, had one of his Majesty's Ships, of the second or
third rank, come up with Mucknell, fortified, as now they are, with two Tire of
Ordnance; doubtless Mucknell must have submitted: And we do believe, That if
any such Ship had been in view of Mucknell, she would have sailed as well as
Mucknell's Ship, and not been liable to that foul aspersion of being sluggish,
wherewith Master Burrell brands them.

In the next place, Master Burrell says, There is a want in the Fleet, of
Pistols, Pole-axes, Swords, and Fireworks.

Ans. To which we Answer; It is not the duty of our Places to furnish any
Ammunition, but belongs to the Officers of the Ordnance: yet we do verily
believe, that for all such Arms as are useful for service, are by them
supplied; the rather for that we have heard no complaint from any Commander
employed in any of the Kings Ships: but as for such Merchant-Ships as are taken
up by us, they are furnished with Pistols, Swords, Pikes, and all other Arms
for War, fitting for defense and offense.

In his eighth Article, Master Burrell recites the new Frigates, and would lay
an aspersion on the Officers of the Navy, That they should give to the Master
Ship-wrights Directions in the building of them; and that when they were built,
they would not be so serviceable as they should be, the work being destroyed
before it be begun.

Ans. What Master Burrell sets down in this Article, is false and untrue, we
having already set forth, by whose Directions these Frigates were built: and if
they prove unserviceable, (as we believe the contrary,) yet they cannot be so
bad as the Mari-rose, built by Master Burrell, being the most sluggish Ship in
the Navy; which we have lately had in the Dock, and caused to be lengthened
Aft, with other works done unto her, endeavoring to make her a serviceable
Ship. And as for the work being destroyed before it be begun, that seems to us
a Paradox, and carries no more truth with it then what else he has set forth.

In his ninth Article, Master Burrell begins to tell his old Story with a piece
of Nonsense, in these words: Unless the Parliament do thus at an excessive
charge, send many great sluggish Ships to Sea, the honor of the Sea is lost,
and so lost, that it cannot be regained; and yet in a contradiction salves up
the matter and says; But by reducing the Navy into a serviceable posture for
these times, into a nimble condition, with one Tire of Ordnance and no more,
and some Drakes for close Fights, with this caution; the greater the Ship is,
the greater the Ordnance, and number of men, as the Ship can well accommodate.

Ans By the first part of Master Burrellls Nonsense, he would have sluggish
Ships sent to Sea, or else the honor of the Sea is lost, but at last says,
That the Navy must be reduced into a serviceable posture for these times; as
if the Navy were to be altered upon every turn of the Tide; and in stead of
having the Navy maintained for the strength of the Kingdom against all
foreign Forces that should invade the Realm, he would bring them to one Tire
of Ordnance, pretending to suppress the Kings Men of War, which are no other
then small Frigates, Dogger-Boats Sloops, and the like: and then indeed he
would make Englands Navy contemptible, both at home and abroad.

Then he lays down what manner of Ordnance he would have put into the first,
second, third, and fourth Rate-Ships.

Ans. For Answer thereunto: This Gentleman it seems would go about to teach
Minerva, to instruct others, that know better then himself: And whereas he
would have none but whole Canon, Demi-canon, whole Culverin and Demi-culverin,
according to their several ranks; we conceive that the Ordnance of his
Majesty's Ships are already so well proportioned and with such good advice,
that there needs none or Master Burrelis Reformation.

In the next place he says, The common Seamen are so grossly cozened of their
thirds of Prize-goods, that many thousands have left the Kingdom; and those
that remain, so dis-heartened, that no good Service can be expected.

Ans Although this charge concerns not us, yet to our knowledge it is most
false, as the Collectors for Prize-Goods will make it appear, when they shall
be thereunto called. And for the many thousands of Seamen that have left the
Kingdom; this is as true as the rest: for we could never learn of any that
deserted the Parliament, but such as have always lived as Pirates and Robbers
at Sea formerly; the Kingdom being better without such than to have them.

The Gentleman's Conclusion is, That Ship that does not sail well, cannot serve
well; and that man that denies this truth, and cannot show a better remedy for
a Reformation of the Navy, that man is wilfully ignorant, or a Traitor to the
State.

Ans In this particular we shall be brief, and conclude; He that sets forth
falsehoods and endeavors to destroy the Navy, (being the Walls of the
Kingdom,) and produces no better reasons, is either grossly ignorant, or an
Enemy to the Kingdom.

And thus we have gone through Master Burrells false suggestions, scandalous
informations and notorious falsehoods; and for the Vindication of our integrity,
we humbly submit to the Justice of the High Court of Parliament.

The Answer of the COMMISSIONERS of the Navy, to the Particular Charge of
Master ANDREWS BURRELL, abstracted out of his General Charge.
MAster Burrell in his first Charge, says, That diverse of his Majesty's Ships
have been suffered to lie rotting in Harbor; as also four of his Majesty's
Ships were lately condemned to be sold; yet such is the providence of the
Officers of the Navy, that those rotten Ships are still continued, and do cost
the Commonwealth, 1500. l. per annum, to keep them above water; and that by
two other Ships, the State may save 1800. l. per annum, and neither weaken, nor
dishonor the Navy.

Answer. To which we answer, That it is false, and scandalous; for we shall
make it plainly appear, That not only those ships mentioned by him but the
whole Navy is in a far better condition, then when his Majesty left the
Parliament. And first for the Sovereign; she was carved, graved, and trimmed,
both under water, and above water, and made fit for the Kingdoms service, the
last Summer. And that since his Majesty's absence; there have been repaired in
dry Dock, the Saint Andrew, Victory, Charles, Unicorn, Vantguard, Constant,
Convertine, Guard-land Bonaventure, Anthelope, Swallow, Mari-rose, and Warwick
Frigate, besides the Triumph, Providence and John in the Dock; which Ships when
his Majesty left them, were all defective, and most of them unserviceable. And
as for the Nonsuch, Asserance, Saint Dennis, and Adventure, they were cast
three years or more, before his Majesty's departure from the Parliament; yet
his Majesty would never suffer them to be sold, until new Ships were built in
their rooms. But the Parliament, at one instance, being informed of the yearly
charge of those Ships, gave Order in October last, to put them to sale; which
was done accordingly, but in regard the Winter was come, and the charge would
be great to the buyer to bring them up to London, no man offered a penny for
them; but now the time of year is come, and three new Frigates upon the stocks,
and shortly to be lanched, we have put them to sail. And for what other Ships,
not herein mentioned, they are trimmed every year; and kept as well, as ever
they were, since the Kingdom stood. And as for the two other Ships which Master
Burrell mentions in the Navy, in which 1800. l. per annum, may be saved, and
neither weaken nor disable the Navy; we confess, That is a good service, if
Master Burrell can make it good, and we desire the Honorable Houses, that he
may give reasons how it may be done, without weakening the Guard of the Navy.

In the next place, he says, That the May-flower is an old Ship, and has
formerly been a Collier, and desires to know how many Men of War she has
taken for the 18000. l. she has received of the State. And that the John is an
old sluggish Ship, and has not taken one Prize, nor that her company have
hopes to take any hereafter. And that the Nicholas is a very sluggish Ship; by
which be would infer, that the Parliament employed none, but sluggish Ships.

Answer, Concerning these worst of Merchants Ships, as Master Burrell is
pleased to call them, the May-flower, John, and Nicholas: As for the
May-flower, she has been ever held a good sailer as most in the River, and of
good force, insomuch, that she fetched up, and fought with three Dunkirk
Frigates in Seavern; and had taken them, if an unfortunate shot had not killed
the Captain, by name Captain Cock: Besides many good services done by her upon
the coast of Ireland, both in the relief of Youghall, and taking Dingley Couch;
she likewise took the Providence- Regis, in Humber, and after beat the enemy
from a Fort upon Humber, and took their Ordnance. And as for the John, she is
no Merchants Ship, but belongs to the State; yet when Captain Haddock was in
her, she took a States Man of War, which was laden with Powder, Arms, and
Merchants goods bound into Scarborough; which Powder and Arms were of great use
to the Scottish Army, when they came first into Sunderland; with other Ships
laden with Iron, Deals, etc. all which were made use of by the said Army. And
after Captain Zachary came into her, under God, the said Ship and her company
had not the least share in taking in of Scarborough, in keeping the enemy from
water, as also all relief by Sea, although attempted by the Kings Men of War;
and in a skirmish on shore, the Captain lost his life. And as for the Nicholas
since she has been in Ireland, she has done as good service as any Ship
whatsoever; although Master Burrell brand her, yet Captain Crowther the
Vice Admiral in his letter to us, desired that she might be continued in the
last winters service, being an active Ship. And as for the 18000l. received for
the May-flower, we think it is far short of that sum. Yet when victuals,
wages, wear and tear, are deducted, there will no great matter remain for the
Adventure, which remains yet unpaid, and due from the State; as likewise to all
other Merchant Ships that are in the service; by reason of which we had much
ado to get a competent number of Ships, to serve for this Summers expedition.
By which your Honors may perceive how Master Burrell seeks to disgrace the
Merchants Ships, as he has done the Royal Navy: yea those Merchants Ships
that have done the Parliament best service, as in his next Article will appear.

In the third place, Master Burrell begins to rack his memory, and complains
of diverse other good Ships, and says, they are Colliers, and calls them the
worst of Ships; as the Hector, the Dragon, the Green-Dragon, the Hopeful Luke,
and the Exchange. And that there were seven Dunkirk Frigates, offered to be
sold to the Officers of the Navy, for less then 5000 l. But the Officers of
the Navy refused them, and thought it better thrift to bestow 11000 l. upon
three Frigates, and that when they arebuilt, (if they be built according to the
directions given by the Officers of the Navy to the Master-Ship-wrights) he
believes (as he does all things else) that they will not be serviceable, as
those of Dunkirk and (says he) those Dunkirk Frigates so offered to this
State, being encouraged by the King, and manned with discontented Seamen for
want of their thirds; have taken many Ships and goods from the Merchants of
London, to an inestimable value.

Ans. In the third Article, concerning the taking up of Colliers, which Master
Bur ell calls the worst of ships: And first for the Hector, Captain Beddall,
she has done very good service; first in taking a Ketch laden with Butter and
Coals which came out of Newcastle which vessel she fetched up in four hours
chase, merely by sailing; the next he took was Galliot Hoy, which came out of
Newcastle with three thousand and odd pounds in money to buy Arms, as
likewise letters of credit for three thousand more, the rest Coals and
Grindstones; in five hours chase she fetched her up, notwithstanding, she was a
choice vessel for sailing, taken up for that purpose; and Captain Cork,
Treasurer to the Earl of Newcastle, (who was employed to buy the Arms) was in
her, and brought prisoner to Dover. The next she took, was a Kings Man of
War, called the Black-horse, which he chased a shore, and after took her, and
brought her to London: thenext he chased Captain Denton a Scarbrough Man of War
a shore, which was then cast away; and after chased another Man of War, with
diverse provisions bound for Scarbrough, which he chased till he had spent, his
mast; and after took him, and carried him into Burlington; the next was a
Collier, conveyed by Brown Bushel, which he took, and sent into Hull. Since
that, he rescued two North-Seamen, out of the hands of a Scarborough Man of
War, with diverse other good services which did conduce to the benefit and
honor of the Parliament, which the said Captain Beddall can give a more
particular Account of; and this is one of the Ships Mr. Burrell calls a
Collier, and the worst of Ships. This Ship has been victualled, and manned by
the State; and has taken more prizes, then four times her freight amounts
unto, the Ships Hull hired for 62 l. per mensem: And indeed these Ships
(although by Master Burrell called Colliers) yet by reason of their great
force, and small draught of water, are the most fit Ships for that Coast,
except Frigates, especially in Winter time. As for the Dragon, and
Green-Dragon, they were taken up by the Committee for Newcastle, to carry
Soldiers to Holy-Island: and afterward in regard of their good service there,
and at Barwick, they were taken up by Order of the Honorable Committee of the
Navy, to guard the Northern Coast where they afterward performed very good
service, in so much that Captain Greens Ship called the Green-Dragon (which
Master Burrell calls the worst of Ships) took diverse Prizes and being in fight
with one, the Captain was slain, and yet the Prize was taken. The Hopefull-Luke
was a Merchant Ship, and no Collier, and the first voyage that ever she made:
And the Exchange was never employed in the service of the State. And as for the
seven Frigates so mentioned in his charge, we heard of it upon the Exchange, and
did acquaint the Honorable Committee of the Navy therewith; and although
money (at that time) was so scarce, that the Committee could hardly find money
to pay Mariners wages, and set forth our Fleet; yet notwithstanding, they
bought the Warwick, Cignet, Star, Hind, Lilly, and Crescent Frigates, which
are now in the service. By this your Honors may perceive how far we have
been from opposing the buying or building of Frigates, but have rather
endeavored to increase the number of them, being now at least twenty. And
whereas Master Burrell says, they might have been bought for five thousand
pound: he does not tell your Honors, That they would cost to be set to Sea,
double the first cost, as by experience we have found in the aforesaid
Frigates. And whereas he charge us with giving directions to the
Ship-wrights, for the building of three new Frigates, it is false; for the
master Ship-wrights, with the Assistants of the Master of their Hall and the
Master Carpenter of the East India, Company, gave us under their hands, the
dimensions and scantlings by which the said Frigates should be built; and we
doubt not, but they performing their duty, one of these Frigates will be more
serviceable, then three of those mentioned by master Burrell. And as for the
discontented Seamen, where with the King has manned his Ships, we are sure
they had no cause to be discontented, neither with the Parliament nor us; for
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, have been pleased to augment their wages
four shillings in a month. and give them the one third of all they took,
which to moderate men should have been an engagement: but in regard we are not
of one mind, as well by sea, as by land, and some had rather live Pirates, then
in an honest calling, there may be some English (although not thousands) out of
their ill affection to the Parliament, that have deserted the Cause, and yet in
the Kings Men of War, there are three strangers for one English man. And as
for the Merchant Ships that have been taken, some have been surprised in going
from their Convoy. And if Dunkirk, being a small fisher-town, takes from the
Hollanders, every year at least eighty, or a hundred sail of ships, and some
years more; notwithstanding, their great Fleets, set out every year for
suppressing of them; how much more may all those Ports of Flanders, France,
Holland, and Denmark infest our Coasts, and yet in all this time, they have not
taken any considerable Ship of force.

In the fourth place, He falls upon some Members of Parliament, to wit, Master
Vassal, and Master Bence, That they are owners of some slaggish Ships now in
the service; as if their Ships were not as well able to serve, as any other
Ships in the Kingdom, and likewise would fain make all the Commissioners of the
Navy, Owners of such Ships as are unfit for the service of the State; when
indeed and in truth, Master Burrell cares not what Ships they have, so he may
have their places. Then he says, he has a new complaint which he has (worn
threadbare, and as false as the rest) testified by witnesses, (and never a word
true.) And that is, that the best of Prizes have been estranged from the
Parliament, and possessed by the Officers of the Navy, and their associates;
And that those Ships have taken many rich Prizes, and when they have taken
them, the Officers of the Navy have paid them off with the Parliaments pay,
not allowing those that have been most valiant, one penny for their shares,
when the Prizes taken, have been worth 11000 l. And when the Seamen demanded
their shares, one of the Officers threatened them with imprisonment: By which
unkind usage ( says Master Burrell) many thousand common Seamen have been
occasioned to leave the Kingdom, and to serve against the Parliament. Then
Master Burrell does beseech their Honors to give him leave to acquaint them.
that there is a Danish Ship now in the River of Thames, and says, it is said,
she was taken from the Danes by authority of Parliament; but says, he knows
not whether Prize or no: But this he knows for certain, that Ship is fitter
for the Parliament, then for any Subject in the Kingdom: and wheresoever the
mystery lies (says wise Master Burrell) that Ship was worth four times so
much money, as she was sold for.

Answer, Master Samuel Vassal does owe part of the May-flower, which is a
serviceable Merchant Ship, and has been often employed, both in the Straits,
and in the West Indies, by diverse Merchants in London, being fortified with
twenty eight pieces of Ordnance, and three Decks, and never understood by us to
be a Collier, or sluggish, as before is declared. Master Alexander Bence, owes
a sixteenth part of the Blessing, being a fit Ship for a Man of War, as any
Ship of her burden, in the River of Thames, and no sluggard, as Master Burrell
would have her. And as for the Angel, we know of no such Ship in the service.
And whereas Captain Crandley, and Captan Morris, are said to be owners of the
Anne Percie, it is not true, although the Ship be without exception, fit to
serve any Prince in Christendom And whereas master Burrell says, that Captain
Crandley, and Captain Tweedy owe part of the Honor and Providence; it is true
Captain Crandley, owes part of the Providence, though not in the service, as
likewise the Honor lately burnt. But as for Captain Tweedie, to be owner of
either of them, or of any other Ship in the service, it is false and untrue;
although both the said Ships were, and are serviceable both for the State, and
Merchants, as appeared by the Honor, which fought with six of the Kings best
Men of War, off Holy-head in Wales, and beat them into Bristoll, and yet not
in the States service. And whereas we are charged with several Prizes taken by
the Parliaments Ships, estranged from the Parliament, and possessed by the
Officers of the Navy, and their associates, and paid with the Parliaments pay,
and their chief Commanders Irish: We answer, it is notoriously false and
scandalous, as what else touching this Article; And we desire your Honors
would be pleased, that he not proving it, we may have vindication, and be
repaired in our reputation, which to us is as dear as our lives. And as for the
Danish Ship, we know of such a Ship taken by Captain Batten, and after
delivered by the Honorable Houses of Parliament, to the Merchants Adventurers,
together with her goods brought from the East Indies, which was by them sold,
in satisfaction for their wrongs received from the King of Denmark; and whether
sold cheap or dear, it no way concerns the State, nor us. By this your
Honors may perceive the malice of this filly ignorant man, that will inform
your Honors with that, which he cannot in the one, nor dare not in the other,
make good.

Master Burrell recites diverse Captains, by name Captain Man, Captain Ellison,
Captain Wills, Captain Wild, and Captain Wappell; which he says have done very
good service, but never received any reward, or preferment; And would make the
world believe they are as discontented as himself, insomuch, that he says they
would leave the Kingdom; when to our knowledge three of them are now at Sea, in
the service of the Parliament in three good Ships; and are neither
discontented, nor unrewarded, as Mr Burrell would have them to be.

Ans. As to the fifth Article touching Captain Man so much commended by Mr
Burrell for his valor, wherein he says, he has deserved a gold chain for his
service against Mucknell; we confess had he and his consorts persevered and
taken Mucknell, they all had well deserved a good reward, but leaving him to
harbor himself in Silly (where he run his Ship upon a rock) we cannot conceive
how he or they have deserved a reward; yet for his encouragement, we suppose
the Honorable Committee of the Admiralty has well preferred him, from the
command of a small Frigate, to command one of the best third rank Ships in the
Navy. As for the good service of Captain Ellison, we are well satisfied; but
that he has not received any shares, of what is due, we cannot believe; or
that he should make any such complaint unto Master Burrell, and not rather unto
those, who would do him right. As for Captain John Wills, we marvel he should
complain of all others; for to our knowledge, he is well satisfied in the
Service, being Captain of a small Ship, the Lucie, he left the said Ship, and
lived ever since on shore; and if he be such a man, as Master Burrell sets
down, that he was intended to leave the Kingdom, and to seek employment in
other Countries; truly he is not to be trusted by the Parliament: for
satisfaction of which, it will be necessary to question him before he takes the
command of Captain Plunkets Ship, being appointed by her owners to be Commander
of her, in the States Service. And as for Captain John Wild, he has been
employed in the Service; and what his deportment was, we leave to the relation
of the Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick: but in his last employment, he was
Captain of the Cignet-Frigate upon the North-Coast, where we were given to
understand, that in that Service, he and Captain Wills in the Lucie, took 4
Ships in Lynne-Deeps, belonging to that Town, when the Earl of Manchester was
before it: his Lordship having taken the Town, the owners of the said Ships
petitioned his Lordship, for restoring of the said Ships and Goods; upon which
his Lordship was pleased to grant them their Ships and Goods again, they paying
the Captains 400 pounds salvage, viz. 100 pounds amongst them and their
Mariners in money, and a bond of 300 pounds to pay to the Captains at a
certain time; which we understand they have received, but ought (in our
opinions) to be accountable unto the State, in lieu of the Ships and Goods
which were Prizes: besides they pillaged the said Ships, as by complaint to us
from the owners: By all which it does appear, he has no cause to complain for
his thirds: And if he be such a man as Master Burrell makes him to be (which we
do not believe,) we leave it to your Honors grave Wisdoms to consider whether
he be so fit a man as Master Burrell makes him, being one of those (as Master
Burrell says) that out of discontent would leave the Kingdom. As for Captain
Wappall, he had almost starved his men upon the Coast of Ireland, insomuch,
that they brought away the Ship for want of Victuals, when Sir Charles Coote
had most occasion to use him after the taking in of Slego, the business being
taken into examination before us; and this is another of Master Burrells men,
that would leave the Land; which, if so, are not fit men to be trusted by the
State. And as for Captain Hawkeridge, we doubt not but the Right Honorable the
Earl of Warwick knows him well; and questionless, if his Lordship had sound
him so capable of employment, as Master Burrell pretends, he had been preferred
as other men. And as for his Giant Captain Hodges, as Master Burrell calls him,
he always served in a private Man of War; by which employment, he made so good
use of his time, that he has purchased a great Ship, with which he is gone for
Venice, laden with Merchants Goods; and not out of any discontent, as Master
Burrell would have it but for his own advantage.

In the sixth place; he says, That diverse persons are employed in the
Parliaments Service, that have deserved punishment; and in stead thereof; have
been preferred to places of trust; and nominates Captain Shaftoe.

Ans Concerning Captain Shaftoe, we did receive information, that he released
(after he had taken) one Leyton; who afterward (as is said) went into
New Castle: Captain Shaftoe, after his coming to Town, did acquit himself, by
diverse witnesses, of that crime; and will be ready at all times (being now
Commander of Holy-Island) to give the Honorable Houses further satisfaction.
As for his Bill for his Ships Pay mentioned by Master Burrell, to be branded by
Master Holland, in regard of the crime abovesaid; it is true, it was so done
by him against our consent, long after he had signed it; but in regard we could
not lay any just charge to Captain Shaftoe, and the money belonging to the
owners, and not to him, for the Service of the Ship; we could not in justice,
but take off the brand of the Bill; Captain Shaftoe being a responsible man, to
answer any thing that afterward should be laid to his charge: and to our
knowledge, he is a man that has been faithful to the Parliament, having done
special Services in landing in Northumberland, by the command of Captain
Edward Hall, with the Anthelopes men and his own, being about 150, and coming
to Colonel Hagerstons house, being very strong, summoned it, and took part of
the outhouses, and after, the Colonel himself thinking to escape away, his
horse was shot under him, and so taken as also his Son in the House; where they
found store of cloth for Soldiers coats for the Colonells Regiment, which he
was raising: the taking of the said Colonel, and bringing himself, and some
prisoners, was the break-neck of that Regiment; which was at that time an
excellent piece of service: In the next place, he most desperately entered into
the Port of Holy-Island, the Castle and Island being for the King; and having
not above 100 men, he first took the Town and the Island, and afterward
summoned the Castle, and had it delivered to the use of the Parliament: for
which good service, the honorable Houses made him Captain thereof, where he
remains to this day. And as for Master Hollands forbearing 14 months to sit in
Commission for this and many other abuses, as Master Burrell pretends; we
humbly desire, that Master Holland may be examined, what these abuses were, and
by whom committed, that, if so, they may receive condign punishment.

In the seventh place, Master Burrell charge Captain Peacock with treasonable
practices, and says, That he took a Vessel, whereof was Master, one Hixon,
laden with Arms and Ordnance for his Majesty, and when Captain Peacocks men
would have gone on board to search her, he denied them, and told the men she
was laden with Apples, bound for Scotland; and after private conference in the
Cabine together, Peacock set Hixon at liberty, and Hixon went into Newcastle,
while Peacock was in sight of him, and there delivered diverse pieces of
Ordnance, and other Ammunition for the King: for which treachery, says Master
Burrell, Peacock did neither suffer punishment nor fine, although the Articles
against him were exhibited to the Officers of the Navy, and proved against
him; yet notwithstanding the great complaint, Peacok is lately made a Captain
of one of the Parliaments Ships.

Ans. As for the charge given against Peacock, we found no just proof against
him, referring him to his defense presented to the honorable Committee of the
Admiralty, by which we doubt not but he has given full satisfaction, before
their Honors admitted him into the service again, being now Captain of the
Warwick-Frigate.

In the next place, Master Burrell charge one Bramble with cowardice, and
says, he was to convoy William Hazard in the Gift of God, from Ireland, with
fifteen Masts for the Service of the Navy; and Bramble commanding one of the
Parliaments Frigates fortified with sixteen pieces of Ordnance, met with two of
the Kings Men of War, and at the sight of them (as Master Burrell says) ran
from his charge, and left Hazard to the mercy of the Enemy, who carried him
into Falmouth; for which cowardly Service, Bramble was put out of the said
Frigate, by the space of a year; but of late preferred to be Captain of one of
the Parliaments Ships.

Ans. Concerning Captain Bramble leaving of his Convoy, which came from
Ireland, with fifteen masts; It is true, that two Frigates chased his Convoy in
the morning, at break of day; and she being so far a stearn, could not recover
her before the Men of War had possession of her, (as we are informed:) and
since that, he has been Master of the Anthelope with Captain Hall; where he
behaved himself so well, that the said Captain Hall recommended him to the
owners of the Ark, a Merchant-Ship, whereof he is now Commander.

The ninth and last Quere (as he says) is of great concernment, and thinks it
not fit the common Seamen should be acquainted with it; and further says, he
finds them so full of discontent, that if he should give them any
encouragement, he fears they would be offensive to the Parliament, because (as
Master Burrell says) they have been grossly cozened in their thirds of
Prize-goods, taken by Captain Swanley and Captain Moltons Squadrons, worth a
great value, but (he says) obscured by transaction. Then he falls again upon
Reformation, and reducing the Navy into a serviceable posture for these times,
and such a Reformation, as will enable the Parliament to recover the
Sovereignty of the Seas: And the jest is, he will defend England it self from
being invaded by Turks and Landrobbers; and says, The honor of the Sea is
lost, and the money spent little better, than cast into the Sea.

Ans. Concerning the fear he has of the common Seamen, of their coming to
clamor at the Parliament-door; we believe there are no such men, except
promoted by Master Burrell and his Agents. And for the Prizes taken by Captain
Swanley and Captain Moltons Squadrons, we refer them to the Collectors for
Prizes and Prize-goods, who can give a very good account thereof. As concerning
the Gentleman's conclusions, of his mark and aim for reforming of the Navy into
a serviceable posture; We hope we have given a full satisfactory Answer to your
Honors: But we wonder that he should be so impudently bold, as to charge the
Parliament with the expense of so much money to be spent at Sea, or rather cast
into the Sea; when it appears, that the Navy, under God, has not had the
least share in preserving the Kingdom, for the reasons given aforesaid. And as
for the honor of the Sea, we dare be bold to say, it has never been better
upheld, then since our Fleets have been abroad; where they have been, and still
are Masters of the Seas, in the face of the Parliaments Enemies. And as for the
Reformation of the Navy so much mentioned by Master Burrell, we know not what
he means, unless it be to destroy it, if it be no other than what by him is
set forth; and in former times would have been held treason, in any Projector
that should have endeavored to put the same in practice. And we much wonder,
that he, or any man, dares presume to inform the Parliament, to bring Englands
Royal Navy into such a contemptible and weak condition, as this Gentleman
would do by his Reformation, contrary to the opinion of the most skillful
Seamen and Ship-wrights of the Kingdom: And therefore we could wish, that
Master Burrell, so much insisting upon a Reformation of the Navy, would first
reform himself of such gross ignorance of which he now stands guilty. And thus
we hope we have answered both his General and Particular Charge, referring
both it and our selves to the grave Wisdom of the honorable Houses of
Parliament, from whom we hope to have vindication, and reparation, for those
many unjust aspersions and false accusations against our persons and
reputation, set forth by Master Burrell, in his Pamphlet.

Postscript.
THen he writes his Postscript, and shows of what rank the Ships shall be,
which he intends to reform; and then he says, If the State had ten times as
many Pinaces, and ten times so many Frigates as are now employed, the honor of
the Sea cannot be maintained by them: It is the Ships of the Navy that must,
and (if they were reduced) that can recover and maintain Englands honor; It is
the Ships of the Navy, and not the Pinaces and Frigates. And then begins to
make his recantation, as he thinks and says, That whereas he says the
Admiralls, Vice-Admiralls, and Rear-Admiralls, have not shot one shot in anger,
since these distracted Wars began, his intention was, and is, that they have
not shot one shot in anger, viz. in offense or defense, in a Warlike manner,
against any of the Kings Men of War, or any other Ship that has affronted them.

Concerning reforming the first, second, and third rank-Ships, we have given so
full an Answer already, that we shall not need to reiterate it again; Only in
the ten times so many Pinaces, and ten times so many Frigates, the honor of
the Seas cannot be maintained: It is the Ships of Englands Navy (says Master
Burrell) that must maintain the honor of the Sea; which we agree unto; but not
to reduce them into the posture of Frigates, with one Tire of Ordnance, as
Master Burrell would have them. And as for the Admiralls, Vice-Admiralls, and
Rear-Admiralls, That his meaning is, they have not shot one shot in anger, in
offense or defense, in a Warlike manner, against the Kings Men of War; He makes
the cure worse then the disease, and abuses not only that Honorable Lord,
but all other Commanders, as if they did not know how to defend themselves, or
offend an Enemy, in a Warlike manner.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

NA. BRENT.


