An answer to a question of a Gentleman of quality (proposed to and made by a
Reverend and learned Divine living in London) concerning the settlement or
abolition of Tithes by the Parliament, which caused him to doubt how to dispose
of his Son whom he had designed for the Ministrey: wherein also are comprised
some Animadversions upon a late little pamphlet called, The Countries plea
against Tithes, discovering the ignorant mistakings of the Authors of it,
touching the maintenance of the Ministry.
Sir,
THough it were high presumption for a private man, as I am, to presage what so
wise a Senate as the Parliament will do for the future, either in point of
Tithes, or any other affair of so public concernment, yet I hope I may,
without reaching above my line, take upon me to tell you, that the ground of
your doubt touching their alienation of Tithes from the Ministry, (which I
shall bring in its proper place) is but such as will serve rather to bear up a
transient suspicion or surmise of such a matter, then a settled assurance that
it either is so already, or that hereafter it will be so. For the first, That
it is not so, I am sure; because,

1. They have passed an Ordinance for the Ministers recovery of Tithes, and
other Ministerial dues from such as do detain them, November 8. 1644. which
is still in force, through the influence of their power and favor.

2. They have made competent additions to very many livings out of impropriated
Tithes in the hands of Delinquents; and this they have done with so much
cheerfulness, and beneficence on the Ministers behalf, by the Committee for
plundered Ministers, that many have cause to bless God for them as their great
Patrons, and benefactors for that manner of maintenance; wherein they have done
beyond and above any Parliament that were before them, and they continue and
persist in the making of such augmentations, as occasion is offered, to this
very day.

3. They have given the repulse to diverse petitions against Tithes, which by
the instinct and instigation of men of unsound principles and unquiet spirits
have been put up unto them.

For the second, that they will not take them away in time to come, I have
these grounds, if not of infallible certainty, yet of very great probability.

Though they have resolved upon the sale of Bishops lands and revenues, in
their Ordinance of November 16. 1646. for that purpose, they have made an
especial exception with respect to the maintenance of Ministers in these
words, Except parsonages appropriate, tithes, tithes appropriate, oblations,
obventions, portions of tithes, parsonages, vicarages, Churches, Chapels,
advowsons, donatives, nomination, rights of patronage and presentation.

In excepting the right of patronage, they mean neither to leave it to the
power of the people to choose what Minister they please, (and the practice of
the Honorable Committee for plundered Ministers shows the same, for they
appoint and place Ministers very often without the petitions of the people, and
sometimes against them, as their wisdom sees cause; and if it were not so,
many would choose such as deserved to be put out again.) Nor to put the
Ministers upon the voluntary pensions, or contributions of the people for their
subsistence, but assign them under such a title what belongs unto them by
the Laws of the Land, viz. Tithes, obventions, etc. which intimates their mind
not only for the present, but for the future.

Their wisdom well knows that the Revenue of Tithes as it is most ancient
for the original of it, and most general in practice, both for times and
places, so it has the best warrant from the word of God (not only in the old
Testament, which none can deny, but in the new, which though it be denied by
some, is averred by others, as D. Carleton, M. Roberts, D. Sclater, M. Bagshaw,
in their treatises of Tithes, and yet unrefuted by any) and from the Laws of
many Christian States, especially from the Statutes of our Kingdom, whereof
abundant evidence is given in the book of the learned Antiquary, Sr Henry
Spelman.

3. That notwithstanding all the authority that may be pleaded for them, the
people are backward enough to pay to their Ministers a competent maintenance;
and if Tithes should be put down by the Parliament, it would be very much ado
to bring them up any other way to any reasonable proportion of allowance for
their support; and so in most places the Ministry would be reduced to extreme
poverty, and that poverty would produce contempt of their calling, and that
contempt atheism.

4. That it is evident that such as make the loudest noise against the tenure
of Tithes, are as opposite to the office and calling of Ministers as to their
maintenance; and intend by their lefthanded Logic (because as the saying is,
the Benefit or Benefice is allotted to the office) to make way for the taking
away of the Ministry, by the taking away of Tithes; and nor to wait the
leisure of consequentiall operation, (according to the craft of Julian, who
robbed the Church of means, expecting the want of wages would in time bring
after it a want of workmen) but presently to bear down both, as Relatives
mutually infer one another, as well by a negative as a positive inference;
and so as the Parliament having put down the office of the Prelacy, now makes
sale of their lands, they, if they could prevail for the discarding of Tithes,
would by the same argument (clamor and slander) presently and importunately
press for deposition of the Ministry. And we see how they take upon them with
equal confidence and diligence, not only to write, but Erbury at Oxford and
Cox at London.
publicly to dispute against them both.

5. That if rights, so firmly set upon so many solid foundations, should be
supplanted, it would much weaken the tenure or title that any man has to his
lands, or goods, and would be a ready plea for rash innovators; and the rather,
because of the manner of the Anabaptists proceedings, who began their claim of
Christian liberty with a Sleydan Comment. l. 5. fol. 71. a.
relaxation of Tithes, and went on to take off the Interdict or restraint in
hunting, fishing, and fowling, wherein they would allow neither Nobility, nor
Gentry, any more privilege then the meanest peasant. And as their principles
were loose; so were their practices licentious, for they held a Ibid.
community of goods, and equality of estates; Bonorum quoque communione^ and
humanitati cum primis esse consentaneam, and ut ex dignitate sunt omnes
aequales, and ex condition libere and promiscue omnibus bonis utuntur. Ibid.
fol. 64. prope finem.
whereupon the Common people gave over their work, and whatsoever Quo factum
est, ut vulgus ab operis atque labor desisteret, and qua quisque re careret ab
aliis qui abundatant etiam invitis acciperit. Ibid. See also l. 10. princip.
they wanted they took from the rich even against their good wills; So that it
was a breach of their Christian liberty, belike, to have a lock or a bolt on a
door, to keep a peculiar possession of any thing from them. And the liberty
was more and more amplified, according to the fancies of their dreaming
doctors, for their dreams were the oracles of their common people; and every
day they set forth their liberty in a new edition, corrupted and augmented,
till all the partition walls of propriety were broken down; and so not content
to have other men's goods at their disposal, and to be quit from payment of
rents, and debts, (having made a monopoly of Saintship to themselves) they
excommunicated all who were not of their faction both out of sacred society of
the Church, and out of common communion in the world as wicked and profane, and
unworthy not only of livelihood but of life also; and usurped a power to
Promittebat auxilium quo viz. impiis interfectis, novi substituerentur
principes and Magistratus: nama Deo fibi mandatum esse profitebatur (scil.
Muncerus) ut sublatis illis constitueret novos Ibid.
depose Prince and other Civil Magistrates, as they pretended they had
commission to kill them, and to constitute new ones in their stead as they
should think fit. Sathanas sub Evangelii praetextu multos hoc
temporeseditiosos and plane sanguinarios excitavit Doctores. Sleydan Comment:
l. 5. fol. 72. See more of their Doctrine l. 10. principio. and of their doings
in the following discourse of the Author of the same book.
Such seditious and sanguinary Doctors, as Luther called them, did Satan stir
up under the pretext of Evangelical liberty; a liberty which in them admitted
of no bounds, being like the etc. oath without banks, or bottom, of no rule
or order, being carried on with a wild and giddy violence; such as the great
and pernicious impostor of the world prompted them unto, though they vented
their diabolical illusions under the Title of Divine Revelations, as the
Prince of darkness made them believe, when he put on his holy day habit, the
appearance of an Angel of light. 2 Cor. 11.14.

6. That the payment of Tithes where there are the fruits of the earth, and
increase of cattle, out of which they may be raised, is the most equitable way
and means of maintaining the Minister, since such a gain is not only
harmless, and without sin, for the manner of acquisition, (which we cannot
say of pensions and exhibitions made up out of trade or traffic) but such as
may be most permanent and constant, since whether the Tithe be less or more,
it is still proportionable to the other nine parts; and if the years be
plentiful, there is the more provision for housekeeping, if scarce, that part
though less is the more in price and worth, either for use in kind, or for
exchange for other commodities. Whereas a rate in money which is competent in
some places, and at some times, is incompetent in others, such is the change
both of moneys and necessaries bought with money. For money, the time was when
an ounce of silver now at 5. s. was valued but at 20. d. So in the Act of
Parliament in the third of Edward the first, Cokes Instit. part 2. p. 410. when
20 marks a year was enough honorably to maintain a Student at the Innes of
Court. Fortescue is his Commentary on the Laws of England, c. 49. p. 114. And
this was held so great a charge as was to be borne only by the sons of
Noblemen, and therefore they only, says the same Author, studied the Laws in
those Innes, Ibid. And of old the Revenues fit for a Knight was rated to 20. l.
a year, of a Baron to 400 marks a year, and of an Earl 400. l. a year: Cokes
Instit. l. 2. c. 3. Sect. 95. fol. 69. and Lindwood in his provincial
Constitutions notes upon the rate of a Vicarage (for such by the fraud and
rapine of the superior Popish Clergy Vicario perpetuum stipendium quinque
marcarum statuitur, nisi in partibus aliquibus Walliae ubi minore contenti
sintd. Lindwood constitut. l. 1. de offic. vicar. fol. 46. p. 2 col. 2. in
Textu and fol. 47. p. col. 1. Sed in glos. lit. g. Augmentatio facta est ad 8
Marcas, sed tamen alii qui non sunt contenti sine december Marcis; and revera 5
Marcae non sufficient ad hospitalitatem and alia Ibid. in glos. lit. g.
were many times deprived of Tithes, and put to pensions) that it was to be 5
marks in England, but in some parts of Wales they were content with less,
afterward their means was augmented to 8 marks a year, but some would not be
contented with less then 10 marks a year; and, indeed says the Gloss, 5
marks was too little for Hospitality, and other expenses; implying that 10
marks was sufficient for all occasions.

2 As for money, so for commodities to be bought with it, the prices have been
very various; In the Sea Polt Abridg. Edict. Londin. 1640. p. 11.
Statute entitled Assisa panis and cervisiae, made Anno 51 H. 3. and Anno Dom.
1266. the dearest rate for a quarter of wheat (which in the middle of the
Kingdom is a measure containing eight times four peckes, I render it by that
proportion, because it is more generally known) was 12. s. the cheapest 1. s.
so that betwixt these two extremes the ordinary rate might be about 6. s. the
quarter. And for other provisions the rate set upon them in a dearth in the
Reign of Edward the second was this, for an ox fatted with grass fifteen
shillings, for one fatted with corn twenty shillings; the best cow twelve
shillings, a fat hog of two years old three shillings; a fat sheep shorn
fourteen pence, with the fleece twenty pence; a fat goose two pence halfepenny,
a fat capon two pence halfepenny, a fat hen a penny, four pigeons a penny, so
that whosoever sold above should forfeit their ware to the King. Dan. Hist. l.
2. p. 209. And I well remember that not very many years ago there was a
controversy brought before the commissioners of charitable uses in Cheshire;
wherein was discovered the cheapnesse of things in former times: the case was
thus. There was a legacy of twenty marks given to the parish of Wood-church in
that County to buy oxen to till the ground of poor men, with which small sum
at the time of the donation, (about sevenscore years before) were bought no
fewer then twenty yoke of oxen; which because the poor people were not able so
to keep that they might be strong to labor, it was thought fit to sell them
and to buy in their stead as many milch kine as the money would reach unto,
which were to be hired at a low rate to such as were not able to buy such
cattle for themselves. But it is yet a cheaper price we read of in Edward the
first his days, when by Stat. Westminster. an ox was to be sold but at 5. s. so in
the 13th year of Edward the 1. cited in Cokes Instit. part 2. p. 410. How
rates are raised in the present age (whether by scarcity of things, or by the
increase of people, or multiplication of coin, or all) is not unknown to any,
and too much experimentally by many whose portion is too penurious for their
necessary expenses. Nor is this great difference of rates, either for money, or
for goods, brought to pass on the sudden, but raised by degrees; so that if
the rule of tithing should be laid down, the Ministers wages must be changed,
as Jacobs was in Labans service, many times over, which would be an intricate
trouble to proportion according to several variations of persons, and places;
to which inconvenience the maintenance by Tithes is not obnoxious; nor to any
other, which may be compared with such as will hardly be separated (if at all)
from the alienation of Tithes.

That if any innovation be made in this matter, and the people be displeased
with it, (as they will quickly be displeased with any thing which puts them to
cost) they will take the more boldness to contemn it, because it is new, and
for that it neither has, nor is like to have such a ratification of authority,
either divine, or humane, by constitution or prescription, as tithing has had;
no, though it should be supposed to last to the end of the world. For Tithes
were paid 1933 years, almost 2000 years before Christ; Salian Annal. Tom 1.
p. 251. nu. 41. and since Christ (excepting some times of persecution) for the
most part of sixteen hundred forty six years; and we cannot hope the
remaining age of the world will hold out half so long.

To these I could add diverse other considerations of importance, which cannot
be hid from the prudence of such a multitude of sage Counselors as that most
Honorable Senate the Parliament consists of; which makes me confident that
before they give assent to any such petitions as are put up against Tithes,
they will be pleased to hear what the Assembly of Divines can say in answer
to such objections, as are framed against them, upon pretense either of
Scripture or religious reason.

Animadversions upon the Petition of the Committee of Kent.
AGainst this, that which moved you to think the Parliament would take away
Tithes, was, that you have read in one of the news books, that the Knights
and Gentlemen of Kent presented a petition to the Honorable House of Commons,
against the payment of Tithes unto Ministers, and that they received thanks
from the Speaker in the name of the House for that service, and that it is held
fit to be a leading case for all other Counties of the Kingdom.

You must beware how you believe the news books, for they are many times
ignorantly and inconsiderately erroneous, or fallaciously false, out of an ill
affection to some, and apparent partiality to others.

For the Petition it self, 1. It comes not as from the Knights and Gentlemen
of that County in common, (who I am credibly informed are not very well pleased
with it) but from the Committee of Kent, who (if they be like the Committees in
many places) are not all of them men of sound, and orthodox Judgment, neither
for matter of Tithes, nor for diverse other Tenets of Religion.

2. Howsoever they profess a good meaning to establish a sufficient
maintenance for godly and well deserving Ministers; a very good meaning to
extend it so far as to succor their widows do was and fatherless children,
as we see by the 8th proposition of their new project. It will be a problem
(which the present age perhaps will not be able to resolve) who the Trusties in
after times will accept for such Ministers; although they may have cause to
suspect that some part of Kent for the present is not so reformed as it should
be; Anabaptists and other sectaries having misled many into adverse principles,
not only to Tithes, but to other matters of moment, concerning man's duty both
of the first and second Table.

3. For their exceptions against the received maintenance by Tithes they say
first, in general, That they bewail the sad condition of the Country, in
respect of the uncertain floting, and miserable condition of the Ministry,
occasioned by the very nature, manner, and adjuncts of the way of Tithes; which
the experience of thus many ages does plainly evince to be miserably attended
with these ensuing mischiefs.

To which I answer;

That the miserable and floting condition of the Ministry proceeds not from the
nature, manner or adjuncts of their subsistence by way of Tithes; nor does the
experience of thus many ages (that is, of the precedent ages hitherto) evince
so much; for God (who is omniscient, and therefore cannot but foresee all
subsequent inconveniences for many hundred years to come) established that
means to be a standing and settled maintenance for his service; and the misery
of the Ministry proceeds not from the nature or manner of Tithes (which to
affirm may seem to coast too near their conceit who imagine God to be the
author of sin) but from the ill consciences of men, who make no scruple to
rob God of his right, Malach. 3. (for Tithes are his portion, Levit. 27.30.)
and Ministers may suffer very much in the present age, because there be many
Anabaptisticall sectaries (from which Kent is not more free, but as some say,
more infected then some other Counties) who take up importunate clamours
against Tithes as Antichristian and Jewish; and there will be the more by the
countenance they may have from such a petition; and such petitioners, because
diverse of them are of good reputation, not only for wealth, but for their
wisdom and learning well affected to Religion and the Parliament; and I
believe it the rather, because some godly ministers have expressed their
approbation both of it and them, though therein I conceive they showed more of
the simplicity of the dove then of the wisdom of the serpent; for albeit
their meaning might be so to gather the Tithes, and to put them into such
hands, as might be rather for the Ministers ease then for their loss, no man
can prophecy that so good a spirit will descend upon their successors, nor how
cross they may prove to such a Christian Intention.

That for the nature of this subsistence it is a very mystery, and secret, not
easily without much art and industry attained unto; namely for the Minister to
know his dues demandable, or the parishioners their dues payable; whence
arises that multitude of scandalous and vexatious suites and brables betwixt
Ministers and people, which does fill all the Courts at Westminster, and other
the Justice-sittings in the Country likewise with causes in this kind.

In this charge there be two particulars contained, first, of the difficulty of
knowing the right of Tithes; secondly, of the vexatious suites raised betwixt
pastors and people upon that ground.

For the first, It is a very strange mystery, that after so many hundred years
of Tithing it should not yet be known what it is; but I doubt not but in this
case the right is better known unto Ministers that should receive Tithes, then
acknowledged by the people that ought to pay them; And how can they set up
their new design upon the old foundation of Tithing, as they project it, if it
cannot be known what is the Ministers demandable due, what the peoples payable
duty: that model is more like to be a mystery which they propound, since it
was never heard of in this Kingdom until they had devised it; and as like it
is to prove a misery to Ministers, if their portion should come into no better
hands then most of theirs, who have petitioned against Tithes since this
Session of the Parliament.

And secondly, for the multitude of scandalous and vexatious suites, they make
no more against the Right of Tithes, then against borrowing and lending, buying
and selling, letting of leases, settling inheritances, Joyntures, etc. upon
which titles are set the greatest number of suites; and for suites for Tithes
if the law allow them a right, it allows them a remedy to recover that right;
and for the suites that were occasioned thereby, they are neither so many as is
here presented, nor so scandalous for the Ministers part, for they may be
imputed to the old avarice of worldly minded men, who being of a contrary mind
to the Apostle, think it an hard bargain to exchange their carnal for the
Ministers spiritual things; but principally to the new principles and
practices of such unreasonable reformers, as imagine they are never far
enough removed from one extreme until they arrive at the other, accounting
all superstitious in point of Tithing, that are not sacrilegious.

For the manner of it, respecting either the collecting or payment of Tithes,
it is a mutual scourge in the hand of Ministers and people each to other, if
either or both (as too often it happens) prove covetous or cross.



For its adjuncts (that is of the maintenance by Tithes) the mischiefs of them
will appear innumerable, if the pregnancy of only one be but considered;
namely, in the unreasonable proportion of livings, or values of Churches to
which they are belonging, whence arise these inseparable evils.

that in the distribution of the revenues for Ministers regard must be had to
the desert of the person, his family, and charge; if so, certainly there is a
great disproportion in deserts; and for charge it is considerable, not only
for the greatness of a Ministers family, but for the dearnesse of his
education; some have spent many years, and a large patrimony in the
University, to make them fit for the Ministry; and should not they be supplied
with a more liberal allowance (caeteris paribus) then those who have been at
little expense both of time and estate to be duly qualified for such a
calling? If the proportion of parts, and pains, of charge both Academicall,
and Oeconomicall, be duly weighed, there will be many more livings found too
little then too great for a Ministers maintenance; especially if you will allow
him a Library (such as a learned Knight thought necessary for a Minister) of
600. l. value. But if the proportion be unreasonable, must Tithes be supplanted
and their ancient Tenure abolished for such a disproportion? must the
foundation be dug up because the building is too high? may not a tree, whose
branches are too luxuriant, be lopped, and left entire in the body and root?
when a man's beard is too long, will you cut off his chinne? that out of doubt
were an unreasonable reformation.

That most unworthy persons, who by favor or friendship or any sinister ways
can get into the greatest livings, being once invested with a legal right of
freehold for their lives, securely fleece the flock, and feed themselves
without fear or care, more then to keep themselves without the compass of a
sequestration, whilst others both painful and conscionable both serve starve.

they are invested with a legal right of freehold for their lives, and if they
have such a right, and walk so warily as to keep out of the reach of a just
sequestration, why should they not enjoy it? would you have all to be betrusted
to the discretion and conscience of your arbitrary Committees? Truly
Gentelemen, we are afraid to trust you so far, as to give up such a certain
title as formerly and anciently established upon the Incumbent by the
fundamental Laws of the Land, as the right of any person to his Temporal
estate, and to stand to your arbitrary dispensations for our livelihood; lest
Laban-like you should change our wages ten times: and if your petition should
take place, it might prove of very ill consequence in another generation, were
you never so well minded, and it may be sooner (in the next succession:) for if
the Trustees should be either proud or covetous, or profane or licentious,
heretical, or schismatic, the best Mininisters might happily be the worst
dealt withal; and the right of receiving Tithes taken out of their hands might
put them into the passive condition of filly and impotent wards under subtle
and domineering Tutors or Guardians, in name such, but indeed nothing less
then assertors and defenders of their rights, as Tutors and Guardians ought to
be. And that our fear and jealousy is not without cause in respect of
Trustees and Committeemen, nor so much of you in particular, of some of whom we
have heard and believe much good, as of such as may have as great authority
without so good an intention, we shall give you our ground out of the
observation and complaint of witnesses above exception, viz. the well affected
freemen and covenant-engaged Citizens of the City of London, in their humble
representation to the right Honorable the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, in these words. And here we may not omit to hint unto your Honors
the exorbitant practices of many Committees and Committee Men, who have such an
influence by means of their authority upon the people, they being at their
wills and in their power to do them a displeasure, that they dare not do
otherwise, then obey their unlawful commands, without the inevitable hazard of
their peace and safety; through which means tyranny is exercised by one
fellow-subject upon another, and justice and equity cannot enter. The cries of
all sorts of people through the land are grown so loud against the people of
this vocation and profession, by reason of those grievous oppressions that are
continually acted by them, that in tenderness of affection toward our
brethren, not being ignorant or insensible of our own sufferings in this kind,
and the great dishonor accrewing to the Parliament thereby, that we cannot but
be earnest suitors to your mercy and justice that such may be dissolved.

obtainment of these livings we see such sordid compliances with such persons
as have the fattest benefices (as they count and call them) in their dispose;
such artifices in contriving, making, and coloring over Simoniacall and
sinful bargains, compacts, and matches, such chopping of Churches, and
restless change of places, till they get into the easiest and warmest: and
other such like practices not to be named, nor yet to be prevented or removed,
otherwise then by plucking up the very root which naturally brancheth out it
self into these foresaid mischiefs, so obstructive and destructive to all
reformation.

Peter to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee, Acts 8.20. then be Levies to
such a Simeon in making a base and corrupt contract for a benefice. And for
that you say, that such practices are not to be prevented or removed, otherwise
then by plucking up the very root, which naturally brancheth it self out into
these foresaid mischiefs, so obstructive and destructive to all religion.
Whether you mean Tithes to be this root, or the disproportion of Benefices,
or the right of patronage and protection, I cannot tell, but sure I am, that
the Apostle calls covetousness the root of all evil, and so the root of that
evil which sometimes passes betwixt a Patron and his Chaplain: and may as
frequently, and with as much injury be found betwixt some Committee Men and
Trustees and the Ministers of their choice, as any other. But as I am confident
that there will be an amendment on the Ministers part, by the regular way of
the Parliaments reformation, according to the directions of ordination of
Ministers already printed and accordingly practiced, so will it be not only
possible, but easy for the State to find out a fit means to prevent
prevarication on the part of the Patron; but if Tithes be removed from their
ancient foundation, and lest loose to the disposal of Trustees or
Committee Men, they will be a more ready prey for the covetous into whose hands
they may come, and from whose hands perhaps they cannot without great
difficulty be redeemed.

Lastly, in the close of this Petition, the Petitioners show great care that
the Ministers may be freed from the encumbrance of Tithes, to serve the Lord
without distraction, and to give themselves to the Word of God and Prayer, and
to be only employed to make ready a people prepared for the Lord; And so they
may do if they be maintained by Tithes; for that means of maintenance gives a
man occasion of more and better acquaintance with the particular disposition of
his people, and it is his part to be diligent to know the state of his flock,
Prove. 27.23. And for that trouble which may be thought inconsistent with the
Calling of a Minister, if his means be sufficient, he may have a servant to
take it from him, and ease him of it. I know a Minister whose Benefice was a
Vicarage, and his Parish so large, that it was 11 miles in length, and of a
proportionable breadth, yet did it not put him to the expense of one day in a
year to compound for, or gather in his dispersed portion.

Now for the success and acceptance of the Petition in the Honorable House of
Commons, to which it was presented; if such an innovation had been granted for
that County, it had been fitter to have been made a Sibboleth, for that cauthe
or angle of the Kingdom (for so the word Kent signifies) as their custom of
Gavelkind is a custom anciently observed in Kent, whereby the land of the
father is equally divided among all his sons, or the land of a brother equally
divided among his brethren, if he have no issue of his own, this was so common
a custom as appears by the Stat. in the 18. year of H. 6. ca. 1. that there
were not above 30 or 40 persons in Kent that held by any other tenure; but Anno
31 H. 8. ca. 3. many Gentlemen upon Petition got an alteration thereof.
Gavelkind, then to be made a president or pattern of conformity to other parts
of the Kingdom, as the News-Book of the same week prescribed that to his
Reader.

But the answer of the worthy Senate was such as may further confirm us in our
confidence, that they will still continue to be gracious Patrons of the
maintenance of Ministers, and that they will be more ready to ratify precedent
Statutes and their own Ordinance made in that behalf, then to dissettle their
tenure which is founded upon them, and to make Ministers arbitrary Pensioners
to such as may be so far swayed by misprision of judgment, or personal
dis-affection, as to deal most penuriously with those, who being truly valued
(without erroneous mistaking or injurious misliking) may both by the eminence
of their parts, and their faithfulness in their places, deserve the most
ample, and most honorable Revenue. I will give you their answer in their own
words, which are most authentic, they are these.

M. Speaker by order of the House of Commons did give the Petitioners (the
Committee of Kent) thanks for their former services, and took notice of their
good affections to the Public; and did acquaint them, That the great
businesses of the Kingdom are now instant and pressing upon them, and that
they will take the Petition into consideration in due time, and that in the
mean time they take care that Tithes may be paid according to Law.





2. For the term Jewish, it is mis-applyed against Tithes, as it was by the
Prelates of late, and is by the Anabaptists at the present against the Sabbath;
nor are they more Popish then Jewish; For the Papists, though their people pay
them, and their Priests receive them, yet they for the most part holding the^
to depend merely upon Ecclesiastical constitution, made no scruple of changing
them into secular titles or uses, as in Impropriations in the hands of Laymen,
and many other distributions made out of them several ways, without any
respect to the service of the Sanctuary. Nor is there any thing in the payment
and receiving of Tithes under the state of the Gospel, which may probably be
suspected to have any savor of Judaisme, or Popery, save only the payment of
Tenths by the Ministers to the King, as has been lately well observed by Mr L.
in his second Book against Mr S. I will set down his words, and seriously
commend them to the consideration of our religious Reformers; they are these,
in answer to Mr S. his Question.

Qu. What Smoke p. 25.
are the maintenance of Ministers by Tithes? Jewish and Popish undenyably.

Ans. How? Jewish and Popish undeniably? As undeniably as the Sabbath was
Jewish when the Prelates so called it, or the article of the Trinity Popish, as
Qued Ecclesiae reformatae ad huc in fide Tinitatis cum Papistis conconveniret.
Bell. praefat. in lib. de Christ, Tom. 1. secund Controvers. general. p. 271.
Valentinus Gentilis took it, when he disliked the doctrine of the Reformed
Churches in that point, because they agreed with the Papists therein. You are
grossly mistaken Sir in the tenure of Tithes, for though there be a clamor
taken up against them by such as make no scruple either of slander or of
sacrilege, and some would change the Ministers portion, which is their masters
wages for his own work, and reduce them to voluntary pensions of the people,
(because they would have a liberty to beggar them who will not humor them in
their fond and false opinions, and licentious practices, but oppose them as of
conscience they are bound to do) neither you, nor all your party can prove
them either Jewish or Popish, as they are allowed and received for the
maintenance of the Ministers of England. And because you are so confident in
your opinion against Tithes, and show your self to have a good opinion of Mr
Nigh, ( whom with Mr Goodwin Smoke p. 14.
you cite for a worthy saying touching the golden Ball of Government) I refer
you for satisfaction to him, who will tell you (as he has done diverse others
in my hearing) that Ministers of the Gospel may hold, and receive Tithes for
their maintenance by a right and title which is neither Jewish nor Popish, but
truly Christian; and there is nothing Jewish or Popish in Tithes, but the
assignation of the decimae decimarum, from the Numb. 18.28
Leviticall Priests to the high Priest, from the high Priest to the In veteri
lege primitiae debebantur sacerdotibus, decimae autem Levitis, and quia sub
sacerdotibus Levitae erant, Dominus mandavit ut ipsi loco decimarum solverent
summo sacerdoti decimam decimae, unde nunc eadem ratione tenentur Clerici summo
pontifici decimam dare si exigeret. Aquin. 22. q. 87. a. 4. ad. 3. Soto 9.
Inst. q. 4. art. 4. ad. 3. Lorin. in Number. 18.28. p. 687.
Pope, and from the Pope to the King; when first Pope Urbane gave them to
Richard the second to aid him against Charles the French King, and others that
upheld Clement the seventh against him, as Polyd. Virg. Hist. l. 16.
Polydore Virgil relates. And King Henry the eighth taking from the Pope the
title of head of the Church to himself by Anno 26 H. 8. c. 1. Poult. Abridg. p.
561.
Act of Parliament, took from him the tenths, and other profits annexed to that
title, which were settled upon the Crown by Ibid. c. 2. p. 565.
Statute in the 26th year of Henry the 8. so that the Jewish high Priesthood
being expired, the papal Lordship abolished, the Tithes paid under those
titles, may be called Jewish and Popish, but not that which is assigned for the
maintenance of Ministers, because they are yet to do service to their Master,
and so to receive the maintenance of his allowance for his work; which
fellow servants cannot take upon them to take away without presumption; their
door-neighbor will not allow them a power to appoint the wages of their
servants, much less may they usurp upon the right of God, and his Ministers,
to alienate tithes from the support of his service and worship, for that is
rather Popish, as has before been observed.

Which being true and clear, (as touching the pedigree of such Tithes from the
high Priesthood of Aaron to the Independent Prelacy of the Pope, and from him
to the King, as by claim from the title, Head of the Church, translated from
the Miter to the Crown) it will not I conceive be thought congruous to the
Christian Reformation (the through Reformation professed by our worthy and
religious Rulers) that such Monuments of Superstition or Popery should be
removed, which were unprofitable, and that only retained (as a silver shrine
to Diana) which brings gain to the King or State, and puts the charge upon the
Ministers of the Gospel; who thereby (I may say it confidently for some whom I
know) are brought to this perplexed Dilemma, either to pay them with
reluctance, (as no less contrary to their consciences then to their
commodities) or to deny or withhold them with suspicion, or imputation of
avarice, or disobedience to lawful Authority.



Sir. Ed. Coke in his second Report in the Archb: of Can. his case. f. 49. b.
And so the Author of the foregoing learned Work.
others (who are men of very eminent note) hold Tithes to be due by divine
right, and some of them have undertaken to prove them so, and to answer all
objections against them, which how far they have performed is left to the
judgment of indifferent Readers.

2. It is more like that (as both religion and reason will dictate unto them)
they will be the more wary how they take them away, lest if that tenure should
prove true, they should be found guilty of the sin of sacrilege, that they
should abolish them, and that they will seriously search and enquire into the
ground of that title, and while they are in doubt, that they will resolve of
the safest course, which is, not to repeal them; for as we must forbear to feed
of meats of which another says, that they are sacrificed to idols, 2 Cor.
10.28. (for his sake that says it, though but a private Christian;) so if
Divines say, (and bring Scripture and reason for it) that Tithes are dedicated
to God, or by him assumed, first to himself, and then assigned or set over by
him to his servants, for his work in waiting on his worship, which must be
maintained to the worlds end, it will be rather a reason for them to support
the tenure of Tithes by their Parliamentary power, then any way to prompt or
dispose them to desert it, or to alienate their right from Ecclesiastical uses.

The fear of sacrilege has been of such force with some heathen Moralists, as
Plutarch observes in his Morals, that if they pulled down a house contiguous
to a temple, they would leave some of that part standing which was next unto
it, lest they should with it take away any part of the Temple it self. Wherein
if they showed any spice of superstition, it will be more capable of pardon, or
less liable to punishment at the hand of God, then we may expect if we proceed
hastily to lay violent hands upon any thing peculiarly entitled to his honor,
who is the author and giver of all things to all men.

2. If the plea of a divine right for Tithes (supposing it setreth them up too
high) should incline to irritation in some to make opposition against them, why
should not the contrary tenet which peremptorily takes them down too low,
calling them Jewish, Antichristian, and Popish, and that undeniably, (as has
been said, but never can be proved) move others the rather to retain them, and
confirm them? chiefly the Parliament (whose authority is most engaged for their
justification) and especially since the servants of God have had possession of
them by so many laws, and so long a prescription; for according to the maxim
of the law, Longa possessio (sicut jus) parit jus possidendi and tollit
actionem vero domino. Bract. l. 2. fo. 52.
the possessers title is the best until he be fairly evicted out of it.

3. If the Parliament do not in their approbation of Tithes come up to the
tenure of divine right, they may yet be willing enough to establish them upon
other grounds, and leave Divines to the liberty of their judgment and
consciences to plead for them according to the principles of their own
profession, as in their Ordinances made for setting up of the Presbyterial
Government, though yet they be not satisfied of the claim of divine right for
it, they were pleased to authorize it by their Ordinance, and to require
Divines to prepare the people for the reception thereof by preaching of it, and
for it; so as both to clear it, and assure it (so far as they could) by the
sacred Scripture.

And on the other side while they approve it, though but by a civil assent,
(as to a prudentiall design, until they see more light, which they look for in
the Answer to their Queres proposed to the Assembly of Divines) the
Presbyterians who hold it in the highest esteem take none offense that they
proceed no farther, and profess themselves well satisfied with their civil
sanction; so one of the learned Commissioners of Scotland has said, in the
name of the rest, in these words. M. Gillespie his brotherly examination of M.
Colemans Sermon. p. 32, 33.
If they shall in a Parliamentary and Legislative way establish that thing,
which is really, and in it self agreeable to the Word of God, though they do
not declare it to be the will of Jesus Christ, they are satisfied.

Ob. If there were no purpose to put down Tithes by such as are in Authority,
how comes it to pass that the Anabaptists are more bold in London to take up
a public contestation against them, then the Presbyterians to make apology
for them? for did not one Mr B. C. an Anabaptist manage a dispute against Mr W.
I. of Chr. and after that undertake another upon the same argument against M.
I. Cr. and offered to proceed in it against all opposition, which M. Cr. durst
not do, upon pretense of a prohibition from authority?

Ans. 1. It is no strange thing for men who have a bad cause to set a good face
on it, and to make out with boldness and confidence what is wanting in truth
of judgment, and strength of argument; Sir Ed: Sands Europ. Specul. p. 85.
this is observed of the Papists by a judicious Author, whom he shows to
have been forward in the offers of disputation; with iterated and importunate
suits for public audience and judgment. And Bellarmine reports out of
Surius, that Io: Cochlens a great Zealot for the Papacy, Obtulit se ad
disputandum cum quovis Lutherano sub poena capitis si in probationibus
defecisset. Bell. de Eccles. Script. p. 423.
offered to dispute with any Luther an upon peril of his life, if he failed in
the proof of his part of the Question.

2. For the boldness of the Anabaptists at this time, and in this Cause, and
this City, there may be diverse conjectural reasons in particular given thereof,
besides the general already observed; as,

1. Because they advance in their hopes of a toleration of their Sect; and to
promote that hope they have been so ready to engage in military service, with a
design no doubt to get that liberty by force (if they be able) which by favor
of authority they cannot obtain.

2. For this matter of Tithes, they might be more forward to oppose their
tenure, because it is a very popular and plausible argument, wherein they might
have the good wills of the people, that they might prevail, and their conceits
that they did so, Quod valde volumus facile credimus.
(though they did not) because they would be very apt to believe what they
vehemently desire may come to pass; and it is not to be doubted but a dram of
seeming probability will prevail more with most worldlings to spare their
purses, then an ounce of sound reason to put them to charges.

3. They might take some encouragement to dispute against Tithes in this City,
because there is a project to change the maintenance of the Ministers set on
foot by many worthy, and well-minded Citizens, which yet in truth makes nothing
for the Anabaptists opinion, who would have Ministers maintained by mere
benevolence; for the Citizens, as they intend a more liberal allowance then
the former, (since they see many of their Churches are destitute of Ministers,
because their Ministers have been destitute of means) so they mean that it
shall be certain, settled by Authority, and not left arbitrary to the courtesy
of men.

3. For the two disputes, the one managed betwixt M. W. I. and M. B. C. the
other purposed betwixt M. I. Cr. and the same B. C. but disappointed, it makes
nothing at all for the taking away of Tithes, For as touching the former, they
who were not possessed with prejudice, or corrupted with covetousness against
the truth, were much confirmed in the lawfulness of such rates as are paid in
London under the title of Tithes, though indeed they are not Tithes, and of
such only was the debate at that time.

For the intended debate which was to be touching the divine right of Tithes,
though some godly and prudent men thought it should not have been taken in hand
without the warrant of public authority, yet they made no doubt but that the
truth of the cause, or ability of the man, who undertook the defense of it
against M. C. would prevail unto victory. But for the disappointment, it was by
the warrant of the Lord Major of the City, to them both, interdicting the
dispute, which was both without M. I. Cr. his knowledge, and against his good
will; yet he obeyed the prohibition, and when his Antagonist insisted, and
urged the performance of what was agreed upon, notwithstanding the contrary
command of the Lord Major, his answer was, that it was agreeable to the
Anabaptists principles to disobey Authority, but not according to the
principles of Presbyterians. And lest B.C. should take it for a token of
distrust in his cause, and make it an occasion of vainglory, either against
the cause or person of M. I. Cr. he proposed the printing of M. B. C. his
arguments against Tithes, and engaged himself to answer them in print, and so
to refer both to the judgment of al unbyassed Readers, which was the best way
to give clear and full satisfaction to such as doubt on which side the truth is
swayed by the most authentic testimony and soundest reasons.

It is no part of my task for the present to argue farther for Tithes, then may
answer the doubt you have proposed to me, which is, of the Parliaments purpose
and proceedings touching the establishing, or abolishing of them.

Animadversions upon the late Pamphlet entitled, The Countries plea against
Tithes.
YEt that you may not be scrupled in conscience (as you were in conceit) by a
new petty Pamphlet against payment of Tithes, which perhaps may come to your
hands; I will give you some animadversions upon it; which may also be of use to
others as well as to you. The title of the Book is, The Countries plea against
Tithes, with this addition, A Declaration sent to diverse eminent Ministers
inseverall parishes of this Kingdom, proving by Gods word and moral reason,
that Tithes are not due to the Ministers of the Gospel; and that the Law for
Tithes was a Leviticall Law, and to endure no longer then the Leviticall
Priesthood did, etc.

Wherein the Authors say much in the outside, but make no answerable proof in
the inside of the Book. They direct it in the Title page as a Declaration to
diverse worthy Ministers in the Kingdom, and in the beginning of the body of
the Book they present it as a joint Declaration of the people of several
parishes for their opinion concerning Tithes, as a Reply to certain papers
from some Ministers, pretending to prove Tithes due by authority of Scripture.
It had been fair dealing if they had printed those papers of the Ministers,
that it might appear how well they had answered them.

But for the confident contradiction of the Divine right they allege, 1. The
novelty of them in the Christian state. 2. The ceremoniality of them, as being
merely Leviticall. 3. The inequality of them in several respects. 4. The
trouble of them to the Minister.


For the first; they refer the original of them under the Gospel, for the
author, to Pope Vrbane; for the time, to the three hundredth year after
Christ's ascension; and for proof of both, they cite Origin, Cyprian, and
Gregory, at large without any particular quotation to find what they cite:
until which time, say they, there was community of all things among Christians.

But first, they should tell us which Urban it was, (who they say began to
bring Tithes into use for the maintenance of the Ministry) for there were 8 of
that Name, and of those 8 (if Origin be a witness of it) it must be Urban the
first, Anno 227 who sat but 6 years, and 7 months, and there was not another
Pope called Urban until the year 1087. which was long after the latest of
those three, viz. Gregory, (whether they mean Greg. Nazianz. or Greg. Nyssen,
or Gregory surnamed,) the Great, Bishop of Rome; and Origin testified so much
of Tithes recalled by Pope Urban, their original must be ancienter then 300
years after the ascension; for that Urban lived not beyond the year 234, and
Origin flourished Anno 226. and if Tithes began when Christians gave over the
community of goods, as these men say p. 2. in the name of Tertullian, but bring
no proof of it, then had Ministers a propriety in Tithes as soon as others had
a propiety of estate; and sooner it could not be. And that which caused this
community, the persecution of the Church (which reached to his age: Tom. 1.
Council. p. 104.
for the next predecessor to that Urban, Calixtus was a Martyr) might very well
cause a suspension of Tithes for all that time.

2. For the tenure of Tithes; there be 3 disputable opinions: Decimae sunt pura
eleemosyna, and parochiani possunt propter peccata suorum praelatorum, ad
libitum suum auferreeas. Council. Constant. Session. 8. Tom. 7. Council. p. 1016
col. 2. Artic. 18.
1 Whether they be Moral; 2 whether Judicial; 3 whether Ceremonial, (there
is a fourth conceit that they are mere Alms, which is imputed to Wickleff in
the 8 session of the council of Constance; but that admits of no dispute since
it is repugnant to all appearance of reason.) 1 Some hold them Moral, as those
Ministers whom these men pretend to answer; most of the Caronists, Marc. Anton.
de Dom. de Rep. Eccl. l. 9. c. 2. Zepperus in Explic. legum forens. Mos. c. 10.
and many English Divines.

2. Some hold them Judicial, as Bell. lib de Cler. c. 25.

3. Some Ceremonial, as these parishioners do. There is the least reason for
this last opinion. For Tithes were taken as a tribute by God himself as the
chief Lord of all the earth, Levit. 27.30. whereby he is acknowledged giver
of all; and that it is in his power to curse the earth with barrenness, and to
starve the creatures that live upon it; and this is true of all ages, and
therefore we read of payment of Tithes by Abraham, Genesis 14.2. Heb. 7.4. and
vowing of Tithes by Jacob, before the Leviticall Priesthood was established,
Genesis 28.22.



Levites for their time, and made them suitable to their state by peculiar
ordinances, as Number. 18.26, 27. etc. Levit. 25.3.4.5. which expired with the
Priesthood, though Tithes in general did not; and therefore such particulars
are no more to be urged against that maintenance of Ministers in the New
Testament, then the Jewish observations of the Sabbath against the keeping of a
Christian Sabbath at this day.

3. For that they say of inequality in respect of impropriations, p. 6. in
respect of tradesmen in Towns and Cities, who gain more then farmers and pay
no Tithes, p. 9. and in respect of the loss which may befall the farmer, when
he has not increase to answer his cost and labor, Ibid.

For the two first, it is worthy consideration of those who are in authority
how to reduce them to more equality. For the third; the exception lies no more
against Tithes now, then in the time when they acknowledge them most in force;
and when it proves an ill year with the plowman, it will be well for him to
consider whether his unconscionablenesse in Tithes have not procured a curse
upon his portion, according to the commination in the third of Malac. 8, 9.

And lastly, for the trouble of the Minister; 1 If he have but a little Tithe,
it will be no great trouble for him to order it, especially since he may
lawfully exchange it into money. 2. If he have a great Tithe, it will bear the
charge of a servant to ease him of the trouble. And 3. If this inconvenience
could not be avoided, (as well it may) there would follow far greater upon
the taking away Tithes, such as before we have observed.

With these exceptions against this revenue of Tithes they have delivered
something worthy the acceptance of Ministers, which is p. 5.6. It is the
desire, say they, of al Gods people (and so it ought to be) that the Ministers
of the Gospel should have a sufficient maintenance allowed them, nay not only
a sufficient maintenance, but an abundant, a large and rich maintenance, such a
maintenance as they may live liberally without any other employment but the
Ministry; Nor is it fit or becoming Christians that their Minister should
live in a mean condition either of diet or clothing, but as he is more
excellent in calling, so ought he to have a more large and better maintenance
in those respects then others, for he feeding the souls with spiritual
things, the word of God, the people ought to feed his body liberally with their
base temporal things: and in the next page say they; And is it not a shame for
a rich and flourishing commonwealth to have a poor and bare Ministry, either
in the general, or in some particulars? and yet into such a condition have
Impropriations brought the Ministry of this commonwealth in very many places.

They conclude with an address to the high court of Parliament for a
reformation in this particular of Tithes, p. 10. and herein we are content to
meet them at the bar of that most wise, pious, and impartial Judicatory of
the Kingdom, who, as they have, so we doubt not but they will ratify the
ancient Statutes, and their own late Ordinance concerning Tithes; and
whatsoever their title be in respect of religion, the people may (though
ignorant zelots hold, and covetous worldlings pretend they may not) pay them
with good conscience, for the State may impose them for the maintenance of the
Ministry, as well as they may impose the 20th part, or any other part they
please, to maintain a just war, or to pay the debts of the Kingdom; and
others may conscientiously submit to such impositions; and hereto the most
learned Divines of the reformed Churches do agree, (though the most of them,
as they are mistaken in the true doctrine of the Sabbath, so are they also in
this question of Tithes) for albeit they maintain their Ministers while they
live, and provide for their widows and fatherless children, when they are
dead, Cujus legis (scil politicae) vi nec ipsi fideles reformati denegant
solvere decimas, in regnis illas, in quibus subjiciuntur Principibus qui illas
lege solvendas sanciunt; qua ratione etiam a theologis responsum fuit nonnullis
qui scrupulo conscientiae se teneri praetendebant, ne pontificiis
ecclesiasticis solverent decimas, qui Idololatriae sunt ministri. D. Rivet.
Exercit. in Genes. Exercit. 80. p. 389. col. 2.
yet they resolve it lawful to pay the 10th to the popish priests, though they
officiate in an Idolatrous service, upon the command of the Prince, or State
under which they live.

This may suffice for this little Treatise, which, though little, if it had not
been less in weight then in length, I would not have been so observant of the
importunity of the Printers calling for my paper, as to dispatch mine
animadversions upon it in the short interim of one night, betwixt rising from
supper and reposing for sleep, which yet had been too much if most readers
were not too readily prepared to entertain any Text that makes for their
commodity, whether by acquiring advantage, or sparing expenses.

Now for your secondary doubt concerning the disposal of your son, give me
leave, Sir, to give you my sense fully and freely in the case.

1. I see by you and him (which I am sorry to observe, yet I fear it is like
to prove too true in all ages) that if there be not sufficient and certain
means allotted to the laborers in the Lords harvest, he is like to have but a
few workmen to undertake it, and go through with it; therefore those that
Julian-like, take away the hire of spiritual laborers, make way, as much as
in them lies, for the marring of the harvest; for either there will be a want
of workmen, or of such sufficiency in them as may make the work to prosper in
their hands: hence is the miserable condition of the Greek Church, living (if
not languishing) under the dominion of the Turks, where their Clergy as they
are the meanest sort of men, (like Ieroboams Priests, who though they were to
serve in the house of high places, were the lowest of the people. 1 Kings
12.31.) so are they as despicable for their ignorance and mean qualifications
every way as for their poverty, G. Sandys his Travailes l. 1. p. 77.
having no schools of learning among them, and therefore more like either to
poison or famish the souls committed to their charge, then to feed and nourish
them with a competent measure of the sincere milk of the Word, that they may
grow thereby.

2. But I fear no such failing of maintenance for Ministers among us, as may
occasion such a discouragement to parents that they should not be willing to
dispose of their children in that calling, Vincent. Charter. de Imag. Deor.
for fear they should serve Christ upon such poor terms as the Priests of
Isis did that heathen goddess, who were not allowed a new suite until the old
was worn to rags.

3. Yet if that were true which you read in the weekly pamphlets, or which
you had by report, of the likelihood of putting down Tithes by the Parliament,
I must tell you plainly as your friend, I like not your wavering touching the
disposal of your son; for if he be furnished with personal abilities for
the service of the Sanctuary, if he be (as I hope he is) a man of holy life and
conversation, if he find himself inwardly moved by the holy Ghost to enter
into that holy function, it will be a greater sacrilege in you then robbing of
the Church of so much Tithe as would maintain him, to divert him from the
service of Christ, and salvation of souls, through distrust of the divine
providence for his support. And therefore,

4. If I conceived you to be so carnal a father (but I dare not think you are
such a one) I should turn my speech from you to your son, had I opportunity
to speak with him, Licet in limine pater jaceat, per calcatum perge patrem
siccis oculis ad vexillum crucis evola. Hicron. ad Heliodor. Tom. 1. p. 2.

Genus pietatis est in hac re crudelem esse. Ibid.


and exhort him not only to serve Christ, but to suffer for him, in the words
of Hierom to Heliodorus, rather to tread upon you, if you should lie as a
block in his way, then to make a stop, or to retire from following after
Christ, though in zeal and haste he should overtake the Cross; for in such a
case it is a kind of piety (says he) to show cruelty toward our chiefest
friends.

Thus, as my little leisure would allow me, I have endeavored to satisfy your
desire in resolving your doubt, and I hope that I have written will reach a
little further then you thought of, even to the settling of your resolution to
dedicate your son to the service of our Savior; and to serve him upon such
terms whatsoever they be, as the Divine providence in the condition of the
times shall put upon him, and so you have my advice, and you shall have my
prayers for you and yours.

FINIS.

