AN ANSWER To several Obiectons made against some things in Mr. THOMAS
CHALONERS SPEECH With an indifferent Censure of those Arguments delivered by
him in the House of Commons upon the reading of the Scottish Papers, concerning
the Votes of both Houses for the disposal of the KINGS PERSON.

Proverbs 15.2^, 23. Without counsel, purposes are disapointed: but in the
multitude of Counselors they are established.

A man has joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in due season,
how good is it?

London, Printed by Francis Leach 1646.

An indifferent Censure of Mr. Chaloner his Speech, delivered in the House of
Commons upon the reading of the Scottish Papers.
DIvisions must needs be great, where mistakes are frequent; and those mistakes
whether of ignorance or wilfulness, make divisions wider then clear
understanding, though in dissenting Opinions, would suffer them to grow, my
hearty wishes are that I could compose differences in our own Parity, to which
my affection shall never be wanting, though my understanding may fail in it.
The reason of my adventure at this time is occasioned upon Mr. Chaloners Speech
in the House of Commons, when the Scottish Papers were there read. It was my
fortune to peru^e that speech: and what opinion I then conceived of it, I
cannot yet receed from, though I have since seen a Paper in answer to it, or
as the Author calls it, Animadversions upon it, as a thing unsafe and
dangerous, striking at the Honor of the Parliament, and interest of England.
How the speech should be guilty of those Aspersions, I can neither find by any
thing contained in it self, nor by any allegations of the Answer against it. I
will therefore first deliver my own sense concerning the speech. The narrative
part of it is undoubtedly true, the illustrative part, or matter of instance is
very proper, if not extended by ignorant or wilful mistakes, beyond the proper
latitude of an instance. his Result upon the whole matter, is no way derogatory
from the Honor of the Parliament, as being no more then was already Voted in
the House, nor injurious to the Kings Person (though the answer be unsufferably
injurious to Mr Chaloner, in falsely aspersing him with a personal grudge
against his Majesty) of whose honor, safety and freedom. He speaks no more,
but with caution, as it stands inrelation to the honor, safety and freedom of
the whole people: which latter (as all rational men must needs grant) was
first considerable both in the Covenant, and the law of nature it self: but
he speaks nothing at all against the King, (...) is the debate of the
Parliament come so far yet, as to question how the Kings Person shall be
disposed of; but by whom.

But it is strange to observe how vainly this answer catches at parts and
instances of the speech. To omit his Verbal exception against the use of those
words abstractum and concretum, howsoever pedantik people have confined the
signification of such terms: it is known that wise men in discourses of state
have used them in that sense, in which the speech has, as he may find in one of
these Scottish Lords, and none of the meanest in abilities among them, in his
book entitled Lex, Rex.

As vain is that exception, which he takes against that most certain truth
in the speech, that the person either of Prince or private man, being in a
foreign state, is at the sole dispose of that state where he resides, and to
be ruled by their laws: and for two instances he thinks to make Mr Chaloner
ashamed, one is a particular case of Prince Charles his now being in France,
and the other General of Ambassadors in foreign Lands. But let any man say
(to speak first of the Prince) whither Pr. Charles be not solely at the dispose
of the State of France at this time I think no sober man will deny it, and that
he cannot be recalled either by King or Parliament (which this answerer would
make a dishonor to the Parliament) for the King sent him thither in
probability because the Parliament of England should not dispose of his person.
It is likely the State of France gave him leave to come over, and may suffer
him to return again according to some promise of theirs: but what use they may
first make of him, and how long keep him, the Answerer cannot tell.

It is a known truth that Princes, who by misfortune, as storms at Sea, or
the like, have bin cast unwillinglly upon other Princes Countries, not only
may, but have been detayned by those Princes, without imputation of Tyranny
for taking that advantage. Was not James the first of Scotland being driven
into England by cross winds, detayned many veares here by Henry the fourth,
and Henery the fifth Kings of Engl. Was not Philip the first of Spain driven
upon the like accident on shore in England, detained by Hen. 7th? and though
that politic Prince veiled his Coercive power under a show of courteous
entertainment (as such civilities are usual in State) yet King Philip finding
himself a prisoner, was content to grant some things to Henry, which he would
not have done had he been in Spain, as my Lo. Bacon writes. But to come
nearer our time, the King that now is, can best tell what he feared, When he
was prince Charles in France, and poasted away from thence in disguise, and I
can tell what the people feared for him in Spain, and would more, had it not
been for the Queen of Bohemia and her Children.

And for his instance of Ambassadors, what can that make against the Speech,
or the honor (as he would have it) of the Parliament? for it is as plain
sense as can be that Ambassadors are protected by the faith of that State,
where they reside: for though they be by consent of Nations to be protected
persons yet none but the State where they reside, can ratify, and immediately
give that protection.

Where he seems to laugh at the instance of K. John, and says that it
strengthens the Scottish Papers; it appears otherwise plainly in the Speech
for it is there spoken as the opinion of Lawyers, if King John had been in
Normandy at the time of the Summons, he ought to have bin tried by the Laws of
France, as Duke of Normandy, what soever had become of the King of England, and
for the vast disproportion (as the answerer calls it) between one that is King
of one Kingdom, and Subject of another, and him who is a free King of two
Kingdoms. I say the instance was not to extend to al points: or if it did, the
answerer is out in another kind, for there is also a vast disproportion between
a King of 2. Kingdoms ruling in peace and justice, and one, who has been long
in actual War against the representative Bodies of his two Kingdoms, and
now a prisoner in their Armies.

But as the instances were proper enough, the narration of the speech is very
true, and the case (though I will not presume to decide any thing) strange
enough to admit of a debate: for it is a strange thing, (as he says) That on
Army of Sons in pay of the Kingdom of England, which by the treaty ought to
be governed by the joint consent of the Committees of both Kingdoms upon the
place, should in England take a King of England, without the privity of the
English Committee and convey him to New castle, a Town likewise of England,
and there keep him six whole Months, without the consent of the Parliament of
England. But he came to them for a shelter, Against whom? Against that
Parliament for whom they fought, and into whose hands I do verily believe, he
might have bin delivered with safety, and more happiness to himself and all
his good people.

I hope the intentions of our Brethren of Scotland were good in it, for I was
ever loath to suspect any evil from them.

But I am sure the effects of that shelter have been already very sad, as by
jealousies here, to keep so many Armies at a needless Charge, and hinder the
relief of poor Ireland.

I have heard that some of the Kings Counsel at Oxford advised him well: that
if he would make an end of these calarnitous troubls, his best way was to come
in (to his English Parliament, which was to come in to all his people: and that
committing himself to any other hands, was but a continuing of these
distractions, which advise I would his Majesty had followed, or that God would
be pleased yet to direct him in the right way.

FJNJS.

